THE TOUCHSTONE OF Precedents, Relating to JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS AT Common Law,

By G. F. of Grayes-Inn, Esquire.

In magnis voluisse sat est. Hor. LONDON, Printed for Awnsham Churchill at the
Black Swan, at the lower end of Paternoster-Row, near Amen-Corner, 1682.

TO THE READER.
NOtwithstanding the present Age has so plentifully abounded with Books of
Pleading in Public; yet certainly there has been as manifest a Deficiency of
some good Directions for the Understanding them; though perhaps one Reason has
been, for that Pleading is esteemed by the Learned the most difficult part of
the Study of the Law, and therefore Collections of this Kind more liable to the
Censure of the Overcritical.

It Is true, there are two Tracts extant upon this Subject; but it happens so
unluckily, that one is but the particular Observations of a single Person in
part of his Time at the Bar, and the other as Antique or Obsolete as the
Language it is writ in, and much wanting the finishing hand of the Designer:
Such has been our misfortune as to this Subject, and we may well deplore our
ill fate, that none of the Learned Gentlemen of the Long Robe has yet given us
their Rules and Methods on a Subject so Excellent as the Incomparable Littleton
does Characterize it, viz. And know my Son, that it is one of the most
honorable laudable and profitable things in our Law to have the Science of
good Pleading in Actions Real and Personal; and therefore I counsel thee
especially to employ thy Courage and Care to learn it. The Reader will here
find most Excellent Directions, to guide him in his Practice through the
Difficulties of the several Parts of Pleading, wherein the Nature of Writs,
Counts, Bars, Pleas, Replications, Rejoinders, Issues; as also Disclaimers,
Discontinuances, Estoppels, Conclusions, Departures, Double Pleas, etc. are
Succinctly and Methodically handled, from Authorities in the Law, both Ancient
and Modern, far more useful and beneficial than any Collection hitherto
Published, as will sufficiently appear to any intelligible Person upon a strict
and serious perusal of the Book it self.

Abatement of Writ or Count.
IN Debt by two Executors, one was summoned and severed, and dyed; and it was
adjudged that it should not abate the Writ. Co. 10. Read and Redman's Case.

If there be two Joynt-Tenants, and the one is summoned and severed, and dies,
the Writ shall abate; but in a Stire facias the death of one after Summons and
Severance, shall not abate the Writ, Co. ib. Where note the difference between
a Writ Original, and a Judicial Writ.

Two Coparceners, one is summoned and severed, and has Issue, and dies, there
the writ shall abate, for that his Issue has Title to the Moiety. Co. ibid.
But if one of the Coparceners takes husband, the writ shall not abate.

In all Actions personal or mixed where the entire thing is to be recovered, as
in Quar^ Impedit, Detinue of writings, and the like, there after summons and
severans the death of one shall not abate the Writ. Also the death of one after
Judgment in personal Actions shall not abate the writ, although there be no
severans. Co. ib.

Where the Writ goes in discharge as an Audita Querela, and the one is summoned
and severed, and dies, the Writ shall not abate, Co. ib.

Note, In all personal Actions where no severans lies, there the death of one
of the parties shall abate the Writ; but not, if it be a Judicial Writ after
Judgment. Co. ubi supra.

In Formedon against diverse, some plead Non tenure, and others take the Tenancy
upon them entirely, the writ shall not abate, and those who plead Non tenure
shall not have Judgment, 22 E. 4. 4. 4 E. 4. 33 a. Stat. 25 E. 3. 13.

Misnosmer in a Scire facias shall abate the writ, 9 E. 4. 35. a.

If a Praecipe be brought of a Manor and 20 s. Rent, it is a good Plea to say,
that the Rent is parcel of the Manor. So in Formedon for Land, it is a good
plea to say, that the Demandant has brought another Formedon of 20 s. Rent
issuing out of the same Land, 3 H. 7. 3.

A Writ was brought against A. Rector of B. de placito debiti 100 s. The
Defendant pleaded, That die impetrationis predicti brevis he was commorant at
C. in another County; but the Court would not allow the Plea, because a Rector
is always supposed to be resident upon his Benefice; quod nota. So a man that
has two Benefices shall be intended to dwell upon them both, although he does
not deny that he is Parson. 10 H. 6. 8. Co. 11. Magdel. College Case.

In a Writ of Right of Advowson against A. B. Dean of C. he pleaded, That by
Authority of Parliament the Corporation was defeated and avoided; and it was
held by Brian to be a good Plea, 4 H. 7. 7. Rast. Entr. 101, 182.

In Assise it is a good plea to the Writ to say that the Plaintiff was seized
of the Freehold of the Lands in the Plaint; but in a Forcible Entry it is no
plea to say that he was seized the day that the Writ was purchased, 5 H. 7. 41.

Death or Coverture at the time of purchasing the writ, shall abate the writ de
facto; but Coverture afterward makes it but abateable, 32 H. 6. 11. 3. Br.
138. Co. Entr. 173. Rast. Entr. 107, 108, 126, 161.

It is no Plea to the Writ to say that the Summons were of other Lands, for the
Defendant may wage his Law de non Sum. 37 H. 6. 26.

A Quare Impedit was brought, and the Plaintiff made his Title to the Advowson
as appendant; The Defendant said, that a Moiety was in Gross, and it was
doubted whether this Plea should go to the Writ, or to the Action, 32 H. 6. 10,
11, 12.

A Quare Impedit is brought against the Incumbent without naming the Patron (he
being alive) this makes the Writ only abateable, and is not good upon a Writ of
Error.

In a Writ of Quare Impedit or other Original Writs, the death of the King
before Judgment shall abate the Writ de facto, but it is otherwise where the
Defendant dies. But in an Information for the King, or for the King and the
Informer, upon the death of the King before Judgment, the whole Proceedings are
discontinued, but the Information it self shall stand good, and Process shall
be awarded against the party de novo. So of Indictments (that are not for
Felony or Treason) for after Trial they are within the Statute of 1 E. 6. ca. 7.

When the Original bears Test before the cause of Action accrues, the Writ
shall abate de facto propter defectum. Anderson 1. 241. a. 96. Rast. Entr. 459.
Co. Entr. 624. Brown's Entries 1. Part, Tit. Abatement.

The death of the Plaintiff of Plaintiffs, or of one or more of the Plaintiffs,
(where there be many) shall abate the writ. Rast. Entr. 416. Fitz. N. Br. 35. B.

Where it appears by the plaintiffs own showing that he had not an Action for
the whole, or for part, the Writ shall abate de facto, as in Quare Impedit, if
it appears by the plaintiff's showing that the Church is full by his own
Presentation, the Writ shall abate de facto.

Some Pleas abate the Writ in the whole, and some but in part. As,

In Trespass against two, one appears and pleads that the other was dead die
impetrationis brevis; or that there was no such person in rerum natura, there
the whole Writ shall abate: But it is otherwise where one of the Defendants
dies after purchasing the Writ, 18 E. 4. 1. 2 H. 7. 16. Rast. Entr. 126.

Trespass against husband and wife, after Verdict and before the day in Bank
the husband dies, in Cro. Caroli 509. it is doubted, if the writ shall abate;
but it is agreed there, That if the wife dies it shall not abate against the
husband. But in case for Slander by the wife the writ shall abate after
Verdict. Heb. 129.

Account against two, one dies after the first Judgment, the Writ shall abate
only against him.

In Right of Advowson the Defendant pleads that the Plaintiff was seized of the
sixth part die impetrationis brevis, this shall abate the whole Writ, 5 H. 7. 7.

In Debt upon an Obligation, the defendant pleads, That after the writ
purchased, the plaintiff had received parcel, and shows an Acquittance, the
whole writ shall abate; and yet it is a good plea in bar for that part. 5 H.
7. 41. a. Rast. Entr. 160. 7 E. 4. 19. 15 H. 7. 10. 3 H. 7. 3. Quere if in Debt
upon simple Contract the plaintiff receives part pendente brevi, if it shall
abate the writ.

In Debt upon an Obligation with Condition to deliver 20 Quarters of Barley,
the defendant pleads in Abatement, that pendente billa the plaintiff had
accepted 15, parcel of the said 20; and adjudged to be an ill Plea, because it
is collateral and not parcel of the Sum contained in the Obligation, 3 Cro. 253.

Where the defendant pleads matter that entitles the plaintiff or demandant to
a better writ, it shall abate the other; as in a Writ of Ayel, Seisin of the
Father. So in Mortd' ancestor, his own Seisin, etc. But in Formedon, or Writ of
Right, darrein Seisin is no Plea; for in Formedon the Gift and not the Seisin
is the Title; and it is not within the Statute of 32 H 8. of Limitations to be
brought within 50 years, 12 Eliz. Dyer 290. 4 E. 4. 32. b.

If the Tenant brings a Writ of Mesne of two Acres, and depending the writ he
alieneth one of them the writ shall abate.

The same Law in an Action of Wast brought of two acres, if the plaintiff
aliens the Reversion of one of them, the writ shall abate.

Where it appears that the writ was never good in part, it shall abate in the
whole.

As in Trespass against 3, if one be dead after the writ purchased, the writ
shall abate in the whole, per 7 E. 4.

The same Law, if Trespass be brought against three, and one says, that there
is no such Name in Rerum Natura as the third person's name, Judicium de Brevi,
if it be found, the Writ shall abate in the whole; because that I have joined
with me such a person who has no color or cause of affirmance, my affirmance
shall abate.

Where the writ is good for part, and for part shall abate.

As in Debt upon Obligation against two, they both deny the deed, and it is
found the deed of one of them, and not of the other, yet the Plaintiff shall
recover against him whose deed it is, 40 E. 3.

Praecipe quod reddat against Tenant for life, the Reversion descends to him
depending the writ, the writ shall not abate.

Misnomer in Trespass shall not abate the writ but only against him who pleads
the Plea, 5 E. 4 2. 13. 2 H. 7. 16. 33 H. 6. 23.

A Praecipe is brought by three jointly, several Tenancy in parcel, or in the
whole, is pleaded by one of the Tenants, it shall abate the whole Writ, and
against all. Rast. Entr. 248. 270, 1, 2, 3. 364, 5. 282.

In Right of Advowson against two as Jointenants, the death of one shall abate
the writ; but secus in Assise of Novel disseisin or Mortd ancestor; for there
it suffices, if there be any Tenant to the Freehold. Cro. Car. 574, 583 Rast.
Entr. 107.

In an Appeal against two, no such person in Rerum Natura as to one shall abate
the whole writ; but it is otherwise of the death of one as it seems. 29 H. 7.
21. 2 H. 7. 8.

But it is otherwise in an Assise, or Writ of Dower, as in Pollard's Case, Com'
89. b.

In Trespass in F. and H. the defendant said that there is not any such Vill or
Hamlet in the said County; and the better Opinion was, That, this Plea shall
abate the whole Writ. 4 E. 4. 33. a. Co. Lit. 155. b. Rast. Entr. 108, 298. Co.
Entr. 121. But Quaere how it should have been tried; for it seems by a Jury of
the Visne or Neighborhood of F.

Debt against two Executors, one said, That whereas he is named of S. that he
was of D. the day of the Writ purchased, and prays Judgment of the Writ; and
agreed, That if the Plea was found for him, that the Writ should abate against
both, and yet the other shall answer: but the other plea shall be first tried.
21 H. 6. 4. Rast. Entr. 108, 295, 298, 299. 160.

In Trespass against two, one pleads that the place in question is within his
Fee; and demands Judgment of this writ quare vi et armis; the writ shall abate
against him only. So where the one is Feme covert, Jointenancy in the Demandant
or Coparcener shall be pleaded in Abatement. 22. E. 4. 4. 2 H. 7. 16. Cro.
Eliz. 554. Rast. Entr. 615.

In a Quare Impedit against two, one pleads, that there was no such Church as
was named in the Writ; the other pleaded, that there was no such Bishop of
Lincoln as was there named; and Issue was joined upon the first Plea, but to
the second Plea the Plaintiffs demurred: and the first being found for the
Defendant, the whole Writ did abate. Hobart 250.

In a Writ of Error, the death of one of the Plaintiffs shall abate the whole
writ.

Some Pleas in Abatement go only to the person of the plaintiff or defendant;
others to the Writ, or Action: As

Excommunication in the Plaintiff or Demandant may be pleaded in disability of
his person; but every Excommunication shall not disable. As if a Major, or
Bailiffs and Communalty, or any other Body aggregate of many, bring their
Action, Excommunication in the Major or Bailiffs shall not disable them,
because they sue and answer by Attorney; but it is otherwise of a sole
Corporation. So if Executors or Administrators be Excommunicated, they may be
disabled; for every one that has to do with a^person Excommunicated, either by
commerce or conversation, are also Excommunicated. Co. Lit. 134.

If a Bishop be defendant, an Excommunication by the same Bishop shall not
disable the plaintiff; and if no other matter be shown, it shall be intended
for the same cause. Co. Lit. ib.

The Writ shall not abate for Excommunication in the Plaintiff, or Demandant;
But the Judgment shall be, that the Tenant or Defendant shall go quit without
day, because when the Demandant or Plaintiff has purchased Letters of
Absolution, and they are showed to the Court, he may have a Resummons or
Reattachment upon his Original according to the nature of his Writ. Lit. lib.
2. ca. 11. Sect. 42.

If an Alien brings an Action personal or mixed in his own right, the Defendant
may plead it in Abatement in disability of his person, or in bar to the Action,
with this difference, that in Actions personal, or Trespass for breaking his
house, the defendant ought to aver, that the plaintiff is an Alien born at such
a place under the Allegiance of such a Prince who is Enemy to our Sovereign
Lord the King; for an Alien Friend as he may Traffic, and have a House for a
habitation, so he may have an Action personal, and Trespass for breaking his
house [as he may have a Writ of Error for necessity.] And the Opinion of the
Lord Coke, in his Commentary upon Littleton, is, That if an Alien Friend brings
an Action, it ought to be pleaded in disability of his person, and not in bar
to the Writ or Action; but if he be an Alien Enemy, the Defendant may conclude
to the Action. And therefore Mr. Theloal in his Digest of Writs well observes,
That an Exception taken to a Writ propter defectum Nationis, vel potius
defectum subjectionis vel Ligeancie, is peremptory, and that the Action cannot
be revived by Peace, or League subsequent; and that the King may grant License
to Aliens to implead, and likewise that such Aliens as come into the Realm by
the Kings License or Safe Conduct may use personal actions by Writ, though they
be not made Denizens; and that Denizens lawfully made by the Kings Grant; and
such Aliens born as are within the express words of the Statute of 25 E. 3. may
use actions real by Original Writ. Co. Lit. 129. a. b. 130. b. Co. 7. 1.
Theloal, Digest de Breifs, Lib. 1. ca. 6. 32 H. 6. 23.

An Alien may be Administrator and have Leases for years as well as personal
Chattels and Debts, Cro. Eliz. 683. Cro. Car. 8. 9.

One brings an Action as Executor, Utlary in the plaintiff is no Plea, because
he sues in auter droit; but it is otherwise of Excommunication, 21 E. 4. 49. 34
H. 6. 14. 14 H. 6. 14.

If the defendant plead that the plaintiff is an Alien born, and conclude to
the person, yet (it seems) he may demand the View, 3 H. 6. 55.

For the Pleading of Matters of Record in Abatement, observe,
That in Formedon for a Manor, another Formedon depending for 20 s. Rent out
of that Manor, is a good Plea, 3 H. 7. 3.

That where in Trespass the defendant pleaded, that the plaintiff had brought
Replevin against the Mayor and Commonalty of A. for the same cause, and that he
was one of the Commonalty die Captionis, etc. Necnon die impetrationis Brevis;
and it was there agreed, That in Trespass a Replevin depending for the same
Cause is a good Plea, if there be not more Defendants in the Replevin than in
the Trespass, 8 H. 7. 27.

A Quare Impedit is brought against the Bishop, and another as Incumbent; the
Defendants plead, that the plaintiff has brought another Quare Impedit against
the said Bishop for the same Presentation which was then depending
undetermined, and demands Judgment of the Writ: and it was adjudged a good
Plea. But the plaintiff might have brought diverse Quare Impedits against diverse
Defendants, Hobart 138. 9.

So in an Assise of Darrein Presentment, it is a good Plea to say, That there
is a Quare Impedit depending for the same Presentation. Hobart 184.

But where an Assise is brought of Lands in one County, an Assise for the same
Lands in another County, and Judgment thereupon, cannot be pleaded; So of a
Recovery in Ancient Demesne, because it cannot be intended, that the Lands
recovered in the Assise or in Ancient Demesne, are the same Lands, 4 H. 6. 24.
Rast. Entr. 65.

In Formedon in le Diseender, it is no Plea to say, that the Plaintiff at
another time brought a Formedon in the Remainder of the same Lands, except both
the Counts be of one and the same Gift, 40 E. 3. 31.

Where the Heir brought two several Formedons upon one and the same Gift,
although the last did vary from the first Gift, yet it is no Plea in Abatement,
for he might claim by two Ancestors sub dono, 4 E. 3 8.

If the Defendant (in a personal Action) pleads another Action depending at the
time of the purchasing the last Writ, he ought not to say, that it is yet
depending, for the last Writ is abated in Law, notwithstanding he is afterward
nonsuited in the first Writ, Co. 6. Ferrers Case. Where Note the diversity,
when the writ is general, as Covenant, Detinue, Assise etc. and the Certainty
is in the Declaration; for there if the Plaintiff is nonsuited in the first
before he counts (or declares) the last shall not abate; and when the writ is
special, and the thing demanded is specified therein, as in Praecipe quod
reddat, etc.

What persons shall be admitted to plead in Abatement, and what not.
Note, One Defendant may plead the death of the other before the Writ
purchased, or that there is no such person in rerum natura. 20 H. 6. 30. b.

But in Replevin if the Defendant avow upon an Estranger, the Plaintiff in the
Replevin cannot plead in Abatement of the Avowry. 22 E. 4. 35. b.

If the Cognizee of a Statute sue execution against one Terretenant only
without the other, he cannot plead in Abatement; but is put to his Audita
Quaerela against the other, because that the Cognizee is not bound to take
Notice of all the Terretenants. 16 Eliz. Dyer 331. a.

Nota, That after a Continuance the Defendant shall not be admitted to plead,
that the Plaintiff was made Bishop, or, that the Woman Plaintiff took Husband
depending the Writ; except that he pleads it after the last continuance: but it
is otherwise of the death, or Coverture of the Plaintiff at the time of the
Writ purchased, because these Pleas do abate the Writ de Facto 32 H. 6. 10. 11.

In a Replevin where the Plaintiff admits the Avowry, the Priee shall not plead
in Abatement but as Amicus Curiae; and not then except it be apparently known;
per totam Curiam 34 H. 6 8.

In a Praecipe against I. S. the Son of W. Edmond, at the retorn of the Grand
Cape the Defendant said, that his Father was named Esmond; and by Thorpe it is
a good Plea, in Abatement of the Writ, before the default saved 40 E. 3. 2.

In a Writ of Aiel Besaiel and Cosinage, one shall not plead to the points of
the Writ, after he has pleaded in Bar; but it is otherwise in an Assise of
Mortd' ancestor, as it seems. 40 E. 3. 19.

Where the Writ abates in part by the Act of the Court, and where it is abated
by the Parties own Confession.
As if an Executor brings an Action de clauso fracto, and de bonis asportatis,
in this case the Writ shall abate for part, and as to the rest it shall be
effectual.

But where the Writ is abated by the Plaintiff, it is reason (although that it
be of his own Conusans) that if it abate, that the whole shall abate

In Assise against two, the one pleads in Bar as to a moiety, the other pleads
jointenancy with a third person, the Plaintiff may choose him who pleads in
Bar for his Tenant, and confess that his writ is false for the other part.

In Assise against two, the one is Tenant, the other is Disseisor; which
Disseisor makes default, the other accepts his Companion Tenant with him, and
pleads in Bar, the Plaintiff dissables the Tenant and does not answer to the
Bar, for in this case he has accepted a Tenant which is not Tenant. As if
Praecipe quod reddat be brought by two where one is a Bastard, or by two
persons as Heirs, where one of them in truth is not Heir; in these cases the
whole Writ shallabate, because that that is merely false whichis supposed to be
true.

Two Executors bring an Action of Trespass of Goods carried away in the
lifetime of the Testator, and also of Trees cut down; here the Writ is good,
notwithstanding that the Executors cannot have the Writ for the Trees cut down;
and if they pray to have an other Writ for the Trees cut down then the whole
Writ shall abate, quod nota.

A Defendant or Tenant cannot abate a Writ by his Act; but the Act of the
Plaintiff or Demandant and the Act of God, and also the Act of an Estranger may
abate the Writ.
In a writ of Ravishment de guard by the death of the Infant, the writ shall not
abate.

Tenant by Statute-Merchant is disseised, the disseisor lets for life, the
Tenant by the Statute brings an Assise, the Lessee dies, the writ shall not
abate, because he shall recover all in damages.

But it is otherwise where he is to recover the Freehold, because in that case
he cannot have the effect of his Judgment.

A Writ of Admesurement of Common is brought by one against three, depending
the writ, the Plaintiff and one of the Defendants exchange their Lands to which
the common is appendant, if the writ shall abate? it seems not, because that
notwithstanding the exchange, the Plaintiff may have the effect of his Suit,
which is, that the Common may be admesured, and at all times pending the writ
the Plaintiff and the Defendant who made the exchange were Tenants, and the
Writ of Admesurement granted between them by reason of their Tenure, for there
was no mean-time between the parting from the Freehold in one Acre and the
taking the Freehold in the other Acre, and that very instant that the Freehold
of the one Acre was parted from the other was vested, so that there was cause
of Admesurement between them as well after the exchange as there was before.

A Writ of Admesurement is brought against three, one has nothing in the
Common, so that the Writ ought to abate, because that non-tenure is a good Plea
in this Action; yet if he that has nothing before any exception be taken to
the Writ purchases an Acre of Land by which he ought to have Common in the
same Land, the Writ is made good. As in Praecipe quod reddat brought against
him that has nothing, and pending the Writ he purchases the same Lands, the
writ is good. So it seems the writ is good notwithstanding no time between the
exchange, ergo a forciori when there is no mean instant.

But by the better opinion it seems, that the writ shall abate notwithstanding
that the party may have the effect of his Suit, for that ground is not
obsolutely general; as Praecipe quod reddat is brought against me, and I have
nothing in the Land, and pending the writ the Land descends, the writ shall
abate.

I bring an Action of wast by reason of the reversion, or a Quid juris clamat,
depending the writ I alien the same Reversion, and after purchase the Reversion
again, yet the writ is abated.

If a writ of Partition or Nuper obiit be brought, and pending the writ the
demandant aliens and retakes the Estate to him, yet the writ shall abate. And
yet in all these cases the Plaintiff may have the effect of his Suit.

But that which causes the writ to abate is the Act of the Plaintiff; for the
writ depending he has aliened that which gives him his cause of Action, and
therefore the writ shall abate as in the cases aforesaid: for as to the
Plaintaiff's part his own Act shall abate the writ, and not the Act of God, nor
of the Law, except in some cases; and as for the Defendants or the Tenants
part, his own Act shall not abate the writ, but the Act of God or of the Law
may: for if the Tenant aliens depending the writ yet the writ shall not abate,
but the Demandant shall recover, and he that comes in by the Tenant shall be
bound by that Recovery. And if an exchange had been made by the Plaintiff with
a stranger who had nothing in the Common, the writ should have been abated
without question; So for that Acr^ which he had when the writ was brought, he
cannot maintain his writ; for put the case, that the day the writ was
purchased, the Plaintiff had not any Land by which he ought to have common, and
afterward pending the writ he purchased an Acre of Land to which the Common is
appendant this shall not make the writ good which was naught from the beginning.

When the writ is made abatable by the Act of the Plaintiff or Demandant,
Videlicet by his aliening of that thing which gives to him the cause of Action,
if he pending the writ does purchase the same again it shall not revive the
writ, nor make it good.

WHere the Grant shall be good ab initio although it was incertainat the
commencement.
Note, If a Parson will Grant to me all the Wool which he shall have for Tithe
the next year to come, this Grant is good, and yet the quantity of the Wool is
uncertain at the time of the Grant; But because it may be reduced to a
certainty after the Grant, it was held good enough. 21 H. 6. 43.

And so, if a man will Grant to me the Perquisits of his Court, this uncertain
Grant is good, causa qua supra, 21 H. 6. 43.

The same Law is, where a Feoffment is made of two Acres, the one for Life, the
other in Fee, without determining in certain in which he shall have Fee; this
uncertain Feoffment may be reduced to certainty, as if the Feoffee loose both
the Acres by default, he may have a quod ei deforceat for the one, and a Writ
of Right for the other Acre, and thereby the certainty of the gift shall be
determined and known. Lit. Fo. 13. a.

And so, if one Grant a Rentcharge to one, now the Grantee may avow or have a
writ of Annuity, and which of them he will use shall be maintainable, and yet
at the Commencement it was uncertain, and yet notwithstanding this incertainty
the Grant was good. Lit. Tit. Rents Fo. 13. a.

In like manner, if a man Grant to one 20s. or a Robe yearly, the Grantee there
cannot know the certainty of the Grant; for peradventure he shall have always
the 20s. or perhaps always the Robe, and yet the Grant there shall be held
good, because that it is reducible to a certainty by the Will of the Grantor. 9
E. 4. 37 en Dett. per Lit. Fo. 13. a.

And so, a Lease for so many years as I. S. shall name, is good, and yet it is
uncertain; but if I. S. name a certain number, then it is good ab initio. Lit.
ib.

So, If I have two Horses in my Stable, a black and a white, and I give to I.
S. one of these Horses; now this gift is good notwithstanding the incertainty,
because that by the circumstances, Viz. by his Election the certainty may be
known. Lit. ib.

Also if a man Let all the Acres of Land which he has in Dale to I. S. for
years, rendering for every acre 12d. although that the number of the Acres were
not known by the Lessor nor by the Lessee, and because the Rent is at the
commencement uncertain, yet upon mensuration or other Trial had, the Rent
reserved may be known certainly, and then the Lessor may have a writ of Debt
for the Rent, and so by this possibility of Trial the reservation is made
good, which at the commencement was void for the incertainty.

So if a man Let Black-Acre and White-Acre for Life, the remainder of one of
the two Acres in Fee, now it is uncertain which of the two Acres he in the
remainder shall have; but if he License the Lessee to cut down Trees in
White-Acre, then he s^all be adjudged to have had the remainder of that Acre ab
initio, and so thereby that which at the commencement was uncertain, is
afterward made certain.

And so was Wheelers case, sc. one Grants his Term to another, upon condition
that (...) the Grantee shall obtain the Favor of the Lessor, and also pay so
much as I. S. shall award; this was taken for a good Grant after the condition
was performed. 14 H. 8. 17. 6. b.

In Trespass the case was, That the Defendant and the Plaintiff had bargained
together that the Defendant should go to a place where certain Wheat grew, and
to see the Wheat, and if he liked it upon the view, that then he should take it
from thence paying 40d. for every Acre; this there was held a good contract
notwithstanding the incertainty of the quantity of the Wheat, and of the gross
Sum which should be paid for it, because that upon the circumstance the
certainty may appear, for although it was a conditional agreement between the
parties, yet it is held a good Justification if he presently paid for it at the
time of his carrying it away. P. 17 E 4. Fo. 1. and Fo: 6 b.

Able and Disable.
SFe the diversity 17 H. 7. where Reg. 1.
one sc. the Obligee was able at the time of the making of the Obligation and
afterward he is disabled by his own Act, and where he was not able at the time
of the making of the Obligation.

For in the first case the Defendant shall be discharged, and if a man be bound
to another by Obligation upon Condition, that if he pay to the Obligee an
Annuity of 10 l. at the Feast etc. Til he promotes him to a convenable
Benefice, and afterward the Obligee takes a Wife, or enters into Religion, the
Obligor shall be discharged of the Annuity, because he has disabled himself
from receiving a Benefice. But if he be disabled at first when the Obligation
is made, it is otherwise.

Acceptance.
A Man is bound to make a Feoffment of a Manor to the Value of 20 l. per
annum, the Obligee accepts a Manor to the Value of 10 l. he shall have
advantage notwithstanding the Acceptance. 32 H. 7

Action.
WHere the principal thing is divested, Reg. 1.
yet the Plaintiff shall have an Action which is acrued to him by reason
thereof.

If I disseise one, and a stranger does Trespass to me, the disseisee reenters,
I shall have an Action of Trespass for the Trespass before.

And so if a Lord does Trespass and afterward recovers by Cessavit.

WHere the Husband shall have Reg. 2.
an Action without naming his Wife, and where not.

IF a man be disseised of Lands in right of his Wife, he shall have an Assise
in his own name.

Also he shall have a writ of Droit de guard in his own name without his Wife,
Trin. 8 E. 3.

The same Law upon an Obligation to Husband and Wife, the Husband shall have
the Action without the Wife. Trin. 12 R. 2. And in 3 H. 6. adjudged that he
might name his Wife if he would.

The same Law, if the Cattle of the woman be taken in the name of distress, and
I Marry her I shall have Replevin in my own name. Mich. 32 E. 2.

Also of the disturbance of Advowson which a man has in the right of his Wife,
he shall have a Quare impedit in his own name. Pasch. 7 E. 4.

If a man be bound to a woman, and afterward she takes Husband, both shall
have Action. 11 H. 6.

The same Law, if a man be Receiver to a Feme sole, and afterward she takes
Husband, both shall have an Action of Account. Trin. 9 R. 2.

Where the Husband and Wife recover seisin of the Land and damages, for the
damages, they shall join in the Action.

The same Law if a Feme sole makes a Lease reserving Rent, and afterward takes
Husband, they shall join in an Action for the recovery of the Rent. 7 E. 4.

A writ of Droit de guard as of the right of the Wife ought to be brought in
both their names, because it concerns the right and not the possession, by
Choke Anno predicto.

If the Beasts of a Feme sole be distrained, and she takes Husband, the Husband
Sues a Replevin in his own name, it seems the Action does not lie; for in every
case where the cause of Action is given to a Feme sole and not to the Husband,
the Husband ought to join his Wife with him, as if a contract be made with a
Feme sole and she takes Husband, etc.

So it is of a Lease for years made by a Feme sole reserving Rent and She takes
Husband.

So of an Obligation made to a Feme sole and she takes Husband; for otherwise
the words of the writ are false.

But if a Feme sole make a Bailiff of her Manor of Dale, and takes Husband, of
all the Rent received by the Bailiff after Coverture, the Husband shall have an
Action of Account in his own name, for there the words of the writ are true.

And when an Action personal is given to the Husband and also to his Wife
during the Coverture, it is at the Liberty of the Husband to bring the Action
in both their names or in his own name, if it be so that the Wife may have
advantage of it.

When a thing is given to Husband and Wife by matter of Record, then he ought
to join with her.

But there is a Diversity when it is of the part of the Plaintiff and when it
is on the Defendants part, as a Feme sole disseiseth me and takes Husband, the
Assise lies against both, supposing that they both disseised me. So it is of
Trespass.

Note, It is at the Election of the Plaintiff to bring his Action of Debt
against the Heir, or against the Executors.

A Man marries a Wife, That has a Rent Charge out of the Lands of another,
Rent is arrear before and after marriage; The Plaintiff shall recover by Action
of Debt against the Grantor or his Heirs.

Action of Covenant shall not go to the Heir but to the Executors, As Action of
Debt upon a Bond or a Lease for years, the Term goes to the Executors and not
the Heir, or any thing where damages shall be only recovered; for that every
Heir may not have Chattels descend, and so not this Action.

A man seized of a House and Goods makes a Lease thereof, and after enters and
enfeoffs I. S. the Lessee reenters; Rent is in arrear; I. S. brings his Action
of Debt, and has Judgment, because the Rent issues out of the House, and not
out of the goods.

A man was bound in a Bill Me teneri and firmiter obligari in viginti libris
solvendum in watches. It was questioned whether the Action should be brought
for the Watches or the Money. But Resolved for the Money; Otherwise if the
number of Watches had been in the Bill: For then it had been for so many
Watches to the Value of 20 l.

If a man had been indebted to me in a single contract and dyed, I could have
had no remedy at the Common Law against his Executors; For he might have waged
his Law in his Lifetime, but his Executors could not. But now I may have an
Action upon the Case against his Executors.

Assault and Battery and Ejectment will lie both in one Declaration. Where two
Men are beaten together, yet they ought to have several Actions, because the
Trespass is personal; but otherwise it is in real trespasses.

If you bring your Action for live Cattle, it must be Cepit and abduxit But if
it be dead Goods or Chattels, then you must say cepit et asportavit: so
likewise you say for live Cattle pretii, for dead things ad valentiam. Diverse
persons may have an Action of Trespass jointly for Goods taken, or the like;
But of Battery or such personal Trespass the Action ought to be single, unless
it be a man and wife. And if the man and wife bring an Action of Battery or for
Goods taken, The writ shall say the Goods of the Husband only; For the Wife
cannot have property in the Goods during the Coverture.

An Action lies against an Executor upon a promise of the Testators, upon
consideration of forbearing to prosecute; but altered since by the late Act to
prevent Frauds and Perjuries.

If there be Three Executors named in the Testament, and Two of them refuse,
the Third may prove the Will alone; And yet the other Two may meddle with the
Goods when they will, and either of them when they will: And if an Action be
brought, it ought to be in all their names, notwithstanding such refusal,

Executors of Executors shall not have an Action of Debt or other Action for
any thing due to the first Testator, For that they are not Executors to the
first Testator or privies to his Will, but were Strangers by the Course of the
Common Law. But by the Statute of 25 E. 3. Cap. 5. they may Sue and be Sued,
and shall answer for whatsoever comes to their hands of the first Testator.

Sr. O. C. seized of an House in Fee, and possessed of an other House (as
Administrator) for years, Lets them both for 10 years to the Lady S. who
Covenants to keep them in Repair, and so Leave them at the end of the Term.
Afterward Sr. O. grants the Reversion of both Houses by several Indentures to
I. P. The Lease made to the Lady S. expires, and the Houses are left Ruinous;
Whereupon I. P. brings his Action. Nicholls for the Defendant said. that the
Plaintiff ought to have brought two Writs of Covenant, for that the Houses are
several; and if (the Case had been) that the Lessor had Covenanted to repair
them, and had dyed, yet the Lessee should have had one Writ against the Heir,
aad an other Writ against the Executor; and when an Action is once severed, it
can never be joined again: and when Sr. O. has granted the House of which he
was seized in Fee by Deed to P. now the Action is severed, and Sr. O. shall
have an Action of Covenant for one House, and P. for the other. And for these
Reasons he held the Action not to be well brought. Doderidge e contra. And
first he agreed with the other that two Actions upon this Covenant are
maintainable, and that if Sr. O. had let his House the Lessee shall have one
Action upon this Covenant, and the Lessor another; But yet he said this Action
will well lie, for the Law is excellent in this Point, for when the Ground upon
which the Action is founded in one, notwithstanding the things are several, yet
all shall be comprised in one Action, for, frustra fiunt per plura quae fieri
possunt per pauciora, and with this agrees 14 E. 3. If a man grant a Rent out
of his Land to one, and sells the same Land, and afterward the vendee grants
another Rentcharge out of the same Land to the same person, and he is
disseised, He shall have one Assise for both the Rents. So if one distreyn for
two Rents and the Tenant rescuos them, He shall have but one Writ of Rescous, 3
H. 6. 17. and 13 H. 7. 12. b. There exception was taken, because it supposed a
Chasing in two Parks, the which ought to have several Punishments, Viz. for
either Park Imprisonment for 3 years, as it is given by the Statute W. 1. and
because he joins the chasing in two Parks together, it is not good; For a man
cannot have a Writ of Ravishment de deux Guards, nor Quare impedit of two
Churches. Yet by the Judges it was held good eonugh, as of Trespa^s, for a man
may join Lands of twenty Titles in Trespass; and Trespass lies f Wood, Pasture
and the like: and 4 E. 2. if a man hold Lands in Capite and dye, having issue
only two Daughters within age, and they are ravished, the Lord shall have but
one Ravishment de Guard. and 31 H. 6. 14. if a stranger enters upon two
Parceners, they shall have but one Formedon; and if the Lessor shall have one
Writ of Covenant for those Houses, the Assignce shall have the same; For the
Statute of 32 H. 8. ca. 14. gives the Assignee the power of the Lessor; And the
Lord Chief Justice Coke said, If a man seized of Lands in Fee enfeoffs an other
to the use of himself for Life, the Remainder of part to one of his Daughters
and ^he Heirs of her Body issuing, the Remainder of the Residue to the other
Daughter and the Heirs of her body issuing, the Eldest Daughter dies without
Issue, a Stranger enters upon the whole, the other Sister shall have but one
Writ. Mich. 8. Jacobi in Communi Banco inter Pyot and dominam St. John.

If an Infant Lets Lands for a Term of years rendering Rent, he may at his
Election have an Action of Debt for the Rent reserved upon the Lease, or bring
Trespass for occupying of the Land; and so he may have an Action of Trespass
for the use of of a thing sold by him. And if an infant do give an Horse to one
without actual delivery of the Horse into his hands at the time of the gift,
and the Donee takes the Horse by reason of the gift, the Infant may have an
Action of Trespass against him. 18 E. 4. 2. If an Infant makes a Lease for
years (or a Lease per dures) if the Lessee enter, the Infant may have an
Assise; but if the Infant makes a Feoffment and deliver seisin accordingly, he
shall have no Assise; for by the Livery of seisin the Feoffee had a possession
at Will at least; but if he makes a Letter of Attorney to deliver seisin, he
may have an Assise. 9 H. 7. 24. 8. 2. Mar. 109. Dyer. Rug. Case.

If an Obligation be made to Husband and Wife, the writ may be brought in the
Husbands name only. 12 R. 2. Brief 639. And so,

Where a Lease for years is made by Husband and Wife, of the Lands of the Wife,
rendering Rent, the Action of Debt must be brought in the name of the Husband
only, 7 E. 4. 5. But by 2 R. 2. in a Writ concerning a Chattel real, they may
join. 2 R. 2. Brief 37.

As to such things which concern the person of the Wife immediately, there the
Writ must be brought in both their names; And therefore,

The Husband cannot sue a Writ of Appeal for the Rape of his Wife, without
naming the Wife. 8 H. 4. 21. 1 H. 6. 10 H. 4. Brook Baron and Feme 34.

Husband and Wife brought an Action of Battery for the beating of them both,
the Writ was adjudged good for the Battery of the Wife, but not as to the
Husband. 9 E. 4. 54.

The Husband and the Wife shall both bring an Action of Trespass for the taking
away the Goods of the Wife before Marriage. 21 H. 33.

In a Writ of Detinue of Chartres against Husband and Wife, Declaration was
upon a Trover, and the Writ was abated. 13 R. 2. Brief 644.

A Writ of Covenant was brought by the Husband and Wife, for that the Defendant
had Leased to them Lands by Deed for Term of years, and afterward ousted them;
and the Writ was adjudged to be good; for if the Husband dies, the Wife shall
have the Term, and in this Case they were both parties to the Covenant. 47 E.
3. 12.

An Action of Debt for the arrearages of Rent reserved upon a Lease for years
made unto the Husband and the Wife, shall be brought against them both; and so
shall a Writ of Wast: for the Wife cannot waive the Lease during the life of
the Husband. 6 E. 4. 10 and 17 E. 4. 7.

An Action upon the Statute of Laborers was brought against Husband and Wife,
supposing that the Wife had Covenanted with the Plaintiff to be waiting woman
to his Wife for a year, and that she departed out of service within the year,
and the writ was adjudged to be good being brought against them both, 8 R. 2.
Laborers. 59.

A man may have a writ of Detinue of Charters and of Chattels jointly, because
there one thing is the ground of the Action, viz. the Deteyner. 44 E. 3. 41
Brief 583.

Likewise a man may have a writ of Debt where part of the Debt is due by
Obligation and part by Contract, because there the Debt is only occasion of the
suit. 41 E. 3, damage 75. 1 H. 5. 4.

So in things of the like nature one writ may comprehend many wrongs; and
therefore an Action of the Case was brought for hindering the Plaintiff to hold
his Leet, 2. for the disturbance of his Servants and Tenants in the gathering
his Tithe, 3. for Threatening so that the people etc. durst not come to a
certain Chapel to do their Devotion, and present their Offerings, and 4. for
the taking of his Servants and Chattels. 19 R. 2. Action sur le Case 52.

When an Action is given by the Statute, and the Statute does not prescribe any
certain form of the writ, the writ framed at the Common Law shall serve for
that purpose, and the special matter shall be set forth in the Declaration.
Dyer 37. a. 83.

Where a man shall have an Action against his own Deed.
A man shall have an Action against his own Deed, as if I disseise an Abbot and
make Feoffment in Fee with waranty, and afterward I am made Abbot of the same
House, my Feoffment shall not be a Bar to me, notwithstanding it was with
warranty; I shall have an Action against my Alienee, because that I recover to
the use of the House and not to my own use.

The same Law, if I disseise Major and Commonalty etc.

The same Law of the Parson of a Church.

The same Law if I take a Horse of a Feme sole and Sell it, and afterward
marry her, I shall have an Action of Debt against my Alienee, because that I
recover to the use of my Wife, tamen quaere.

A Monk shall have a Quo minus debitum Domini Regis solvere non potest for the
advantage upon a Lease made by the King reserving Rent, 14 H. 4.

The same Law if a Villein be made executor to a man to whom the Lord is Bound,
the Villein shall have an Action against his Lord.

The same Law if a Monk be made Executor etc.

The same Law if an Abbot has been disseised, and afterward the disseisor is
desseised, the Disseisor releaseth with warranty and after that is made Abbot,
he shall find against his own Deed etc.

The same law if an Abbot make a Feoffment in Fee, and afterward is deposed
and sometime after is made Abbot, now he shall have an Action against his Deed
which he himself made when he was Abbot, because that now he comes in as
Successor, and not in the place as he was before.

The same Law of Warden and Scholars.

But it would have been otherwise, if he had disseised a Parson; and made
Feoffment in Fee with warranty, or without warranty, and afterward is made
Parson, now if he will use an Action, his own Feoffment shall be a Bar against
him, because that all that he shall recover by this Action is to his own use.

The same Law if a man disseise a woman, and makes a Feoffment in Fee, and
afterward he takes the woman to Wife, in this case the Husband shall be
Barred, because that he will have advantage of this Recovery to his own use.

If a man has right to have Land where his Entry is toll, and releaseth to
the Tenant all manner of Actions, and dye, his Heir shall have his Action and
recover the Land, because that by such release no right is extinguished; and if
the Tenant makes Feoffment in Fee or dies seized, he that made the release
shall have his Action against the Heir of the Tenant or his Feoffee against his
own release, and the cause is, because that nothing is released but his Action
against the same person, and not any right.

If the Son disseise his Father, and make a Feoffment with warranty or without
warranty, and after his Father dies, he cannot ouste his Feoffee because that
it was his own Deed.

A man has good cause of Action sometimes, and yet by matter ex post facto and
by the Act of a Stranger his Action is destroyed.
As I am disseisee and he is disseisor, and I release to the disseisor.

Also I bail or lend Goods to one, a Stranger takes them, the bailor sells them
to a Stranger etc.

Action of Debt upon an obligation brought by an Executor, the writ shall be
detinet and not debet, and for this cause they join in the same Action for an
Horse delivered by themselves to the same Obligor.

The same Law, if a man recover Lands by default in which I have an Estate for
life, and he recovers by another writ by default Lands wherein I have an Estate
Tail, I shall have a Quod ei deforceat, because the conclusion of the writ
serves me. And so a man may join two or three things in his Action where the
conclusion of his Action is pertinent to the several matters and does not vary.

If two or three Acres are given severally in tail, and the party discontinue
the whole, his Heir shall have Formedon for the whole, because that the writ is
le quel un I. dit S. dona, and although the Acres are given severally, that is
not material, forasmuch as the common Writ will serve in this case.

But if the Acres are given by diverse or several men, or that the one shall be
given to the Heirs Males, and the other to the Heirs Females, and the third to
the Heirs General, in this case the Heir shall have several writs, and not one
writ, because that one writ cannot serve for such several Gifts.

If I deliver Goods to one who is indebted to me, and he dies, against his
Executors I may have a writ for the Goods and for the Debt, because that the
writ is against the Executors for the Debt in the Detinet, and for the detinue
it is in the Detinet, and therefore the writ well warrants the count to declare
partly for debt and partly for Detinue; but such an Action he could not have
had against the Testator, because that for the debt against him the writ ought
to have been in the debet and detinet.

A Feoffment is made upon condition of payment by the Feoffor, he commits
Trespass, and afterward enters by force of payment etc. yet the Feoffee shall
have Trespass because his possession is affirmed. 43 E. 3.

Assumpsit, If he would relinquish such a debt to pay him 30 l. and says he
did relinquish it etc. and after Verdict for the Plaintiff, Judgment stayed
because he shows not how he relinquished it and it may be by parol which were
void. Gregory versus Lovell. 3 Cro. 292.

Assumpsit in Consideration he would discharge him from an Arrest; and says,
that exoneravit ipsum: moved in Arrest etc. he shows not how he discharged him
sed non allocatur; for they might be per parol or for a time but in Pleading a
discharge of a Rent or bond which must be by Deed and perpetual, it must be
showed how, King versus Hobs. 2. Cro. 930. 960.

Assumpsit; the Defendant pleads the discharge of the promise, whereof Issue
taken and found for the Plaintiff, and diverse defects in the Declaration, moved
in Arrest of Judgment; but by Wr^y all these defects tending to the Assumpsit,
are cured by the collateral Plea. Manwood v. Buston. 2. Leond. 203, 204.

Assumpsit, If he would make it appear etc. and says he made it appear by the
Court-Roll, Good, without saying what the Court Rolls were for the Infinitely.
So a Bond to save harmless from all Estreates, good, without showing what, for
the same reason, Vide 9 E. 4. 15. a. 22 E. 4. 41. a Mo. Pl. 1175. 3 Cro. 149
Pl, 3. 919. Pl. 3. 3 Bulst 31. Latch 130. H. 2. H. 7. Pl 22. H. 6. H. 7. Pl. 8.
8. 22 E. 4. 15. ab. 28. b. 29. a.

Assumed he would assign Goods to pay etc. and says he assigned, and shows not
how, but per scriptum yet good; Note, after verdict. Forth v. Yates Tr. 30 Car.
2. B R.

Assumpsit against an Executor, who Pleads solvit to such a one on a Bond of
100 l. and to another 100 l. on a Bond, and so to diverse others which he was
forced to do, the Payment being post exhibitionem Bille, and Pleads a
Recognizance in force not satisfied; the Plaintiff Pleads non solvit to such a
one 100 l. nor to such a one 100 l. Et si de ceteris and hoc petit etc. and to
the Recognizance, that it was satisfied and kept in force of Fraud; the
Defendant demurred quia replicatio multiplied and double, consisting of two
matters, where one goes to the whole; but Judgment for the Plaintiff; for the
first objection to one 100 l. to another 100 l. make several Issues though que
de hoc. And in case of an Executor one may answer to every thing alleged by
him. H. 21, 22. Car. 2. B. R. Jeffreys v. Dod.

Assumpsit to permit Land to descend, breach laid quod non permisit; well,
being in the negative, but in the affirmative it ought to be showed how
disposed, though they could not descend. H. 9. Jac. B. R. rot. 3 Bulstr. 18.

Assumpsit to perform an Award, and sets it forth; the Defendant pleads that
they did not Award modo et forma, etc. Et hoc paratus, etc. ill; there he
should have concluded all pais. And on general demurrer ibidem where an Award
was, That one bound with Sureties, assigns breach that he did not become bound
modo et forma etc.. well, though the Award bind as to the Surety, it is good as
to him. A breach assigned that he did not etc. and the modo et forma extends
not to the Surety, but to himself only, though it be made modo et forma as
Awarded. Cook versus Whorewood H. 22, 23. Car. 2. B. R. rot. 116.

Assumpsit, If he would abate Ten Pounds and forbear the 90 l. till Michaelmas
to pay it, and declares, that he abated the 10 l. but shows not how; but held
ill on demurrer per tot. Cur. Thornton v. Kempe. 3 Cro. 477.

In Conspiracy the Defendant justifies to carry in the Presentment found in a
Leet before the justification, and though there is no Conspiracy, yet he must
plead que est eadem Conspiratio. P. 27 H. 8. Pl. 6.

Conspiracy, the Defendant pleads, the Plaintiff has another Writ, depending
for the same; the Plaintiff replies null tiel record; and so 19 H. 6. 57. a
Pleads, that he removed; the other Pleads null tiel Record of the removal. 9 H.
6. 14. a.

Amendment.
IF an Original Writ be defaced, it may be Amended at the discretion of the
Justices. Hill. 25 et 26. Car. 2. B. R.

The Clerk in the King's Bench may amend the Roll until a Recordatur be thereof
made either in Writ of Error, or by rule of Court. Trin. 26 Car 2. in B. R.

A Note was brought to a Clerk to make an Obligation, who for milite, writ
generoso, upon which the Process issuing, the Plaintiffs Counsel came and
prayed that this Misprision of the Clerk might be amended; and upon mature
deliberation all the Court agreed, that it should be amended, and the Lord
Chief Justice said, That at the Common Law no Original might be amended in this
Court before the Statute of 8 H. 6. ca. 12. Which Statute enables them to amend
only Misprision; that is, when the Clerk takes one word for another, or where
he writes a Latin word which is not Latin or false Latin, as hos breve, for hoc
breve. 9 H. 7. 16. b. or imaginavit for imaginatus fuit; Benlowes Reports, fo.
19. or in a Writ of Partition to say Ostensurus quare non fuit, for fuerit, or
Henricus deigratia etc. when dei gratia should not be in the Writ; or if it be
matter of Form, as Praecipe quod solvat, for reddat, 22 E. 4. in all which
Cases last cited, there shall be no amendment. And the Lord Chief Justice Coke
said, That if the Defenda^t had been sued to the Utlary, he would not have
amended it; but the Principal not being so, it was amended. [See 11 H. 7. 2. 10
H. 7. 25. 11 H. 7. 1. and Co. 8. Blackmores Case, 156.] Mich. 8 Jacobi Regis in
Communi Banco.

If one makes an Obligation, and Seal and deliver it and mistakes the day; yet
by Coke Lord Chief Justice, it is good. Mich. 8. Ja. ^bi supra.

If the Test and the Retorn of a Venire facias be both upon one and the same
day, it is no Error, (although the* Test ought to bear date Fourteen days
after) but shall be amended; and 7 E. 4. a Venire facias was retornable Mense
Michaelis; whereas it should have been Octabis Michaelis, and the Jurors
appeared; It was agreed by the whole Court, That it should be amended, and that
Error did not lie thereof. Co. 8. Blackmores Cases. fo. 156.

After Verdict in Ejectione firmae, these Errors were alleged in Arrest of
Judgment, That, where the Declaration was prout praedictus Willielmus, which
should have been Johannes. 2. praedictus defendens similiter, ponit se super
patriam, which ought to have been querens; These are not Errors, but
Misprisions of the Clerk, which by the Judgment of the whole Court shall be
amended. So 11 H. 7. 2. b. per Brian praedictus defendens etc. was amended, and
10 H. 7. 23. b. per Townsend, a Bar was pleaded by the Tenant, which concluded
with praedictus Johannes, is ready to aver etc. where it should have been
Rogerus; It was amended by the Advice of all the Justices; and Coke Lord Chief
Justice said, That Misprisions were amendable at Common Law in the same Term;
for during the Term the Record is in pectore Judicis, as 1 H. 6. 29 in Brooks
Abridgment, Title Amendment 32. if Judgment be entered in the King's Bench or
Common Pleas otherwise then it is in Truth; Or if Tales be awarded and marked
on the back of the Writ, or of a Scrowl, and not entered on the Roll, All these
things may be amended in the Term (and the reason of the Book is) because that
the Record is in the Justices, and under their care the same Term, and not
esteemed to be on the Roll so absolutely, but that they may amend the same at
their discretions; for they do not account it a Record until the next Term: And
this Amendment is by the Common Law, and not by the Statutes of Amendment of a
Syllable or Letter. And per Cheine, ibid. The Justices of the Common Pleas
after a Writ of Error cannot at all amend the Roll where a Judgment was given
the same Term, and is mistaken in the Entry, because the Roll is not a Record
of that Term. And herewith agrees 5 E. 3. That this was so at the Common Law
until the Statute of 14 E. 3. came, which gives Power to amend process in the
other Term; and after 46 E. 3. the Case was, Et praedictus defendens similiter,
whereas it ought to have been Querens, but it was not amended, because it was
an old Roll, and the Statute gives Authority only for New of the same Term they
are Entered; and then was made the Statute of 26 H. 8. which gives power to
amend a Plea Roll, but no Omissions can be thereby amended but Misprisions
only. Mich. 9 Jacobi in Communi Banco, Weeks versus Blacksteed. Lessee de
Cambden.

A Venire facias in Ejectment is a warded to the Sheriff, wherein the Plaintiff
is named I. P. the Jury is returned and give their Verdict by his true name viz
P. P. and so is the Postea. The Court said, If the Record be true, and not the
Process, it may be amended as a Misprision of the Clerk; but contra if the
Record be false and the Process true, but in the principal point the venire
facias was void, and therefore they would advise upon it. Mich. 10. Jacobi in
C. B. Peircy versus Milton.

In Quare impedit the Writ was by the Misprision of the Clerk Bicaria, where it
ought to have been Vicaria, and it was amended. After a Writ of Error brought
in the Kings Bench, Sergeant Hutton moved that the Warrant of Attorney might be
amended where the Christian name was omitted, but entered in the Clerk of the
Warrants Office upon the Statute of 38 H. 6. and it was amended. Mich. 14
Jacobi in C. B.

A Judicial Writ shall be amended by the Record, because it came from thence.
Paschae 15 Jacobi in C. B.

The Original Writ is primo Martii, and in the Declaration it is primo Maii, it
is void; for there is no such Record, and it cannot be amended, because the
Count cannot be amended. 4 E. 4. and Come Chief Justice said, That a Judgment
given without an Original is not void, but voidable. Mich. 10 Jacobi ubi supra.

Misprision shall be amended by the Statute of 14 E. 3.

As upon Variance between the Count or Declaration and the Writ, if it be in
default of the Clerk, it shall be amended.

The same Law, if an Exigent be awarded retornable Octabis Michaelis, and the
Roll is Quindena Martini. 7 E. 4.

The same Law, in Trespass the Parties were at Issue, and Venire facias and
Habeas corpora were served, and Distringas awarded with Nisi prius, the Roll
was Quindena Martini, and the Writ Mense Michaelis, at the day in pais the
Justices took the Enquest, notwithstanding that it was brought without Warrant,
the Writ of Nisi prius shall be amended. 7 E. 4

The same Law, Ravishment de guard was brought against one Banaster, and the
Process was Vanastr', and for that it was amendded. Mich. 4 H. 6.

The same Law, if the Roll vary from the Original, the Process etc. 19 H. 6.

Amendment is properly where there is default in the Clerk, as where a man
shows an Obligation to a Clerk of the Chancery, and the Clerk does not make a
good Origiginal upon it, now it shall be amended because the Clerk had
sufficient Instructions: but it is contrary if he show the Clerk only a Copy of
the Obligation.

The like Law if a man brings a Formedon, and these words, quam ^lamat esse jus
et heredltatem suam, are omitted, there the Original shall be amended, for the
Clerk ought to look to his Register, and there he might see in what Form he
should make the said Writ.

So it shall be where the Original is good in any case, and the judicial
Process naught, it shall always be amended; for it appears to be wholly the
default of the Clerk.

The like Law shall be, in Trespass the Defendant pleaded non cul. et ponit se
super patriam, and the Clerk entered it Et def. similiter where it should have
been, Et praedictus querens similiter; this shall be amended, because it
appears that the default is in the Clerk, as in other cases before.

But where no default is in the Clerk, otherwise; as if in a Plea, that matter
which he would a verre be omitted, it shall not be omitted, it shall not be
amended, for it is part of the Plea.

The like, if a Color be omitted in a Writ of Trespass or Assise. And so see
the diversity.

In Assise brought against two or three where one is Tenant and the other is
Disseisor, the Tenant takes the Tenancy upon him and Pleads in Bar, now if the
Plaintiff makes Title and Traverseth the Bar, and concludes, et issint fuit il
seisie tanque per les trois disseisie; this Plea is not good, for he ought to
maintain his Writ, and there he shall have it pro falso clamore.

So it is in Trespass, a second Capias is awarded, and then an Exigent, the
Defendant appears upon the Exigent and shows the matter, now the whole Process
is discontinued and shall not be amended, for it was the fault of the Party,
for he ought to pray his Process at his peril, and then the Office of the Clerk
is to make it as it should be etc.

So if Summons be awarded in Precipe quod reddat, and afterward a petit cape
or grand Cape be made, it shall not be amended for the cause rehearsed.

A Judgment given in a Writ of Annuity was reversed, for that the Writ of
Annuity was Precipe quod reddat 26 marc' 6d 8^ que ei aretro sunt de annuo
reddit' 4 marc' per annum, and the Count the 6s 8d were left out; and because
that there was a disagreement and it is the warrant of the Writ, it was
reversed, for the Count is by the Party and not by the Clerk. 9 E. 4.

Venire facias was made Vicecomiti, but Salop, was omitted, and the Sheriff of
Salop impanelled the Jury, and it was amended a Trial, and diversity taken
whereby special Plea the issue shall be of another County, and the Award of the
venire f^cias special, there it shall be ill: but where upon general Issue or
within the same County the Award is fiat inde Jurata, there it s^all be
amended. Yelvertons Rep. Lee verse Lacon 69. and 2 Cro. 73.

Appearance.
A Man is Arrested upon mean Process, and gives Surety to the Sheriff by bond
to appear, and after Supersedeas comes to the Sheriff before the day of
appearance; Yet the Defendant ought to appear, otherwise the Bond is not saved.

By the Statute of W. 2. a man of 70 years old shall not be amerced for not
appearing upon the Jury. per tot. Cur. Mich. 9 Ja. in C. B.

Annuity.
AN Annuity is granted pro consilio impenso et impendendo to one Plumer an
Attorney; There is a Suit depending between the Grantor and a Stranger; The
Attorney gives Council to the Stranger, That is adversary to the Grantor, But
it is not required to give Council to the Grantor in that Cause; Whether this
was against the effect and intent of the Grant aforesaid; And it was held not,
by the Court, and that the Annuity should continue.

Note, in Annuity it is not necessary to express in the Declaration the Estate
of the Grantor, but only to say, That the Grantor did grant the Annuity. Co.
Entr. Fol. 49.

Arbitrament.
DEbt upon Obligation or upon arr^arages of account cannot be put in
arbitrament with other Trespasses or such like, notwithstanding the submission
be by Deed; but it is otherwise of a contract; quod nota.

Arbitrament is not good except that the party can perform it without the aid
or license of an other, as if Arbitrators award, that the one Party s^all
enfeoffee the other of the Manor of D. of which I. S. is seized, this is a
void Arbitrament, and yet it is possible, for he might disseise I. S. and make
Feoffment etc. or might purchase the Manor of I. S. and thereof make Feoffment
according to the Award, but the party shall not be charged with these mischiefs
and therefore the Arbitrament shall be void. Otherwise it is, if the Award was,
that one of the parties s^all Enfeoffe the other of the Manor of D. generally,
without speaking of I. S. that he is there compell^d to make Feoffment thereof.
And so note the diversity where it appears upon the Award, and where not.

Further, if the Award be that he shall go to Paul's with an Estranger, this is
void, and vet it is possible, but peradventure the Stranger will not go with
him.

Note. if the Award be that one of the parties shall deliver to the other the
Goods that is in the house of I. S. this is void, and yet it is not impossible,
but because that he might do wrong to I. S. to enter into his house and to
convey his Goods from thence.

But if the Property of the Goods be in the party that is to perform the
Arbitrament peradventure it may be otherwise, forasmuch as his Entry is lawful.

Audita Quaerela.
A Statute is Acknowledged before the Major of Westminster and Recordor of
London according to the Statute; The Cognizor being within the age of one and
twenty (viz.) 20 years and upwards; And after his full age to the 23 d he
brings his Audita Quaerela upon this matter and Judgment, that he take nothing
by the Writ, because it could not then be tried by inspection, whether he were
within age or not; And the form of the Writ in the Registors is to allege
that he still is within age.

Audita Quaerela lies upon Nihil facias, but not upon Sc^re facias, 21 E. 3.
For vigilantibus et don dormientibus subvenient Leges, per Hutton, Mich. 11
Jacobi in C. B.

The Executor of the Conusee releaseth to the Conusor in a Statute Merchant,
and afterward dies, and one takes Administration of the Goods of the Conusee
not Administered, and has Execution of the Statute, and against him the Conusor
brings an Audita Quaerela. Trin. 28 Eliz. rotulo 2136 in C. B.

Avowry, vide Replevin.
AVowry for an Amerciament in a Court Baron quia presentatum fuit, that he was
Summoned and came not, and alleadges in fact, that he was resident etc. as he
must etc. for when it is only presentatum etc. and not alleged in fact, it is
ill. Mo. Pl. 221.

In Avowry it was set forth, that a Dean and Chapter were seized in Jure
Ecclesie, and not said seized in Fee, and held ill: for they might be seized
per auter vie, and their Title ought to be certainly set forth, and this is but
that they made a Lease for 99 years, per dodrige if it had been that they made
a Lease for 200 years, it had employed a Feoffment in Fee Pop. 163. Latch. 121.
Avowry

Avowry for damage feasant, and shows a Lease from I. S. seized in Fee: the
Plaintiff says I. S. was seized in Tail, and conceives the Estate to himself as
Heir; the Avowal seizes the Land rendering Rent, and that he had accepted it,
Qu. If it be not a departure. 1 Jnst. 304. It seems a fortifying of the Avowry,
and so not, Sti. 41. Tailors Case, Yelv. 134. Wood versus Haukshind. i. Cro.
156. 2 Cro. 121. 3 Cro. 404 Die. 956. 1 Jnst. 304 Hob. 271 Die. 103. 253 b. Yelv.
96 Leon. 32. 156.

Avowry on a New Grant of a new Rentcharge in Fee, the Plaintiff pleads, that
nothing passes by the Deed; it is an ill Plea, he should have said that he did
not grant by the Deed; for a thing not in Esse, could not pass though it was
raised by the Deed, Stewards Case. 2 Leond. 13.

Avowry by an Executor for Rent reserved by her and her Husband upon a Lease
for years derived out of a Lease; Exception taken, because not showed when the
Husband dyed, so it appeared not due in his time but because all belongs to
her, one way or other, Wellwood in Newman Latch 121 Pop. 163.

Costs to the Avowant upon 7 H. 8. c. 4 vide Common et Commoners, Sect 4.

Costs given to the Avowant for Damage-Fesant, by 21 H. 8. c. 19. Cro. 1. James
verse Tutneg 532.

Replevin against 3, the one Avowes, and the other 2 makes Conusance, and
Judgment against the Plaintiff; but reversed, because that those two did not
make Conusance as Bailiffs to another. Yelv. Owen verse Williams, 108.

The Lord has still his choice to avow as at the Common Law, but if he will
take the Benefit of the Statute, then the Privity on both sides is removed, and
the Tenant shall Plead any discharge though he be a mere Stranger; for the
Charge of the Land is only in question, though in that Statute 21 H. 8. there
be no literal Provision so to be. Hob. Brown verse. Goldsmith 108.

Avowry for 5 l. and 80 l. nomine poenae, no demand of the Rent was alleged,
which made it unsufficient for the penalty; but Return adjudged to him, for
they appeared to the Court to be several. Hob. 133 Howel verse Samback.

If the Donee Alien, the Donor cannot Avow upon the Alienee Keilway. 130. b.

Prescription, that if one be chosen Constable at the Leet he must serve
himself, or find a sufficient man to do it; and the Avowant says, that the
Plaintiff was chosen; and did not find a sufficient man to serve; upon which it
was demurred, and Adjudged, That the Avowry was ill. Escot verse Stokes. 14 Car
2. in B.

One who is a Stranger to the Avowry shall not Plead any Plea but horse de son
Fee, or some other which is Tantamount.

As Lord and Tenant, the Tenant makes a Lease, the Termor shall plead no Plea
but horse de son Fee, because that he is a Stranger to the Avowry, and he cannot
have a Writ of Mesne, because it is a Maxim, Where a man cannot be helped by
way of Action, he shall be aided by way of Reversion.

He that is a Stranger to the Avowry cannot disclaim, for a man cannot disclaim
in auter droit. An Abbot cannot disclaim, nor Tenant in Tail. Mich. 9 E. 4. fo.
34. Hill. 8 H. 5. Disclaimer 11. 26.

If a man has common by Especialty, as in Land held of me, the Rent is not
arrear, if I take the Beasts of the Commoner I do him wrong, and he shall
recover damages; for he may Plead rien arrere, although that he be a Stranger
to the Avowry.

If the Tenant be in arrearages with his Lord, and the Tenant makes a Feoffment
in Fee, which was notice to the Lord; in this case the Lord may choose whether
he will take him for his Tenant or not, if he will not tender him his
arrearages; and the reason is, if he will accept him for his Tenant generally,
he shall never be received to avow for the arrearages afterward.

But if the Tenant dye, so that the Tenancy discends to his Son, or that the
Tenancy is recovered, or that the Tenant has forjudg'd the Mesne, so that he
is become Tenant to the Lord Paramount, in all these Cases he shall accept them
for his Tenants, and make Avowry upon them for all the arrearages; and the
reason is, because they are become Tenants to him against his Will.

As to Avowries 5 things are to be known.
1. AVowry upon my very Tenant, where the Lord has the Rent in Fee simple, and
the Tenant the Tenancy in Fee.

2. Avowry upon my very Tenant by the manner, as I make a Gift in Tail,
remainder over reserving Rent.

Also if Tenant by the Courtesy, I avow upon him as before.

Also where a man dies seized of three entire Manors, and if his Wife be
endowed of one Manor entire.

3. Avowry upon my Tenant by the manner, as Lessee for life rendering Rent. Also
if a Woman be endowed of the third part of a Manor, the Heir distrains her and
avowes.

4. Avowry upon the Land, as a Rentcharge is granted, the Grantee avowes in
the Lands charged with his distress.

5. Avowry upon my matter, as I am seized in Fee, and let for years for certain
Rent, and so show the whole matter.

Avowry for Homage, or for Rent-service, although that the Avowry be made upon
the person uncertain, yet in this case he that is a Stranger cannot plead any
thing but horse de son Fee, or that which is Tantamount, as a Release etc. which
prove the Land to be out of the Fee of the Lord.

A Man cannot avow the taking of Beast for Rent arrear, if those Beasts were
taken by Night, but for damage Fesant he may. Pasch. 10 E. 3.

Where the Avowant shall justify, and where he shall make Avowry.

Where the Avowant is of right to have the thing for which he distrains, he
shall make Avowry, although that the Estate of him upon whom he avows be
determined; as if I let Lands for term d'auter vie, and I distrain for the
Rent, cestuy que vie dies, the other sues Replevin, I make Avowry for homage;
he that ought to do homage dies, his Executors sue Replevin, now I ought to
justify because the thing for which the the distress was made by his death is
gone and extinct.

As, two Jointenants, the one enfeoffs a Stranger of all that etc. upon
Condition the Feoffee gives notice to the Lord, here he holds of the Lord pro
particula illa, and the Lord shall have several Rents of the Tenants. And yet
if the Lord grant the services of the Feoffee to a Stranger, and he attorne,
and afterward the Condition is broken by which the Feoffor who was jointenant
enters again, here the Jointure is revived, and they hold the grant of Services
of his part, and the other Jointenant holds of the Lord as he held before, and
yet they are Jointenants.

Avowry by the Lord for homage, and alleges seisin by the Husband of Lands
which he has in Right of his Wife. The Plaintiff alleges that the Husband
has nothing but in right of his Wife, and although he alleges seisin by the
Husband etc. yet he shows that the Husband was seized in his demesne as of
Fee, without that, that the Wife has any thing etc. 11 H. 4.

If a man makes Avowry upon one as Son and Heir of his Mother, where he is in
as Heir to his Father, the Avowry is abated.

In Avowry for Rent Service, or any other Rent, except that he shows the
Commencement of the Rent, as a Gift in tail or a Grant of a Rentcharge, he
ought to alledg no seisin of the Rent in his Avowry, because he shows the
Commencement of the Rent.

In Avowry for Homage or Escuage, if he show not the Commencement of the
Tenure, he ought to show seisin of the Homage, or otherwise it is not good.

Avowry for Releif or aid pur file marrier, he ought not to alledg seisin of
the Releif nor of the Aid because that they are no parcel of the Tenure as
Homage or Escuage be, but incident to the Seigniory.

Where in Avowry the Defendant shall answer to the seisin, and where he shall
traverse.
IN Avowry the Lord alleges seisin of the services, the Tenant cannot
traverse the Tenure in part but he shall answer to the seisin; For in Avowry
the Tenant shall not avoid encroachment of Services; but in a Writ of Rescous
or in Assife he may avoid the encrochment, and not answer to the Tenure.

If the Lord encroch an other thing which was not part of the Tenure before the
encrochment, it is void, and the party shall avoid it and Travers it
notwithstanding seisin alleged; as where the Tenant holds by Homage and Ten
shillings, the Lord encroches a Horse; this encrochment is void because it is
an other thing, and other then the Tenure was before. Also where the Lord
avowes for Homage and Ten shillings Rent, the Tenant may say that he holds of
him by Homage Ancestrel, without that, that he holds of him by Homage and ten
shillings; in this case he shall not answer to the seisin, because that he may
traverse the entire Tenure of the same thing, quod nota.

Where the Effect of the Plea shall be Traversed.
THe Avowant avows, that I. S. was seized of an Acre of Land, and so seized
grants him Twenty shillings Rent in Fee; The Plaintiff says that the said I.
S. had nothing but for Term of Life of the Lease of the Plaintiff, the which I.
S. is dead; this is a good Plea, and the Plaintiff shall not say, without that,
that I. S. was seized in Fee, and yet the Avowant alleges that he was seized
in Fee, and the Plaintiff says that he had nothing but for Term of Life which
is in a manner contrary, and yet the plea is good, and he shall not be
compelled to say, without that, that he was seized in Fee, and the reason is,
because that seisin in Fee was not the effect of the Avowry, but the Grant
which is confessed and avoided; and because Seisin in Fee is not the effect,
the Plaintiff may answer it by an Affirmative, and shall not be compelled to
travers with a without that.

The same Law is in Avowries, when the Avowant says that he was seized of an
Acre in Fee, and let the same to the Plaintiff for Life or for years reserving
Rent, and for Rent arrear he avows. The Plaintiff says that one I. S. was
seized in his demesne as of Fee, and let to the Avowant for the life of I. N.
the which I. N. dyed, and the said I. S. entered, before whose Entry there was
nothing arrear; this is a good Plea, and he shall not need to say, without
that, that the Avowant was seized in Fee at the time of the Lease for if the
Seisin had been the Effect of his Avowry, he ought to have Traversed or
Confessed and Avoided, and this he has notdone, for the Avowant says that he
was seized in Fee, and the Plaintiff says that he was seized but for Term of
Life, the which is no direct Travers, but Argumentative, but the Plea is good
enough because that the seisin is not the Effect of the Bar but the Lease,
quod nota.

Bail.
ALattitat is sued out against two in a Joint Action, and both taken, one puts
in Bail as of Michaelmas and the other of Hillary Term; The Court was moved
That the Bail of Michaelmas Term might be taken off and filed as of Hillary
Term, Else it would be Error to declare in a Joint Action upon Bail for one in
Michaelmas, and the other in Hillary Term, quod concessum fuit per curiam.

If a Captas be awarded and Returned non est inventus against the Principal,
and the Bail bring him not in, If the Principle dye, although there be no Scire
facias against the Bail, Yet the Bail is chargeable; For though the Court will
excuse the Bail, Yet the Bail if they bring in the Principle before the Return
of the Second scire facias, yet this is of grace and not of necessity.

If the Husband and Wife be Arrested for the Debt of the Wife, and the Baron
find Bail for himself, yet he may be detained until ^e find Bail for his Wife;
but he shall not be detained until find Bail for her Husband, or the Husband
for himself.

Judgment was given against one in the King's Bench, upon which he was in
Execution, and had another Judgment against him in the Common Pleas, in which
Court his Sureties to save their Bail brought him to the Bar by Habeas Corpus
to render his Body; but before that he had brought a writ of Error in the
King's Bench to reverse the Judgment in the Common Pleas, but the Record was not
removed. In this Case the Court said, When a man comes in to save his Bail, he
shall not be committed if the party do not pray it, but when Error is brought
before that he be in Execution, it is a supersedeas, so that they cannot commit
him at the Prayer of the party. And Waller Prothonatory said, That the Bail is
to render his Body so that the Party may take it in execution, but here he
cannot, in regard a writ of Error is brought, and therefore the Sureties shall
be discharged. Mith. 14 Jacobi in Banco Communi.

In the Common Pleas the Bail is bound in a certain sum, but it is not so in
the King's Bench; and when a man enters Bail in the King's Bench in a cause, they
shall be charged in all Suits between the same parties entered the same Term.

The Bail shall answer for all Actions brought the same Term against the Party
for, whom he is Bail; but if a man be bail for another, and has Lands in Fee,
and he declares, and afterward the Bail sells his Lands, and an other
commenceth a Suit against the party the same Term, he shall not be charged with
the other Actions. Cro. lib 2. fo. 449. Term. no Sci' Hillarii Anno 15 Jacobi
Regis.

One Gabriel Mihil was indebted to A. B. and put in Bail in the Common Pleas to
pay the same, and afterward A. B. Arrested Mihil in London for the same Debt,
whereupon Judge Forster (the other Judges being in the Chancery) awarded an
Attachment against A. B. for this Contempt; and herewith agrees. 2 H. 7. Hill.
15 Jac. in C. B.

Bankrupt.
IF Creditors after a Commission of Bankrupt is sued forth, although at the
first they refused, yet within three or four months they come and tender their
proportion toward the charges of the Commission, They shall be received to
have their parts, as the other Creditors, if no distribution has been made of
the Bankrupts estate before.

The Commissioners of a Bankrupt may sell the Goods of a Bankrupt, although the
Bankry, had sold them or disposed of them to his Creditors, if the sale or
disposal thereof were after he became a Bankrupt.

The Commissioners may sell the Copyhold Lands of a Bankrupt, for and toward
the payment of his Debts by Deed inden^ed and enrolled, declaring how he was
found a Bankrupt, and expressing to the use of the Creditors, and at next Court
the vendee shall be admitted and have his Copy.

I. C. and R. C. brought an Action of Debt jointly upon a joint Debt assigned
to them by Commissioners upon the Statute of Bankrupts and it was said by the
whole Court, that the Commissioners had not pursued their Authority by that
joint Assignment; for they ought prorata to have assigned to every one; but
quere if the joint Debt may be divided among the C^ed^tors: and the Lord Chief
Justice said, That a Custom may devide a Debt, and then a fortiori an Act of
Parliament may. Mich. 10 Jacobi in C. B.

A Bankrupt cannot make sale of any of his Goods after he becomes Bankrupt; but
Goods which he has as Executor, or a Legacy before it be invested in him, or a
Grant of a Reversion before Entry, all these shall not be charged within the
Statute. But if a man sells those Goods which he has as Executor, and
afterward retakes an Estate to himself, or converts them to his own use, this
is within the Statute. Per dom. Coke et alios justic' Pasch. 9. Jac. in Com
Banco. A man shall not Forfeit those Goods which he has as Executor by
Outlary. ib.

Bar.
A Man may be Barred pro tempore, and yet afterward he shall have his Action.

IN Debt against an Executor he Pleads plene administravit, and so it is found,
the Plaintiff shall be Barred; and yet if Goods comes to his hands which were
the Testators, he shall have a Writ of Debt.

The same law in Debt against an Heir who pleads Riens per descent, which is
found so, and afterward he has Lands by descent etc.

In Formedon the Tenant pleads the warranty of the Ancestor of the Demandant,
with that, that he has Assets by descent; he pleads that he has nothing, and
it is found that he has, he is Barred.

To plead a thing by way of Bar or Estoppel which the Demandant or plaintiff
is to defeat or destroy by the Usageof his Action, is no good Plea.
AS in Attaint brought upon a Verdict de nativo habendo, Villenage is no Plea.

Also where Reversion and Rent pleaded for Assets, is not Assets, there the
Heir is to defeat the Assets.

If a man sues a Prohibition, and the Defendant alleges Excommunication in
the Plaintiff, he may say it is for the same cause.

If a Villein brings a Writ of Error upon Judgment had in nativo habendo,
Villenage is no Plea.

Where a man Pleads a Recovery in Bar, he ought to add more to it, or
otherwise the Recovery is no Bar.
ANd that is where the Tenant Pleads a Recovery by default against the
Demandant, he ought to add more to it, viz. with that, that he will averr that
he was Tenant at the time of the Recovery.

The same Law if Tenant in Precipe quod reddat will Plead a Recovery in a Writ
of Cosinage by default, he ought to show how he was Cousin.

Also if the Tenant will Plead a Recovery in a Writ of Right against the
Demandant by default, he ought to show of what possession his Writ of Right was
conceived.

But otherwise it is, if he will Plead a Recovery in Formedon by Action tried,
this Recovery is a good Bar without adding any thing more to it; where note
the Diversity.

Where a man demands a Debt or any thing by Deed, he shall not be Barred but by
deed, or a thing of as high a nature.
AS Trespass for taking of an Apprentice, it is no Plea to say he discharged
him, ^^^^out speciality. Mich. 22 H. 6.

The same Law in Debt upon an Obligation, it is no Plea for the Defendant to
say, that the Plaintiff has received parcel at such a place depending the
Writ. Judgment, 7 E. 3.

The same Law in Debt upon Arrearages of Account, the Defendant Pleaded
Arbitrament, it is no Bar, because that Debt upon Arbitrament is not of so
high a nature as Debt upon Arrearages of Account; for there he cannot wage Law.

The same Law in Debt upon an Obligation, it is no Plea to say that he has
paid the Sum in demand to the Plaintiff, because that he ought (if he will
avoid the Deed) to say that he has the Plaintiffs Release or Acquittance to
show.

The Disseisor Levies a Fine with Proclamations, the Five years pass, the
Disseisee is bound, afterward the Disseisor reverseth the Fine by a Writ of
Error, then the Disseisee may enter, and yet he was once Barred. Vide Bar pro
tempore.

Where a man shall Plead a Bar which shall comprehend one matter in fait, and
where it shall comprehend two matters.
IF a man Pleads in Bar an Arbitrament, he ought to say where the Submission
was, and also where the Award was made, and so to make the Plea certain.

But when he Pleads a Plea which comprehends two matters, he ought not to show
the certainty until the Plaintiff has Traversed one of them.

Of Bars perpetual.
A Woman is bound to me in an Obligation, and I afterward take her to Wife, I
am once Barred and always Barred.

Tenant in Tail leaves Assets, which is Pleaded against him who is Heir; both
he and all his Heirs are Barred for ever.

A man is bound to pay the Abbot of Westminster and his Successors every year
Twenty shillings, the Abbey being dissolved, he is discharged of the Twenty
shillings for ever.

Also if a man be obliged to keep my Court in Dale, I purchase all the
Copy-holds and Free-holds of the said Manor, he is discharged from keeping the
said Court for ever.

See Pleas and Pleadings.

Cinque Ports.
AN Elegit to extend Lands within the Cinque Ports was directed to the
Constable of Dover; But he would not extend, so that the Plaintiff was
compelled to have a Certiorari to remove the Record out of the King's Bench into
the Chancery, And from thence by Mittimus sent to the Constable to make
Execution.

Custom's and Prescriptions.
ALI Customs against Cannon-Law are to be Tried at Common Law, and not in the
Ecclesiastical Courts.

Customs are payable to the King by the Common Law: the Reasons why they are so
paid, see in Davies Rep. fo. 9. ct 10. Le case del Customs.

See the difference between Malum in se, etmalum prohibitum, and how the King
may Pardon it, but not license it to be done, 11 H. 7. fo. 12. et Davies Rep.
fo. 73.

Where Debt or damages are recovered in a Court Baron, the Bailiff ought not to
sell the Goods of the Defendant and deliver the money to the Plaintiff, But to
impound them and keep them as pledges until the Defendant makes his agreement;
but where it has been the use of the Court to award a Levari facias, it is
good by Custom.

Where the younger son in Burrough-English dies, the Middle Son (not the
Eldest) shall have the Land. The same Law for Customary or Copyhold Lands.

It was the Custom of the King's Bench every Term once or twice to send the
Coroner of that place to the Marshal to view the Prisoners that are in the
Marshals Custody by Commititur or matter of Record, and if any of them are
wanting that he could not find them there, then to mark their names in his
Coroners Book, and to inform the Court thereof. And thereupon the Court did
pose the Marshal who was to inform the Justices what was become of those
Prisoners; And if he found not sufficient cause of excuse, the Court would
Record their escape against the Marshal; And the abusing of an Office, is the
escape of Prisoners in the Marshal, an abuse of his Office, and just cause of
Forfeiture.

If an Alien have a son that is also an Alien, and after the Father is made
free, and then has another Son, and after purchases Lands and dies; The
second Son born after the Freedom shall be Heir and not the Eldest by the
Common Law and usage of the Realm. And also if there be three Brothers, and the
middlemost purchases Lands, and dies without Heir of his Body, the Eldest
Brother shall inherit and not the Youngest.

By the Custom of London a Feme Covert, that is to say, a Sole Merchant, may
sue and be sued in absence of her Husband. Bulstrode part. 1. fo. 14. where you
may read of three sorts of Customs that are void and against Law, 1. a Custom
against Justice. 2. a Custom against the Benefit of the Commonwealth, and 3. a
Custom that is to the Prejudice of a third Person.

Custom and usage in the intendment of the Law, is such a usage as has
obtained the force of Law, and is binding to such particular place, as
Gavelkind in Kent, and Burrough-Euglish in many Corporations in England.

When the Custom of the Realm is the Common Law.
WHen it is the Common Law, a Custom ought not to be alleged or Pleaded. But
an Action against a Carrier, Hoyman, Common Hosteler, and for negligently
keeping of Fire, the Plaintiff may declare upon the General Custom of the
Realm, or not, at his Election. And note, That a Custom is always Local, and to
be alleged in one certain place, but a Prescription is personal, and ought to
be alleged in some persons certain, as in such a man, his Ancestors or
Predecessors, or those whose Estate he has. 22 H. 6. 22.

A Prescription is always to be of such a thing, and in such manner as may be
intended to have a lawful and legal commencement or otherwise it is not good;
but a Custom may be contrary to the Rules and Maxims of the Law, as
Borough-English, Gavelkind, Copyhold Tenures. So Lands devisable by Custom, So
that the Custom be reasonable. Co. 6. Gatewards case, and lib 5. Perimans Case.

None can prescribe but who has Fee, but all other Estates derived out of the
Fee, as Lessee for years, Life, or at Will, ought to prescribe in him who has
the Fee. Gatewards case, ubi supra.

A Lord prescribed, that he and all those whose Estates he has in the Manor
have hitherto used to have a Herriot after the death of any Tenant for life, or
for years within the Manor; and, good, notwithstanding the Estates of the
Tenants have no continuance. 21 H. 7. 15.

Prescription ought not to be in the Negative, but if it be in the Negative
with an Affirmative, it is good. 14 H. 6. 3. 22 H. 6. 36. 11 E. 4 2.

A Prescription by Que Estate ought not to be of things which lie in Grant, as
Rents, Villein, etc. but ought to be made only in him, who prescribes and his
Ancestors, or otherwise he ought to show the Deed and Grant by which he claims.
But a man may alledg a Que Estate of a thing which lies in Grant, when it is
but a Conveyance to another thing; as to say that he and all those whose
Estates he has in an Hundred have used always to have a Leet: So a man may
allege a Que Estate in another of a thing which lies in Grant, although not
privy to the Conveyance, as the Plaintiff in Replevin may alledg a Que Estate
in the Seigniory in the Avowant. Co. Lit. 121.

Such things as cannot be forfeited or seized, before the Encheson of the
forfeiture be found by Record, cannot be claimed by Prescription, as Bona et
Catalla Felonum, etc. Co. Lit. 113. and Lib. 9. Abbot de Strata Marcella's Case.

When one has Common by Prescription, paying for it such a Sum of money, he
may prescribe generally; and if the Money be not paid, it may be shown of the
other side, and also is a Condition subsequent; but when a Custom is for one to
have Pot-water etc. paying a penny for it, Quaere if it may be claimed
generally, because that the other part has not any Remedy for the penny. Co 5.
Rep. Grayes Case.

In Replevin the Avowant said, That the Plaintiff and his Ancestors and those
whose Estate he has in such Lands etc. have Common in locus in quo etc. being
the Land of the Avowant, and that he and his Ancestors etc. have paid 10 s. per
annum for the same, and so avowes; and good per curiam. 26 H. 6. 5.

When a Corporation (which has any thing by Prescription) be changed and
incorporated by an other name etc. how they ought to prescribe, see Co. Lib. 6.
fo. 66. and 7 E. 4. 32. and Co. Lib. 8. fo. 64.

Inhabitants of a Town cannot prescribe, but they may alledg a Custom. 18 E. 4.
3.

A man prescribes that he and his Ancestors and all their Tenants at Will have
Common of Turbary, it is not good. (See the Prescription in the Bishop of
Winchesters Case. 2 Rep. 1. That he and his Predecessors, Bishops there have
used time out of mind for himself and their Tenants to hold the Demesnes of the
Manor discharged from Tithes.) 9 H. 6. 62.

A Benefit or Profit apprendre cannot be claimed by Custom in the Lands of
another, except in Cases of necessity; as in the Case of a Copyholder, when he
claims Common or other profit in the wastes of the Manor, or in other Lands of
the Lord with the Manor. But when he claims it in the Lands of any other
within or out of the Manor, he must prescribe in the Lord; and the thing where
etc. be it aliened and severed from the Manor, or comes again to the Lord,
although the Copyholder in such Cases may alledg the Custom. Co. 6. Gatewards
Case. Lib. 4. 31. Co. 8. 64. Swains Case.

An Action upon the Case for stopping a Watercourse que currere consuevit, was
brought against one, and held good: But if it be against a Terretenant, or when
a Quod permittat or an Assise is brought, there he must prescribe and show his
Title.

A Custom pro bono privato cannot be alleged in an Upland Town, which is
neither City or Borough: But Customs which are pro bono publico, as to have a
Way to the Church, to make Bylaws for Reparations of a Church, Highways, or
Bridges, or for the good ordering of a Common, may be alleged in an Upland
Town or Hamlet. Co. Lit. 110.

A Copyholder ought not to allege a Custom to make a Surrender, because it is
the Custom throughout England; so of a Lease for a year; for by the general
Custom of England Copyholders may make Leases for a year. Co. 9. 751. Combs
Case. Co. Entr. 576.

But particular Customs of particular places may be alleged, as the Custom of
Gavelkind, and of Burrough-English, which Customs must be precisely pleaded,
and alleged. 28 H. 8. Dyer 27 b. Rast. Entr. 143. Co. Entr. 602. But the Lord
Coke in his Commentary upon Littleton, fo. 175. b. is of Opinion, that it is
sufficient to say that the Land is of the Custom of Gavelkind, or of
Burrough-English, for that the Law takes notice of the Quality of the Customs.

How, and in what manner a Custom may be pleaded; and when it shall be a good
plea, and when not.
SEE James Bags Case in the Lord Cokes Reports, lib 11. fo. 94. where in the
Margin of the Pleading in Action upon the Case against the Major and Burgesses
of Plymouth, it is said, that in the Plea of the Major and Burgesses, they
ought to have first prescribed that they were a Corporation of a Major and
Burgesses time out of mind, etc. Co. 11. 94.

Note, The Parishoners may prescribe to Choose two Churchwardens, and may put
them out of their Office if they see cause. The Parishioners may not bring an
Action of Account against the Churchwardens; But they may choose other
Churchwardens, and they may have an Action of Account against the former.

No man can prescribe to have a Pew or Seat in a Church, but in an Isle
adjoining to the Church which he has used to repair at his own Charge.

If a man dwell in one Parish, and hold, Lands in another Parish, he shall be
Taxed toward the repair of that Church where the Lands lie; For he is
accounted a Parishioner there in respect of the Land, and the person and not
the Land is chargeable. But if a man lets Land to another, the Lessor is not
chargeable in respect of the Rent he receives.

If a man comes to a Common Inn, and delivers his Horse to the Hostler, and
requires him to put him out to Grass, and he does it accordingly, and the Horse
is stolen; the Inn-holder shall not answer for it.

Tithes shall be paid for the second mowing of Grass, unless there be a
prescription to be discharged by payment for the Tithes of the first Mowing:
But after Tithes are paid for the first Mowing, it is thereby discharged for
that year; for all after pasture for Tithes shall not be paid two ways in one
year for the same thing.

No prescription in Lands makes a Right; Therefore a man must show some other
matter to prove his Right; but a prescription of Rents or Profits out of Lands
makes a Right.

A Woman may prescribe, that all the Women within such a Town have been endowed
of the moiety of all the Lands of their Husbands, of which they were seized as
of Fee, yet she shall not be endowed of the Moiety of the Rent.

Where there is a Custom, That if the Father be hanged for Felony his Son shall
Inherit, and the Land shall not escheat to the Lord; yet if the Father shall
abjure the Realm for Felony, or be outlawed of Felony, the Land shall escheat,
and the Son shall not inherit, and yet both are Attainders in Law.

But every Custom that is against the Common Law shall be taken strictly.

Debt.
DEbt super obligationem in London, the Defendant Pleads Delivery as an Escroul
in Midd super Conditionem etc. et Issint non est factum, by the Issint etc. the
special matter is weighed and amounts to the general Issue to be tried in
London per distre in Midd. et issint Rien luy doit, is a waver of the special
matter, and tender of the general Issue. P. 27 H. 8. Pl. 34.

Debt against two Executors, one Pleads plene administravit, the other Pleads
non est factum Testatoris; and if they sever and have those several Pleas in
Bar multum altercatur, Choke, they may, Moyle, they may not. Danby, Executors
may sever, but if they shall have these several Pleas, doubted, vide IN. 37 H.
6. one Pleads Misnomer, the other, that he is Administrator, doubted if
Pleadable, and ibidem the Authorites they are cited, and vide 21 E. 3. 10, 11,
12. Defendants plead not, Executors cannot plead severally in dilatories but in
Bar they may, P. 7 E 4. Pl 19 Debt upon Obligation to perform Covenants, all
being in the Affirmative, he Pleads Performance general; and by Inglefield and
Fitz he ought to show how he performed each specialty. Sed vide Co. 1 Jnst.
303. a. b.

In Debt upon an Obligation conditioned to discharge the Sheriff, Plea, That he
discharged the Sheriff without showing how M. 5 E. 4. Pl. 21.

Debt super Obligationem conditioned to pay to the Chamberlain of London, and
his Successors, he Pleads Payment to A. Chamberlain and his Successors; he must
Plead how he came out of his Office, and how the Successor came in; Else A.
shall be intended to continue in M. 4. E 4. Pl. 30.

Debt against three Executors who Plead several Pleas, and each goes to the
whole; per Danby, Moy'e and Clark, the Plaintiff may elect which he will have
Tried first, Needham contra, the most peremptory shall be Tried first. Hill. 8
E. 4. Pl. 3.

Debt against Executors, they Plead a Judgment against the Testator by A. for
200 l. and another by B. for 100 l. And that they have not Assets, but to
satisfy the 200 l. per Bryan the Plea is double, having Pleaded 2 Judgments,
and rely upon one. 9 E^ 4. 12. a.

Bond to pay 20 l. when A. comes into England from Venice, Plea, That A. was
not at Venice, not good; for where part is to be done within, part without, the
Trial must be within. Tr. 19. El. et B. Hales Case. Ow. 6.

One bound to save another harmless, Pleads that he had saved him harmless, and
showed not how; it is not good; but non fuit damnificat, generally, is good; et
Pop. 297. dictum per Jones, If the first be generally demurred on the advantage
of it is lost, for which I think it not Law; for in Mansels Case, Co 2. the
Demurrer is general upon such a Plea, and Judged ill. et 2 Cro. 165. 363.

One Action against several Defendants for one Debt etc. they may sever in
Bars, but not in Dilatories. Hatton 26 Hob. 245.

In Debt upon a Lease for years, the Defendant pleads non habuit nec occupavit,
adjudged no Plea other then Tenant at Will, by Fitz Herbert. Die. 14.

In Debt upon an Obligation with Condition payment is a good Plea with
Acquittance, as appears, Dyer 15 b. 1 Cro. 55. 2 Cro. 59. 360. 558. but payment
on a single Bill Obligatory is no plea without Acquittance, nor it seems upon
an Indenture to pay so much for a forfeiture, Die. 6. a. 51. a. Co 5. rep. 43. 2
Cro. 86. 377. 3 Cro. 157. 3 Cro. 455.

Debt upon a Statute of Usury, and misrecites the Statute of Usury, and says
in the Action, the Defendant lent money usuriously, and received the principle,
and so much for Usury, and that is Traversed and found against the Defendant,
and moved to be a Jeofail; but it seems both Surplus, and he need not show the
Cause of Action in the Writ; And showing the Receipt was more then received;
for the very lending usuriously is against the Statute though he never received
it.

Where one has special matter and pleads it, and concludes with the general
Issue; It waves not the matter precedent, as in Debt to plead unlettered,
issint non est factum, or a special Payment issint Riens ^uy doit, or for one
to Plead that he was Joyntenant with his Feoffee at the time of the Feoffment
et issint Riens pass per le fait, 10 E. 4. 3. b. M. 9 E. 4. Pl. 15. et fo. 19
b.

Debt on a Bond against an Abbot, he pleads, Predecessors imprisoned the Prior,
and threatened the Monks to imprison them if they would not seal it double, one,
the Imprisonment of the Prior; the other the threatening of the Monks: And if
both should be traversed and one found for the other against the Plaintiff, the
Court should not know for whom to give Judgment. M. 15. E 4. Pl. 2.

In Debt of 100 l. the Administrator pleads Judgment of 200 l. to another So
plene administravit, and that he had not goods preterquam non attingen' ad 200
l. the Plaintiff demurrs generally, because he showed no certain sum whereto
the goods amounted, according to Co 9. Merriel Treshams Case, 109 b. Hob. and
Winch held performance the substance. Hob 133 Moore verse Andrews.

The King brought an Action of Debt, and averdict upon non est factum pleaded,
and after pardoned the Debt; which Debt he at the day in Bank pleaded, and was
allowed to do it because he could have no Audita Querela or sei. facias against
the King Co. 3. J^st 135.

Debt, and shows, that he made a Lease for years Rend. etc. the Lessee was
thereby possessed, and devised it to the Defendant, and he entered, and Null
possession etc. ill, first, because he showed not that any was made Executor,
or that he entered by his Assent; nor 2 that vir^ute legationis he entered, and
then it might be for another Title. Die 254. b 3. Cro 537.

Debt of an Obligation conditioned, that he and his Wife should appear; he
pleads that at the time of the Obligation he was solus and innuptus, Rolls held
it did not amount to ne unque Loyalment accouple and ruled for Judgment upon
Demurrer nisi Causa Yeane verse Skeleton H 23 Car. 1. B. R. Sti. 17.

Debt to perform an Award made 10 May, ready to be delivered the 11 th of May,
Null Award pleaded; he replies, that the Award was made the 10 th of May, to be
delivered the same 10 th day of May; The Defendant demurred for doubtfulness or
departure; Resolved not: yet being a thing whereof Issue is to be of the Award,
not of the day of the Award Tyers Case. Trin 23. Car. 1. B. R. Sti 4.

Debt upon an Obligation, he pleads, that he paid at such a day, the Jury find
he did not pay at that day, the Truth was, the^e were two days of payment, and
he paid one part the one day, and the other at the other day; the Court seemed
he is condemned by the Verdict and his own Plea, P 24. Car 1. B. R. Sti. 93, 94.

Debt upon Obligation to perform Articles, the Defendant pleads Covenants
performed; Issue and Verdict for the Plaintiff, who moved for a new Trial to
prevent Error, because no Issue joined; but the Court said it was a good issue,
but ill plea whereon he might have demurred; and ruled: the Defendant shows
Cause why a Replication should not be. Weights Case M 24. Car 1. B. R. Sti.
139, 140.

In Debt upon a single Bill, the Defendant pleads he had paid, and the other
accepted part since the Action brought; ruled a good Plea in Abatement of the
Writ, not in Bar of the Action as here it is Hillingworth versus Whetstone. P.
1649. B. R. Sti. 112 163 Co. 9 Jnst. 303. 2 Cro. 304. 959. H. 10. H. 7. Pl 3.
M. 21. E. 4. Pl. 38.

Debt for 40. l. against an Executor, he pleads, that he received but 10 l. and
40 l. was due to him; the Plaintiff replies, that he is Executor de tort, and
has more goods Et hoc parat etc. where it should be Et hoc petit, etc. ill, and
that discontinues the whole Plea. Alexander versus Lane.

In Debt for Rent, Lessee pleads, that Lessor nil habet etc. he replies quod
habet; it is ill, not showing what estate, but cured by Verdict, if Issue be
joined and found quod habet, Hill versus Glassey. Yel. 227. 2 Cro. 312.

Debt upon two Bonds, whereof one is not due, the Defendant pleads a Release of
that, and another Plea to the other, both found against him, and this showed in
Arrest of Judgment, yet shall not be stayed; for by his pretending a false
Release, he passed over that Advantage. So in Debt by an Executor, the
Defendant pleads he has a Co-Executor who has released to him, and found
against him, the Plaintiff has Judgment Friths Case. 3 Cro. 68, 69. 4041. 110.
111.

In Debt on an Obligation the Defendant pleads al jour, and issue of it puis
darr. contin. he pleads that the money was attached in his hands in London. Pel
versus Pel 2. Cro. 101.

Debt upon two Bonds, the Defendant demands Oyer of the Condition, one of which
was to pay etc. after performance of a Will; the other was to pay etc. within
two years after the Devisor's death and performance etc. and pleads, that the
Will was that he should make a Release, and alleges the death to be at such a
day which is within two years, and that he required the Defendant to make a
Release, and he refused, Issue of the death and all found for the Plaintiff,
moved in Arrest etc. one day is not come and damages entire, so no Judgment to
be; but per Cur. it is only the Allegation of the Defendant, that he dyed at
such a day, which if true, the Defendant would have rested on it and not have
pleaded a false Plea whereon the Issue is taken, and found against him.
Thurbettle versus Reeve and Tie, 3 Cro. 110. 111. 40. 41. 68, 69.

Debt upon an Obligation, the Defendant pleads non est factum, it is found that
he Sealed, etc. and the Seal was torn off, after the Plea pleaded, but on atthe
time of the Plea, it is against the Plaintiff. Mirral versus Scebrith. 3 Cro.
120 Co. 5 Rep, 119. b.

Debt for Rent against an Executor, he pleads Levy per distress and sans
Detinet, void, find no Levy by distress, but that an assignment was made by the
Testator, and the Rent paid by the Assignee, and adjudged for the Defendant,
for the substance is on the new Detinet, and the rest but circumstance. S. Tho.
Cecil versus Harriot 3 Cro. 140.

Debt on a Bond, conditioned to save harmless against another Bond of Fifty two
pounds, And so he saved him harmless; but because that he shows not that he was
not damnified before. ill; Denis versus Thomas 3 Cro. 156.

In Debt on a Bond by A. and B. the Defendant pleads the Obligation was made to
them and B. And that all three have an Action depending against him, Judgment
is got, but because the Bond to three cannot be intended, And that the Plea
goes in Abatement and he has concluded in Bar, ill; Isumet Priscot versus
Hitchcot 3 Cro. 102.

Debt on Obligation, conditioned, If such Lands be four miles distant etc. the
Defendant pleads that it is four thousand paces distant, the plea Ruled good,
for a thousand paces is a mile, So it tantamounts the Condition; but how a mile
or the spaces shall be reckoned per communem viam or strait as a Bird could Fly
qu. Mirige versus Eat. 3 Cro. 212. 267.

Debt super Obligation, conditioned to pay 35 l. at Michaelmas and 33 at
Lady Day, he pleads payment of the 70 l. secundum formam Conditionis, good,
though objected, he should have pleaded several payments, for the several
Conditions do implye it. Lox versus Lee 3. Cro 256.

In Debt a good plea in Bar, replication ill, Judgment by nil dicit, because
the Defendant never rejoyned shall not be reversed, for that ill till all be
made up; herewith agrees Co 5. Rep. 55. a, Princ. and Boyer versus Jennings, 3
Cro. 284.

Debt against an Executor, the Defendant pleads, that pending the Action,
another brought an Action for a true Debt of the Testator, which he confessed,
and that he has nothing wherewith to satisfy the Judgment; the Plaintiff
protestando, that was a true Debt pro placito, replies, that the Recovery was
by Covin to deceive him; Defendant demurrs; and adjudged against him for the
Covin is not Issuable, but reversed in Error, nor could the Recovery be by
Covin, if the Debt true. Green versus Wilcox 3. Cro 462 463.

Obligation, conditioned to appear in the King's Bench, the Defendant pleads,
that the Court was adjourned to Hartford, and that he appeared there; ill, not
saying prout ^atet per Recordum. Corbet versus Cook 3 Cro 466.

Debt super Obligation covenanted to appear in the King's Bench such a day, and
there elect two Arbitrators who with two more to be elected by the Plaintiff
shall Award etc. the Defendant pleads, that he appeared there at the day, and
there elected two, the Plaintiff was not there time enough for the Award to be
made nor that he had his Arbitrators there. Edwards versus Marks. 3 Cro 549.

Debt upon Obligation conditioned, that if he upon request deliver the
Plaintiff all the Tallow that shall be made before Michaelmas of all Beasts
killed by him or his servants, then etc. the Defendant pleads generally prout
in Condition; the plaintiff demurred, supposing he ought to set out
particularly that so many Beasts were killed, which were all etc. As Maleveres
Case cited, Bond to pay all Rents of a Manor, they must set forth that such
Rents be paid, which were all; but resolved good; for where the length of
particulars would cumber Records, it is allowed to plead generally to all
affirmatives as performance of all Covenants etc. and the Case cited doubted
of, unless it being certain, may be set down in short. Mints versus Bethell 3
Cro 749.

Debt upon Obligation the Defendant pleads quod factum predict' was sealed
without date, and the Plaintiff put in a date after Et sic non est factum, and
on demurrer adjudged against him, for by saying factum praedictum he has
confessed his Bond, but he should have pleaded non est factum. Cospee versus
Turner 3 Cro. 800.

Debt super Obligation, conditionee to redeem Lands mortgaged; the Defendant
Pleads, that they were not mortgaged; the Plaintiff replies, that they were
mortgaged, and says not how, by Feoffment, Bargain and Sale etc. yet well,
being a stranger to it. Baley versus Tailor 3 Cro. 899.

Debt upon Obligation made to perform a Will which was to pay 20 l. to the
Poor, and the Churchwardens of such a Parish, he Pleads payment to the
Churchwardens and Poor; without naming of them; yet good. ^ring versus Laws. 1
Leon. 17.

Debt on an Obligation to perform an Award to deliver up all the Houses that he
had, he pleads that he delivered up all etc. without showing what they were,
and adjudged ill; and where it was awarded he should discharge and save
harmless A. from such an Obligation, he pleads non damnif.; ill, for he was not
only to save him harmless, but to discharge him of the Bond, and that ought to
be showed now. Bret versus Andrew. 1 Leon. 71 M. 2. R 3. b. 17.

Debt in Wast of a Lease for years generally, the Defendant pleaded, that the
Lessor nil habet; the Plaintiff replies, that the Lease was by Indenture; a
good Estoppel no Departure, for it corroborates the Declaration. 1 Leon. 257.

Debt super Obligation, Condition, That I. S. shall not disturb the Plaintiff
in his possession by any indirect means, but by due course in Law, objected the
plea ill, because not showed how by due Course, viz. what suit, it is agreed the
plea had been good if he had said only not disturbed by any indirect means; but
doubted if not ill, because he pleads over by any Lawful means, and shows not
what, so it might be tried. Dighton and Clark's Case 2 Leon. 199.

Debt upon Obligation conditioned (inter alia) to account, the Defendant pleads
conditions performed; the Plaintiff replies, he had not accounted; ill, not
showing what he had to account for, and difference taken when the Condition is
in the negative, not to do a thing, it is sufficient to say he did not do it.
And when in the Affirmative to do, as to perform his office, and to Enfeoffe
him of all his Land etc. there he might show what his office was, and what
Lands he had; And that he did etc. M. 2. R 3. fo 17. Pl. 44 vide Latch 16. 1
Leon. 136. Tr. 4 H. 7. Pl. 6.

In Debt on an Obligation the Defendant pleads payment, and the Obligee
delivers up the Obligation in nature of Acquittance, and after Retainsit by
force, the Plea not* double, as objected; the payment not being now issuable
but only the delivery of an Acquittance, also the delivery is pursuant enough,
and though difference taken in Debt on a contract to plead Payment and
Acquittance as double, yet in Debt on a Bond not. H 1. H 7. fo 15, 16.

Debt upon Obligation conditioned to gather all the Amerciaments of the County
etc. the Defendant pleads that he collected all etc. without showing what they
were; yet good as well to prevent infiniteness, as for that they are not in
fact and in the Affirmative, otherwise if matter of Record, as to be nonsuit in
all etc. there he must show the several suits. per Bryan. H 2. H 7. Pl. 22 p
13. H 7. Pl 1. m 21. E 4. Pl 37.

Debt to perform an Obligation conditioned to perform an Award, Ita quod etc.
The Defendant pleads, that the Arbitrators made no Award nor demanded it; it is
a double Plea; one, that they made not etc. and the other, that they did not
etc. m 5. H 7. Pl 15.

Debt upon Obligation to make Assurance as Council should advise, pleads, that
Council advised, and he gave notice etc. not double, though the advice and
notice be two things; traverse, for without notice, no sufficient breach Tr. 6.
H 7. Pl. 5.

I am bound to perform all Covenants of an Indenture, if they be all
Affirmative and matter in fact, I may allege performance generally, without
showing how or what they be, otherwise of matter of Record: but if the
Covenants be in the negative, I must plead negatively to them, particularly if
the Covenant be disjunctive, I must show which part I have performed and if the
Covenants be in the Affirmative, and the Obligee to do an Act toward the
performance, I must answer it particularly; as Covenant in sale of Woods, to
leave six Trees standing at the appointment of the Bargainer, and must show
what he did or did not appoint: so if the Covenant be an Affirmative that
implies a negative, as to save harmless, I may plead the negative non
damp^ificatus P. 10 H 7. Pl 3. P. 16. H 7. 11, 1. Co Jnst. 303 b. a. b. 13 H. 7
pl. 1. M. 21. E 4. pl. 18.

Debt, the Defendant pleads the Statute of Usury, and that the Plaintiff lent
him etc. 12 July, and shows no usurious contract; the Plaintiff replies, and
shows the lending to be for a longer time and so not usury Absque hoc quod
corrupta etc. the Defendant rejoyns, that it was but for the shorter time
absque hoc, that upon the 12 th of July was agreed for a longer time; the
traverse tying him up to the 12 th of July and so make the day material, ill,
Nevison versus Whitby 1 Cro. 260.

In Debt against an Executor he pleads quod non habet nec hab^it die
impetrationis bille bona que fuerum Testator' tempor^ mortis s^e preterquam
etc. Exceptions that tempore mortis is ill, for he may have Goods that were not
his tempore mortis, and damages recovered, Lands devised to be sold, and sold,
and yet are disallowed for not intended still showed. Secondly, because he
says non h^b^t tempore bille, but says not unquam post^^, it is incurably ill;
for if he had the day of the Ple^ pleaded it is Assets. Green versus ^olls. 2
Cro. 131, 132.

Debt on a Statute Merchant, the Defendant pleads that the Clerk mentioned, was
no Clerk at the time, but did not insist on it, and seems not Pleadable, for a
Statute is a Record, and it is against a Record. For versus Iucks. 2 Cro. 13^.

In Debt against an Executor he pleads a Judgment in Bar, and because he did
not plead prout patet per Recordum, it was resolved to be ill. 2 Cro. 226.

Defendant in Debt to perform an Award which was to enfeoff or Release, or pay
20 s. pleads performance; ill, not showing which; for performance of any one is
good excuse; wherefore he must show what he has performed. 27 H. 6. I. b.

In Debt against an Executor or Administrator he pleads a Judgment, and that he
has not Goods preterquam que non etc. Co. 9. Rep. 109, 110. It Is held ill on
general demurrer, not showing what sum he has; but Hob. 133. More versus
Andrews, it is held but form, and good on general demurrer, and Vide Co. Entr.
446. a. 148. Pl. 27. 152. a. 269. a. 617. b. It is oftener pleaded in the
general, then to plead a particular sum etc. here the Court held it but a
form, and cured by General demurrer. Davies versus Davies. Tr. 16. Car. 2. B. R.

Debt on a Bond conditioned to pay all etc. Defendant pleads he paid all
without showing what; the Plaintiff replied he received some sums and has not
paid; the replication good, for the knowledge is on the Defendants side what he
received, therefore to have been set out by him and not by the Plaintiff in the
Replication, and therefore the Bar ill. Woodcock versus Cole. Tr. 16. Car. 2.
B. R.

Debt super Obligation conditioned to deliver such Letters by such a day; plea,
that he delivered them secundum Conditionem; ill, for being to do a particular
thing by a particular day, he ought to have pleaded particularly, and not
generally secundum conditionem Brook versus Deane. P. 16 Car. 2. B. R. Rot. 451.

Debt upon a Bond at London conditioned, that if a ship do not miscarry etc.
Defendant pleads she miscarryed in Cornwall, ill, for he cannot plead
transitory matter in another County then the Action is laid, and so altered the
Trial, and if he have local matter to plead, he must show it Collings versus
Sutton. Tr. 16 Car. 2 B. R. rot. 1666. 11 H. 4. 50. a. b.

Debt, and counts that one possessed of a Term, granted him a Rent, by mean
Conveyances is come to the Defendants, and shows not how; yet ruled good
aliter: if the Term be pleaded to come to himself or any that he is privy to.
Note, This was after Verdict, but no advantage taken of the Verdict. Cotes
versus Wade. m. 18. Card. B. R.

Debt for an Escape, and begins with the Writ of Execution and Arrest; ill, not
showing the Judgment quod cum recuperasset etc. Jones versus Pope M. 18. Car. 2
B. R.

Debt on a Bond conditioned to save against another Bond, Defendant pleads that
he did save, not showing how; the Plaintiff says he was sued at Law pro eo
quod, the money was not paid, and pleads not the Writ etc. as he ought, the
Defendant rejoynes, he had not notice, which is a departure and not material,
the Plaintiff demurrs. Resolved, the Bar ill, but if not to have it specially
assigned for cause Secondly, the eo quod affirmative, and Traversable as well
as if said in facto. Thirdly, the Replication ill, not pleading the Writ etc.
Fourthly, because the rejoyner is a departure and admits it being but ill, for
incertainty and circumstance has cured it. Cather versus Pierce Soutbres and
Falker M 18. Card. 2. in Sci.

Debt against an Executor who pleas three Judgments in debt had against him;
and says nor pro vero debo, and concludes prout patet per seperalia recorda et
inde exeeution tato it; for both Cases no resolution. Palmer verses Lawson M.
18. Car. 2. R. R. Rot. 302.

Debt on a Bond to perform an Award, Ita quod, it be made before 25 March
pleads null Award; replication, that ante 27 May they made an Award, good;
without saying infra tempus limitat they may traverse nullum etc. without
traversing the day, if not before the day, the Jury is to find it Skinner
versus Andrews, Hill 20. Car. 2. B. R. Rot. 292.

Debt against two Executors, they plead a Judgment had against one as
Administrator, who ultra to satisfy has not Assets et been. Parker versus
Amy. Hill. 20, 21. Car. 2. B. R.

Debt on a Bond against an Executor who pleads a Judgment and a Bond, the
Plaintiff replies the Judgment satisfied, and satisfaction given Et hoc paratus
est verificare; And to the Bond assets ultra, Et hoc petit quod inquiratur per
Patriam. Defendant demurrs, and adjudged for the Plaintiff, though not said to
the first per Recordum for but form, and cured by the general demurrer; also he
has not answered the last issuable Plea. Hancock versus Proud M. 21. Card. 2.
B. R.

Debt on a Bond conditioned to do several things; Defendant pleads performed
generally and demurr, adjudged ill, he should have answered to all the
particulars expressed in the Action; aliter where it is to perform Covenants,
Winbleton versus Helderup. Trin. 22 Car. B. R. rot. 704.

Debt on a Bond conditioned to perform Covenants which were within two years to
deliver a Mapp of all Land in D. in the possession of A. Lessee of B. and B.
pleads performance, repl. Assigns breach, that Lessee did not deliver a Mapp
within two years of all the Lands in D. in his Occupation; and in the
occupation of B. and C. and the replication seems ill, first because he does
not say Lessee nor his Executors: Secondly, in his occupation, is uncertain
what is meant by it. Thirdly, he ought to show what Lands were in the
possession of B. and C. Q. If the recital not an Estopel to say none were.
Palmer versus Greenhil, Executor of Greenhil Pa. 11 Jac. Rot 688 Bridge. 46.

Debt by two Barons and their Femes on an Obligation made to their Femes when
sole, and say, the money was not paid them, good, and though not said vel
licaui eorum; for payment to one, is payment to both. Sparmer versus Stone et
ux' vide Pa. 77 et Latch 49 and Pop. 161 ibm. 3. Count jointly and severally in
Action against one, sufficient to say he paid not; but if against all, that
they nec aliquis eorum Noy. 69.

Executors sue on a Bond Testat. plea, non est factum, after Verdict for the
Plaintiff, moved, yet he had Judgment. Noy. 79.

A. and B. jointly and severally bound to stand to an Award betwixt them and I.
S. Arbitrators, awarded A. to pay B. 3 s. B. to pay 10 s. to I. S. in debt on
the Bond in Plea for A. to say he had performed the Award, without showing how,
and how, B. had performed it, for he is bound to him also. Bendlo. 5.

Debt on a Contract, Defendant pleads payment in a Foreign County; and on
demurrer adjudged ill, he might have pleaded in the County: and so was the
Opinion of Twisden in the King's Bench H. 22, 23. Car. 2. That if a Foreign
plea which is not local be pleaded, the Plaintiff may demurr upon it; but if it
be local, he cannot demurr upon it, but then the plea must be sworn.

Debt on a Bond to account, he pleads he accounted; Plaintiff Assigns breach in
30 l. received not accounted for. Defendant rejoynes and says Robbed of it,
and gave notice Et hoc paratus etc. good, and not Et hoc pet it etc. for now he
leaves the other to traverse the Robbery, though it makes a negative and
affirmative. Vere versus Smith P. 23. Car. 2 B. R. Cook versus Whorewood.

Debt on a Bond to perform Covenants to enjoy such Land against A. and B.
Defendant pleads Covenants performed; Plaintiff replies and says, A. and B.
habentes jus virtute tituli eis inde fect' ante Burg. predicta' entered, the
Defendant demurrs because the breach Assigned too general; but per Hall good
enough, he being a Stranger. Twisden doubted. Proctor versus Newton Trin. 23.
Car. 2. B. R. Rot. 826,

Debt on a Bond to save harmless from payment of Legacies, and Assigns breach,
that A. sued in Chacery for a Legacy, first, not showing were the Chancery was.
Secondly, saying, he sued for a Legacy, and says not in fact, a Legacy was
given. Dainty versus Fair Mich. 10. Jac. B. R.

Debt upon an Obligation dated at Hamburgh was brought in London, and good; for
Hamburgh in that sense shall be taken for a place, as Antwerp Tavern in London,
not for the Town of Hamburgh in Germany, and it was brought in the Detinet
only; and yet good, because of Foreign Coin, But naught, if for English money.

A man may bring an Action of Debt upon a Statute-Merchant, but not on a
Statute-Staple.

Debt against a Prisoner for Debt, or for an Attorney for Fees, no Wager of Law
lies: But a Prisoner for Lodging and Diet may wage his Law. It lies not for
Rent, it lies upon a simple contract if it be brought in Debt; But if it
brought in Case, the Defendant cannot wage his Law.

A man brings an Action of Debt against two, and has Judgment, and two
Precipe's against them, and Arrests one by Fieri facias, and the other by
Capias ad satisfaciendum it is vicious, per totam Curiam; But he may Arrest one
by one Capias, and the other by another Capias; and if one of them satisfies
the Judgment, the others Body is free: and with this agrees 36 H. 6. Hillary's
Case, and 4 E. 4 it is said that the Plaintiff shall have but unicam
executionem i. e. unicam satisfactionem. Mich 11 Jacobi in Communi Banco.

An Action of Debt ought to be brought in the Debet et Detinet against an Heir,
but against Executors only in the Detinet. per Coke, Lord Chief Justice. ib.

A man brings a Writ of Debt upon a Deed, and declares de octinginta Libra; the
Defendant prays oyer of the Deed, and has it, and it was octogesima Libra, and
good per totam Curiam: and with this agrees 9 H. 6. et Pasch 12 Jacobi, where
yginta for viginti was adjudged good. Mich. 13 Jacobi in C. B.

Detinue.
IN Detinue of a Box of Writings the Defendant pleads that A. B. and C. have
each of them severally brought their Writ of Detinue against him; and brought
the Writings into Court ready to deliver to whom the Court shall award; they
shall interplead, and the interpleader shall be on the eldest Original (viz.)
A. shall interplead with the Plaintiff to Bar his Title, and B. shall plead
against them all; But vide if there be variance of the Writings, etc. in the
Declaration when no interpleader shall be. P. 4. E. 4. Pl. 11. 11. E 4. 11. a.
3 H. 6. 20. a. 32 H. 6. 25. b. 25 H. 6. 20. a. Trin. E. 4. Pl. 2.

Detinue, and counts of a purchase of an Annuity and the deed; the Defendant
pleads non Detinet; Jury find the sale etc. but it is not agreed that the
Defendant should detayne the Deed till the money paid, which is not before the
plea; but on the general Issue he ought not to have given, that in Evidence,
but should have pleaded it; for upon the general Issue that which would make a
special Bar cannot be given in Evidence, or if found by the Jury is it
material. vide Cest Case title Averment, 22 H. 6. 37.

Detinue of Charters and Counts of a writing Cont' that I. S. infeoffed etc.
And though he said but in facto a Deed whereby I. S. infeoffed, etc. but Cont'
that etc. And so for ought appears no Livery might be; yet per curiam, well;
for it is a deed though nothing passed, and the Action lied. But Princ. it may
work by Confirmation. 39 H. 6. 37. b.

In Detinue, after Verdict, 'twas moved in Arrest of Judgment, that Sattago was
not good, but Sartago, and igneum ferrum anglice a firegrate, improper: yet the
Court adjudged the Declaration good enough. Smith versus Warder 13 Car. 2. in
B. R.

Of Disclaimers and Discontinuances of Actions.
ONe brought an Action of Covenant, and had Judgment and a Writ of Enquiry of
damages, and afterward it was discontinued by Rule of Court. Trin. 10 Jac. in
communi Banco.

If a man brings an Action of Trespass in 3 Towns, and mentions, but 2 Towns
where the Trespass was committed, the whole is discontinued. 16 E. 4. 11. So 9
E. 4. 51. A man brought an Action of Debt and demanded by his Writ 10 l. 6 s. 8
d. and his Declaration was but of 10 l. and his Writ did abate.

An Action of Trespass was brought in the Court of Common Pleas o^ several
things, one of which was discontinued, and by Warberton Justice, the whole
Action was thereby discontinued, adjudged in Sir Fran Pawmes Case.

If two are bound jointly and severally, and an Action of Debt is brought
against them both, and it was discontinued against one of them, it shall abate
against both. 7 H. 4. Fitzh. Tit. Brief. 279. 5 E. 4. 107. But by Hobart Chief
Justice, a man may put more in the Writ than in the Declaration, but not more
in the Declaration than in the Writ. Hill. 12. Ja. Pl. 4 in C. B.

In Audita quaerela scire facias or Attaint by 2, the Nonsuit of one shall not
be Nonsuit of both, and his Release shall only Bar himself; and the reason is,
because they are compelled by the Law to join in the Action, and the cause of
Action accrues not by their deed but by Act in Law, and for that the Law is
favorable to them; So that if one will not sue, the other may sue by himself.
But if a debt be due to two by reason of Contract or by Obligation, or two
Jointenants have cause to have an Action of Trespass, in this case the Nonsuit
of the one, or the Release of one shall Bar the other, because it was their
fault to take such a joint Estate, or that the Obligor was bound to them
jointly. 35 H. 6. 23. a.

In Replevin Verdict is given for the Avowant, and the plea is discontinued
afterward by the death of the King, or otherwise, and the Avowant sues a Scire
facias against the Plaintiff; in this case the plaintiff may plead a Release of
the Avowant after Verdict of all Actions, or he may plead other matter to
discharge himself. 5 E. 4. 19.

In Trespass the Defendant pleads two pleas, and the Plaintiff demurrs to one
and does not plead over to the other, it is a discontinuance, as it appears by
two Presidents in the Books of Entries, and Holcrofts Case, Co, Lib 4. where it
is pleaded accordingly.

In Precipe quod reddat the Tenant disclaims the Judgment shall be, that the
Demandant nihil capiat per breve, and if the Tenant will make a Feoffment in
Fee, the Demandant may enter upon him, and if the Tenant will discontinue, the
Demandant may say that he has nothing in the Land but by disseisin which he
made to I. S. and put him from the disclaimer, because that by the disclaimer
he has nothing but his Right; and the Entry of the disseisee is lawful upon
him, because that he has nothing until by that discontinuance he perfects the
Recovery.

In Replevin the Defendant makes Conusans as Bailiff to an Abbot upon an
Estranger as upon his very Tenant. The Plaintiff prays aid of this Stranger
because he let for years; they join in aid and process is continued until his
Term, at which time the Term ends, they both disclaim to hold of the Abbot; the
Court awarded that the Plaintiff sue forth a Writ of Inquiry of Damages. 29 H.
6.

No man can disclaim against a Termor, because that if his Lessor will not
bring his Writ of Right upon disclaimer, he has no Remedy. 9 E. 4.

Husband and Wife cannot disclaim in Avowry, for if they do, the Lands of the
Wife shall be lost by it. 10 E. 4. per Cur'.

In Replevin the Defendant avows upon Plaintiff, and he disclaims to it, he
shall not be received, for you have made a Feoffment of the Lands, so that we
cannot have a Writ of Right, Sur disclaimer; held a good plea; To which the
Plaintiff says, that he was seized of those Lands in Fee, without that, that
he has made a demise.

In a Writ of Entry in le quibus of the disseisin of the Demandant or his
Ancestor against two, one would disclaim, and could not because he was in of
his own wrong.

Distress vide Trespass.
IF a man distrain Household-Goods, That will take hurt by wet or weather he
ought to impound them in an House within three miles within the same County
where they were taken; But if he put them in an open place were they perish,
the distreynor shall not answer for them.

If a man distreyn a Horse, and the Horse leaps out of the Pound, and after the
distreynor Retakes him and ties him to a Post, and in struggling the Horse
strangles himself, the Distreyner shall be punished inan Action of Trespass.

So if a man distrain a Cow, he ought not to milk her although it be for the
good of the Cow; for you must not do good in such a Case without the Owners
consent: For Peradventure the Owner might come in time and milk her himself;
and if the Cow perish for want of milking, The Distrayner may distrayn again
and so be at no damage.

An Officer of the Sheriff cannot justify the breaking open of doors to
distrayn for the Kings Rent, much less a Landlord.

A man shall not use things distreyned, because he has them but as Pledges in
the Law.

No man shall drive a distress out of the Hundred it was taken in or to any
Pound above the space of three miles, or into several Pounds, whereby the party
shall be driven to take out several Replevins.

None shall drive a distress out of the County, Nor shall distrain in the
Highway; None shall drive distress into a Castle or Hold to withhold them from
the Owner upon his Replevin.

If a man come to distrain and the party seeing his purpose drives the Cattle
off the Land or put the goods out of the house, to the intent he shall not take
them upon the ground for a distress; Then I may lawfully pursue, and if I take
the same upon the Highway or upon the ground, the taking is lawful as if I had
taken it upon the ground or house out of which the rent issues to whomsoever
the property of the goods or Cattle do belong.

A man cannot distrain for an amerciament in a Court Baron, but for an
amerciament in a Court Leet he may.

If a man grants a Lease to B. rendering Rent to be paid at four several
Quarters, and if it be behind and lawfully demanded, That then it shall be
lawful for the Lessor to distrain etc: If a man comes to distrain, and the
Tenant enclose the ground or shuts the doors of the house, That the Landlord
cannot distrain for his Rent, it is a disseisin; For the Landlord may not break
the doors or Fences to come at the Distress.

Also Forstallment, That is lying in wait or threatening a Landlord, whereby he
is disturbed, and hindered of the means to come by his Rent, is a disseisin of
the Rent, viz. to hinder the taking of his Rent.

A man brought Yarn to the house of his Neighbor on Horseback, to the intent
to weigh the same by his Neighbors Beam, the Landlord comes and distrains the
Horse and Yarn for Rent due out of the house to which the Yarn was brought; and
by the whole Court adjudged an unlawful distress.

A man cannot distrain for Rent but on the Land or House out of which it
becomes due, and there he may take what he finds to whom soever the same
belongs.

If a man distrains Beasts without cause and impounds them in a Pound overt,
it is not lawful for the Owner to break the Pound, but must bring his Replevin.

If Beasts dye, or goods distrained for Rent perish, the Landlord may distrain
again for the same Rent, and the loss of such Beasts so dying shall be loss of
the Tenant if it be in a Pound overt.

If the Landlord be in view of Cattle, he intends to distrain for Rent, and the
Tenant to avoid the Distress, drives the Cattle out of the Landlords Fee; Yet
the Landlord may take them in or out of his Fee. And it seems the same Reason
if a man comes to a house to distrain for Rent, and be in the house and have
^ight of the Goods, and the Tenant to hinder the distress shuts up the Rooms,
The Landlord may force open the doors, if the Tenant will not open them upon
request.

If I grant a Rent to I. S. and his Heirs out of my Manor of D. Et obligo
Manerium et omniabona et Catalla mea super Manerium predict. existentia ad
distringend' d'per Ballivum Dni' Regis; The Limitation of this distress to the
Kings Bailiff is void, and it is good to give a power of distress to I. S. the
Grantee and his Bailiffs Bacons Elem. of Law. 15.

Error.
IF a Writ of Error be brought and allowed, And the Plaintiff in the Writ of
Error dies pendente breve Errore, the Plaintiff in the Action may sue out a
Scire facias against the Executors or Administrators of the Plaintiff in the
writ of Error, without mentioning the Writ of Error, for that it is no
Supersedeas, but only to privies, and not to Strangers.

When a Writ of Error is allowed, Execution upon the former Judgment ought not
to be awarded; For by the writ of Error the Record it self is Removed, and the
Court has nothing whereupon to award Execution; Yet supersedeas the safest way.

If a man Levy a Fine sur Conusance de droit Come Ceo etc. And suffer a
Recovery of the same Lands, and there is Error in them both, He cannot bring
Error first upon the Fine, because by the Recovery his Title of Error is
discharged and released in Law inclusively; But he must begin with the Error
upon the Recovery, which he may do, because a Fine executed barreth no titles
that accrue de puisne tempus after the Fine levied, and so restore himself to
his Title of Error upon the Fine.

If a man levyeth a Fine where he has nothing in the Land which inureth by way
of conclusion only, and is executory against all purchases and new titles which
shall grow to the Conusor afterward, And he purchases the Land and suffer a
Recovery to the Conusee, and in both Fine and Recovery there is Error; this
Fine is Janus Bifrons, and will look forward and Bar him of his Writ of Error
brought of the Recovery; And therefore it will come to the reason of the first
case of the Attainder, That he must reply that he has a Writ also depending of
the same Fine, and so demand Judgment.

Execution.
IN Escape against the Sheriff, The Case was, That a Prisoner being in
Executition, the Jailer lets him out of Prison about his occasions, and after
the Prisoner returns to the Goal, and another Sheriff comes in and then the
Prisoner escapes and comes no more; It was held, That an Action did not lie
against the last Sheriff, for the Prisoner was utterly discharged of the
Execution by the first permissiom of going at large by the Jailer.

The Sheriff may not break open the doors of any man to execute a Fieri facias,
much less a Landlord to distrain by the same reason.

Judgment in Debt against three, and a Capia's ad satis faciendum against the
Principal, the Sheriff retorns non est inventus, upon which issued a Scire
facias against the Sureties, and before the retorn the Principal came into
Court and prayed his Body might be taken in Execution, which was done
accordingly. Mich. 10 Jacobi in C. B. And with this agrees the Course of the
Court of King's Bench, and diverse Presidents of this Court.

A Writ of Error was brought 4 November retornable 10 January, whereupon the
Court was moved for Execution, because it seemed to be but for delay, in regard
the Retorn is so long, (and with this agrees 4 H. 6.) an Execution was granted
by the Court. Mich. 16 Jac. in C. B.

Of Estoppels and Conclusions.
HE who claims nothing by him that was estopped, shall not be estopped. As, two
jointenants are disseised, the disseisor lets to the one, now he is stopped to
say, that he has another Estate than for Life. Afterward he to whom the Land
was so let, dies, the other Jointenant shall have the Land, and he shall not be
by that Deed estopped, for he claimed nothing by him who was estopped, by the
Survivor.

If I am named W. B. and I bring my Action by the name of I. B. and recover by
that name, afterward if I will bring my Action against another person by my
right name, he shall not estop me by that Recovery of the same name; for if I
had been estop'd, I should not have had my Action against the other person, but
he that is party may estopp me well enough. 26 H. 6. 30 H. 6. et 10 E. 4. contr.

Where he in Reversion or Remainder claims nothing by Tenant for Life, he shall
not be estopped.
AS, the Father disseiseth the Son, and Levies a Fine thereof to a Stranger,
where Recovery is had against the Father, and afterward the Father dies, the
Son enters, or he that recovers, or he that was party to the Fine between him
and the Son brings an Assise, and the other pleads the Fine or Recovery by way
of Estoppel; this is no Plea, because that notwithstanding that the Son is
privy to him that was estopped, yet he claims nothing by him.

Where there is Lord and Tenant, and the Lord lets his Seigniory to one for
Life, the Tenant for Life of the Seigniory distrains the Tenant, and he bring
an Action of Trespass against him, and he justifies, for that he holds of him
by ten shillings of Rent; and the other traverses it, and it is found against
the Lord for Term of Life; This shall be no Estoppel to him in the Reversion.

If a man pleads a Plea in which he confesses a thing that is not material, it
shall not be an Estoppel.

As if a man voucheth one as Son and Heir to such a person, and when he comes
he is bound to warranty by his own Deed, yet may say afterward in an Assise of
Mortdancestor, that the same person which I vouched before as Son and Heir is a
Bastard for the words Son and, Heir, in his voucher are not material.

The same Law in a Writ of Trespass brought by one Executor of Goods taken out
of his possession.

Where a writ of Debt is brought by an Executor, who counts of a duty due to
himself, there the word Executor is not material, and he shall not be estopped,
but he may say afterward that he never was Executor, nor ever administered as
Executor.

If a man will plead a Record to estopp him that was privy, he ought to show
what end the Action had.
AS if I bring an Action against you in which Action you plead, that at another
^ime, viz. such a day, etc. I brought an Action of Trespass against you, and
the Defendant pleaded Villenage, and the Plaintiff confessed it; he ought to show
further, by force of which he was nonsuited, and to show what end the Plea had,
and demand Judgment if against that he shall be answered.

Where a man has Judgment to recover Land, by that Judgment he shall be
estopped to claim any other Title than he has by the Recovery.
AS if a man recover by Writ of Right Sur disclamer, if the Tenant cease
afterward, he shall not have a Cessavit to recover the Land though he sues not
out, Execution; for he shall be estopped to claim any other Title, or to have
any other Action to recover the Land, than that by which he has recovered; and
by the same reason that he shall not have a Cessavit, he shall not have Eschete.

If a man has Rent in Fee he may distrain or have a Writ of Annuity, and if he
brings a Writ of Annuity and has Judgment to recover, although that he sues
not out Execution, yet he shall never distrain for the Rent afterward.

Tenant in Tail discontinues for Life, and dies, and the Tenant for Life aliens
in Fee, and the Heir bring in consimili casu and recovers, now by this Judgment
he shall never have a Formedon of the same Land etc.

The disseisor enfeoffs the disseisee by deed indented upon Condition, or makes
a Lease for Life by Deed indented; this is a good Conclusion to the disseisee
to demand his Right; and the Reason is, that by the Deed indented the disseisee
has affirmed the Estate of the Disseisor, which is as much as if he had
confirmed his Estate before the Feoffment.

In Debt upon an Obligation the Defendant pleads a Release, upon which the
Plaintiff is Nonsuit, afterward the Plaintiff brings a new Action of Debt, the
Defendant shall be estopped to say that he was deins age, or that the
Obligation was made per minas: But it is otherwise if the Plea be discontinued.

An Essoin is cast for the Tenant in a Writ of Dower, yet the Tenant shall be
received to say that he has been allways ready to render Dower, and because
that an Essoin may be cast for a Stranger, this Essoin is no Estoppel; for an
Estoppel shall be good to every intent, but because an Essoin may be cast for a
Stranger as well as for the Tenant himself, it shall be said an Estoppel.

I bring an Assise of Mortdancestor, and recover, when in Truth I have no
Right, etc. yet the Wife of the same Father shall be endowed etc. Also in
Avowry.

Tenant for life Aliens in Fee, the Wife of Tenant for Life shall be endowed
against the Feoffee.

Also Tenant in Tail is bound by Statute and makes Feoffment, Execution against
the Feoffee.

Of some Estoppels none shall have advantage but those who are parties or
privies.
AS if I loose Land by Erroneous Judgment or false Verdict, those that are
Strangers shall have no advantage.

But of some Estoppels every one shall have advantage.
As Bastardy certified by the Bishop.

User of Action is no Estoppel to prejudice an other, viz. Heir etc.
AS a man grants a Rent Charge in Fee to an Abbot and his Successors, or to a
Feme-Covert and her Heirs; if the Abbot or Husband brings an Action, it shall
not prejudice the Successor or the Wife.

In no Case one person shall estopp another but in Dower.
AS where a Woman demands Dower, and she has Writings touching the Inheritance
of the Heir; for in debt it is no Plea to say that the Plaintiff is indebted to
the Defendant in ten pounds, because that it cannot be tried by the Original. 3
H. 6.

In every Case where I am Barred of Land, as if it be found that I am not next
Heir, this Estoppel shall pass with the Land, and every one that claims the
Land by me shall be Estopped, but of other Lands it shall be no Estoppel
against me. 33 H. 6.
IF I bring a Praecipe quod reddat by the name of Richard, when my name is
John, and recover by default against the Tenant, and afterward I bring another
Writ by my right name against the same Tenant, he shall not estopp himself by
that Recovery.

So if I have misnamed the Tenant in the first Record, because he shall not be
grieved by it. Mich. 33 H. 6. contra per Prisot, contra per Fortescue. 34.

By Prisot none shall be received to plead an Estoppel against another, but he
that pleads may be estopped by the same plea; and this is where both parties
are parties to the Record, otherwise not;

For if I bring an Action by the name of Robert (when my name is John) against
one that pleads with me, if afterward I sue him by the name of John, he shall
estopp me by that Record; but against a Stranger I shall not be estopped by it;
by Prisott and by Fortescue, 30 H. 6. 26 H. 6. 14 E. 4. contra.

Bastardy certified against me or found against me, every Stranger shall estopp
me, because that every Stranger is estopped to say that I am mulier.

But if I am certified mulier, a Stranger* shall not be estopped by it to plead
special Bastardy, because that it may be that I am a Bastard in our Law, and a
mulier in the spiritual Law, but not e contra.

No Stranger shall take advantage by an Estoppel, but where the Estoppel
extinguisheth the Right.
AS if a Man makes a Lease to me for Term of years of my own Land, and the Term
passes, and he enters and grants a Rent Charge in Fee, and afterward I
recover against the Grantor the Land by default, the Grantee shall not falsify
the Recovery by Estoppel.

A Stranger shall not take advantage of an Estoppel in fait, if it be in the
Realty, but by matter of Record it is otherwise.
A Man takes a Lease of Lands for years or for Life, of which Lands he himself
^s se^sed in Fee or in Tail at the time of the Lease made, if it be by Deed
indented he is estopped to say that he had any Estate or Right in those Lands
at the time of the Lease.

The same Law if a man be disseised, and takes a Lease of the disseisor for a
term of years of the same Lands by Deed indented.

But if a man takes a Lease for term of life of his disseisor he shall not be
thereby estopped, notwithstanding it be by Deed indented, because that by the
Livery he is remitted, and the Lease is void, ut dicitur, quaere tamen, for the
Indenture is strong against him; but if it be indented, it is clear Law: but if
it be by Fine, it shall be an Estoppel, because that the Estoppel takes effect
before his Entry; Or if Livery be made out of the Lands within View, etc.

If a man makes a Lease by Deed indented to one, of his own Lands, now he is
concluded, after the Lease determines the Lessor enters by force of the
conclusion, and a stranger comes in aid of him, the Lessee shall punish the
stranger for this Trespass, and he shall not conclude him by force of the
Lease, because he is wholly a stranger to the Judgment. per totam Curiam, 14 H.
6. But quaere if he justify as servant, if he shall conclude himself.

Fines and Recoveries.
A Fine was Levied of Lands in two Counties, and but one County mentioned in
the Fine; yet because it was for the uses declared in an Indenture which did
mention the Lands in the other County, all the Lands mentioned in the Indenture
did pass.

If two persons having several Interests in Lands acknowledge the note of a Fine
before a Judge, and then one of them dies; The Conusee may for all that proceed
with his Fine against the other alone; for the death of the other is no
impediment; for the Conusans of every one is against himself, and shall work
for so much as he can pass.

A man and his Wife acknowledged a note of a Fine before Commissioners (the 26
th of March) by Dedimus potestatem, and the wife dyed 27 th of the same month;
and the next day being the 28 th, Composition was made in the Al^enation-Office
upon a Writ of Covenant Retornable in Hillary Term before, and the Kings Silver
was entered as of the same Hillary Term, and so the Fine was past and engrossed,
And in Easter Term the Heir of the Wife moves against the Fine; But upon debate
it was agreed the Fine should stand.

Tenant in Tail Levies a Fine with Proclamations, and 5 years pass in his
Lifetime, Yet this shall not Bar his Issue.

A man of full age, and his Wife being but 19, Levy a the Fine of Inheritance
of the Wife, whereby an Estate is conveyed to the Husband and Wife in Tail, and
the Remainder to the right Heirs of the wife; and many exceptions taken against
the proceedings by the Heir to the Wifes inheritance, viz. I. S. as that the
said Feme was not of full age at the time of the Fine Levied, and other undue
means committed in getting out the Son; Yet by the whole Court the Fine was
held good Law, for Facta valent multa que fieri prohibentur.

If there be Tenant for Life, the Remander in Fee to an Infant, and they both
Levy a Fine, and afterward as to the Infant the Fine is Reversed, yet the
Conusee shall have the Land for the Life of the Tenant; for each may pass and
give what he lawfully may.

If there be two Jointenants, and one of them suffer a Recovery declaring the
uses of the whole; this shall bind but only a Moiety, unless the consent of the
other Jointenant can be proved.

Heir.
IF an Heir be sued upon a Bond, and Lands are proved to descend unto him from
his Ancestor, you must have a special Writ to enquire what those lands are
worth to be delivered to the Plaintiff at a reasonable extent and price; and if
the Heir confess the Action, and show what Lands come to him by descent, Then
his Body and all other his Lands and Goods and Chattels are free from that
Execution; but if he deny the Action and plead Riens per descent, or it go by
default against him, then Execution shall be against Body, Goods, or other
Lands; And the Declaration shall be in the Debet and Detinet, as though it were
his proper Debt.

Outlawries and Outlaws.
OVtlawry was pleaded in Bar, and day given before when the Defendant reversed
it, the Defendant shall not be condemned for Failer of Record, but
Respondouster. Green against Gascogne. vide Title failer of Record. Yel. 36.

Outlawry in the Kings Bench reversed by Error in the same Court; but that is
for Error in Fact, not in Law, as if no Outlawry lay in the Case; and if
Process of Outlawry lie in an Action upon the Case for turning a Watercourse,
vide P. 10. H. 7. pl. 15. Die. 195. b. 196.

Original in Debt, called the Defendant Nuper de Land. Exig. called him de
Land. is erroneous; for it must pursue the Original without Variance, and the
Original was against Lancelot, the Exigent was against Lancelot ill. 3 Cro. 49.
vid. 50, 95. 104. 116. 172.

Error of a Judgment in Debt, and Outlawed. 2. on it against. 2. where the
Sheriff returned quod non habent bona out catalla; quod summon' potuer. it
should have been per quod, etc. 2. it should be nec eorum aliquis het' 3. the
Original is against Lancelot A. and the Exigent is against Lancelot A. 4. it is
said in Hastings, and it should be in Hustingis de Com. plac. and revocetur
Lancelot vers' Jones. 3. Cro. 50.

An Outlawry was reversed, because it was against Lewellin with a single l, and
now the mean Process against Llewellin, with a double Ll, and it was against
two, and returned quod non sunt inventi, and not nec eorum aliquis. Llewellin
against Watkins vide M. 2. R. 3, 4, 13. pl. 16. 3 Cro. 85. 104. 49. 50. 116.
198. 240. 248. 205. M. 21. H. 7. pl. 37.

Exigent names no place where the Sheriff is to have the Body; and that
adjudged Error to reverse the Outlawry: For the Sheriff cannot tell in what
County to carry him. Caesar against Stone. 3 Cro. 104.

Outlawry reversed, because the Party was Indicted in Com. Somerset, and
supposed to be of London; and the Capias awarded to the Sheriff of Somerset,
where it ought to go to the County where he lives. Rorset's Case. 3 Cro. 179.
vid. Die. 295. b. vid. M. 1 E. 4. pl. 2.

One Outlawed of Felony, assigned his Term, and then reversed the Outlawry, the
Grantee shall maintain Trespass for the Profits taken in the mean time, between
the Assignment and the Reversal of the Outlawry: For though it was then the
King's, yet it is now as if no Outlawry had been at all. Ognell's Case. 3 Cro.
270. vide 218. Accord.

Outlawry is not reversed but by pleading without Writ of Error, per tot. Cur.
though there be apparent Faults in it. 3 Cro. 274. vide Co. 1. Inst. 259. b.

One is Outlawed, and has his Term sold, and then reversed the Outlawry, he
shall be restored to the Term it self, not the Money: Otherwise, if sold on a
Fieri Facias, etc. quod vide plus Title Exec. Air against Woodfare. 3 Cro.
778. Co. 5. Rep. 90. b. 1. Acc. pl. 285.

In Debt, against an Executor, the Defendant pleads, that the Testator was
Outlawed, and doubted if a good Plea, because the Testator may have some Goods
not forfeited by Outlawry, as simple Contract, etc. but on the other side, such
special Ass. shall not be intended to Com. next he has nothing. Wooley against
Brade. 3 Cro. 575. 851.

Outlawry reversed, because the Writ was Test Edmund Anderson; so wanting a
Title, had no Test, which is the Warrant of it, Growdy and Juham. 3 Cro. 592.

Judgment against two in Debt, C. and B, and Capias only against one; and he
Outlawed; whereupon was brought Error, and reversed it, because the Capins
should have gone against both. Also 'twas not per Judi^' Coron' Beverly against
Beverly. 3 Cro. 648.

Debt against the Sheriff, on an Escape, where the Case was, that the Party was
Outlawed after Judgment, reversed it by Error within the Year; and because he
assigned not any Error, the Plaintiff took out a Capias utlegatum, and the
Sheriff took him, and let him go, and resolved for the Plaintiff; and in Co. 1.
Report of this Case the difference is taken of an Outlawry after Judgment,
where the Plaintiff has not over-stayed his Time, viz. the Year; but many have
Habeas Corpus, or Fieri Facias, without Scire Facias: If the Prisoner be taken
by Capias utlegatum, he shall be in Execution for the Party, without the Prayer
of the Party, or Accord of the Court, if he will; but if it be after the Year,
not without Prayer; it is the Course upon Outlawry after Judgment, if Error be
brought to award a Capias utlegatum, if he does not assign Error; but if it be
before Judgment, and the Defendant brought in, the Plaintiff must declare
against him de Novo; and if one Outlawed after Judgment, bring Error, and comes
to assign Error, he shall be committed to the Marshalsey, and find Security to
reverse the Outlawry, and answer the party. Lishton against Garpores. 3 Cro.
706, 707, 850. Co. 5. rep. 88. 89. vid. 1 Leon. 51. 263. stat. 1 H. 7. pl. 6.
Mo^ pl. 772. 817.

One recovers in Quare impedit against the Kings Presentee, and is Outlawed,
the King shall have a Scire Facias, to have the Presentment; for the Church was
immediately revested in him before any Writ to the Bishop; and though the King
be not Party to the Judgment, he shall maintain the Scire Facias being Entitled
by Act in Law, but the Scire Facias must mention the whole Record of the
Outlawry: And so in Debt on a Bond and Judgment to recover, the King shall have
a Scire Facias. Beverley against Cornwall. 1 Leo. 63, 64.

In Debt on a Bond, the Defendant pleads, that the Plaintiff was Outlawed by
the name of J. S. of D. the Plaintiff replied, that at that time he dwelt at S.
absque hoc, that he dwelt at D. he avoids the Plea of Outlawry; for he shall be
intended another Person. 1 Leo. 87.

Upon an Exigent to Land. it was returned that he had proclaimed the party de
Com' in Com' and for that the Outlawry on Felony was reversed: For it should
have been de Hustingo in Hustingum. Marshes Case. 1 Leo. 326.

Outlawry of Murder, the King seizes Lands; and because the Outlawry was ill
for the quinto Exact', and was ad comitat' omitting meum: Wherefore to affirm
the King's Title, the Attorney General prayed a Certiorari to the Coroner, to
certify what County (and on such a President showed) granted. Fumes Case.
Latch. 210.

Where one is Outlawed before the Justices of Assize or Justices of Peace, on
an Indictment of Felony, the same Justice may award a Capias utlegatum: For
they that have Process of Outlawry, have power also to award a Capias utlegat'
per omnes Justic' Co. 1^. rep. 103.

Appeal of the Death of her Husband, and because some of the Defendants lived
in another County, a Capias with a Proclamation issued to that County. The King
dies, and Reattachment sued: If it be General, then a new Capias and
Proclamation must go into the Foreign County, if Special, not; for the Statute
has been once satisfied. Vid. Co. 7. rep. 30. a. b. 1 E. 5. 43. a.

In Appeal of Robbery, the Defendant was Outlawed, and Sued a Pardon, and Scire
Facias thereupon. Dicitur, he ought to show a Release of the Appeal before the
Scire Facias be granted; then the Pardon to he Special, not General; but the
Appellor, not appearing at the day of the Scire Facias returned, the Pardon was
allowed; but at another day came the Appellor, and prayed Execution; but his
Default being Recorded, could not have it. Note sometimes, the Pardon is
General, sometimes* Ita quod stet rectus, etc. M. 2. R. 3. fol. 8. pl. 17. M. 9
H. 7. pl. 1.

One Outlawed of Felony, ductus ad Barram, to say why Execution, etc. pleaded
that he was in Oxford Castle all the time; and because he did not say in what
County Oxford is, nor did not say he was in any Bodies Custody there, the Plea
adjudged ill. H. 11. H. 7. fo. 13. pl. 27.

Baron and Feme Outlawed in Debt; he brought Error; and after a special Pardon,
Ita quod stet rectus a Scire Facias, and prays it may be allowed; but the Court
would not till his Wife came in also, that the Plaintiff may declare against
both; and then it seems he may declare against them in the Kings Bench, within
the Equity of the Statute of 5 Ed. 3. though it say render al Court donec le
Exigent fiat sher', it went out of the Co. B. but now it is in the Kings Bench
by Writ of Error. P. 1 H. 7. pl. 7. H. 1. H. 7. pl. 19.

One taken by Cap' utleg', an Appellee of Felony came in, and pleaded, that it
was against J. S. Gentleman, and he is but a Yeoman, and the plea allowed and a
Scire Facias against the Appellor, who not coming in he was discharged; so 21
H. 7. pl. 16. Outlawry against J. S. de D. he pleaded that he lived at S. good
without Error. Vide 21 H. 6. 20 and 23 H. 6. 4. a. Outlawry when reversed by
plea, when by Writ of Error, 37 H. 6. 16. vide M. 21. E. 4. pl. 61. 21 E. 4.
37. H. 5. H. 7. pl. 7. M. 6 H. 7. pl. 2. M. 21 H. 7. pl. 27. Co. Ent. 689. 4 E.
4. pl. 15.

A. takes the Goods of B. who was Outlawed, if the King may seize the Goods of
B. vide M 6 H. 7. pl. 4. verse. finem and pl. 5. One that reversed an Outlawry,
had a Writ de bonis restituend' to the Bailiff of Westminster, who returned,
that he was not Bailiff, not good; he must answer to the having the Goods, and
must deliver them, though gone out of his Possession, or show Cause, M. 6 H. 7.
pl. 5. b. H. 4. E. 4. pl. 3.

An Outlawry was reversed, because the Sheriff said, ad Comitat' tent' such a
day, in Comitat' Midd', and said not Comitat' meum, seems Error of Outlawry,
because the Exigent was in R. 3. Time, and two Proclamations then, and the
other three in H. 7. So the Exigent abated; but being in Felony, he must have
Scire Facias against all the Lands, though dicitur he had no Lands: For that must
appear Judicially, and upon Scire Facias, though the Outlawry were reversed for
the Default of the Exigent, he must answer for the Felony; otherwise if at Suit
of the party he were discharged against him, H. 6. H. 7. pl. 7. M. 11. H. 7.
pl. 33. M. 7. H. 7. pl. 7.

Writ of Error delivered before the Exigent awarded, and the Plaintiff
Outlawed; yet it is not void, but voidable by Error, and Issue shall be joined
to try Delivery before the Exigent, but not by Jury, P. 10. H. 7. pl. 25, 31.

One may avoid an Outlawry, as well by saying he was beyond Sea, by the King's
Command, as that he was a Soldier at Calais under such a Captain, and shall
not show the Patent; if the party appear upon Scire Facias, it shall be tried
in one Case by the Natives, in the other, by the Certificate of the Captain, M.
11. H. 7. pl. 17. P. 21 E. 4. pl. 4.

The Sheriff returns the Exigent thus, Ad Comitat' tent' apud C. in Comitat'
Somerset. 5. Exactus non comperuit, because it is not said ad Comitat' Somerset,
nor Somerset, set in the Margin: It Is held to be ill, because it might be the
County Court was not held in the County of Somerset, but in another County, sed
adjornatur, M. 11. H. 7. pl. 33. H. 6. H. 7. pl. 7.

One taken upon a Capias utlegat' by the Name of J. S. Gentleman, says, he is a
Yeoman, and was etc. Scire Facias against the Plaintiff, and issue, that he is
and was a Gentleman, and the party was bailed; the King dies before the Issue
tried; the party comes in Court, temps the next King, and is committed; for the
Bail was determined, and the Cap' utlegat' also, and a new utlegat' awarded and
returned; and then he pleaded the same plea again, and issue, for before he
could not, all being determined, M: 1. E. 4. pl. 7.

Original against W. B. Cap' against J. B. and Outlawry shall be reversed by
Moyle. Danby contra. Et sic per Moyle, if all the three Cap' had been against
J. B. for then no Cap' had been against W. B. quod Danby denied, M. 15. E. 4.
pl. 17.

Trespass and Judgment for the Party, and Fine for the King, and Exigent at the
Suit of the King; and after two or three Courtiers of the King send a Supersed'
under the Privy Seal, they proceed to Outlawry, but shall not prevail: for
though the King have this Fine, by reason of the parties Suit; and if the party
be taken, he shall be Imprisoned, and not discharged at the Parties Suit, if he
will; yet, till he be taken, it is only the King's Suit, and the Parties have no
Interest in it; and if the Defendant be Outlawed after the Supersedeas, it is
Error, and shall be reversed. P. 4. E. 4. pl. 24, 36. Tr. 4. E. 4. pl. 4. M. 4.
E. 4. pl. 14. H. 4. E. 4. pl. 3. vid. Co. 5. rep. 88, 89.

The Sheriff returns the Copy of the Exigent, and not the Writ it self, with
Proclamation, etc. he shall be Amerced for the Imbezlement of the Writ; and if
the Party render himself to the Chief Justice in Vacation time, and get a
Supersedeas, whether he showed it to the Sheriff or not, it shall be entered in
the Term, and the utlegat' discharged, 1 Inst. 128. and idem ibid. 43. b. If
Error be brought of an Outlawry, and it appear doubtful, a Special Supersedeas
shall go to the Sheriff, quod capiat securitatem que les biens ne serront
illoine, vide 9 H. 6, 44. a. b. utlegat' after Supersedeas void, and 7 H. 4. 1.
a. if void, and the party shall be restored to his Goods, 7 H. 4, 5, b.
Supersedeas and Exigent; rules at the day, and a new Exigent and a Supersedeas,
the Outlawry after void, H. 4. E. 4. pl. 3. Tr. 5. E. 4. pl. 13. le Amerciamt'
37 H. 6, 17. vide 3 H. 4, 5. a. 8 H. 4. Cas. Prin. 8 H. 4, 7. a. 11 H. 4, 34. a.

Audita Quarela, by one in Execution, and he offered in Mainprize the other, ut
amicus Curiae, surmised, that the Plaintiff is Outlawed; wherefore he ought to
stay in Prison for the King's Fine; wherefore he was put to reverse the
Outlawry, or sue a Pardon, H. 6. E. 4. pl. 1.

The Plaintiff had sued three several Executions against the Defendant, and
brought Supersedeas for every one; but there was granted a^ Exigent with
Precept, that if any Supersedeas come to the Sheriff, he should not allow it,
P. 7. E. 4. pl. 20.

Error of an Outlawry in Debt, after Judgment, because no Proclamation went
into the County where the party inhabited; but being after Judgment, resolved,
it need not, but only in Outlawry and Process before App' but because in all
the Proceedings she was named, A de B. and in the Exigent she is named nuper de
B. and because it was recuperavit versus eum for eam, it was reversed, Lady
Gargrave against Markham, 2 Cro. 516.

Exigent in London, and it is returned quod ad Husting', etc. and recites a Form
which was ad Husting' de Com' plit', and that assigned for Error. 2. The
Exigent is, that he non comperuit, and it is returned the same day it bears
Test; and that was held Error, Archer against Dalby, 2 Cro. 660.

Outlawry reversed, because the Exigent supposes, that Robert the Plaintiff did
sue the said Robert, whereas the Plaintiff's name was Thomas; and Defendant
being ready in Court, it was reversed immediately, Jonson against Kite.

One enters a Judgment, and then is Outlawed in a personal Action, then makes a
Feoffment of the Lands; and he that has the Judgment, extends the Lands in the
Hands of the Feoffee, and well: For by this Outlawry, the King has but a
pernancy of the Profits, of which he is prevented by the Feoffment before
Seizure, not if after Seizure; and if by Feoffment, after Inquisition found,
before it be returned and ibidem Opinio, if the Seizure be Virtute Officii,
Tenant after puts the King out, not if seized Virtute, Windsor against Savel.

Outlawry against two reversed, because it is entered ideo Vtlegat' sunt, and not
uterque eorum Vtlegat' P. 15 Caroli Secundi B. R.

One Outlawed after Judgment, comes and pleads Misnomer, and has Fieri Facias
against the party, and he returned Mort^ Another Scire Facias is awarded after,
against the Executors, and Trial of Misnomer in this Case shall not be by
Averment taken for the King; but the Executors shall be made parties, because
it Trenches to the whole Duty; but upon mort' ret', no Scire Facias goes
against the Executors; but the Misnomer is tried between the King and the
Defendant, 21 H. 6, 21. a. 22 H. 6, 7. a.

In detinue of Charters, and other Writings: As to the other Writings, the King
waged Law; and then as to the Charters, he pleaded in Bar, by Att' nolens
volens the pl. For of them concerning the Freehold, no Process of Outlawry
lies, but Distress infinite, and 8 H. 6. 23, 30. Vtlegat' lies not in Detinue
for Charters and other Goods; for the Charters, draw the other Goods to them,
21 H. 6. 42. a. 30 H. 4. b.

Upon a Cap' utlegat' before Judgment, the Sheriff may break open an House; but
the Plaintiff sending a Process in another Man's Name, feigned an Outlawry
where his Writ was but a Latitat, it is an abuse of Process, and he Fined 50 l.
Hob. 263. Waterhouse against Saltmarsh.

If one that is Outlawed for Treason, Peer or Peasant, be out of the Realm, at
the time of the Outlawry, yet he cannot for that avoid it by Error, since the
Stat. 26 H. 8. and 5 E. 6. as he might at Common Law, 3. Inst. 32.

By 26 H. 8. 13. Outlawry in Treason against persons beyond Sea, shall be as
good, as if they had been in England at the time of the Outlawry, by 5 E. 6.
11. if within a Year after, the Outlawry pronounced, the party come in to the
Chief Justice, and traverse the Indictment, and be found not guilty, he shall
be discharged of the Outlawry.

By the Award of the Exigent in Case of Felony, the Goods are forfeited; but
that may be avoided by matter in Law, as if the Indictment, etc. be sufficient;
or by Matter indeed, or Record he may excuse his Absence, as that he was beyond
Sea, etc. 3 Inst. 232, 233.

If one taken by Cap' utleg' plead a plea triable per pais, for avoiding the
Outlawry, as that he was commorant in another County, he shall be Bailed, 4
Inst. 179.

No Goods are forfeited by the Judgment of the Court, till the Outlawry appear
of Record, nor is the party disabled by Outlawry, till the Exigent be returned
also; not does any Writ of Error lie of it then 1 Inst. 288. a. 4 Inst. 266.
Die. 223. a. b.

When Outlawry is pleaded in Debt upon a Bond, it goes upon a Bond, because
thereupon the King is to have the Obligation; but in Trespass, Contract, etc.
not; because after the Outlawry pardoned, the party may have those Actions; and
when Outlawry is pleaded in Bar, and failer of Record at the day, the Judgment
is absolute; but in the 1. of Cro. in Dawson's and Lee's Case per Barkley, the
Party might pray only, that he should answer over; and 2 Cro. Iron against
Gray, if it be reversed before the day, etc. a respond' Ouster; and 1 Inst.
when it is pleaded in Bar, day is given; but when in Disability, it must be
showed presently sub pede sigilli, and such Outlawry to disable the Plaintiff,
must appear of Record; and the Exigent be returned, vide 8 E. 4, 6. b. Ow. 22.
Barnard's Case. 1 Cro. Dawson against Lee. 2 Cro. Iron against Gray. 1 Inst.
128, 5. 4 Inst. 286. M. 4 H. 7. pl. 3.

Outlawry in Chester and Durhan^ cannot disable the party at Westminster;
Outlawry not pleadable in Attaint, nor in Writ of Error, to reverse the same
Outlawry, 1 Inst. 128.

Return upon the Exigent, that he made Proclamation after Divine Service, ill,
not showing, there was no Sermon: For the Stat. appoints it to be done after
Sermon, and if none, after Divine Service, Ow. 49.

The Sh. made a Lease to one Outlawed; and that he was Outlawed again; then
came the General Pardon, resolved he was capable of a Lease, and by the Pardon,
the Term forfeited, by the Second Outlawry revived; for a person Outlawed and
pardoned, has property in his Goods, Ow. 116. Knowles against Powel.

All Outlawries are by Judic' Coron' naming them, excepting Lond', else they
are void but in Lond', it is ideo utlegat' of the principal Judgment ipso facto
reverses the Judgment of Outlawry, 1 Inst. 288. b. Pop. 185. 2 Cro. 358, 528,
531, 521. 4 Inst. 247. Die. 317. a.

Exigent against Baron and Feme; the Wife comes in, and prays a Supersedeas;
doubted if she shall have it: For the Process must continue against the Baron
and be stayed as to the Feme, till he be Outlawed, and then she shall be
discharged, sans jour, and vide diverse Proceedings in Outlawry against Baron
and Feme, Die. 271. b. 3 Cro. 611. Hutt. 86. 1 Cro. 42. Smith against Ash. 2
Cro. 445.

Per Statute 5 Edw. 3, 12. None Outlawed shall be pardoned, till the Party, at
whose Suit be warned; yet upon two Nichils, or a Scire Facias, he shall be
discharged; but then quid remedium parti? Quaere when he is pardoned of an
Outlawry before Judgment, with an ita quod stet, because he is to Answer to the
Party; but when it is after Judgment, it is ita quod satisfac' parti, because he
is to pay the Condemnation, Dyer 172.

Trespass by J. S. plea that he was Outlawed by the name of J. S. de D. he
pleads, that he lives, and ever did, at S. it seems good: for it must be
intended another person by Little': vide M. 41 H. 6. pl. 19. in an Action
brought by J. D. plea that he was Bail for one by the name of J. D. Gentleman,
and Outlawed on it: He replies, that he is a Yeoman, and held no plea: for if
he entered the plea by that Name, he is Estipped; but the better Reason seems to
be, that no Addition needed in the Recogn'. because the Statute speaks of
Original, Tr. 10 E. 4. pl. 10.

An Outlawry in Chester or Durham, is not pleadable at Westminster; for they
have butprivate Jurisdiction per^sett'; but an Outlawry in Lanc' here per les
Sergeants Com' lower Jurisdic' sit per Outlar' de Parliam', 12 E. 4. 76. a.

One taken by Cap' utlegat', pleaded that his Name is J. Stokes, not J. Stoke,
as named; and prays Scire Facias; for the Plaintiff says, he is known by the
one and the other Name, issue of it, and he left to Mainprize, Tri. 14. E. 4.
pl. 6.

If there were no Add' in the first Writ, there must be none Exig'; for they
must not vary, Tr. 16 E. 4. pl. 15.

Outlawry in an Indictment of Forestalling, reversed, because Parties of
Outlawry lie not in that Case, P. 22 E. 4. pl. 13.

One Outlawed of Felony, comes in by sepi Corpus, and pleads Misnomer, and if
he shall have it by plea, or be put to Writ of Error, and sue Scire Facias
against the Mesn Lord', doubtful by some he shall not avoid it by plea, for the
disadv' of the Lords alii he may have Scire Facias on this plea; and if he
should bring a Writ of Error, it must be by the same Name in the Record, which
will be an Estoppel, M. 22 E. 4. pl. 22.

If a Supersedeas be sued, though not delivered to the Sheriff before the 5.
Exit', the Outlawry shall be reversed; and so if delivered to the Sheriff who
certifies the Coroner so; and yet because he appears not for him, they Outlaw
him; shall be reversed; for the Supersedeas is of Record, 4 E. 4, 42. a. b. Mo.
pl. 199.

The King makes a Lease to a person Outlawed; for the Render' of Rent makes him
capable as a Farmer; then he is Outlawed again; then comes a General Pardon;
and it seems that restores him by the word Damus in it, against the Forfeit on
the last Outlawry, and ibidem, the King makes a Lease to Commence from the
Forfeiture, End or Determination of a former Term, the 1. Less is Outlawry,
yet the 2. Term shall not begin, Mo. pl. 378.

One recovers in Quare Impedit, and before Execution is Outlawed, the King
shall have a Scire Facias to present; for he cannot present, but is to
prosecute the Execution of the Judgment; sed he is not privy to it. Beverleys
Case, Mo. pl. 378.

If one forfeit a Presentation fallen by Outlawry, and the King presents, and
he reverses the Outlawry, he shall have a Scire Facias and outs the King's
Clerk: For by the Reversal he is restored to all that he lost as Principal, not
Accessaries; therefore if the Advowson were appendant, and it becomes void,
whilst the Manor is in the King's Hand for Outlawry, and the King presents, he
shall not avoid it, though he reverse by Error, nor Rent-Copy-holders put in by
the King; and if it were an Advowson in Gross, and becomes void, whilst in the
King's Hands, and the King presents, it seems he shall avoid it after Reversal,
because the Advowson is the Principal thing, and the Presentment, but the usage
of it. Beverly against Cornwall, Mo. pl. 421. 3 Cro. 44.

The Sheriff ret' ad Com' Lanc' tent' ibidem, etc. where it should be ad Com'
Lanc' tent' apud Lanc', or other place cert', and for that the Outlawry was
reversed, though dict' many Presidents that passed subsilenter', Co. 4. rep.
95. a.

My Lord Co. says, the better Opinion of Books is, and so is his, that Debts by
simple Contract, or for which one may wave Law, are forfeited by Outlawry, and
with him his Heirs, agree the Judges Pop. And. and others, 1 Inst. 128. b. he
says Debts, etc. which are cetain are forfeited, not Damage, etc. uncert'; but
so 10, 22. it is said, in Debt, on a Contract, Outlawry in Plaintiff, Abatement,
because the Defendant not forfeited; but on a Bond it is pleaded in Bar, because
the Defendant forfeited, Co. 4. rep. 93. a. 95. a.

My Lord Cook says, that at Common Law, if the Party was Outlawed, he was at an
end of his Suit, and put to his New Original; yet he granted no Capias lay in
Debt at Common Law; so it seems Outlawry lay where no Cap' lay at Common Law.
Garner's Case, Co. 5. rep. 58. a.

One Outlawed in Debt, after Judgment dies after the General Pardon, wherein
it is provided none take Advant' of the Party that is Outlawed after Judgment,
without satisfying the Plaintiff, and having the Pardon allowed in Scire
Facias, yet resolved. First, here the Outlawry was pardoned, quoad the King,
and may make Executors, and take Advantage of the Pardon. Secondly, Here being
no Capias ad satisfac', which he against the Executors, nor no Scire Facias;
therefore the Executors satisfying the Party, may plead it without Scire
facias. Sir Edward Fetton's Case, Co. 6. rep. 79, 80.

Outlawry reversed, because the Exigent required the Sheriff to Arrest ita quod
habeat Corpus, in Cro. Trin. and St. is of no signification: Dr. Drurie's Case,
Co. 8. rep. 141. a.

One Arrested that had Privilege, sues a Supersedeas, and after is Outlawed;
there is a Nullity in all Proceedings, and the Outlawry declared void, without
suing any Writ of Error, Co. 8. rep. 143. b.

Outlawry by Asst' being avoided by Plea, it is held by Cro. that its no
Determination of the Original; but he might have proceeded in the Original,
suing another; but the first Original should have excused within the Statute of
Limitations. Sir Thomas Finch against Lamb. Citer. Just. sembl. con. 1 Cro.
214, 215.

Exigent against three Men, and two Women, ret' non comperuer', ideo per Judic'
Com' utlegat' existant, ill; and reversed, because not said, nec eorum aliquis
comperuit.

2. The Women ought to have been waviati. Middleton's Case, 2 Cro. 358.

It seems one cannot assign for Error, that he was beyond Sea at the time of
the Outlawry pronounced; but time of the Exigent: For if after Exigent one fly,
he cannot assign for Error, that he was beyond Sea; and if he do, the Attorney
General may reply, that he departed after the Exigit. Carter's Case, 2 Cro. 464.

Partition.
IF two have one Manor in Common before Partition, the one is said to have
dimidium Manerii; but after Partition, he is said to have medietatem Manerii:
And so after Partition, if one of them be ousted by Force, the Indictment shall
say, medietatem, not dimidium Manerii.

Privilege.
ONe of the Clerks of the Chancery lost his Privilege, by suing out a
Supersedeas in the Common Pleas: For by that Writ, he submitted to the Court
there; and then his Privilege shall not be allowed there.

Pars^n.
IF a Parson that has a Benefice, be made Bishop of the same Diocese, and he
acccepts of the Bishopric, the Parsonage thereby becomes void; for that he
cannot Visit himself: So that a Man cannot have two Benefices with Cure of
Souls, Simul and Semel; but the first is void by Acceptance of the Second.

Tith. The Tith of those things which proceed from the Earth, as Hay, Corn,
Apples, and such like, ought to be severed upon the Ground (or place where they
grow;) but not so of Sheep, Pigs, etc. because they are of another Nature: And
if a Man have Sheep in two Parishes, the Parsons of both Parishes shall have
Tith of them. Willows, Horn-bane and Sallows are Titheable; but Timber Trees,
as Oak, Ash, Elm, etc. are not, nor the Loppings of them, contra, if they be
felled or lopped before the Growth of Twenty Years, per totam Curiam, Hill. 8.
Jacobi in Communi Banco.

Plea. If a Parson makes a Parol Agreement of his Tithes for his Life, and
afterward grants the same to another, who sues for the Tithes, Concord is no
Plea in this Case; but by Warberton Justice, a Parson may grant his Glebe Corn
before it be Sowed, and good for a Year. Trin. 10. Jacobi in C. B.

If a Parson gives 10 l. to the Patron, to present him to the next Avoidance,
(the Church being full) it is Simony: So if the other give it to such intent.
Mich. 14 Jacobi in Communi Banco: But if the Parson who is in by Simony dies,
if the King shall present. quaere, et vide ibid' in Quare impedit inter
Winscomb, et Episcopum Winton', et alios.

Of Pleas and Pleading.
A Bond was made and delivered as the Act and Deed of A. to B. for the use of
C. which Bond B. offered to C. but C. refused to accept the same from B. yet B.
left the same with C. to take, and the Bond being sued, A. pleads the whole
Matter, and so not his Deed: And upon a Demurrer, Judgment and Quaer'.

If the Condition of an Obligation be to pay 20 l. 7. Maii, and the Obligor
pleads solvit ad diem, although he paid the said 20 l. to the Obligee, the 8th.
of April before, it is a good Plea to say he paid it the 7th. of May: For if it
be paid before, it is paid at the day in the Condition mentioned; and the Intent
and Substance of the Condition, is observed and discharged.

Three are bound in one Bond, and every of them jointly in the whole; the
Obligee afterward gets Judgment against one of them, and brings his Action
against the other: This Recovery is no Bar; for it is no Satisfaction of the
Debt; but an Execution is a good plea in this Matter.

Obligation dated 8th. of December (78.) and does not say the Year of our Lord
God, nor the Year of the King's Reign, the Date is void, and the Obligation
good without Date: and the Plaintiff may count how the Bond was delivered to
him any day when he pleases.

Reg. 1. Acts and Statutes in pleading need not be recited wholly, only the
particular Branch that concerns the Matter in Hand, because every Branch is an
Act of it self. Secus of a Record, for that is grounded upon an Original, and
Judgment; and ought therefore to be entirely recited, when pleaded in Bar.

If Tenant in Tail of a Manor, whereunto a Villain is Reguardant, discontinue
and die, and the Right of the Intail descend to the Villain himself, who brings
Formedon, and the Discontinuee pleads Villanage. This is no Plea, because the
Devesting of the Manor, which is the Intention of the Suit, does include this
plea, because it determines the Villanage.

Reg. 2. Pleadings must be certain, that the Adverse Party may know whereunto
to answer; or else he were at a Mischief; which Mischief is remedied by
Demurrer.

If tenant in Ancient Demeasne be disseized by the Lord, whereby the Seigniory
is suspended, and the Disseizee brings his Assize in the Court of the Lord.
Frank Fee is no plea, because the Suit is brought to undo the Disseison, and so
to revive the Seigniory in Ancient Demesne.

If a Man be Attainted and Executed, and the Heir bring a Writ of Error upon
the Attainder, and the Corruption of Blood by the same Attainder be pleaded, to
interupt the conveying in of the same Writ. This is n^ plea; for then he were
without Remedy, ever to reverse the Attainder.

If Tenant in Tail discontinue for Life, rendering a Rent, and the Issue brings
a Formedon, and the Warranty of his Ancestor with Assets be pleaded against
him, and the Assetts is laid to be no other, but his Reversion with the Rent.
This is no plea, because the Formedon, which is brought to undo the
Discontinuance, does inclusively undo this new Reversion in Fee, with the Rent
thereunto annexed.

If a Man be attainted of two several Attainders, and there is Error in them
both, there is no reason but that there should be a Remedy open for the Heir to
reverse those Attainders, being Erroneous, as well if there were twenty as one.

And therefore, if in a Writ of Error brought by the Heir of one of them; the
Attainder should be a plea peremptorily: And so again, if in a Writ of Error
brought of the other, the former should be a plea, these were to exclude him
utterly of his Right; and therefore it should be a good Replication to say,
That he has a Writ of Error depending of that also: And so the Court shall
proceed, but no Judgment shall be given until both Pleas be dismissed; and if
either Plea be found without Error, there shall be no Reversal, either of the
one or the other; and if he discontinue either Writ, then shall it be no longer
a plea: And so of several Outlawries in a Personal Action.

If Tenant in Tail of two Acres, make two several Discontinuances to several
persons for Life, rendering Rent, and brings a Formedon of both; and in the
Formedon, brought of W. Acre, the Reversion and Rent reserved upon B. Acre; and
so contrary, it seems to be a good Replication, that he has a Formedon also
upon that depending, whereunto the Tenant has pleaded the Descent of the
Reversion of W. Acre; and so neither shall be a Bar: And yet there is no
doubt, but if in a Formedon, the Warranty of Tenant in Tail with Assetts be
pleaded, it is no Replication for the Issue to say, that a Precipe depends by
J. S. to evict the Assetts.

An Attorney may plead not informed to an Action, if his Client does not give
him order to plead otherwise: For this will save the Attorney Damages in a Writ
of Deceit, if it should be brought against him.

In an Action of the Case, if the Defendant plead to issue upon one part, and
Demurrer to the other part, the Demurrer ought to be argued first, because the
Jury at the Trial, may give Entire Damages for the whole.

Scire Facias against Manucaptor', they plead, that after Judgment against the
Principal, (viz. 6th. die and anno) the Principal brought a Writ of Error,
whereby the Record was removed into the Exchequer, and that pendente br' de
Errore, the Principal rendered himself to the Marshal, and there died; and this
he is ready to prove, etc. This Plea is naught, because the Rendition ought to
be tried by the Record. Secondly, The plea is double, and imports two Issues,
the one the Rendering, and the other the Death. 3. The bringing the Writ of
Error, is a Supersedeas to the Execution (and the Execution being suspended,
during the Error, undetermined, and depending the Bail) was not sufficient
Authority to bring them in: So that his Rendition is in vain, and nothing
worth, and the Death is only answerable; which if true, is a Discharge of the
Bail.

Reg. 3. In all Imperfections of Pleading, whether it be in Ambiguity of Words,
and double Intendments, or want of Certainty and Averments, the plea shall be
strictly and strongly taken against him that pleads it.

For Ambiguity of Words, If in a Writ of Entry upon Disseisin, the Tenant
pleads Joynt-Tenancy with J. S. of the Gift and Feoffment of J. D. Judgment,
del brief, the Demandant says, That long before J. D. any thing had, the
Defendant himself was seized in Fee Quousque predict' id super possessionem
ejus intravit, and made a joint Feoffment; whereupon he the Demandant
re-enter'd, and was seized, until by the Defendant alone he was disseized. This
is no Plea, because the word intravit may be understood, either of a Lawful
Entry, or of a tortious, and the hardest against him shall be taken, which is,
that it was a lawful Entry; therefore he should have alleged precisely, that
J. D. disseisivit.

Reg. 4. So upon Ambiguities that grow by References; if an Action of Debt be
brought against J. F. and J. B. Sheriffs of London, upon an Escape, and the
Plaintiff does declare upon an Execution, by Force of a Recovery, in the Prison
of Ludgate, sub Custodia J. S. and J. D. then Sheriffs in 1 H. 8. and that he
so continued sub Custodia J. B. and J. G. in 2 H. 8. and so continued in
Custodia J. F. and J. P. in 3 H. 8. and then was suffered to escape: J. F. and
J. P. plead, that before the Escape at such a day, Anno superius, in narratione
specificat', the said J. S. and J. D. adtunc Vicecomites, suffered him to This
is no good Plea, because there be three Years specified in the Declaration;
and it shall be hardest taken, that it was 2, or 3 H. 8. when they were out of
Office; and yet it is nearly induced by the adtunc Vicecomites, which should
leave the Intendment to be of that Year, in which the Declaration supposes
them to be Sheriffs; but that suffices not, but the Year must be alleged in
Fait: For it may be mislaid by the Plaintiff: And therefore the Defendants
Meaning to discharge themselves by a former Escape, which was not in their
time, must allege it precisely, Dyer fo. 66.

Reg. 5. For uncertainty of Intendment, if a Warranty Collateral be pleaded in
Bar, and the Plaintiff by Replication to avoid the Warranty, says, he entered
upon the Possession of the Defendant, non Constat whether this Entry was in the
Life time of the Ancestor, or after the Warranty descended; and therefore it
shall be taken in the strictest Sense, that it was after the Warranty
descended, if it be not otherwise averred, 3 H. 7. 2, 3 Plo. 46. a.

For Improperty of Words, If a man plead, that his Ancestor died, by
Protestation serzed, and that J. S. abated, etc. this is no Plea; for there
cannot be an Abatement, unless there be a Dying seized, alleged in Fait; and
an Abatement shall not be improperly taken for Disseisin in pleading: For Words
make Pleas, 38 H. 6. a. b. 39 H. 6. 5, 6.

Reg. 6. For Repugnancy in pleading, if a Man in Avowry, declare, that he was
seized in his Demesne, as of Fee of 10 Acres; and being so seized, did demise
the said 10 Acres to J. S. habend' the Moiety for twenty one years, from the
Date of the Deed, the other Moiety from the Surrender, Expiration, or other
Determination of the Estate of J. D. qui tenet predict' medietat' ad terminum
vitae suae Reddend 40 s. Rent. This Declaration is insufficient, because that
the Seisin that he has alleged in himself, in his Demesme, as of Fee in the
whole, and the Estate for Life of the Moiety is repugnant; and it shall not be
Cured by taking the last, which is expressed to control the former, which is
but general and formal; but the plea is naught, and yet the matter in Law had
been good, to have Entitled him to distrain for the whole Rent.

Reg. 7. A Bar may be good to a Common Intent though not to every Intent: As if
Debt be brought against Five Executors, and Three of them make Default, and two
appear, and plead in Bar^ a Recovery had against them two of 300 l. and nothing
in their hands over and above that Sum: If this Bar should be taken strongest
against them, it should be intended, that they might have abated the first
Suit, because the other three were not named, and so the Recovery not ^uly had
against them; but according to the Rule, the Bar is good: For that by Common
Intendment, it will be supposed, that the two did only administer: And so the
Action well considered, rather than to imagine, that they would have lost the
Benefit and Advantage of abating the first Writ.

Reg. 8. In pleading, a Man shall not disclose that which is against himself;
and therefore, if it be matter that is to be set forth on the other side. Then
the plea shall not be taken in the hardest Sense, but in the most Beneficial;
and to be left unto the contrary part to be alleged.

And therefore, if a Man be bound in an Obligation, that if the Wife of the
Obligee, does Decease before the Feast of St. John the Baptist, which shall be
in the Year of our Lord God 1598, without Issue of her Body by her Husband,
lawfully begotten, then living; that then the Bond shall be void: And in Debt
brought upon this Obligation, the Defendant pleads, that the Woman died before
the said Feast, without Issue of her Body, then living: If this Plea should be
taken strongest against the Defendant, then should it be taken, that the Feme
had Issue at the time of her Death; but this Issue died before the Feast: But
this shall not be so understood, because it makes against the Defendant; and it
is to be brought in on the Plaintiff's side, and that without Traverse, Dyer
16, 17.

Non dimisit to an Action of Debt upon a Lease in Writing, was adjudged an ill
Plea, and a Repleader awarded thereupon by the Court, Mich. 44, and 45 Eliz.
Rot. 158. in Banco Reginae.

If J. S. Covenant to make me an Assurance, I paying the Costs and Charges for
making thereof, he shall not bar my Action of Covenant, by saying, he was
ready to do it, unless he bring the Writings Engrossed, and ready to Seal, and
I refuse to pay the Charges accordingly.

Debt against an Executor, who pleads three Judgments of an 100 l. a piece; and
that he had paid 40 l. in Satisfaction of two of the Judgments; and that he
has not, nor had, etc. praeterquam, etc. the said 40 l. and 20 l. more, which
is not sufficient to satisfy the other Judgment, upon which the Plaintiff
demurred and adjudged for the Defendant; for its but in effect, a plene
administravit specially.

Administrator durante minore etate, if he wastes the Goods of the Infant, he
shall be punished as an Executor in his own wrong.

If an Administrator brings an Action of Debt, and averrs in his Declaration,
how that Administration was granted to him at London, and the Letters of
Administration bear Date in another place and County, the Plaint shall abate.

Upon a Scire Facias against two Executors, the Sheriff returns nulla bona
against both, and Devastavit to the Value of the Debt against one of them;
whereupon another Scire Facias issued forth, and Judgment was obtained only
against him thereupon by Default, and after that a Fieri Facias de bonis
propriis against him alone.

If there be two Executors, and the one of them confess the Action, and the
other lets it go by Default, or pleads non est factum, or plene administravit,
Judgment shall be against both, de bonis Testatoris. Diverse Executors are but
in the Nature of one Person; For they all represent the Person of their
Testator: And if the Action had been brought against him in his Life, he should
have made but one Answer.

If Debt and Damages be recovered against one, and before Execution he dies;
upon a Scire Facias against his Executor or Administrator, you shall recover
only de bonis testatoris, and not de bonis propriis, because the Prayer of the
Scire Facias is only de bonis Testatoris; and the Court will not exceed the
Prayer of your own Writ.

Reg. 9. The Defendant may plead an Outlawry in disability of the Plaintiff,
before Imparlance; but after Imparlance, he cannot plead in disability of the
Person; but he may plead it in Bar of the Action, 32 H. 6, 33. 35 H. 6, 36.

In a Writ brought by one, as Son and Heir to J. S. after Imparlance, the
Tenant cannot plead to the Writ, that he is a Bastard, or that he is not Heir;
but he may well plead it in Bar of the Action, 22 E. 4, 35.

An Outlawry is a good Plea in Bar of an Action of Debt: For by the Outlawry
of the Plaintiff, the Debt, if it grow due by Specialty, is vested in the King;
but secus of an Action of Debt upon Contract: For in that Case, the Debtor
might wage his Law against the Debtee, who is Outlawed, 16 E. 4, 4.

By 10 H. 7. it seems, that an Outlawry goes rather in Bar of the Action,
than to the Writ; for there it is said, that where a Man cannot plead to the
Writ, but by showing of a matter in Bar, there he may show it, and conclude to
the Writ: For in an Action of Debt, a Man may plead Outlawry in the Plaintiff,
and conclude to the person, and yet the matter goes in Bar; and he may plead
it also in Bar, and conclude to the Action, 10 H. 7, 11.

After a Voucher is counter-pleaded, and the Tenant put to another Answer, he
may notwithstanding plead, that the Demandant is Outlawed; but after Voucher,
the Tenant cannot plead to the Form of the Writ, 21 E. 4, 64. 5 E. 3, 223.

If a Man pleads, that the Plaintiff is an Alien born, or a Villain, or an
Outlawed Person, it is left to his Choice, whether he will conclude these
special Matters to the Writ or to the Action, 32 H. 6, 27.

If the Husband and Wife bring an Assize, and a Feoffment or Release of the
Husband or the Wife; or of some Ancestor of one of them be pleaded in Bar, both
of them shall be barred, 21 R. 2. Judgment 263.

An Exception taken to a Writ, propter defectum Nationis, vel potius defectum
Subjectionis ligeantiae, is peremptory, and the Action cannot be revived by
Peace, or League subsequent. Theloal Digest' de Briefs. Lib. 1. Ca. 6. The King
may grant License to Aliens to implead; and that such Aliens as come into the
Realm, by the King's License, and safe Conduct, may use Personal Actions by
Writ, though they be not made Denizens. And Denizens lawfully made by the
King's Grant, and such Aliens born which are within the express words of the
Statute of 25 E. 3. may use Actions Real by Original Writ. Theoloal ubi supra.

If a Man be Excommunicated, and he sueth an Action Real or Personal, the
Tenant or Defendant may plead, that the Plaintiff is Excommunicated: And
thereupon he ought to show the Bishop's Letters under his Seal, testifying the
Excommunication; and then he may demand Judgment, whether he ought to be
answered. But if the Demandant or Plaintiff cannot deny this, the Writ shall
not abate; but the Judgment shall be, that the Tenant or Defendant, eat inde
sine die; because, when the Demandant or Plaintiff has purchased Letters of
Absolution, and they are showed to the Court, he may have a Re-summons, or
Re-attachment upon his Original, according to the Nature of his Writ, Lit. Lib.
2. Ca. 11. Sect. 42.

An Action upon the Case was brought, and the Plaintiff set forth, that a Jury
was Impannelled and Sworn; and that one of the Jurors was challenged, for that
there were not 12 Jurors. Talis de Circumstantibus was awarded, and another
Juror Impannelled; and so legitimo modo acquietatus fuit; but this was held
Erroneous per totam Curiam: For it does not appear, that he was legitimo modo
acquietatus, because he does not say, that this other Juror was sworn, Mich. 8.
Ja. in C. B.

Reg. 10. If a Man plead a General Act of Parliament, and mis-recite the same,
yet it shall not prejudice him, because the Judges ought to take notice of it,
per totam Curiam; and null tiel Record' cannot be pleaded against a General Act
of Parliament, although it cannot be found; per Coke Chief Justice, ubi supra.

Reg. 11. Note by all the Justices for a general Rule, where a thing alleged
does confess and avoid my Plea, I may Traverse it, 7 H. 6. 13 Eliz. Dyer.

A Copyholder pleaded, that per Licentiam Dominorum Manerii adtunc
existentium, he made a Lease for Years, to J. S. and ruled to be an ill plea;
because he has not shown what Estate the Lords have in the Manor: For they
may be only Tenants at Will, and so cannot give License to make a Lease for
Years, although they have Power to grant Estates by Copy.

A Man brought an Action of Trespass for his Horse taken: The Defendant said,
that the Plaintiff gave him License to take his Horse; and farther said, that
he was within Age at the time of the License, etc. Afterward the Defendant
said, that he was not seized long time before that the Infant any thing had,
etc. and so possessed, until J. S. took and gave to the Infant. This is a good
Departure, because that he does not maintain his Bar, sc. his License, 5 H. 7.

Assise, the Tenant pleads, that his Tenant died without Heir, he shall not be
received to say, that he committed Felony, for which he was attainted, because
that it is new Matter, and not pursuant.

An Obligation did bear Date the first day of May, and was delivered the. 20
th. day afterward; the Obligee releaseth the Second day of May; which Release
was delivered the same day: This Release is no Bar, quod nota. If the Obligee
brings an Action, and declares upon a Bond bearing Date the first day, etc. and
does not say that it was afterward delivered the 20 th. day, the Defendant
shall bar him by the Release, which was made after the first day; and the
Plaintiff shall not reply, and show the first Delivery of the Bond the 20 th.
day; for that is a Departure, and because that he might have alleged it it at
the Commencement.

By Keeble, where the Defendant in Trespass fortifies his Bar; and there is no
other Matter but pursuant to the Bar, and goes before the Bar in Conveyance
of his Title: This is no Departure; but where the Bar is before the Matter
shown in his Rejoinder, this is a Departure: As in Assise, the Defendant pleads
the Dying seized of his Father, and gives Color, etc. The Plaintiff pleads the
Feoffment of the Defendant after that Descent; the Defendant rejoyns, and
says, that Feoffment was upon Condition, which Condition was broken, and so he
did re-enter. Now this is a Departure; for the Bar was before the Feoffment:
But if the Tenant in Assisse says, that J. S. was seized, and enfeoffed him,
and gives Color, etc. and the Plaintiff says, that J. S. disseised him, and
enfeoffed the Defendant, upon whom he re-enter'd, and was seized until, etc. if
the Tenant rejoyn, that after the Disseisin, he released to the said J. S. and
then he enfeoffed him. This is no Departure, and yet he might have pleaded it
at first.

Also, if the Plaintiff plead a Feoffment upon Condition to J. S. and that the
Condition is broken; and that thereupon he entered, the Defendant may say, that
he released to J. S. after the Condition broken; and then he enfeoffed him.

A Man pleads a Feoffment in Bar, in Assize of the Plaintiff; and the
Plaintiff says, that he Let to him for Life, and afterward he made a
Feoffment, by which he entered; the Tenant may well say, that after the Lease,
and before the Feoffment, the Plaintiff released to him: This is no Departure,
because that it is pursuant; and yet it might have been said at first, 1 E. 4.

Quare Impedit against a Bishop, he pleads, that he claims nothing but as
Ordinary, and demands Judgment, etc. The Plaintiff replies, that such a day he
presented to him such a person, whom he refused; to which the Bishop rejoyns,
that the Church was void (and shows how) and that thereupon he collated by
Laps, Judgment, etc. This is no Departure, 35 H. 6.

In Assize, the Defendant pleads a Lease of the Plaintiff for Years, which is
yet in being; the Plaintiff shows the Alienation of the Tenant; the Tenant
says, that the Plaintiff released to him after the Lease. This is a Departure,
by Marten, 3 H. 6. Precipe quod reddat, the Tenant pleads, that J. S. was
seized of the same Lands, and that they were devised to him in Fee; by Force
whereof he entered, and gives Color, etc. The Plaintiff says, that J. S. was
seized, and that he died seized; and that the Lands descended to him, as Son
and Heir; and that he entered cum hoc, that he will averr, that the said J. S.
was within the Age of 21 Years, at the time of the Devise. The Tenant rejoyns,
that the Custom is, that every Infant of the Age of 15 Years may Devise; and
that he was of the Age of 15 Years at the time of the Devise. The Court was of
Opinion, that it was a Departure, 37 H. 6.

In Assize, the Tenant pleaded, the Dying seized by Protestation of his Father:
The Plaintiff said, that J. S. was seized, and enfeoffed him, and so seized,
etc. To which the Tenant replied, that his Father (by Protestation) died
seized; and that J. S. did abate, and enfeoff the Plaintiff; and that the
Tenant, as Heir to his Father, entered, and was seized by Fortescue This is no
Departure, because the Tenant has maintained his Bar, and has only added new
Matter to maintain it, 37 H. 6.

If a Man plead a Gift in Tail in Bar, and the Demandant reply, ne dona pas;
if he show a Recovery in Value, it is no Departure.

In Assise, the Tenant pleaded horse de son Fee; the Plaintiff showed that the
Tenant held of him issint de son fee, and the Defendant showed a Release of all
Right. This is a Departure, because this plea was a Bar, 5 H. 7.

In Formedon, the Tenant pleaded, ne dona pas; the Demandant showed a Recovery
in Value issint dona; The Tenant shall not plead a new Bar, because that that
would be a Departure; quod nota, 21 H. 6.

Reg. 12. In all Pleadings, where you claim as Legatee, you must surmise the
Consent of the Executor, as cui quidem dimissioni idem J. S. consentivit. After
Verdict the Plaintiff dies, viz. before the day in Bank; in Error brought, this
is assigned for Error, and the Plaintiff per Attornatum suum, pleads, that he
was alive; 'twas tried, and found that he was dead.

Argued by Mr. Allen, That there was no Trial proper for the Cause; for that
the Issue was joined by a Stranger; and that there ought to be a Scire Facias
against the Executors, or Administrators of the Plaintiff; and that the Writ of
Error is discontinued.

But per totam Curiam the Trial is good, and the Judgment reversed for that
Error in fait, Mich, 14 Car. 2. in B. R. Dove vers' Dinkey.

Quare Impedit.
IN Quare Impedit, to present by Turns to an Advowson in Gross, Three Judges
were of Opinion, that the Commencement, how it came presentable by turns, must
be showed: But two Judges were of a contrary Opinion, Leek against Coventry, 3
Cro. 111.

A Viccarage, and none presented to it for one hundred and sixty Years:
Resolved, that all Viccarages are taken out of the Parsonage, and are not
remitted to them by Non-usage, without some Act. Robinson against Beadle, 3
Cro. 873.

Quare Impedit by the King against A. he pleads, that the King made a Lease for
Years, to J. S. and during the Term J. S. presented him, etc. And it was moved,
that he being Incumbent, could not traverse the King's Title, without making
one for himself; but show that he came in by Usurpation during the Lease; but
in the Writ, it was excepted, that the Patron and Ordinary are not named, but
only the Incumbent, which they ought to be in all Cases, but that of Collation;
but because the Defendant shows, that he came in during the Term, in which Term
the King could have no Right, it was adjudged for the Defendant. Regina versus
Middleton: vide Co. 7. rep. 26, 27. 25 H. 6. 62. a. 3 H. 4. 2, 3, 11.

Writ against the Incumbent only adjudged ill, and abated, by 46 E. 3. vide 7
E. 3, 11. 7 H. 4, 26. Writ against the Incumbent only good, 1 Leon. 44, 45, 46.
vide 47. E. 3. 10, 11.

Quare Impedtt, and Counts of an Advowson appendant, that it is become void, and
he presented J. S. The Defendant pleads, that it is in Gross, and Let to him;
and that he presented J. S. absque hoc that it is appendant, the Traverse is
good; but where the Count is of an Advowson in gross, etc. and the Defendant
pleads, that it is appendant, there the Presentment is traversable; not that it
appendant: For the Presentment makes it in gross. Seignior Buckhurst against
Epm. Winton, 1 Leon. 154.

In a Quare Impedit by Tenant for Life, Exception was taken, because he counted
of a Presentment only in himself, and laid not any in his Lessor; but adjudged
good: For the Lessor may lay a Presentment on his Lessee; therefore it is good
for the Lessee. Palms versus Epm. Peterborough, 1 Leon. 230. Co. 5. rep. 57.
b. 3 Cro. 518. vid. M. 7 E. 4. pl. 22. con. 8 H. 5. 4 Accord.

Quare Impedit against the Bishop and J. S. and Judgment; they join in a Writ
of Deceit, and avoid the Judgment for Non Summons; and of that a Writ of Error
brought and assigned, that they could not join, and Adjourned. Guilliams
against Blower; sed vide 3 Cro. 65. They join in a Writ of Error on a Judgment
in a Quare Impedit, 1 Leon. 293.

One that had a Benefice was presented to another, and then purchased a
Dispensation; it came too late, and so the first was void; and if that be such
as that it avoids the last quaere. Underhill against Savage, 1 Leon. 316.

Queen Mary seized of a Rectory impropriate, granted Advocationem Ecclesiae;
the Advowson passed not: For being appropriate, it cannot be disappropriate,
and the Rectory it self could not pass: For by the Appropriation, the Advowson
is gone, and not in esse. Eadem Lex, if it were the Grant of a Common person.
Regina against Lord Lumley, 2 Leon. 80.

A Common person presents to a Church, before Institution he may revoke it, and
present another: But the King may revoke it after Institution, and before
Induction, wherewith agrees F. N. B. 34 C. but says, a Common person having
presented cannot revoke at all: And Mr. Bacon in his Reading on the Statute of
Simony, in August. 14 Car. 2. held clear, that a Common person may revoke his
Presentation; and so is 14 E. 4, 2. b.

By the Common Law, Filius non potest succedere Patri in Ecclesia; and
therefore where the Patron presented the Son of the last Incumbent, the Bishop
refused him; but that holds not in England; but the Patron presented another,
whom the Bishop instituted, etc. The first got a Dispensation of the Canon, and
sued the Bishop in the Delegates, and he prayed a Prohibition, and had it,
though both Parties claim by one Patron; I suppose, because the latter
Presentment was a Revocation of the first: If the Bishop will not Institute,
etc. duplex quaerela lies, Stoke against Sykes, Latch. 191, 192.

A. brings a Quare Impedit against B. pending which B. was instituted and
inducted; Then A sues in the Spiritual Court to remove him, prohibition prayed;
first, because he sues in duplici foro. Secondly, it is after Induction granted,
Oliver and Hussy, Latch 205.

Quare Impedit and Counts of an Avoidance. The Defendant pleads, that the
Avoidance was by Resignation; and that he had notice the Church continued void
six Months, whereby he presented by Laps, ill; not showing, that it was void
six Months without notice, as it must be, not after the resignation; wherefore
he amended it, H. 1 H. 7. fo. 9. pl. 8.

The Defendant in a Quare Impedit reversed a Judgment had against him for
Default of a Letter of Attorney, and prayed a Writ to the Bishop, and could not
have it till he made Title, H. 1 H. 7. fo. 13: pl. 28.

Three Manors descended to three Sisters, to one of which an Advowson is
appendant; they make Partition of all, except the Advowson, and assigned the
Manor, whereto, etc. to one, and another to each of the other, and say nothing
of the Advowson; and if it be Appendant, or in Gross alternis vicibus, viz.
Appendant when the Sisters Turn comes that has the Manor, or in Gross pro
toto: doubted; but the Opinion seems, that it is in Gross pro toto: For the
Partition is as a Sale, excepting the Advowson; and if the Advowson had not
been excepted, then clearly it had been in Gross: vide Dyer 205. A Church may
be Appendant and in Gross, alternis vicibus, M. 2 H. 7. pl. 16.

In a Quare Impedit against a Bishop, he claims nothing but as ordinary: The
Defendant pleads, that he presented A. and he refused him: The Plaintiff
replies, that such a day before the Presentment, J. S. presented one, and then
he presented, etc. whereby the Church became litigious. The Plaintiff Demurrs.
The plea of the Bishop good. Secondly, If the Plaintiff thereupon might pray a
Writ to the Bishop, quaere; but the Court divided; but it was agreed, that the
Bishop might have pleaded this at first; and now has put the Plaintiff upon
Title with a Stranger, whereas perhaps before he might have prayed a Writ to
the Bishop, either himself, or the Metropolitan; but which quaere: It seems a
Departure, 34 H. 6, 11, 12. a. P. 5 H. 7. pl. 1.

Quare Impedit against a Bishop, and counts that he presented A. who was
admitted, etc. and died, and the Church continued void for Six Months; the
Bishop collated B. by lapse, and that A. died, so as it belonged to him, etc.
The Defendant pleads, that J. S. presented B. to him, and traverses the
Collation; and whether the Bishop in Suit against him, might set up a Title in
a Stranger, to avoid the Plaintiffs Suit, was the Question? And it seems, he
having the Cure of the Church, and to see that the Rightful Patrons do present,
may; and hereby the Usurpation of J. S. the now Patron, is out of Possession.
Quaere if a Disturber may plead such a plea? Tr. 5 H. 7. pl. 2.

One grants Omnia tenta', if an Advowson passes, it is doubted: For it seems it
cannot be held, because no place for a Distress; and therefore no Tenure of it
can be: vid. Trin. 5 H. 7. 3. and Co. 1 Inst. 6. a. 19. b. 154. a. by what
Name, Rents, etc. do pass; and vide P. 6 H. 7. pl. 5. some doubt if an Advowson
may pass by Livery and Seisin, semble non, because a thing merely in Grant; but
the son may take Livery by the Ring of a Door, for his Induction, by way of
Seisin: vide H. 5 H. 7. fo. 37. a. pur le livery and 12 H. 7. 16. Tr. 26 H. 8.
pl. 1.

Usurpation in the time of a Lessee for years of the Manor, wherein, etc. it
seems puts not the Patron out of Possession after the Lease, nor makes not the
Advowson continue in force after the Lease ended, P. 10 H. 7. pl. 6. Tr. 11 H.
7. pl. 15.

Quare Impedit declares, that he presented A. to the Church, being void, etc.
the Defendant pleads, that long before he presented A. and that he being in
Possession, the Plaintiff presents him: it seems not good without a Traverse,
that the Church was void when the Plaintiff presented him, P. 11 H. 7. pl. 1.

Quare Impedit, and lays a Presentation in J. who was seized, and that his
Lands came to the King by the Stat. and the Church voided, and he granted to
the Queen, the immediate Presentment, and also the next Avoidance: The Queen
presents, and it is void again, and was disturbed. It seems, the laying these
Presentiments, makes the Declaration double; for one of them well makes a Title;
but at last they judged not: And it seems, because the Statute is so high, that
no Title can be precedent to it; so that what was laid in J. only was
Surplussage. H. 13 H. 7. pl. 7. P. 16 H. 6. pl. 11. P. 13 H. 8. pl. 2.

In a Quare Impedit against the Parson, Patron, and Ordinary, they all join and
plead one plea; and Exception taken by Keeble, that they have several Interests
and Rights; and so ought to have severed in the Plaintiff; and none can plead
to the Right of Patronage but the Patron, H. 13 H. 7. pl. 24.

In a Quare Impedit against two, one appears at the Distress, and the other
made Default, and a Writ was awarded to the Bishop, immediate quoad him, and
the Plaintiff proceeded with the other Defendant to Trial, P. 14 H. 7. pl. 1.

If the Ordinary refuse a Clerk for disability, he is to give Notice to the
Patron, if he be a Layman; but not, if he be a Spiritual Man, P. 14 H. 7. pl.
3.

In a Quare Impedit by the King, the Ordinary pleads, that such a one presented
his Clerk to him, and he came to him as he was taking Horse, and bid him come
again in three days, and he never came, and so permitted a Lapse: Resolved the
Ordinary not bound immediately to examine the Clerk, but may take convenient
time to do it in: for it may be at the present time, he is busied in aliis
agend'; and though he pleads, that he presented (whereas his Collation) yet it
seems well enough, P. 14 H. 7. pl. 4. Tr. 15 H. 7. pl. 2.

That the Clerk has one or two Benefices already, is no cause of Refusal: For
it is a Privilege to the Clerk, and the Bishop is not to meddle in it; but
Villein is a cause of Refusal, whereof Notice must be given, be the Clerk Lay
or Spiritual, Tr. 14 H. 7. pl. 2.

Grantee of the next Avoidance, brought a Quare Impedit against the Patron and
Ordinary, and recovers; but pendente lite, the Parson resigned, and another is
admitted. This the Bishop returns on the Writ unto him; Scire Fac' Issue
against the new Incumbent; objected it lies not; for he was to have only the
next, not the second Avoidance; but resolved that the Church, quoad him,
remains always void. Note Co. 6. rep. 52. that the Bishop ought to admit the
Clerk on the Writ; and then the Trial of Right, shall be between him and the
Clerk, admitted pendente lite, and no Scire Fac' to be sued; but 2 Cro. 93. is
contrary to that; vide Dyer 260. Hob. 201, 320. H. 2 H. 7. pl. 7.

He that pleads presentation by a Corporation, needs not to plead it by Deed,
because it may be without Deed: For a presentation is but as a Letter
Commendatory.

In Quare Impedit, it is enough to say, his Clerk was Instituted and Admitted
without Induction, but in a Writ of right Induction, is necessary, because he
must lay the Esplees in taking the Tithes, Tr. 26 H. 8. pl. 7.

Two Joynt-tenants brought a Quare Impedit; one will not prosecute, he shall be
summoned and severed; but if he come and make another Title, all is gone; for
they must join in the Title, Trin. 26 H. 8. pl. 22.

Quare Impedit by three Joyn-tenants, and make Title by a Grant to them, and J.
S. And J. S. presented, and the Church is void, so it belongs to their
Presentment; so they make Title of the presentment of one Joynt-tenant, quod
nota: vide Co. 1 Inst. 186. b. Accord. M. ^1 E. 4. pl. 28. Mo. pl. 14. P. 27 H.
8. pl. 28.

Quare Impedit, and counts that A. was seized, and presented, and gave in Tail
to the Ancestors of the Plaintiff, who presented, etc. And the Declaration
adjudged not double, laying one presentment in the Donor, another in the Donee,
18 E. 3. 15. a. ad idem, no more than if the Heir counts in a Quare Impedit of
a presentment, by the Ancestors, and another by his Guardian. Quaere if one
lays a Presentment in the Feoffer, and another in the Feoffee, P. 4 E. 4. pl.
3. M. 7 E. 4. pl. 21. 11 E. 4. 10. b. Co. 5. rep. 98. a. 14 H. 6. 15. b. 1 H.
5. 16. 40. E. 30. 10. b.

Quare Impedit, and counts, that he presented the Defendant, and he deprived,
etc. the Defendant pleads, that the Church was full of him by 6 Months before.
No plea without traversing the Resignation; but what a Traverse it is, see 5 E.
4. 3. b. and 12 H. 4. 11. He needs not say, 'twas full by 6 Months before; for
if he had, his presentment before, or pending the Writ, it shall abate, and he
shall not have an Action for his Presentment, where he has had the Fruit of it
before P. 4 E. 4. pl. 37.

If two present severally, the Ordinary is not bound to award his Jure
Patronatus, without Prayer of the party, H. 8 E. 4. pl. 6.

In Annuity, the Defendant pleads, that, he was presented by the King, and
prays in Aid of him and the Ordinary: Oyer demanded of the presentment. Resp'
It belongs to the Ordinary. Danby, There is a difference between the Bishop's
Collatee, and the King's Presentee, Trin. 9 E. 4. pl. 14.

Composition, that if the Patron of a sine Cura present not within a Month, the
Ordinary shall, if the Patron be disturbed, so as the Month past, he shall
recover Damages for the two Years: For afterward he has lost his presentment,
though the Ordinary has not presented; and so it is not like a Lapse at six
Months at the Common Law, M. 13 E. 4. pl. 5.

One to name the other to present; he that names the Nomination, shall have the
Quare Impedit; but if it be to name two, whereof the other is to present one,
the Presentor is Patron, because of his Election. Quaere if he that has the
Nomination name one, and revoke, can afterward name another? And it seems he
may, H. 14 E. 4. pl. 2. Mo. pl. 147.

Quare Impedit, the Incumbent pleads, that the Church is full, and has been 6
Months before the Writ: Judgment del' brev', if no plea: Nor to the Action by
an Incumbent, nor no other; but him against whom a Writ of Right of Advowson
lies, H. 16 E. 4. pl. 6. vide 48 E. 3. 19. b. 22 H. 6. 14.

The Plaintiff has Judgment in Quare Impedit, and a Writ to the Bishop; and
before the Clerk is admitted, a Stranger brought a Quare Impedit against the
Plaintiff, and has a ne Admittas to the Bishop; doubted which Writ he is to
obey; and by Littleton and Vavasor, the first, because it is an Execution of a
Judgment. Fairfax contra, the last is a Supersedeas, P. 18 E. 4. pl. 36.

Quare Impedit, the Plaintiff is Non Suit, after appearance, the Defendant
makes Title, and has a Writ to the Bishop, H. 19 E. 4. pl. 12.

One may in some cases maintain a Quare Impedit, without alleading any
presentment: As one erects a New Church, and presents to it, and is disturbed;
yet the Quare Impedit lies per Billing' and per omnes Justic', he that recovers
in a Writ of Right of Advowson, shall maintain a Quare Impedit, without
alleging any presentment; so if enacted by Parliament, that one shall have
such an Advowson: For, if a Church lapse, the Ordinary shall collate and
maintain Quare Impedit, without alleging presentment, 21 E. 4. 3. a. b. and
17 E. 3. 13. b. 14. b.

Quare Impedit by the King, counts that A. was seized of a Manor and Advowson
Appendant, and Attainted of Treason, and Office found, that the King presented,
etc. the Defendant makes Title to himself in Gross, absque hoc, that the King
presented, and by some held, that the party may traverse the Kings Title in
this Action, not traverse in Chancery, and the Presentment, not the Appendancy
traversable, unless where they claim from the same person; but at last, almost
all were of Opinion, that the Traverse of the Kings Title here, and not in
Chancery is void; but vide Co. 9. rep. 95. b. 96. a. the presentment is
traversable here, M. 20 E. 4. pl. 11, 17. P. 21 E. 4. pl. 15.

Quare Impedit, the Defendant pleads, ne disturba pas: The Plaintiff presently
prays a Writ to the Bishop, and has it; and so is the 5 H. 7. 22. a. M. 21 E.
4. pl. 42.

A. B. and C. Joynt-tenants of an Advowson, they present C. by a strange name
to the Church, and he is admitted, etc. by the Bishop, and is held a good
presentment; sed vide 10 H. 8. 14 a. Corporation present their Head, and it is
held a void presentation; see Mo. 45. accord' al principal case, and P. 17 H.
8. pl. 28. M. 21 E. 4. pl. 48.

Three Patrons of an Advowson, agree to present by Turns, if one usurps one,
the other presents in her Turn; yet it puts her not out of Possession; but if
one be in Ward to the King, and he usurps in Right of one of the Parceners, it
puts the other out of possession, because he not privy to the Partition; per
Choke and Bryan, sed Catesby contra, because in Right of the Parcener, P. 22 E.
4. pl. 3.

Void or not Void, is tryable at Common Law; but Full, or not Full, by
Certificate of the Bishop; and so is 40 E. 3. 20. b. 11 H. 7. 18. a. M. 22 E.
4. pl. 3.

Quare Impedit against A. as Patron, and B. as Incumbent, the Defendant pleads,
that C. presented him not named; no plea: For here the Plaintiff has named one
Disturber, and he shall not force him to name another; and vide 9 H. 6. 30, 31.
a Disturber must be named; but contrary of an Incumbent: For that is at the
Plaintiffs pleasure, H. 22 E. 4. pl. 7.

In Quare Impedit, Title was made by Acceptance, of a second Benefice, contrary
to the 21 H. 8. and Issue taken of the Jurisdiction: And so it seems Admission
and Institution makes not the Avoidance till Induction, Mo. pl. 45. Hob. 166.

Owner of an Advowson grants, that whenever the Church is void, J. S. shall
nominate, and he will present; each shall maintain a Quare Impedit; and if he
that has the Nomination presents, he that should present, shall have a Quare
Impedit, and e contra; and a Rent Charge granted, must be confirmed by both;
but Aid shall be prayed only of him that has the Nomination; for it is in the
Right, Mo. pl. 147. vide H. 14 E. 4. pl. 2. Mo. pl. 1258. vide Mo. pl. 11, 78.

Quare Impedit against Parson, Patron and Ordinary, who make default; the
Plaintiff is forced to make Title; and then has a Writ to the Bishop, and
another to enquire of the four points, and recover Damages against them all,
because by the Default, all supposed Disturbers, Mo. pl. 214.

Barroness retains Chaplains; her Marriage after is no discharge of their
Detainer, unless the Husband actually discharge them; but Attainder either in
Man or Woman, is a Discharge, Rex vers' Epm' Peterborough, Mo. pl. 924.

Resolved, the Advowson of the Viccaridge is properly appendant to the Rectory,
but may be to the Manor; as if the Manor and Rectory were both in a Hand
before Appropriation; and at the Appropriation, the Lord reserved the Advowson
of the Viccaridge; but that must be showed either by the Appropriation, or
usual Continuance, which is an Evidence of it, Sir George Shirley against
Underhill, Mo. pl. 1258,

Quare Impedit against the Bishop and another, who demurred Judgment for the
Plaintiff, et Epus' in Mia, and Writ to enquire, 7 E 3. 30. a. Writ to enquire
of Damages on Demurrer and Judgment, et Epus' in Mia': And that assigned for
Error, because he is twice amercied: Resolved none; for, First, The last is but
a Recital of the first. Secondly, The first however is good at Common Law, and
the Plaintiff may take it at Common Law, without Damages if he will; wherefore
it is affirmed. Specot's Case, Co. 5. rep. 58. b. 59. a.

Quare Impedit, and the Writ was Ad Ecclesiam, and the Count was, de
Advocatione duarum partium; and well: For the Writ must be General; but the
Count must be according to his Title. Windsor's Case, vide Co. Ent. 489. a. 3
Cro. 687, 688. Co. 10. rep. 13. b. 1 Inst. 17. b. 18. a. vide 2 Anderson pl.
16. Writ, quod permittat presentare ad duas parts Ecclesiae, and Counts of the
Advowson, that duae parts and been aliter, if the Count had been de duabus
partibus, Co. 5. rep. 102.

A Tenant for Life Remainder to B. presents his Clerk, etc. and after sues him
to Deprivation for not reading the Articles. A. dies, and two years after, the
King presents by Lapse; and then the Clerk of A. dies, and B. presents.
Resolved first, That the Patron is not bound to take notice of the Deprivation,
though at his Suit; but it is to be given by the Ordinary to the Patron; and not
only a General, but public Notice. Secondly, Though the Church be so void, for
not Reading, as a Parishoner may plead it against the Parson, in Debt for the
Tithes; yet the Patron is not to take Notice before it be given. Thirdly, The
King mistakes his Title, his presentation is void. Fourthly, The Institution
and Induction, etc. thereon had, are void, and the Church remains so void; to
that Hob. 203. Dr. Griffith's Case. B. R. 14 Car. 1. Fifthly, If a Common
Parson usurp upon the King, and his Clerk be inducted, the King is put to his
Quare Impedit; but a double or treble Usurpation, gives only the possession,
not the Right from them. Sixthly, Without presentation, the Patron cannot be
put out of Possession: For Collation may put one that has Right to collate, out
of possession; but not one that has Right to present: And so it is agreed after,
fo. 50. in Boswell's Case. And note, if the Presentation be in the time of War,
though the Admission, Institution and Induction, be in Time of Peace, all is
void. Green's Case, 2 Cro 385.

Quare Impedit against the Bishop and Clerk, omitting the Patron. Resolved, it
shall abate: For the Patron only at Common Law could plead, and must be named
in every case, unless where the King presents, who cannot be sued; and unless
it be in such a case as the Patrons Right is not concluded, but only the
presentment recovered; and if it be brought against the Clerk and Patron, and
the Patron does plead to the Writ, it shall not abate, nor shall it if brought
by Baron and Feme, or two Parceners, or Joynttenants, and the Feme, and one
Parcener or Joynt-tenant dies. Hall vers' Epm' Bath, and Martin, Co. 7. rep.
25, 26, 27.

Quare Impedit, the Defendant pleads, that he had been in 6 Months, and
traverses the Avoidance; Issue of it: Jury find for the Plaintiff, and enquire
of the three points: First, That the Church was full of J. S. a Stranger.
Secondly, That it is of Eighty pounds value. Thirdly, That the Action was
brought within six Months after the Avoidance, and Judgment, quaer', and Writ
to the Bishop, to admit his Clerk nominated. The Plaintiff by J. S. pending the
Writ, and resolved in Error on it, first at Common Law, if an Usurper
presented, and had his Clerk admitted and instituted, the plenarty shall be
tried by Certificate, because no Induction, the Patron had lost his
presentation pro hac vice; for the Clerk could not be removed, and was put to
his Writ of Right for the Advowson; but at Common Law, the King might remove
the Incumbent of an Usurper by a Quare Impedit; for nullum tempus occurrit
Regi; but could not present: No removing him without Quare Impedit, if
inducted. Then comes the Statute, and excuses the Infant, and Feme Covert, that
they should not be bound by an Usurper; but after the Disability removed, they
may have the same Action the last Ancestor might have had. Eadem Lex, if Tenant
in Tail, in Dower, by Courtesy or for Life suffer an Usurpation, he in
Reversion claiming by Descent has the same remedy: So in case of Usurpation, in
time of Vacancy of a Bishop, etc. But the Statute revests not the Right; but
gives a possessory Action, to recover the presentation thereof. Where one
usurped on an Infant, who at Age Aliened the Manor, his Alienee could have no
Action for the next Avoidance, because the Advowson passed not, nor had himself
any Remedy after; but where Tenant for years brought Quare Impedit, and was
barred, yet it barred not the Right of him that had the Freehold. Secondly, it
makes plenarty no Bar in Quare Impedit, or Assise de darrein. Presentment, if
brought within half a year after the Avoidance, though not so soon ended.
Thirdly, It gives Damages. Infants, etc. by purchase are not within the first,
and the Issue of Tail is within the Equity of the first Branch: because Tail
made the same Parl. which divided the Estate, and takes away his Writ of Right
at Common Law, the three points were not enquirable; but now they are ex
officio at the Common Law. No Plaintiff recovers Damage, nor the King now,
because not within the Statute, which was made to help them that lost the
presentment. Si tempus semestr' transivit, which the King did not; yet the
Declaration for the King ever counts for Damages at the Common Law, if the
Defendant present pend' the Writ, his Estate was to be removed: So if a
Stranger usurp, pend' the Writ; and in all cases, he that came in pending the
Writ, if not by good Title, though by presentment from the King; and since the
Statute no Incumbent made before the Writ shall be removed by it, unless named
in it, and in the case at Bar resolved the Incumbent that came in pendente
lite, is to be removed, viz. the Writ is to be to the Bishop, to admit the
Plaintiffs Clerk, and he cannot return plenarty; and then the parties shall try
it between themselves viz. if he that came in pend' lite, had good title he
shall stay, else be removed; but in Cro. rep. of this case, 2, part 33. it is
held the Bishop ought to return plenarty; and thereon Sci' Fa' go against the
Incumbent, and therein to show his Right, Boswell's Case; but 1 Cro. 423. Writ
to the Bishop for the Plaintiff, and to remove the Incumbent inducted. Co. 6.
Rep. 49, 50, 51, 52.

If the Plaintiff be Nonsuit, or discontinue it is Peremptory, and a Bar in
another Quare Impedit; First, because the Defendant on Title, is to have a Writ
to the Bishop; but if it be abated for false Latin or Insufficiency, found by
the Clark's Fault, within six Months he shall have a Note; so if the Plaintiff
or Defendant be misnamed, and the Plaintiff confess it, for it may be the
Clerk's Fault; but if he take on him the Order of Knighthood, it is peremptory.
Sir Hugh Portman's Case. Co. 7. rep. 27. b.

Quare impedit ad Medietat' Ecclesiae, good: When there are two Patrons and two
Parsons in one and the same Church, yet it seems he may have it also ad
Ecclesiam; but when there is but one Parson, though the Patronage be in two
several hands, it must be ad Ecclesiam, and in a Writ of Right of Advowson.
When the Church is divided amongst Parceners, the Writ of Right shall be ad
Medietatem Advocationis; but where two several Persons are to present two
several Parsons to one Church, each whereof is to have the half, the Writ must
be Advocationem Medietatis, for the Advowson is entire, but the possession
several, which make the Difference between the Quare impedit, and the Writ of
Right of Advowson. Richard Smith's Case, Co. 12. rep. 136. vide Co. 5. rep.
102. 1 Inst. 17. b. 18. a. vide 33 H. 6. 11. 6.

Quare Impedit, The Defendant pleads, that he is Persona Impersonata, good;
without saying that he was so the day of the Writ purchased, for it shall be
intended to relate to the Writ; and if he was not so at the time of the Plea,
it is good, and has made the Writ good. Lady Chichesley against Thompson, 1 Cro.
75.

Assise de Darrein presentment in Wales; The Jury fine the Church 80. l. value,
and Tempus semestre modo praeterit, but say not how long since, yet good, and
forty pounds Damages given; the Court of Grand-sessions Writ to the
Archbishop, to admit etc. and Quia Episcopus est pars, doubted if they may;
but it seems, now they may, since the Court of Grand S^ssions is one of the
King's Courts, but when they were in the Marches they could not. Vrse against
Epm' St. David, etc. 1 Cro. 249.

Quare Impedit, The Defendant pleads, that he was admitted, instituted, and
inducted, etc. and the Plaintiff traverseth the Admission and Institution, and
for that was forced to reply, and traverse the Induction alleged; for that
must be where it is alleged, because it alters the Trial, and makes it be per
pais; then it was moved, after Verdict the Bishop was dead, and that the
Plaintiff might have his Judgment against the rest, and so he had it. Stevens
against Facon, 1 Cro. 276.

Quare Impedit, and counts that A. was seized, and presented D. who died, and
he presented the Plaintiff; the Defendant pleads, that long before A. was
seized, Qu. Elizabeth was seized, and presented him, and he was admitted and
instituted Plaintiff, traversed that the Plaintiff was admitted etc. upon the
Queen's Presentment and Good, without traversing the Queen's Seisin. Sir John
Dryden, etc. against Yates, etc. 1 Cro. 423.

The way to stop Strangers from Presentment, Pendente brevi, is to sue a Ne
Admittas, and then the Plaintiff may remove him by a Quare incumbravit; else he
is put to his Scir' Fac'; and if the person present Pendente brevi, he shall
bar the Plaintiff in a Scir' Fac' per Popham, and not denied. 2 Cro. 93.

The King grants the Manor, the Church Appendant being then void the
presentation passes not, except by special Words. Phane's Case, 2 Cro. 198.

One sued in the Deligates to avoid an Induction, supposing the Institution
void, was prohibited; for Induction being a temporal Act, and tryable at Common
Law, is not avoided but by Quare Impedit, but this Prohibition not to be
granted, having Hutton's Quare Impedit, because of his own showing, it should
abate it; but he must make his Surmise in the Deligates, without mentioning
that Quare Impedit. Hob. 15. Hutton's Case.

Prohibition to the Incumbent, that pending the Quare Impedit, felled Timber
upon the Gleeb. Hob. 36. Kent against Drury.

Where one brings a Quare Impedit, and his Title arises merely by Usurpation,
he must not declare generally, that he was seized in Fee, for that was false,
and so he might be tried by the Defendant's traverse of the Seisin; but he must
lay his Case as it is, that A. was seized, and the Church voided, and he
presented, and now the Church being void, he presents again. Hob. 103. Digby
against Fitzherbert.

Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Exeter and A. and B. they plead, that he
has another Quare Impedit depending against the Bishop, and A. and aver it to
be the same Plaintiff, the same Avoidance and Disturbance, etc. and demand
Judgment. The Plaintiff says, that after the first Writ he presented C. to the
Bishop, and he refused, which is the Disturbance; whereupon he new declared,
the Defendant demurrs, whereupon the Writ abates, for he shall not have two
Suits at once, and here was a Disturbance laid in the first Action, so the new
Disturbance mends not the Plaintiff's Case; so if he had new brought an Assise
of Darein Presentment, the Quare Impedit depending, had been a Bar. St. Andrew
against Epm' Ebor. Hob. 184. Noy 18. 9 H. 6. 68. 73. 22. E. 3. 4. Hob. 137. E.
Bedford against E. Exeter, etc. Die. 93. a Hut. 3. 4.

Before the Stat. 25. E. 3. Stat. 3. Cap. 7. No Incumbent could counter-plead
the Title of the Plaintiff, because that was Title to the Patronage, and with
that he had nothing to do, but to avoid the Patron's Confession of the Action.
Counter-plea was given by that Stat. but as Amicus Cur' he may show false
Latin in the Writ, etc. for that is no pleading, and the general Issue every
one might plead for, thereupon the Plaintiff may pray a Writ to the Bishop. p.
3. H. 7. pl. 1. ad ult'. Hob. 61. 62. Co. 7. Rep. 26. 2.

If he that has one Benefice in Cure, take another, if it be not inducted, the
Patron may at his pleasure take the Church to be void or not void, for it is not
within the Stat. 21. H. 8. till Induction, Hob. 166. Winchcomb's Case, Mo. pl.
45.

In Quare Impedit, where one of the Defendants pleads himself inducted at the
King's presentment, and after, surmised that he was not Inducted, and prayed a
Writ from the King to the Bishop; and because without Induction the Defendant
could not plead, and the King could not be made a Defendant; therefore a Writ
was made for the King, with a special Entry in the Judgment, that the Defendant
was not inducted, Hob. 193. Winchcomb against Dobson.

Presentment pend', the Quare Impedit does not abate the Writ. F. N. B. 35. b.
but if the Church be full the day of the Writ brought, it abates, because it is
false, which says, quae vacat' etc. Hob. 194. Winchcomb against Pulliston.

Quare Impedit, the Defendant and Ordinary agree in a plea of presentment by
lapse, the Plaintiff replies, that he presented his Clerk, and the Ordinary
refused him, and collated the other Defendant; the Plaintiff demurrs for
doubleness of the plea, because he says, he did not present; which is an
Affirmative against the Ordinary's Negative: He says farther, that the Ordinary
refused and collated; but the plea held good: For he must lay a Refusal to make
good the Disturbance; and showing the Collation is but Aggravation and
Surplussage, and the only material part of his Replication, was, that he had
presented a Clerk, Hob. 197, etc. Brickhead against Archbishop of York.

Quare Impedit, laying distress General, the Ordinary and Defendant make Title
by Collation for Lapse: The Plaintiff replies, showing that he presented, and
the Ordinary refused, 29 May, whereas his Writ bore date the ninth of May;
Judgment must be against him: for though the count was General, yet the
Replication applies it to a more particular Disturbance, since his Writ
brought: So of his own showing, he had then no cause of Action, and the Court
must judge upon the whole Record, Ibidem.

Quare Impedit, the Ordinary pleads nothing but his ordinary plea, as Ordinary;
he shall not be amercied, making no Disturbance; but the Plaintiff shall have
Judgment against him pro falso Clamore; but if the Ordinary cast an Essoin,
it is a Disturbance, Ibid.

If the Patron bring a Quare Impedit before any Disturbance, and after surcease
his time, per Hob. the Ordinary shall not be debarred of his Lapse, Ibid.

A. brought a Quare Impedit against B. pend' the Writ; a Stranger gets in C.
his Clerk; and then A. has a Writ, and his Clerk admitted, thereupon; yet if C.
have better Right, he shall retain the Benefice, Hob. 320. Die. 364. ibid. 201.
2 Cro. 93. b. 6 rep. 52. a. vide H. 21 H. 7. pl. 7.

The Church is void, A. and B. severally pretend Right, present their Clerk;
the Ordinary refuses both. A. brought Quare Impedit against the Ordinary, and
B. and his Clerk the six Months Incur: The Ordinary collates by Lapse: A.
recovers, he shall remove the Ordinary's Clerk, Hob. 214.

No Infants, nor Woman's Release by the Statute, Westm' 2. 5. against
Usurpations, made against them (during Infancy or Coverture) but for such
Advowsons as they have, as Heirs, and not as Purchasers or Successors of single
Corporations, are relievable within the Equity of this Statute; an Heir out of
the Ward as well as within, and an Heir in Soccage upon a double Usurpation,
before he comes to the Age of 21 Years (not if the Guardian surrender to him,
or Institute in ventre sa mere;) and the Purchaser may be within the Statute;
as if the King grant the Advowson, and one usurps: For he is in loco Haered',
and per Hob. an Heir of him in Remainder, as well of him in Reversion: vide 2
Inst. 359. and so it is of Tenant in Tail; but if the Heir himself of full Age,
make a Lease, and the Lessee suffers Usurpation, that is out of the Statute:
For the Lease must not be made by the Heir himself but his Ancestor: So if a
Bishop suffer an Usurpation, being in Succession, his Successor shall not have
a Quare Impedit; but if it were in time of Vacation, he shall; and the King
upon this Statute, may present at the next Avoidance, H. 239. Lord Stanhop
aginst Bishop of Lincoln, 2 Inst. 358, 360. 1 Inst. 16. a F. N. B. 31 a.

Collation being by right or wrong, gains no Patronage, doing it in the Patrons
Right, Hob. 154. Co, 6. rep. 29. Green's Case and 50 Boswell's Case. 1 Leon.
226. Mo. pl. 222. Hob. 124 b. 122.

A Church being void, the King within a Month, reciting ad nostram
presentationem spectam' jure prerogativae, presents one who is admitted, etc.
and dies; the King presents again; the true Patron brings a Quare Impedit.
Resolved the King's Presentation is void; as it is in Green's Case, Co. 6 rep.
where the King presents, as by Writ of his own Title, where he had Right of
Lapse, and the Patron had not only Right of Quare Impedit; but might have
presented upon him at any time; and by the Bishop's receiving his Clerk, the
other is ipso facto out: For it was but as an undue Collation of the Bishop,
and no U^urpation in the King, Hob, 301. Grandy vers' Epm' Cant. Die. 327.

One had a Grant of Outlaws Goods in the Rape of Bramber, and that had a Grant
of the next Avoidance of the Church within the Rape, was Outlawed, and the
Church became void, the Grantee shall have it: For it has such a Locallity
within the Rape, that the Lord of the Liberty shall have it wheresoever the
Grantee of the Voidance, or his Deed is, which the other needs not show, coming
in the Post. Hob. 132 Hollam against Shelley.

Before the Statute 25 E. 3. The Incumbent or Ordinary could not counterplead
the Plaintiffs Title; yet if the Quare Impedit were brought against the
Incumbent and Ordinary, the Incumbent must plead in Abatement, that the Patron
is alive, not named, etc. Hob. 316. Ellis against Bishop of York.

No Incumbent is enabled to counterplead by 25 E. 3. 27. till he be possessed,
that is, till he be inducted; and if he resign, he could not counterplead; for
that was given to maintain his possession, which by the Resignation is gone,
Hob. 319, 193. Dyer 1. b. 293. a. H. 2 H. 7. pl. 15.

If any one of the several pleas of the several Defendants in a Quare Impedit
against a Patron, he shall be barred against all; therefore name no more
Defendants than necessary: No, not the Ordinary, if the Church be once filled,
Quare Impedit against two, the Incumbent sets up one Title, the Patron another:
Neither Estops the other; and because it appears not which is true, both are to
be admitted, Hob. 320. Co. Ent. 491, 492. pl. 10.

In making Title in Quare Impedit, lay the presentation of the last Incumbent,
and name him; yet it is not material whether the Clerk were the same that is
named, so it be of the same Patron, Hob. 321.

Lord of a Manor, whereto an Advowson is Appendant, grants the three next
Avoidances, and usurps upon the Grantee; at the first, this puts the Grantee
out of possession of all the three Avoidances; and he has the whole Advowson
again Appendant to the Manor; so that being Attainted, and the King grants the
Manor, adeo plene, as the Grantor, viz. the Parson attainted habuit, it passes
the Manor with the entire Advowson Appendant, and not as the three Avoidances
were in Gross, and the rest of the Advowsons Appendant to the Manor; for then
that in Gross would not pass for the King's Grant, Hob. 321, 202, 323. Elves
against Bishop of York.

Process at Common Law, was Summons, Attachment and Distress infinite; but by
Marlbridge cap. 12. if he came not at the Grand Distress, Judgment, and a Writ
to the Bishop, although Nichil be returned on every Process. Distress against
two, one makes Default, the Plaintiff shall have a Writ to the Bishop, by the
Common Law; but if the Defendant appear at the Distress, and make Default
afterward, no Judgment; but a new distress must be. 2 Inst. 124, 125. F. N. B.
39.

The common Essoyne, de malo veniendi, is allowed in Quare Impedit, not de
servitio Regis, etc. 2 Inst. 125.

None ought to present the King's or any Judge's Clerk to a Livery in
Controversy, on pain that the Clerk shall lose the Church and his Service to
it, for a year. 2 Inst. 212.

It was ordained at the Council of Lions, that Lapse be given against a Patron
after six Months; but this bound not the King nor Subject, till it was here
allowed; and in many Cases, it is restrained by Act of Parliament; as in some to
give notice, etc. As it is said, it was by the Council of Lateran. 2 Inst. 273.
368.

In Ass. de Darr^in presentment, or a Writ of Right of Advowson, none can have
Title without alleging Seisin in himself; but in a Quare Impedit one may have
Title of the Seisin of him by whom he claims, and in a Writ of Right, he may
declare of his Ancestors Seisin; but a Purchaser can only have it of his own:
and before Westm' the second, if Tenant in Tail or for Life, had suffered an
Usurpation, they had been without Remedy. 2 Inst. 356. 358.

If the Heir within Age be in Ward, he shall not have a Quare Impedit till he
come of Age; but if out of Ward, he shall immediately have such Quare Impedit,
as the Ancestors by Possession might have had, though the Ancestor actually had
it not. 2 Inst. 359.

Plenarty hanging, the Writ was no Plea, but Plenarty before the Writ brought,
was a good plea in Quare Impedit at Common Law; but by West. 2. 5. it is none,
unless it be by the space of six Months, before the Writ brought. 1 Inst. 360.

No Plenarty is bar to the King, whether he presents in his own Right, or in a
Subjects, but it is in case of the Queen, though she claims by the King's
Endowment. Vide 43 E. 3. 14. 47 E. 3. 4. 21. 8 E. 3. 38. b. 1 E. 3. 3. 15. Co.
1 Inst. 119. b. 344. a. It Is said, no Plenarty is against the King till
Induction, that it seems a hindering from presenting, but Induction is no bar
of his Quare Impedit. 2 Inst. 361.

When several persons claiming an undivided Interest in the Advowson, agreed by
fine etc. to present by Turns, if one usurps the other's Turn, he is not put to
a Quare Impedit, but shall have a Scir' Fac' out of the fine, and therein a
Plenarty by six Months, is no bar. 2 Inst. 362. F. N. B. 34. l. Die. 259.

If upon the Foundation of a Chantry, the Composition be, that the Lapse shall
incur within a Month, if upon a Disturbance, the Lapse be suffered, he shall
recover Damages within the Equity of Westm' 2. though it says, per tempus
semestre, and yet here it is but one Month. 2 Inst. 362.

The two years Damages or Imprisonment are given whereby the party loses his
presentation by the Disturbance, or might lose it by the six Months passing;
but if the Church remain void after the six Months, so as he may have his Turn,
he may pray a Writ to the Bishop, and take's half years damage for two years,
and loses his Turn. 2 Inst. 363.

Westm' 2. Cap. 5. gives the Quare Impedit de Prebendis, Capellis, Vicariiis,
Hospital etc. yet de Capella a Writ was before. 2 Inst. 363.

If one Parcener usurp the Turn of the other, it puts not the other out of
possession, but he should have his Turn when it happens; and this extends to
their Assigns; so if one Joynt-tenant presents alone, it puts not his Companion
out of possession. Ib. 365. 1 Inst. 186. b. Tr. 1. 243. a.

In a Quare impedit, the Ordinary must show the Cause of Refusal, specially and
directly, that the Court by Advice of Learned men may judge whether sufficient
Causes of refusal may be in respect of the person, as Bastardy, Villainy,
Outlawry, Excommengement, Laity, under Age, etc. in respect of Inability, as
unlearned etc. and if the Refusal before Ecclesiastical Causes, as Heresy,
Schism, Want of Learning, etc. he must give notice to the Patron; if Temporal,
as Felony, Homicide, or other temporal Crimes, or the Party be disabled by
Statute, or Temporal Law, notice need not be, unless so provided by the
Statutes; and the Ordinaries Refusal concludes not the party, but he may deny
it, and then the Court shall be certified by the Metropolitan; or if temporal,
it may be traversed, and tried by Issue; and if the party refused, be dead, it
shall be tried per Patriam, least there should be a Failure of Justice, because
the King cannot examine him. 2 Inst. 632. 5. rep. Speccot's Case, Die. 254. b.
291. b. 6. rep. Green's Case 4 rep. Holland's Case, Die. 327. 328. 58. Yel. 7.

If an Alien be presented to a Living, the Bishop ought not to admit, but may
lawfully refuse him. 4 Inst. 438.

One that has Judgment to recover in Quare Impedit, is sued to be outlawed;
Quaere how the King shall have it? Whether the King shall have it either by
Scir. Fac' against the Plaintiff or Incumbent, that is presented by Lapse.
Beverly against Archbishop of Canterbury, Ow. 53. Die. 26. a. 129. 130. 269. a.
283.

A Manor whereto Advowson is appendant, the Church is void; a Grant of the
Manor which the Advowson passes, not the Avoidance, neither in the King, nor
in the case of a common Person, for it is a Chattel vested. Die. 300. a.

Next Avoidance is granted to A. and B. and becomes void, and then B. releases
to A. totum Jus, etc. and A. being disturbed, brings a Quare Impedit in his own
Name, for by the Release Nichil operatur therefore his Companion shall join
with him. Ow. 65. 32. 1 And. pl. 241.

Quare Impedit, it lies of a disturbance of a Presentation and Nomination to an
Archdeaconry. Ow. 99. Sale against Epm' Litchfield.

Several have an Advowson to present by Turns, and one presents, etc. if his
Clerk be deprived; yet it shall go for his Turn, unless the presentations, etc.
were all void; as it is for not reading the Act; or as in Windsor's Case, where
one prosecuted upon the Deprivation of another, and the Deprivation taken off,
and the Parson restored by future Sentence; and the Advowson is granted over
after the Church void by Deprivation, quod non est lex: For one Grantee cannot
release to his Companion, Co. Inst. 276. b. Ow. 131. Lees vers' Epm' Coventry,
5 rep. Windsor's Case.

Assize of D. Darrein presentment against several; one makes Default, if they
do not plead in Abatement: The Assize shall not be awarded, because it cannot
be taken by parcels; therefore a Re-summons shall be awarded against him that
makes Default, and the like to the Jury, Hutt. 3.

By an Usurpation upon a Grantee, or Lessee for Years, the true Patron is out
of Possession, and the Usurper in possession of the whole Fee; so that against
him, the Writ of Right lies, but by Westm' 25, he in Reversion may have a Quare
Impedit whent he Church is void, and re-continue it, Hutt. 66. Hob. 240, 322. 1
Inst. 249. a.

The King, having no Right, presents one by Lapse; the Church is not void as to
Spiritual matters (to wit) to have Tithes, etc. for to that purpose he is
Incumbent; but as to hinder the true Patron of his Presentment, he is not; but
the Church void, Hutt. 66. Hob. 302.

He that recovers in a Quare Impedit presents his Clerk, and has him admitted
without any Writ to the Bishop, it is as good as if he had; like one that
entered after Judgment without habere facias possessionem, Hutt. 66.

The King presents, having no Title, the Patron gives another a presentation,
and then recovered against the King's Presentee; then the presentation was
exhibited to the Bishop, Issue being, if the Church were void when the Patron
presented; held it was: For he presented when the presentation was exhibited;
and that was after the Judgment: and so it had been, if it had been exhibited
before the Bishop. Then the Patron recovers, and then exhibited to the Bishop
again, it is a good Presentation: For the Patron could not revoke, or give a new
presentation; for he had passed over his Title by that, Hutt. 66.

In a Quare Impedit, the Plaintiff made his Title from the College of, etc.
and was seized, and presented; and that after the Plaintiff's Ancestor was
seized and presented, and that he was attainted of Treason, and the College
usurped on the King; and that afterward the Attainder was reversed, and the
Church became void; and so it belonged to him to present: And the Defendant
demurred, and had Judgment without making any Title, Die. 24. b.

The Church being void, the Patron grants proximam praesentationem, etc. the
next Avoidance passes not, being a thing in Action; but the Grantee shall have
the next after, 2 Cro. 91. if the Church voids by the Incumbents taking a
Bishopric or Plurality; the Grantee must take that Avoidance, and cannot have
the next, Die. 26 a. 31. Ow. 131. 53. Die. 121, 130, 282, 283, 269. a. 1 And. pl.
32.

If Co-parceners agree to present by turns, the Composition is exempted by
presentment, by every one in their Turn; and in Quare Impedit afterward
brought, he need not mention the Composition, because exempted, Die. 29. a. F.
N. B. 33. l.

One seized of an Advowson, grants proximam Advocationem to one, and then
granted proximam Advocationem to another; Fitzherbert held the second Grant
void, because he cannot have the next Avoidance; and so is the second part of
Croke 691. Shelley's Case; and that if one grants a third Avoidance, and the
Woman recovers that in Dower, the Grantee shall have the fourth, Co. 1. Inst.
agrees with three Cro. grantee of proximam Advocationem, cannot have the
second, where one is granted before. Die. 35. a. b. 1 Inst. 378. b. 379. a. 3.
Cro. 790. 791.

One had the Nomination of a Church to an Abbot, and the Abbot to present, the
Church being in the King's hands, he presented without nominating; the Party
may have a Quare Impedit against the Incumbent, without naming the King, for it
lies not against the King; and he that had the Nomination, had the Patronage,
Vide Mo. pl. 147. Vide 14. H. 4. 11. He that has the Nomination, brings the
Writ, Quod permittat nominari, the Writ abated for it should have been
nominare, 1 H. 5. 1. b. Die. 48. a. 1 Cro. Daviston against Yates, F. N. B. 33.
b. 14 H. 4. 11.

Two Parceners, the younger in Ward, the Guardian marries the eldest, and
presents in both their Names, the Church voids again, and whether the elder
Sister shall present as in her Turn for the younger, quaere. Die. 55. a.

The Jury finds the Church full, of a Stranger presented by one not party to
the Writ, and that ex officio, yet good. Die. 77. a. Co. 6. rep. 52. a.

In Quare Impedit, one made Title to a fourth part of the Church in Grosle, and
that he presented, and showed, that others were seized of the other three
parts, as appendant to certain Manors, and they presented; and their Clerk
dyed, and so it belongs to him to present. Die. 78. b.

Quare Impedit by the King, the Bishop makes Title to a Stranger, and he
permitted a Lapse, then the ordinary presented; the Clerk pleads, that he is
Parson Imparsonee of the Presentment in causa and forma preallegata. It seems,
that the Plea by the Bishop, that he presented, etc. is good enough, though
indeed he collated, but the Clerk's Plea is, per totam Curiam, uncertain and
void; for in causa preallegata cannot refer to any thing in his own Plea,
because nothing alleged, and to the Ordinary in cannot, because to the
Ordinary he is a Stranger, not a Servant: p. 14. H. 7. Pl. 4. Tr. 15. H. 7. Pl.
12.

Quare Impedit, by a Corporation the Defendant pleads, that they are
incorporated by another name, and demands Judgment; so where the Plaintiff goes
but to the Right, by Fitzherbert, it is ill sans doubt. p. 26. H. 8. Pl. 3. a.

In Quare Impedit he counts of an Avoidance by Deprivation, and shows not how
it became void, or for what cause; and that assigned for Error; for it might be
for Simmony, or some such Cause, that gives a Title to the King, sed non alloc'
and Judgment was affirmed. Episcopus Glouc' against Veake. 3 Cro. 678.

Quare Impedit, the Bishop claims nothing but as Ordinary, the Writ good, if a
Writ against him immediate, quaere the Plaintiff says, he presented A. whom he
refused, he says he presented to the Church, because litig' if a Departure
semble, it is, for he intended to have pleaded it at first. Tr. 5. H. 7. Pl. 3.

In a Quare Impedit, the Plaintiff claims by a grant of a next Avoidance by A.
the Defendant says, that A. was Tenant in Tail, held of D. by Knights Service,
and describes the manner whereto, etc. and then usurped upon the Description,
and dyed; his Heir within Age, and the Lord granted the Ward to him, adjudged
the Plea not double, tho the Usurper had Writ Remitter which was one thing; and
though the Grantee of the Ward should have the first present against the
Grantor of the next Avoidance, which is no more than a Lease for years, which
the Guardian shall avoid for his time, and he have it after the Ward comes of
Age, for, with pleading both, he could not show his Title. Tr. 5. H. 7. pl. 3.

Quare impedit, and makes Title as appendant, and that A. as Ancestor presents
B. etc. the Defendant protests, it is not appendant; says that he presented D.
etc. The Plaintiff says, that at the time he presented D. it was in Lease to
E.; the Defendant rejoyns, that before the Lease, his Ancestor presented I.
it is a Departure, for he might at first have laid the Presentment in I. p. 10.
H. 7. pl. 6. Tr. 11. H. 7. pl. 15. p. 27. H. 8. pl. 11.

Quare Impedit for the King, the Defendant pleads the Statute 25 E. 3. 1. That
the King shall not present to any, living in Auter droit, but such as fall in
his own time; and if he do, the Court is not to hold plea, Judgment Si Curia
cognoscere vult, per Thurning: This is a plea to the Action, not merely to the
Jurisdiction: For pleas for the Jurisdiction of one Court, give Jurisdiction to
another, which this does not, 11 H. 4. 8. a.

Quare Impedit, and Counts of an Advowson appendant, and makes Title to a Gift
in Tail, the Defendant pleads, the Donee in Tail was seized of it in Gross, and
granted per Curiam illam, admit it once Appendant, and not show how it after
came to be in Gross, 44 E. 3. 15. b.

Quare Impedit, to present to a Church in Somersetshire, the Defendant pleads,
that the Land whereto the Plaintiff supposed it to be reputed, parcel of the
Manor of S. in Devonshire; Issue of both Counties tried it, Bend' 26.

Release.
IF Money be due upon Recognizance, and the Counsor pay part, and the Counsee
give him a Release; if the Release mentions not the Recognizance, it shall
release so much as paid only: For the Recognizance is entire, and being
destroyed in part, is destroyed in the whole.

If a man be bound to pay an 100 l. to another, on such a day, and he tender
the same at the day, he is not bound to pay the same on any other day, unless
the Obligee will give him an Acquittance or Release.

Replevin.
IN a Replevin, the Defendant avoyed to distrein for Rent; Charge granted in
Tail, the Plaintiff says, that an Ancestor of the Defendant, whose Heir he is,
was seized of the Lands, discharged of the Rent, and gave to him with Warranty:
No Assetts descended; adjudged an illlegal plea; First, because he pleads
Warranty from an Ancestor, and showed not what, whether lineal or collateral:
Nor, Secondly, because he pleads, that he was seized of the Lands, discharged
of, etc. and showed not how, viz. by Union or otherwise, H. 21 H. 7. pl. 11.

Replevin avows Damage feasant bar, that the place where his Acre called A.
whereof he is seized of 100 l. and has Common in the Residue; after Verdict
moved, the Blank in the Declaration makes all uncertain, quid resid' est sed
non alloc'; it is found there is a Residue; and be it what it will, he is to
have Common: And here no Land is to be recovered so, certain enough. Sir
Anthony Cope agaiust Temple, Yel. 146, 147.

Replevin, the Defendant avows, Forty shillings Rent for two Acres held of him;
the Plaintiff replies, that he holds them and twenty more of him by 12 s.
absque hoc; that he holds the two last by Twenty shillings; and though
objected, the plea double, traversing that the quantity of the Rent: And also,
that he holds the two Acres, only adjudged good, because otherwise he could not
avoid the false Avowry, M. 8. H. 7. pl. 1.

Replevin and Avowry, for that A. was seized in Jure Ecclesiae, and leased;
good, without saying, that he was Parson, supplied by in Jure Ecclesiae, but
not in Quare Impedit the Plaintiff, that so he is a Parson Imparson', because
till then, in that cause, he cannot plead in Bar. Rolls against Walters, Noy.
70.

If Cattle or Goods be distrained for Rent, or otherwise for Damages, then the
party, whose Goods are fo distrained, may make Replevin, and must prosecute his
Replevin, as Plaintiff, and the Defendant must avow the taking; but if by
chance the Plaintiff in Replevin become Nonsuit, or Judgment against him, then
shall the Defendant have a Retorn' hend' averiorum, upon which the Plaintiff in
Replevin, may bring his Writ of Second Deliverance; but if he become Nonsuit
again, or Judgment against him, then the Defendant shall have Retorn' hend',
irrepledgeable, and keep the Goods for ever.

If Live Cattle, and Dead Things be Replevied by one Writ, as they may; the
Live Beasts or Cattle, must be named before the Dead; as thus, Quendam Equum
suum and Catella sua quae B. cepit.

If a Man distrain Beasts or Goods for his Rent, and the Tenants tenders Amends
before the Distress is taken: The taking the Distress, is tortious, Mesme le
Ley pur Damage fesant. But tender after the Distress be taken, and before the
Impounding, the Detainer, and not the taking, is tortious: But tender after the
impounding, neither the taking nor detaining are tortious; for the Tender comes
too late.

In Replevin, the Plaintiff is Nonsuited, and the Defendant had a Writ of
Retorn' hahend' and enquiry de dampnis, the Plaintiff brings Second
Deliverance: This is a Supersedeas to the Retorn' hend', but not to the Enquiry.

By the Common Law, when the Goods or Chattels of any person are taken, he may
have a Writ out of the Chancery, commanding the Sheriff to make Replevin of
them; and this Writ is Viscontiel, and in the nature of a Justicies, in which
the Sheriff may hold plea to any Value, and in all Cases; but when the
Defendant claims Property, and when more than one Live Beast is taken, then the
Form of the Writ, is quod replegiari faceret J. S. averia sua; and when only
one Beast is taken, then the Form is quod replegiari faceret J. S. quendam
Juvencum suum, vel bovem suum etc. And when many Dead Chattels are taken, then
the Writ shall be quod replegiari faceret Bona and Catella sua, and the
Plaintiff must ascertain them in the Declaration; But if but one Dead Chattel
be taken, then the Writ shall be, quod replegiari, facias J. S. quoddam
Plaustrum cum furnitura, etc.

By the Statute of Marlbridge, cap. 21. the Sheriff upon Plaint made to him in
Court, or out of Court, ought to make Replevin of the Goods or Chattels taken.

In Replevin, the Sheriff ought to take two sorts of Pledges; by the Common
Law, Pledges de prosequendo, and by the Statute, Pledges de Retorn' habend',
Co. Com' 145. b.

A Man who has but only a special Property, may bring a Replevin, as when
Goods are pledged to him, or Beasts are taken by him to compost his Land; and
the Writ may be General or Special, 41 E. 3. 18. b. 22 H. 7. 14 b. 11 H. 4. 17.

If this Plea be before the Sheriff by Writ, then it may be removed into the
Kings Bench or Common Pleas, by pone, by the Plaintiff, without Cause, and by
the Defendant, with Cause mentioned in the Writ: But if it be before the
Sheriff by plaint, then it may be removed by Recordare, issuing out of Chancery
by the Plaintiff, without showing cause, and by the Defendant, if he do show
cause in the said Writ.

A Replevin lies of such things whereof a man has but a qualified Property, as
of things that are ferae naturae, and are made tame, so long as they have
Animum revertendi: le Case de Swans in Co. 7. rep.

So Replevin lies of a Leveret or of a Ferret, 2 E 2. Fitz. tit. Avowry 182.

Also Quare cepit quoddam examen Apium, etc. Register Original. fol. 81.

In many cases, this Action or Trespass lies at the Election of the Plaintiff;
but against the Lord, Trespass lies not, 7 H. 4. 28. b. 6 H. 7. 9.

A Replevin lies against one, de Averiis capt' per ipsum simul cum alio, Co.
Ent. 600. 2 Inst. 533.

So it lies de averiis capt' and detent' quousque etc. and de aliis averiis
capt' and adhuc detent', Rast-Entr. 567. 572. And in this Case, when the
Plaintiff declares, that the Defendant yet detains the Cattle, and the
Defendant appears, and makes Default, the Plaintiff shall recover all in
Damages, F. N. B. 69. b. Co. Ent. 610.

When the Beasts are chased into another County after they are taken, the party
may have a Replevin in which of the Counties he pleases, or in both, Idem 65.
6.

When the Cattle of several men are taken, they shall not join in Replevin; nor
is it a Plea to say, that the property is to the Plaintiff and another, Co.
Com. 145 b.

In Replevin, the Plaintiff ought to allege a place certain, where the Cattle,
etc. were taken.

When the Plaintiff is Nonsuited before Declaration, and he sues Second
Deliverance, and is Nonsuited also again before Declararation, the Defendant
shall have the Cattle irreplegiable without any Avowry, etc. Dyer 280.

Scire Facias.
SCire Facias, by the King to repeal a Patent, the Defendant pleads a Plea,
whereon the Attorney General demurrs, the Defendant joins in Demurrer, and
pleads over part of a Statute, and Informand' Curiam. Co. 8. rep. 12. b.

Scire Facias against an Administrator, who pleads a special Plene
administravit: Replic' quod devastavit, and says not who devastavit, issue quod
praedictus J. S. non devastavit, found for the Defendant: the Plaintiff moved
in Arrest, etc. it is not said who devastavit, so might be the Executor at Age,
but per nonnullos, the Plaintiff shall, not after Issue, find a Fault in his
own Replication. Oxford against Rivet, and 1 Cro. 135. Plaintiff after Verdict,
when no Advantage of his own ill Declaration. 1 Cro. 56. 66. vide Co. 7. Rep.
4. 6. 5. rep. 39. b. 8. rep. 59. a. 1 Cr. 39.

Scire Facias of a Recognizance entered by A. and B. returned Terre-tenants,
come in and plead, that C. has three Acres of A. Land not summoned, etc.
whereof he was seized in Fee Issue, that A. was not seized of three Acres,
Verdict find that he and E. were jointly seized and infeoffed C. per Popham and
Gaudy, it is against the Defendant; for now though the moiety of these Lands are
subject to the Extent, yet upon the special Plea, which is false, for A. was
not seized alone of them in Fee, as the Plea alleges, he cannot abate the
Writ. Fenner con' Dame Needam against Buning. Vide 3 Cro. 524. 52.

Scire facias against two, for Damages recovered in Assize, by three; one
Defendant pleads, that one of the Plaintiffs, supposed by the Plaintiff to be
dead, at the time of the Scire Facias, was alive; and the other pleaded, that
one of the Plaintiffs now supposed alive, is dead: ill, for they must join in
Dilatories, though objected, they might have severed in their Pleas to the
first. Vide p. 26 H. 8. pl. 7. One imparls, the other demands the view in a
Precipe quod reddat, quaere of that. M. 7. H. 7. pl. 8. m. 10. H. 7. pl. 6. m.
12. H. 7. fo. 3.

Scire Facias, to have Restitution of Money, or Reversal of Judgment; the
Defendant pleads Payment, not good against a Record, without matter of Record,
or specialty; and 'twas long before it was agreed, that levied by the Sheriff
in a Scire Facias, was a good Plea, but at last agreed, because grounded on the
Scire Facias, which he cannot withstand, Vrse against Harrison; sed vide 2 Cro.
29. Ognel against Randal. Per Popham, bare payment without Writing, is no Plea
to bar an Execution by Fieri Facias of Scire Facias, vide H. 4. 58. 59. In
Debt on a Judgment leavyed Fieri Facias, and paid to the Plaintiff no Plea,
because the Sheriff is to bring the Money into Court, not to deliver it to the
Plaintiff, other if the Lands were extended by Elegit, 1 Cro. 239.

Scire Facias, as Cousin and Heir to D. viz. Fitz A. etc. Plea that I had no
such Son, good, and he needs not show who was the Plaintiff's Mother, as if it
had been pleaded, the Plaintiff was not the Son of A. for then, the Birth of A,
was confessed, he must, when he takes one Mother from him, give him another;
but here the Birth of the Plaintiff is not at all mentioned, admitted, or
granted. Vide talem 11 H. 456. b. 74, 75. H. 4. 38. 9. E. 3. 30. 31. Plea that
he had no such Son, not admitted, but he for to plead whose Son he was. 8 H. 4.
21. a. 9 E. 3. 30, 31.

Scire Facias on a Recovery against the Heir and Terre-tenants, the Sheriff an
Heir and four more Terre-tenants the Heir, Nil dicit; the other four plead,
that two of them are Joynt-Tenants of part with J. S. not named, and resolved
that the Joynttenancy is a good Plea in this Action, but not for all, but for
that part wherein the Joynt-tenancy is: but because all joined, where but two
were Joynt-tennants, the Plea was ill for all four. Holland against Donitree,
etc. 3 Cro. 739.

Scire Facias on a Recognizance. Defendant pleads an Acquittance, Plantiff
replies, it is razed in such and such material places, and demands Judgment of
the Writ, per Curiam; this being but a matter tryable by the Court, is but a
Plea in Abatement, whereon a respond' Ouster shall be, and lies not peremptory,
and sic de Margin dict. in all. In all our Books, Matters tryable by the
Court, go only in Abatement, and are not peremptory, which seems, must be
intended either of matters of Fact, or with some restraint; for, every Plea in
Law, is tryable by the Court, 5 E. 3. 32 b.

Scire Facias on a Judgment against an Executor, he pleads a Judgment to J. S.
of 100 l. another to himself of 100 l. and that he has but 100 l. to satisfy
J. S. and says not ultra, to satisfy himself, ill; for he may pay himself, if
he have not ultra to pay J. S. and himself, he is not bound to pay the
Plaintiff, Feltham against Executors of Tourston, Tr. 8. Car. 2. in Scaccario.

In Scire Facias, on a Recognizance for the Plaintiff, it is sufficient to
assign breach, that he beat one, contra Pacem, without saying vi and armis,
aliter in Battery. Hutchins against Perryman. M. 14. Jac. B. R. 3. Bulstr' 220.

In Scire Facias of a Judgment against an Executor, he pleads, Plene
administravit, Jour de brief, ill; for he might have paid Bonds before, so
should he have pleaded, Riens tempore mortis nec unquam postea; but the
Plaintiff taking Issue, waved the benefit of the ill Plea, Harcourt against
Wrenham Mo. pl. 11. 78.

Sheriff, Bailiff, etc.
ALattitat was delivered to the Undersheriff, to be executed, the Defendant
being in Company with the Undersheriff; and the Undersheriff lets the
Defendant go, and returns, non est invent': Whereupon, the Plaintiff brings his
Action of the Case, against the Undersheriff, setting forth the whole Frand
and Falseness of the Undersheriff, and Judgment by default. But upon Motion in
Court, in Arrest of Judgment, the Action did not lie; for the Sheriff, is the
person alone to answer in Court for all Misdemeanors of the Undersheriff and
Bailiffs.

Upon a Fieri Facias, if the Sheriff return, that he has levied the Money, and
do not pay it to the Plaintiff at the Return of the Writ, the Plaintiff may
have a Scire Facias against the Sheriff, to show cause, wherefore the Sum
levied, should not be levied of the Goods of the Sheriff.

The Sheriff cannot break open any man's House or Close, upon a Fieri Facias
executing, (and much less the Landlord shall not break open doors to distrein
for Rent) but where the King is concerned (as upon an Utlary) there the Sheriff
may justify the breaking open the doors, if he be resited; but he must
acquaint them in the House with the Cause of his coming, before he force them
open.

If a man be in the hands of the Undersheriff, in Execution for Debt, and the
Debtee tell the Sheriff, that the Prisoner has satisfied him, if the Sheriff
release not the Prisoner, it is false Imprisonment.

A Bailiff having a Warrant to attach the Goods of a Person, to answer at the
Cou^ty Court, does attach the Goods acc^rdingly, and after delivers them to the
Defendant, and takes Bond of him, to appear at the day, or redeliver the Goods
to the Bailiff, this is not within the Statute of 23 H. 6.

A Bailiff of a Liberty cannot execute a Capias Vtlegatum, and if the party be
in the hands of the Bailiff, the Sheriff may take him, for it is a Non Omittas
in it self. Per Curiam. Hill. 13. Ja. in C. B.

Observations upon the Statute of 29 Car. 2. Regis, for prevention of Frauds
and Perjuries.
1. BY this Act it appears, That if a Feoffment be made, and Livery and Seisin
duly executed, although it were before many credible Witness (as formerly the
Law was) yet unless it be put into Writing, nothing shall pass thereby, but an
Estate at Will: and in like manner, all leases made by word for any longer time
than three years; or other Estates made or created without Writing, are subject
to the same Rule, (that is) shall be only Estate at Will, that are so made by
Words, without Writing, after the 24 th. of June, 1677.

2. After the said 24 th. of June, 1677. No Executor or Administrator, shall be
charged with any special Promise, to answer Damages out of their own Estates,
but only in Relation to the Testator having Assetts in their hands, and that no
other person shall be charged with any special promise, to pay the Debt of
another man, or answer for the Default of any other, or upon any Agreement of
Marriage, or for any Agreement for Lands, or for any other commodity or thing
not to be performed within one Year after the making of any such Agreement,
unless the same Promise, Bargain or Agreement, be set down in Writing, and
signed by the party to be charged therewith, or by some other person, lawfully
authorized by him, so to do.

3. All Wills and Bequests of Lands, Tenements, etc. after the said 24 th. day
of June, 1677. shall be put into writing, and subscribed by the Testator, or
some person else in his Presence and by his express Directions, and attested
and subscribed in the presence of three or four Witnesses; other wise, all such
Gifts to be void: all such Devises so made and subscribed by the Testatoror his
Directions, as aforesaid, shall be good, and stand eff^ctual in the Law, unless
the Testator shall, at any time, cancel the Will, or alter it by a subsequent
Will.

4. All Trusts shall be in Writing, and signed by the Party, declaring the
Trust, else to be void, except such Trusts as arise by Implication of Law, and
Lands in Trust for the use of others, shall be chargeable with the Judgment,
and liable to the Execution sued out against Cestuque use.

5. Aman seized of one Estate pur autre vie, may devise the same by Will, in
manner afo^esaid, and no such devise shall descend to the Heir, that so died
seized, as Lands in Fee-simple should do, and such Heir shall be chargeable
therewith, as a special Occupant; and in case of no such special Occupancy,
then shall the Land descend to the Executors and Administrators.

6. From and after the said day, every Judgment shall be signed with the day of
the Month, and the Year in which such Judgment was Signed; and the day of the
Month and Year are to be entered on the Margin of the Plea-Role, and they shall
be accounted Judgments but from that day wherein they were so signed, and not
from the first day of the Term, as formerly was used: the like Rule for
Recognizances.

7. No Writ of Fieri facias, or Writ of Execution, shall after the property of
Goods, but from the day the Writ was delivered to the Sheriss, to execute,
which day and year the Sheriff is to endo^se on the backside of the Writ.

8. No Bargain of Goods above the value of ten pounds, shall stand good, unless
the Buyer take part of the Goods (so sold) into his Possession, or give
something in Earnest, or that some Note or Memorandum be made thereof in
Writing.

9. No nuncupative Will whereby an Estate is bequeathed above the value of
thirty pounds, shall be good, unless it shall be proved by three Witnesses at
the least, nor unless the Testator did bid the parties present bear witness,
that so was his Will, or to such like effect; nor unless such a Will was made
in the time of the Testator's last Sickness, and in his place of Habitation;
and unless he was surprised and taken sick from Home, and that no Testimony
shall be received to prove such Will after six Months, unless the Testamentory
Words were committed to Writing within six Days after the making of such Will.

10. No words unless they are committed to Writing and read to the Testator and
allowed by him, and proved by three Witnesses to be his Will, shall alter any
Will in Writing concerning any Goods or Chattels, or any Device or Bequest
therein.

Trespass.
IF my Servant without my knowledge, puts Beasts into another man's Ground, the
Servant is Trespasser, and not the Master.

If a man beat my Servant, I may have Trespass, and my Servant another Action
of Trespass, diversis respectibus.

It is good to lay the Action some day after the Trespass committed; yet it is
not material or traversable if be laid before: For it is but a Circumstance: As
Trespass done the Fourth of May, the Plaintiff alleges the First of May, it is
sufficient, if upon Evidence it be proved, that the Trespass was done before
the Action brought.

A Master is punishable for his Servant, if he be about his Masters Business:
An Abbot for his Monk; a Captain for his Soldier; an Host for his Guess; So a
Sheriff for his Undersheriff and Bailiffs: But a Master shall not be Punnished
for Trespass of Battery, or Entry into Lands, or Felony, or Murder, or such
like, done by the Servant, unless done by his Command.

If a Servant keeps his Master's Fire so negligent, that it burns his Master's
and the Neigbours House, the Master is chargeable therewith.

A man is chargable with the Faults of his Family or of his Beasts: If a Ship
is perishing, and the Mariners cast the Goods, to save them, on the Land next
adjoining; yet this is Trespass, and punishable by him that holds the Land.

A Servant may justify the beating of another in Defense of his Master.

A Man shall not have his Action of Trespass for Threatening, and recover Damage
as well as in Assault and Battery.

The Law does not allow any man to strike in Revenge of Ill words; and the
reason is, because there is no proportion between Words and Blows; but he that
is struck may strike again.

In Trespass, he that consents and gives aid to the committing of Trespass is a
Principal and no Accessory to the same Trespass.

If Tenant at Will commits voluntarily Waste, Trespass lies against him,
notwithstanding his Possession; so that if I deliver my Sheep to another, to
Fold or Dung his Land, or a Horse to Ride, or Oxen to Plow his Land; If the
Bailiff spoil or kill them, I have an Action of Trespass against him,
notwithstanding the Delivery of them, or Trover at his Election.

If a Man desseize me of my Land, or dispossess me of my Goods, yet I may enter
upon the Land, or take my Goods, although I release to the party Disseizer or
Trespasser, all Actions; yet this Release shall not Bar my Right.

No Trespass can be excused by Law; but it may be justified; as upon son
assault demesne, or prout ei been licuit; but not to say per infortunium and
contra voluntatem suam; or casualiter or such like, is no good pleading to
excuse a Trespass or Wrong done.

One Train-Band Soldier in Skirmishing, hurts another in Discharging his
Musket, who brings Trespass, and the Defendant justifies and excuses himself,
as being a Soldier upon his Duty; and upon a Demurrer, Judgment for the
Plaintiff: for though the Law be, that if two men Tilt or Turney in the presence
of the King, or two Masters of Defense, in playing a Prise, the one Kills the
other, this shall be no Felony: So if a Lunatic Kill a Man, it is no Felony,
because Felony must be done Animo Felonice: But yet in Trespass, where Damages
are to be recovered, according to Loss or Hurt it is not so: And therefore if a
Lunatic hurt a Man, he shall be answerable, in Trespass, wherein no man shall
be excused, except it may be adjudged utterly without his Fault.

If there be a Lease of a House for Years, and the Lessor Enters, to see if
Waste be committed, or want of Repairs; and then he takes away some of the
Lessee's Goods, against the Will of the Lessee, he shall be punished as a
Trespasser ab initio: So of one that comes into a Tavern, and carries away a
Cup; for though the Entry were lawful, in both Cases at the First; yet if they
do an evil Act after the Entry, it makes the Entry and all the rest unlawful:
And the reason is, for that the Law gives liberty to enter for one intent, and
he uses the same for another ill Intent. The same Law is where Goods are
seized for Rent or Damage feasant^ and the Goods are abused.

A Man may Distrain in an House, if the Doors be open, otherwise not but a man
may distrain per Ostia and senestras; so that a Distress taken out of a Window
is good.

You cannot present, in a Court Leet, any thing that is particular Trespass, to
particular persons, but only such things which are a Common Nuisance to all;
neither is such Offense punishable there; As if a Freeholder erect a Dove-house
it is only Trespass to those whose Corn they eat, and not punishable in the
Leet.

Also every Man's Land is supposed to be Enclosed, though it lie in the open
Field, and if Trespass be done the writ is quare Clausum fregit.

If a Man does a Lawful Act which proves unlawful, it is Dampnum sine injuria:
As if in Plowing my own Land, the Cattle are so unruly, that they carry the
Plow upon another's Land against my Will; this is a good Justification.

In all Trespasses there must be a voluntary Act of the Trespasser, and a
Damage to the other party, else the Trespass lies not.

In Trespass for Beating and Assaulting the Wife, the Husband shall have the
Action aone, without mentioning the Wife, because whatever Damages are
Recovered shall go to the Baron only.

In all Actions of Trespass, vi and armis. etc. there ought to be an express
Averment of the Force in the Declaration, and ought not to be expressed with a,
whereas there was such a Force.

In an Action of Trespass against one, with a Simul cum, against others, if
nothing be proved against the other, they may be examined as Witnesses in the
Cause: And if recovery be had against the Defendant, named in the Declaration,
those in the Simul cum can never be sued afterward for the same Trespass.

Trespass against three, they plead, that they had Common, and each put in his
Cattle to use it; and the plea adjudged single and good enough: But in Trespass
against one, and he pleads, that A. had Common, and to B. and S. C. and he as
their Servant acct' in etc. 'twere confused and ill; but if he pleads, that as
a Servant to A. he put in such, and to B. such, etc. it is good enough: vide
Title Jointly and Severally, Tr. 15. H. 7. pl. 18.

In Tresp^ss, the Defendant pleads, that the Plaintiff delivered Goods to the
Defendant, to carry to such a place: The Plaintiff replied, de Injuria sua,
etc. per nonnull'; no plea: For where the Defendant claims under a Gift or
Delivery of the Plaintiff, the Plaintiff must answer to the Gift or Delivery by
himself, and not the mean Conveyance, which Bryan granted; but held, that de
Injuria, etc. was a good Traverse, that he delivered them, M. 16. H. 7. pl. 2.
M. 10. H. 7. pl. 15. H. 15. H. 7. pl. 6. Tr. 15. H. 7. pl. 19.

Trespass: the Defendant justifies for taking a Distress for an Amerciament as
Bay liff of a Court Baron, good; though he showed no Warrant in Writing, for
the Precept may be per parol; but because he pleaded not that he returned the
Precept, it is ill; as if the Sheriff returned not the Cap', he is a Trespasser,
Trin. 16 H. 7 El. 9. 15.

Trespass and Battery against a Constable, he pleads that the Plaintiff was
beating another, and he came to keep the Peace, and laid Hands on the
Plaintiff, and he beat him, and so justifies, per Ryder Just. it is double: For
he justifies as Constable, and also in his own Defense. Kingsmil contra, the
Beating had not been Lawful, but that he first beat the Constable, P. 2 H. 7.
pl. 5.

Trans' de domo fracto and muris ^jusdem domi, the Defendant pleads Not Guilty
to the breaking of the House; and as to the Wall justified, ill: For the Wall
is part of the House; so he cannot be Not Guilty of all, and justify for part;
for that is repugnant, pl. 21 H. 7. pl. 7.

Trespass of a thing done at D. and after in plea, they allege another thing
in pursuance of the former to be done at D. and though they say not at D. yet
intended so, and ruled well, M. 21. H. 7. pl. 10.

Trespass for Digging, etc. the Defendant justifies as Commoner, to dig a
Trench, to let out Water, wherewith it was usually surrounded, in the Winter,
as well for the saving the Lands as the Commons; and by some this seems double;
for either of them was a sufficient Justification of Issue: And where one
pleads two things, either of which is a plea of it self, it is double, Tr. 17.
H. 8. pl. 1.

He that pleads a Fine in Bar in Trespass or in Warranty must conclude
Judgment, Si Acco', and not r^ly on the Estoppel; for that goes to the Realty,
which is not in question in Trespass, Tr. 27. H. 8. pl. 19.

Trespass against A. for Imprisonment, etc. he pleads, that the Plaintiff had
committed Felony, and he prays the Constable etc. and thereupon they went and
arrested him; ill, because he answers nothing for himself; that he, by Command
of the Constable, etc. P. 2. E. 4. pl. 20.

Trespass: the Defendant pleads, that his Father was seized, and let to A. for
Life, to enfeoffee; etc. And A. died, and his Father entered, as in his
Reversion, and it descended to him, and objected; his plea double, on the entry
of the Father, the dying seized and descent, by Billing and Needham, but
Littleton and Cook, contra. M. 2. E. 4. pl. 15,

Trespass by A. and B. for breaking their Close, the Defendant to A. pleads a
Title in Bar, and to B. not guilty, by Danby, Mayle, Cheke, the plea ill, for
the Bar goes to all, and the other makes it double, Needham and Ashton contra,
each Plaintiff ought to have his Answer. M. 2. E. 4. pl. 20.

Trespass for cutting Subbosc', and carrying away two Loads of Barley: quoad
the Barley, the Defendant pleads a Lease at Will, by one Tenant, as Tenant in
Common: and quoad the Wood a License by him, and the Plea not double, for a
Tenant at Will cannot cut, etc. without License. M. 2. E. 4. pl. 25.

In a Precipe, the Tenant pleads a Release in Bar, and it was in Bar of all
the Lands in S. that he bought of J. S. ill; not avering, that he bought the
Lands of J. S. the words being general, viz. All the Lands, etc. not particular
of bl. Acre, etc. which will be otherwise. M. 2. E. 4. pl. 26

Trespass on the Stat. R. 2. the Defendant pleads a Gift of the Land by Act of
Parliament, whereby he was seized temps' H. 6. and the Plaintiff entered upon
him temps E. 4. and he entered; Choke Justice, and Littleton, held it double,
for the Gift and Seizin is one bar, and the Entry of the Plaintiff and the
Re-entry of the Defendant is another; but Ardern Justice, and Lason, contra,
for it is all pursuant, Et ibidem by Choke and Needham, Justice, when the
Defendant pleads, that the Plaintiff entered so long after the Statute, and says
not by what Color it shall be intended more strongly against himself, and
intended by Title, Ardern, Justic' cont', no Title shall be intended, till the
Plaintiff shows it. Trin. 3. E. 4. pl. 1.

Trespass for taking a bag of Money, the Defendant pleads, that the Plaintiff
was indebted to him, and says not how, and delivered it him in payment; the
Plaintiff replies, De injuria, etc. And per Littleton, no Plea where the
Defendant justifies by an Act of the Plaintiff himself. Vide Trin. 20. E. 4.
pl. 1. m. 9. E. 4. pl. 25. 12 E. 4. 10. 6 H. 19. E. 4. pl. 15.

Trespass against the Lord, vi and armis, he admits it, and pleads a Distr' for
Services and the Issue of Views, Arrear, found for the Defendant, yet no
Judgment; for the Court is not to admit him to recover against a Negative
Statute, other, if it were affirmative, and Election to proceed either way. p.
10. E. 4. pl. 10.

Trespass by J. S. for taking an Horse, the Defendant pleads, that J. S. de D.
was possessed, and gave him the Horse, etc. the Plaintiff replies, that he is
not the same person in the Bar and Dem', and tho objected this ill in matter
of Fact and Dem' for matter in Law; and it cannot be tried by Court and Jury,
the Plea ruled good; for by joining in Dem' it is confessed, he is the same
Person, and he might have taken Issue of it. H. 13. E. 4. pl. 4.

Trespass against three, they all plead Not Guilty, as to part, and quoad
resid. plead a gift of the Goods, and Issue, and at Ni. pr. 2. make default;
the third pleads a Concord, Prius Darr' contin' prayed to try the Issue against
the two by Default, because no contin' can be made of it, because they absent,
and if not tried, now 'twill be discontinued. Objected, that goes but to part,
and there is now a Plea, that goes to all, which is to be tried first; for if
that be against the Plaintiff, though he should have Verdict on the other, he
can have no Judgment but for the Inconvemency, and for that this Plea to the
whole, comes after the ven' fa', and the other was before; therefore 'twas
tried; but if both had been before the ven' fa', it could not have been, and
they found for the Plaintiff, and they had Judgment with a Cessat Executio,
till the other tried; for the Concord was laid in another County; so the
Plaintiff released to him, and took Execution though the Judgment on the First
Plea, Tr. 15 E. 4. pl. 11, 3. vide 4 E. 3. 42.

Trespass, the Defendant justified for Tithes severed; the Plaintiff replies,
de son tort; objected no plea, no more than when in Trespass the Defendant
makes Title, and pleads son Franktenement, or a Lease for years, by Bryan; and
so it seems though Piggot says there, he claims there the Occupation of the Land;
not so here, P. 16 E. 4. pl. 9. 2 Cro. 224, 225.

Trespass Not Guilty, and Issue, the Defendant puis darr' contin', pleads a
Release, dated before the last Contin'; but delivered after; the Plaintiff
replies, that was delivered the same day 'twas dated, Judgment against him; for
he did confess, he did release; so satisfied, and no matter when; but he might
have pleaded, that he did not deliver it puis darr' Contin'; or that it was not
his Deed puis' darr' contin, by 78 H. 6. and 39. H. 6. 8, 9. Tr. 16 E. 4. pl. 2.

Trespass, the Defendant pleads, that the Plaintiff let to him for Years per
Cur' he must show what Estate he had, as that he was seized in Fee, etc. and
let but by Kidwelly: when one pleads a Lease from a Stranger, it is necessary to
plead it so; not when he pleads the Lease to the Lessor himself, M. 22 E. 4.
pl. 217.

Trespass for Assault and Battery, and Threatening, etc. de son Assault demesne
Obj. in Error, the plea ill, not answering the minas; but resolved well enough
for the minas, laid but in aggravation of damages. Penruddock against
Errington: sed vide Hill. 16 E. 4. pl. 8. contra M. pl. 983.

In Battery, the Defendant justifies by Warrant out of a Leet; and though they
plead not the day of the Leet, nor that the House was within the Jurisdiction,
nor the Warrant; yet all these being but Indictments, adjudged good. Curey's
Case, M. pl. 11. 47.

Trespass for entering the Close, and cutting so many Trees, quoad all but
cutting the Trees, and entering the Close, pleads Not Guilty; et quoad fract'
Claus' pleads* matter in Law, and justifies the cutting the Trees; but because
in the quoad, etc. nothing was said of the Trees; the plea is ill, and was
amended, and made et quoad fract' claus', Cutting, etc. Co. 4. rep. 62. a.

Trespass and Battery, the Defendant pleads, that he had a Lease for Years of
an House, and the Defendant would have put him out, etc. good, without showing
by what Title his Lease or Commencement, etc. of it, because said but as
Inducement: For whatever Title he had, his possession excused him. Scable
against Avery, 1 Cro. 69.

In Trespass, Quare clausum fregit in Dale, the Defendant justifies in Sale
absque hoc, that he is Guilty in Dale: It seemed to be an ill plea, amounting
but to the General Issue; but Fitz-herbert douts, because Dale and Sale may be
adjoining, and it may be doubtful in which the Close lies, Dyer 19. a.

In Trespass in several things in a Park, the Defendant made several
Justifications, and pleaded, that quidam J. S. granted, etc. and quidam J. S.
granted, etc. and so began every plea with quidam J. S. which shall be intended
several men; and it all being about one Office, it is ill: for several men could
not severally grant him it, 3 Cro. 401. quidam J. S. intended the same person
that it was mentioned before: And so Sti. 329. and 18 E. 3, 49, b. and Brid.
100. Hat. 84. quidam, found by Special Verdict, doubted if good.

In Trespass, the Defendant pleads a special plea, and justifies; the Plaintiff
replies de Injuria sua propria; but did not Traverse absque tali Causa; Issue
and Verdict for the Plaintiff, Judgment staid, and Repleader awarded: For here
is no Negative but an Affirmative of the first Declaration; but no denying the
Defendant's plea by the Impa'. Jennings versus Lee, M. 24. Ca. 1. B. R. Sti.
150, 151.

In Trespass, the Defendant justifies his Entry, by Virtue of a Lease for
Years; and adjudged no good plea, amounting but to the General Issue. Jaynes
Case, 1651. in B. R. so 2 Cro. in Trover, the Defendant pleads Sale in Market
Overt; not good in Trover; The Defendant pleads, that A. was possessed of
Goods, and sold them to the Defendant, and retained them in his Hands, and sold
them to the Plaintiff; and they cme to the Defendant's Hands, and he converted,
ill; amounting but to the General Issue, and leave no Color for the Plaintiff's
Action; whereupon a Writ of Enquiry was awarded, and not ruled, for that the
Defendant pleaded Not Guilty, Sti. 355. 2 Cro. 165, 319. Hob. 187. 1 Cro. 112.
2 Cro. 146, 147. 169, 435, 532. 555.

In Trespass, the Defendant pleads the Statute of Limittions; the Plaintiff
replied, that he sued an Original within six Years. Et hoc pet' quod, etc. an
ill Conclusion: For thereupon he lies upon the Defendant, and binds him to an
Issue, which he cannot pass over; but he should have ordered his Plea, Et hoc
paratus, etc. Whitehead versus Buckland, Hill. 1651. B. R. Sti. 401, 402. Yel.
138.

Trespass for taking and Imprisoning him such a day; the Defendant justifies by
Warrant on a Capias ad Satisfaciend'; the Plaintiff shows, that after the Writ
issued, and before executed, he paid the Money to the Sheriff, who gave him a
Supersedeas to all Bailiffs, etc. and the Defendant Arrested him; whereupon he
showed him the Supersedeas, ^ho yet detained him an Hour: The Defendant says,
he was not Lettered, and took that time to advise: Whereon it is demurred, and
adjudged for the Defendant, not on the Matter in Law; but the plea for the
Declaration, charges him with a taking and imprisoning, and the Replication,
with a detaining only, so a Departure. Stringer against Fanlake, 3 Cro. 404.

Trespass for breaking two Gates and three Pearches of Hedging, the Defendant
prescribes to go in Preambulation that way in Easter Week, and given the
Plaintiff two Gates and three Pearches of hedging, he broke them, and upon
Demurrer, adjudged the Plea ill, because he says not praedictas, and the two
Gates and the three Pearches, may be other than those laid in the Declaration.
Gooday against Mitchel, 2 Cro. 441.

In Trespass against several that entered to take the Corn, whereto one of them
had Right upon the Determination of a Lease, depending on a Lease for Life,
ended: the Defendant pleads Not Guilty, and all the matter found specially,
though their Entry were lawful as in the Right of one, yet it being by a
License in Law, which must have been pleaded, and is not to be given ^^
Evidence, or by a special Verdict, for that Cause, Judgment was against them,
for their entering, though against the Plaintiff as to the taking the Corn. Sir
Henry Knivet against Powle, etc. 2 Cro. 463. 464.

In Trespass, the Defendant justifies Damage feasant, the Paintiff made a new
Assignment, the Defendant justifies there for an Herriot, the Plaintiff
demurred, supposing it a Departure, but adjudged not; for, by the new
Assignment, the Bar is out of doors, and that in the Replication, is as of a
new thing, and could not be pleaded otherwise, for, it may be, he took one on
Damage feasant, and the place mentioned in the Bar, and another for an Herriot
in the Replication. Odyham against Smith. 3 Cro. 589, 590.

Trespass for taking an Hide, the Defendant justifies, because the Mayor etc.
of London is seized of a House, called Leaden Hall, and 'twas there Damage
feasant, for he by etc. The Plaintiff replies, that Leaden Hall is an ancient
Market on Fridays, and he bought it there, and had it on his Back to carry
away; and though objected, the Replication not good, because he concludes not,
que est eadem, etc. because he varies from the manner of the Caption, and by
his Plea, takes from the Plaintiff his Authority, yet resoplved good without it
agreeing with him in the time and place of the Caption. Sawer against
Wilkinson. 3 Cro. 627, 628.

In Trepass, one as Bailiff, pleads quod presentat' existit, that such an one
surcharged the Common, and for that was amerced, therefore distrained: it is
good without saying in facto, that he did surcharge the Common, for he is to
take notice of no more than what is done in Court. Volleston against Alimond 3
Cro. 748. 386. com. 1. Leon. 292. 2 Cro. 582.

Trespass for taking two Hides, the Defendant justifies for a Distress, the
Plaintiff replied, that he tanned them, the Defendant rejoyned, they could not
keep else, he did it to save them; ill, and a Departure. Duncomb against Reeve
and Green. 2 Cro. 783.

Trespass, the Defendant pleads, that he is Clericus and seisitus de Rectoria
in Jure Ecclesiae, and prescribes, that he and all his Predecessors, Parsons of
that Church, have had a way, and so he says, not that he was Parson; and so it
was objected, he had not enabled himself to make a Prescription, yet, saying he
is seized Jure Ecclesiae, it tant' amounts and is good. Dom. Sandr. against
Pender. 3 Cro. 8. 98.

In Trespass, the Defendant justifies, because, per quandam Indenturam, A.
bargained and sold Land habend' to B. the Plea ill, because not said in the
Premises to whom he being, etc. but it is the habend', and the Granter and
Grantee, must be named in the Premises; but, because the Plaintiff replied,
Quod been and verum, that A. granted to B. that is, a Confession to whom the
Grant was, and mends it, Bustard against Collyer. 3 Cro. 899.

Trespass, the Defendant prescribes for Estovers at all times, except fawning
times; the Plaintiff made an ill Replication: the Defendant demurrs, though the
Bar was ill, the Defendant not showing, that at the time that he cut, etc. was
not fawning time; yet, he having demurred on the Plaintiff's Replication, the
Court would not to the Bar, but no Judgment of the Plaintiff's ill Replication,
Russel against Booker. 2 Leon. 209. 210.

Trespass for Battery, the Defendant justifies, Molliter manus imponendo, in
defense of the Possession of his House; the Plaintiff replies, de Injuria sua
absque, etc. Verdict for the Plaintiff, and Judgment, Replication good, for the
principal is the Battery, Hall against Gerrard. Latch 128. 3 Cr. 225. La^ch
221. 273.

Trespass, the Defendant pleads, the Plaintiff is a Recusant convict, whom the
Statute 3 Jac. 5. makes excom' Judgment de billa, because it wants, Et hoc
paratus, etc. per Recordum; also, the Conclusion is unapt for the Plea, for the
Plea is in Disability; the Conclusion is bar, but, it seems, the Conclusion is
but form, and used by general Demurrer. And vide the form of several
Conclusions, Inde si Cur' vult cognoscere. 2. Al' person' sit serra respond'.
3. Al' brief Judgment ate' Br. 4. Al' accon' del brief. 5. In barr' Com'
apprest Bracton de excepc', and differ Quando le ple al' br'; of perempt'
quando neme. If the pleading to the Writ be tryable, and tried per pais, is
peremptory to the Defendant, other if Demurrer upon respond'; but if the Plea
be tryable by Certificate of the Ordinary, it is never peremptory; and if the
Plea to the Writ be to the Action of the Writ, it seems peremptory, so Plea to
the Action of the Writ, and Conclusion to the Writ peremptory, if demurred: one
pleaded to the Action of Avowry, he shall not resort to plead in Abatement,
after Imparlance: one pleads Outlawry in the Plaintiff, allowed. Dr. Cudman
against Grendon. Vide 40 E. 3. 9 pl. Abatement, Avowry and Conclusion the bar.
Latch 177, 178, 179. Co. 11. rep. 52 a. and 1 Cro. 117.

Trespass, the Defendant justifies as Executor, the Plaintiff says, that the
Defendant was annulled upon Appeal to the Court of Rome, and so not Executor,
if the Conclusion good; diverse of opinion semble, as well as where one pleads
a Divorse in the Spiritual Court, and so not his Wife. M. 2. R. 3. fo. 22. pl.
51.

In Trespass for Misprision, the Defendant pleads, that Robery had been done,
and that he being a Watchman, and the Plaintiff coming through the Town in the
Night, he stopped him, to see what he was: doubted if not double, for he might
stop him generally, either under Suspicion, or particularly as a Night-Walker,
being a Watchman. H. 4. H. 7. pl. 2.

Trespass against two Defendants, they Justify, Et hoc paratus ut Justific'
exceptionis, taken because it should have been, Et hoc parat' sunt. 1 Cro. 413.
414.

Trespass for taking his Apprentice, Plea, that the Plaintiff discharged him,
not good; for he cannot be Apprentice but by Indenture, and then he cannot be
discharged but by Deed, no more than one Covenant to build me an House in
Covenant to plead a Discharge of the Building, unless he plead it by Deed, 21
H. 6. 31, 32.

Trespass, Defendant pleads a Lease at Will made to him, by Virtue whereof he
entered, and was possessed, and held good, without showing of what Estate he was
possessed; Idem in pleading a Feoffment, etc. For it may be doubtful in Law, as
if made by an Infant, etc. Therefore more safe to plead the Matter, and to omit
the Conclusion how he was seized and leave it to the Court, 35 H. 6, 63. b.

Trespass, the Defendant pleads, that the Plaintiff had nothing but in Common
with J. S. etc. per Cur', he ought to show how Tenant in Common, viz. the
Feoffment, etc. if of a Joint Tenancy personar, etc. but not after, the
Plaintiff, stands not on it, but says, he was sole seized, and some thinks the
Law is, he pleaded a Tenancy in Common of the adverse side; but if he had
pleaded on his own side, then I agree I must show how, 3 H. 6, 56.

Trespass for Fishing in his several Fishings: the Defendant pleads it is not
Freehold; and by some the plea is good, till the Plaintiff make a particular
Title to the Fishing; Idem in Case of Warren; but per Yel. and not denied; but
not so for Common, because when one demands Common, it must be intended in
alieno solo: But when one demands Fishing or Warren, it may be intended in his
own Soil: And so for the Defendant to plead un' Fr' Tent' a good plea prima
Facie, till the other makes a Title; but per Fortescue, with a Traverse of
Fishing, etc. it is good, else not, no Resolution: vide Title Forest per tout:
And Title Fishing per tout, plus de cest' matter; and vide 21 H. 6. 21 b. and
the Plaintiff makes Title, 18 H. 6. 29, 30.

Trespass, Quare lib' Warr' fregit, et Cuniculos cepit, the Defendant pleads,
that the Plaintiff was seized and let to A. he by Command of A. took the
Conyes; Judgment le sans Title Mre', and after waves that, and pleads ut auter
Judgment, si Acco' per Danby, on plea, because the Warren passed not by the
Lease of the Land, and one may have Warren in his own Freehold. Note, he may
plead Title under the Plaintiff himself; and Note the General Issue, and Note
after he pleads the Freehold in a Stranger, who let ut supra; and that he by
Command of A. etc. absque hoc pt', the Plaintiff has any Warren there. Jenny,
that is, doubt the Freehold in a Stranger, and traverse of the Warren; and
thereon he Demurrs, L. 5 E. 4, 54.

Trespass for cutting Trees, Defendant makes Title to the Lord in Right of his
Ward; and that he cut prout sibi been licuit, Danby Chief Justice, and the
Conclusion ill: For it appears waste and unlawful, Marle, and mal Opinion ut
mihi videtur, it is Lawful, quoad the Plaintiff; and good: For before the
Statute of Waste, Lessor, or Ward had no Remedy against the Lessee or Guardian
by Trespass; and now it is punishable only by Waste, not in Trespass; but it may
be an Estoppel in Waste; therefore better to plead, he cut them for a Repair,
prout sibi been licuit, L. 5 E. 4, 64, 89. b.

Trespass for taking, beating and impounding his Cow, Defendant, quoad ven' vi
and armis, and pleads Not Guilty, and quoad the taking and impounding justifies
for a Distress; ill, not answering the Beating. Copeley against Piercy, Trin.
19 Car. 6. B. R.

Trespass for taking Cattle, Defendant justifies, Plaintiff replies and avoided
it, and hoc etc. unde petit Judicium si. ab Action praecludi; ill, being
specially demurred on, it ought to be petit Judic' et dampna sua sibi
adjudicari. Lady Broughton against Holly, Tr. 21 Car. 2. B. R.

Trespass for Battery, Defendant pleads son Assault demesne, Plaintiff replies,
the Defendant would have rid over him, and he molliter assaulted the Defendant
in defense of his person; and so the Battery was of his own Assault, qui est
idem insultus: In the Bar, the Defendant demurrs, and Judgment for him for the
Replication molliter assaulted; ill: it should have been molliter manus
imposuit. Jones against Trysillian, Tr. 21 Car. 2 B. R.

Trespass for taking his Cattle, Defendant justifies damage feasant in his
Freehold, Plaintiff replies, and claims Common to a Message, etc. Defendant
rejoyns, that he set sufficient Common for all the Cattle, levant and couchant
in the Message, Plaintiff demurrs, and objected he should have averred
sufficient Common to the Message for all levant, etc. for at that time he
might not have so many levant as he had right of Common; for but adjudged the
Rejoinder; good. Leech vers' Mickley, H. 21, 22 C. 2. B. R.

Trespass, Defendant justifies as Owner of an House, and says, That long before
the Trespass, he was et adhuc seisit' existit, and does not say necnon tempore
Transgression' praedict'; yet per Hob. Winch and Hutton; good. Grise against
Lee, Winch 16, 17.

Trespass for Battery of A. and B. his Servant, per quod servitium amisit;
Defendant justifies, because A. and B. would have erected a Building to the
Nuisance of his Lights, and on demurrer, adjudged ill, because he says, not as
Servants, or by command of the Plaintiff: And then he answers the quod servitum
amisit, which is the Gist of his Action. Norris against Baker, H. 13 Jac.
Bridge. 47.

Trespass for entering and breaking his Close, and driving his Cattle; Defendant
justifies as to the Entry, and driving the Cattle; Issue of it and Verdict but
Judgment against him, because he proved not the Breach as well as the Entry.
Praunce against Tuckle, P. 8 Jac. B. R. Rot. 138. 1 Bull. 164.

Trespass str. May, Defendant Justifies 7 May, quae est eadem, etc. and on
demurrer, adjudged a good Plea, without a Traverse; and if he had Justif' of
the same time, he need not say, quae est eadem; but at another time he must.
Vasterope against Tailor, H. 8 Jac. Rot. 1337.

Trespass for Assaulting, Wounding, Taking and Imprisoning the Defendant: quoad
the Assault and Wounding, pleads Not Guilty; and as to the Taking and
Imprisoning, justifies; and on Dem^rrer, ill; because he justifies not the
Assault; and there could be no taking without the Assault, and the quoad
captionem and Imprisonment, does not imply, and include the Arrest. Wilson
against Dodderidge, Hill. 12 Jac. B. R. 2 Bulstrod 335.

Trespass, Defendant makes Title by Descent from J. S. to himself, as Heir;
Plaintiff demurrs generally, resolved then of the not saying, how Heir, but
form and amendable. Duke of New Castle against Wright. M. 18. Car. 2. B. R.

Trespass for breaking six Closes; Not guilty to two pedibus ambulando: for the
rest pedibus ambulando, he justifies for a way: upon which Issue. For the
Trespass cum Averiis, he pleads want of Enclosure. The Plaintiff says, the
Enclosure was good, and the Defendants Cattle unruly, absque hoc, that they
were out of Repair; upon which, the Defendant demurrs, and for cause shows,
that the matter of Inducement is idle. Opinion of the Court was, that 'twas
good, and the Traverse necessary upon that Inducement; that an Inducement is
not material, a man may have many if the Issue offered be single: resolved the
Replication good. Parnell against Row. Anno 15 Car. 2. in B. R.

Trespass, Quare clausum fregit and cuniculos suos ad valentiam, etc. Verdict
for the Plaintiff; moved in Arrest of Judgment, that it ought not to be ad
valentiam, of a living thing, but precii. 2. That it ought not to be cuniculos
suos: resolved by the Court, 1. Ad valentiam was but matter of Form; 2. That it
shall be intended, that it appeared upon the Evidence, that they were domestic
Coneys, and that the Jury were directed by the Judge: Also, that the Jury gave
not any greater Damages in Respect of Property, alleged by the Plaintiff in
his Count.; Judgment for the Plaintiff per totam Curiam. Sir Orlando Bridgman
also declared, that the Opinion in 1 Cro. 15 Car. Child against Greenhill, that
of Deer in a Park, or Coneys in a Warren, a man might say, suos is not Law; and
contrary to Coke, lib. 7. Case of Swans. Saywell against Thorpe, 16 Car. 2. in
C. B.

Trespass, quare coepit, etc. 100 Oves; Judgment for the Plaintiff, Damages 2
d. after which, upon another Action for the Conversion, it was resolved, that
the damages were only for driving them away, and not for the Conversion, 1 Cro
36. Lacon against Bernard.

He that has the possession of an Hawk may have an Action of Trespass for
striking and killing her. 1 Cro. 18. Sir Fran. Vincent's Case.

Trespass, a man after he is arrested upon a Latitat, tenders Amends according
to 21 Jacobi; resolved it comes too late. 1 Cro. Wats against Baker, 264.

Trespass lies of Trespass done in an Hamlet, Yelv. Lapworth against Wast. fo.
77.

Trespass, the Plaintiff lays it in an Acre bounded etc. with Abuttels; the
Jury found it to be in Dimidio Acrae infrascript', it is good; also, if the Jury
had found it to be half an Acre, whereas it was assigned an Acre, 'twere well
enough. Yelv. Winkworth against Man, 114. But in an Ejectione firmae 'twere
uncertain, and void. Yelv. ibid. and 2 Cro. 183. 2.

Wager of Law.
IN Debt for an Amerciament in a Court Baron it is said one cannot wage Law, But
two or three Presidents are there cited, where in such Cases Wager has been,
Mo. Pl. 430.

In Debt by an Attorney for his Fees the Defendant cannot wage Law, But for
Moneys laid out by him as a Solicitor he may, Rolls versus Jermin. Mo. Pl. 500.

Tenetur that the Defendant cannot wage Law in Account for the profits of
Lands, Popworth versus Archee. Mo. Pl. 670.

A wager of Law may be done by eight, ten or twelve hands, As the Court shall
appoint; The Party is to swear directly that he owes or detayneth nothing, The
Compurgators, that they believe that he owes or detaineth nothing, Term. Ley.
341.

Cook says Debts by simple Contract, are forseited by Outlary, though it puts
by the party his Wager of Law, and so he says is the latter opinion of the
Books and of the Judges now, And he says in every Quo minus by the Kings
Debtor it puts the Defendant by his Wager of Law, for the benefit of the King
though not party a fortiori where the King is adjudged party, Slades Case, Co.
4. Rep. 93. a. 95. a b. 9 Rep. 88. a. 89. b.

In Debt for Arrearages of Account before one Auditor, the Defendant may wage
his Law, because not within the Statute of W 2. Ca 11. unless two Auditors, And
so if the Lord be found in Surplus in Debt against his Servant, it may be
waged, because not within the Statute, which is made only as to Accountants,
the rest being determinable at Common Law, Debands Case 38 H 6. 5. b. contrary
to this last, Co. 10. Rep 103 a.

It Is said that Ley gager lies not before Justice of Peace or Justice of Oyer
and Terminer or any other inferior Court, but those at Westminster, Therefore
an Information upon 23 H. 8. against Brewers to be brought at Westminster, not
in the proper County, because the Statute, Ousts Ley gager; and so intends such
Courts wherein it lay. Vide Kitchen. 494. b. Ley gager, the proper Trial in
Court Baron, and Per Pais. 1 Cro. 79. 104. Co. 4. Inst. 64. 65.

Commissioners of Bankrupt assign a Debt due by simple Contract to the
Bankrupt; in Debt the Defendant may wage Law against the Assignee of the
Commissioners, as well as he might have done against the Bankrupt; though obj.
they coming in by Act of Parliament, it is quasi a Debt of Record, for that
alters not the Law: quoad Wager. Morgan against Green. And so it is adjudged
also, 2 Cro. 105. Bradshaw's Case, and Noy 112. 1 Cro. 135. 2 Cro. 105.

Debt by an Attorney for his Fees, Defendant cannot wage his Law, because the
Plaintiff was compellable to be an Attorney: but in Debt, by a Sergeant at Law,
for 10 l. to be of his Counsel, for two years, the Defendant may wage Law; yet
dict. the Sergeant was compellable to be of his Counsel, but it seems, not for
two years, nor are those his certain Fees appointed by the Law. 3 H. 6. 33. b.
34. a. In Debt, for 20 l. by Sergeant at Law. Good.

Debt against a Successor of an Abbey, and Counts of a Sale of Goods, by Deed
to the Predecessor, which came to the use of the House, it seems the Defendant
may wage Law, notwithstanding the Contract was by Deed, and by the Predecessor;
for, the Deed binds not, had it not come to the use of the House: and that
being it which maintains the Action, it is not material, though it was the
Predecessors Contract, Sed ibidem by Ascue, and not denied: If I sell Goods to
the Servant of J. S. and they come to the use of J. S. he cannot wage Law,
because de auter Contract: but if my Servant sells my Goods to J. S. in Debt he
may wage Law, because it is my Sale by my Servant, qu. Diversitatem. 21 H. 6.
23. a.

Detinue of three Tallies, the Defendant wages Law; and so it seems he might,
if it were a free Obligation. 21 H. 6. 30. a.

Detinue and Counts of a Delivery in London: If the Delivery were in Middlesex
the Defendant may wage Law by Newton, and not denied, Quia non detinet modo and
forma, etc. And so if in Debt, and suppose the Delivery in Middlesex, and it
was in Truth in Essex. 21 H. 6. 25. b.

In Detinue of Charters and other Writings, the Defendant wages Law as to the
other Writings; but as to the Charters only, he pleads in Bar 38. H. 6. 21. In
Detinue of a box of Charters sealed, it seems he may wage, unless he counts of
some Inspect. 21 H. 6. 24. a. 22. H. 6. 15. b.

In Debt against a Lombard, the Receipt is to be read to him in the Language
which he understands, and in his own Language he is to wage his Law, not in
French or Latin. 21 H. 6. 42. a.

Debt against one, and counts that he set A. and B. to board with the
Plaintiff, at 15 s. a Week; the Defendant wages Law, and so it seems might A.
and B. (the parties that took the Board) have done, if the Action had been
brought against them. 22 H. 6. 13. b.

Debt, and Counts of Arrearages of Account before Auditors. It appears, the
Parties by Deed submitted the Account to Award of Arbitrators, who awards 20 l.
for which, the Action is brought; the Defendant wages Law, and may, for this is
but an Award, and not Arrearages, found by Auditors of the Account, and ibidem,
23 H. 6. In Arrearages of Account the Defendant pleads Riens lui doit, and
prays, the Attorney of the Plaintiff might be examined, who could not; if the
Defendant wage Law, he shall not make it present, but have day to do it. 22. H.
6. 41. a. 33. H. 6. 24. a.

In Debt, upon an Insimul computaverunt, against four whereof, one was
outlawed, one of the other waged his Law alone, and though opposed, resolved
he may do it, and so did make his Law; and the Plaintiff was Nonsuit. Hob. 244.
Essington against Butcher.

Wager of Law must be duodecima manu, the Party himself de fidelitate, the
other eleven to be sworn de credulitate, so is equal to a Jury. Vid. Mag. Chapter
1. 28 Co. 1. Inst. 295. a.

When one has any thing of common Right, or by Course of Law, the same may be
enlarged by Prescription, as the Lord has Court Baron of common Right, and by
Course of Law, all Pleas therein are determined therein by Wager of Law, yet
the Lord may prescribe to determine them by Jury. Co. 2. Inst. 143.

In Debt, upon an Account before Auditors, brought either by the Master against
the Accountant, or the Accountant against the Master for Surplus, the Wager of
Law lies: for the Auditors by Westminster 2. 11. are Judges of Record, the
Statute being in the nature of their Commission. Co. 2. Inst. 308.

Where the Statute gives a Forfeiture to be recovered in any of the King's
Courts, wherein no Wager of Law, Essoin or Protection, shall be allowed. Per
Co. 4. R. 55. It may be in a Case where no Essoin lies; for it is Reddere
singula singulis; viz. There shall be no Essoin if they lie in the C. But 1
Cro. in Faringdon and Comer's Case, p. 79. and Green's and Girle's Case, p.
104. the contrary is held by the Court. Co. 4. Inst. 64. 65.

In Debt, upon the Statute of Coppices, the Defendant would have waged his Law,
but could not, the Action being grounded upon a Statute, 9 H. 3. a. No Wager in
Debt for Arrearages in Account before Auditors, aliter, on Account to the
Plaintiff. H. 10. H. 7. Pl. 18.

No Wager of Law can be against a Specialty, (as if I deliver a Charter to
another by Indenture, and the Bailiff dye, Detinue lies against his Executor,
by reason of the Indenture) nor against a Receipt Per auter maines, in account.
Dyer, 265. a. vi. 39 H. 6. 35. a.

Detinue on a Contract of Goods bailed, the Defendant may wage his Law, or
plead non Detinet. Die. 30. a.

In such Actions where the Defendant is put from his Wager in Law, there he may
traverse a point that is but inductive to the Action, and not a point of the
Action; as in Debt, upon a Lease he may plead non dimisit. In Debt, for
Arrearages of Account he may plead non computavit; but in Debt, for Money or
Wares, sold to him, he may plead non debet, and traverse, that he sold them.
Dyer 121. b.

In Account, the Defendant pleads ne unque Receiver, and waged Law thereon, and
had day, and at the day, would have waved his Law for part, and confessed the
Action for it, and waged Law for the Residue: per Curiam he cannot without the
Plaintiffs assent. Die. 261. a.

It Is held, that at the Common Law, he that waged Law in a Court of Record, was
to bring with him Fideles Testes, wherewith Glanvil agrees, Lib. 1. C. 9. But
in inferior Courts, one might wage Law without Witnesses; to prevent which,
was Magn. Chapter 28. made Nullus Ballivus ponat aliquem ad legem, etc. sine
testibus fidelibus ad hoc inductis. Others hold, that Ballivus there extends to
all Judges. Co. 1. Inst. 168. b.

An Infant cannot wage his Law, but the Husband and Wife, for the Debt of the
Wife, may: 18. E. 3. 53. a. A Mute wages Law by Signs. Co. 1. Inst. 172.

Wager of Law is not allowed in any case where a Contempt, Trespass, Deceit or
Injury, is offered; but it is allowed in some Cases, in Debt, Detinue, and
Account; it is not allowed when there is a Specialty. Co. 1. Inst. 295. a.

One Infamous cannot wage Law, nor an Infant, but a Fem^ Covert with her
Husband, may. No Wager lies where the Suit is for the King, or his Benefit, by
Quo minus; no Wager against an Infant. An Alien must wage Law in his own
Language. No Wager against Receipt, P^r auter maines on Account, unless his
Wives or his Companion. Bailiff of a Manor cannot wage Law in Account, in
Debt, for Rent, or nue, for a Lease no Wager, because sounding in the Realty.

It lies in Debt for a Fine in a Leet, because a Court of Record; otherwise,
for an Amercement. No Wager in Debt upon Account, before Auditors; otherwise,
if but one Auditor. No Wager in Debt by a Jailer for Victuals, nor against an
Attorney in Debt for his Fees, nor against a Servant retained according to the
Statute in Debt for his Wages. One charged as Executor, etc. shall not wage; no
Wager in Debt for a Penalty given by a Statute. Co. Ent. 118. Pl. 1.

Error of a Judgment against an Executor in Bristol, upon a Concessit solvere
per Custom, there to pay a Debt of the Testator, by simple Contract, because it
takes from the Wager of Law, Cur' advise etc. Wigg against Roberts. H. 22. C.
1. b. r. Rot. 956. Pascal against Spurning. p. 1649. b. r. Rot. 75. Sti. 145.
198. 199. 228.

In Debt against Baron and Feme, for Beer sold to the Feme dum sola, they waged
Law. So note, he waged Law for the Defendant. Hucks against Holmes, 3 Cro. 161.

Debt against an Executor for Money awarded to be paid by the Testator, it lies
not, for the Testator might have waged his Law, which the Executor cannot.
Hampton against Bower. Sed vide Latch 213. Symonds Case. no Wager of Law
against an award, P. 1. H. 7. Pl. 18. 13. H. 3. Noy 96. No Wager against an
Award, because the third Person cannot 3 Cro. 557. 600. 11. H. 4. 56. b. Wager
in Debt, for the Son award.

In Account against A. as Bailiff of his Manor of D. the Defendant waged Law,
and had day to make it: but, at the day, 'twas ruled, that Ley gager lies not
in this Case, being a matter tryable per Pais Archees Case. 3 Cro. 579.

Debt on a Contract against two, one pleads Nil debet per Patriam, the other
waged Law; he cannot, but must plead per Patriam, being jointly concerned in
one Contract. 3 Cro. 645.

Debt sued by one in Chancery, a Servant to the Lord Keeper; Defendant, as to
part waged Law, and to the Residue pleaded Nil debet per Patriam. And being
sent into the King's Bench, it is doubted if he may make his Law good, but, de
been esse, it was done, Audley against Frank. 3 Cro. 648.

In Debt for Money on sale of Land, doubt if the Defendant could wage Law,
being on a real Contract, and resolved he may, and he did make his Law. Miller
against Eastcrowe; and so it is held by Newton, 22 H. 6. 11. a. and not denied,
3 Cro. 750.

In Account against one as Bailiff he cannot wage his Law, but as Receiver he
may. Sheffeild against Barnefield. Note, it was Account against him as a
Bailiff of Towngoods, as Merchandise, not a Bailiff of a Manor. 7 Cro. 790.

Debt against a Defendant for his Diet, he would wage his Law, but could not,
and pleaded, ad Pais. Bish against Walford, vid. 39. H. 6. The Court divided in
this point, H. or E. 19: H. 6. 10. a. Per totam Curiam, he may wage in Debt for
Diet. 3 Cro. 818.

In Account, upon a Receipt by the hands of the Plaintiff's Wife, the Defendant
was to wage his Law, because that is not a Receipt per auter maines, upon a
Receipt by the hands of the Plaintiff's Wife, they being one Person. Goodrick's
Case. 3 Cro. 919.

In Debt, against the Abbot of D. on a Contract by the Predecessor for Goods,
that came to the use of that House, the Defendant would to wage Law, Et per
opinionem Curiae, he may: and vide there diverse Cases, where one may wage Law
on another Contract. Prior de Dunstable's Case. P. 1. H. 7. Pl. 18. M. 13. H.
7. Pl. 2. H. 22. E. 4. Pl. 39. H. 6. 22. a.

In Detinue of a Bailment per auter mains, the Defendant may wage Law; so in
Debt, on a Contract per auter mains, otherwise on Account on a Receipt per
auter mains; for there the Receipt is traversable; but in the first Bailment
it is not, but the Detinue. M. 18. H. 8. Pl. 15.

In a Writ of Right of Advowson, Grand Cape issued for default; the Defendants
came and offered to wage Law of Non-Summons; and because some said the Writ was
peremptory, so as he could not have another, the Ley gager was respited. Tr.
27. H. 8. Pl. 2.

In Account, upon a Receipt at the Plaintiff's hands, though by Writ the
Defendant shall wage his Law, and by Detinue upon a Bailment by deed, for he
might take them again; and it is that Detinet is the cause of Action; not the
Bailment. Er. 27. H. 8. Pl. 14.

Debt against J. S. he waged Law, and at the day, appeared to make it, the
Plaintiff said, there is J. S. Senior, and J. S. Junior, and the Action brought
against the elder, and this is the younger; and in tant' the elder makes
default, prays Judgment. Er. 5. E. 4. Pl. 22.

In Debt for diet, the Defendant may wage Law, whether the diet were for
himself or another. 22. H. 6. 13. b. But on a Lease of a House, etc. he cannot,
but on a Lease of Goods or Chattels he may. No Ley gager in Debt for diet of a
Pentioner. P. 9. E. 4. Pl. 1. H. 15. E. 4. Pl. 2. Co. 9: R. 87. 6. 19 H. 6. 10.
a.

Debt on a Contract, the Defendant pleads the Contract was made with him and
Br. and abates the Writ; yet in another Action he may wage Law, though herein
he confessed the Contract; for, he may have pleaded it after, per Littleton,
and not denied, and ibidem, by him. In Debt against Baron and Feme on a
contract by the Feme dum sola; both shall wage, though he a Stranger to the
Contract; for, by the Marriage he has made himself liable to it. And to this
last agrees M. 15. E. 4. Pl. 4 Sed vide 33 H. 6. 43. b. If she make default at
the day, it is the Default of both, and binds the Husband. 9 E. 4. 2. 4. b.

Debt and Counts of a Retainer, to shape and make such Clothes; In this case,
the Defendant may wage his Law, and in similiter, not against a Labourer,
compel to wage by the Statute, 1 H. 6. 23. b. Not wage in debt by a Servant for
his Wages. H. 16. E. 4. Pl. 3. Mo. Pl. 971. Co. 9. R. 88. a. b.

Detinue of a chain of Gold of four ounces weight, of the value of twenty
pounds, though the Defendant have, and detain them, yet, if it be but two
ounces weight, he may wage Law, as if it were a black Horse, and the Suit for a
white one: but if the Count were of a thing certain in the quant. or qual* as
six yards of cloth, tho he mistake the Price, as ten Shillings for eighteen
Shillings; yet the Defendant cannot safely wage law, Count of a Contract for
500 l. It was for 500 l. to be paid in Jewels, Defendant waged law. 39 H. 6.
34, 35. 3 H. 6. 49. b. Count of a Contract for 40. l. plead that it was for 20
l. and wage law for the rest. P. 22. E. 4. Pl. 8. 9. Mo. Pl. 1. 48. Vide 39 H.
6. 34. 35.

Debt by a Keeper of the Tower, for Manger and Boyer for one committed there
for Treason; Defendant cannot wage law, Et dict. for debt by a Priest, for his
Salary, Defendant may wage law: 28 H. 6. 4. b.

In Account of Receipt per auter maines, no Wager lies, because the Receipt is
the cause of the Action, and that is notorious al pais being per auter mains:
but in Detinue on a Delivery per auter mains, Wager lies, because, not the
Livery, but the Deteiner, which is, in a manner, the cause of Action; but in
next Case, it is the Usage which makes the law of Wager; therefore in debt it
lies, in Trespass it lies not 33 H. 6. 9. a.

Debt on a Judgment in Court Baron, the Defendant pleads, Null tiel Judgment,
it is no Record, therefore tryable per Pais; Defendant not wage Law; 34 H. 6. 49.

No Wager lies in debt, or Arrearages of Account before Auditors, but that was
not at the Common Law, but is given by the Statute of Westminster, 2 Ca. 11.
But though the Statute gives it only in Case where the Lord sues for the
Arrearages against the Receiver; yet it seems by Needham and Prisot, the Wager
lies not where the Bailiff or Receiver sues the Lord for Surplus on the
Account, 38 H. 6. 5. 6.

Debt for Wages and on a Reteyner to serve in all Occupations, the Master wages
law, because it may extend to other things besides Husbandry, which the
Reporter holds to be otherwise; for, the Service and Wages being entire and no
Wager for part, he thinks there should be none for the rest; for, Magis dignum
trahit ad se minus, 38 H. 6. 13. 14.

Party wages Law, and day given to make it; either of the Parties at that day
may be excused by Essoin, but if either make default, it is adjudged against
him; or if the Defendant do not bring twelve sufficient men, it is a default, as
if any of them prove Execution, Attachment, etc. Et ibidem if in Replevin the
Plaintiff say that the Defendant kept himself out of the way, that he could not
tender Amends, and bring his Suit of it, Defendant may wage law of it; but if
he bring no Suit, he need not wage, for against one single Voice he need not
wage; whereby, since (moy semble) he means Proof, and so Seldom upon Fortescue
expounds it. vid. Brit. 60. a.

Debt and Counts upon a Lease for three years, of certain Sheep, the Defendant
wages law, per Cur', he may, though not in a Lease of Land; Vid. 9. E. 4. 1. b.
1. H. 6. 1. a. b.

No Wager in Law lies in debt by a Servant for his Wages, sed quaere, for that
seems, such a Servant only, as is retained according to the Statute, 3 H. 6. 33
B. 34. a.

Debt and Counts of Reteyner to scald his Hogs, and foul by the Year, taking
100 s. The Defendant may wage his Law, and so he may upon a Retainer to serve
him at Plough a year, and to find Ploughs, etc. for these not Reteyners
according to the Statute; and so of a Reteyner to be his Counsel for a year,
etc. 3 H. 6. 42.

One waged law, and brought twelve with him, one whereof was challenged, for
that he was under Age; and he was tried by Inspection of Court, to be of full
Age, whereupon, the Party made his Law, and went quit; 8 H. 6. 15. b.

Debt of a Box of Writings and Charters, and Counts of one Charter in Special.
To which, the Defendant pleaded non detinet, and to the rest, wages Law, and
bon; for, if one Count of a box of Charters, and show not in Special, he may
wage Law as to all: for, unless one Charter be certainly set out the Box, and
all counted Chattels: Vid. 14. H. 6. 1. a. Detinue of Goods and Chattels,
defendant wages Law quoad the Goods, and pleads to the Charters 44 or 4 E. 3.
41 b. and 19 H. 6. 9. b.

Debt, Defendant having answered in Court, that he bought, etc. to the use of
the King, waged Law, and was admitted; for, notwithstanding he acknowledged the
debt, it being a Contract, and he might have paid (or pleaded) it in pais, the
Wager allowed, simile, 11 H. 4. 28 and 3 H. 4. 40. 7 H. 4. 7. a.

Account by the Husband or an Abbot, and counts of Receipt per manus de Son
feme. or de Son Comoine, good, and needs not count of a Receipt by his own
hand; yet, it is as a Receipt by his own hand, and the Defendant may wage Law:
And so vice versa, in Account against Baron or Abbot, Count of Receipt per
manus del Feme o^ Cemoine, le Defendant; and so is 2 H. 5. 2. b. vid. 47 E. 3.
16. 13 E. 4. 8. a.

Debt against two, one makes default, the other wages law, and at the day makes
it. The whole Writ is abated, Et quer' nil capiat against both entered; where,
by the Acceptance of the Law quoad one, the whole Writ is abated. Vide 41. E.
3. 26. or 2. b.

Precipe quod reddat against two, one makes default after Joynt-wager, the
other joins, and makes the Law. And it is accepted, though the defendant
opposed it, the defendant recovered some of the other Moiety. Note, here both
waged jointly at first, vide 48 E. 3. 13. b. Cessavit against two who waged
law, one comes to make it, Seizin is prayed of the, others Moiety that made
default; for, if the Law of the one be accepted at first per Wishingham, all
the Writ abates. But here when he prays Seizin of the entire, for the default
of one, it was denied; and upon the whole it seems, if one make default, Seizin
of his part must be pr. first, else, by acceptance of the others Law, the Writ
abates; And if Seizin be granted of the Moiety, it seems it is conditional;
for, if the other makes his Law, the whole Writ abates tamen quere, and vide 3
E. 4. 21. a. 12. E. 4. 1. b. 5 E. 3. 9 B. and quere in personal Actions, not to
be done in such case, for there no Seizin of part can be prayed. 40 E. 3. 35.
b. vid. 40 E. 3. 40. 41.

Debt against a Bailiff for Arrearages on Account; obj. He cannot wage, etc.
because in the Realty; but resolved he may, and so may he by 13 H. 7. 3. 6. If
he had accounted, and was found in Arrearages before one Auditor. 43 E. 3. 1. 6.

Attaint on a Prohibition; Plea, that he sued out Sugg' to Prohibition, and
therefore he wages Law: doubted if Ley gager lies, by Belknap, it does; because
the first Suit but for debt, in which Ley gager lies. 44 E. 3. 32. a.

The Servant retains one as Attorney for his Master, the Master makes the
Servant Executor; and dies: In debt by the Attorney against the Executor, he
cannot wage Law, though the Master might; for, the Servant is bound by his own
deed of Retainer, though he be sued as Executor, etc. And per Finchden, Baron
may wage Law, if a Feme contract, and an Abbot, if his Monks: And so Bro. Tit.
Ley gager 46 E. 3. 10.

Debt against a Bailiff for Arrearages found before Auditors, assigned in pais
by the Master; the defendant wages his Law, Et been per Cur', though Brooks
and Bridges say the Law is otherwise at this day, quere, since it is not before
Auditors assigned by Court, Et hic dicitur quod, one may wage Law for a Sum
recovered in a a Court Baron, because no Court of Record; yet it is found by the
Suitor, and so it is said, 13 H. 7. 3. 6. Per Cousby. It Is also here said, one
may wage Law in debt for a Sum recovered in Trespass, but in Trespass Ley gager
lies not: 49 E. 3. 2. 3.

Debt in the detinue only for rent Corn, as it is agreed it must be, not being
Money; and though 'twas upon a Lease ^o years, yet being in the Detinet only,
the desendant is admitted to wage Law, 50 E. 3. 16. a. b.

Debt against J. D. who appeared by Attorney, and ley gaged; and at the day, J.
D. Junior, comes to make the Law: Plaintiss says his Suit is against J. D. the
elder, and per optimam opinionem, J. D. Junior shall be discharged, and the
Plaintiff shall have Judgment against the elder by default, and the Plaintiff
be no longer delayed. And so it is adjudged, 9 E. 3. 20. b. 5. E. 4. 23. 26. 114.

Annuity, defendant pleads a Refusal to give him advise upon Request; plaintiff
offers to wage his Law, that he did not request him, denied, because he cannot
wage Law de alieno; from (then) he offers to wage Law, that he did not refuse;
(then) per Herle, that admits, that he did request, and shows no performance on
request; and if he requested, he did or did not perform, and when he sued not,
if he did perform, it must be intended he did not qu. of law gager in such
cases if it lie at all. 5 E. 3. 55. b.

In a Plea of Land the defendant defendant wages law of Non-summons, and offers
to make it instanter, and per Herle (and not denied) he may Ley gager, and make
it instant, 7 E. 3. 24. a. Account by an Executor, and counts of a Receipt per
manus Testatoris, was per auter maines, then his that sues tamen quaere. In
Debt and Account by Executor, it is said, defendant may wage his Law, Et sic
semble hic. 7 E. 3. 61.

An Abbot is permitted to wage law of Non Sum' per Attornatum, quere If a
common person may do so also, though he must make it in person. 8 E. 3. 20. a.

Prohibition of a Suit in Trespass contra pacem, the Sheriff comes, and says he
is sued not contra prohibitionem, on the attachment, and tenders Law; denied,
for in Trespass contra pacem, it lies not, no more than in Count of a Receipt
per auter maines; non allocatur, and that Law was received, and in 29. E. 3.
47. b. Debt lies and grant of a delivery of goods by the Testator, per auter
maines, defendant wages Law. So 30. E. 3. 24. 29. E. 3. 34. b.

In account, the defendant before Auditors says he paid the Money to the
plaintiff; the plaintiff would have waged law, That he did not receive it, but
the other alleging that he had passed it per auter maines, non allocatur. Vide
30 E. 3. b. a. Ley gaged, that he did not receive a Statute, Wine, and Cloth,
in Satisfaction of a Debt, and doubted if it lie quoad the Statute; but the
Clark said it is usual, 29 E. 3. 46. b.

Debt against two who wage Law, one makes default, the other his Law, Nil
capiat per breve; and the reason seems, that he having charged the two jointly,
and the debt disproved quoad one, the Writ is satisfied in toto, yet eodem
folio. 6. in a Precipe of Land against two, one makes Ley of non sum; the Writ
abates quoad him, and Seizin of Land against the other that makes default.
Note, the first Action is in the personal and entire, the last in the realty
and several. 38 E. 3. 33. a.

One wages Law, and at the day failed, and the Roll marked, and Costs taxed,
yet on motion sedente Curia, the same day he was admitted, and made his Law,
and eodem in libro. Pa. 44. Ley gager lies not in debt for Releif, Noy 42.

Defendant had day to make his Law, and at the day, made Affidavit, that he was
pressed to serve the King, and could not come, and they prayed farther, and
denied for peremptory; but the defendant pleaded al pais per advisamentum
Curiae, and consent: Ashford against Greenvile, M. 1. Ca. 1. sed vide in
Bulstr. 186. He cannot wave his Law, and plead al pais, without consent. 3
Bulstr. 263. Affidavit, that he was sick, yet no day, but he pleaded al pais, 3
Bulstr. 316. on default, Judgment, and no day. Ben. 151.

Debt for Scavage, and declares that the Mayor, Aldermen, etc. time out of
mind, have so much for Scavage, and the defendant brought so many Boards,
whereby so much was due; defendant waged Law, and on demurrer adjudged, it lies
not on this debt grounded on a Custom Ma. etc. of London against Delpester, Tr.
26. Ca. 2. b. r.

Wast.
DEvise to one for Life, Remainder to A. in Fee; Tenant for Life does wast, he
in Remainder shall have an Action of Wast, but the Writ must be special, and
show that he was the Reversioner by Devise, not generally ex assignatione.
Hutton. 110.

Lease, excepting wood and underwood, Lessee cuts Timber; it seems an Action of
Wast lies not, because the Wood was devised, and so not within the Statute.
Dyer 19. a. 1 Leon 61.

In Wast it seems, that the defendant, if he never attorned, may either say que
riens passa, and give in Evidence that he never attorned, or plead it. Dyer 31.
a. 231. a. b.

In Wast, for cutting and selling Trees, the selling must be answered, as well
as the cutting, for that is traversable. Dyer 75. b. 90. b. Co. 1. Inst. 53.
Hob. 104.

If an house be ruinous at the Lessee's Entry, it is no wast to suffer it to
fall, but to pull it down it is, and it is wast in the Lessee to cut Timber to
re-edifie such an house, per Dyer; but I suppose not, for, if the house fall by
Tempest, the Lessee may cut Trees to repair, by Co. 1. Inst. 53. b. 54. a.
contrary to Dyer 36. a. Co. 4. Rep. 63. a. 11. 81. a.

The general property of Trees remains in the Lessor, and the Lessee has but
particular Interest to take them; and in Dyer it is said, the Lessor cannot
grant them without the Lessee's License. But Co. 11. Rep. it is said, it is good
to take effect after the Lease; which is yet a doubt upon Waller and Pettit's
Case. Dyer 36. a. b. Co. 4. Rep. 36. b. 11. Rep. 48. b. 81. 1 Cro. 199.

Wast assigned, quod amputavit and decapitavit quadragi^ta Fraxinus, and
viginti Vlmas, and adjudged it well lies. Dyer 55. a.

Wast assigned, Succidendo quercus, the Truth was, he did not lop and top them;
he may plead, Null wast fait, and give the special matter in Evidence. Dyer 92.
a.

Upon the Retorn of the Summons, 'twas said, quod quer' obtulit se quarto die
per Attorn' without naming him; and though he was named in the assigning of the
Wast, yet 'twas Error, and so it was that the Estate was not set forth in the
Writ, though it was in the Action of Wast. Also, he showed one Tenant for Life,
by way of use, the Reversion to him, and said not specta^' vel pertinen'. Dyer
93. b.

Wast may be assigned in destroying the Planks and Managers in a Stable, but
then they must be averred, fixed to the Freehold. And so of letting a
Brick-wal fall, but it must be averred that it was covered. 1 Inst. 53. a. Dyer
108.

Wast by a Bishop, moved to abate the Writ, because, 'twas ad Exheredationem
ipsius Episcopi, where it should be ad Exheredationem Ecclesioe; but no
Resolution given. Mich. 10. H. 7. Pl. 8. Ad Exheredationem ipsius A. B. and
Ecclesioe de S. Mich. 42. E. 3. 22. b. Dyer 129. a.

Lessee of an house and Wood, covenanted to repair the house at his proper
Costs, and took Timber to repair it; he is not charged with Wast, but in
Covenant he is:

The same Law, if the Lessor had covenanted to repair it, and the Lessee had
took Trees on his default. Vide 21 H. 6. 47. a. Lessee may plead in Bar of
Wast, that the Lessor granted the Repair, and he took the Trees to do it in his
default. Dyer 198. b. 314. a. Dr. and Stud: 66. b. Perkins. 738. Plow. Com. 29.
Dyer 32 a.

A. makes a Lease to commence in futuro, and before the Lease commences
infeoffs B. The Lessee does wast, B. brings wast, supposing quod tenet ad
terminum, etc. ex Assignatione A. de quo idem defend' tenuit, etc. and good,
there being no other form, though he never held of A.; for his Term was never
commenced in A's time. Dyer 206. b. Hutton's Reports, fo, 110.

Lessor grants the Reversion to A. who grants it to B. the Lessee assigns the
Term to C. Form of the Writ denied per Justic' utriusque Banci. Dyer 208.

Scire facias of a Fine, and Writ of Estrepement sued; one that purchased wood
long before the Scire facias, is hindered to fell it. Quoere, what Remedy? Dyer
110. b.

In wast assigned in taking a Furnace fixed to the Soil; the defendant pleaded
a Devise of it by the Termor, and removal of it by the Executor's Assent: It
seems no Plea, being doubted if the Plaintiff ought not to have Judgment for
the wast confessed. Dyer 272. b. Owen's Rep. 70. Wentworth's Office of
Executors, fol. 36.

Quid Juris Clamat was brought upon a Fine, and after Judgment, and before
Execution, a Writ of Estrepement awarded. Dyer 325. b.

In wast for cutting Trees, the defendant pleaded quod fuerunt aridoe and
cavoe, and putridoe in culminibus non existentes sufficiens Maheremium pro
edificiis. Two Judges held it ill, because not said non portantes fructus nec
folia. Dyer contra, it tantamounts. But agreed non existen' sufficiens
maheremium ad edificand alone, ill; for it may be fit for other uses. And to
other he justified to make Posts for Inolosures, and that ill, because not
showed, that all those Trees were so employed. Dyer 332. More pl. 246.

A. and B. Joyntenants for Life, Reversion to B. make a Lease; they shall join
in wast. And so if Tenant for Life, and he in Reversion make a Lease, they
shall join, and Tenant for life shall recover Locum vastatum, he in Reversion
damages. 1 Inst. 42. a. b. 1 Leon. 49:

To cut down Timber is Wast, to suffer the young Germina to be destroyed, is
Destruction; so if one when he has cut a Sale-wood lets the spring be spoiled,
or stubs it up. Cutting Willows, Beech, Maple, etc. that stand in defense of
the house, and stubbing up a quick set Hedge, is destruction: for all which, an
Action of Wast lies. 1 Inst. 53. I. K. L. M.

To suffer a ruinous house to fall down, that was so at one's Entry, is not
wast; ytt, he may take Timber and re-edifie it: but if he pull it down it is
wast. To destroy Glass, Wainscot, Doors, Furnaces, etc. fixed to the Freehold,
is wast. Cutting Fruit Trees in the Orchard or Garden, is wast; otherwise not.
If a house be blown down by Tempest, Lightning, etc. the Tenant must in
convenient time repair it. Destroying the Stock of Dove-houses, Warrens, etc.
is wast. Where Timber is scant, to cut Beeches is wast. Lopping Oak, Ash, or
Elm, or any thing to prejudice Trees, is wast. Making Charcoal of wood is
wast. Felling Timber to repair voluntary wast, is double wast. To dig for
Gravel, Stone, etc. is wast, unless for Reparation of the house. To suffer a
Sea-wall, or against a River, to decay, is wast. To take Timber, etc. to make
new Fences, is wast. Tenant cuts Trees for Repair, and sells them, though he
buys them again, and employs them, it is wast. Burning a house by Negligence or
Mischance, is wast. 1 Inst. 53. 40. E. 3. 15. b. Willows cut in view of the
House, is wast. 40 E. 3. 25. b. So to cut Hasels in a Wood where there is no
other Timber.

If one grants in his Leaf that Wast shall be redressed by Neihgbours, and not
by Plea, yet he may bring an Action of Wast, for the place wasted is not
otherwise recoverable. 1 Inst. 53. a.

If the Tenant repair houses before any Action of Wast be brought, the Action
of Wast is not maintainable; but he must not plead Quod non fecit vastum, but
the special matter. 38 Ass. 1

Reparation after the Writ brought, not pending the Action seems no Plea. 1
Inst. 55. D.

None shall have wast, unless he had the immediate Inheritance, yet an other
may join with him against Tenant by the Courtesy with the surviving Partner,
Joyntenant for life with him that has the Fee. Where the Estate is
determinable, the Wast is general, as Tail becomes Tail after possibility, etc.
The Heir cannot have it of Wast in his Ancestors time, nor a Bishop of his
Predecessor, nor shall Executors be punished for Testators wast. Aunt and Niece
may join. 45 E. 3. 8. b. Gift to two and the Heirs of one, he that has Fee
cannot have Wast against his Joyntenant, but his heir may, if wast after, if
the other survive, if the Reversion be not continued in the same it was at the
time of the wast done, the Action is gone, though taken back again. 1 Inst. 53.
D.

Wast lies against Tenant by the Courtesy, and in Dower, though they have
assigned, unless the Reversioner have assigned also. All others shall answer
for their own wast, unless Guardians. And if the Guardian assign it lies
against the Assignee. Guardian shall not answer wast by an other, (because it is
poenal) unless he is Joynt-Guardian. If one recovers against him under Age, he
recovers the Land, else only Damages. Infants, Feme coverts, etc. shall answer
Wast, etc. done by Strangers, and she for her Husband. Co. 1. Inst. 53, b. 54.
a.

Husband Tenant for Life in his Wives Right does wast, she dies, it is
dispunishable; but if tenant for years in her Right, not; because the marriage
is a Gift of it to him. Tenant for Life grants his Estate on Condition, Grantee
does wast, Grantor ent^rs, Wast lies against the Grantee, and the place shall
be recovered. Lord not punishable for wast done by his Villein before Entry,
Occupant punishable generally or specially; Tenant afsigns, and takes the
Profits, wast lies against the Tenant. Wast done sparsim in Woods or Houses,
all is to be recovered. No Action of wast lies against Guardian in Socage, but
Trespass or Account. 3 Cro. 357.

If Lessee take Trees, etc. to repair houses, it is not wast, though he was not
bound to repair them as his Lessor covenanted to repair them; for, if it was
sans Impeachment of wast for the houses, as the house was ruinous at his Entry:
and this for that Favor the Law gives to houses of Habitation. Co. 1. Inst.
54. b. a. Dyer 194. 198. b. Brook 463. Tit. Wast.

Lease of lands, he may dig in open Mines, and if it were of lands and mines,
if any were not open, he can open none new; but if none were then open he may
open new ones. Co. 1. Inst. 54. b. 5 R. 1. 2.

Tenant for Life makes Feoffment, wast is done, 'twas upon Condition, Lessee
enters for Condition broken; Lessor shall have wast. So Successor of a Bishop
shall have Wast on his Predecessors Lease, for wast done in time of Vacation.
So if Lessee for Life be disseised, and wast done, if he enters he shall be
charge. able for the rest; yet in none of these cases had the Lessor any
Reversion in him at the time of the wast, as regularly he ought: but these
cases stand upon their particular Reasons. 1 Inst. 13. b.

The Aunt and Niece join in Action of Wast done in the old Sisters Life; the
Aunt alone recovers the damages. Co. 1. Inst. 233. b.

Tenant for Life makes a Lease for years, and enters upon his Lessee, and
consents to a Recovery in Wast against him; the Lessee for years shall be for
ever excluded, for, of necessity, the place wasted must be recovered: but if he
had granted a Rent charge, and committed Wast, and the land recovered, the Rent
had continued. Co. 1. Inst. 233. b. Perkins 844.

Tenant for Life does wast, and grants over his Estate, Lessor releaseth all
wast to the Grantee, it shall discharge the Lessee. Idem of Tenant in Dower, or
by the Courtesy; for, besides the Privity that endures, if the Lessor should
maintain his Action, he should recover Locum vastatum against the Grantee,
contrary to his own Release. Co. 1. Inst. 269. b.

Lessee does wast, and then surrenders; it is said, the Lessor shall maitain
wast, but the Book seems to be misprinted, and that it should be [shall not
maintain, etc.] for, by his own Act he has determined his Action in part. Co.
1. Inst. 285. and 5 Rep. 12. b.

Wast brought against Tenant pur auter vie in Ass; he dies pending the Writ, it
shall not abate, but proceed for the damages, because altered by Act in Law:
but if Baron and Feme, Tenants in Tail special, bring Wast, and she dies
without Issue pendente brevi, so as the Husband becomes Tenant in Tail apres
possibility d'issue extinct, it shall abate, because all wast must be ad
exheredationem. And note, that Release of actions real bar wast, and so does
Actions personal, for he shall not apportion his own Action. Co. 1. Inst. 285.
a.

One devises Lands by the general words Bosc' Maherem' Miner' Carbon' in tam
amplis modo and forma, as the Lessee habuit or habere potuit; the Lessee opens
a Mine, and cuts Trees to use about it, the cutting is wast, for the Trees were
not granted, it being a Lease, nor do they pass as incident to the Mine, it not
being open. And Hobard holds, that if the Mine had been open at the time of the
Lease, it had been wast. Hobard 234. Darcy against Ashwich, Hutton 190. 191.

Lessee cannot change the nature of the thing devised, and therefore, not turn
Meadow into Arrable, or Wood into Pasture, dry up an ancient Poole, suffer a
Park pale to decay, destroy a stock of Deer, Fish, etc. but may better a thing
in the same kind; and therefore may dig to make a drayne in a Meadow. Ibidem
Owen 66. 67. Hutt. 103. Die. 37. a. Co. 1. Inst. 53. 2 Leon. 174.

Lessee builds a new house, it is wast to suffer it to decay; not if the Lessor
builds it after the Devise. Ibidem Co. 1. Inst. 35. s. Hutt. 103.

Whether Tenant by the Curtefie were punishable for wast by the Common Law? Or
not. Vide Co. 2. Instit. 299. 145.

The first Statute that gave prohibition of wast and damages against Farmers,
was Marlbcap^ 23. And where the Statute says vastum etc. non facient, it is to
be understood also, non permittent vastum; and so it is in the Condition of a
Lease. Co. 2. Inst. 145.

None can claim to be dispunishable of wast in a particular Estate, but by
deed, because, it is the Lessor's disherison, Co. 2. Inst. 146. Dy^ 281. a.

Lessee of a Manor commits wast in a Tenement escheated, the Lessor shall
declare in wast of a Lease of the Tenement, and maintain it by special Matter.
Co. 2. Inst. 146.

At the Common Law, to prevent wast by Guardian, Tenant in dower, or by the
Courtesy, the Party might have a Prohibion to the Sheriff, and by that he might
have a posse Comitatus; and so it may be done at this day. And such Remedy as
is against them at the Common Law, is against Farmers, etc. by Marlb. ca. 23.
Co. 2. Inst. 299. Vide Stat. 10 R. 2. c, 14.

If a Lease be made to A. for his own life, Remainder to him for the life of B.
or where a Remainder for years is upon an Estate for life; there, if A. does
wast, it shall be punished, because himself had both Estates: and in the latter
case, the Remainder shall not destroy the Term for years. Co. 1. Instit. 54.
and 2. Inst. 301.

The Husband that holds in Right of his Wife (Lessee for life) does wast, the
Wife dies, the wast is not punishable, because the Husband held not, but in his
Wife's Right, and the Estate was here is. Clifton's Case, ibidem. Co. 5. Rep. 75.
b.

Although Tenant in Tail after possibility of Issue extinct be dispun. of wast,
yet if he grant over his Estate, it is punishable in the Assignee. ibidem 302.

Tenant by Statute, Merchant, Staple, or Elegit, though they have but a
Chattel, are not within the Statute of Gloucester, 1. 5. Executors shall be
punished for wast done in their own time, not in the Testators. He that holds a
third or fourth part pro indiviso, is within the Act. Tenant for years assigns
upon Condition, the Assignee does wast, and he enters, for that Condition the
Action must be against the Assignee. Ibidem.

Tenant for Years, or Life, assigns, and takes the profits, and does wast; the
Action lies against the pernor of the profits, by 11 H. 6. c. 5, Co. 5. Rep.
Booth's Case 77.

Tenant assigns the Term (except the Trees) Wast is done in the Trees, the
Action lies against the Assignee. Co. 5. Rep. Saunder's Case.

Lessee commits Wast, and then assigns; Wast in the Tenant shall be maintained
against the Lessee, and the place wasted, and treble Damages shall be recovered
against him. Non Tenure general is no Plea in Wast but special non Tenure is.
Assignment, and no Wast done before the Assignment, or Wast done by the King's
Enemies, or Tempest, or Lightning, is not punishable. Co. 2. Inst. 302. 303.

The Tenant shall answer for permissive Wast, unless in such case where he
could not prevent the Wast; as where he is ousted by Cotssee of a Statute
entered into before his Lease, and that Cotssee does wast, or by any precedent
Title, ibid. 303.

Feme Tenant in Dower of a Manor and Copy hold, commits Wast, the Action lies
against the Tenant in Dower. Ibid. 303.

Femes Coverts, and Infants shall answer for Wast done by Strangers, though
some have held the contrary; and so shall the Wife for wast done by the Husband
for Lease made to them for Life, if she agree to the Estate. Ibid. 303.

Where the Wast is done Sparsim in houses, Woods, or Meadow, there the whole
shall be recovered ibid. 304.

One may have an Action of Wast in the Tenct after the Term is determined by
Expiration, Death, or the Act or Wrong of the Tenant; and theresore, if the
Term end, hanging the Writ, it shall not abate, because maintainable for the
damages; but if the Tenant surrender after the Wast done, no Writ is
maintainable; for the Lessor cannot by his own Act alter the form of the
Action. Ibid. 304.

The Heir cannot maintain an Action for Wast done to the Ancestor, because the
damage belongs not to him; yet, if two parceners be, and wast is done, and one
of them dies, and wast is done again, one Action shall be maintained for both,
and the Writ shall say, both Wastes were to both their Disherison, but the
Judgment shall be for the place wasted to them both, and for the damages
severally in their several Tenures. Ibid. 305.

Guardian shall not be punished for Wast done by Strangers, unless it be such
as he might have prevented, and would not; for then qui non prohibet, jubet,
ibidem 305.

If the Gnardian commit Wast, he shall by Gloue' Ca. 5. lose the Wardship and
single Damage; and if it be done so near his Age as he could not bring his
Action of Wast, or had not notice of it, then he shall recover treble damages
upon the said Statute, as a common person shall. Ibidem 306.

Wast upon the Stat. of Glouc' Ca. 5. lies not in Ancient Demesne, because
they cannot award a Writ to the Sheriff, to inquire. Ibid. 306. Owen 24. contra.

In an Action of Wast by two in the Tenuit, if one relinguisheth, it bars
both; not so of an Action in the Tenet. Ibid. 307.

A. has B. and C. in his Wardship, Ratione Custodiae, and commits Wast in the
Lands of B. yet he shall not lose the Wardship of C. because the Wast was not
to his Disherison. Ibid. 306.

At the Common Law there lay an Estrepement after Judgment; Glouc. c. 13. gives
it, Pendente placito, and may be sued out with the Original. If the Tenant
alien pendent the Plea, the Estrepement may be against him and his Alienee, and
the Defendant shall not have his Age in it. And tho the Statute says, Du
Tenement in demand, yet in the Scire Facias to execute a Fine in a Quid juris
clamat, or in Wast, an Estrepement may be had, yet no Land is demanded in the
Writ. Upon the Statute, the party shall recover damages after delivery of the
Lands. Co. 5. Rep. 114. b. It lies before or after Judgment in Wast, and the
Sheriff may take the Posse Comitatus, to prevent the Wast. Co. 2. Inst. 328.
329.

In Wast, the Process is Summons, Attachment, Distress, and then upon default,
a Writ ad Inquirend'; and the Sheriff, by the Statute, is to go in Person, and
with the Jury view every place in every Town; but he may inquire at any Town,
and there cannot be less than twelve of the Jury. Co. 2. Inst. 140. or 146.

Articuli super Chartas, gives an Action of Wast against the Escheator or
Sub-Escheator, if they do wast in any thing that comes into the King's hands,
with a Respondeat superior'. Co. 2. Inst. 571.

Wast may be in destruction of the Game of Deer, or Pigeons, though all be not
destroyed, so to stop the holes of Dove-houses, to stop Coney buroughs; but,
to dig Stones, Marle, or stub up old Thorns, or plough a Hop-ground, is not.
Ow. 36. 67. Co. 1. Inst. 51. K. 2. Leon. 222.

Adjudged, That if Houses or Groundsills be putrified for not scouring a Ditch,
Wast lies, In Domibus pro non escurando, etc. Ow. 43.

To stub up Thorns is not wast, unless growing in a hedge-row or on a Wood, or
old Thorns of fifty or sixty years growth. Ow. 67. 1 Inst. 53.

One made a Feoffment to the use of himself for Life, and to another in Fee,
and was punishable in Wast by him in Remainder therein; tho in the Dr. and
Stud. it is said, if Feoffment be to one for Life, he is not punishable for
Wast. Ow. 91. 25 Eliz. Com. Banco, Rot. 603. Rayer con' Durat.

One entered into Bond not to commit Wast, and the permitting a house ruinous at
the time of the Lease, to fall, was a Forfeiture of the Obligation; such Wast
is not punishable, if there be no Bond, nor Covenant against it. Owen 29 Eliz.
Glover against Pike.

It seems, that a Quod ei deforceat will lie upon a Recovery by default in a
Writ of Wast, against Tenant in Dower, etc. But because the default was after
Appearance, and so a Contempt, it lay not in Elmer's Case, not because Damage
on the Prin', or that Wast is a personal Action. Vide 3 Cro 263. 2 Rolls 102.
2. 104. 4. Damage, Owen 101. p. 33. El. Co. Baneo Rot. 1125. Elmer against
Thatcher. 1 Inst. 355. 198. 2. r. 68. b.

Lessee for years, waves Possession, and a Stranger commits Wast; the Lessor
shall have wast against Lessee; and so if Lessee assigns, and continue in
Possession, and does wast, the wast shall be against him. Ow. 141.

When the Writ to enquire of wast is Awarded upon Nichil dicit, there the
Command in the Writ, that the Sheriff go to the place wasted, and enquire etc.
is but Surplus; and the Sheriff needs not go thither but may enquire of it in
any place in the County, because the wast is confessed; but if the Writ be to
enquire at the Grand Distress, upon Westminster. 2. 24. There such Command is
necessary, and the Sheriff must go to the place, because that must better
appear upon the view; yet the Entry in both cases is Per visum Juratorum. Pop.
24. Die. 204. a. Hutt. 44. 3 Cro. 18. 290.

When the Interest of the Inheritance is in one person, and the Lease for years
in another, though by several Demises, part at one time, part at another time,
yet one Action of Wast lies: and so if Lessor have but two third parts of the
house in which the wast is done, he shall assign wast to be done in the whole;
for it cannot be done in part, but it is to all, and though not in all, yet it
goes to each part. But 14 H. 8. where one lets several Leases of the same Lands
to one person, not one, but several Actions. Pop. 24. 25. 3 Cro. 290. 14 H. 8.
12. b.

Lease for Life without Impeachment of Wast, Lessee has an Interest in the
Trees, etc. and may give them, and shall have them whoever cuts them, and shall
have Trespass against a Stranger that cuts them; contrary to Co. 4. 63. a. Die.
184. a. Hob. 132. Pop. 195. Co. 11. 82. b. Die. 47. b. Co. 1. Inst. 224: a. 2
Cro. 216.

When the Wast is confessed by Nil dicit, the Writ to enquire is not to enquire
of the Wast, as it is when the Judgment is upon the Distress by the Statute,
but only of the Damage. Hutt. 44. Tippin against Rives.

Trenching a Meadow, whereby it is meliorated, is not wast; but building a new
house is, because it puts the Lord to more charge; and so is planting a
Hop-ground, because it alters the Lord's Inheritance. Dyer 361. b. Hutton 19.
103. Hob. 234. 1 Inst. 53. f.

By Fitzh and Baldwin, Chapter Inst. One Joynttenant shall have Wast against his
Companion by the Equity of the Statute, cum duo vel tres, etc. but not
Parceners, because they were compellable to make Partition: and not denied. p.
27. H. 8. Pl. 37.

Wast, Et inter alios Arbores, white Thorns, each valued at 6 s. 8 d. Defendant
pleads, that they were for Hedge-boot, and House-boot. Plaintiff says, there
were black Thorns enough besides; and as to the Hedgeboot, is taken, that there
were not enough besides, and found there were as to the House-boot: the
Defendant demurs, and the Plaintiff enters a Nolle prosequi on the Demurrer,
and Cur. advisare vult on the Verdict, and no Judgment given. Co. Entr. 708*
709. Pl. 11.

Wast and Issue of a Confirmation, and in the Venire facias was omitted, Et
Interim Terram illam videant; wherefore, obj. they cannot take the Inquest.
Responds. they may; the Issue here being for a collateral thing, and the Estate
not to be enquired of. P. 7. E. 4. Pl. 2.

Wast against Baron and Feme, and she received in his default, pleads an
Assignment by them, and till then, no Wast. And it seems she shall have the
Plea, though it appear she can lose nothing. And for Damages she shall not be
received. Trin. 9. E. 4. 15. Vid. 22. E. 4. 35. a. 21. H. 6. 46. 4. or 40. 42.
E. 3. 22. 6.

Wast brought by two, and one summoned, and severed, and the other recovers the
moiety of the place wasted, and the Moiety of the damages and quoad, the
VVillows Assize for wast, Cur' advisari vult. P. 12. E. 4. Pl. 1.

If one does wast, and repairs before Action brought, he may plead it and
excuse himself; but, if the Condition of a Bond be not to do wast, and he does
wast, and reedifies, yet, Debt lies, for the Bond was once and ever forfeited.
20 E. 4. 18. b.

Lessor sells Trees, Vendee cuts them; Lessee's Cattle eat the Germines, no
Wast, for he not bound to fence them in, against the Lessor's own tortious Act.
Tr. Mo. 9.

Lease for years, Remainder for Life, Tenant for years does wast, Action of
Wast lies. So if Lessor covenant that he will not sue Lessee for wast within
two years, yet after the two years, he may sue him for wast done within them.
But if Tenant for Life be, Remainder to Baron and Feme in special Tail, Feme
dies without Issue, wast lies not; otherwise, if the Remainder in Fee were to
the Baron, because the Tenants in Tail, after Possibility, were merged by the
Fee, per Brown; quod tamen Die. negat. Tenant for Life, Remainder for Life,
Wast is done, he in Remainder surrenders, Wast lies. Co. 5. Rep. 76. b. Mo. pl.
64. Co. 5. Rep. 76. b. 2 Cro. 68. b.

Tenants in Common cannot join in Wast in the Tenet, but Joynt-tenants or
Parceners may; and also Tenants in Common in the Tenuit, being only to recover
Damages. Ibid. Mo. f. 383. Mo. pl. 110. 127.

He in Reversion, by way of use, brings wast against the Feme Tenant for Life;
of the same use, she pleads that the place was left so ruinous at the death of
her Husband, Quod reparare non potuit, and adjudged a good Plea. Mo. Pl. 158.

Wast assigned in permitting Sea-walls to be ruined, whereby, etc. if not done
by sudden violence; as if a small breach were, and he permits it grow greater,
it seems wast, Et per omnes, the permitting Decay in the Banks of the River is
wast. Mo. 173. 187. 200.

Dower; Tenant pleads ne unque seisie que Dower, and Issue of it. Demandant
prayed a Writ of Etrepement, because great part of his Coppice wood, and the
Husband dyed not seized, so she cannot have damages; yet it seems Etrepement
lies not, because Damage lies in the Action. Mo. Pl. 186.

Wast, and the Writ was quod fecit vastum in terr' In the Count assigns wast in
cutting Trees; and adjudged, it maintained not the Writ, but if it had been
assigned of digging Clay, etc. it had. Mo. Pl. 200.

VVast and Count of VVast done contra prohibitionem, after the Estrepement sued
upon a Formedon, Defendant pleads Quod non fuit vastum contra prohibitionem.
Issue; Verdict, and Judgment pro querente. Mo. Pl. 1. or 245.

It Is VVast to take away a Partition, etc. fixed by the Lessee to the
Freehold; sic of Benches or Glass-windows, to take away Doors of the Houses,
if they be outer doors, for defense of the houses; not in ward for Separation
of Chambers. Mo. Pl. 315.

One that had power to make a Jointure of third part, makes her Jointure of a
third part undivided. And this held by Popham, not according to the Power,
which was to be sans impeachment of wast, and against the Tenant in common wast
lies not: so it should have been done in Severalty, by Popham fo. 374. But that
is denied by Mo. fo. 387. 388. And that wast lies against the Tenant in Common,
of a third part also, by Popham, the Proviso being to do it, Sans Impeachment,
etc. And he makes an Estate for Life, with Remainder, it is disjunctive by
reason of the Remainder; whereto, More answers, that it is but the effect of the
Law, not the word of the Party, and then Remainder were created before; so he
must make it by operation of Law, Sans Impeachment, etc. or make none: Also,
it is not eadem sans Impeachment, etc. but the Remainder does at present hinder
the Action; and it is not like Cases upon 32 H. 8. there Tenant in Tail shall
not make a Lease for three Lives in Possession. So another way to satisfy the
Statute, Perrot's Case. Mo. Pl. 506.

Tenant for Life Remainder for Life, tho Wast in the Tenant for Life be
dispunishable, yet the Chancery will by Injunction bind him to do no wast; and
such a President cited temps. R. 2. Mo. Pl. 748.

Error to reverse a Recovery in Lancaster, and pendant it a Writ of Estrepement
granted, and so resolved it is grantable in a Scire Facias. Holland, etc.
against Jackson and Ogden, and sic vid. 2 H. 6. 13. Estrepement granted in
Scire facias, on a Judgment in a Formedon. Mo. Pl. 850.

Resolved, that great Birch is used in the Country as Timber, and esteemed in
Law as Timber, and it is wast in the particular Tenant to cut them; and so in
Cro. are black Thorns in some Countries. Countess of Cumberland's Case. Mo. Pl.
1099. 1 Cro. 283. 2 Cro. 126.

Writ of Wast in two Towns, Count of Wast in three Towns ill; but e contra, if
less be in the Count, than is in the Writ, it is good pro tanto. Earl of
Cumberland against Countess Dowager Cumberland. Mo. Pl. 1185.

To convert a Horse Mill to a Hand Mill, or a Corn Mill to a Fulling Mill, is,
though it be better for the Reversion, and the reason seems, because it alters
the Evidence. City of London against Groyme. Mo. Pl. 1230. 2 Cro. 182.

Lessee covenants to repair at his own Cost, and the house being out of
Reparation, put Timber on the Land to do it, and held a bar; for, the Covenant
takes not from him the Liberty the Law gave him: but it seems the Court was of
another opion, Mo. Pl. 80. vid. Die. 196. b. 314. a.

Lease except Trees, Lessor grants and sells the Trees to Lessee, he cuts them;
resolved first, Lessee has but special Property in Trees, till severed, and
then Lessor may take them, be it by Wind, or wilfully, unless Doatards.
Secondly, Sans Impeachment of wast gives no interest, but that is contra to Co.
11. Rep. 82. 83. Popham 195. Dyer 184. b. Thirdly, such Interest has Lessee in
Timber of Houses, if blown down, to take to rebuild; but, if he pulls them
down, Lessor may take it. Fourthly, by the sale of Trees to the Lessee, they
are not so reunited, but the Lessee is absolute Owner of them, for he has not
an equal Interest in them and the Land, to extinguish; as if Feoffor sells the
Trees to Feoffee. Fifthly, Wast may be in Glass, tho in the Lessee's own
setting up, fixed by Nails or otherwise; and so in Wainscot, set up by the
Lessor or Lessee, and fastened either by Nails or otherwise, to remove it if
nailed. Harlakenden's Case. Co. 4. Rep. 62. 63. 64.

Lessee devises the Term, Executors do wast, and then assent to the Legacy,
Wast lies against them in the Tenuit; and so if the Grantee on Condition do
wast, and then the Grantor enters for the Condition, yet wast in the Tenuit
lies against the Assignee on Condition. And if the Lessee unlawfully open a
Mine, and not that Term except Mines, if after the Assignee dig in it, it is
wast in him, though the first began it, for the Exception is void. And
resolved, first, Lessee may dig in Mines opened before, not open new. Secondly,
if it be of the Land, and all Mines, he may open new Mines. Sanders Case, Co.
5. R. 12. b.

Wast lies against an Occupant, for he is within the words of the Statute, for
he holds, Pur Term de auter vie, and it is against all Tenants for Life. But
it lies not against Tenant by Elegit, Statute Merchant, for they hold not, but
come in by Act in Law. Co. 6. R. 37. b.

Lessee. for years, Sans Impeachment of Wast accepts a Confirmation for Life,
the Privilege is gone, because the Estate whereto it was annexed, is removed.
Co. 8. R. 76. b.

If the Sheriff go and see the place wasted, and cause the Jury to have the
View, he, may take the Inquisition at another place. Co. 8. R. 15 2. b.

Lease for Life, Sans Impeachment of Wast per parol; mult' alter^at', and not
resolved whether the Privilege be good without deed; but resolved, if the
Privilege be void without Deed, yet the Estate is good, as an Estate without
the Privilege. Co. 9. R. 9. a. 10. b.

In Wast, for cutting down a tree, nothing shall be recovered but the Circuit
of the Root, and not according to the Latitude of the Branches. Co. 11. R. 50.
a.

Lease for years, Sans Impeachment, etc. Lessor confirms his Estate for Life,
the Term is merged, and he punishable for wast, so lease pur auter vie, Sans
Impeachment, etc. Remainder in him for his own Life, it merges his first
Estate, etc. he is bare Tenant for Life, punishable for wast. Co. 11. R. 83. b.

Term expires, Lessee continues in Tenant at Sufferance, and does voluntary
wast, his Lessor also being Tenant for years, brings Action upon the Case; and
adjudged it lies, and not Trespass, as objected by Littleton it ought to be,
and the rather here, because the Plaintiff being but a Termor, subject to Wast,
ought to sue his Action to have as much in Damages as he may be charged over.
West against Trend, 1 Cro. 135. vid. Co. 5. r. 13. b.

Error of a Judgment in wast assigned, first, because the Wast being assigned
in several things, entire Damages are taxed, which ought not to be, for some of
them be Pettits not punishable, and the Court is to judge; Sed non allocatur
being found not intended any of them Pettit. Secondly, thirteen Jurors enquire,
and they not an Inquest of Office, as Writ to enquire of Damages for Attaint
lies; but that seemed well enough also. Thirdly, the Wast is assigned in
cutting twenty Trees, and the Jury found him guilty but of two, and yet no
Misericordia pro Resid'. But Barkley held it well, for when they find any part
of the same thing assigned, there needs no Miserecordia pro resid'. But if they
find wast in some things, and no Wast in any part of one thing, as if Wast
assigned in Domibus and Boscis, and they find it in part in Domibus, and none
in Boscis, he shall be in Misericordia pro Boscis, but where they find a less
number of trees than assigned. Jones and Cro. doubted. K. and uxor against
Fitzh. 1 Cro. 299. 327.

Eradication of white Thorns is wast, not succidendo and vendendo, unless they
grow in places for defense of Cattle, and it be so averred. 2 Cro. 126.

Lease for years with House-boot and Hayboot, sine impetitione vasti, as good
as sine impetitione vasti, and traverse to the whole, not the House-boot and
Hay-boot. Ley against Air. 2 Cro. 226. or 216.

Wast, and Counts general of wast done, ad exhered', it is found, that the
Defendant was Lessee for years, Remainder to D. Sans Impeachment of Wast, who
is dead; and if the wast was committed in the Life of B. yet good amover, for,
though then no Action lay, and B. might have licensed him to do wast, yet now
he may count of it, as Wast immediately done to himself. Bray against Tracey. 2
Cro. 688.

Wast, and Counts of a Lease for Life, Defendant pleads, it is part of an
Hospital whereto the Plaintiff presented him for life; it seems it lies not,
for he is in from the Foundation, and though in but for Life, the person has
the time, no Revertion in him. 21 H. 6. 2.

Wast by an Abbot, and Counts of a Lease by the Predecessor, and assigns wast
general, without saying whether in the Predecessors time, or his own; and good,
for were the wast committed in the Predecessors time, the Successor shall
punish it, and so is 42 E. 3. 22. And if the Predecessor had released it, yet
the Predecessor may punish it; for, being in the Realty, the Predecessor could
only release for his own Life. eod: Libr. E. 3. yet there it is doubted, if an
Agreement had been made with the Predecessor for the wast, if it had not been a
Bar. And in 21 H. 6. where one justifies to cut Ashes for Firewood could be
had, and that per Curiam; yet note in the end of the Case it is pleaded, and that
no under-wood was there. And in this case it is held by some, that Ashes, Oaks,
etc. under twenty years growth, may be taken for Fire-boot, etc. but denied by
others, for they are Ashes, and it is held, that Lessee Sans fait may take
House-boot, etc. as well as if by Deed, and that if Lessor in the Deed of Lease
granted that he will require the House, Lestue may take Trees in his default,
and pleaded it in Bar of the wast; and so seems Dyer 198 b. 124. a 24 H. 6. 46.
47. 48.

The Summons, Attachment and Distress, all returned, nihil, and whether a Writ
to enquire of the VVast shall be awarded, no Writ being returned, served, or
an Alias distringas, multum dubitatur, and alter catur; but at last the Writ
was awarded, To inquire of Wast, vide 41. or 14. H. 6. 2. b per Roll. If Baron
and Feme Tenants in Common of a Term be, and wast is done, wast lies against
her after his Death, quod alii concesserunt Trav. denied. Et vide F. N. B. 59.
Baron and Feme Tenants for Life, she shall not be punishable after his Death
for VVast done by him 46 E. 3. 25. vid. Case. 21 H. 6 56. a. b. H. 6 25. b.

VVast, and assigns wast in cutting down so many Oaks, and in cutting down the
Springs that came up from the Roots again: Resolved, this is double wast, and
so may be double Assignment, and is not a double Assignment of the same wast,
and treble Damages shall be given for each cutting; tho by some it can be
recovered but once, 2 H. 12. a. b.

Tenant in Dower, or by the Courtesy, grants over their Estate, yet the
Husband shall maintain an Action of Wast against them; but if he assigned his
Reversion, his Assignee must have it against their Assignee Co. 1. Inst. 316.
a. F. N. B. 45.

Two bring an Action of VVast, one releases; it bars both, if it be in the
Tenuit, wherein Damages only are to be recovered, not if in the tenet, where
locum vastatum, is to be recovered also. Co. 1. Inst. 355. b.

In Co. 1. Inst. it is held of one side, and denied by the other, that an
Attachment lies upon an Inquiry of wast. But 1 Cro. it is held clearly, that it
does. And F. N. B. fays it was fo resolved by the Court, 2 H. 4. But his
Opinion is contrary Co 1. Inst. 355. b. 1 Cro. 299. F. N. B. 107. c.

The Reversion must continue in him that brings the Action, at the time of the
Action brought, because it is said, Ad Exheredationem, and it must be in him at
the time of the wast done, unless in special Cases; as Tenant for Life makes a
Feoffment on Condition, VVast is done, and he enters for the Condition, Lessor
shall have wast, fo if Lessee of a Bishop commits wast in time of Vacancy the
Successor shall have the Action; so if Tenant for Life be disseised, and wast
is done, and the Tenant reenters, Lessor shall have wast, yet he had no
Reversion. Note, it is no plea for Lessee in wast, to say generally that Lessor
had no Reversion, etc. but must show how he lost it. But in wast, by Assignee
of the Reversion, such Plea general is good, vid. 39 E. 3. 19. 20. Wast by
Successor of a Bishop, or wast done in the Predecessors time, quaere sc. bon.
for laid ad exheredationem Ecclesiae, Co. 1. Inst. 356. a. vid. 1. H. 4. 26.
Opinion that Successor of an Abbot or Prior shall have wast for wast done in
the Predecessors time; or if a Bishop, Parson, etc. that can make Executors.
Vid. 71 E. 3. 53. b. 43 E, 3. 8. 49 E. 3. 26. Successor of an Abbot, not
chargable for wast of a Predecessor.

In wast, if the Plaintiff's Reversion determine either before, or pendant the
Suit, his Action is gone; but if it be pendente, the Suit it must be so
specified. Ewer against Moyle. Yel. 141.

In Wast, the Plaintiff declares, Quod cum seisitus fuit, and let for years,
the Defendant had wasted, and though not said of what Estate seized, (so it
might be for Life) yet being ad exheredationem, and that alleging of Seizin
but Surplus, held by most good enough. Sir Walter Asto^ against Sweten hall. 3
Cro. 47.

Wast assigned in the house, where, it appears, the Plaintiff has but two parts
of the Reversion, yet good, he cannot assign it otherways; Wast inquired of by
the Sheriff, where it was confessed by Nihil dicit, yet no Error. Warnford
against Haydock. 3 Cro. 290.

Wast against a Husband, Tenant for life in right of his Wife, dead, not being
in the Tenet or Tenuit, ill; also, the Writ is Quod fecit vastum, and being in
her right, it should have been fecerunt vastum. But by Co. 1. Inst. this Wast
is dispunishable by her death: otherwise, if it had been a term for years. Co.
1. Inst. 54. P. Note, the Estate was made to the use of the Wife for Life, yet
Action lies. Sackervil against Bagnell. Con. to Dr. and Student. Co. 3. Cro.
356. 357.

In wast, the plaintiff prayed a writ of Etrepement against the Tenant and his
Servants, and at last a Warrant against both, though doubted at first, if it
lie in this Action, though it do in Writ of Entry, etc. Anderne against
Anderne. 3 Cro. 393. F. N. B. 61.

In a Writ of Entry sur disseisin done to himself, the plaintiff prayed a writ
of Etrepement, doubted if allowable, because in that Action he is to recover
Damages, but because Non constat, whether the Tenant be able to satisfy him if
he pull down his Houses; granted. Wright against Pearcy. 3 Cro. 484. 774.

Tenant in cutting three hundred Oaks, Defendant as to two hundred, justifies
that the House was ruinous, and he cut and employed them in repairs; and for
the other hundred, he cut them to have them ready to repair. Tempore opportuno,
adjudged an ill Plea on Demurrer, for so every Lessee might ^ut where there is
no Necessity. Gray against Stanfeild. 3 Cro. 593. vid. 498. 499.

Want, the writ was general, and that the woman held etc. ex dimissione A. her
former Husband, and counted that A. enfeoffed B. to the intent a Rocovery be
had against him to the use of A. for Life, Remainder to the woman for Life,
which was done accordingly, and for this Judgment against the Plaintiff, for
the writ ought to have been recited; for the Husband could not let to the Wife,
but she is in by the Husband, and so has the Estate from the Feoffee. Green
field against Dennis. 3 Cro. 722.

A. lets to B. B. assigns to C. and D.; D. assigns to E. except the Trees, then
it is enacted by Parliament, that the Heir of the Body of A. shall have the
Land, A. being dead, leaving three Daughters who took Husbands, one of them
dies, the other two and their Husbands quitt; the Tenant by the Courtesy brings
wast against C. and E. in the Term, the Term being ended, adjudged first the
Writ good, notwithstanding the settling the Estate by the Statute, without
showing the special Title; and secondly, without joining the Tenant by the
Courtesy, because he not entitled to the Damages non locum vastat: And thirdly,
the Writ supposes quod tenuerunt, which implies a Joynttenancy, now they appear
Tenants in Common, good, because the Land at first one and entire; but if wast
can be committed in the Trees, excepted by the Lessee not agreed; but in Co. 5.
Rep. adjudged it does, and the Exception void. Sir Roger Leuknor against Freed.
1 Leon. 48. 3. Cro. 17. Co. 6. Rep. 12. b.

Lessee for Life, and he in Reversion make a Lease, wast is committed, they
shall join and Tenant for Life recover Locum vastatum, and he in Reversion the
damages, Lessee for Life Sans Impeachment, etc. Wast is committed by a
Stranger, the Lessee in Trespass shall recover no Damages for the Trees cut,
but only for the Entry, for the property of the Trees remaining in the Lessor.
1 Leon. 49. Co. 1. Inst. 42. a. p. 27. H. 8. p. 36.

Lease of Lands (exceptis arboribus grossis super Praemissa crescentibus)
Trees, then little, grow great, and are cut, if wast, Semble non per Anderson;
for they were excepted, whereas great, and not only what were great at the time
of the Lease. Garrock versus Cliffe. 1 Leon. 61.

A. lets to B. for years, and during the Term, lets to C. for years by
Indenture to commence presently; B. commits wast, A. brings a Writ against B.
the Defendant cannot plead null wast, nor can he plead that the Lessor had
nothing, for the Plaintiff will estop him by the Indenture; and though the
Count be general of a Lease, and says not per Indenturam, yet a Replication
that by Indenture, is no departure, but a coroborating of the Declaration. 1
Leon. 156.

Tenant for Life is disseised, and Disseisor commits wast, he in Reversion
shall maintain an Action of wast against Tenant for Life; yet note, that by the
disseisin, the Reversion was out of him. 1 Leon. 264.

If wast be assigned in a whole wood sparsim, if the Jury have view of the
outside of the wood, it is good, without entering and viewing of every part, and
so of a house; otherwise, if the wast were assigned in certain part of the
wood, or Rooms in the house, 1 Leon. 267.

Feoffment to the use of himself and wife for Life, Remainder to his own Heir;
he dies, she commits wast, the Writ must be general, Quas tenet de hereditate,
etc. and non ex dimissione, for she comes in by the Statute. 2 Leon. 222. vid.
Co. Entr. 706. Pl. 9. 700. Pl. 7.

Feoffment to the use of A. for Life, without Impeachment of wast, and power to
cut and sell Trees, and make Leases; Remainder for Life to B. with the same
power. Latch 163. 268. Poph. 193. 706. Pl. 9. A. makes a Lease, and dies,
quaere, whether B. may cut the Trees, not agreed; but' it is agreed, that the
Clause Sans Impeachment gave an Interest, and A. might have done what he would
with the Trees, but not his Executor after his Death, because it was an
Interest annexed to his Estate, and determined with it: the doubt of the
Remainder chiefly seems to be because the Lease arises partly out of the first
Feoffment, and partly of the Lessors Estate for Life. Note, the Lease was
excepted, the Trees and the Exception good, because Tenant for Life had an
Interest by the Sans Impeachment. Secherval versus Dale. Latch 163. 268. etc.
as before.

Lessor brings wast against Lessee for Trees of the Plaintiff, the Lessor
himself cut them; it is a good Bar, and therefore in Trespass by the Lessee
against Lessor for the cutting, he shall recover only for the Fruit and Shade,
because not charged over, as if a Stranger had cut them he should. Co. 13. r.
96. 70. M. 10. H. 7. Pl. 3. 2 E. 4. 2. or 7. b.

In wast for digging Gravel, Defendant justifies by. Command of the Lessor, no
plea, for it is the Lessee's Land pur temps, not the Lessors, so he could not
command him; also, it is per parol, and without Deed, and against the Tenant for
Life, yet dict. such a Command to cut Trees, good, because not the Lessee's but
Lessor's: and that is agreed in Co. 11. R. 48. b. H. 2. H. 7. Pl. 20. M. 10. H.
7. Pl. 3.

Feoffee to use, Cestuy que use, makes a lease for years, according to the
Statute R. 3. The Reversion remains in the Feoffee, for the Statute does but
give Authority to Cestuy que use to dispose; as where one wills that his
Executor shall sell, if Lessee commits wast, the Feoffee shall bring the
Action, tho no Privity; because they could not have any; so shall the Lord in
Escheate maintain Wast, yet he had not Privity. Mi. 5. H. 7. Pl. 11. H. 8. H.
7. Pl. 1. Tr. 26. H. 8. Pl. 131. or 31.

It Is wast to pull down, or suffer a wall to go to Ruin, be it made of Wood,
Mud, or Stone, or be it within the house for Separation, or without for
Enclosure; so to destroy wood of hasle or willow, not to cut them Husbandly. To
cut Fruit Trees in an Orchard, and destroy them, is wast, not if they grow in
Hedges and Closures: and if a house be ruinous at the Entry, it is no wast to
suffer it to decay; otherwise, if not ruinous at the Entry, but where it is
held, ploughing Meadows is no wast, it is no Law. Hob. 234. Ow. 66. M. 10. H. 7.
Pl. 3. 4.

In an Action of Wast in the Tenuit, an Accord is a good Plea, because only
damages to be recovered, not in the Tenuit, because locum vastatum is to be
recovered also. Co. Entr. 706. 707. Pl. 9. H. 11. H. 7. Pl. 7. P. 13. H. 7. Pl.
3. Co. 6. R. 44. a.

Upon Scire facias of a Judgment in wast, one may have a Writ of Estrepement,
or in any Suit where no Damages are to be recovered; but not Scire facias, of
wast committed after the first Scire facias, because he might have had
Estrepement at first: But for wast after Estrepement, a Scire facias lies to
show Cause why he committed the wast; and a Scire facias lies in Assise for
wast done after Judgment, not before Judgment, because he cannot recover
Damages for its after verdict, but in a Formedon not; because he might have had
Estrepement, and Pl. 20. Error of a Judgment in Assise, and the Piaintiff in
the Error prayed an Estrepement, and could not have it, because he may, (it
seems) have Scire facias for damages done after the Judgment, etc. But
questioned, per Fennel, because, by the Statute he finds Security in the Writ
specified, to answer for all the Damages. Mich. 14. H. 7. Pl. 20. but vid. 32
or 33 H. 6. b. a. In Scire facias of a Fine Estrepement lies.

Lessee does wast in a corner of a Wood only, the part, not the whole, shall be
recovered; but if he do in the whole Wood, and there be plots of ground within
the Wood; that shall be recovered with the Wood. Tsin. 15. H. 7. Pl. 21.

Furnaces, Fatts, Posts, Rails, etc. fixed to the Freehold by Lessee for
years, it is h^ld by some, that if he remove them during the Term, it is no Wast,
quod qu. But agreed, that if he leave them there till the Term ended, he cannot
remove them. Vid. 42 E. 3. 6. a. 6. M. 20. H. 7. Pl. 24. Trin. 21. H. 7. Pl. 4.
Owen 70.

Lease, Absque impetitionc vasti, in Wast he shall plead that in Excuse; but if
the Lease at first were given, and then a grant after that he shall not be
punished in Wast; it is not pleadable in Bar, but to bind as a Covenant. Vide
diverse such Cases, 21 H. 7. 30.

Tenant for life grants his Estate to one Parcener in Reversion, and her
Husband, it is no Surrender; and if the Baron and Feme do wast, the other Sister
shall bring a Writ in all their names, and the Baron and Feme shall be summoned
and severed. M. 2. H. 7. Pl. 60.

In wast by Lessor, the Lessee pleads not guilty, and gives in Evidence, a
grant to cut etc. to repair etc. And per Brook, Pollard, and Elliot, it was no
wast, but ought to have been pleaded, and not given in Evidence, for thereby
the Advantage thereof is lost, Ad quod Bradnet concessit, but held it wast, but
not punishable Wast; and he held, that if a Lessor covenant to repair, and do
not, Lessee may do it; and deduct it out of the Rent. And if one covenant to
repair a ruinous house, if he do not, it is wast, but he may take Trees, else it
had not; yet, in that case he might have repaired it, and taken Trees to do it,
though not bound to do it. And at Common law; Lessee might take Boots, but if
excessive, it is Wast; Lessee suffers Posts, Pales, etc. to decay, it is wast.
Trin. 12. H. 8. Pl. 1. or 4.

Wills.
WIlls and Testaments were originally proved at the Common Law, as Perkins
confesses. and Leonard says, they are by the Courtesy of England proved in the
Spiritual Court, not de communi jure, nor in other Nations; and in diverse
Manors, the Lords have the Probate at this day. Co. 5. Rep. 73. b. 16. a. 9.
Rep. 38. a. 5. Rep. 30. b.

Issue at Common Law, for Lands devised by Will, and the question, whether a
Will or not; and now they moved at the Spiritual Court to it, which will
blemish the Evidence at the Common Law; wherefore, prohibition prayed, but
granted only quoad the lands, and that it be proved quoad bona. Hill against
Thornton. 1 Cro. 118.

Debt on a Bond, conditioned, he permit his Wife to make a Will to the value of
50 l. and it is found on Issue, Nullum fecit voluntatem, etc. that she did make
a Will of 50 l. but was covert, it is for the Plaintiff; for, though properly a
Feme-Covert can make no Will in Law, yet it is a Will within the Intent of the
Condition, and the Husband is bound to perform it. Marriot verse. Kinsman. 1
Cro. 159. And so Tilly and Parryes Case, 273, 274. Bond to pay 300 l. to such
Persons and U^es as the Wife should appoint* she appoints in form of a Will, he
is bound to pay it. And 433 Bond to permit her to make a Will, and pay, etc.
Plea that he permitted, etc. without pleading payment, not good.

Action upon the Case, lies not for Non-payment of a Legacy, for no Duty in our
Law, so it cannot take notice of the wrong in Non payment. Mich. 18. Car. 2.
Nicholson against Sherman, in Banco Regis.

Bond conditioned, that the Wife shall make a Will of 300 l. in presence of the
Husband, if he will be present, if not, in his Absence; she makes it (and it
appears not that he was requested to be, or that he was, present) of 250 l. to
several persons, and not an entire Legacy; yet, after Verdict the Plaintiff had
Judgment: for, the Intent was, that she should make a Will whether he would, or
not; and she needed not devise all to one, nor devise the whole 300 l. for Cui
licet quod majus, etc. Mich. 14. Car. 2. Harris against Bury, in Banco Regis.

Debt by A. as Executor, the Defendant prays Oyer of the Will, which was thus;
Memorandum, Quod A. B. fecit Testamentum Nuncupativum in hunc modum, viz.
Constituit C. D. fore Executorem suum. And this was under Seal of the Ordinary,
and resolved a good Will, and he Executor, and well able to sue; and so was it
decided upon Appeal to the Delegates. Mich. 16. Car. 2. Lewis against Shaw, in
B. R.

Witnesses.
HE that is attainted of a false Verdict, Conspiracy, or convicted of Perjury;
Praemunire, or Forgery upon 5 Eliz. or Felony, or that has stood in the Pillory,
lost his Ears, been stigmatized, etc. whereby he becomes infamous, or Recreant
in a Writ of Right, or an Infidel, under Age of Discretion, or interessed,
ought not to be a Witness, nor a man's Wife for or against her Husband. But one
outlawed in personal Actions may be a witness Co. 1. Inst. 6. b. 25. J. K.

Witnesses are not to prove a Negative. ibid.

Where Trial is by Witnesses, there ought to be two at the least. ibid.

A Juror may give Evidence as a Witness to his Companions, but it must be
publicly, by Examination in Court, not privately to his Fellows. Styles Rep.
233.

Bail for the Defendant being a Witness for him, upon motion was taken off the
File, and new Bail filed. Idem. 385.

A Felon that has been burned in the hand, may be a Witness, for he may
purchase, and his Punishment has satisfied his Offense. Idem 385.

In Ejectment, he that had the Inheritance of the Land was admitted as a
Witness, where note, the Plaintiff and Defendant both claimed under one person.
Idem 482.

A Counselor at Bar being examined as a Witness for his Clyent, was denied to
be examined on the other side; for he shall not be put to discover the Secrets
of his Clyents Cause. Idem 449.

Debt on 5 Eliz. 9. because the Wife did not appear, whereas he served her, and
tendered to her, her Charges, etc. to his Damage. And though not laid what
Damage, yet being for the 10 l. upon the Statute, not for his damages for her
not appearing, and a Feme Covert being within the Statute, 'twas held good
enough. 3 Cro. 130. 1 Leon. 122. Note, she being the person who was to appear,
the Charges are to be tendered to her or her Husband. Iidem ibid.

Debt for 10 l. against a Witness, that being Subpena^d, appeared not; moved
first, it is not showed that the Subpena was left; resolved, it needs not, for
it might be for more Witn^sses. 2. There was but 12 d delivered, but resolved,
since he promised to pay the rest, and the Witness accepted the 2 d. it is good,
else the Witness had not been b^^nd 'till the whole Charges had been tendered.
But thirdly, because he av^rred not that he was damnified by the Nonappearance
of the Witness, though the Action be but for the ten pound P^nalty, and not for
the Damages over. R^^olved, it lies not. 1 Cro. 376. 388.

Judgment staid, because the Verdict was had upon the Testimony of one Witness,
and he since convict of P^rjury in the very same thing. Pasch. 17. Car. 2.
Banco Regis.

In Deceit for forging a Will, one that took a Legacy by the same Will, was
allowed and sworn as a Witness in a Trial for the Forgery; for this makes
nothing to the Probate of the Will, or Recovery of the Legacy in the Spiritual
Court, nor do they take notice of it.

Moved to examine a material Witness that lay dying; and it was said by the
Court, that if the adverse party did consent, it might be done, else they could
not compel him. Mich. 13. Car. 2. B. R.

A Councellor may be examined as a Witness against his Clyent, so far as it is
of his own Knowledge, not what he knows by the revealing of his Clyent. Pasc.
15. Car. 2. B. R.

One shall not justify what he heard an other say. ibid.

In an Indictment for beating one of the King's Messengers, the Witnesses for
the Defendant were sworn, because, though against the King and criminal, yet
not Capital. Pasch. 17. Car. 2. B. R.

One that was a Witness indorsed to the Livery upon a Feoffment, having part of
the Lands as Tenant at Will, was allowed as a Witness in the Trial on the
Feoffment, afterward in a Trial at Bar. Bulstrodes Rep. 202.

A Person attainted of Felony, though afterward pardoned by the King, is
incapable after of being a Witness, and therefore a Suggestion being proved
only by two such, a Consultation was granted. 2 Bulstr. 154.

Words.
TO say of a Woman, that J. S. did beget her with Child, and she had a Child by
him; by speaking whereof, she lost a Marriage with I. D. Although these words
are a Spiritual Slander, yet the loss of Marriage is Temporal, and therefore
the Action lies for them. Co. 4. 16. b. Ann Davis against Gardner, adjudged.

So if a Man says of a Woman, that J. S. had the use of her Body, by which she
loses her Marriage, an Action lies. Pasch. 5. Jac. B. R. Dame Morison against
Case, adjudged.

If a man says to J. S. Thou art a Whore-Master, for thou have lain with B's
Wife, and had to do with her against a Chest. By which he lost his Marriage
with A. D. etc. I. S. shall have an Action for these words. 2 Cro. 323. Mathews
Case. Mich. 12. Jac. B. R. Sell against Fairee, per Cur.

To say to a Woman, Thou art a Whore, I will mar thy Marriage, by which she
loses her Marriage, an Action lies. Trin. 22 Jac. B. R. Tonson against Spring;
adjudged upon Arrest of Judgment.

In Action upon the Case, if the Plaintiff declare that she has many Wooers to
marry her, and that the Defendant said of her, She is with Child, and has
taken Physic for it; whereby, she came into Disgrace, Et perdidit consortium
vicinorum suorum, etc. Although that it be not alleged, that she lost any
Marriage thereby, yet the Action lies. Mich. 21. Jac. B. R. Medhurst against
Balam; adjudged in Arrest of Judgment.

If a man says to an other; Thou wast found in Bed with J. S. his Wife; by
reason of the speaking of which words, he lost his Marriage with A. S. etc.
Although that he might be in Bed with her, without any ill done, yet because
that it sounds in Disgrace, and he has lost his Marriage by it, the Action
lies. Mich. 8. Car. B. R. Southal against Dawson; adjudg'd in Arrest of
Judgment.

If the Plaintiff in an Action of the Case for words, declare, that the
Defendant said of him, He had the use of my Wife's Body by Force; by reason of
which words, he was brought before certain Justices, etc. and examined by them,
for a Rape committed by him upon the said Woman, whereupon to purge himself
thereof, he expended diverse Sums of Money; an Action lies upon this Deelaration
for the temporal Dimage he had thereby. Mich. 9. Car. B. R. Harris against
Smith; adjudged upon Writ of Error.

In Action upon the Case, if the plaintiff declares, that in London, by the
Custom, a Common Whore ought to be carted, and a Basin rung before her; And
that the Defendant spoke these words of the Plaintiff, Thou art a Whore, and a
common Whore, and art a Bawd to thy Mistress, and I will have a Basin tinged
before thee; the Action well lies upon this Declaration for these Words. Trin.
15. Car. B. R. Hassell against Capcot; adjudged in Arrest of Judgment.

In Action upon the Case, if the Plaintiff declare, that in London there is a
Custom, that a Bawd ought to be carted; and the Defendant said these words of
the Plaintiff, She is a Bawd, and I will have her carted. Hill. 15 Car. B. R.
Riley against Jews; adjudged in Arrest of Judgment.

If the Plaintiff declares in an Action upon the Case, that whereas he was a
Parishoner of S. the Defendant being Vicar there, to the intent to scandalize
the plaintiff, and to create an evil opinion of the plaintiff among his
Neighbors, so that they Abstraherent seipsos a consortio of the plaintiff,
tanquam ab homine excommunicato, and nulla fide aut credentia digno, and to
exclude the Plaintiff injustly from the Church, and for a long time, to deprive
him of the benefit of hearing divine Service in the said Church; the Defendant
in time of divine Service in the Church in the hearing of the parishioners
maliciously pronounced, the plaintiff excommunicated, Praetextu cujusdam
Instrumenti, by him received from the Ordinary, whereas he never had any such
Instrument of Excommunication, nor was he excommunicated. And also at another
time to the same Intent aforesaid, in time of Divine Service in the hearing of
the parishoners maliciously pronounced the plaintiff excommunicated, and
refused farther to celebrate divine Service, until the plaintiff departed out
of the Church; whereupon, the plaintiff was compelled to go out of the Church,
whereas the plaintiff was not excommunicated; whereby the plaintiff was
scandalized, and hindered from hearing Divine Service for a long time, and for
the clearing of this Scandal, and of his Innocence therein, Diversos corporis
sui grandes labores capere, and diversas ingentes denariorum summas errogare
and exponere coactus fuit, in extremam depauperationem and ignominium maximum
of the plaintiff. This Action lies, notwithstanding he does not show that any
person did avoid his Company, or refused to trade or deal with him; and
notwithstanding he does not set forth any temporal or spiritual loss: for it is
a great Scandal and malicious, tho to his Soul, and spiritual. Mich. Car. B. R.
Barnabas against Traunter. Adjudged in Arrest of Judgment.

If a man says of another, who has lands by descent, That he is a Bastard, an
Action upon the Case lies, for it tends to his Disinheritance, and disturbance
by Suit. Mich. 3. Jac. B. R. per Curiam.

In an Action upon the Case, if the plaintiff declare that he was Heir apparent
to his Father, and B. his Brother, and that either of them has Lands in Fee to
the value of 40 l. per annum, and that they did intend to suffer the said Lands
to descend to him, or to convey the same to him; yet the defendant intending to
disinherit the plaintiff, said to the plaintiff, Thou art a Bastard, whereby
his Father and Brother intended to disinherit him, and to convey their Lands to
another. The Action lies upon this Declaration, for the temporal damage which
might come to him thereby. Pasch. 13. Car. B. R. Humfries against Stutfield.
Adjudged in Arrest of Judgment.

Where there was Grandfather, Father, and Son, and the Son brought an Action
upon the Case, and declared that the Grandfather (whose heir he is) entailed
certain Lands upon him and the Heirs males of his Body, and the Defendant
intending to scandalize his possibility that he has to inherit this Land, as
Heir of the body of his Grandfather, said that he was a Bastard,
notwithstanding that the Grandfather and Father were alive, yet the Action
brought as above by the Son did lie. Humfries Case ubi supra.

In an Action upon the Case, if the Plaintiff declare that he exhibited
Articles in the Kings Bench against the defendant for the good abearing, and
swear the Articles to be true before Justice W. (Innuendo the said Oath taken
upon the said Articles) although it be not averred that the Oath was taken of
Record; yet the Action lies, for it shall be intended the Articles exhibited in
Court, and sworn before a Justice of the Court. Mich. 10. Car. B. R. Yolden
against Wannel. Adjudged in Arrest of Judgment.

If a man says of an other, He has written a forged Will, wherein I will
prove him salse, forsworn, and perjured, in a Will that he made of John Hunt;
an Action lies for these words, for it shall be intended, that he was perjured
in his Oath taken, touching the said Will. Hill. 12. Car. in B. R. Cowley
against Clough.

In an Action upon the Case, if the plaintiff declare, that there was a Writ to
inquire of Damages between A. and B. in a Court of C. at the Sessions House,
where he was sworn to give Evidence according to his Knowledge; and afterward
the Defendant said of him, He is a forsworn Rogue, in taking an Oath at the
Sessions House; an Action lies for these words, although it was objected in
Arrest of Judgment, that if he swore falsely before an Inquest of Office, it is
not within the Statute of 5 Eliz. for admit it were not, yet they all agreed,
that for such forswearing; at the common Law he may be indicted; and therefore,
if it be out of the Statute, yet an Action lies for this Slander. Mich. 13.
Car. Pruer against Moadman.

If a man says of an other, He is a Perjurer, he swore once for me, and the
second time has perjured himself with J. S. (a Stranger) Action lies. Mich. 9.
Car. in Camera Scaccarii. Adjudg'd in Writ of Error.

If a man says of J. S. I will prove J. S. forsworn, and that ten men can
justify; and I could prove him perjured if I would. The Action lies not for
the first words, but it lies for the latter; for it is a great Slander, to be
reputed that it is in the power of any man to prove him perjured. Pasch. 5.
Jac. B. R. Whitacre against Loverden per Cur.

If a man says to another, [I did not know that Mr. W. was your Brother, he
has forfworn himself, and I will prove him perjured or else I will bear his
Charges.] Action lies for these words, although they are spoken conditionally
to bea^ his Charges, if he did not prove him perjured. Mich. 37. 38 Eliz.
Woodroffs Case adjudged.

If a man says of an other, That he was perjured, and he would prove him so by
two Witnesses. Action lies for these words, although he does not say in what
Court he was perjured, or how. Trin. 39. Eliz. B. R. Rayners case adjudged.

If a man says to an other, Thou wast perjured in a Court of Tottenham, Action
lies, for it shall be intended a sufficient Court to hold Plea. Pasch. 40. El.
B. R.

If a man says to another, Thou art a forsworn Knave, and wast indicted by
twelve men, and have compounded for it, Action lies, for all being laid
together, it appears that he intended a Perjury in a Court of Record. Mich. 1.
Car. Gilbertin against Row; adjudged in Arrest of Judgment.

If a man says to another, Thou art a forsworn Knave, and I will prove thee
forsworn in the Ecclesiastical Court. Action lies for these words, for the
Ecclesiastical Court is a Court known. Pasch. 40. Eliz. B. R. Shaw's Case,
adjudged.

To say to a man, Thou art a Whore master; or to a Woman, Thou art a Whore; no
Action lies, because that it is merely spiritual, without any temporal loss.
Trin. 11. Jac. B. R. Matthew against Croze, per Curium. 2 Cro. 323.

To say of married man He has had two Bastards thirty six years agone, and he
should pay for keeping of them: no Action lies, although he aver that by force of
those words there was Contention between him and his Wife, and he was in danger
to be divorced, for there is not any temporal Loss, and the Offense was
pardoned by many general Pardons, it being 36 years before. Pasch. 16. Jac. B.
R. Randal against Beal; adjudged in Arrest of Judgment.

He had a Bastard-child by Jennings his Wife of Northampton; by speaking of
which words, the Plaintiff says in his Declaration, that he refused to marry
with A. S. whereas it ought to be, that A. S. refused to marry with him. The
Action lies not. Mich. 11. Car. B. R. Carters Case, per Cur'.

If a man says to a Feme Covert, Thou bold Cullobine-bastard-bearing Whore,
thou did throw thy Bastard into the Dock at White Chapel; no Action lies for
these words, although it may be intended that she had a Bastard by the said
Cullobine, (who in truth was her husband) before Marriage; inasmuch as there
appears not to be any temporal damage by it, by loss of any Marriage; but only
a Punishment by the Statute, for having a Bastard, which is not sufficient
cause to maintain the Action. Hill. 10. Car. B. R. Cullobine and ux' against
Vinor; adjudged in Arrest of Judgment.

In an Action upon the Case, if the plaintiff declare, that whereas diverse
persons conabantur and desiderabant, to marry their Cosins and Friends to him;
the defendant (being a woman, on purpose to scandalize the Plaintiff, and to
hinder him from marrying with any Woman) preferred a scandalous Libel against
the Plaintiff in the Spiritual Court, thereby charging him, that he under
color of being a Suitor to her in the way of Marriage, resorted often to her
in the Night, and lay with her, and begot a Child of her body, and after
published and affirmed the same matter before divedrs persons falsely and
maliciously, whereby the plaintiff was so much scandalized, that all honest
persons having the fear of God before them, aliquem mulierem de filia^us aut
consanguineis suis in legitimo Matrimonio cum quaerente copulari and jungi
semper postea and hucusque omnino recusaverunt and adhuc recusant. And upon Not
guilty pleaded, the Jury found a special Verdict, scil. that the defendant
preferred the said, Famosum and Scandalosum Libellum, etc. and that she
afterward at the Sessions of the Peace, being examined who was the Father of
the said Child begotten of her body, said and affirmed, that the Plaintiff was,
and that she did affirm it falso and injuriose of the Plaintiff, and that by
reason thereof, the Plaintiff was much scandalized in his name and Fame; and
that all honest persons having the Fear of God before them Aliquam mulierem de
filiabus and consa guineis suis in legitimo matrimonio cum quaerente copulari
and jungi semper postea hucusque rccusaverunt and adhuc recusant. The Action in
this case lies not upon this special Verdict, because here does not appear any
malicious Prosecution, and here there is not alleged or found any loss of any
particular Marriage, or that he had any Communication of any particular
Marriage; and this general matter, That all honest persons refuse by reason
thereof, to marry their Daughters or Cosins to him, is too general. Mich. 11.
Car. B. R. int^r Norman and Simons, per Cur. Adjudged in the Exchequer Chamber,
and the Judgment given e contra in B. R. reversed accordingly.

If a man says of another that has Land by Descent, that he is base born, no
Action lies; for these words taken in mitiori sensu are not actionable. Mich.
3. Jac. in B. R. per Curiam.

If a man says of the Son and Heir apparent of J. S. that he is a Bastard, no
Action lies, because he has no prejudice by it yet. Mich. 3. Jac. in B. R. per
Curiam.

If a man says to a woman, Thou had a Bastard, no Action lies, because it
does not appear thereby, that he intended that the Bastard was chargeable to
the Parish, in which Case, a corporal punishment is to be inflicted by the
Statute. Hill. 5. C^r. B. R. Lightfoot against P^got. Rot. 423. per Curiam. It
being moved in Arrest of Judgment, and the plaintiff never had Judgment in it.
Mich. 1650 inter Winter and Barnard ^djudged.

In Action upon the Case for words, the plaintiff, Thomas B^owne, declares,
that one A. G. had a Bastard Son begotten of her Body, then living; the
Defendant knowing it, of his Malice to defame him, and to bring him in danger
of the Statute of 18 Eliz. having Speech of the said Bastard, and of the
plaintiff, said of the Plaintiff, that Brown is the reputed Father of that
Child, whereby he was greatly prejudic^d in bargaining and selling, and put to
great Expenses for the clearing of himself in hac part; the Action lies not
for these words upon this Declaration, because it is not said by the plaintiff,
that he was to be punished by the said Statute, for he was not to have corporal
punishment, or to be imprisoned, unless the Bastard be some charge to the
Parish. Hill. 11. Car. B. R. inter Salter and Brown. Adjudged in Writ of Error.

In an Action upon the Case for scandalous words, if the plaintiff declare that
the Defendant said these words of the plaintiff, being a Feme sole, viz. This
is that Whore that my man A. got a Bastard by, and withal, spent all my money.
And being asked by an other person standing by, whether he were not mistaken,
for the Maid has been but little above a year in Town; the defendant replied,
The Queen has been too long to my Cost. No Action lies for these words, for to
say that a Woman had a Bastard is no cause of Action Trin. 1651. Inter Owen and
Jevan. Adjudged in Arrest of Judgment.

If a man says of another, He was the true Patron of the Advows^n of S. but he
has lost that Patronage and Presentation, by being a Symonist and a Recusant,
both which I will prove him to be; yet no Action lies, for by the Symony only
comes the loss of the Presentation, pro hac vice by the Temporal Law, and the
Recusancy only touches him in Religion; sor it does not appear that he intends
him to be a Recusant, according to the Statute. Trin. 16. Jac. B. R. Sir John
Tasborough's Case adjudged in Arrest of Judgment.

I^ a man says of an other, He has forsworn himself; no Action lies for these
words. Pasch. 40. Eliz. B. R.

To say to a man, Thou have forsworn thy self Leak Court, no Action lies,
without showing what manner of Court it is, because that it cannot be intended
nor known whether it be such a Court as may compel one to swear or not. Mich 8.
Jac. B. R. Inter Law and Bennet, per Curiam.

If a man says of an other, He did forswear me (ineuendo the plaintiff) 46 s.
worth of Tithes in Canterbury Court, no Action lies for these words, for there
are diverse Courts in Canterbury, and it is not shown in what Court, nor before
what Judge, nor that the Judge had Authority to hold Plea of Tithes. Pasch. 43.
Eliz. B. R. Inter Bray and Partridge adjudged.

If a man say of J. S. I had not been cast in that Action if it had not been
for the Oath of J. S. and he was forsworn; and I marvel that B. would marry his
Daughter to such a forsworn man. In an Action upon the case for these words, if
the Plaintiff aver that there was an Issue between him and A. and that, Ad
Curiam Baronis de Geton Soca Domini Regis tenta apud S. in Comitatu praedicto.
He himself was produced as a Witness, and sworn about the matter of the Issue;
and afterward, the defendant having Communication of this Issue, spoke the
words aforesaid. No Action lies upon this Declaration, because that it is not
alleged, that S. is within the Soke of Geton, and so peradventure, the Court
was held out of their Jurisdiction; and also, because that it is not alleged
that he was sworn about a matter pertinent to the Issue. Mi^h. 11. Jac. B. R.
Inter Crawford and Brice, adjudged.

If a man says of an other, he is a forsworn Knave, for he swore that the wood
was worth 40 s. where it was dear of 13 s. 4 d. No Action lies for those words,
though he aver, that there was Communication between them of the matter at the
Assizes, where the Plaintiff was sworn as a Witness, because that he did not
say directly, that the Wood was not worth 40 s. but that it was dear of 13 s. 4
d. Also, it does not appear, that the Defendant intended it sworn at the
Assizes. Hill. 13. Jac. B. R. Inter Stephen Apthorpe and Cockerel, adjudged.

If a man says to an other, Thou were forsworn in B Court, which is but a
Court Baron, no Action lies, because it is no Court of Record. Pasch. 8. Jac.
in Scaccario. Inter Perie and Rock, agreed per Curiam.

If a man says to another, Thou art forsworn, and did take a false Oath at
the Assizes at Hereford, against J. S. No Action lies for these words, without
an Averment, that it was at a Trial or before the Court or Jury; for it might
be at the Assizes in a private house, or other place. Pasch. 15. Car. B. R.
Inter Prichard and Smith. Adjudged per Curiam.

If a man says to an other, Thou deservest to be hanged, no Action lies for
these Words, because it only expresses his Opinion and Judgment of him. Trin.
4. Jac. Inter Hake and Molton, adjudged.

If a man says to J. S. Thou art a scurvey bad Fellow, and have done that thou
deservest to be hanged. No Action lies. Mich. 11. Car. B. R. inter Fisher and
Atkinson; adjudged per Cur. in arrest of Judgment. after Verdict for the
plaintiff.

If a man says to another, You are no true Subject to the King, no Action lies
for these words, because they are too general; for it might be, he had not paid
his Taxes, Mich. 5. Jac. B. R. inter Smith and Turner, adjudged.

If a man says to another, Thou art a Rogue, and an arrant Rogue, and I will
prove thee to be a Rogue; no Action lies. Mich. 41. and 42. Eliz. B. R.
adjudged.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
Abatement. WHERE the Death of one of the Parties, after Summons and Severans,
shall abate the Writ, and where not. page 1, 2. What shall be a good Plea to a
Writ, what not. p. 2, 3. In what Cases the Writ shall abate de facto. p. 4.
What Pleas shall abate the Writ in the whole. and what in part. p. 5* 6, 7, 8,
9, What Pleas in Abatement go only to the person, and what to the Writ or
A^tion. p. 9, 10. How matters of Record shall be pleaded in Abatement. p. 12.
13. Who shall be admitted to plead in Abatement, who not. p. 14. Where the Writ
abates in part by the Act of the Court, and where by the Parties Confession. p.
15, 16. That a Defendant or Tenant cannot abate a Writ by his own Act, but the
Act of the Plaintiff or Demandant, Act of God, or of an Estranger may abate the
Writ. p. 17, 18, 19, 20.
Ab Initio. Where the Grant shall be good Ab Initio, although it was uncertain
at the Commencement. p. 20, 21, 22, 23. Able and Disable. Where an Obligee was
able at the time of the making the Obligation, and afterward disabled by his
own Act, and e contra. p. 23, 24. Acceptance. Where it shall be no Prejudice to
the Acceptor. p. 24. Action. Where the principal thing is divested, yet the
Plaintiff shall have an Action, which is accrued to him, by reason thereof,
ibid. Where the Husband shall have an Action without naming his Wife, and where
not. p. 25, 26, 27, 29, 33, 34. Where the Plaintiff has Election to bring his
Action against the Heir or Executor. p. 27. Bill teneri etc. in 20. l. solvend.
in Watches, Action shall be brought for the Money, not the Watches; but if the
number had been expressed, contra. p. 28. Assault and Battery and Ejectment,
will both lie in one Declaration. ib. Of bringing Actions of Trespass, and what
words are most proper to be used therein, upon several occasions. p. 28, 29.
How Executors, and Executors of Executors, shall sue and be sued. p. 29. Of
bringing Actions of Covenant. p. 30, 31, 32. Of Infants bringing their Actions.
p. 32, 33. Where several things may be put into one Declaration. p. 35. Of
bringing Actions upon the Statute. ib. Where a man shall have an Action against
his own Deed. p. 36, 37, 38. Where a man has good cause of Action sometimes,
and yet by matter ex post facto, and by the Action of a Stranger his Action is
destroyed. p. 38, 39. Of bringing Actions upon the Case, Sur assumpsit. p. 40,
41.
Amendment. In what Cases the Court will suffer an Original Writ, Venire
Facias, Quare Impedit, Habeas Corpora, or Writ of Nisi prius, etc. to be
amended. p. 43. to 51. Misprisions of the Clerk, no Errors; shall be amended.
p. 45, 46.
Appearance. The Defendant having given Bond to the Sheriff to appear, if
supersedeas comes to the Sheriff before day of Appearance, yet he must appear
to save his Bond. p. 51. By W. 2. a man of 70 not bound to appear upon Juries.
ibid.
Annuity. Grantee in Annuity pro Consilio, etc. not bound to give Counsel to
the Grantor, unless required. p. 51. How to declare in Annuity. p. 52.
Arbitrament. Where good, where not. p. 52, 53. Audita Querela. Brought by an
Infant who was non-pros'd, and why. p. 53, 54. It lies upon Nihil Facias, not
Scire Facias. ibid. Brought by Conusor in Stat. Merch. against Administrator of
Executor of the Conusee, after Release. p. 54.
Avowry. Avowry for Amercement in Court Baron, ill, and why. ibid. Set forth in
Avowry, that Dean and Chapter were seized in Jure Ecclesiae (not saying in Fee)
ill, and why. ibid. Pleading in Avowry, Damage fesant, and on a new grant. p.
55. Exceptions to an Avowry, by an Executor. ibid. Costs to Avowant. ibid.
Judgment for Avowant reversed, and why. p. 56. The Lord has Election to avow
at Common Law, or upon the Statute, and which most beneficial. ibid. Avowry for
two Sums nomine penae, without alleging Demand of Rent, insufficient, etc.
ibid. Donee aliens, Donor cannot avow upon Alienee. ibid. Avowry adjudged ill
upon Demurrer, and why. ibid. Stranger to Avowry shall plead nothing but horse
de son fee, or matter tantamount. p. 57. Stranger to Avowry cannot disclaim,
nor any person in auter droit. ibid. Five things to be known in Avowries. p.
58, 59. Where, in Avowries the Defendant shall answer to the Seisin, and where
he shall traverse. p. 61. Where the Effect of the Fee shall be traversed. p.
62.
Bail. UPON Latitat. 64. Upon Capias, ib. for Husband and Wife, ib. Upon Writ
of Error. p. 65. Difference of being Bail in King's Bench, and Common Pleas.
ibid. Bail sells his Lands, if chargeable. p. 66. If one puts in Bail to a
Debt, in C. B. and be afterward arrested in London for the same Debt, he shall
have an Attachment. ib.
Bankrupt. Creditors (after refusal) may upon Tener of their Proportions
toward the Charge of the Commission, be received to have their parts, as other
Creditors, if no Distribution has been made of the Bankrupt's Estate before.
ibid. Commissioners may sell Bankrupt's Goods, if by him before disposed to his
Creditors, after he became Bankrupt. ibid. They may sell his Copyhold Lands.
p. 67. Two brought Debt jointly, as assigned to them by Commissioners, per Cur.
they ought to have assigned pro rata to every Creditor. ibid. A Bankrupt cannot
sell his own Goods after he becomes Bankrupt, but Goods which he has as
Executor, or a Legacy before it be invested in him, or a Grant of a Reversion
before Entry, he may. ibid.
Bar. A man may be barred pro tempore, and yet afterward he shall have his
Action. p. 68. To plead a thing by way of Bar or Estoppel, which the Demandant
or Plaintiff is to defeat or destroy by the Usage of his Action, is no good
Plea. ibid. Of pleading Recoveries in Bar. p. 69. Where a man demands a Debt,
or any thing by Deed, he shall not be barred, but by Deed, or something of as
high Nature. p. 70. Where a man shall plead a Bar which shall comprehend one
matter in Fact, and where it shall comprehend more, p. 71. Of Bars perpetual,
ibid.
Cinque Ports. HOW Lands shall be extended in the Cinque Ports, p. 72. Customs
and Prescriptions. Customs against Canon Law, how to be tried, p. 72. Customs
payable to the King by the Common Law, and why, ibid. Difference between malum
in se and malum prohibitum, ibid. Bailiff ought not to sell Goods taken in
Execution for Debt or Damages in a Court Baron, but impound, and keep them as
Pledges, till the Defendant makes his Agreement; but where the Court has used
to award a Levari Facias, it is good by Custom, p. 73. Custom of Borough
English. ibid. Custom for the Court of King's Bench, every Term to send the
Coroner to the Marshal, to view the Prisoners, that the Coroner might mark the
Names of those were wanting in his Book, and inform the Court thereof, who
would record their Escape against the Marshal, as an Abuse of his Office, and
cause of Forfeiture, ibid. The Law and Usage of the Realm, concerning Aliens,
and their Issue, p. 74. Custom of London concerning Feme sole Merchant, ibid.
Custom and Usage binding to particular places, ibid. In what Cases the Custom
of the Realm is the Common Law, ibid. Prescription what, and how to be
alleged, p. 75, 76, 77. Profit Apprendre cannot be claimed by Custom in the
Lands of another, except in Cases of Necessity, p. 77. Where a man may have an
Action upon the Case, for a Tort, and where he must prescribe and show his
Title, p. 78. How and where Customs pro bono privato, and pro bono publico, are
to be alleged, ibid How Copyholders ought to allege Customs,. ibid. Of
alleging Customs in particular places, p. 79. In what manner Customs shall be
pleaded, ib. Of Prescription by Parishoners, ib. 80. Custom of England
concerning Innkeepers, ib. Of Tithes. ibid. No Prescription of Lands makes a
Right, but of Rents or Profits it does, p. 81. Women may prescribe to be
endowed of a moiety of the Lands of her Husband, but not of the Rent, ibid.
Gavelkind Lands shall escheat, if the Father abjure, or be outlawed for Felony,
ibid. Every Custom against Common Law shall be taken strickly, ibid.
Debt. SEE variety of Pleading in Debt, from 81. to 104. Detinue. Inter-pleader
in Detinue, p. 104. Upon general Issue in Detinue, that which would make a
special Bar, cannot be given in Evidence, or if found by the Jury is it
material, p. 105. Detinue will lie of Chartres not specially and particularly
named what they are, ibid. Improper words in Detinue, adjudged good enough
after Verdict. Disclaimers and Discontinuances of
Actions. Action of Covenant discontinued after Judgment, and Writ of Inquiry,
by Rule of Court, p. 106. Action of Tresp. in three Towns, and mentions but two
Towns where it was committed, the whole is discontinued, ibid. So in Debt, for
that the Writ was 10. l. 6. s. 8. d. and the Declaration but 10. l. ib. So if
the Declaration be of several things, and it be discontinued as to one, it
shall be discontinued as to all, ibid. Debt brought against two Jointly and
Severally bound, it being discontinued against, one did abate against both,
ibid. In what Cases (where two Persons bring their Action) the Nonsuit of one
shall not be the Nonsuit of them both, and e contra, p. 107. If after Verdict
for the Avowant in Replevin the Plea be discontinued, and he sues a Scire
Facias, the Plaintiff may plead a Release of the Avowant, after Verdict of all
Actions, or other matter to discharge himself, ibid. Trespass, Defendant pleads
two Pleas, Plt' demurrs to one, and does not plead over to the other, it is a
discontinuance, ibid. In Pr. quod reddat, if the Tenant disclaims, the Judgment
shall be, that the Demandant nihil capiat per breve, p. 108. Writ of Inquiry
awarded upon Disclaimer in Replevin, ibid. No man can disclaim against a
Termor, ib. Husband and Wife cannot disclaim in Avowry, ibid. In Replevin the
Defendant avows upon the Plaintiff, and he disclaims to it, he shall not be
received, 109. He that is in of his own Wrong, shall not disclaim in a Writ of
Entry, in le quibus, ib.
Distress. If Household Goods be Distrained, they ought to be preserved in an
House from the Injury of the Weather; but if put in an open place, where they
are spoiled, the Distrainor shall not answer for them, ibid. If an Horse
Distrain'd happen to strangle himself, the Distrainor shall be punished in an
Action of Trespass, ibid. A man shall not milk a Cow he has distrained without
the Owners Consent; and if the Cow perish for want of Milking, he may distrain
again, and so be at no Damage, ibid. 110, 112. Sheriffs Officer cannot justify
breaking open Doors, to distrain for the King's Rent, much less a Landlord's,
ibid. Things distrained shall not be used, because but Pledges in Law, ibid.
Distress not to be driven out of the Hundred, or to a Pound above three Miles,
or to several Pounds, or out of the County. No Man shall distrain in the
Highway, nor drive Distress into a Castle or Hold, ib. The Tenant shall not
disturb the Landlord in taking his Distress, or hinder him of the Lawful Means
to come by his Rent, ib. Distress of a Strangers Goods for the Tenants Rent,
unlawful, ibid. Owner must bring Replevin, not break the Pound, though the
Distress be unlawful, p. 112. Where Limitation of Distress void, ibid.
Error. WHere the Plaintiff in the Action may sue out a Scire Facias against
the Executors or Administrators of the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error, p. 113.
After Writ of Error allowed, Execution upon the former Judgment shall not be
awarded, and why? ibid. Where there is Fine and Recovery of Lands, and Error in
them both, a Writ of Error cannot be brought first upon the Fine, but upon the
Recovery, ibid. In what case a Fine shall bar a Writ of Error brought of a
Recovery, p. 114.
Execution. Action lies not against the Sheriff for Escape (of a Prisoner in
Execution) in the time of his Predecessor, ibid. Sheriff may not break open
Doors to execute Fieri Facias, p. 115. Ca. sa. against Principal, returned non
est invent', then Sci. Fa. against Sureties, before the Return whereof the
Principal Surrenders his Body in Execution, allowed per Cur', ibid. Execution
granted by the Court, upon Motion, after a Writ of Error brought because the
Retorn was too long, ibid.
Estoppels and Conclusions. He who claims nothing by him that was estopped,
shall not be estopped by his Act. Where he no Reversion or Remainder, p. 115.
claims nothing by Tenant for Life, he shall not be estopped, p. 116. If a Man
pleads a Plea in which he confesses a thing that is not material, it shall not
be an Estoppel, p. 117. If a man plead a Record to Estop him that was privy, he
ought to show what end the Action had, p. 118. Where a Man has Judgment to
recover Land, by that Judgment he shall be Estopped to claim any other Title
than he has by the Recovery, ibid. Of some Estoppels, none shall have
Advantage but Parties or Privies, 120. And of some, every one shall have
advantage, ibid. Vser of Action no Estoppel to prejudice another, ibid. In what
case one shall estop another, ibid. Where I am barred of Land the Estoppel
shall pass with it; but of other Lands it shall be no Estoppel against me,
ibid. None shall be received to plead an Estoppel against another, but may be
estopped by the same Plea, and both must be Parties to the Record, otherwise
not, p. 122. In what cases a Stranger shall take Advantage by an Estoppel, p.
123.
Fines and Recoveries. SEveral Cases of Fines and Recoveries, p. 125, 126.
Heir. The manner of Suing an Heir upon a Bond entered into by his Ancestor, p.
159. Outlawries. PLeaded in Bar, and Disability, p. 161, 163, 165, 175, 177,
181, 196, 197. Reversed for several causes, p. 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 168,
170, 171, 172, 173, 178, 179, 181.
Partition. TWo Tenants in Common of a Manor, before Partition one of them is
said to have dimidium Manerii; but after Partition, medietatem Manerii, and an
Indictment of forceable Entry after Partition, it shall be Medietas, not
Dimidium Manerii, p. 183 Privilege. Lost by Chancery Clerk by suing out
Supers' in C. B. Parson. Parsonage becomes void by Acceptance of a Bishopric,
p. 183. And Acceptance of a second Benefice, makes the first void, p. 184. Tith
of things proceeding from the Earth, as Corn, Hay, etc. shall be severed upon
the Ground, but secus of Sheep, etc. ibid. What Trees are Tithable, what not,
see ibid. Parson makes parol Agreement of Tithes for his Life, afterward
grants to another who sues for them, Concord is no Plea, ibid. Simony to give
10. l. to Patron, to present Parson to next Avoidance, the Church being full,
ibid. If Parson in, by Simony, dies, shall the King present? ibid.
Pleas and Pleadings. Special non est factum, to Debt upon Bond delivered as an
Es^r^ul, whole matter pleaded, Judgment on Demurer for Plaintiff, p. 185.
Solvit ad diem pleaded specially, ibid. Recovery pleaded in Bar (ill) instead
of Execution, ibid. Bond ill dated, how to declare upon it, ibid. Acts of
Parliament and Records, how to be recited in pleading, p. 186. Where Villenage
no good Plea, ibid. Pleading must be certain, and why, ibid. Where Frankf^e no
good Plea, ibid. Where Corruption of Blood by Attainder, no good Plea, ibid. In
what case Warranty of Ancestor with Assets no good Plea in Formedon, ibid. Of
reversing Attainders, ibid. 188. Of pleading in Formedon, ibid. Attorney may
plead not informed, if no Order to the contrary, ibid. If Defendant in case
pleads to issue for part and demurrs to other part, Demurrer shall be argued
first, p. 189. Plea by Manucaptors to Sci. Fa. ill, double, etc. ibid. Plea
shall be taken most strictly against him that pleads it, ibid. Pleas ill for
Ambiguity, p. 191. For Incertainty of Intendment, ib. Impropriety of words,
ibid. Repugnancy in pleading. p. 192. Bars may be good to common Intent,
though not to every Intent, ibid. In pleading, a man shall not disclose that
which is against himself, p. 193. Repleader awarded upon non dimisit, p. 194.
Covenant to make Assurance at my Charge, it is no Plea to say he was ready to do
it, unless he tender the Writings ready to seal, and I refuse to pay the
Charges, ibid. Pleading of Judgments by Executor, adjudged upon Demurrer to
amount but to Plene Administravit specially, ibid. Administrator durante
minoritate, etc. Wasting Goods shall be punished as Executor in his own Wrong,
ibid. Administration brings Debt, and avers Administration granted at L. when
it bears date in another place, the Plaintiff shall abate, p. 195. Sci. Fa.
against two Executors, nulla bona retorn'd to both, and Devastavit to the value
of the Debt against one, and another Sci. Fa. and Judgment against him only by
default, and Fi. Fa. de bonis propriis against him alone, ibid. Two Executors,
one confesses the Action, the other lets it go by default, etc. or pleads, Non
est factum, or Plene administravit, Judgment shall be against both, de bonis
Testatoris; for diverse Executors but as one representing the Person of the
Testator, who (if living) should have made but one Answer to the Action, ibid.
After Imparlance, the Tenant cannot plead to the Writ, that the Demandant is a
Bastard, but he may plead it in Bar of the Action, p. 196. If Husband and Wife
bring Assise and Feoffment, or Release of either of them, or the Ancestor of
one of them be pleaded in Bar, both shall be barred, p. 197. Excommunication
pleaded in disability of the Plaintiff or Demandant, p. 198. Action of the
Case, wherein Legitimo modo acquietatus, is set forth, makes the Declaration
erroneous. p. 198. If a man pleads a general Act of Parliament, and mis-recite
the same, yet it shall not prejudice him, and why. p. 199. Where a thing
alleged, does confess and avoid my Plea, I may traverse it. ibid* Departure in
pleading, what. Several Cases of Departures. ibid. 200, 201, 202, 203, 204.
Quare Impedit. TO present by Turns in an Advowson in gross, the Commencement
how it came presentable by Turns, ought to be showed, per 3 Justic. 2 contra.
p. 205. Descent of three Manors to three Sisters, Advowson is Appendant to
one, Partition is made of all, except the Advowson; the Advowson seems to be in
gross pro toto, but if not excepted, it had been clear, p. 209. A Church may be
appendant, and in gross alterternis vicibus. ibid. See the Method of bringing
Writs of Quare Impedit, of counting thereon, and variety of Pleading therein.
p. 205 to 248.
Release. OF part of the Money due upon Recognizance (if not mentions the
Recognizance) shall be for so much as is paid only, and not destroy the
Recognizance, p. 248. A man bound to pay 100. l. tenders the same at the day,
he is not bound to pay the same at another day, without Acquittance or Release,
ibid.
Replevin; see Avowry. Variety of pleading in Replevin, p. 248. to 254. Scire
Facias. HOw to be brought, and pleading thereto, 254. to 261. Statute.
Observations on the Statute of 29 Car. 2. for prevention of Frauds and
Perjuries, p. 266. Trespass. WHere it lies, how to declare therein, and plead
thereto, p. 261. Wager of Law. IN what Cases Wager of Law does lie, and in what
not; what persons shall wage Law; and the manner of performing it. p. 294. to
316. Wast. Where an Action of Wast does properly lie, how it is to be brought,
and the manner of pleading to the same. p. 317. to 357. Wills. Wills and
Testaments originally proved at Common Law, 358. They are proved in the
Spiritual Court, not de Communi Jure, but by Courtesy. ibid. Prohibition
granted to the Spiritual Court, to hinder the Probate of a Will quoad Lands,
and allowing that it may be proved quoad bona. ibid. Bond conditioned, he
permit his Wife to make a Will, he is bound to perform it. ib. 350. Action upon
the Case lies not for Non-payment of a Legacy. 359. Bond conditioned that the
Wife shall make a Will of so much, in the presence of her Husband, if he will
be present, if not, in his Absence, she makes it, not requesting him to be
(neither does it appear that he was) present; yet good. ibid. Memorandum, quod
A. B. fecit Testamentum suum nuncupativum in hunc modum, viz. constituit C. D.
fore Executorem; Resolved a good Will, and he Executor, and well able to sue.
ib. 360.
Witnesses. Of the Crimes which render Persons incapable of being Witnesses. p.
360. One under the Age of Discretion, or interessed, or a man's Wife for or
against her Husband, cannot be Witnesses. ibid. One outlawed in personal
Actions, may be ^ Witness. ibid. Witnesses are not to prove a Negative. ib.
Where Trial is by Witnesses, there ought to be two at the least. ibid. A Juror
may give Evidence publicly, not privately to his Fellows. p. 361. Bail cannot
be Witness for the Defendant. ib. A Felon burned in the hand may be a Witness.
ibid. In Ejectment, he that had the Inheritance of the Land, was admitted as a
Witness. ibid. A Councellor at Bar being examined as a Witness for his Clyent,
was denied to be examined on the other side, and why. ibid. Debt for 10 l.
brought on 5 Eliz. ca. 9. against the Wife for not appearing, being served, and
Charges tendered, held good. ibid. Debt for 10. l. against a Witness, that being
subpened, appeared not, does not lie, without averring that he was damnified by
the No^appearance of the Witness. p. 362. Judgment staid, because the Verdict
was had upon the single Testimony of one convict of Perjury in the very same
thing. ibid. In Deceit for forging a Will, a Legatee allowed as a Witness in a
Trial for the Forgery. ibid. A material Witness that lies dying, may be
examined by consent of both Parties, not otherwise. p. 363. A Councellor may be
examined as a Witness against his Clyent, so far as it is of his own Knowledge,
not what his Clyent bath revealed to him. ibid. One shall not justify what he
heard an other say. ibid. Witnesses may be sworn against the King, in
Indictments, Battery, etc. because, though Criminal, not Capital. ibid. Tenant
at Will of Lands, in Question allowed a Witness in Trial at Bar. ibid. Person
attainted of Felony, and afterward pardoned by the King, is incapable after of
being a Witness. ibid.
Words. What Words are actionable, and what not, see fol. 265. to the end.
FINIS.

