AN ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF GEORGE MONCK, General of His MAJESTY's Forces, Duke
of ALBEMARLE, etc.
(As it was Presented to the Late, and Most Deserving DUKE His SON.) Having
appeared about the same time an Extraordinary STARR.
CAn thy Stars, Heaven! think thy MONCK e're meant
To seek for blazing from thy Firmament?
Ambitious Snuffs! He needs not them to tell
He Great was, his own Metal sounds that knell.
Ah long-tayl'd walking Wisps above! ye show
But by your too much Moon, all is Night below:
That Flame I doubted was the Rump on fire
(Some Jubilee blaze) in The Air, to light Him higher:
When Heavens Christmas Candle's head was light,
Much did I fear Great GEORGE's only height
Could reach such rage; I knew too well he would fall,
When Gods turned Link-boys for some Funeral.
Dire Death! before thou never could tyrannize,
With Him lies more than in the Earth 'gain lies:
England the worst is past, the Best is gone;
Hereafter thou will scarce know how to moan:
The Plague's a scab to this, his Pile brings more
Ruin to the City, than the Fire before.
Brave Metempsucosis of GEORGE long past,
Thou but ascend'st to tell us what we would lost
Before thy Birth again; and that no more
Such Gallantry of Soul has CHARLES in store:
We need not dread more lightning in our Skies,
Jove can but All have for a Sacrifice.
Thrice constant Spirit, thou 'rt too Loyal grown;
(Since Caesar's loss but Thou with joy could crown)
All-pale and dying Him why leav'dst? did fear
Rebellion once more in the Hemisphere?
No fire-nos'd Vulcan does in Heaven sit,
Thou did not hope a Traitor there to meet:
A lower Orb for their High-treason's meant,
Which is as black as are the Harb'rers in it.
Farewell our Magazeen, we are robbed; in vain
May plund'red Troops now cry, Call GEORGE again.
Hell upon Earth, or Hell upon Hell! see
All Is double-grim! there is not a Century
But's died again; their former Mourning may
But be the Lyning to another to day:
All Black-Guards now are! Lo! they never were bred
To fly their Colors, though their General 's dead.
Dead; (as I live) yet live in spite of Fate
He surely must, that could our King create:
Gods cannot die, and He could be no less,
Who was the Guardian to such Sacredness.
Dead! that I were but cloyst'red in his Tomb,
That he had lived, and I enjoyed his Home:
Else, since so Great and Good can have a Pit,
I wish I ( Russian-like) had leapt into it:
Thus, golden Oar (like the Wiseman's Chymick stone)
Mixed with my common Sand, had made Us one:
Then (whilst below Pikes dragging were, Guns dumb,
With Flags as dismal as their Kettle Drum,)
How boldly I should have had fired my pass,
'Twixt Nol and the Prince of Air to happiness?
Compendious discipline to worth, wee've seen
In Him more must'red than the World again:
He was our Health, to Him our Lives we owe,
Since Fate quelled Him, We do desire to bow:
Oh quick some Knife! I Will to his Grave and try
My transfused blood; if that serve not, I Will die:
Or bring my Gansa's, I Will to the Moon; from thence
To Him in the Orb Emperial I Will advance:
These if denied, I Will Mars invoke, who shall,
With all the Law of Arms, revenge his Fall.
Ye Destinies, now cut your own threads, dare
Ye let me live and strike an Officer?
He who before still (like the Gorgon's head)
Though's Foes not Stone he made, he made as dead:
Base coward Atropos, me thinks I see
Thee pale, and proud, yet blush at Victory:
As if some mighty Conquest thou had won,
But that again thou came not fairly on:
Can MONCK and truest Valor fail, can He
Be vanquished by a poor Anatomy?
Ha! then I fear our Arms must too lie dead,
Nor do I wonder since they have lost their Head:
Who having first his King set on his Throne,
Took now (too soon) possession of his Own.
Thornburgh Freeman.

LONDON, Printed by and for Thomas Ratcliffe, and Thomas Daniel, and are to be
sold at their House in New-street, betwixt Shooe-lane and Fetter-lane. 1670.


