A LETTER FROM TANGIER Concerning The Death of Jonas Rowland the Renegade, and
other strange Occurrences since the Ambassadors Arival here.
IN my last I gave you an Imperfect Account of the Arrival of Ben Hadu the
Morocco Ambassador and his kind reception and noble Entertaiment here by our
Governor Colonel Kirk. Since then by the Return of the Renegadoes Wife, we
have had a more ample account of all passages since the Arrival of the
Ambassador at Court, and the Death of the Renegade her late Husband, which for
the strangeness of the Manner, with what other Occurrences happn'd since, I
thought fit to send you.

The Ambassador attended out of Town with 200 of our Horse, (his own being all
dead or killed at Sea) we marched with him as far as our Liberties Extend,
where he was received by a Party of 300 of the Moors with great Shouts, and
three Volleys of Shot being discharged on both sides he was Conducted to the
Emperous Palace. The next morning being sent for to Render an Account of his
Embassy, he did it with a great deal of Satisfaction, where he Insisted much
in the praise of England, Concluding every Period of his Discourse with the
Greatness of the King, the Gallantry of the People, and the nobleness of his
Entertainments, when having ended his discourse, Buzzy Ham, the other
Ambassador there who was as Superintendant to Ben. Hadu the Principal
Ambassador said he had spoke very kindly of England, as indeed it had well
deserved, but he had forgot two things which merited his Commendation, viz,
their Wine and Women, with whom he had been as familiar, and to whom he was as
deeply engaged as the rest, this being seconded by the Secretary, which so
enraged the Emperor, that immediately he ordered him to the Ballcove, the
other two to other Prisons, till they made good their Information. The
secretary being put to the Rack, confessed that he had joined in a Confederacy
against the Ambassador on Shipboard, being put upon it by the Renegade, and for
what he had said against his Master, was by Subornation of Buzzy Ham the other
Ambassador. Of all which when the Emperor was made sensible and that it
proceeded rather from Malice then any other just grounds of Accusations, he
ordered Buzzy Ham with the Secretary to be strangled, and the Ambassador to be
set at Liberty.

The Renegade who was brought to Morocco bound, having all things proved
clearly against him, was Committed to a deep Dungion of 100 Steps descent their
to Continue a fortnight with a very small Allowance of Bread, and Water, to do
penance for his Apostasy, and to atone for the affront put upon their great
Prophet Mahome^, whose Religion he had formerly Embraced. Afterward being
taken bu^ as a contempt of Christianity and the Holy Unction, he was anointed
all ^ver with Sea Fish Oil, and hung upon a Gibbet three days together Naked,
Exposed to the Wasps and Flys with all sort of Obnoctious Insects, sed at the
same rate the third day being taken down yet alive he was thrown into a
Cauldron of hot boiling Oil, where he Expired an unlamented Martyr for his
Apostasy, neither Christian nor Mohammedan; his he^d b^ing sent to Tange^^, and
Body throw (...) into the Sea as thinking it unworthy e^^her of Christian or
Pagan Bu^^al.

Complaint was then made by the Ambassador against three of his Retinue, who to
keep their hand in u're by a slight of Ligerdemain wou^d turn Knives, Forks,
Spoons, or any other moveable into Ale and Brandy or what other Creature they
listed. This was looked upon as so high an Abuse to the Dignity of the
Ambassador and Emperor, nay of Mahomet himself* that they were condemned
without Benefit of Clergy* being ordered to be thrown into the Lions Den, and
there to be devoured alive, one only Escaped, who diving a little too deep into
a Ladies placket palm'd away her Ladyships Oracle* which hung by a gold Chain,
for whom a Certain great Countess Interceeding with his Exeellency, obtained
his promise for his Pardon* which accordingly he has performed.

Some were accused for drinking, others for whoring and mixing Pagan* Ru^^^s
with Christian Giblets, whereof some of them that carried with them the Tokens
of their Mistresses kindnesses (which several its thought did to their sorrow)
the foreman of the Jury giving in Verdict against them, their principle
Evidence was cut off, which it is thought will spoil their whoring for the
future.

This was all which happened during the stay of Mrs. Rowland, Wife to the late
Jonas Rowland the English Renegade, who after she had seen the sad and Tragical
End of her Husband, obtained leave to come hither in order to her return for
England; where she will her self satisfy you more at large of the Truth of
every particular, which I had from her self, and is as faithful delivered from

S^r, Your Affectionate Kinsman William Franklin.
Tangier, Aug. 26. 1682.
LONDON, Printed for J. S. 1682.


