THE Friendly Conference OR, AN HUE and CRY After the POPES HOLINESS.
Discovering the corrupt Doctrines of the CHURCH, and abominable Practices of
the COURT and CLERGY of ROME, To raise themselves to their present Pomp and
Grandeur.

With the several Prodigious Births of the Whore of Babylon: And how she has
preferred all her Children.

In a familiar Dialogue between Theophilus a Protestant, and Juliano lately
turned Papist.

Printed for M. B. in the Year, 1673.

A HUE AND CRY After the Popes Holiness, etc.
Juliano. YOur Servant Neighbor Theophilus.


Theophilus. I am heartily glad to see you Juliano, the rather for that I was
lately informed you were dead.


Juliano. How? dead! have people talked me into a Ghost? I Will even run to the
Prerogative and enter a Caveat my self, least some Kn^ve or other should take
Administration of my Estate. Dead! I protest I know no business I shall have in
the other World this fifty years: There Is nothing in Nature I hate so much as
dying this cold weather, for truly I conceive a Tomb, though made of Marble,
and placed in the Chancel, but a damp untoward Lodging; besides it yields no
good company, for the men lose their Senses before they come thither; and as
soon as the women have been there a while, they all grow flat-nos'd.


Theoph. I perceive you mind dying but little; but if you fear catching cold in
your Grave, you were best charge your Executor to bury you Legally in Flannel:
however I doubt you may have more reason to aprehend burning torments, than
Cold, for I hear you are dead Spiritually: I mean, Twice dead and plucked up by
the roots, as the Apostle Phrases it: That you have forfeited your Discretion,
cast your Reason overboard, and abandoned your Religion.


Juliano. I hate dissembling, and must own my self a Roman Catholic.


Theoph. Can you hate Dissemulation, and yet own at the same time a Religion
that is made up of nothing but Frauds, Cheats, and Delusions: That very Title
Roman Catholic, is a Falicy, or at best an Absurdity in Terminis; for since
the English, and proper signification of the Word Catholic is no more then
general or universal: to join Rome to it, is an insignificant Bull, and as pure
nonsense, as to say a particular, Universal, or a general Individual.


Juliano. I shall not quarrel with you about words; I am a member of the Church
of Rome, that Mother Church where true Religion has flourisht ever since it was
first planted there, by the Apostles in an uninterupted Succession: that Church
to which our Savior has given Privilege to be the infallible Judge of all
Controversies, and promised, the gates of Hell shall never prevail against it


Theoph. Alas Sir! you boast of the Casket when the Jewels are gone; The Church
of Rome, sailing under the merry gale of Earthly pomp and prosperity, has long
since discharged her self of that rich Laden she was fraught with, when she
Traded for Souls under the Fathers of the Primitive Ages, there having since
been such a succession of Imperious greatness in that Chair, that Rome is more
like the proud triumphant Chapel of Antichrist, than the poor militant Church
of God.


Juliano. The Primary ever the Apostles and Spirit of infabilility was
delivered to Peter, and thence conveyed down in his successors Bishops of Rome,
so that there could be no such Apostasy as you pretend.


Theoph. These parivolous pretenses are easily confuted; but not to enter into
a tedious Discourse, I shall only ask you this serious Question, since you can
cast your eyes upon no story where the villary of Popes is not largely
discovered, how can you conceit that the pure Spirit of God should endow with
infalibility of judgment, Monsters so visibly debauched? or how can you
believe the Holy Ghost, which under the Law forbad all impurity, though in
outward Ceremony should now under the brighter light of the Gospel suffer
himself to be poured out of one unclean vessel, into another, beginning again
with a Conjurer, where he left off with a Sodomite?


Juliano. I cannot believe any Popes were ever guilty of such Crimes, or if
they were, these are still personal Infirmities.


Theoph. But most gross ones in those that blasphemously style themselves Their
Holinesses, and impudently boast to the world that they cannot err, nor can
deny the truth of their impieties, as to matter of fact without proclaiming
your own ignorance in History.


Juliano. Truly Sir, you know I am but a Layman, and do not pretend too much
Reading.


Theoph. The fitter to embrace a Religion, whose chiefest support is ignorance:
But for your information, I care not if I draw a short Historical Scheme of
your Romish Church, that you may see by what means and degrees it first
intruded to that Grandeur, with the gaudy Luster whereof your eyes have been so
far dazzled, as to choose a Cloud for Juno, change a Diamond for a Bristol-stone,
and forsake the true Spouse of Christ, to wantonize in the embraces of a
painted Harlot.


Juliano. I am satisfied with my choice, yet care not if I give you the
hearing, since you will needs take upon you as a Doctor.


Theoph. Thus then, after the piety of some primitive Bishops of Rome,
augmented by the flame of that Imperial City had purchased them reputation, so
that they got first to be Archbishops, then Patriarchs, and at last to the
Papal Title (A name it is thought derived Quasie pater Patriarcharum) which for
Brevity was written Papa.) They soon began to change their piety for promotion,
and taking the advantage of newkindled zeal, whereby they led Princes and
people at pleasure; they had the opportunity to carve themselves almost what
power or Riches they list. But as policy can seldom tread long in that narrow
path that guides to Heaven, so at last it led them into a World of Impieties,
by encroaching under pretense of Religion, upon higher Jurisdiction and power,
than could belong to subjects, which they colored as the Donations of Princes,
who had indeed no better Titles to their Crowns than Usurpation on the
weakness of the former possessors: And were therefore glad of the Popes
protection, because people out of Ignorance esteemed those most just that were
most favored by the Clergy. Thus a bargain was often driven for mutual
assistance between Usurpers and the Pope, who in his approbations diligently
laid up their petitions, and his grants to remain as presidents whereby to
guide to posterity. The Cloud of Ignorance then covering the World, was a great
help to keep their Juggling undiscovered; that little learning extant, was
wholly included in Monastic Cells; who took the opportunity to make most Books
speak in their favor: which being only a few Manuscripts might easily be
effected. Besides the Clergy were kept unmarried on purpose, that being free
from all other obligations, they might solely intend the promoting their own
Interest, (which they called the power and Immunities of the Church) So that in
time by the Indulgence of good, and necessity of wicked and Illegitimate
princes, they freed their whole society from the temporal Jurisdiction: And now
having purchased Ease, Honor, and Impunity; such as were Poor, Guilty, or
Ambitious, Listed themselves of their fellowship, and being for the most part
of the best Abilities, soon learned the skill so to work on the consciences of
dying people affrighted with their sins, that the Church was left Heir of the
best part of Christendom. Nor did they only make use of the profitable errors
left them by their forefathers, but brought in new ones of their own
contriveing, guilding them with the splendid Tytles of things necessary, and of
Religious use: Thus Images came to be Idolized, the Cognizance of the Cross
made a Tutelary God, looking no higher in their Extremities, and the blessed
Saints scandalized with the worship given to them, and their Relics. Thus a
fire is kindled in purgatory, only to maintain that in the Popes Kitchen,
confession is devised as a pick-lock to discover each man's secrets, pardons for
all past sins, and Indulgences for never so many to come, are publicly
Exposed, and in brief all Religion almost made subservient to their Policies
and cursed Avarice; whilst the Monks and all sorts of Friars are daily promoted
and armed with Immense privileges, as a strong and faithful Militia in all
Countries for the Sea of Rome, yet fed and paid by the respective Princes, that
tamely suffer themselves to be enslaved by Popish Tyranny. To conclude most of
the things in dispute, which you would Impose on our Church concern, either
profit or honor; and were brought in by the subtle Priests long since the
primitive times, taking advantage from the Ignorance of preceding Ages, nor
can such Papists as are wise conversant in History, and acquainted with the
present practice of the Court of Rome, but be souly suspected of Atheism,
because conscience can never be persuaded against a convinceing experience.


Juliano. Sure you have railed your self out of breath by this time against the
Pope, but I cannot now stand to answer your Invective story particularly,
having some occasions that oblige me to take my leave.


Theoph. I shall freely dismiss you, only desire you would before you go,
favor me with some brief Relation, how you came to be thus seduced, winnow and
sift your heart, to find out what threw you into this Abiss. He that falls into
the water by breaking through the Ice, must rise where he fell, or he is lost
beyond recovery.


Juliano. Truly Sir, I came to embrace the Catholic Religion; as it were by
accident, being about two Months ago, at my Cozen Esquire Preistridden's after
Dinner being very merry; Topeing off three or four dozen Bottles of wine, with
two strange Gentlemen, that happened to be there, one of them began by degrees
to feel my pulse as to Religion, and did applaud the Romish Church as the only
certain true easy and orthodox way, and so far decry the protestant, that I
who then had more mind to sleep than dispute, knew not scarce what to answer;
and at last the whole Company plying me so hard at once with strong Arguments,
and full Glasses, that I seemingly consented; whereupon next day the two
Gentlemen (who as I may tell you under the Rose were a couple of reveren'd
Fathers of t^^ society of Jesus) came to my house, and there continued till
they had completed my Conversion.


Theoph. A most excellent method. These are the Jesuits who compass Land and
Sea for a proselite, and barbarously caused more than a 100000 silly Americans
to be murdered, to the disgrace of Christianity, I cannot but adm^re so many
of our English Gentry (in other things very Judicious) should suffer themselves
to be rookt, oppressed, enslaved, and often undone by these Egyptian Locusts. I
knew a young Gentleman of 2000l. a year, married not above three years ago into
a Catholic family, who by their art seduced him to their Religion; whereupon
he was continually haunted with such Shoals of these Roman Horsleaches, that
preying continually on his means, they soon brought his estate into a
Consumption, and his wife dying, wheadled him to bestow the remainder on a
College of theirs, and Imure himself for the wretched remainder of his ^ife in
a Monastery: thus they bought their Palace at Dulevort, with the vast portion
of a ghost-led Maid, who was forced afterward to Live afflictedly upon their
sorry Alms, and repent of her mistaken Charity. Thus their Abbey of Lanspring,
they subtlely recovered from the Lutherans; so they fooled a doting old Abbot
with false Alarms out of England, till he Invested them in their College at
Doway, and purchased their sumptuous House at Paris, by a trick no less Impious
and fraudulent. In brief, Treason, Rebellion, Fraud, Deceit, and Circumvention
have bin their continual study, since Loyola hatched them into the world,
concerning which I shall only tell you one story; and then refer you to your
occasions. Once upon a time, (for so all tales use to beg^n) ^ome was
with-child, and she brought forth her eldest Son. The Benedictine Monk, to him
as Heir she gave her Lands, she remained free a while, but at last she was with
child again, and brought into the Light Twins. The Dominican and the Franciscan
Friar: to the first having already bestowed her Lands. she gave certain Houses
and Moneys by way of pension: to the other (having now nothing else lest) The
Wallet, and set him out of doors a begging: she stood clear again for a
considerable time, till at last she was once more Mountain-big, she longed, she
groaned, she drew her breath short, and made store of outlandish faces, but in
Conclusion gave the World a Lusty Boy, who was no sooner born, out he uttered
from natures backdoor, the Midwives Lapful, which was interpreted an omen of
future good Luck. This was the fiery Jesuit, and his Mother having given away
Lands, Houses, Wallet and all, took him up gave him a smart clap on the right
Buttock, and said, My Darling, shift for thy self, and so he has done ever
since most accurately, to the Destruction of all places where he comes.


Juliano. I will be in Debt to you for this story till our next meeting: In the
Interim, consider your condition, and remember, that out of the Church there is
no Salvation.


Theoph. I do consider my own condition and pity yours; remembering the
punishment attending them who turn their backs on sacred truths, they have once
professed, and make void the Law of God by their vain Traditions.


FINIS.
depiction of a balance containing the bible in one pan and objects
representing eccesiastical tradition in the other The Bibl^e con^^^^^^g the
word of God.

The D^cr^^^ and (...) ^^^^^^^i^g M^^^ tra^itio^s.




