The Yorkshire Spaw, OR A TREATISE Of four Famous medicinal Wells viz the
Spaw, or Vitrioline-Well; the stinking, or Sulphur-Well; the Dropping, or
Petrifying-Well; and S. Mugnus-Well, near Knare borow in YORKSHIRE. TOGETHER
With the causes, virtues, and use thereof. For farther Information read the
Contents.

Composed by J. French, Dr. of Physic.

LONDON, Printed for Nath: Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill, 1654.

Celeberrimo viro, THEODORO de MAYERNE, Equiti Aurato, triumque Monarcharum
Archiatro (...)
CUi nisi Medicorum Monarchae, Monarcharumque medico dicare liceat opellam hanc
de eo elemento elucubratam, guod Germanum Jovis, ac Nepotem Saturni ingeniosa
finxit antiquitas, cunabula rerum depictura? Hanc dextra omnibus porrectam si
tua passim celebrata claritas sereniore front decorari dignetur, nubilosa
Momorum supercilia non est quod vereor. Tenera quidem proles est, sed si
coruscantes Phoebei tui laminis radios irretorte contueri polleat, non
dubitandum est, quin genuina agnoscetur, nec ut adulterina a Medicinae Mystis
abdicabitur, nec a me illius susceptore abnegabitur, repudiabiturve. Et quid
tibi Philosophorum Cynosurae justius deferri poterit, cum Universi pene
Philosophorum, sive flores, sive faeces, hoc argumentum meum extitisse primam
materiam, ex qua exoriuntur Universa, nec contradicente plebecula, and
imbiberunt, and tradiderunt? Quid enim creatum complectitur nature a rerum non
ex aqua humectante, and coalescente adultum, and animatum? Ignem quid humoris
expers pabulatur? Aerem vero nuncupari attenuatam aquam quilibet cerdo se
explorasse gloriatur. Terram quoque exuccam in pulverem redigi, and fatiscere
omnis tressis agas^ deblasterat. Quid spirat, vernat, crescit, consistit sine
suo fluore? Animalia, plantas, lapides, metalla testor. Sed haec prolixius tuae
eruditioni multifariae philosophari, perinde est ac noctuas ad Athenas defer,
and Cramben bis coctam apponere, vel capulam unde in Oceanum ((...) velut viror
ab effectu dictum) instillare satagere, quibus minutiis supersedere consultius
autumo.

Digneris itaque in hisce nostris scaturiginibus, dulcibus, salsis, and
mediocribus, in Oceanum, veluti tuae censurae influentibus, Candoris tui
tridentem intingere, ut, tejubente, effluant puriores, hydropotisque
gratissimae. Hoc mihi votum si dederis concessum, ad majora ibo alacrior, quae
tuae tutelae (si cui) commendare gestiam, and interim ipse audire

Tuae Amplitudini devotissimus JOH. FRENCH.
Londini Maii 21o. 1652o.
To the READER.
Reader,
I Being the last year commanded by my occasions down to the Spaw in Yorkshire,
was desirous to improve my time in applying my self to experiment, and
observation: to the one for the discovery of the true causes of those Famous
Medicinal waters of Knares-borow: to the other, to be convinced what real
effects they wrought upon the drinkers thereof. And this I had leisure, beyond
expectation, to do, being prevented from my intended, and speedier return, by
reason of the then Northen distractions. Now my experience herein I do freely
and faithfully present to the world a public account of; as for a more full
satisfaction of those of mine own profession, (especially some worthy Drs. in
the South, who first excited me hereto;) so also for the better direction, and
greater success of those that shall make use of those waters.

In my observation I perceived that these waters, although very effectual in
themselves, yet many times proved the contrary, and that by reason, first of a
want of a due preparation; secondly of intemperance in diet; thirdly of a
prejudice against the use of all manner of Physic in the taking thereof, which
should promote the full operation of them, and prevent the symptoms, which are
oftentimes occasioned by them; fourthly by reason of mistaking the proper
water; and lastly by not observing a just proportion suitable to the
constitutions and maladies. Now for the prevention of whatsoever shall occasion
the ineffectual operation of those waters I have published these few lines,
which are made up, not of* obscure, dark, and such as the vulgar might not
understand, but of words plain, and as clear as the glasses themselves wherein
the waters are drunk, that every one may see what it is he drinks, clearly
seeing therein the true causes, virtues, and use of them.

I do not desire that any should adhere to my judgment herein any further,
than they see it consonant to reason; for to that, as also to the candid
censure of the learned Drs. of Yorkshire, long experienced in these waters,
and to all other, who shall rationally, and civilly convince me wherein I have
erred, I subject it. Reader, approve of me according as herein thou find me

Thy friend J. F.

CHAP. I. The place together with the Nature of the same, where four famous
Medicinal Springs are discovered, in Yorkshire.
ABout fourteen Miles from York, Southwest, is situated the ancient Town of
Knaresborow, formerly famous for the invincible Castle thereof built upon a
Craggy Rock, but now remarkable for four famous Medicinal Springs, which in
these latter years have been discovered near the same; the names of which are
viz. The dropping or petrifying Well, the sulphur, or stinking Well, the Spaw,
and St. Mugnus Well. In naming only four, I speak as to the species, or kinds
of them, but Doctor Deane in his treatise of the said Waters mentions five,
which in effect are but three, for he speaks as to the Individuals, and names
three sulphur Wells, which indeed differ not at all, the one from the other,
and if at all, yet only gradually; and withal he rejects St. Magnus as an
ineffectual superstitious relic of Popery, which notwithstanding; because it
has of late regained its reputation (as I shall afterward declare) which it
had lost in the account of some, I think worthy of a place amongst the four
famous Wells of Knaresborow.

The Nature of that country, especially South-west is very rocky, yet moorish,
and heathy, consisting of an unctuous bituminous earth, which the country
People cut at a certain time of the year, making Turfe, and Peate thereof,
which being dried make good fuel. In that place are found several sorts of
Earth, Stones, Minerals, and veins of Metals. Doctor Dean observed white, and
yellow Marle, Plaster, Oker, Rud, Rubric, Freestone, hard greet-Stone,
(which broken in the middle does oftentimes very much resemble Loaf-Sugar,) a
soft Reddish-Stone, Yron-Stone, Brimstone, Vitrial, Nitre, Allume, Lead,
Copper, and diverse mixtures of these; to which I shall add Alabaster, and a
glittering sand, which yields some Gold: And certainly many more than these
might be discovered, if the experienced Artist would make a diligent search.

CHAP. II. Of the original of Springs in general.
BEfore I speak any thing of the Nature of Springs, or Fountains in
particular, it will be necessary, as conducing to the better understanding of
them, to premise something concerning the original of them in general; and the
rather, because there have been great controversies betwixt the Stoics and
Peripatetickes about the causes of them. Now the several opinions concerning
the original of lasting Springs, (which are called Fontes perennes) may be
reduced to three heads: for either they proceed from rainwater, or they are
generated in the bowels of the earth, or else they must of necessity flow from
the Sea through subterraneal channels. If any shall object as some have done,
and say they may come from subterraneal lakes, let me demand of them whether
those sakes proceed not from some of the three former, and whether they would
not in time be exhausted if otherwise.

Arguments for the first opinion alleadgedand answered.
Arg. They that contend for the first opinion, such as are Albertus Magnus,
Georgius Agricola, etc. Affirm, that in those Countries where there falls but
little rain, the Springs are few and small, and that in winter time all Springs
flow more plentifully, than in summer, and that by reason of the wetnes of the
Season: and what becomes say they of all the rain, if it sinks not into the
earth, and there maintains Springs?

Sol 1. The Assertion concerning the increasing of Springs in winter is not
universally true; for St. Mugnus Well in Yorkshire (as I was most credibly
informed by the Woman that has looked to it, and been the keeper of it for
these many years last past) begins to rise high about May, and to fall low
about October; besides diverse, more Springs which in several counties of this
Nation are dried up all the Winter, and flow a new toward the Summer. And
Pliny makes mention of a certain Spring in Cydonia before Lesbon, that flows
only at the Spring: many more of this nature might be produced if there were
occasion.

2. If that were granted to be true which they say, yet it does not follow that
rain is the material cause of Springs, although at that time they break forth,
which were before dried up; for their drying up was not occasioned for want of
rain to supply them, but by reason of the dryness of the earth toward its
superficies which attracts to it self, and drinks in for the satisfaction of
its drought the water of the Springs, which it does again let go, when it has
drunk plentifully of the showers from Heaven. Now that the dry earth will drink
a great quantity of water, you may see by the drying up of Rivers in a long
drougth by the drynes of the earth, although the Fountains, which are the heads
of those Rivers, flow plentifully at the same time as some do, although others
some be dried up. And as for those Springs which break forth only after great
rain, they are caused from the rain which is drunk up by some boggie, spongious
earth, and is drained from thence, or which is sunk into some caverne, or
hollow place, near the superficies of the earth through some secret passage
thither, and there being collected in some considerable quantity imitates a
Spring as long as it lasts.

3. The gratest part of showers of rain falling upon high places run down from
thence into plains, and from plains through small channels or trenchs into
Rivers, and that rain, which falls upon any place from whence it cannot in some
such manner be conveyed away remains upon the superficies of the earth, till it
be exhaled by the Sun, as we see in diverse places: besides it cannot be
imagined that rain sinks so far into the earth as to supply Springs; and that
because it is generally observed by all that dig in the earth, that rain wetts
not the earth above ten feet deep: And the reason hereof Seneca the Philosopher
gives in his third Book Naturalium quaestionum chap. 7. Where he says, that
when the earth is satiated with showers, it then receives in no more, and this
we see by daily experience. Besides, when we dig a Well, although it be in a
soft place, we dig sometimes one, two or three hundred feet deep, before we
come at quick Springs, and that the rain should sink so deep, it is no way
probable; nay, although there were hallow veins and chinks in the earth,
through which many would have it pass to a great depth; for who cannot easily
conceive that those veins and crannies (which yet are not granted to be in
every place where there are Springs) are easily stopped with dust, or dirt, which
the rain carries with it when it is fallen on the earth; or swelled up, and
contracted, as we see they are in Summer time with rain after a long drougth?

Arguments for the second opinion Alleged and answered.
Arg. They that contend for the second opinion, such as Seneca etc. affirm
that Springs are generated chiefly of earth changed into water, and that
because all Elements are mutually transmutable into one the other. And some, as
Aristotle, and H. ab Heers, that Springs are generated of the air shut up in
the earth and by the coldness thereof condensed into water.

Sol 1. It is more probable according to reason and experience, that by reason
of the density of the earth water should more easily be converted into earth,
than the earth into water.

2. It is to be wondered at, that seeing that ten parts of air (if not many
more) serve for the making of one part of water conteinable in the same space
there should be so much space in the earth for the containing of so much air as
serves for the making of such a quantity of water, as springs daily out of the
earth: Besides so much air being spent, there would of necessity follow a
vacuum, for where should there be so many, and great crannies, or holes to let
the air into the earth fast enough? But if there were, yet how is it possible
that so much air can be corrupted in such a moment, the whole Elementary air
being of its own nature most subtle, and not being sufficient to make such
abundance of water as all the Springs of the earth will amount to? Now although
this answer be according to the sense of common Philosophers, and sufficient
for the satisfaction of this objection, yet Helmont will not admit of any such
supposition, viz. That air and water can at all be mutually transmuted into one
the other. It is true, says he, that water can easily be turned into a vapor,
and the said vapor into water again; but this vapor is nothing else
materially, and formally but a congeries of atoms of water sublimed, and air
will not in cold or heat yield water any more then it contains in it the
vapor, viz. of rarefied water. For says he, if those two Elements were so
mutually convertible, one species must be transmuted into another, and the air
that is made out of water, may be again reduced into the same numerical
waterwhich it was before its rarefaction: but this cannot be unless you will
grant that which all Philosophers deny, viz. That A privatione ad habitum datur
regressuc: Lastly for the confirmation of his opinion, he brings in an
experiment: viz. Air shut up in an Iron pipe of an ell long may be compressed
by force, that it will be contained within the space of five fingers, which,
when it expands it self, drives out the pellet (with which it was stopped at the
one end) with a sound like to that of a gun, which would not be, if the air
thus compressed could have been turned into water by the coldness of the Iron.

Arguments confirming the third opinion, and objections made against it,
answered.
The third opinion is the most ancient of all, and was held by Plato, and
Thales himself one of the first Philosophers in Greece, and not so only, but
is also asserted in sacred writ, viz. Eclesiastes chap. I. verse. 7. Where the
wisest of men affirms, that all the Rivers run into the Sea, and yet the Sea
is not full, unto the place from whence the Rivers come, thither they return
again.

The reason for the confirmation of this opinion are many, but the chiefest are
these two: First, because there is not any body besides the vast Ocean, that
can afford near such an abundance of waters as spring from the earth. Secondly,
because the Sea it self is not increased by that multitude of waters that flow
daily into it, as it must of necessity be, unless they did by occult cavities
of the earth return to their Fountains, as is declared in the fore cited place
by the wisest of Philosophers. Neither is Aristotle's imputing the wasting of
the Sea to the Sun and winds, of any force to persuade to the contrary; for
although this kind of wasting may be granted in part, yet if it should be
according to his judgment, his whole Element of water had been long since
consumed.

Obj. Seeing the Sea according to its situation is lower than springs (for the
course of water is downward) how then does the water thereof ascend so high as
the heads of springs, especially those in high Mountains, and Hills?

Sol. I shall first show after what manner it does not ascend, according to the
opinion of some, for there are diverse opinions concerning the causes of its
ascent.

1. It is not forced upward by a spirit, or breath that is in the water it
self, as Pliny, and Vallesius supposed. For if it should be granted that there
were any such intrinsecal impulsive spirit, or breath in waters, as it can not
rationally be (for it is not observed that the Sea is moved any other way but
by tempests sometimes, and the Moon by way of tide) yet that could not (though
assisted extrinsecally by strong winds blowing contrarily, and that in an open
Sea,) force them to the height of springs, much less could it alone in
subterraneal crooked channels.

2. Neither does the weight of the earth force it up, as was the opinion of
Bodinus, and Thales: For the earth, seeing it is a solid. and firm body, does
not lie upon, and press the water, but contrarily, the water the earth:
Neither is the earth held up by the water, but the water by the earth, as you
may see in all Rivers, Lakes, Pits, and the water of the Sea it self, when it
is in channels of the earth. For if they should not at any time be quite full,
as it sometimes happens, the upper part alone proves empty, which would not be
if the waters were pressed by the earth, but contrarily.

3. Neither does the weight of the Sea force it self up as was the opinion of
Seneca, who supposed that the greatest part of the water of the Sea is out of
its place, viz. above its place in the place of the air, and so above the heads
of springs, toward which it forces it self by its natural descent, and so
rises up again as high as the level of the water from whence it came; but he
proves it not, only he asserts it.

But Doctor Jorden in his treatise of Baths being of the same opinion as
touching the Seas being higher than the earth (though he holds that the natural
place of the waters is above the earth) seems to give some plausible account
of it: For says he, although near the coasts it be depressed, and lower than
the shore, yet there is reason for that, because it is terminated by the dry,
and solid body of the earth, as we see in a cup or bowl of water filled to
the top we may put in a great bulk of silver in pieces, and yet the water will
not run over, but be heightened above the brims of the bowl, the like, says
he, we may see in a drop of water put upon a table, where the edges, or
extremities of the water being terminated by the dry substance of the table are
depressed, and lower than the middle like a half globe: But take away the
termination by moistening the table, and the drop sinks even to an evennes. And
whereas we see, says he, that Rivers run downward toward the Sea per declive,
it does not prove the Sea to be lower than the Land, but only near the shore
where it is thus terminated, and in lieu of this it has scope enough assigned
it to fill up the Globe, and so to be as high as the Land, if not higher. Now
if I should grant that the Sea were higher in the middle than the highest place
of the Land, yet it is very improbable that it should force it self to the
tops of Mountains sooner than into Rivers which are far lower than the head of
Springs, and more open than the narrow channels, and veins of the earth,
through which it must pass to the Springs. And for that similitude of his
concerning the termination of water by drynes, it will not hold water, nay it
rather makes against him, than for him, for he says that this termination is
taken away by moisture, Now let me demand of him, or of those of his judgment,
whether or no many great Rivers terminated in the Sea be not a sufficient
moisture for the taking away of the termination of the water made by the
dryness of earth, and so to make the globous Sea to sink to an evennes?

4. And as the water is not elevated by any of the three foregoing ways of
impulse, or forcing, so neither is it by any of these two ways of attraction,
viz. by the power of the Planets, or by the earths sucking it in, as a sponge
does water, from beneath, and sending it to higher places; For the first, there
can be no such attractive virtue demonstrated; and if there were, it would as
well, and promiscously extend a like to Valleys, and low Countries where we
see few Fountains, as well as to high Mountains, and Hills, from whence proceed
the greatest Springs. As to the second, an attractive virtue, if there were any
such here, attracts to this end, that the subject wherein it is, might consume,
retain, or enjoy what is attracted, and over and above that, none, or at least
not so much as would suffice for the making of Springs.

5. Neither are there such veins, in the earth through which the water should
pass, as cloth wine through crooked pipes or cranes which wine-coopers, and
Vintners use for the drawing of wine out of one vessel into an other, through
which the wine being once sucked, runs continually till all be run forth: For
the veins in the bowels of the earth are not wholly, and throughout full, as
of necessity they must be before water will ascend through them for
preservation of its continuity and the avoiding of a vacuum.

6. Neither is the water raised to the superficies of the earth by Helmonts
sabulum, or virgin-earth, which he says is a certain sand continued from the
Center of the earth in diverse places, even to the superficies of the same. and
to the tops of some Mountains, which sand has in it a vitality, and in which
as in a vital abode, and natural place, the water, whilst it remains, is
living, and enjoyes common life, and knows neither superiority, or inferiority
of place, any otherwise than the blood in the veins which flows upward to the
head, and downward to the feet: But moreover he adds, that when this water is
let out of its natural abode, viz. the virgin earth, as blood out of a vein,
it then does like a heavy thing hasten to its Center, or iliad, viz. the Sea.
Now for the confirming of this vitality in water, he brings in this distich of
the Poe^t

-- -- -- -- -- undas
Spiritus intus alit, vasti quoque marmoris aequor;
Men's agitat molem totam diffusa per artus.
And he further adds that the sea has in it a kind of life, because though the
winds cease, yet it has its spontaneous motions, and observes its tides
according to certain observations that it has of the course of the moon, as if
it would rise to meet her. Now let us observe the weight of Helmonts arguments;
and that indeed is little or none as I conceive, for first he does not any way
demonstrate that continuation of his virginearth from the Center to the
superficies of the earth, much less the vitality thereof: Secondly for the
vitality of water he only quotes a poetical fiction: and thirdly for the
spontaneous flowing of the sea, it is noe more a demonstrative reason for the
vitality thereof, than the loadstones attracting Iron a reason of the vitality
of the same.

7 Neither is it raised upon that account of condensation, and rarefaction,
which the learned Docter Flud, endeavors to demonstrate by the experiment of
his weather-glass. The air, and water, says he, fill up all the cavities of
the world, so that in what hemispheare the air, by reason of cold is condensed,
there the waters are rarefied, and swell, as may be seen in the weather-glass,
where the water is rarefied, and raised highest, when the air is with cold most
condensed; as also in the swelling of springs in frosty-weather. Now although
this his experiment of the aforesaid glass does prettily illustrate the business
of condensation, and rarefaction in close vessels, yet it does not demonstrate
sufficiently the raising of waters from the deep subterraneall channells to the
superficies of the earth, for it is apparent, as I have showed in the former
part of this chapter, that some springs swell more in summer than in winter;
Secondly if springs do rise higher in time of frost than in hot seasons, it is
only either because some subterraneall vapors, which could not evaporate by
reason of the earth being constringed with cold, are condensed into water, and
so make for the present some small addition to springs, or because the
subterraneall waters are rarefied, and swell by that heat which is occasioned
through the aforesaid binding of the earth, for we see by experience that
springs are hotter in frosty weather than in summer. And thirdly because the
water of that weatherglass if it were open at the top as the veins of fountains
are, would not observe the nature of the season so, as to rise or fall
accordingly, for that in a close glass it arises only ad evitandum vacuum;
and now rather than nature should suffer a vacuum by the airs being condensed,
vapors and fumes would proceed out of the earth, nay the next adjacent warm
air would come in as a supply to prevent a vacuum, sooner than water in the
bowels of the earth could be rarefied, which would not in an open glass be
raised at all, though the weather were never so cold.

By these seven negatives it appears how the waters in the earth do not ascend,
I shall endeavor to demonstrate how they do ascend to the heads of Springs.

It is absurd to think (being the same which Aristotle himself and his
followers grant) that the waters should not be elevated from the bottom of
Caverns, to the heads of Springs after the same manner as water is elevated
from the Sea to the middle region of the air. Now this elevation is done by the
force of heat resolving the water into vapors. And if so, why then may not the
other be done after the same manner, viz: by heat: Neither is it any matter
whether that heat be above, or beneath the waters, if so be it forces them
into vapors, and makes them ascend as high as is requisite they should. But
it may be said that the middle region of the air is very cold, and it is
coldness that condenseth vapors into water: but now the earth, through which
these vapors pass, is warm, as is agreed by most. To this I answer, that it is
not necessary that there must be cold for the condensing of vapors into water,
it is sufficient if there be a more remiss degree of heat, as you may see in
the head of an alembick, and the cover of a seething pot, the interior
superficies thereof being full of drops, whilst they themselves are warm.

Now for the making of a vapor of any liquid matter, heat is altogether, and
absolutely necessary, according to the opinion of all, and for much vapor
there is much heat, and a considerable proportion of humor required. But
seeing abundance of water comes from the Sea into the bowels of the earth, the
subterraneall heat, which must be in like proportion, being the chiefest cause
of the generations of Springs, is next, and diligently to be inquired into. Now
that the earth is hot, it is known by daily experience. And Lucilius Baldus
says, that the earth being newly dug is hot, and smoketh, and that out of
deep wells is drawn warm water, and especially in winter season by reason of
the cold binding the earth, and keeping in the heat: but how this heat comes to
be in the earth, he speaks like a Stoic, and says it is in it as naturally,
as vital heat is in animals. But this opinion is not so probable as that of
the Peripateticks, who say that the earth is of it self, and naturally cold,
because dense and heavy, but hot accidentally only.

Now the great question will be from whence this heat of the earth does proceed.

I will first show from whence it does not proceed, and thereby confute the
opinion of some.

1. It proceeds not from the Sun, as many imagine, supposing that all heat in
the world comes from thence, and that the earth being beat upon by the
sunbeams, does thereby receive into it self a certain heating virtue. But
this is very improbable, seeing that they, that digg in the bowels of the
earth, observe that the heating power of the Sun, although in most hot seasons
does not penetrate the superficies of the earth above six feet deep: do not we
see how a thin wall, or boughs of trees in an arbor keep off the heat of the
sun, though never so great? to say nothing of the earths being colder two feet
deep in Summer than in Winter.

2. It proceeds not from an antiperistasis of the cold air in the superficies
of the earth, for this has place no further than the heating power of the
rays came. Besides the natural cold of the solid, and dense earth must of
necessity have greater power to repel upwards, than the adventious of the
soft, thin, and light air to force downwards the heat of the sun, which, indeed
in all reason should, being generated but a little way within the earth of its
own accord being very light ascend upward through the passage made by the Sun:
and this we know that after a long Summers day, it is before the next morning
almost vanished though never so great, much less will it be preserved till, and
through the Winter. It must then of necessity be another kind of heat, and it
is such, that toward the superficies of the earth is colder, as being more
remote from its original, or beginning, and is in Summertime by reason of the
Suns opening the earth, and making vent easily, expired, and is therefore less
perceived, but in Winters frost is restrained from exhaling, and is condensed,
as may easily be perceived in deep wells

Now to know from what principle this heat has its original, or rise, we must
examine whence proceeds the heat in hot baths, for there the subterraneal heat
offers it self more conspicuous and apparent to our view.

But concerning the original of the heat of subterraneal waters, there is as
much doubt, as of the generation of those waters themselves. And therefore I
shall in the first place endeavor to prove how heat does not come, thereby
confuting the opnion of some, and in the next place to show which way it may
proceed probably.

1. It is not caused by the heat of the Sun, and that partly for the reasons
above mentioned, as also because then, those waters would be hotter in
Summertime, than in Winter.

2. It is not from the agitation of winds in the channels of the fountains, for
if so, then they being vented forth, the heat would presently be extinguished.

3. It comes not from sulphur, Calx viva, (as is the opinion of many learned,
as Seneca. etc.) and that because neither does sulphur at all heat unless it be
actually hot, nor Calx viva, unless whilst it is dissolving in water: to say
nothing of that vast quantity, which would in a little time be resolved, and
the sudden remarkable change that would be in hot springs.

4. It proceeds not according to Doctor Jordens opinion, from the fermentation
that is in the generation of metals, and minerals caused by the agent spirit
acting upon the patient matter, and so producing an actual heat (for ex motu
fit Calor say all Philosophers) which serves as an instrument to further this
work of generation; For if it were so, then the heat in bathes would in time
cease, for he himself says that this fermenting heat continues no longer till
the generation of them be finished, which is done in some determinate time, but
we see that the hot baths continue for ever. Neither does it suffice that he
says that generations of metalls are not terminated with one production, but
the mineral seed gathers strength by enlarging it self, and so it continually
proceeds to subdue more matter under its government, so as where once a
generation is begun it continues many ages, and seldom gives over, as we see in
the Iron mines of Illua, the tin mines in Cornwall, the lead mines at Mendip,
and the Peak, which do not only stretch further in extent of ground, than has
been observed heretofore, but also are renewed in the same ground, which has
been formerly wrought, I say his saying thus does not suffice, for though it be
so as I do not deny but it may, yet notwithstanding he does not say, that
generation of metals continues in one place, except any ground be dug
first; and so space and place left for new mattter to come, as is not in our
baths, and so by consequence the flowing of hot water would cease in that
place, where the said generation is not continued; and if that generation be
extended further yet so also and accordingly is the heat diminished, unless it
break forth continually in new places: but we see hot springs continue many
years together in one place at a constant heat. Besides if this opinion were
true, then where we see metals, and minerals generated, there also must of
necessity be hot baths, but we see it is not so. I shall now moreover demand of
him, how that crude metalline matter is before any the said fermentation
sublimed from the central parts of the earth toward the superficies thereof,
if not by a subterraneall fire?

All these being excluded, it remains now that we consider of a subterraneal
fire only, for it seems impossible that so great, and durable a heat should be
caused, or preserved by any other power whatsoever, than that of fire, and of
this opinion was Empedocles an ancient Greek Philosopher, and also Seneca, but
both these differ amongst themselves as to the manner of the heats proceeding
from this fire, and indeed from other Authors that seem to be more Anthentick.
The one is of opinion that it is sufficient if the fire be under the place,
through which the waters run, and so like fire under a still force up the water
by way of a vapor: the other that the heat proceeds from some occult remote
burning and passed through the veins, and fibers of the earth where it meets
with the waters, and distill them up to the heads of the fountains. But
Agricola excepts against these two ways as being very impropable; the first,
because the earth, where the fire is, could not endure the fire so long, being
of a calcinable, and cumbustible nature: the second, because by this way such a
quantity of water could not be so heated as to be turned into a vapor so
suddenly, by so small a degree of heat.

There can therefore no other reason be given for these hot springs, than the
fire which burns in the very cavities, and caverns of them, the cavities
themselves consisting of a Bituminous matter. For Bitumen, and these things
which are made of it being kindled burn in water, by which also the said fire
is cherished: This you may see in Naphtha, which is a kind of Bitumen, for if
you put but a drop thereof into water, and put fire to it you will see it burn,
and continue burning so long, that you would wonder at it, which could not be
unless it were fed by the moisture of the water, which it did attract, and
transmutes into its own nature; The like you may see in Champhir, and other
kind of Bitumen. Pliny also affirms that these are some certain burnings in the
earth, which sometimes cast out Bitumen, and are increased by rain. And
Fallopius says that in the territories of Mutina is a short plat of ground,
out of which comes fire and smoke, and the ground is all like dust, which if
you kindle, you cannot quench again with water: so that these kind of fires are
perpetual, and very long lasting in waters. And has it not been observed that
a fiery Bituminous matter does sometimes flow out of hot Springs? Pliny makes
mention that in the City Somosata of Comaganes a certain lake sent forth
burning mud: and Plato makes mention of the like concerning a Spring in
Sicilia: And Agricola reports another upon his credit. Fallopius also says
that in many places where the earth is dug deep, there are ashes, and
calcined stones, which are the effects of fire, and that in the territories of
Modena, Bolonia, Florence, and other places, as in Italy etc, there are found
Springs and several places casting out fire. But as to Springs, this happens
only where the bituminous* matter is very near the Spring head, and as high,
and where the veins are more open.

Now then the manner of Springs being caused by this Bituminous fire is this,
viz: Seeing art does for the most part imitate nature, the thing is even the
same in a hot Spring, as in a distilling vessel, or a seething pot covered
with a lid; only there is this difference, that to the bottom of these the
fire is put on the out side, but here the fire is within the cavern it self
through which the water passes, and that either lying in the bottom, or
sticking to the sides thereof. As therefore in these artificial vessels the
water being by the heat of fire resolved into a vapor is forced upwards to the
covers or heads thereof, where by reason of some less degree of heat it is
condensed into drops, and returns to its self, and into its own nature again:
So even after the same manner water in the caverns of the earth being heated by
the Bituminous fire, with which it is mixed, is by the heat thereof forced into
a great quantity of vapors, which ascending through the cranines, veins, and
fibers of the earth being there for the greatest part turned into water, does
with the rest of the vapor yet very hot break forth in fountains viz: very
hot, and very full of spirit, so that it seems to boil, if the fountains be
near to the caverns, or only warm, if more remote. And as these Springs differ
in their heat according to their nearness, or remoteness to their fire, so also
in their Bituminous odor? and taste. For as in distilled waters their Empyreuma
vanishes in length of time, so in these in length of course: So that these
fountains, which are very remote from this Bituminous fire, are neither, hot,
nor have any Bituminous odor. And as by this natural distillation water is the
best way procolated from its Sea saltness; so also does it become thereby less
obnoxious to putrefaction: For we know that distilled waters last longest.

Ob. It may be objected, that if the matter preserving this fire were Bitumen,
then it would follow, that almost the whole world should be Bitumen, because
ever since, and before the memory of man these hot baths were, and are like to
continue for ever, and therefore there must be that element for ever which must
preserve that fire.

Sol. It does not follow that there must at present be so much Bitumen as will
maintain the fire so long, for it is perpetually generated, and as long as
there shall be sic city, and humidity in the earth, there will be Bitumen
generated: And do not we see that metals are generated a new in the same
places, out of which they have formerly been dug? Witness the profit which
Fallopius says the Duke of Florence has by it; and the testimony of learned
Sendivogius, who says that there have been metals found in mountains where
formerly there have been none. If so, then much more may sulphur and Bitumen be
generated a new.

Ob. If it should be granted that Bitumen is generated a new, yet, if that were
the aliment of the fire, the fire would change its places, because the Bitumen
is consumed one part after another, and so by consequence the baths would not
be so equally hot as before, the fire being by this means more remote from the
fountains

Sol. The flame is fed two ways, either when the flame follows the matter, as
when the fire burns wood, or when the matter follows the flame, as in a lamp,
in which the oil follows the flame, not the flame the oil; and so it is in
the earth, and therefore the fire is always in one place. Neither does that
withstand it, which we see by experience in sulphur which is burnt part after
part, the fire following of it: for you must know that in the earth where there
is a great heat, the Bitumen and Sulphur are melted, and by this means follow
the flame, as I said before of Oil.

Ob. If Bitumen feed the fire of these baths, then the waters thereof would
have the odor, taste, and color of Bitumen; but it appears that they have not.

Sol. Though all baths are heated by Bitumen, yet some immediately, as those
which do pass through the place where it burns, and these only have the taste,
and odor of the same: and some mediately, as those that pass through places,
as rocks, etc. heated by Bitumen, burning under them, as was the opinion of
Empedocles and Vitruvius. Neither do I by this distinction contradict what I
said before, concerning the waters being distilled up by that fire only which
burned in the caverns, and veins of the earth, through which they pass: for in
this place I speak only of the waters being heated, this mediate heat not
being sufficient to distill them to any considerable height.

Ob. It is very improbable that any subterraneal fire can burn within the
bowels of the earth by reason of the want of air, as we see in cupping glasses,
where as soon as they are applied, the fire goes out; besides the fuliginous
vapors would recoil and choke the fire, for there are few, or no vents and
exhalation seen.

Sol. There is not any such great want of air in the earth, nay there is such a
plenty of it there, that many learned Philosophers were, nay, Aristotle himself
of opinion, that all Springs were generated of subterraneal air.

2. Air is not the aliment of fire, for says the Lord Bacon in his Treatise De
vita and morte. Flamma non est aer accensus, flame is not kindled air; nay, but
unctuous vapors, which arise from the matter that is burnt, so that whereas
without air fire goes out, and is extinguished, the reason is, because the
fuliginous vapors wanting evaporation, do recoil upon the fire, and choke it.
Now this Bituminous fire is not, being of a sulphurous nature, very
fuliginous, and besides what smoke or sumes or vapors there come from it are
subtle, and penetrating, and either evaporate through the superficies of the
earth insensibly, or incorporate themselves with some suitable subject that is
in the earth, or else are of themselves condensed into some unctuous matter
adhearing to the sides of the caverns into which they are elevated. So that
according to the fuliginousness of vapors more or less recoiling, the fire is
more or less choked. Nay if we will believe Historians, there have been
burning Lamps closely shut up in glasses for fiftheen hundred years together in
old sepulchers; Now they burnt without air, and were not extinguished by reason
the aliment of it was a Naphtha, or Bituminous matter, which was so pure that
it bred no fuliginous vapors to choke the fire thereof.

3. Where this fire is very great, there is a great vent, and exhalation, but
where but little, little is the vent, and insensible. And in most places the
fire is not great extensively, but intensively, because it is kept within a
narrow compass, as in small caverns and veins of the earth.

Q. How comes this Bitumen to be kindled in the earth?

Sol. It is agreed by all that are of the opinion that Bitumen is the matter of
the subterraneal fire, that hot and dry exhalations in the bowels of the earth
being shut up, and not finding any place to break forth, are agitated,
attenuated, rarefied, and so inflamed, and being inflamed kindle the Bitumen.

Now lastly let no man wonder that there should be so great a force of fire
contained in the earth as to be sufficient for the generation of so many
Springs that flow from thence daily, seeing Pliny and many other Philosophers
wonder so much on the other side, when they considered of the subterraneal
fire, and brake forth into an exclamation, saying, it is the greatest of all
miracles that all things are not every day burnt up. And cannot the burnings of
the Aetnean, Visuvian, Nymphean mountains convince us a little of this? But for
the further confirmation of this opinion, let us a little consider whence the
winds proceed, and what they are. And are they not a hot and dry exhalation?
Now that this proceeds from, and out of the earth, most agree: and that it
entered not first into the earth is very probable: For how can a hot, dry,
light exhalation, whose nature, and property is to ascend, descend into the
earth in such a quantity, as to cause such great and lasting winds, as many
times happen? It must therefore be in the earth originally, and be stirred up
by some great heat in the same. And what shall we think of the dry exhalation
or spirit which is shut up in the caverns of the earth in great quantities, and
endeavoring to break forth through obstructed passages causes great
earthquakes whereby Cities, Towns, and Countries have been overthrown, to say
nothing of those dreadful noyses sometimes in the bowels of the earth? Whence
I say these great exhalations (I say great, because I confess that some little
quantity of them may be caused by certain fermentations in the earth) should be
raised, if not from some great heat of fire within the earth, never any one yet
could rationally determine.

And Caesius affirms that at a cerain village called Tripergulus about an
hundred and twenty years since after fiftteen days earthquake the earth
opened, and winds, smoke, and very great fires brake forth out of the same,
also pumice-stones, and abundance of ashes, in so much as they made a mountain,
and about that place were many hot Springs. Also in Apulia is a hot bath called
Tribulus, where there is abundance of ashes and calcined stones; and about the
lake Lucrinus and Avernus are the same.

But if any should yet doubt that winds proceed from the earth or from the
occult fires of the earth, I shall make it yet further to appear by propounding
to their consideration some observations concerning the Sea. For it is observed
that wind does proceed from the Sea, after a more apparent, and violent manner,
than from the land, and that more certain signs of an ensueing wind are taken
from the Sea, than from the land. For when a calm Sea makes a murmuring noise
within it self, it signifies that then the exhalations, which is the matter of
the wind are rising out of the earth, and bottom of the Sea; and this the
fishes perceiving, and being afraid of it, especially Dolphins, play above the
water, and the Sea-urchins fasten themselves to rocks: the Sea a little
swelling shows that the exhalation is endeavoring a vent; then boiling
shows that it has penetrated to the superficies, but as yet in a little
quantity: but then the eruptious of the exhalations following upon the waters
mounted up aloft, make wind, and a tempest; such as Mariners have often
experience of, when as they perceive that the wind blows from no other place,
but arises at themselves. Now why waves or billows should preceed wind, let
any man if he can give any other reason.

Also I have been informed by some Mariners that a little before a great
tempest there is seen a great quantity of an unctuous shineing matter floating
on the top of the Sea, and that this is an infallible sign of an ensuing
storm. The reason of this is because wind breaking forth out of the earth,
forces up with it self that Bituminous matter from the place where it self was
generated.

But now why winds should arise from the Sea more apparently than from the
land, is because there is more plenty of fire in the gulfes of the Sea, for
there it has more aliment or fuel, viz. Water, which as I said before, is the
aliment of that Bituminous fire. And whence are those great mountains of stones
and minerals, and those Islands, which do sometimes arise up anew from the Sea,
but from a subterraneal fire, which forces them up from thence (according to
the judgment of learned Sendivogius, and experienced Erker) and those chasmes,
and gapings of the Sea?

Much more might be alleged for the confirmation of this opinion, as the
manner of the generation of minerals, and metals and many such like
subterraneal operations, which can not rationally be ascribed to any other
cause, than fire within the earth; but all the premises being seriously
weighed, and impartially considered, I suppose there are but few but will
conclude, that as all Springs proceed from the Sea through subterraneal
channels and caverns, so also are distilled up to the heads of Fountains by a
subterraneal bituminous fire. And as for those that are not yet satisfied let
them consult with the treatise of our late, and learned Countryman Mr. Thomas
Lydyat, entitled Disquisitio physiologica de origin fontium, and there they
shall find this opinion rationally discussed, and solidly confirmed: but if yet
they shall be left unsatisfied, let them produce a more rational account of any
other opinion, that will hold water in all respects better than this of mine
does, and I shall thank him and embrace it.

And thus much for the original of Fountains in general, I shall now proceed
to treat of the nature of Springs in particular.

CHAP. III Of the strange variety of Fountains, and other Waters.
NAture has not discovered her self so variously wonderful in any thing as in
the Waters of Fountains, Rivers, etc. Some of which strange waters I shall
reckon up, hat it may be the better conceived how variously subterranealls
communicate their virtues to this Element. Now the wonderfulnes of waters that
I shall mention, consists either in the strangeness of their colors, tastes,
odours, sounds, weight, observation of time, and effects.

1. Srange Colors. Athenaeus makes mention of a Lake of Babylonia, that in
Summertime for some few days is red.

He also says that the water of Borysthenes is blew in Summertime.

Pausanus mentions a certain water at the Town Joppe and in Astyris, that is
yellow.

Cardanus speaks of a white water in the River Radera of Misena.

He also says there is a green water in the Mountain Carpatus.

He makes report of a black water in Allera, a River of Saxonia.

Scaliger reports that the Fountain Job in Idumea changes colors four times
in a year.

2. Srange Tastes. Agricola makes mention of sweet water in Cardia near
Dascylus, and Puteolana near the cave called Syhill.

Aristotle relates of a water in Sicania, of Sicilia, which is used instead of
vinegar, and pickle.

Rulandus also makes a report of a sour water in Mendick and Ponterbon.

Caesius speaks of a bitter and salt water in Palastina in which Fish can not
live, of the same taste is the sulphur Well in Yorkshire.

Caussinus says that the River Hyspanis is as sweet as Honey in the beginning,
and acide at the end.

Pliny relates that in the country of the Troglodytae, there is a Spring called
Fons Solis, (i. e.) the Fountain of the Sun, which alters its taste according
to the rising, and setting of the Sun.

Mutianus says that the Fountain Diotecnosia in the Isle Andros has the taste
of Wine.

Salt waters in Yorkshire, Spain, Italy, Sicilia, and diverse other places.

Nitrous water in L^ti^ of Macedonia, and at Epsome, and Scarborow, etc.

Astringing waters, as Alluminous, and Vitrioline almost every where.

Corroding water is in the River Styx, the water whereof being put into a
Silver, Copper, or Iron vessel, corrodes its way through the same.

Fat waters as they are tastable may be mentioned in this place, and many of
this sort says Caesius are in Germany, Italy, Macedonia, and other places.

3. Strange Odours. Pausanus says that in Peloponnesus is a water that has a
very fragrant smell.

He also says that in the Town of Elis the water of the River Aniger is of
such a horrid smell, that it kills both man, and beast.

Aristotle makes mention of a water not far from the River Aridanus, which is
hot and sends forth such a stanch the nothing can drink of it, and kills all
birds that fly over it.

Caesius reports of Arethusa a River of Sicilia, that it smells like dung at
certain seasons.

The Sulphur-Well in Yorkshire smells like the scouring of a Gun that is very
fowl.

4 Strange Sounds. Pliny makes mention of a Fountain of Zama in Africa, that
makes mellodious sounds.

Vitruvins reports that a Fountain in Maguesia, has a tunable sound.

5. Strange Weight, and that either in relation to themselves as being heavy,
or light, or to other things put into them.

Plutarch makes mention of a River called Pangeus, a vessel of the water
whereof weighs twice as heavy in Winter as in Summer.

Strabo says that the water of the River Euleus is fifteen times lighter than
any other water.

Seneca writes that in Syria there was a Lake called Asphalites, in which no
heavy thing could sink.

Caesius says that the Lake Alcigonius in Lerna is of that nature, that if any
go into it to swim, he should certainly be drowned.

Strabo writes that amongst the Indians in a mountainous Country there was a
River called Silia, on which nothing could swim, which River says Caussinus is
an emblem of ambition, because it will suffer nothing to be above it. Some
Rivers run over Lakes and will not mix with them, as Marcie over Fucinus, Addua
over Larus, and diverse other there are of this nature.

Some Rivers run under the bottom of the Sea, and will not mix with it, as
Lycus in Asia, Erasinas in Argolica.

Atheneus says that in Teno is a Fountain that will not mix with Wine: but
will fall always beneath it.

6. Strange observations of times.

Cardanus mentions a Spring called Fons Sabbaticus, that flows all the six
days of the week, but is dried up the Sabbath day.

Caussinus relates that the Fountain Vmbria, flows only against a time of
famine.

Ovid writes that the water of Pheneus is unwholesome by night, but wholesome by
day.

Solinus reports that in Helesina Regione, a Fountain otherwise still and quiet
does at the sound of a pipe rejoycingly exult and leap up.

Ovid says that the Fountain of Jupiter Hammon is cold by day, and hot by
night.

7. Strange effects.

The River Styx kills all them that drink of it, as is agreed by all Historians.

Strabo writes that in Palestina the Lake Gardarenus makes the nails, horns,
hair, fall off from those beasts that drink thereof.

Pomponius Mela says in Insula Fortunata is a water that makes them that drink
of it to laugh to death.

Pompeius Festus reports that the Fountain Salmacis inclines men to venery.

Vitruvius relates that the Fountain Clitorius makes them that drink of it to
abhor wine.

Ovid says that the Fountain Lyncestis makes men drunk.

Pliny makes mention of a Fountain that makes men mad.

Pliny reports that the Dodonean Fountain will quench lighted torches, but
kindle those that are extinguished.

Heurnius says that he saw amongst the Eugeneans a certain Fountain that would
turn diverse things to stone, that were cast into it: H. ab Heers, and Doctor
Jorden reckon up many of this nature, whereof some will couvert things into
stone in a short time, and some in a longer, and some only crust over things
as that dropping Well at Knaresborow, unles it sinks into things, as leaves,
moss, and all those it converts to a stoney substance.

Maginus makes mention of a Lake in Ireland, in the bottone whereof if you put
a staff, it will being pulled out some months after, be turned into Iron viz.
that part which stuck in the mud, and that part which was in the water into a
whetstone.

Aristotle mentions a certain Fountain in Sicilia, into which if living
creatures being before killed, were put, they would become alive again.

Athenaeus says that the fish of the River Clitoris have a certain voice.

Solinus speaks of a Fountain that is in Boeotia, which helps the memory.

Isidorus says the like of the River Lethe which causes forgetfulness.

Scaliger says that the River of Juverna, is of that nature, that the leaves
of a certain tree hanging over, falling into it, become living fishes.

Pliny reports that in Agro Carrinensi in Spain is a certain Fountain, which
makes all the fish that live in the water of it seem to be of a golden color.

Agricola affirms that fishes live in the hot Sulphur-waters of the lower
Pannonia near Buda.

Varro, and Solinus affirm that there is a Fountain in Arabia, which, if the
sheep drink thereof, changes the color of their fleeces, and makes the white
to become black.

Pliny reports that the water in Falisco makes the Cattle that drink thereof,
to become white.

He also says that in Pontus the River Astaces watering the fields, makes the
Mares that feed therein to yield a black milk, which feeds the Country.

It is reported that in Ulcester in Ireland, there is a Fountain, in which he
that washes himself shall never become gray.

I could reckon up many more waters of very strange natures, but whether they,
or these already mentioned be all certainly true, I will not undertake to
affirm, only thus much I will say, that some of them, I my self have seen,
other some I am assured of from those whose unquestionable worth may justly
command mine, and other men's faith to their indeniable testimony, and for the
rest we may believe them according to the reputation of the Historian. These
here I mentioned that it might not seem strange to us, how capable waters are
of receiving diversity of qualifications from the earth: and although some of
them may seem magical, and supernatural, yet may they upon a profound enquiry
be made to appear truly natural.

CHAP. IV. Of the nature, and virtues of simple Waters.
I It will be necessary for the better conceiveing of the nature, and virtue of
mineral waters in particular, to speak something of the nature, and virtues of
water in general, or of simple water, which is an element, as says
Sendivogius, most heavy, full of unctuous phlegm, and is more worthy in its
kind than the earth; it is without volatile, but within fixed; cold and moist,
attempered by air. It is the Sperm of the world, in which the seed of all
things is preserved, and it is the keeper of every thing. It is called by the
ancients (...). Thales as says Aristotle called one and the same water the
beginning of all things. Empedocles also believed that of water were all things
made. Hippon also says Aristotle called it the soul of things, as if it were
the life of them, which made Hippocrates say that water and fire were the
principles of life, and especially water, for says he, many animals may want
fire, but none can well live without water. Theophrastus affirms that water is
the matter of all things. And indeed if water were accurately anotamized you
should clearly see that both vegetables, minerals and animals are generated of
water, but of this I have treated more largely elss where: I shall not now
stand to repeat, especially since my purpose here is chiefly to speak of the
medicinal virtues of water.

Now we must know that water is twofold, for either it is simple or mineral,
which we more usually call medicinal. Water is called simple, not according to
its own nature, but to our sense, or being compared with that which is mineral,
and of this there are five kinds, viz. rain, fountain, pit, river, and standing
water.

I shall not here stand to prove whether or no water be nutritive, or be only
a vehiculum of aliments, as Galen would have it, because in another treatise I
have clearly showed how vegetables, animals and minerals are generated of, and
increased by water, which has such strange dissimilary, or heterogeneal parts
as can scarce be believed by those who never saw the spagyrical anatomy
thereof, or curiously examined the production of all natural things. I shall
insist only upon the medicinal use thereof, as being administered either to
prevent or cure the distempers of the body.

Simple water which cooles, and moistens, is either taken inwardly, or used
outwardly.

It is taken inwardly either warm, or cold.

The virtues of warme-water taken inwardly are these, which follow, viz.

1. It does by reason of its warmth cause nauseouseness, and it is drank in a
greater quantity to cause vomiting in headache proceeding from drunkenness, and
in any other ilness of stomach; but with this caution, that they that have very
cold, weak and laxated stomachs must abstain from this kind of vomit, because
warm water does moisten very much, and so by consequence would laxate tht
stomach more than it was before. Also it is not to be administered to those that
are accustomed to drinking of water, for them it will not move to vomit, but
remain in the body, and weaken the vessels upon the aforesaid account of its
extreme moistening.

2. It allayes sharp, acid, and gnawing humors, and cures such symptoms as
proceed from thence, as says Galen; also it represseth the ebullition of
choler, and helps the inflammations of the throat, and mouth caused thereby as
says Aetius.

3. It cures the inflammation of the reins by altering of them, if it be taken
before meals.

Note that if warm water be given to cause vomiting, it must be administered to
the quantity of a pint or two, or of as much as will be sufficient thereunto.
But if it be used for qualification it must be taken to the quantity of a cup
only, which may not cause nauseousnes.

The use and virtues of cold water are these viz.

1. It conduces to long life in regard it condenseth the spirits says the
Lord Virulam. And indeed water was the usual drink of the ancients who lived
long.

2. It repels by reason of its coldness, and is thefore effectual against
diverse distempers; it forces crudities out of the stomach, and as says
Aetius, promotes the operation of any medicine that is taken, and works not:
besides it suppresseth the fuming of vapors to the head as says Dioscorides,
and Mesues, and being drunk at bedtime causes quiet rest, as says the Lord
Virulam in his learned treatise de vita, et morte, by suppressing the ascent of
vapors to the head.

3. It allayes extreme hot distempers. whether they be in any particular part,
as in the stomach, liver etc. or in the whole body, as in continual, and
burning fevers. It is upon this account commended by Galen against an inward
Erisipelas. I know some that account it, especially rain water, as a great
secret against ulcers of the reins.

Note that cold water is prohibited from a cold temper either of the whole, or
of principal parts, also from old age, because it is very feeble, and from
childhood because it is subject to convulsions as says Galen, and from a thin
habit of body extenuated by reason of scarcity of blood, which is a great, and
the principal safeguard against cold things. Winter also, and a cold, crass
slimy morbifick, or a hot impact matter, as also great obstructions of the
vessels, and cold inward tumors forbid the use of cold water.

As for the time when cold water is to be drank, note that it is never to be
administered in fevers, unless concoction do first appear, as says Galen, for
although it be a remedy for a fever as it is a fever, yet it is not a remedy
against the humors which cause a fever, but as it evacuates them by Urine
stool, or sweat. But these cannot safely be expelled before they be concocted.
Now we must not notwithstanding expect a perfect and full concoction, but it
will suffice if it be moderate and in good part performed, for else there will
be a danger of the fevers turning into a Hectic. Also it must not be taken on
the critical day, for then says Hippocrates we must not move the humors,
because we do not certainly know which way nature will attempt an evacuation.
But for a more particular time of the fever it is to be taken most
conveniently in the fit, or in the very hour of the ebullition of the humors,
because then the inward parts do burn most, and need most then to be qualified,
besides coldness is then least offensive; because the greatness of the heat is
a safeguard against the offensiveness thereof.

As for the quantity to be drunk, note that if the repelling, or suppressing
virtue thereof be required, it is to be taken to the quantity of half a pint,
more or less as things may be considered. But if the altering or allaying
virtue, as in a fever, then it is to be taken in such a quantity as may be
drunk at one breath, or as much at the sick party needs for satisfaction, or
elss can well bear. But the greatness of the distemper, the age, time of the
year, custom, and strength is also to be considered.

But it will be demanded which is the best water, and most wholesome; and for
answer hereunto, I say that is the best which is void of taste or odor, is
clear, pure, most light, is soon heated, and soon cooled, and in which flesh is
soonest boiled, and in particular as says Galen rain water is the best, but
yet not any, but such which falls in Summertime when the heaven is in great
part serene, and especially with thunder, being that which consists of thinner
vapors, elevated and purified by the heat of the Sun and lightning. And next
to this is that pit water, which flows from the next fountain, or river
especially through a sandy earth, because if the said earth partake of no other
quality, it is percolated, made more thin, and becomes more depurated than
other water. And in defect of these two, fountain and river water may be used,
being indeed very good and wholesome, and indeed are by many accounted the best:
but the worst of all is standing water as lakes, pooles. Now in case there can
be got no good water, but only what is bad, than Galen would have that to be
boiled, and cooled again, and so to be used. Thus much of the use and virtues
of cold, and warm water administered in wardly.

It remains now that I speak two or three words of the external use of water
both warm and cold, and of the effects thereof. Now water is used outwardly
says Julius Caesar Claudinus first by way of Balneum, or bathing the whole
body, secondly by way of insessus or sitting in water up to the navel thirdly
by way of aspersion or affusion (i. e.) sprinkling or pouring on, fourthly by
way of stillicidium, dropping or distilling. Fistly by way of fomentation, and
lastly by way of lotion or washing any part.

Bathes are either hot, or cold.

Cold Bathes were by ancient and modern Philosophers, and Physicians ordained
for diverse uses. Many used them only by way of exercise as for swimming in
them, which the Lord Verulam in his learned treatise de vita and morte reckons
up as one of those robust exercises, as he calls them, which makes the flesh
hard, and compact, conducing to long life.

They are used also for the astringing of the body, and condensing the same,
also as says the a foresaid Learned Vicount for the closing of the pores of
the body that are too open, whereby the hot air excluded from preying upon the
body, besides they unite the Calidum innatum, corroborating the same by an
antiperistasis whereby by consequence it does beget a good appetite, cause a
good digestion, excite the expulsion of excrements, repress a canine appetite,
and other ill symptoms caused by the exolution of the skin, stop bleeding, the
overflowings in women, and the gonorrhea, cure the Hydrophobia which is a
symptom occasioned by the biting of a mad dog, and many sorts of seavers both
intermitting, and continual; if the party make use of them when that fit is
approaching, and there continue an hour or two.

Note that the use of cold baths is not for youths, because they hinder their
growth, nor for old men, because that little heat which they have is thereby
suffocated, nor for cold and thin women which have delicate bodies, because the
cold penetrates too much into their solid parts, nor to any that be sick,
unles they be of strong natures (for as cold baths do wonderfully corroborate
the Calidum innatum, or natural heat if it be strong, so do they on the
contrary overcome it if it be weak) and the humors appear to be concocted and
fit for evacuation, and no principal part, or bones, nerves, brain ill
affected, and the body free from convulsions.

Note also that when the intension is to be formed by cooling only, and there
is no need of moistening, then as says the aforesaid author of the History of
life and death, the body is to be anointed with oil, with spissaments or
thickeners that the quality only of the cooler be received, and not the
substance. Yet we must in such cases have a care that the pores of the body be
not thereby stopped too much, for when any extrinsecal cold obstructs the body
too much, it is so far from cooling it, that it stirs up the heat the more, by
suppressing perspirations.

Baths also of hot or heated water are of great use; but before I declare the
uses and effects thereof, we must consider that they are of three sorts, for
either they are tepid, (i. e.) Lukewarm, or moderatly hot, or very hot water.

A Bath that is very hot dryes rather than moistens, contracts the skin,
condenseth the pores thereof, so that neither any external humidity can be
received in, or internal superfluities expelled forth thereby. So that there is
no great use thereof, only it serves for the contracting of the skin where it
needs contraction, and where the use of a cold Bath may not be admitted safely
for that intension.

A Bath that is moderately hot serves for diverse uses, and is very necessary in
several cases.

It draws from remote internal parts, and causes hot humors to be digested
into vapors, and opens the pores, that the offensive humors, and vapors
may be evacuated by sweat, and perspirations. It moisteneth a dry body and
therefore, is very good in a putrid and hectic fever, in the itch, and scab,
etc. attracts nourishment to the extreme parts, where before by reason of some
defect it came not, allayeth the sharpnes of humors in the habit of the body,
and upon all these accou^ts serves as effectually, if not more, for most
intensions, that almost any Physic is prescribed for. I shall only add to
these the great virtues that Columella attributes to Baths of hot water; for
says he, we do concoct our crudities by the use of Baths. And for this end
they were much used by the ancient Romans, who used a crude kind of diet as of
herbs, and raw fruits, which bred crude humors in their bodies, and therefore
needed some such help to concoct them, and by this means they became very
healthful, and of delicate bodies. But they must be used for the concocting of
crudities with this caution, viz. that there be no fever present, for then
instead of concocting of them they will become by being stirred, more putrid,
and by being attracted to the habit of the body, as of necessity they must by
the use of hot Baths, obstruct the pores thereof, to the increasing of the
fever; and in case of a fever, hot Baths must be used in the declining
thereof as when concoction appears, and after purging of the gross humors,
abound in the first vessels, but in other cases Hippocrates commends Bathing as
a preparative to purgations.

A tepid Bath cools as well as heats, and heats as well as cools, and serves
for the same uses as a hot Bath does but more remisly.

Note that if the patient that is bathing be subject to faint, he must hold
cold water constantly in his mouth, and drink ever and anon a draught of cold
beer or water.

I might here prescribe many rules and directions for bathing, or for the
ordering of ones self before, in, and after bathing, but it was not my purpose
to make a full, and large discourse of this subject, only to touch it by the
way, referring those that stand in need of bathing to their skilful Physicians
for their directions,

To this kind of bathing, viz. with hot water, I might add the manner of
bathing by vapor, which is when a vessel of seething water close covered has
proceeding from it a long pipe, which is fastened into a bathing tub, into
which the hot vapors come upon the patient there sitting: but of this I have
treated more largely in another discourse, and will not now repeat.

The second way of using water outwardly is called insession or sitting in
water up to the navel, and this is used when the weakness of the body cannot
bear a bathing of the whole body, and particularly it is made use of, if warm,
for laxating, and mollifying the hardness of the belly, for provoking of Urine,
the mitigating of the pains of the stone, and chollick, etc, and if cold, for
the performing of the same intensions for the lower part of the body, as a cold
Balnenm does for the whole.

The four last ways of using water outwardly, as aspersion (i. e.) sprinkling,
or affusion, Stillicidum (i. e.) dropping or distilling, fomenting, and lotion
respect parts, with the like operations upon them (although with some kind of
variety of application) as baths do the whole body. They that will understand
more these external uses of cold and hot water, let them read Claudinus his
treatise de Ingressu ad Infirmos, and Galen de tuenda Sanitate.

Note that that water is best for outward uses which will bear soap best, and
make the greatest some therewith.

And thus much for the virtues, and inward, and outward use of simple water,
whether hot or cold, and that in brief, for I would not dwell upon this
subject, as not being the chiefest that I propounded to my self to discourse of
in this treatise, taking it in only by the way and for order sake, and the
better illustrating of that which follows, and is principally to be here
treated of.

CHAP. V. Of the several kinds of mixtures in mineral waters.
IT is granted by all that there is some kind of mixture in all mineral
waters: and indeed there are four kinds of things that are usually mixed with
these kinds of waters, viz. Metals, Minerals, Stones, and Earths; and of some
of these, 1. Sometimes the vapors only are mixed, viz. Such as arise from the
fermentation, and dissolution of Metals, and Minerals, and are mixed with the
water that passes by them through the veins of the earth. And concerning this,
says Aristotle, that the vapors of Minerals keep the taste, and odor of the
Minerals from whence they proceed: but of this more fully in the Chapter of the
Spaw. 2. Sometimes the juice only of them, viz. Whilst they are in principiis
solutis. And indeed gold can be mixed with waters no otherwise, because it
cannot be corroded with the acid spirits of the earth, as other Metals can,
having in it self when concocted, and perfected none of that esurine acid salt,
which a subterraneal aciditie will resolve and set at liberty to corrode the
Metal with which it is per minima together with the embrionated Sulphur of the
same conjoined. 3. Sometimes the substances, and that after a threefold manner,
for some are mixed with water so very close together, that from the mixture of
them there results but one form, neither will they ever or scarcely be
separated, and such are those that will not vapor away faster than the water
it self is evaporated, neither remains in the bottom, but is all evaporated
with the water. Some are mixed confusedly, Such as subside or fall to the
bottom, if the water be put into any vessel, that it may stand still. And
lastly some are mixed in a way betwixt both, as salt; for salt and the water
continue to be in one and the same form, but yet the salt will subside and
remain in the bottom after evaporation of the water.

Now the cause of this variety of mixtion is either the difference of the heat
that should unite, or of their abode together, or else of the aptness of the
things, to be mixed, for mixtion.

This being premised, I shall proceed to relate where these Springs, and waters
are found, which are impregnated with the aforesaid four kinds of Ingredients.

1. Of Metals

Gold is said to be found mixed with Balneis Ficuncellensibus, Fabariis,
Piperinis, etc.

Silver, in a certain Spring in Hungary, and in the Bath at Bol. etc.

Copper, in the Bath of Saint Mary's in Flaminia in Thermis Cellensibus in
Suevia, and in many places in Germany. etc.

Iron, in Springs in Agro Lucensi in Asatia, in Agro Calderiano and diverse in
England.

Lead, in Lorayne, whence a certain Bath there is called Balneum Plumbaceum.

Quicksilver, in Serra Mordena in Spain, near the village Almediea in a cave,
where they say are many wells infected therewith.

2. Of Minerals.

Sulphur is said to be found in Thermis Puteolanis, Aponitanis, and Badensibus
in Helvetia, and those at Knaresborow.

Antimony, in Germany, and in a certain Spring at Meldula, as also in diverse
other purging waters.

Arsenick, and Auripgimentum in the lake Avernus.

Bitumen, in the wells at Baia Mutina and those at Knaresborow called the
Sulphur-wells.

Salt in Balneis agri Pistoriensis, and Volaterrani and in the Sulphur-well at
Knaresborow.

Nitre, in Agro Puteolano of Campania, in Egypt and diverse other places where
the waters are very nitrous.

Alum, in Balneis Agri Senensis, and Lucensis, and in some Springs in the
North of England.

Vitriol, in agro Volaterrano, and those Spaw-wells in Germany, and these in
England.

3. Of Stones.

Plaster, in a Spring of the Mountain Grotus in agro Pataviano.

Lime-stones, in Springs of chalkie countries, where the water sometimes runs
forth white.

Marble, in a Bath in agro Agnano.

4. Of Earth.

Potters clay, in a bath of the mountain Orthonus.

Rubric, or a certain red earth (for so sometimes it signifies) in aquis
Calderiani^.

Marle, in Oaxes a river of Scythia, etc.

But of all these by the way only and for method sake, and also for the better
understanding of what is behind, and indeed is the chiefest subject of this
present treatise.

CHAP. VI. Of the Original of Vitriol, and the causes of Vitrioline waters, or
Spawes, difference of them the one from the other, and the reasons of their
different operations.
IN the first place I shall give a description of Vitriol (in which shall be
declared the causes thereof) and explain the terms thereof, difficult and not
obvious to every ones apprehension, as being not usual in common natural
Philosophy.

(...) Vitrial therefore is but an esurine acid Salt, of the embrionated
Sulphur of Copper, or Iron, which attracting an acidity from air, or water is
thereby opened, and resolved, and then corrodes the parts of the said metals,
with which it is connate, the body of which compound, consisting of Pure Metal?
and superfluos Sulphur, and Salt, being thus opened is dissolved in water
passing through the veins thereof: And this water thus impregnated is boiled to
a Vitrial.

The difficult terms hereof I thus explain.

1. By embrionated Sulphur I understand a superfluous sulphur, which is not the
matter of the Metals, but connate only with them for the embrional
conservation of them, and after the perfection of the Metal is cast off in part
by nature, and more fully by the refiners fire. Paracelsus explaines it by a
familiar example of a Nut. A Nut says he per se is only the kernel, which is
not generated by it self, but together with the shell, and shales, which are
superfluous* and serve only for the embrional conservation of the Nut, that
is., of it whilst it is in an Embrio or imperfect. And here by the way note
that as every Mineral, Metal, and vegetable has its distinct Sulphur
Embrionatum, so every Sulphur Embrionatum is distinct from the true genuine
thing generated, with which it is connate, as much as a form, essence,
substance, and corporality differ the one from the other, and is but an
impurity of its Embrio, and as it were as Helmont calls it, the secundine
thereof.

2. By esurine salt I understand in this place (not the acid spirit of air,
water, and subterraneal sulphurious vapors, not yet coagulated or
specificated, which also are sometimes called an acid or esurine salt, but) a
certain acid vapor applicable to all Metals and Minerals, and connate with
them in their principiis solutis, and Embrioes, and especially to those that
abound with sulphur, as Iron, and Copper, and with them congealed into a saline
principle, giving consistency to the compositum, as sulphur does coagulation,
and is by Hel-mont for want of another name called the esurine salt of an
embrionated sulphur. (But any one may call it what he please, if so be he
understand it) and is resolved, and unloosed by an acid spirit contained in
air, and water, which spirit is indeed the seed of salt (for in them viz in air
and water, are the seeds of all things, in the former as being therein
imagined, as says Sendivogius, as in the male, and in the latter, as being
afterward by a circulative motion cast forth into the same as into their sperm
(for he makes a subtle distinction betwixt seed, and sperm) wherein they are
conserved, taking not upon them the nature of any specifical salt, until they
meet with some corporeal principles that are consentaneous to them) and is,
when it meets with any saline corporeal principle in its resolving of it
coagulated together with the same into a distinct species of salt, viz: into
this or that according to the nature of the compositum; where this solution,
and coagulation is made.

I shall for the better illustration of this nativity of salts, briefly show
how two of the four said salts, viz. Nitre and vitrial are made artificially,
because this artificial process is performed in imitation of the natural
production of them.

1. The process therefore of making nitre artificially is this, viz. Sprinkle
distilled vinegar upon fat earth, as fullers earth, bole, marle, etc. beaten
small, and let it stand for a few days in a cold place, and you will see pure
nitre produced from thence. Or take any one of the aforesaid earths, and beat
it small, and set it in a cold moist place for some weeks, and you will see the
same effect. Now this latter way seems as much natural as artificial, and
indeed it is just in imitation of nature: for we see that any fat earth, if it
be covered from rain, and the Sun, so as it spends not its strength in
producing of herbs and plants, breeds plenty of nitre.

Now note that in these kinds of fat earths there is at first observed no
nitrous taste, neither can there from thence be extracted any nitre, but after
they have continued a certain time in the cold air, do by a certain magnetic
power of a nitrous principle, or saline unctuosity which is in them, attract an
acidity, or rather acid spirit, which opens the bodies of those fat earths, and
resolves the said saline unctuosity, and is therewith coagulated, (for the
solution of the one, is the coagulation of the other) and after this manner is
the nativity of nitre.

2. The process of making artificial Vitrial is manifold, I shall speak of
only two, and they are these.

1. Cast Sulphur into melted Copper, and there let it burn till it cease to
burn any more, then presently cast the melted Copper into rainwater, which
will thereby become green. This do so often till all the Copper be dissolved in
the water: then evaporate the water, and you shall have a good Vitrial.

Note that it is an acid spirit in the sulphur, which opens and resolves the
esurine Salt in the Copper, whereby the Copper it self is corroded, and fit for
dissolution in the water.

2. Take Copperas stone, which is a certain Sulphurious glittering Marcasite,
break to pieces a good quantity of them, and lay them in air, and rain, upon
sticks over wooden vessels, and in a certain time the stones will be resolved
by an acid spirit in the air, and water, and washed down into the said vessel
with the rainwater, which will thereby become green, and yield upon
evaporation a good green Vitrial: and after this manner do we make our Vitrial,
or Copperas in England.

Now let it not seem strange to any one, that there is such an acidity in
water, and air; for whence else does Iron, and Copper, being put into water, or
standing long in the air, especially in a cold Cellar contract such a rust as
they do? Is not this rust from the aforesaid acid spirit, viz. of the air and
water, resolving the erusine Salt in those metals, and making it thereby more
corrosive, and more powerful to corrode part of the metals themselves, with
which it is mixed per Minima? And will not this rust being boiled in rainwater
yield a Vitrial?

Ob. But some will object, and say, that this rust is caused not from the
acidity, but only from the humidity of the air, and water, resolving thereby
the said esurine Salt.

Sol. This I will solve with a relation of two experiments, viz.

1. Take the above named Copperas stones broken to pieces, weigh them exactly,
and lay them in a cold moist place, (but so that no rain come at them to wash
away the Salt thereof, as it is resolved by the acidity of the air,) and after
some months they will, by a certain magnetical power, attract a certain saline
humidity, and fall into a black powder, which being well dried, and then
weighed, will prove far more ponderous than before, which implies that there is
an addition of something else than a mere quality, viz. the humidity of air,
and water.

2. Take a pound of Salt of tartar, make it red hot, and weigh it exactly, then
put upon it two pints of rainwater distilled, and evaporate it, then put on
more, and evaporate that also, and then make the Salt red hot again, and weigh
it, and you shall find it far heavier than before, which is caused by the said
Salts attracting to it self that occult acid saline spirit, which was in the
water, and fixing of it into its own nature; and not by assimilating the water
it self, which will never be converted into Salt any otherwise than as it
contains a saline acid spirit, which is the only thing coagulable in it.

Ob. Some again will object, although they do admit of this acid spirit in air,
and water, and say that in case the said acid spirit do corrode and dissolve
the metals, it does not follow that there is any such esurine Salt in those
metals, as distinct from the pure mercurial, or other Sulphurous part of them,
but say that it corrodes only the said mercurial, and Sulphurous part
thereof, as we see aqua fortis does silver, and mercury, and aqua regia does
gold, and so becomes coagulated into a saline nature, and consistency.

Sol. The said acid spirit of the air, and water, can not corrode, or putrify
the pure metalline part of metals, for we see that mercury is not corroded,
and reduced into a saline nature thereby, and that gold does never rust, and
that because it is purified from all the said acid saline principle, and is not
at all corroded, but by an aqua regia; and silver contracts but little rust,
and that according to the small quantity there is in it of the said Salt. And
for the superfluous embrionated Sulphur, that neither can be corroded by the
said acid spirit, any otherwise than it contains in it that esurine Salt, for
if we put pure Sulphur extracted from Sulpbur vivum into aqua fortis, it will
not be corroded thereby, much less then by the aciditie of air, and water, nay*
Theophrastus says, that if woods, and cords be smeered over with an unctuous
oil, which he prescribes to be made out of Sulphur, they will be preserved from
putrefaction for ever, though they continue in the air, water, or earth: and
the truth is, nothing can open and resolve Sulphur but oil, being of a like
unctuous nature with' it, as I have oftentimes tried. There must therefore be
another corporeal Principle, viz. of a consentaneous, suitable, and saline
nature, that is apt for to be corroded and resolved, and to coagulate the said
spirit.

3. Vitrial is made artificial after this manner, viz. Take an ounce of spirit
of Sulphur, or vitrial, and put it into a gallon of rainwater, stir them well
together, then put into this acid water half a pound of the filings of Iron, or
Copper, and within a few hours the metal will attract the said acid spirit to
it self, be dissolved it self thereby, and coagulate that. This being done
decant the water, and calcine the said mixture in a crucible, and being
poudered, put it into rainwater seething hot, stirring them together, and then
all that being settled to the bottom* that will settle, power off the clear
green water, and evaporate it, and you will have a pure Vitrial.

Like unto this is the making of Vitrial, by sprinkling a considerable quantity
of distilled Vinegar upon the powder of Steel, or Copper, and letting of them
stand till the mixture grow very hot by fermentation, and be again cooled, and
then putting it into rainwater seething hot, and proceeding as in the
foregoing process.

Almost after the same manner is Verdigrease made, viz. by hanging plates of
Copper or Brass over the hot vapors of Vinegar.

Now these three processes of making artificial vitrial being seriously
considered, will clearly illustrate the nativity of natural vitrial, which is
as I conceive after this manner, viz: by an acid subterraneal spirit (whereof
there is great quantity in some mines) corroding the veins of Iron, or rathe
Copper, which being thus resolved, and opened are by the water that passes
through them, dissolved, after which, this liquor is boiled to a Vitrial; and
thus is made the Vitrial in Dansick, Hungary, etc.

Note that any of the said Vitrials, if they be made out of Copper, whether
natural, or artificial, being distilled in a forceing furnace, yield oil, and
spirit, and the Caput Mortuum thereof dissolved in rain water yields a pure
Vitrial, and the Colcothar that falls to the bottom of the said water, yields
upon a refiners taste most pure Copper like to very gold; as does Verdigrease,
the Metalline parts thereof being purified from their feculencies by means of
the foresaid corrosion and dissolution.

The nativity of Vitrial being thus promised, it will most evidently appear
what are the true causes of Spaw water, viz. Of their Vitrioline taste, and
odor. It will not now be a thing irrational to grant that all Spaw waters
partake either of the corporeal, or spiritual parts of Vitrial.

They that partake of the substance of Vitrial are such, as when they are
evaporated, leave behind them a Vitriol at the bottom, and such are the
Sevenir, Paubon, and Geronster Springs, the two former of which Helmont said,
he carefully distilled, and found nothing in them but the Vitrial of Iron, and
like to this was a certain Spring within two miles of Knaresborow, the water
whereof I distilled, and found in the bottom a Vitrial of Iron.

Moreover, betwixt these wells, which are impregnated with a corporeal Vitrial,
there is a considerable difference; for some work upon the bowels mostly, and
by stool, if not sometimes by vomit, and such are they that contain in them
much Vitrial, whether of Copper, Iron, or both mixed together, as Geronster,
and are more gross and corpulent, and the operation of these is much after the
same manner as that of steel, which for the most part does, the first days it
is taken, cause a nauseousness in the stomach, and passes away by stool all
the time it is taken, and by reason of the harshnes it has, is seldom
attracted to, or passes through the vessels of the second concoction: But they
that contain little of the substance, but more of the spirit as does Serenir,
do pass the stomach, Liver, and other vessels far sooner, and with less
disturbance than do the other. And they that partake of none of the substance,
but only of the spiritual part, or virtues, such as the Spaw-well at
Knaresborow, of which particularly in the next Chapter, etc. are far more
efficacious in many cases, especially where obstinate humors, and confirmed
obstructions betwixt the stomach, and Liver, are not the causes of the
distempers, for in such cases, such a Medicine must be administered, which way
more strong irritate these vessels to eject those obstructing tartareous, and
viscous humors, or at least dissolve and attenuate them, thereby making them
to yield to more benign purgatives.

Note also that these waters may, the more they are impregnated with the said
corporeal substances, the further be carried without loss of their strength.
The water of Sevenir is carried many miles, and into other Countries without
loss of its virtues, but that of Pauhon much further, and into further
Countries; we have it transported into England very frequently. Now the water
of the Spaw in Yorkshire cannot be carried near so far; but yet further than
most believe, as I shall declare in the next Chapter.

Now these differences, or varieties of impregnations arise either from the
difference of the quantity of the acide spirit corroding, the difference of the
fruitfulness of the vein of Copper, or rather Iron corroded, or the greater or
lesser continuance of the course of the water already impregnated, through
veins of the said Metals, whereby it becomes long yet more impregnated, if the
course be continued.

Note that the veins of the said impure Metals contain in them more esurine
salt, and yield more natural spirits than they themselves when melted, and
therefore communicate far more efficatious virtues than they do, I mean in many
cases.

CHAP. VII. Of the Spaw-well near Knares-borow.
ABout a mile and a half from the said Town, Westward, in a moorish, boggie
ground, (within less than half a mile from which there is no considerable
ascent) arises a Spring of a Vitrioline taste and odor, resembling much those
ultramarine Spaws. The water of this Fountain springs directly up from the
sandy bottom; and this is no otherwise than that water does, which passing
through pipes in the earth (serving for the conveying of water, from a Fountain
to a house or Town) does break the pipes if they be obstructed, or force it
self through them, if already broken, upwards through the superficies of the
earth, and flows in the manner of a Spring. For in this place the subterraneal
veins, through which the water passes, are either (if not there terminated)
obstructed, or too infirm to contain the water of the spring, passing forcibly
through them, and making a vent where it can.

As for the vitrioline, and Ironish taste, and odor of this water, I need (in
regard I have in the preceding Chapter declared more at large the causes of
all Spaws) speak the less in this place. But for more particular satisfaction,
the aforesaid taste and odor may be imputed, partly to those vapors that
proceed from the fermentation, that is in Iron, or Copper mines* and thus
Aristotle, and H. ab Heers, would have it to be, affirming, that vapors retain
the taste and odours of their minerals, and the water with which these vapors
are mixed become thereby impregnated, though in a more remiss degree, with the
same qualities: partly to the long abiding, or continuing of the water with the
Iron, or Copper mine viz. in some great cavities in the midst of the veins
thereof, whereby it contracts their odor and taste, as we see it does in Iron,
or Copper vessels, if it stand long there, especially if excited by heat, or
acuated with any acidity, and as does white wine standing long with scales, or
filings of steel, or iron: or partly to the water acuated with some
subterraneal sulphurious acidity, and passing swiftly through some hungry
barren vein of Iron, which it corrodes lightly resolving thereby some of the
spiritual, and subtle parts thereof only, which it becomes it self
impregnated with. And hence it acquires the nature of a Spaw-well.

Now for the better understanding of the nature of this Spaw, I made diverse
experiments thereof, which are these.

1. I distilled it, supposing that if I could draw off the mineral spirits by
themselves, I should discover a great secret, very advantageous for diseased
people, but the water, yea, the two first spoonfuls, which were distilled, and
the rest undistilled that remained, utterly lost, both the taste and odor,
which they had before, neither would they become any otherwise tinged with
galls than common Springwater, although the water undistilled with the mixture
of the powder of galls, became as red as a well colored Clarret wine. Now it
is hard to conceive the true reason of this, especially since I distilled it in
a glass still, and luted or closed up very carefully the joints thereof, so
that spirit of wine could not evaporate out thereat. I impute it to the
subtilty of those spirits, which are so volatile that they are sooner sublimed
than the water it self, therefore becoming to be unbodied (for before they were
incorporated with the water) and by consequence wonderful spiritual, penetrate
even the glass it self, or the lute, and I believe that neither glass or lute
can hold them.

2. I took two viol glasses, and put into them a just equal quantity of the
Spaw water, I put one of them into a skillet of warm water, and just took the
cold off from it, than I put an equal quantity of the powder of gals into each
of those two viols, and that water which was cold received no deeper tincture
than the other as I could perceive.

3. I filled two viol glasses with this water, and stopped one of them very close
with wax, and the other I stopped not at all, and at two days end they yielded a
tincture with the powder of gall, little less than that which is newly taken
out of the well, but that less, which was left unstopt. How much it will loose
this tincture by carrying far, I do not know; it were worth while to try, and
thereby to be the better assured how much of its strength is wasted, for
according to the spending of its spirits the tincture fades.

4. A glass of this water stood seven days close stopped with wax, and than
yielded a tincture with gall, like to small beer.

5. This water does not coagulate milk as do the German Spaws, and another
Vitrioline Spring in the same moor, which yields a Vitrial of Iron upon
evaporation as I said before. Now the reason of this is not because it is not
acide enough, for it is far more acid than the water of the dropping Well,
which coagulates milk, if it be boiled with it, but because the acidity thereof
is not permanent, or fixed enough, but so volatile as to evaporate before the
milk boils.

6. This water kills Worms and Frogs, if they be put therein, and such kind of
Creatures as these.

7. It being evaporated, leaves nothing at all of Vitrial behind, but only an
insipid powder of a darkish color, like unto which powder will that bluish
cream or skin, which swims upon the said water after long standing, be when it
is dried. Now note that the aforesaid skin swimmeth upon all such Mineral
waters, and as says H: ab Heers, being put upon the fire is inflamed, and
yields a sulphurous odor. It is also called by Hadrianus Mynsicht, Anima
vitrioli.

8. I weighed this water, I think exactly to a grain, and it weighed neither
heavier nor lighter than simple spring water.

9. It is observed generally, and I took especial notice of it, that it is
almost an infallible sign of an ensuing rain, when glasses filled with this
water continue not clear, but are covered all over as it were with a mist,
contrary to what is observed in glasses full of simple common water. Now the
reason of this I conceive is from the Mineral subtle spirits giving, as nitre
does, activity to the coldness of the water, whereby the glasses themselves
become more cold, and so cold as eminently, and apparently to condense the
humid vapors of the air, with which it abound before the rain.

To these experiments, and observations I shall add this observation also, viz.
that this Spaw water is strongest, viz. with the Mineral spirits in Winters
frost, by reason of the earth being the more bound up, and the said spirits
being thereby kept from perspiration: and weakest in rainy wet weather by
reason the water sinks into the veins of the springs, viz. those that lie
nearest to the superficies of the earth, for it cannot sink above ten feet deep
though the rain be never so much. Also this water is in Summertime stronger in
the morning than at noon, because the coldness of the night does somewhat bind
the earth, and the heat of the Sun opens the same, thereby making it the more
easy for the Mineral spirits to evaporat out thereby.

To prevent the inconveniences of rain, it were to be wished that there were a
very deep trench (yet not so deep as to cut a sunder any of the veins through
which the water passes, if any should lie within six, eight, or ten feet of
the superficies of the earth, as it is possible some may) made round the well,
and bridges, made over some places of the same, for as by this means the rain
would be carried away, so also the water in the boggie ground adjoining to it,
which may perhaps sink into the veins of the spring, and corrupt the same,
would be dreyned away, and the well by this means much improved, for the ground
about it is spongious, and drinks in water apace, the uppermost part thereof to
to the depth of a foot, consisting of that hollow earth of which is made pete
and turfe, and that beneath it being sandy, and also hollow.

CHAP. VIII. Of the virtues of the Spaw-well, to whom, and in what cases
profitable, or hurtful.
I Shall not stand here to reckon up all, and the several virtues of Vitrial,
as not properly conducing to our present purpose, because the varities of its
operations depends upon the variety of the forms, in which it is administered,
or used; for the Salt thereof has one operation, the Colcothar another, the
corrosive spirit another, and that subtle acide penetrating spirit, (which
Theophrastus calls his great secret, or Arcanum against the Epilepsie, and other
such symptoms, because of its wonderful penetrativenes leaving no part or
places of the body unsearched) another, and with this has the spirit of the
Spaw water great affinity, and is therefore so much the more excellent, as
being so much the nearer to it, Primum ens as Helmont calls it. Now note by the
way, that although this spirit cannot be by it self extracted out of this
water, yet it may be extracted out of Vitrial, yet by a very expert artist.

This water according to its first qualities cooles and moistens actually,
heats, and dries potentially. And by these four qualities, the distempers of
the body consisting in the excess either of heat, cold, dryness, or moisture,
are tempered, every quality altering its contrary, and reducing it into its
natural temper. And indeed it is worth taking notice of, that in such cases a
distemper will rather be altered by its contrary, than increased by its like.
As for exemple, if the distemper consists in heat, the heat will be allayed by
the coldness of the water, and not be made more intense by the heat thereof
(although the heat continue longer than the coldness, for the water is quickly
warmed in the stomach, and then the potential heat is reduced into act, and
continues) and so on the contrary, I mean If the water be taken regularly, and
cautiously, or otherwise such happy success may not be expected.

Now according to other qualities, viz. second, and third it cuts, dissolves,
attenuates, abstergeth viscous, tartarous humors in the stomach, messenterie,
hypochondries, reins, bladder, etc: and evacuateth them by Urine, as being
indeed very diuretical, and by consequence opens the obstructions of the said
parts, which are the occasions of most distempers, and diseases. It penetrates
also through every narrow, occult passages of the body, where other medicines
cannot come. Moreover it corroborates, astringeth, and laxateth, and diverse
such as these, and the former contrary operations has it upon the body of man.

Now note that although its operations are thus contrary, and the cures
effected thereby, of so contrary natures, yet this is no other than what
consists with, and conduces to the preservation of nature, for if by its
astriction any retention is caused, yet nothing is retained, but what should
not be evacuated, and if by its laxating, evacuation is promoted, yet nothing
is evacuated that should be retained. It dries nothing but what it finds too
moist, and flaccid, and so on the contrary, and it heats nothing, but what
before was too cold, and so on the contrary also. I speak now as to the
generality of its operating, and do not deny but there may accidently something
happen contrary to general observations. But as for most exceptions that are,
or can be made, either they may easily be answered, or any accidental or casual
prejudice be easily prevented, and the credit of the Spaw maintained. If any
shall object and say by its coldness and moisture it weakens the liver more
than by its heat and dryness it coroborates it, and thereby occasioneth a
dropsy, where before was none, and where it finds it, increases it. To this I
answer, viz. if the body be well prepared first, and the water pass freely* and
other such directions and cautions observed as should be, and I have
praescribed in the following chapter, it does not only prevent, but cure the
dropsy by heating, drying, and corroborating the liver.

And if any shall object that it astringeth and binds the bodies of some, so
much that there is no ejection of their excrements by stool for two or three
days together, I answer, that it is true, this may happen sometimes, and it
may be oftentimes by reason that those humors which should irritate the bowels
to expel and eject their excrements are diverted through the ureters, by which
means also the bowels become more dry, and dull, but yet this inconveniency may
easily be remedied, and prevented, by taking every night at bedtime a little
Cassia, or some such lenient medicament, and sometimes a glister, or
suppositorie.

Many such like observations, and exceptions may be made against mine aforesaid
positions, but they may as easily be answered ( salva adhuc fama aquae
Spadanae) as made.

Now the manifold virtues, and various operations of this Spaw (as effecting
cures of a contrary nature) being premised, it will I hope, be easy to
conclude, what distempers, symptoms and diseases it is effectual against.

It allayes all acid* gnawing, and hot humors, and cures all such symptoms as
proceed from thence, as agues, consumptions, quincies, tumors, impostumes,
ulcers, wounds; it stops bleeding, the over flowing of choler, the dissentery,
and such like fluxes.

It corroborates the brain, nerves etc. and prevents or cures the Apoplexy,
Epilepsie, Palsy, Virtigo, inveterate headache, and madness, and all such
symptoms as proceed from the weakness, coldness, heat, dryness, or moisture of
the same.

It corroborates the stomach, and causes good digestion, consumes crudities
which are the causes of obstructions, and breed ill blood and infirm flesh or
an ill habit of body; it makes the fat lean, and the lean fleshie, cures, and
preventeth the chollick, and worms.

It strengthens and opens the Lungs, Liver, Spleen, messentery, and cures
difficulty of breathing, the Asthma, the dropsy, melancholy and fearful,
passions Hypochondriacal wind, and vapors (offending the head and heart,)
which most women and many men are afflicted withal. It does also upon this
account cheer the heart* cure and prevent the palpitatious, and passions
thereof, as also all faintings.

It purifieth the blood, cures the scurvy, even in those whose teeth are ready
to drop out of their heads, by reason of the extremity thereof, also the foul
veneral disease, the leprosy, Jaundise, yellow, and black, and for the more
perfect effecting of these cures, it does in many open the hemorrhoides.

It provokes Urine, and cures the suppression and allayes the sharpnes
thereof, it diminishes the stone in the bladder, by dissolving the soft
superficial part thereof, and evacuating that mucousslimy water* in which it is
involved, and by this means also it prepares it for cutting, for sometimes this
stone cannot be felt, by reason of that slimy mucus, which mucuus it self does
also sometimes by its torments counterfeit the stone, where it is collected in
a great quantity, being of an acid tartarous nature. It forces out from the
kidneys, and bladder abundance of sand, and small stones to a great number, and
sometimes such as are as big and as long, as long pepper. And as it cures all
ulcers, and wounds in the body, so especially and much sooner in the reins, and
bladder, suppressing also the pissing of blood, and the gonorrhea.

It cures the Gout, Aches, Cramp, convulsion in what part of the body
whatsoever, and gives great ease therein suddenly.

It opens all obstructions, and suppresseth all manner of over-flowings in
Women, strengthens the womb, cures the mother, makes the barren fruitful,
and is a great preventative against miscarryings, and rectifies most
infirmities of the womb.

Note that this water does not help all parts, cure all these infirmities after
one, and the same manner; for some part of the body, it helps per se, as we
call it, and some per accidens: per se, it helps those, through which it
passes and touches, and that either by its crass substance, as the Mouth,
Jaws, Stomach, Messentery, Liver, Reins, Bladder, etc. or by its Spiritual
parts, which do penetrate the whole body. Per accidens it helps those which are
distempered by consent, or by the obstructions of other parts, and this by
removing the obstructions thereof.

It is also used by way of insession in griefs of the womb, and by way of
injection, into that as also into the bowels and bladder, where all the
qualities act immediately upon those parts, allay the sharp, and hot distempers,
mitigate the pains thereof, healing and corroborating the same.

It may moreover be used by way of fomentation, and lotion in external wounds,
Ulcers, Itch, or Scabs, and being dropped into soar eyes wonderfully cools,
dries, and clears the same.

In a word, if any intensions in a medicinal way, be to be performed by
allaying distempers, opening, obstructions, evacuating* superfluous morbifick
humors, and corroborating all the parts of the body, those are effected in a
very good measure, if not fully and perfectly by this water. And I my self have
seen many of the aforenamed diseases cured by the help thereof, and for other
cures effected thereby, I have been assured by them themselves who received the
benefit, or by others who have been eye witnesses of the same.

Some may demand whether this water may be administered to Children, Old, Men,
and Women great with child.

Sol. 1. As to the first, although the heat of children be soon destroyed by
cold, yet this water may safely be given to children of a year old, if the
water which they drink exceed not the strength of their stomach, or if their
stomach can bear it. And H. ab Heers says, he saw a sucking child drink of the
German Spaw with good success, and some children very young have taken of ours,
not without benefit.

2. As to the second, It is true that their heat also is very little, and soon
extinguished by cold, yet if the strength of their stomachs be able to carry it
off, without a manifest dejection of the appetite, it may safely to them also
but not in so large a quantity as to others, be administered.

3. And as to third* It is true it is diuretical, and may seem dangerous for
them to take it, yet it has been observed, that many have taken it securely
enough, some when they have been very young with child, and others, when near
the time of their bringing forth. I shall not give too much liberty, neither
shall I lay too great a restraint upon them, Only I say, it is safest for them
to take it in the fourth, fifth, and sixth month, and Hippocrates himself will
admit of purgation, at that time. But if any be very defirous to take it
before, or after by reason of some griefs urging them thereto, let them use it
cautiously and in less quantity, and withal take something every night to
prevent the inconveniences thereof, as Pearl, Coral* powder of hartshorn, or
the like.

(...) Q. It may be demanded, whence it is that the excrements upon the taking
of this water become black.

Sol. This blackness is not from the mixture of black melancholy humors as
many will have it, for if the soundest healthiest body in the world, who can in
no wise be suspected to have any adust black choler in him his excreme^ts will
also be tinged black therewith. Besides, we do not find that one man's body in
twenty, that are diffected, have any such black humors in it, nay, although he
were the most melancholy man in the World, and therefore to impute it to a
mixture of this, is a great error. Neither do I impute it to Iron only, as H.
ab Heers, who, because Iron did the like, would not ascribe it to any thing
else. But it seems he had not, as it appears by his own words, observed that
Vitrial would do the like, and that either of Iron, or Copper, and that
although, Iron being taken inwardly, the excrenents are tinged black, it was by
the Vitrial which was made in the body by the acid spirits thereof, resolving
the esurine Salt of the Iron, and corroding it into a Copperas, he, I do
suppose, never considered, and the reason he gives to prove, that Vitrial does
not discolor the excrements, is* because oil, or spirit of Vitrial will not.
But herein he argues a conjunctis ad disjuncta, and therefore his argument is
of no force. For here is but a part of the Vitrial, viz. one part abstracted
from the other, and that not without the destruction of the species. Now if the
species could be conserved it might be done, although it were volatile and more
spiritual as the Vitrial is in this Spaw; for the truth is the same species may
be fixed, and yet become volatile, and more spiritual, and yet all this while
the species be conserved.

Note here by the way, upon what account it is that Iron, or Steel opens
obstructions; and it is this, viz. There being a great affinity betwixt the
esurine Salt in Iron, and all acid unspecificated spirits, the acid spirits in
the body which are the cause of fermentation and coagulation, and by
consequence of obstructions, do presently forsake those parts, and humors
where they are seated, and betake themselves to the Iron, which they endeavor
to dissolve, and so be united to the aforesaid Salt that is in it, (to which
union they have a natural propensity) and so being therewith united, are with
the same ejected, together with the obstructive humors, which at the same time
are ejected, viz. when nature is strongly irritated to expel the Iron, as being
very offensive to her.

CHAP. IX. Of some general directions to be observed before, in the time of,
and after the taking of the Waters.
THere are seldom any distempers, or diseases that occasion people to go to the
Spaw, that are without peccant, excrementitious, obstructing humors, which
must of necessity be removed before the drinking of the waters attempted: and
that either because those crude, gross humors in the greater vessels will be
by the force of the waters carried down into the narrower passages, and there
cause greater obstructions, and by consequence Fevers, Dropsies, Gripings,
etc. and also hinder the free passage of the waters, to the endangering of many
unthought of inconveniences, and symptoms; as also because nature, being
thereby disburdened of the load of grosser humors, will be the better able
with the assistance of the waters to overcome, digest, and evacuate the
thinner, and those that are left behind, and the sooner recover its natural
vigor, and sanitude.

Now for the Medicines to be administered, they must be elected suitable to the
humor offending, and proportioned to the strength and constitution of the
patient. I do in most cases very much approve of vomits, because they do
effectually cleanse the stomach, and the primas vias, and instead of them,
where they cannot be safely, and conveniently used, biera picra comes next in
place for absterging, and cleansing the stomach, bowels, messentery, and making
free passage for the water to pass to the Liver. And after either of these,
some proper lenitive for the opening the passages through the Liver, Ureters,
Kidneys and into the Bladder.

Phlebotomy also, or letting of blood is in many cases to be considered of,
viz. if the veins and other adjacent vessels be oppressed with blood, or any
peccant humors, for thereby they will be made more fit for the waters to pass
through them, and the virtues thereof into them.

Also in case of very obstinate obstructions, I advise that a chalybiate course
of Physic be run through for a certain time, that thereby the waters may with
the less resistance act their parts, and sooner, easier, and more perfectly
effect the intended cures.

Now after such preparation is made, and the patient come to the Spaw, let him
also then take some easy vomit, as of Oxymel, or wine of Squils, or the like,
or some hiera picra, the first day after he is come thither, and the next
morning after that some Lenitive, as Lenitive Electuary, Cassia, Manna,
Tamarines, infusion of Seen, Rhabarb, syrop of Roses, or the like, according to
the humor that is to be evacuated, and then let him cheerfully, and
confidently begin to drink these waters with a resolvedness to observe all such
rational directions, as he shall find in this, and the next ensuing Chapters
prescribed. But for poor people, or they that loath all that bears the name of
Physic, drink three or four mornings of the Sulphur-well, for that will in a
good measure effect the same.

When any one is resolved for the Spaw, let him then first apply himself to
some experienced Physician, who shall be able to understand his constitution,
distemper, and the nature, and use of the waters themselves, that accordingly,
as cause shall require, the more succesfull preparatives may be administered,
and the more effectual directions given. This I advise the rather, because
there be diverse Physicians in the Nation, who never saw, tasted, scarce read of
the waters, or conversed with those that know them, yet send their patients,
such as they account incurable, and desperate, thither, giving them such
directions for the drinking the waters as the very Spaw-women themselves laugh
at.

A due preparation being premised, let him that drinks the waters begin with
four, or five, or six half pint glasses, more or less as his stomach can well
bear, and so by degrees proceed to two or three glasses more every day until he
come to the height, and his full dose, which will be when he can take no more,
without a manifest oppression and nauseousness. Some will drink twenty, some
thirty of these glasses in a morning, and some can not take half so many.

In the morning before the water be drunk, let first all excrements be
evacuated, either by nature, or art, as by glysters, suppositories, or some
pills, or lenitive taken the night before at bedtime; for the retaining of the
excrements hinders the concoction of the waters (if I may call it a concoction)
and by consequence their passage through the body, whereby are caused
pressures, fluctuations, tensions, gripings, and sometimes cold sweat.

Betwixt every two, or three, or four, or five glasses, let some exercise be
used, of which more largely in the Chapter of exercise. And for the better
passing of the waters, comforting the stomach, and preventing of nauseousness,
let some good cordial, stomachical spices, seeds, and roots, be taken betwixt
while, as Annisseed, Caryoway and Coriander confects, Citron, or Lymon pilled
candied, or dried, Pepper lossenges, Cardamums, but above all I prefer
Elecampany root candied, or for want thereof Angelica root, or seeds, for they,
especially Elecampany, as the Lord Virulam says, breed a robust heat, and I am
sure promote the passage of the water most eminently, and comfort all the
vessels through which the water passes, and withal make the water more
effectual for the opening of obstructions, and corroborating infirm parts.

I approve not of taking the waters too fast, or alloting too short a time for
the drinking of the full dose, or proportion. I conceive that for the
generality it will be most convenient for to take at first a quarter of the
proportion, and then exercise half an hour, and then another quarter, and
exercise till the water begins to be evacuated, and then a third quarter, with
exercise half an hour more, and then the last part with exercise, till it be
all passed out of the body. But if any cannot bear the drinking of a fourth
part at a time, then let them take the eighth part, with a quarter of an hours
exercise betwixt every while. To drink the waters too fast causes for the most
part nauseousnes, oppresses the natural heat, and compresseth the passages and
vessels, that the water cannot pass so freely through them as otherwise it
would do, and also causes diverse symptoms, as tensions, gripings, cold sweats,
dejection of appetite, and the like. If a great quantity of water be cast upon
a fire at once it extinguisheth it, but if by degrees, it makes it burn the
more furiously, and intends the flame thereof. Ryetius is therefore in my
judgment very erroneous, as to this point, who would have the whole proportion
be taken in half an hours time.

The time for the continuing the taking of the waters must be proportioned
according to the greatness of the disease, and profit received by it. In case
any one after a due preparation, and upon a careful observation of such
directions as are required, shall not be able to bear the waters, and drink
them without a manifest and eminent oppression, and nauseousness after several
assayes, let him cease presently from the taking of them: but if upon the
taking of them, he can take them without any such inconveniency as should cause
him to desist, and yet perceive no benefit thereby; let him not presently give
over the use of them, as despairing of any further benefit, but continue the
use of them a month, or two, or longer, if the disease require it. In Germany
they drink of the Spaw, not only a quarter of a year together, but sometimes
half a year, and sometimes a whole year if it be requisite, and at last they
receive the benefit thereof, by being cured of most desperate diseases, which
otherwise were in the vulgar account incureable. It is a great error amongst
us English, to allot but two or three weeks time, or a month at the most, for
the taking of the Spaw, let the disease be what it will, and hence it is, that
many miss of those happy cures, which by a longer continuance might have been
effected, and this to the prolonging of their own misery, and defamation of the
Spaw it self.

I do admit of the use of purging Physic, to be taken every eight, or tenth
day, for the evacuating of crudities, which for the most part are bred in that
time, and also some grosser humor loosened by the water, or those which become
crass, or thick by the waters themselves, carrying away the thinner part first;
for these remaining in the body, would else be carried down into the smaller
vessels, and cause obstructions, and thereby many other great inconveniences
and symptoms, retarding also, if not utterly preventing the intended cure. Now
the Medicaments I approve of most in these cases, are Hiera picra simplex
Galeni, Rhabarb with Crystal of Tartar, and such like, to be taken one, or two
days together, as there shall be occasion, and some Lenitive, as Cassia, or
Lenitive electuary, or the like to be taken the next day after that, for the
moistning of the bowels, and the better preparing the passages betwixt the
stomach, and bladder, against the next repeating the use of the waters, which I
advise may begin the next morning after. And in some cases Physic may be taken
every day, nay, mixed with the waters themselves, as in Germany.

Now I know it is a common, though absurd opinion, that Physic is very
prejudicial to those that take it, whilst they are in a course of drinking the
waters, and therefore is most irrationally decried. Now the chief ground of
this error, as far as I ever could understand is this, viz. Some certain years
since, some famous Doctors attending upon persons of great quality, their
patients, to the Spaw, did prescribe them the use of some Physic, with the
waters, and it succeeded ill. This might be true, but what then? Might not
those Physicians, though otherwise knowing enough, be ignorant of the right use
of the waters themselves, and of the preparations requisite for the taking of
them with success? Or might not they be willing to bring the Spaw out of
credit, because it might happily cure their patients too soon, and thereby be
prejudicial to them? Or might not their patients be unwilling to drink the
water regulary; or disorder themselves in respect of diet, exercise and the
like? Now whether either of these, or all these might be the cause of the
aforesaid unsuccesfulnes, I cannot determine, only this I know, that the use
of Physic is not only not unsafe, but very necessary in the use of the
waters, nay, and in many cases to be mixed with the waters themselves, as in
the next Chapter I shall more particularly give you to understand.

Three or four days before giving over the waters, they must be abated by
degrees, as at the beginning increased by degrees.

After the ending of the waters, immediately, even before you return from
thence, some such purging Physic will be necessary as may evacuate all the
water that shall remain secretly in the body, as oftentimes it does, and
withal comfort and strengthen the stomach, and Liver, and moisten the bowels
if there be any fever, of too great astriction of body afterward. Also a very
spare diet will be very necessary for a month after, for by this means nature
will become master of the bodily infirmities, all crudities being removed, and
prevented.

CHAP. X. Of particular directions, and cautions in particular cases, and of
preventing and curing such accidents and symptoms, which sometimes happen in
the taking of the waters.
THey that have a very good digestion may in the afternoon about five, or six
hours after dinner, take half the quantity which they did in the morning, but
with this caution, that they eat a very light supper after it; and as for those
that have a very bad concoction, let them altogether forbear it in the
afternoon, or at most drink but a glass for the diluting, and better
distributing of the chylus, if already perfected.

If any shall drink of the water for the curing of an ague, let them so observe
the time for the taking of it, that it may be all passed through them before
the coming of the fit, because otherwise nature will be distracted in her
motions, viz. evacuating the water by Urine, and the morbifick humor by sweat.
And as for those that have a continual fever, let them forbear it altogether,
unless the humors be concocted and fit for evacution, either by sweat or
Urine, as I have more at large declared in the fourth Chapter, concerning the
taking of cold water inwardly, in case of a fever.

My advise is that they that have very weak and cold stomachs, should take the
water a little warmed first (i. e.) the cold being just taken off. The truth
is, the coldness of the waters does very little good at all, unless it be to
allay a very great heat, and drought. So great a quantity thereof as is usually
taken cold, must of necessity diminish the natural heat in cold constitutions.
A glass of cold water cast upon a fire, though but small, may make it burn the
more strongly, but if ten, or twenty be cast upon it, they, if they do not
quite extinguish it, yet will so far check it, that it will a long time labor
under the destructive contrariety thereof. And actual heat is far more suitable
to nature, and if so be the virtue of the water is not dimished thereby, (as it
is not, as I have demonstrated by the second experiment in the foregoing
Chapter) far more effectual, the potential heat thereof being sooner reduced
into act without any checking, or oppressing the natural heat. The stomach
being a nervous part, and of exquisite sense, must needs be offended with that,
which is actually cold. This made the ancient Grecians and Romans drink most of
their water, and wine hot, as we find in Salmuths collections. The Lord Virulam
wonders that calidum bibere is so much grown out of use. If to drink an
ordinary quantity of drink cold, were not approved of by the Ancients, with
what face shall I commend the taking of gallons of cold water every morning for
certain weeks together? I do therefore seriously advise those that have cold
and effeminate stomachs to take off the cold from the water before they drink
it.

If upon the taking of the water, it pass not through the body freely, but is
retained, it is to be considered in what place of the body it is at a stand,
that accordingly some appropriated means may be administered for the evacuation
of it. For if it be retained in the belly, or hypochondries (which will appear
by its rumbling, wind, tension, oppressure) a glyster will evacuate it; if in
the stomach, which appears by a disposition to vomit, hiera picra, or Rhabarb
will be convenient for the opening, and cleansing thereof and making free
passage for it from thence. If it be retained in the habit of the body and
veins, which appears by oppressure, and a chilness over the body, without the
aforesaid rumbling, tension, wind, etc. I approve of hiera picra, with Jollap,
Mechoacan, or the like hydragogal medicaments.

They, that when they have taken the waters, cannot evacuate them for want of
exercise, as being to feeble to stir much, or walk, and not having the
conveniences of horses, may either drink all their proportion of water in the
bed, or take some part at the Well, and then go to bed, and there take the
residue. I have oftentimes observed that the water would freely pass through
many, when they were in bed, but would not otherwise, and the reason of it was
as I conceived, because the passages of their body were contracted by going
into the air, but more open by the warm'th of the bed.

Now for the rendering the water more effectual, it will be necessary, as is
the course in Italy, to make use of some specificks with the drinking of it. H.
ab Heers, allows of the decoction of Sanicle, Pimpernel, Scabions, etc. to be
drunk in case of spitting of blood, inward Impostumes Ulcers, Wounds, and
Infirmities of the breast, and Lungs, the benefit whereof he experienced by
many years practice. And why may not we do the like in several cases, as to
allow of a spoonful, or two, of the juice of Saxifrage, or the like to be
taken in the first glass, in case of the stone, or gravel, or to take
Turpentine pills, or a bole with Turpentine and Cassia the night before and in
case of very great obstructions, dropsy, and cold moist stomachs, or the like,
to mix some Sugar of steel, or steel wine with the first glass? But note that
in such cases, they are to be taken half an hour, or a whole hour, before the
taking of any more of the water.

For the better passing of the waters, let the first glass be mixed with Sugar,
Syrrup of Liquorish, or de quinque Radicibus, or Nitre, or Spirit of Salt, or
Vitrial, Salt of Tartar, or a glass of white wine, in the midst of the water,
or mixed with three, or four of the first glasses, or two or three glasses of
the Sulphur Well in the midst of the Spaw-water, or a good draught of the
decoction of Fennel, or Parsley-roots, be taken half an hour before the water.
Note that some of the aforesaid things are penetrative and so force their way,
and some are sweet, and therefore are sooner attracted to, and by the Liver,
and so the more speedily evacuated.

In case of the necessity of any of the aforesaid mixtures, it will be
convenient and necessary, that some experienced Physician be first consulted
withal. And if you meet with none at the Spaw, that you can confide in, York,
and other places are not far, where you shall find such Gentlemen that are able
to advise you, as concerning this, so also in any other case, and especially if
any unexpected accident should fall out whilst you are drinking the waters.

In case in the taking of the waters, sumes, and vapors fly to the head as
oftentimes they do, even to inebriation, let none be disheartened thereat, for
either they are the spirits of the water themselves alone, which will do the
head much good, or else there is a mixture of wind from the stomach; for when
that is filled with water, the wind that was in it must of necessity be forced
up to the head, but there it continues but a very short time.

And as there is no necessity of preventing it, so neither can it be well
prevented: but yet for some satisfaction, let Nutmeg, and Coriander seed, being
beaten together into a gross powder, be taken after every fourth part of the
water; for the grateful vapor thereof will also be carried up to the head,
with the force of the other vapors from the stomach, and withal somewhat
corroborat, and close the mouth of the stomach.

Q. It may be demanded whether or no the rednes, and hot pimples of the face
may be cured by the inward use of this water, and it is the more questioned,
because it dries, and heats the Liver.

Sol. It is true, that for the most part the rednes of the face is increased by
the use of this water, but yet notwithstanding, it may in a great measure be
cured with the help thereof, with the observing of certain rules, and cautious
which do much conduce thereunto. The patient that is thus affected (his body
being well prepared by medicaments, and phlebotomie,) must in the first place
drink of this water, ten or twelve mornings together, for by this time it will
in some considerable measure remove those obstructions of the messentery, and
Liver which are the chiefest cause of the aforesaid distemper, then let him be
purged with some cooling lenitive, and then because the continual use of the
water should not, as does steel, heat the blood too much, or rather by its
strengthening the inward parts, drive outwardly the heated corrupt humors of
the body too fast, I advise that he do for seven, or eight days together drink
clarified whey, made with cooling, moist, and diuretical herbs and medicaments,
as Borage, Lettuce, Seangreen, Endive, Grasroots, Parsley, and Fennel-roots,
Nitre, Tamarines, Liquorish, and such like, and withal have a vein breathed,
if nothing contradict it, and then return again to the use of the water for
another fortnight, and after that again to cooling purges and the cooling* and
clarified whey, as before, for a months time. Note that withal, that some
topical Medicines are to be applied to the place affected, as oil of the yelks
of Eggs, oil of Tartar, juice of Lemmon and Salt, unguentum alhum, but above
all flores sulphuris dissolved in oil, or the like. By such kind of means with
the use of the Spaw-water, I would undertake to cure almost any red pimpled
face whatsoever.

CHAP. XI. Of the necessity, and manner of exercise, in the use of the waters.
EXercise is, whilst the water is in the body, very necessary, as being good
to laxate the passages of the body, to excite the natural heat, for the better
digestion of the waters (if as I said before, we may properly call it a
digestion) for by this means, says Archigenes, as also Aetius, the internal
vessels being heated will more strongly attract, and expel. Some kind of
exercise is, if strength permit, to be continued from the first glass to the
evacuation of the whole proportion taken.

Now for exercise in particular, riding on a trotting horse, or in a Coach are
the best, because thereby the muscles of the abdomen being pressed, do intend
the expulsive faculty of the Ureters and bladder. And where those cannot
conveniently be had, and used, I commend walking, bowling, pitching of the bar,
and leaping, and the like, all which must be used so moderatly, as not to
provoke sweat, for by sweat the water will be drawn into the habit of the body,
to the endangering of a dropsy and such like symptoms. They that are not able
to walk, nor have the accommodation for riding, must take the waters in their
bed, for the warmeth of the bed does as I said before, serve very well instead
of exercise, and answers to the intensions thereof.

Sleep is very hurtful, because in sleep all exceptions, or evacuations of
excremently except sweat, which is thereby promoted, and for the aforesaid
reasons to be prevented, are suppressed.

Sitting on the ground is hurtful, and also standing in the Sun, and walking
late in the evening.

CHAP. XII. Of the time of the year, and day when the Spaw is chiefly to be
taken.
IN frosty weather the water is strongest, because the mineral spirits thereof
are by the binding of the earth suppressed and prevented from evaporating
through the superficies thereof (as they do at other times) by which means the
water becomes the more strongly impregnated therewith. But by reason of the
inconveniency of journying, and of the uncertainty of the frost, I prefer the
Summer, viz. from the beginning of May to the end of September, and before and
after, if the season be dry.

Ob. Some may object against the use of the Spaw in the Canicular, or Dog
days, because, say they, Hippocrates in the fifth of his fourth book of
Aphorisms, says, (...) forbiding thereby purgations, and evacuations, and
these being forbidden, say they, how shall we prepare our bodies for the taking
of the waters?

Sol. This aphorism having been these many years grossly mistaken, has been
the occasion of the deaths of thousands. I say mistaken, because purgations are
not here at all forbidden, but only intimation given, that in that season by
reason of that usual extremity of heat, the humors being drawn outwardly
toward the habit of the body are not so easily retracted, and evacuated by way
of purgation, as being more remote from the medicament, and also in a contrary
motion. Besides, who is ignorant of the great difference betwixt the climate
Hippocrates lived in, and ours, as also betwixt his medicine and ours, which
are both far milder and temperate than his? And who does not know (being the
same also which, Heurnius says of the seasons of his Country) that May and
June prove oftentimes far hotter months then July and August? It is needles to
enter upon any long confutation of the Vulgar opinion, which is weakly grounded
upon the said aphorism, and has a long time been absurdly maintained, and the
rather, because it begins to be generally exploded: And indeed, it is good for
men to grow wise by others harms.

In extreme wet weather the water becomes far weaker than before, and the
reason is, because the rain, although it does not usually sink above ten feet
deep yet may into some of the veins of the said spring, which lie toward the
superficies of the earth. In such a season the water may best be omitted, (as
having but little, or no strength in, at most* not enough to qualify the
coldness* and moisture thereof) unless it be corrected and amended with Sugar of
Iron* made out of the very Mine of Iron, or with spirit of Vitrial, for want of
the other.

The fittest time in the morning, is betwixt six and seven of the clock, for
those that be of a strong digestion. But as for those that are very sick with a
nauseousness in their stomachs, in case they rise early; I advise that they lie
longer in their bed, and sleep for the better digestion of those crudities, for
otherwise they will be carried down with the water into the narrower passages,
and cause great obstructions, and the water thereby become more impassible.

As for the taking of the waters in the afternoon, I have occasionally declared
my judgment with the reasons thereof, in the tenth Chapter, page 89.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Diet to be observed by Spawdrinkers.
THe greatest reason why many receive but little benefit, and some none by the
Spaw, is* because of their intemperancy in respect of diet. This water for the
most part begets a very great appetite, by reason whereof many forget
themselves at Table, putting in more than nature can dispose of, and hence are
crudities, the nursery of all diseases; And it is true what Galen says,
affirming, that no man shall be vexed with sickness that is not oppressed with
crudities. And whence crudities, says Hippocrates, but from fulness, affirming
also, that to eat without fulness is the rule of health? He also says, that
what diseases so ever are cured by evacuation, are caused by repletion: and do
not we see that all diseases are cured by evacuation, viz. vomiting, purging,
bleeding, sweat, and urine? When the Chylus is ill concocted, or rather
corrupted (for Aristotle calls it (...), not (...) corruption, not concoction)
it passes crude through the whole body, for the second concoction does not
amend the first, nor the third the second, so that hence of necessity great
obstructions, the occasion of tensions, gripings, all manner of hypochondriacal
distempers, stone, gravel, distemper of the head, heart, liver, stomach,
bowels, limbs, and indeed of all parts. There is an Italian Proverb, that he
that will eat much, must eat little, that is, by eating little he shall live
long and so eat much. A sober diet, as it prevents, so also cures many
infirmities, and distempers by diminishing crudities already bred, and reducing
all the humors of the body to the government of nature.

Let such diet be used, as may not hinder the effects of the Spaw, being of a
good laudable nourishment, of easy digestion, and may freely pass through the
vessels, serving for the distribution thereof. Let not the meat be dressed, or
sauced deliciously, so as to prolong appetite, beyond the satisfaction of
natural hunger, and thirst, thereby causing a greater quantity to be taken in,
than otherwise would, or nature requires, or can digest. For the most part meat
offends more by its quantity than quality.

In more particular manner I forbid all flesh that is very salt, and fat,
Bacon, Pork, Neatsfeet, Tripes, tame Ducks, Geese, gizards of Poultry, all salt
Fish, Eels, and all things that come from milk (except Butter, Whey, Milk,
Pottage, Chees-curds) also Leeks, Onions, Parsnips, Cabbage, Muskmillions,
Cucumbers.

Helmont forbids nothing, only excess, saying, that Nature hates curiosities.

I could reckon up diverse other things that I should forbid, but because they
are never used at the Spaw, it will be needles to mention them.

I disapprove not of Beef, if it has been salted but a week, especially for
those that love it.

I allow for those whose blood, and Livers are hot, Pears, Apples, Plums,
Cherries, Rasp-berries, ripe Goose-berries and raw Sallets, but with this
caution, that they be eaten a little before supper, and also sparingly, and one
glass of white wine drank after them, for they do temper the blood, and promote
the curing of the distemper thereof.

I forbid much variety of meats, because of the unequalness of their
concoction, and because nature is (although the palate be not) best satisfied
with simplicity of diet. And excellently does Macrobius discuss this point.

As for drinks* I commend beer, or ale, that is neither too small, or too new.
They, whose stomachs are very cold* may drink Beer, or Ale as strong as can be
made, and also a glass, or two of Sack with a roast put into it, which they may
eat; and these do much further, and help concoction.

I approve of the drinking of pure, thin, well refined white and Rhenish wine,
but not at meals* unless in a very little quantity, because they are very
diuretical, and penetrative, carrying down with them to the Liver, and through
the narrow vessels, the crude juice of the meat, before it be concocted,
thereby endangering obstructions; but let them be drunk a little before supper.

The time of eating must be considered according to the passing of the water
through the body, for when the Urine begins to change its color, passing from
white to a higher color, then is it a sign that the water is passed through,
and then something may be eaten and not before, unless when good part of the
water, although not all, has passed through freely, and then ceased for an
hour, or two, and then also it is time to eat something, for it may be that
nature has disposed of the residue that is left behind, and retained, for some
other uses, as to moisten some dry parts of the body, or the like.

They that are first ready to eat, may stay their stomachs as we call it, with
a mess of broth, which commonly is there made very good, and then have so much
good fellowship and civility to wait for their dinners till all the good
company of the house be ready for the same.

Let the supper be larger, than the dinner, because in the evening the stomach
is less laxated, and languid, than at noon, and can therefore concoct a greater
quantity of meat. Yet the supper must not be very large, neither greater than
what the stomach can be well able perfectly to concoct before the next morning.
Let it be ready at six at least, if not seven hours after dinner.

I advise that all, whether it be at dinner, or supper, that they lerve with an
appetite, and eat not half so much as the Spaw drinkers usually do, indulging
their pallates, and gratifying their stomachs according to the measure of their
appetites, which many times is rather adventious, or preternatural, then
natural.

I utterly disapprove of mixing of the Spaw water, with either Wine, or Beer,
but yet I allow of the drinking of a glass of it self at bed time, for the
corroborating and closing of the mouth of the stomach, and suppressing of
vapors, which would otherwise disturb the brain from quiet sleep.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Sulphur-well.
THis is called the Sulphur-well; by reason of its Sulphurious odor, although
besides this, it has two other qualities, viz. saltness, and bitterness. I
shall in the first place endeavor to prove, whence it contract its saltness,
and thereby I shall the better make to appear the cause of it stanch and
bitterness. Now, because the Salt, which this water yields upon evaporation, is
of the same nature with, and cannot be distinguished either in odor, or taste
(the stanch being lost in the evaporation) from common black Sea Salt, I shall
first declare what is the cause of the saltness of the Sea, which is no other
than that of this water. And first I shall show what is not the cause of it,
thereby confuting the opinion of many ancient Philosophers, and their followers.

1. The saleness of the Sea, is not caused by the Suns exhaling the sweeter
parts out of it, as was the opinion of Aristotle; for this supposes that there
was the same saltness in the Sea before* but was not, but upon this account
manifested, but this can not be, for then, why are not other waters, as Rivers,
Ponds, Lakes, etc. made saltish also by the Suns exhaling their sweeter vapors.

2. The Sun does not boil into the Sea, by the vehemence of its heat, that
saline taste, according to Pliny being almost of the aforesaid opinion, for
then, why does not the Sun work the same effect, upon a Pond, or Vessel of
water, on which it may work more vigorously, by heating more vehemently, viz.
(because it is less resisted, by reason of the small quantity of water in them)
than on the Ocean?

3. This saltnes is not caused (as Scaliger would have it,) by rain, mixed with
hot, dry, and terrene exhalations; for the rain it self would also then be
saltish, which indeed is most sweet, and if it were saltish, then why are not
Pits, Rivers, etc. which are many times filled with Rainwater, saltish also?

Now the weakness of these opinions, viz. (the chiefest that have usually been
embraced) being detected, I shall show from whence very probably this saltness
of the Sea may proceed. We must therefore in the first place consider that the
Sea is not simply saltish, but saltish and bitter together, that is, it has a
taste made up of bitterness, and saltness: for which cause, as says, our
learned Countreyman, Mr. Lydyat, in his disquisitio Physiologica de origin
fontiam, Chap. 9. de salsedine maris, the Latins gave these two names to it,
viz. Mare, quasi amarum, and Salum, quasi salsum. And this Aristotle himself
consents to, giving the reason of those two tastes in general, and of them in
the Sea in particular, where he says, that all kinds of tastes arise from a
kind of terreness more, or less adust; but bitterness from a terreness, very
much elaborated by a fiery heat in the burning bowels of the earth; and
saltness, where that heat is somewhat remitted. If so, then let us consider
whether there be not abundance of terrene adustness in the bowels of the earth,
and gulfs of the Sea where a bituminous fire is always burning, being fed by
water (as I declared more at large in the 2. Chap. viz. Of the original of
Springs in general) and that whether we may not probably conclude, and
especially because bitumen is bitter, and very full of Salt, that the burning
of the bitumen together with the terreness therewith mixed in the gulfs of the
Sea be not the cause of the saltness thereof. Moreover, that bitumen has a
great power to communicate to, and beget a bitter, and saltish taste in water,
is confirmed, by that which Geographers write concerning the Lake of Palestina,
which is called in Greek (...), i. e. bituminous. For say they, the Lake is so
bitter, and saltish, that no fishes can live therein, and it is called in
sacred writ the salt sea (...). And Historians say of it, that if a man be cast
into it bound hand and foot, he cannot be drowned; and the reason of this is
the saltness thereof, for we see that waters bear the greater burdens, by how
much the salter they are, witness the difference betwixt the Sea, and fresh
Rivers, and our boiling of brine till an Egg swim thereon, and will not sink.

This being premised, it will be easy to conclude from whence the saltness,
and bitterness of the Sulphur-well proceeds. And as for the stinking odor
thereof, that I suppose is caused from the vapors of the burning bitumen, and
adust terreness mixed therewith, which lie not far from the very head of the
Well.

Ob. If there be the same reason for the saltness of this Spring as there is of
the Sea, then why is there not the same reason for the Sulphurious odor of the
Sea as of this, and why does not the Sea receive, and retain the same odor as
this does?

Sol. I do not deny, but the same odor may be communicated to the Sea, as to
this water, together with the saltness thereof; but because the saltness
thereof was communicated to it by degrees, viz. from some certain gulfs of the
Sea, so also this odor; for it cannot be rationally conceived, that the whole
Sea received all its Salt into it self at one time after a natural way, and
therefore being such a great body must become saltish by little and little even
insensibly. And accordingly the Sulphurious odor also is imparted to it
insensibly, and although the saltness may continue by reason that the Salt it
self is of a fixed substance, yet the odor being of a subtle volatile nature,
is exhaled by the Sun, and so lost. But now the case is far otherwise in the
water of this Sulphur-well, for this is at once fully impregnated with the said
saltness and Sulphurious odor, and immediately passes away through narrow
channels^, and veins of the earth, without any vanishing of the odor (by means
of the Sun, or otherwise) which it contracted from the bituminous vapors.

Ob. What is the reason that seeing this water has passed lately through the
bituminous burnings, as it appears by its fresh odor of the same, should be
cold, and not hot, as hot Baths are?

Sol. 1. It was the opinion of Fallopius, that such kind of waters proceed from
a remote fire, but passing through narrow passages retain their full odor, and
taste, (which cannot be vanished by the way any otherwise, than smoke through a
Chimney, or pipe) although by the length of its passage, it may loose its heat.

2. Though the fire be near to the superficies of the earth, where this water
breaks forth, yet it is very probable that the coldness thereof may proceed
from a mixture of a cold spring before the breaking forth thereof. Neither let
it seem strange to any, that cold springs and hot may be so near together in
the bowels of the earth: for just above the head of this Sulphur-well there
arise two cold Springs, which meet and run down within a few feet of the head
of the same. And Mr. Jones in his treatise of Buck-stones Bath in Derbishire
says, that the cold Springs and hot Springs are so near* that a man may put
one finger in the cold, and another in the hot.

Having in some measure declared unto you the cause of this Sulphur-well viz.
of its saltness, bitterness, and sulphurious odor, I shall in the next place
give an account of some experiments, and observations which I made, and they
are these* viz.

1. If Silver be put into this water, it is thereby tinged first yellow, and
then black, but Gold is not all discolored thereby.

2. If this water be a little boiled, it loses its tinging property, and also
stinking odor.

3. It coagulates milk, if it be boiled therewith.

4. The distilled water thereof loses its odor and does not coagulate milk.

5. If the water be boiled, it will still coagulate milk, though it loses its
odor.

6. Seven gallons yield by evaporation a pound of Salt, which though at first
black, I have made as white as snow.

7. This Salt coagulates milk also.

8. This water kills worms, and such kind of creatures presently, if they be
put therein.

9. I filled two Vial glasses with this water in wet weather, and stopped the
one, but the other I left open. The water in that which was stopped, within an
hour, or two, became white, and thick, and within two, or three days deposited
a white sediment, and the sides of that glass were furred, the water in the
other glass altered not.

10. I filled two Vial glasses in fair weather, whereof the one I stopped, but
the other left open, the water in neither of them turned color any whit
considerably, only a kind of a thin whitish matter, after two, or three days
fell to the bottom, the water continuing very clear. The water of that glass
which was stopped, retained its odor most.

11. A pint of this water weighs two scruples, i. e. forty grains more than a
pint of common Spring Water.

Note that the reason of its tinging white metals is not from any bodily
Sulphur, or bitumen mixed with it, (for the substance of them will not mix with
water, but swim on it, as in the Spring at Pitchford in Shropshire, and in
Avernia, in France, and in diverse other places) but from the vapors, or the
subtle atoms and efluvia's thereof, which are mixed with the water, and in
boiling are evaporated.

The reason of its coagulating property is from some occult acidity in the Salt
thereof, which to sense is not perceptible, only by effect.

Out of the Salt is drawn a very good spirit of excellent virtue, as I shall
declare in the next Chapter.

Before I conclude this Chapter, it will be worth taking notice, that about 240
yards above the head of this Sulphur-well is a bog, of about twenty yards
diameter, in which I dug a mineral kind of substance, like the finders of
Iron, but almost rotten, being corroded with some acid spirits, of which that
bog is full, as also other places. This mineral substance being cast into the
fire burns blew, and smells like Sulphur; It is in taste like Vitrial, and out of
it Vitrial may be drawn* nay, in time it will be almost all resolved into
Vitrial. For I washed it, and set it in a Cellar for two, or three days, and
it was covered over with a white sweeetish Vitrial; which I dissolved in water,
and set the said substance in a Cellar again, and it contracted the like, and I
did as before still reiterating this work till it was almost all turned to
Vitrial. In the said bog I found three or four sorts of waters, viz. a Sulphur,
and Vitrioline, and of each two sorts. This was done the last day of my abode
there, and therefore I had not time to make any further search, only some of
that mineral substance I took with me, with which I tried the aforesaid
experiments. If any Gentleman would be pleased to expend some costs in digging
up this bog, and erecting some new Wels there* he would prove an acceptable
benefactor to his Country, and it may be some new kind of water might be
discovered hereby having yet more virtues than any of the former.

Note that the stink of this Sulphur-well is perceived afar off, especially in
moist and cold weather.

CHAP. XV. Of the virtues, and uses of the Sulphur-well together with
directions and cautious for the taking of it.
THe use of this water is either inward, or outward.

It being taken inwardly incideth, abstergeth, attenuates and resolves viscous
thick humors, and irritates every vessel of the body to expel whatsoever
humors are offensive in them. It opens, and removes those strong and
obstinate obstructions, whether in men, or women, that would not yield to any
other Medicine whatsoever. It does oftentimes evacuate by stool great lumps of
viscous slimy matter, which was certainly, whilst it was in the body, the
cause of some great distemper, oppressure, gripings, tensions, etc. and which
could hardly any other way be removed.

It heateth, and quickneth the stomach, bowels, liver, spleen, blood, veins,
nerves, and indeed the wholly body, in so much that it consumes crudities,
rectifieth all cold distempers in all parts of the body, causes a good
digestion, cures the Dropsy, Spleen, Scurvy, Green sickness, Gout, Cramp*
Epilepsie* headache, Vertigo, Kings*evil, and all such Symptoms as proceed
either from crudities, cold, viscous, slimy, or corrupt humors, which obstruct
and distemper the stomach, Bowels, Messentery, Liver, Veins, Brain, and Nerves,
and these though of long continuance. It kills worms infallibly.

Note that this water must be begun by degrees, and the full proportion be
taken not at once, but at several times, exercise intermediating* as in the
taking of the Spaw.

The full dose, or quantity to be taken must be proportioned according to the
constitution and strength of the party and his bearing of it, as also the
humor offending, the predominancy of the distemper, and the aptness of the
body to be wrought upon. In cold, dull bodies more may be taken than otherwise
may. In general, let the proportion to be taken* be such, as may cause four,
six, or seven stools, without auy manifest inconveniency of the fewness, or
multiplicity thereof.

Note that in many bodies this water works very quickly, and indeed too soon,
and in such a case my advise is, that two, or three glasses of the Spaw-water
be first drunk, for that will somewhat impede the sudden operations thereof,
and cause it to continue longer in the body, for the better performing of its
operation therein before it pass through it.

Note also that after the full proportion is taken, and in a good measure
passed through the body, four, or six glasses of the Spaw-water may be drunk
for the prevention of the excoriation of the bowels and fundament, especially
in hot choleric bodies.

They that cannot drink this water by reason of its stinking odor, and yet
stand in great need of the effects thereof, may boil it a little while, till it
has lost its odor, and then drink of it, for although some virtue vanishes
with the odor thereof, yet the greatest and most effectual virtues which are
in the Salt, and aforesaid subtle acidity thereof do yet continue as I have
often tried, or if they please, put some Salt thereof into the Spaw-water, and
so drink it, for indeed as I said before, the chiefest virtue lies in the Salt.

The Salt also thereof being rightly made, and put into any common
Spring Water, does in good measure perform the same effects.

The spirit of this salt is of excellent virtue, if a drop, or two thereof be
put into every glass of the Spaw-water, for it makes it far more penetrative,
and indeed far more effecutal against all distempers, and diseases, as the
Dropsy, Gravel, Stone, and suppression of Urine, etc.

I advise, that they that have any inflammation, or excoriation in their
bowels, abstain altogether from the taking of this water, because it will
inflame them more; also they that have Ulcers, and inflammations in their
kidneys, and bladder, and are troubled with a sharpness of Urine.

Such directions for exercise, and diet, as I have prescribed for the Spaw
drinkers, I prescribe also to Sulphur-water-drinkers for the general; only
this liberty I grant them, viz. that these may exercise less, and feed a little
more liberally than Spaw-drinkers.

This water used outwardly dissolves hard tumors, cures old Ulcers, the Scab,
the Itch, the Scurff, Leprosy, and all such breakings out whatsoever, if the
parts ill affected be washed, and bathed therewith, for it dries, consumes all
corrupt humors in the habit of the body, and prevents all putrefaction of
humors in the same.

It being used by way of a warm Bath for the whole body, is of the same
efficacy, as Paracelsus says, that his liquamen salis, i. e. brine is of, and
that is to consume all humid distempers, whether hot, or cold, as the Dropsy,
Gout* hard tumors, swellings of the legs Leprosy, and the like, also it makes
the falean, and reduces them into a natural dry, firm, healthy habit of body,
but it must cautiously be done with the observing of such rules and directions,
as I prescribed for bathing in warm water, as in Chapter the 4.

I wish there were more conveniences, as fit vessels for bathing, at this
Well, than are, for I believe that after a time, Baths with this water would
grow more in use, and become as famous as those hot Baths in Sommersetshire for
many uses.

The spirit of the Salt rubbed into any parts swelled, or pained only, cures
them presently.

And as the waters themselves are outwardly used for cleansing* and healing, so
also there is a kind of slimy bituminous mud below the Sulphur-well* which will
burn like Sulphur, and is of great efficacy for mollifying, digesting, and
resolving hard tumors, and for corroborating weak infirm parts, and allaying
of pains, and aches in the limbs, of what nature so ever, being outwardly
applied.

As I am silent in particularizing cures, yet one strange cure I cannot but
mention* viz. A certain youth came the last year to these waters from the more
remore Northern parts, having on each finger a horn, covering the top thereof,
and also a horny substance on his wrests, and face* which with the inward, and
outward use of this Sulphur-water did in a little time, being loosed thereby
all fall off. If such excrescenices may be loosened and made to fall off
thereby, then Attendite Cornigeri! En vobis medelam!

CHAP. XVI. Of the Dropping, or Petrifying-well.
OVer against the Castle of Knaresborow, the River Nide running betwixt,
arises a certain Spring, in the manner of other Springs in a high ground,
which running a little way in an entire stream, is at the brow of a descent by
a dam of ragged stones, divided into several trickling branches, whereof some
drop, and some stream down, partly over* and partly through a jetting Rock, and
this Spring is of a petrifying nature, for of it was the Rock, from which it
distills, wholly made, and is by it daily increased, notwithstanding the cutting
off great pieces from it. This water also generates stones where it falls, and
likewise where it runs, but not all the way it runs, but near the place only
where it fell, the reason of which I shall presently show.

If any stick, or piece of woodlye in it some weeks, it will be can died over
with a stony whitish crust, the inward part of the wood continuing of the same
nature as before. But any soft spongie substance, as moss, leaves of trees,
etc. into the which the water can enter, will thereby in time become seemingly
to be of a perfect stony nature, and hardness.

Now the cause of this petrifying property is, as Philosophers call it, succus
lapidescens, i. e. a stony matter which is in its principiis solutis, for
indeed the principia soluta of all things, whether animals, vegetables, metals,
or minerals are in a liquid form, and are concreted by degrees* by a natural
heat separating from them all accidental humidities, and fixing them into their
proper species.

When the water, with which this succus lapidescens is mixed, is in part wasted
by the Sun and air, it does then deposite it, as being too heavy for it any
longer to bear it. And when that is deposited, or fallen down, it does by a
continued addition, and concretion in time amount to a considerable stony mass.

For the better understanding the true nature, and causes of this water, I made
these three experiments.

1. I evaporated away the water, and in the bottom was left a stony powder*
very like to the powder of the stones of the Rock.

2. A pint of it weighs ten grains heavier than a pint of common Spring water.

3. It coagulates milk if it be boiled therewith, and the reason of this is,
because for the principiis solutis of all minerals, nature has provided some
Sulphurious acidity for the better fermentation, and digesting them into
perfection. The chief virtues of this water are to allay acid, gnawing, and hot
choleric humors, and to stop all fluxes proceeding from thence; It is also
good against burstness, pissing of blood, all overflowings in women, and
strengthens the back.

They that take this water, except in case of looseness, must every other day
take a glyster, or some lenitive as Cassia, Manna, etc. every other night, in
case it binds too much.

This water in many cases is better than the syrup of Coral, and the powder of
the Rock, or rather the powder that remains upon evaporation maybe used for
Coral; for the truth is, (as is the opinion of many Philosophers) that Coral is
a certain vegetable, fed and nourished with a succus lapidescens.

The proportion of the water to be taken is from half a pint to half a gallon,
according to the age, constitution, distemper, and place of the distemper.

The quantity of the powder is from ten grains to a dram, according to the
aforesaid considerations.

CHAP. XVII. Of St. Mugnus Well.
WHether Magnus, or Mugnus be the true, and Original name of this Well I could
never yet be ascertained; It is usually called by the latter. Now whether this
Well was Sainted from its real virtues, or only supposed virtues attributed to
it, because first Sainted, I will not stand now to dispute, but I rather
believe the former. Dr. Dean, will not have any greater virtues attributed to
it, than to common Springs, allowing it only a bare name, and title. It seems
the Dr. was no Catholic, or if he were St. Mugnus, must not be his
Intercessour.

Now the reason why he will ascribe no other than common virtues to this water,
is because, as he says, it has no mineral virtues, and faculties, I suppose
he means perceptible. But to this, answer might easily be made, viz. that
waters oftentimes are impregnated with mineral virtues, and spirits to,
although insensibly. Who would have thought that the dropping-well would have
yielded a stony powder upon evaporation, and coagulate milk? Besides if upon
experiment nothing could be found perceptible to sense in waters, must we
always judge of things by sense, and not sometimes by effects?

In many mineral waters the substance of minerales, and metals is mixed, in
other some the gross, perceptible vapors only, and in other some, the subtle
insensible spirits, or rather atoms, and effluvia's. In this well the last
only, and they are the effluvia's of either Lead, or Tin mines (as is the
opinion of some Philosophers, concerning such kind of Springs) which being
mixed with the water, do not only give activity to its coldness (as do cold
atoms of the Northen wind to rain congealing it into snow, which will with
much handling, heat the hands, and make them even to burn) but also a kind of
fermenting nature to it, so that when the water has a little entered into the
pores of the body, it causes a kind of light fermentation amongst the humors,
and by consequence stirs up a heat in the habit of the body, and withal draws
out the natural heat into the same. And this is apparent, for if any one enter
into this water to Bathe, or wash himself, and abide there but a quarter of an
hour, or little more, he will as soon as he comes forth, presently become very
hot (his body being all over red) and so continue a long time, although he walk
in the cold air; nay, although he put not on his clothes.

Nay, many times tender women, who dare scarce wash their hands in cold water,
will adventure to go into it, although it be colder than ordinary water, with
their linen about them, and when they become forth, go to the next houses, and
lie in their wet linen all night, and toward morning begin to sweat, and by
this means are cured of many old aches, in what part of the body soever they
are, and of swellings, and hard tumors, and agues, and indeed many outward
distempers and symptoms caused either by cold, or hot humors, the latter
being cured by an actual coldness, viz. if it be a bare distemper of heat only,
for which alteration only will be sufficient; the former by the heat of the
body, being drawn outward and increased, whereby humors offending are
digested, attenuated, and discussed, or evaporated by sweat. Also such
distempers as are caused by too much chilness, and tenderness, are hereby
recovered. And upon this account it is, that they that are very tender in their
heads, and wear many caps, and subject to take cold upon every slight occasion,
are cured of this tenderness by washing their heads, two or three times in a
day in cold water: for hereby the open pores, which let in the cold, and
through which the natural heat did too much transpire, are closed, and stopped.

Before any attempt the use of this cold Bath, let them first consult with some
able Physician; and if they please, observe such directions for the ordering of
themselves, as I have given in the fourth Chapter, concerning bathing in cold
water.

This Well is square, with a high wall about it, and a house adjoining to it,
where people make themselves ready for bathing, going immediately out of it into
the Bath.

This Spring rises high about May, and falls low about September*

Now if any shall not approve of my hypothesis, concerning the nature of this
Well, let them tell me of one that is more rational, and I shall not be ashamed
to learn that, which I am convinced I did not know, or else let them embrace
mine. The reason inducing me to declare this of mine is, because I know it is
the unanimous consent of most sound Philosophers, that waters running through
Tin, Lead, and Silver mines, or minerals of a cold nature, may contract some
imperceptible medicinal virtues from them, (and therefore H. ab Heers. and
Helmont say, that many Medicinal Springs are called fontes acidi, from their
effects, not sensible acid mineral taste) and also because I know that this
Country yields almost all manner of metals and minerals, which an expert
Artist, assisted with a good purse, would easily discover. I believe that many
other Springs of this nature might in that Country, and other such mineral
Countries be found out upon examination, and trial.

Now for the conclusion of all, let not any one judge me to be a Catholic by
this my approbation of this Sainted Well, for I am none, and as none my self,
so neither do I hate those that are, or those of any other heterodox judgment
whatsoever. Their living according to their own light, and within the bounds of
civility, is a sufficient ground, for me to exercise good will, and love to
them.

And as I do not out of any superstitious account attribute any medicinal
virtues to this Sainted Well, so neither do I do it out of any affectedness to
contradict D. Deane's judgment.

The reason of my vindication of it, is grounded upon some notable cures, which
I'have seen effected thereby. And the Doctor himself acknowledges, that it
has, formerly been very much frequented by all sorts of infirm people: if so,
then certainly not without some cause.

Now if it were but their faith in the water, and strong imagination, (as some
may say) that cured them, yet let them use this water, or any lawful means
else that may exalt their imagination, if that may promote their cures.

FINIS.
A TABLE of the Contents of this Treatise.
1. THe place together with the Nature of the same, where four Famous Medicinal
Springs are discovered in Yorkshire. page 1. 2. Of the Original of Springs in
general. page 2. 3. Of the strange variety of Fountains, and other waters. page
32. 4. Of the nature, and virtues of simple waters. page 39. 5. Of the several
kinds of mixtures in mineral waters. page 50. 6. Of the Original of Vitriol,
and the causes of Vitrioline waters, or Spaws, the difference of them, the one
from the other, and the reasons of their different operations. page 54. 7. Of
the Spaw-wel near Knaresborow. page 65. 8. Of the virtues of the Spaw-well, to
whom, and in what cases profitable, or burtfull. page 71. 9. Of some general
directions to be observed before, in the time of, and after taking of the
waters. page 81. 10. Of particular directions, and cautions in particular
cases, and of preventing and curing such accidents and symptoms, which
sometimes happen in the taking of the waters. page 89. 11. Of the necessity,
and manner of exercise, in the use of the waters. page 96. 12. Of the time of
the year, and day when the Spaw is chiefly to be taken. page 97. 13. Of the
Diet to be observed by Spawdrinkers. page 100. 14. Of the Sulphur-well. page
104. 15. Of the virtues, and uses of the Sulphurwell, together with directions
and cautious for the taking of it. page 112. 16. Of the Dropping, or
Petrifying-well. page 117. 17. Of St. Mugnus Well. page 119.
FINIS.

