THE French Intrigues DISCOVERED. With the Methods and Arts TO Retrench the
Potency OF FRANCE BY LAND and SEA, And to Confine that MONARCH Within his
Ancient DOMINIONS and TERRITORIES.

Humbly submitted to the Consideration of the PRINCES and STATES of EUROPE,
especially of ENGLAND.

Written in a LETTER From a Person of Quality abroad, to his Correspondent here.

Nulla potentia scelere quaesita, est diuturna. LONDON: Printed for R. Baldwin.
1681.

THE French Intrigues DISCOVERED, etc.
SIR,
IN obedience to your Commands, I have soberly considered your learned
Discourse; wherein are such excellent Prudentials of Government, such grave
Aphorisms of State, and the whole composed with so great judgment, that it
makes me think the Opinion of the equality of Souls, to be a Paradox: Yet I
must beg your pardon, if I cannot obtain so much favor of my Reason, as to
agree with you, that in this Juncture of Affairs in Europe, it is England's
Interest to stand Neutral.

When Neighbor- Princes are at difference, and their Forces not greatly
unequal, and no fear of any Parties aggrandizing it self, it may be prudence:

But when Kingdoms are tottering, Nation reeling against Nation, and France
endeavoring to set up an Empire over the Emperor himself, and by the power of
Arms reducing Princes and States under an Universal Dominion (as it is evident
to be the French Design;) then I take it, for England to be an idle Spectator
and to sit still, is the greatest Soloecism in point of State: For that Prince
which stands Neutral, and suffers his weaker Neighbors to be subdued, (except
his strength does overbalance the Victors) does but expose himself to danger,
and his own Dominions to the mercy of the Conqueror.

Theramenes thought it a great instance of prudence, during the Peloponnesian
War, and the troubles of the Athenians, to keep himself quiet without taking
part with the one or with the other; but in the end was deserted by all, his
Dominions made a Prey, and his Life a Sacrifice to the prevailing Powers.

Certainly, Sir, nothing can be more becoming the wisdom of the greatest
Prince, than to be watchful that the States about him should not ingreaten
themselves by access of Dominions, by ruining of Confederates, blocking up of
Trade, or by the like means.

Hence it was that Sextus Quintus being jealous of the Spanish Greatness, and
that his design was of aggrandizing himself, with great efficacy stirred up
the Crown of France to assist and defend the States of Holland.

And for this reason of State, Pope Julius the second, Maximilian the Emperor,
Lewis the twelfth of France, Ferdinand of Aragon, and other Princes and States,
An. Dom. 1508. at Cambray, entered into a League against the Venetians; yet so
as the Confederates had a perpetual Eye one upon the other, that none of them
should over top.

And the best Guard which the Italian Princes have, is the reciprocal fear
which the one of them has of the other.

The wisest Princes have ever been in this point very jealous, (and the more
jealous, the less they have been deceived;) for then are Kingdoms and States
most safe, when their Neighboring Forces are not greatly superior to their
own Strength.

And it is prudence in a Prince, as well to contain his best Friends within a
moderate Greatness, as to weaken and depress his most potent Enemies.

The safety of Princes consists in the equal counterpoise of Power; for Power
is never safe when it grows bold and does exceed.

And therefore it was great weakness and oversight in the Neighboring Princes
and States to the Commonwealth of Rome, to suffer it to grow to that magnitude
of Reputation and Power, that when forty Princes and States, being jealous of
its Power, with united Forces did endeavor to reduce it, they were all
subdued; and their Conspiracies did much contribute to the enlarging ber
Dominions: for by seeking to suppress Rome, they made them not only provide
for their own defense, but also gave them the means how they might, with more
Force, better advice, and greater Power offend them.

It has been looked upon as a great imprudence in Lewis the twelfth of France,
after he had gotten Millain, to give Aid to Pope Alexander to seize upon
Romagnia; who thereby became so powerful, that he would have made himself Lord
of Tuscany, if Lewis had not with his Army made a descent into Italy.

The Neighboring Princes to the Signiory of Geneva would not suffer it (though
but a palm of ground) to fall into the hands of the Duke of Savoy, or of any
other Potentate of more strength than himself; insomuch that when he besieged
it An. 1589. England, the State of Venice, and Florence, aided them. And at
another time, when the Pope, the French King, the Spaniard, and Savoy, had
designs upon it, the Emperor offered them assistance both of men and money;
and sometimes the Duke of Savoy has assisted them against the others.

So watchful were Princes and States in those times, that none of them could
enlarge their Dominions, thereby to become troublesome or formidable to their
Neighbors. France and Spain were the Scales of the great Balance of Europe,
and England was then the Beam of that Balance, which kept it in an even
Counterpoise.

And let me tell you, Sir, England, by observing this fundamental Maxim of
their State, and by contributing Aid to one Party, has ever risen in Honor
and Reputation; and most commonly has kept both Parties at their Devotion, and
in Dependancy, the one in hopes of Succors from them, the other for fear of
their giving Assistance against them.

And in case England should not take any Party, yet in prudence a Fleet must be
equipped, Soldiers raised, an Army maintained, and all this Expense and Charge
without any Fruit or Glory; otherwise the Scene of the War may be turned upon
you, and the Ambition of the Victor may erect his Trophies, and extend his
Triumphs into England.

Whereas by giving Aid unto one Party, you will maintain a Spring and Seminary
of brave men at the expense of others, (which will make you considerable to
your Neighbors.) And in case of an Accommodation or Peace, you shall be sure
therein to be comprised; which will be your Safety; Otherwise you will remain
friendless, exposed to the charity of the Conqueror, and to the scorn and
contempt of the Conquered; who upon all occasions will meditate revenge against
you for not giving them your Aid, and it may be that both Parties with united
Forces may attempt against you.

However, that Prince or State which will stand for a Cipher, when in prudence
he is obliged to arm, shall with Servilius in Rome, please neither side; of
whom the Historian observes, that P. Servilius medium se gerendo, nec Plebis
vitavit odium, nec apud Patres gratiam inivit.

Henry the Eighth (amongst several other Princes) understood this Maxim of
England so well, that he assumed unto himself this Motto, Cui adhaereo, praeest.

Sometimes he would make Charles the Fisth weigh down, sometimes Francis the
First.

Anno 1522. at Cambray he settled all Europe in quiet (when it was much
turmoiled) and Italy in security; therefore he was styled, Protector of the
Clementine League: the Instrument whereof does still remain in the Treasury at
Westminster sealed with gold.

And Clement the Seventh being cooped up by Charles the Fifth in the Castle of
St. Angelo, was freed by the means of Henry of England; and therefore by the
whole Consistory of Rome, he was called Liberator Orbis.

Charles the Fifth, An. 1521. was by him made Emperor, as he does acknowledge
in two Letters to Henry of England; and indeed he was the great Arbitrator of
all the Assairs of Europe in his time.

If Henry the Eighth was so much celebrated for keeping the balance in
aequilibrio, what Glory and Renown will his now Sacred Majesty of Great Britain
have, by putting a Batricado to the Ambition of the French Empire, and
reintegrating all Princes and States in their ancient Liberties and just
Rights, and settling the Peace of all Europe upon a solid Basis? which only by
his Wisdom and Power is to be effected.

An Act certainly so full of Grandeur, that it will tread upon the grave of
History, bury Monuments, see the Worlds funeral, Time laid in the dust, and
stand up with Eternity.

The glory of Sovereignty consists not in a Chair of State, but in such Acts as
are well-becoming a Prince. Private men may direct their Counsels to such
things as they think may be prositable to them, but the Actions of Princes must
tend to Grandeur, and the attaining of Honor and Fame.

For want of due observation of this prime and Alphabetical Maxim of England,
the French King of late has risen up to that Greatness, and is arrived to that
Pyramid of Grandeur, that Europe begins to bow to his Power.

Universal Empire was first attempted by Charles, the Fifth, designed by Henry
the Great, but will be effected (if not timely prevented) by Lewis the Potent.

And how great a Progress he has made toward so vast a Design, it well
becomes your great Judgment to consider.

He has gotten Brisac and Friburg, to enter Germany; the French Comte, to a we
the Switzers; Pignoral, to enter Italy; Perpignan, to enter Spain; and almost
all Flanders, to enter England. Besides, he has impatronized himself of the
Countries of Rousillon and Catalonia, the Dutchies of Lorrain and Bar,
Alsatia, Burgundy; The French Comte, all the Spanish Netherlands are in his
Talons, and he has a hovering possession of the remainder, as a Hobby has
over a Lark.

The Italian Garrison in Avignion is casheer'd, and he is Master of that place,
though it was part of St. Peter's possession three hundred years.

The Garrison of Foreign Soldiers which were in Orange, is dismissed, and the
Castle is dismantled which was in the bowels of one of his Provinces.

What will he not be able to compass against the rest of Europe, when he has
gotten the Accession of Germany and all the Low Countries, to that already too
boundless Power, by which he has inslaved his own people, and subjected them
to an absolute Vassalage?

Can England and the rest of Europe expect better terms than he has given to
his own Subjects? It Is well if he allow them Canvas and Salowes.

By Sea he is become so potent, that I question if he were but furnished with
Mariners and experienced Commanders suitable to the goodness of his Ships, if
he might not contrast the power of all Europe, and make the Sea between Callis
and Dover as a Ferry to pass over what Armies he pleased into England.

In the beginning of the year 1665. he was not able to put to Sea twenty Ships
of War; now he has two hundred and upwards, and many larger than most in
Europe, and is every day building more. Is it not then necessary for England,
the United Netherlands, and all Europe, to look about them, and to secure their
Necks against the Yoke of Slavery with which he threatens them? If some timely
Expedient be not applied, from this Naval Power of France the destruction of
Europe may take its date before we be much older.

It will much concern England in point of Interest, to consider if Ireland by
the Scheme of their designs, may not be looked upon as a Country which may
procure France the absolute dominion of the Sea, of Trade, and the Conquest of
the West Indies; which have been their ancient Project.

For he being so potent at Sea, they may from Breast transmit an Army into
Ireland (they having many of the Irish Nation in their service, and those
discontented) if they should seize upon Kingsale or Waterford, and keep a good
Squadron of Ships there, (which they may do, having such numbers of Men of
War). And though it should not prove the loss of that Nation, yet it would
obstruct and debar all Trade upon those Seas: And if you have any Ship pass
there, it must be by their favor, and paying what Tribute they please to
impose.

Be assured, Sir, the French Cabal have some notable Design against England,
either to engage you in a Civil War by disseminating of Divisions amongst you,
thereby to put a disability upon his Majesty of Great Britain to give any
Assistance, or contribute any Aid to the relief of the Spanish or United
Netherlands, in case by his Arms he should attack them, as without dispute he
will, in case there be not a stop put to his Career.

Or peradventure the French King (if the Capricio shall take him) may by his
Arms give disturbance to England it self: For he cannot think it safe to
proceed in his Conquest on the Continent, whiles he has so dangerous an Enemy
as England at his rear. He well knows the Courage and Gallantry of the English,
and your Talbots and Bedfords are not by them forgotten.

They are setting up an Universal Monarchy of Commerce, and to make France the
Staple of Trade; and to that purpose do labor to get what Ports they can into
their power.

After the Pyrenean Peace, they immediately entered into a League Offensive and
Defensive with Portugal, though contrary to the Faith of that Treaty; and all
the Harbors and Ports which the Portugal should take in Spain, either upon the
one or other Sea, were to be put into the power of France.

No sooner was Dunkirk in the French King's hands, but he made it a free Port.
And that he might want no Seamen of his own, he has by all imaginable
Encouragements, established a mighty Navigation in France, and thereby will lay
the foundation of a greater Empire than ever was in Charlemain.

For one trading Ship twenty years since, there are now forty. For this purpose
he has propagated the Fishery in Newfound Land (which is the Propriety of the
Crown of England) and where they formerly (till now of late) never fished but
by License, and paying a Tribute to the Kings of England; and besides, has
yearly educated supernumerary Seamen on board the French Trading-Ships at his
own charges.

He has engaged most of his Nobility in the East and West Indian Trades; and
the better to encourage them, has granted many Privileges to them.

And without doubt, by reason of his great preparations by Sea, he has some
great Design in projection. If he shall propose to make himself Master of the
Indies, I do not see how he can fail in his Attempts, if Europe be not more
watchful.

By an Ordinance of the French Privy Council (which is the now standing Law of
that Kingdom) all the Officers and Commanders in the Islands of America, are
strictly enjoined and required to secure to the Most Christian King the
Sovereignty of those Seas; and the French in execution of it, have much
interrupted the Trade there, and have proved very vexatious.

And having erected the East India Trade, he has attempted to get footing in
diverse places in the East Indies: What his success may be, time will show.

But if he should unite the Dutch Trade and Strengths in those parts to
himself, by an Union of the United Provinces, and their Navigation to his
Empire, (as he will, if some timely Assistance be not given by England) how the
English Factories there will then preserve themselves from Violation or utter
Extirpation, it does well become England to consider: For France designs to
engross the Trade of the Universe.

And by their irregular course of Trade, they will exhaust all Europe of their
Money. I have heard that England loses yearly by the French Trade 1500000 l.
sterling; and I am sure they draw out of the Northern Regions of Europe, for
Wines, 25 Millions of Florens; for Salt 10 Millions of Florens; for Brandy 5
Millions; for Wines, Brandy, and Salt, they yearly exhaust from thence 40
Millions of Florens; for Silks, Stuffs, Toys, and Fripparies, they spirit out
of those Countries yearly 40 Millions of Florens: and there is not imported
into France of the Commodities of all the North so many as do amount unto 15
Millions of Florens. So that France does yearly drain out of the Northern
Regions of Europe 65 Millions of Florens. And what great and prodigious sums of
money he draws from the rest of Europe, must be left to sober men to consider.

But no Foreign Commodities can be imported into France, but they are clogged
and encumbered with such great Duties and Customs, that the return made thereof
to the Merchant is without any profit.

His Most Christian Majesty having for his Royal Revenue Sixty Millions of
Florens yearly, and France being enriched yearly as abovesaid, and being able
by his supreme power, without any check or control, to impose what Taxes he
pleases; he has laid such an inexhaustible Fond of Treasure to carry on his
designs to the Oppression of all Europe, that he can rarely be disappointed or
fail in any: He can support his Armies, when other Princes are enforced to beg
for Peace because their Treasures are exhausted.

He, after many years War, can engage in a new War; and upon occasions, by
reason of his Treasure, have Instruments to execute his Projects.

By this he purchases the assistance of Foreign Princes, and endears their
Ministers, opens their Cabinets, engages true and close Correspondencies, and
poisons their Councils. By this he can pass unseen through Rampires and Guards
into Cities and Forts, and can surprise them, without tedious hazards of
Guards. And many contemplative men think that he has gained more Territories
and Dominions by his Pistols, than by his Sword and Cannon: So that the Serpent
is more serviceable to them than the Dragon as acting with less noise and
greater execution. Ambition is the Compass whereby they sail, and Universal
Dominion the Port whereunto their course is directed; and as their Ambition
has no Horizon, so their Designs have no Latitude.

Charles the fifth his Motto, Plus Vltra, and his Son Philip's, Non sufficit
Orbis, discovered their vast Ambition: And does not that of Lewis the eleventh,
Immensi tremor Oceani, and that of Lewis the fourteenth, Solus contra Omnes,
manifest the Designs of France?

Well, if there be not a Retrenchment of the spreading and ambitious Designs
of France, I am sometimes of the opinion, that the Most Christian King may ere
long take upon him that jolly humor of the great Cham of Tartary; who when he
has dined, commands his Trumpeters to sound, and make proclamation that now
all other Kings and Princes may sit down to dinner.

It will be worth the while, that all Europe may be satisfied of the Conduct of
the French Cabal, to consider the candor and integrity of their Actions for
some years last past; and whether they may expect better Principles and Methods
from them for the future, than they have hitherto had. The first Essay of their
Ingenuity and Honesty, was in their behavior and carriage in the Pyrenean
Treaty, and their performance thereof.

By the Endeavors of the Queen Mother of France, a Peace being promoted
between the two Crowns of France and Spain, with a Marriage between the French
King and the Infanta of Spain; the whole Treaty was founded upon two
considerable points: The one was the forsaking of Portugal; the other a
Renunciation of the Infanta (ratified by the French King) of all her present or
future pretenses, titles, or claims whatsoever to the Spanish Monarchy and
Dominions thereof; which if not granted, the great work of the Match had never
taken effect. As to the first, the French King did promise and oblige himself
upon his Honor, and upon the Faith of a King, not to give at present or for
the future, neither in common, nor to any person or persons thereof in
particular, any help or assistance, neither public nor seeret, directly or
indirectly, of Men, Munition, etc. under any pretense whatsoever.

Yet the Peace was no sooner made, but they sent them Supplies of Men, Arms,
and Money; and a while after, notwithstanding their former Treaty with Spain in
the view of the whole world, they entered into an Offensive League with that
Kingdom against all their Enemies.

The other was the Renunciation aforementioned: And as to this, the French
King, after the death of the late King of Spain, claimed (notwithstanding the
said Renunciation) a great part of the Spanish Low Countries, as being devolved
to him in the Right of his Wife; and to take possession thereof, invaded the
Country contrary to his Engagements, and so destructive to the Essence of the
Treaty, with a powerful Army. The Marquess de la Fuente extraordinary
Ambassador from Spain, being upon his return into Spain, upon the death of the
late King his Master, his Most Christian Majesty did with all possible
Asseverations engage his Faith and his Royal Vow, That he would religiously
observe and keep the Peace, and continue a faithful Friendship both to the
Queen of Spain and to her Son.

And the Archbishop of Ambrun, after the French Army was already in the Field,
and had possessed Charleroy, some sive days before the News of it came to
Madrid, did in verbo Sacerdotis, and upon all that is most sacred, protest and
vow to the Queen, That his Master intended nothing less than what was reported
of him, and would not break with the King of Spain, or invade his Dominions; as
long as he was under age.

These Circumstances are more surprising than the Breach it self. But the March
of the French Army, and the Hostility they committed, agreeing so little with
their Vows and Promises, and the same being complained of, they answered, It
was no Breach; and that they only came fairly and in a friendly manner to take
possession of what belonged to them.

This War, or as the French term it, a Friendly possessing of their own, ended
by a Treaty at Aix; after which, contrary to the faith of that Treaty, they
first dismantled the strong places and holds of the County of Burgundy, carried
away all Munition out of the Country; and notwithstanding the same Treaty at
Aix, they exacted great Contributions from the Dutchies of Limburg and
Luxemburg, and laid a new Claim to some Towns as important as any of those
granted to them by the Peace, and confiscated the Estates of the Subjects of
the King of Spain that would not forswear their Allegiance. If these
Infractions, and many more, are not sufficient to awaken England and all
Europe, I know not what will.

Since the Treaty at Nimmeguen, such have been the actings of the French
Ministers, such Contraventions thereof, such horrid Injustice has been
committed and executed upon the Subjects of his Catholic Majesty in the
Spanish Netherlands, and else where, notwithstanding the great Territories
granted to the Most Christian King by that fatal and destructive Peace (which
all Europe may have time enough to repent and lament) that no King in the world
can in justice own or give any countenance thereunto. Certainly there men act
as if great sins would merit Heaven by an Antiperistasis. Thus they have dealt
with Spain.

Let us see how other Princes have fared with them.

We'll begin with the Duke of Lorrain, who by the Pyrenean Treaty was to be
restored to his Duchy of Lorrain, with all the places and Towns which he had
possessed in the Bishoprics of Metz, Toul, and Verdun; but contrary to the
Treaty, the French King refused to restore it, and to this day does detain it;
and ordered one of his Generals to seize his person, and to bring him either
dead or alive, (as it is the usual practice of all Usurpers to destroy those
they have dispossessed and injured): and it was very near being effected.

A new way of dealing with a Sovereign Prince, not yet known in these parts of
the world, and which gives some hopes to Europe of seeing ere long the West
governed by Bashaws, as well as the East. None but an Universal Monarch can
pretend to a Right of displacing Princes, and disposing both of their Lives and
Territories: And therefore nothing could deserve a higher Resentment, nor a
more vigorous Opposition from all the Kings and Princes of Europe.

The Kingdom of Poland comes next; which has lain a bleeding ever since they
had a French Queen, and which is at this instant in imminent danger of being
conquered by the Turks, through the means of the French Cabal, who have called
into the Kingdom the Enemy of the Christian name, merely because they could not
have a King either of French Blood or of French Interest.

The Duke of Newburg was not better used, whom they caused to engage the
greatest part of his Estate almost beyond redemption, in hopes of the Polish
Crown which they had promised to raise him to, by the help of a strong Party
they had made in that Kingdom: Yet underhand, contrary both to their Treaties
(as well with the Elector of Brandenburg, as with himself) and to their
reiterated Promises and Vows, both by word of mouth and in writing, they did by
their Creatures and Agents oppose the said Duke's pretension, and endeavored
with all industry to have the Prince of Conde preferred before all other
Competitors.

Nothing certainly can be a greater instance of the perfidiousness and
treachery of the French Ministers, and how little faith or credit is to be
given to any of their Promises or Vows. If there were no other instance
thereof, this alone were sufficient to alarm the World to be careful and
advised how they put any trust in them.

The Emperor has as little reason to thank them; for at the very time when
the Most Christian King sent his Forces to join with his Army against the
Turks, they began to settle a Correspondence with the Counts Serini,
Franchipani, Nadasty, and Toffenback; from whence that so-wellknown Conspiracy
has since broken out, as it has been made apparent by the Depositions and
Confessions of some of the Accomplices, who had been instrumental in carrying
both Money and Letters from the French Ministers at Vienna.

All the Confusions, Distempers, and Wars in Hungary, have been raised and
continued by the Practices and Intrigues of France. And they have given
disturbance to all Germany by their private Treaties and Correspondencies with
several Princes, contrary to the Treaty at Munster.

To which may be added, That one of the greatest Motives of bringing the Turks
into Poland, was the Marriage of the Empress's Sister with their King.

Yet it must be owned, that the French seem to have repented their pernicious
Intrigues and caballing in that Kingdom: For when they saw the Emperor
preparing in earnest to assist the Dutch (in the late Wars they made against
them) to work him from that design, and to engage him (if it had been
possible) not to concern himself or take part in the Quarrel; they very fairly
offered him to put into his hands and deliver him all the original Letters they
had from their Creatures and Friends in Poland, to the end both his Imperial
Majesty and the King of Poland his Brother might take what course they thought
fit with those Rebels.

A fair warning to all those that prefer French Money before their Loyalty, and
the true Interest of their Country.

Nay, I doubt the Swedes, their good friends, have not always been pleased with
them; and they cannot to this day forget, that about eighteen years since,
having made a Treaty with the French, whereby they were to receive by way of
gratuity or pension sixteen hundred thousand Crowns, the French (upon second
thoughts) finding their Treaty with Sweden of little use to them, refused to
ratify it; and sent their Monsieur de Trelon, who without more words told them
in short, That the King his Master declared it to be void. A sine Court-stile
for one Prince to use to another I and a short Majestic way of rescinding all
Treaties.

These are stupendous passages, and will be no more credited by Posterity,
than we do what is said of King Arthur's round Table.

It Is needless to tell you, how they have observed their Treaties with Holland;
for all Europe has taken notice of it.

They are in continual acquests of Dominion by force or fraud; and what they
get by fraud, they keep by force: for the Sword, with them, is ever better than
half the Title to any Dominion.

They do not only pursue, but commonly wound their Adversary, before they
declare him such, or give him leisure to draw. They first invade a Princes
Territories, and after set up their Title and Cause of War. They are not
concerned, that all the world observe their pretense to be false and trifling,
vain and unjust, warranted by no other reason than that of absolute and
unbounded Will, which are the foundation and conclusion of all the Actions (of
the Most Christian King) and Wars abroad, as well as of his Laws and Edicts at
home, expressed in these imperious words, Tell est Nostre Plaiser.

It Is a prime Maxim of the French Cabal, That that Prince which wars for his
Glory, and avows Power to be the Rule, and Strength the Law of Justice, may
without Right enter upon any Princes Dominions, and may in Honor and Justice
detain them, so they be of convenience to him to keep them.

The Dukes of Lorrain, Deux-ponts, and Mewthelward, and the ten free Towns in
Alsatia, sufficiently prove the truth thereof.

They have erected at Metz, a Court where his Most Christian Majesty, as Judge
and Party, cites the most August and Illustrious Houses of the Empire, (which
he has nothing to do withal) to make their appearance, and to give him an
account by what Right they possess that which their Predecessors have for three
or four hundred years peaceably enjoyed.

His pretentions are to the greatest part of Lorrain, the whole Dukedom of
Deux-ponts, and the best part of Alsatia as far as Lauterburg. These, as
ancient Dependencies of the Bishoprics of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, and Thersow,
must be reunited to that Crown, because they are of convenience for him. By
this all Kings, Princes, and States, may see what they are to expect, if they
come within the despotical power of France.

All Princes and States which may give them any jealousy, they keep employed,
and design to depress all Powers which are capable of obstructing the Torrent
of their Ambition. All Europe is sensible thereof, to their grief: They have
engaged the Swedes to embroil the Empire; which they did to the loss of all
their Territories and Dominions in Germany: And they brought the Turks upon the
Muscovites, whereby the Swedish Army in Livonia, was let loose upon the
Confederate Princes.

They worked the Messinesses to form a Rebellion against his Catholic Majesty
(their Sovereign Prince) in Sicily, and had gotten Messina into their power,
where they had a potent Fleet of Men of War, thereby to give Law to all which
should pass upon the Mediterranean. But afterward (because they could not keep
it) did most perfidiously desert them; whereby those poor people were exposed
to the displeasure of an enraged Prince, and to the greatest miseries and
calamities imaginable. A fair warning to all ambitious and discontented
persons, who shall quit their Allegiance which they owe to their natural Prince.

They are continually brooding of Mischief, and laboring to enlarge their
Empire, herein imitating the Grand Seignior of Asia, who first subdued Asia
Minor, then he passed over into Europe, and conquered all Greece; next he falls
upon Syria, Egypt, and Armenia, till at last he came as far as Moldavia and
Hungary. And does not the French Cabal observe the same method? conquering or
surprising one Dominion after another; by Arms endeavoring to reduce the
Seventeen Provinces under his Obedience, and also Germany; laboring some of
the Princes thereof to stand Neutral, working others to their Party by
proposals of Matches and other Artifices; and will in short time (if not
prevented) shake hands with the other Grand Seignior of Asia.

They have now in design, by the power of their Arms, to procure the Dauphin
to be elected King of the Romans. Are not the persons and Estates of the three
Ecclesiastical Electors, and of the Prince Palatine of the Rhine, every hour
exposed to the Violences and Irruptions of the Arms of the French? It may
easily be foreseen (without the help of Galileas Prospective) whether by force
or promises (which will never be kept) they may not give their Suffrages for
that ambitious Crown; and how far the Marquess of Brandenburg may be prevailed
with, by reason of that dishonorable Peace patched up at the Congress at
Nimmeguen, a little time will discover. But if the Dauphin shall be advanced to
the Imperial Dignity, will not Germany become a Province to the French
Monarchy? (the fatal consequences whereof let Europe soberly consider.) Can the
Princes thereof expect better terms than they have given to the Duke of
Lorrain? For certain, the Protestants will be sure of the same usage and
infelicities which the poor Hugonots are now under in France: For Fire and
Faggot must be prooemial to his Universal Monarchy.

Dissimulation is the best support of the French Interest, and the first step
to their Grandeur: And to deal plainly with you, that Prince which will lay the
foundation of Empire by Cruelty, must build the Superstructures by
dissimulation. The whole Globe of Miseries, Calamities, and Infelicities, which
Europe has suffered for many years, we must own to the unlucky contrivance and
ambitious designs of the French Cabal.

If there be not a Retrenchment of the Grandeur and Potency of that aspiring
Monarch, I have so much of an Astrologer in me, that I can foretell what will be
the fate of Europe: France, like a perpetual Aetna, will fling Fire and Flames,
Blood and Confusion, into the Dominions of the Kings and Princes of Europe; and
will be more dreadful to his Neighbors, than the Indian Hurricanes are to the
Natives there.

The common Inscription of his Cannon, Ratio ultima Regum, is by him inverted
to a contrary sense, and made a public Warning to mankind, That he designs,
as God did of old, to give Law to the world in Thunder and Lightning: To
scatter by the flames of his Artillery, all those Clouds of Confederate Forces
that shall eclipse the Majesty of his Glory. He makes the power of his Arms,
his first and last reason.

His Device, the Sun in its Meridian, with this Motto, Non pluribus impar,
sufficiently shows his intentions for the Universal Monarchy; and the haughty
opinion he conceives of his being the only person qualified for the government
of more Worlds than one, declares his resolutions of admitting no Rivals in
Sovereignty; looking upon all other Princes but as so many smaller Stars or
wandering Planets, compared with him the Sun, from whom they are to receive
their borrowed light or power as it shall please his Mightiness to dispense. So
that crowned heads, Princes, and Republics, as well as their Subjects, are to
expect the same meat of Slavery; and though that be not sweat, yet the Sauce
will be four, Poinant to all, though perhaps a little differenced. The former
may be allowed Golden, while the latter are to be manacled with Iron Chains.

And be assured, he that makes War for his Glory, has more ambition to put his
Chains on Princes and States, than on their People. His thoughts are as large
as any of the Roman Emperors; and they esteemed it a greater glory to lead one
King in Triumph, than a thousand Subjects of several Kingdoms.

He does purpose to make all Princes and States of Europe Vassals and
Tributaries to his Universal Empire; and rather than fail, he has designed to
bring in the Turks, (with whom, they will tell you, they have contracted an
entire Friendship) in whose Court he has found help to make his Coin current.
Nor is that infallible man at Rome to escape, at least to the Temporal part of
his power, which he has not as he ought employed for the French Interest; but
will abrogate that great Authority in which his Predecessors Pipin and
Charlemain's Charity have vested him; and without doubt, will pull down his
Spiritual Grandeur, by fixing it in a Gallican Patriarch: and so his Holiness,
instead of being Christ's Vicar, will be made a French Curate.

And some of the Princes of Germany and Italy, which now seem unconcerned,
will, when it is too late, repent the oversight.

Sir, it is storied, when Beasts had Kings, the Lions had the Sovereignty every
one of them within his peculiar Forest. Whiles their strengths were equal, they
lived neighbourly; none insulted over the other: At last time produced a Lion
stronger than the rest, who disdaining to be kept within the Precincts left by
his Progenitors, preyed upon the Forest adjoining: The other Lions fearing
their particular Estates or Walks, consulted for remedy; the way resolved upon,
was to pare his Nails.

Your Prudence, Sir, will easily make the Moral.

Certainly, it is the true Interest of Europe, for all Kings, Princes, and
States to unite for their common safety, and to act in concert; and not only
to chase that ambitious and aspiring Prince out of his new Conquests, but to
confine him to his ancient Empire, and his own Dominions.

A devouring Lion which is never satiated with Prey, must be chained up.

The Conquest of Naples by Charles the Eighth, occasioned a Consederacy of all
the Neighboring Princes against him; whereby he soon lost that he had gotten.

Look into Asia, did not the Grand Seignior pick up one Commonwealth after
another (the one giving no Aid or Assistance to the other, but looking on with
their hands in their pockets) till at last he reduced them all under his
Empire? and what was the fatal consequence thereof, is well known.

How much more then are the Arms of France to be dreaded, whose power is
mightier than that was of the Turks!

And every new acquest and accession of Territories enlarges his desires, and
makes that Prince think, that which before seemed not only difficult but
impossible, to be easy and feasible.

Ambition is never so high, but it still thinks to mount; and that Station
which lately seemed the top, is but a step to her now; and what before was
great in desiring, seems little, being once in power.

The Successes of the French have already made them think no Enterprise too
hard, and still prompts them to push on their good fortune; which nothing can
withstand, but a general opposition of all the Princes and States of Europe.
Dum singuli pugnant, universi vincuntur.

Sir, I must confess you are obliged in all duty to acknowledge his Majesty of
Great Britain's incomparable Wisdom, great Vigilance, and dextrous Conduct of
Affairs, that you have been hitherto preserved in Peace and Prosperity, when
the whole Neighborhood has been infested with Fire and Sword, and had no
other Prospect but Blood and Confusion.

But by sad experience you will find, that if you do not vigorously contribute
your Assistance to put a stop to the progress of the French Arms, that the
natural strength and situation of England, can be no sufficient defense
against the power of France, when to that he has already, is added all the
rest of Europe; unless you can dream that your Fleets by Sea and Armies at Land
are able to contrast and secure you against that power which has subdued all
Europe. I have observed, that the neglect of beginnings, many times makes the
Disease mortal and incurable. The vivacity and boldness of brisk Resolutions,
always bring forth fortunate proceedings, and glorious conclusions. The way
down hill is easy and ordinary; but to ascend unto the top of Glory, requires
Wisdom to frame the steps, and Courage to give the attempt.

As sudden Resolutions are always dangerous, so no less peril ensues of slow
and doubtful Delays. In times of Danger, it is more safe to be found in Action
than Counsel.

Cunctatio servilis, statim exequi regium est. I am in my Constellation under
Mercury, not Mars, and desire Peace; but I am of that Princes mind, not to
take up Peace at the interest of Danger to ensue. A wise State ought to desire
Peace; but it is necessary to be prepared for War.

In Puglia in Naples, if any be bitten by a Tarantula, it is not to be cured but
by Music only. You are bitten in your Trade, and wounded in your Traffic;
there is nothing will cure you but the noise of Cannon, and sound of Drum and
Trumpet.

But you are pleased to say that you are in League with France, and a Rupture
on your part would be unjust; it is not honorable to break Leagues, which are
the Tie and Cement of Nations.

The French King will grant us any terms.

I do not deny, but he will grant you any terms; but the more advantageous
terms you have (if you consider the Genius of the French Nation) the more ought
it to be your fear and jealousy of their breaking of them. But when France
shall be brought to more Equality, better and more advantageous Conditions will
be drawn from him, and he will be well advised before he break them.

Sir, I must tell you, there is no Faith or Trust in France, but in its
puissance to do hurt. France has ever preferred interest of State before the
faith of Treaties and Leagues; and that made the Duke of Rohan observe, that
Princes command over the People, and Interest commands over Princes.

Leagues and Alliances, as they are made for Interest, so Interest will
dissolve them; and foreign Friendship lasts no longer than it is advanced with
mutual Interest.

All Leagues and Alliances made with France, are but as the Rod of Mercury, to
charm them asleep with whom they are made.

It was truly observed by Lysander the Greek, that Children are to be deceived
with Toys, but Princes with Oaths and Leagues: And you know it is a prime Maxim
in the Cabal of France, That Leagues and Alliances are to be made for Interest,
and not on design to keep them: For a Prince ought not to be a Slave to his
Faith or Word.

What Leagues, Alliances, or Treaties can be reckoned, which the French
Ministers have not violated? Have they not broken the famous Pyrenean Treaty
confirmed by Oaths and Sacraments, and contrary to a solemn Renunciation, and
the double Ties of Blood and Marriage? Before a Breach complained of, or a War
declared, they invaded the Territories of an Infant King. Have they not by
Addresses and Cunning, by Bribes and Rewards, endeavored to corrupt most of
the Ministers of State in Europe? How well they have kept the Articles of Peace
concluded at Westphalia and Nimmeguen, the Emperor, King of Spain, and Princes
of Germany, can tell you. And can you prudently hope that the future Practices
of the Most Christian King will be more just than his former? He that has
broken through so many Obligations, Alliances, and Treaties, will he not do so
again?

Be assured, Sir, you cannot anchor any faith or confidence in the Alliance or
Friendship of France; for France is a floating Island, and no Terra firma. It Is
prudence to keep an Enemy at the Swords point, and not to suffer him to come
within you. The Spanish Dominions are the Fountain from whence you draw a great
part of your Traffic, and by consequence your Riches.

The Netherlands are the Out works of England; if they are taken, you are weak
and dismantled. And let me tell you, Sir, the day of the Ruin of Flanders, is
the eve of the Subversion of England.

If the United Provinces should be brought under the subjection of France, it
would be a thing of that dreadful consequence, that the very thoughts of it
must needs raise the blood of all true English men. They are so situated, that
several of the greatest Rivers in Europe not only run through their Country,
but disembogue into the Ocean within their Precincts. "If the French make
themselves Masters of the Rivers, (as it is their design and endeavor) will
they not in a short time bring all the Havens, and all the Inhabitants
bordering upon the Sea, under the same subjection?

The Seaports without the Rivers, and the Rivers without the Seaports, being
altogether useless; if they be reduced under the Obedience of the French, their
Country will be the Nursery of his Seamen, and in all other respects the
support of his Naval strength. If they must be Slaves, will it not be some
satisfaction to them to lend a helping hand to bring their Neighbors, and in
truth all Europe, into the same condition with themselves?

The conquering of the United Provinces, is not only a fair step, but it is the
best part of the way to the Universal Monarchy: They being conquered, the
Spanish Netherlands will of course fall into their hands, being the Key which
opens the door to the Throne of that Monarchy. And if you do not act vigorously
with the rest of the Confederates, the Most Catholic King will be enforced to
take new Measures, and break with you.

I need not use many words to make all England sensible of the sad consequence
of a Spanish War: 1. The seizure of all your Merchants Estates, amounting in
the whole to a vast sum. 2. The loss of your Trade with them; which of all
others is the most beneficial to England, and without which your Woollen
draperies must lie upon your hands, and half of your Weavers and Spinners, etc.
go a begging. 3. The interruption of your Levant and Plantation-trade, which
cannot in case of a Breach, be secured by ordinary Convoys With what
encouragement or safety can your Traders venture abroad, when the Seas come to
be infested with Ostenders, Biscainers, Majorcans, and Minorcans? Did not those
very men, without any help, take above 1500 Ships from you in the late Spanish
War, when Spain was at the lowest, and fought alone against England and France?
I could offer many other reasons, but I am unwilling to be troublesome.

When the French King suffered the Duke of Alenson his Brother to take upon him
the Title of Duke of Brabant, and defense of those Countries, he sent an
Ambassador into Spain to excuse his Brother's going thither, and signify unto
the Spanish King, that which was done, was done without his privity or consent.
The Spanish King was highly displeased with the Message, and answered the
Ambassador, That he had rather have the French King his professed Enemy, than
a dissembling Friend. And whether England ought not to have the same
Sentiments, I pray consider.

The French have no kindness for England, but an inlaid and hereditary Malice
against them. When Lewis of France sent an Army into England to the assistance
of the Barons there, against King John their Sovereign Prince, he vowed utterly
to extinguish the English Nation; whom he held vile, unjust, perfidious, and
never to be trusted, as it was declared with much compunction by Viscount
Melun, a French Gentleman, lying at the point of death.

And I can easily believe that the same Rancor does yet run in the veins of the
French. I pray, Sir, who contrived and encouraged the Distempers of the Scots
against King Charles the First? was it not France? And the Peace at Rippon,
Anno 1639. being concluded between the two Nations (but much against their
will,) did not France stir them up to break that Peace, and to make a second
attempt by their Arms on England? Which they durst never have done, if they had
not received countenance and encouragement from France.

By their Emissaries they formed a Rebellion in England, and underhand
supported it; and his Majesty's Forces being defeated and broken, France looked
on till that great King was sacrificed to the Tyranny of his worst Enemies. His
now most Sacred Majesty ( England being hanged all with Blacks, and the best of
his Subjects weeping over the Kingdoms funeral) for the safety of his person,
retired into France; where he might have expected protection from so near a
Relation, and comfort as a distressed Prince, but found none: for by virtue of
an execrable Treaty made with the then Usurper, he was forced to forsake that
Kingdom, or else would have been resigned up to Cromwell. For the chief Article
of that Alliance was, That his Majesty, the Dukes of York and Gloucester, with
all their Relations and Friends, should be expelled out of, and no more
admitted into the Kingdom of France.

If the French King had had the least trillo or touch of Honor in him, he
would never have yielded to such a Condition, as to banish out of his Kingdom
those who came to him for succor and relief, in the utmost extremity that ever
Princes were put to; and they his nearest Relations, being his Sisters
Children. And what could be more unbecoming so great a Prince, than to make a
League Offensive with him who had murdered their Father, and expelled them out
of their Dominions?

What was this but the owning of that Murder, and aggravating their Oppressions
instead of relieving of them? Such practices as these amongst private
Christians would be abominable, and much more amongst any Kings, not styled the
Most Christian.

But you may observe, that neither Honor or Relations, can stand in
competition with Self-interest.

Did they not oppose his Majesty's restoration to the Emperial Crown of his
Royal Ancestors? Did they not cabal with his greatest Enemies, to keep him out
of his Kingdom? Of which his now Majesty was so sensible, that upon his coming
into England, he commanded away the French Ambassador Bordeux, and would not
suffer him to come into his presence.

In the times of the Usurpation in England, they were the mischievous
Instruments of the War between you and the States of the United Provinces, as
they were of the two following in 1665. and 1671. dreading nothing more than a
durable and firm Friendship between the two Nations; blowing up the Fends on
both sides, pretending to take part with each, that they might with less
opposition invade their Neighbors, and increase their Naval strength; but not
really purposing it with either, having the same design of weakening both
Parties (for your weakness is his strength) as the Britans formerly had in
throwing the Apple of Contention between the Picts and the Scots, that they
might in the end be the better able to overcome both.

When you had Victory in your palms, and Triumphs in your prospect, it was
ravished from you by their means.

The Bishop of Munster, who was his now Majesty's Allie, and in Arms against
the said States, was necessitated to withdraw his Forces (for the security of
his own Territories) because they sent their Troops against him.

France wrought Denmark off from your Party, and hindered the Swedes to arm in
favor of you, and contrived that Affront you suffered (to your shame and
dishonor) at Chatham. They have made it their Masterpiece to raise Jealousies
between you and the Dutch; and at last sided with the Dutch in a War against
you, not with any intention for themselves to fight, but to see you destroy
each other.

Did they not most treacherously put to the sword and slavery, his Majesty's
Subjects in St. Christophers, plundered them of all which by their industry and
providence they had for many years acquired?

But a Peace at Breda being concluded, the French were by the Treaty to return
to his Majesty St. Christophers in such sort as therein is expressed. But
instead of performing it according to the true meaning, and the very letter of
the Article, they upon several unjust and frivolous pretenses, did not deliver
it in four years to the Commissioners which were sent to receive it: For it is
against the Candor and Integrity of the French Cabal, to part with any thing
that may be of convenience for them to keep. But at last they delivered it to
Sir Charles Wheeler; but before the delivery of it, they destroyed all the
Plantations, plundered and carried away all that was there, laid the whole
Country waste, and left it in a much worse condition that if it had never been
planted.

And as if the detaining of his Majesty's Territories had not been sufficient,
they interrupted the Trade of his Subjects in those parts, and assuming to
themselves the Sovereignty of those Seas, they would not suffer any Ships but
their own to sail by or about their Islands; and upon no other ground, have
brought in as Prizes, and confiscated many Vessels.

In 1674, and 1675. when the Dutch and Neighbour-Nations were in War, but
England in Peace, who thereby expecting a great Trade, bought many Dutch-built
Vessels; the King of England accordingly granted them his License to trade in
them, by reason of the Act of Navigation.

But France, to hinder the Trade of England, issued out an Edict for the
seizing of all Ships bought in any Enemies Country. And in execution of their
Edicts, there came out a swarm of French Capers, who not only seized on those
Dutch-built Ships, though they had his Majesty's License, but sinding the
sweetness of that Trade, seized upon your Englishbuilt Ships, on pretense they
carried Enemies goods, whilst they themselves would be Judges; they did
actually seize all English-built Vessels merely laden on the account of being
English Merchants, and retook many which had been discharged in France; they
plundered your Ships, and wounded your Seamen.

There were about 400 fail of your Merchants Ships seized by them in this
manner, many of which the French did absolutely condemn; and such as were
released, were kept some three months, some six months, some twelve months, and
others longer; and then were discharged with great damage by expense and
plunder in France, besides the first affronts and violences. And after all, you
lost the intended Fruit of your Voyages; and what was yet worse, they making
the most advantages of every thing, got many thousands of your Seamen by
extraordinary Pay to engage in his service. And that which may super-adde
Calamity to your Misery, when the French did forbear to take your Ships, the
Algerines (Allies of France, and by them set up) have continually picked up your
Merchantmen, and Vassalized your Sea men ever since. And what they take from
you, they carry into the French Harbors, where the French buy the Commodities
at their own prices.

I need not tell you the great discouragements your French Trade has for many
years lain under, through their unjust practices, and manifold devices.

Nor shall I speak now how by their Emissaries and Factories of Sedition, they
have contrived and brooded a most execrable Plot in England and other his
Majesty's Kingdoms; and have sown Divisions, Discontents, and Jealousies
amongst his good Subjects; thereby to prevent his Majesty's Royal inclinations
in giving his assistance to his oppressed Neighbors, against that great Prince.

If these Enormities and Super-injustices of the French Cabal, be not
sufficient to awaken England, considerate men will wonder what Opiate has cast
you asleep; and if you be not enchanted by the Magic of French Pistols.

I pray, Sir, draw the Curtain; open your eyes, and see if the Liberty of all
Christendom be not now at stake! Do you think it will add any Trophies to your
Glory, when Posterity shall say, It was England which advanced the Most
Christian King into the Throne of an Universal Monarchy?

Is it not your interest to oppose that Power which opposes all Europe, and
labors to bury it in the Grave of Infamy and Slavery?

If you be backward to give your Assistance, when you may have so many Allies,
what will you do when their Forces are broken, and you are enforced singly to
contrast the Power of France and its new Acquests? What you may expect from his
Mightiness, enquire of the Duke of Lorrain, and of the Princes of Germany, and
they will tell you. The Dominion of the British Sea (which is your Glory, and
ought to be your Care) is gone.

He will give Law to your Commerce; and Navigation which is now your Honor,
will be nothing but a Piracy to you; and England, for want of Trade, (being an
Island) will be nothing but a Prison to you.

You which are the great Merchants, and so famous in the world for your
Traffic, must become Higlers and petty Chapmen under him. Your Men of War
(which are now a Terror to your Neighbors) will be of no use to you, but to
make your Slavery the greater: Your gallant Commanders and Seamen (as the
Romans served the Britans when they had conquered them) will be sent into
foreign Dominions to advance their Empire. And if he shall suffer any of you by
his favor to grow rich and full, it is only like Spunges to be squeezed. You
must like the Camel down upon your knees, and receive what burdens he shall
please to lay upon your backs. You are now a flourishing and well- Crested
People, you have your Liberty and Freedoms (which you ought to value above a
Crown;) but if you come within the power of France, you will be such Slaves, as
you will not be capable of a Jubilee.

Suppose the Most Christian King should be so kind and merciful unto you, as to
observe his Alliance with you tell he has reduced all other Princes and States
under his Obedience, yet you cannot but expect Poliphemus Courtesy, to be the
last which shall be eaten up. Whereas if we all associate and unite, and act
potently against that aspiring Prince, we are freed of all fears and
jealousies; and it is not possible for him to be other than the French King. And
then instead of an Universal Monarchy (which is the desigue of France) there
will be established in Europe an Universal Peace; of which his Majesty of Great
Britain will have the honor: for by the power of his Arms it is only to be
effected.

A timely War is less dangerous, than an uncertain Peace; and such is your
condition with France.

A War will fall upon you; and it is a great oversight to have been so modest as
to abide the taking of the first blow. Wisdom teaches us, that in Warlike
actions the having of the start, and to strike first, is a great advantage; it
puts the Enemy to the defensive, which is no other than fighting for his own
stake.

The Romans, as long as they were Defendants, were miserable; and Antiochus
refusing Hannibal's counsel to invade Italy, was put to the defensive, wherein
he lost his Life and Crown.

The charge of the invading Prince is certainly known; if he like not the
Attempt, he may desist at pleasure. Whereas the invaded is not only at the
charge to maintain Armies, but his Territories are instantly impoverished, his
Revenues deminished, Trade and Commerce laid aside, his good Subjects with fear
amazed, the Ill-affected who desirous of change, apt to run to the Enemy; and
many other Mischiefs will fall upon you, whereof you cannot be eased, but at
the pleasure of the Invader. Besides, the Money to be disbursed for the War
offensive, especial with you in Great Britain, where Victuals, Arms, Shipping,
and other Habiliments for the War abound, runs into the Subjects purse, and the
Realm is little or nothing impoverished by it. But to forbid and attend the
descents of the Invader (if we be on the defensive part) your Fleet must
necessarily be divided; the consequence whereof (considering the Potency of
their Naval power) I am afraid will prove, that you will be too weak in either
Squadrons of your shattered Navy.

I should be sorry to see Great Britain become a Province to the French
Monarchy, and be made a Theater where the Tragedy of Monieurs perseention shall
be acted; and the good Protestants there suffer the same Calamities,
Banishment, and Miseries for the Liberty of their Conscience, as the poor
Hugonots have done in France for the exercise of their Religion. I do assure
you, Sir, you cannot expect better terms than the Hugonots now have in France.
With what Infelicities, pressures in Gonscience, and inquietude of Mind, and
how precariously they do possess, but not enjoy their Estates, gotten with
Sweat, and kept by Care, I need not tell you.

It was not the method of Christ to force Belief by Slaughters, or instruct
men's Consciences by the Sword; yet these are the Arguments which they apply to
convince those unhappy Souls.

Sir, there is no safety in depending upon the Charity of France; I must tell
you again, the only security of all Christian Princes and States in Europe, is
their impuissance to do hurt. The end of War is Peace; but a Peace with France
seems to me to be the beginning of War: And though War be a great Evil, yet
from all appearances, I dread the consequences of a Peace more. If the Most
Christian King shall disband his Forces, it is far from being any security,
since he may raise them again at his pleasure; nor is it to be imagined that he
will so do, since that were to give his People an opportunity of rebelling, for
which he is sensible they are sufficiently prepared, and only want Domestic
Heads and Partisans, or foreign Assistance, to rescue them from Tyranny and
Oppression.

And whiles so potent a Monarch is in Arms, all Princes and States will be
obliged for their own safety, to keep up standing Armies; which Charges will
assuredly undo them: for it is a declared Maxim in their Counsels, That there
is no better way to ruin the Princes and States of Europe, than to oblige them
to keep Armies on Foot. For those require great expenses, which will impoverish
them, and by consequence precipitate their Ruin.

Just Fears, are a just cause of War; and a preventive War, is a true
defensive, as well as a War upon an actual Invasion, though offensively acted.

Hence the Lacedaemonians (as Thucydides tell us) armed against the Athenians,
by reason of their over-growing Greatness. And Antiochus, upon this principle,
invited Prussias King of Bithinia (at that time in League with the Romans) to
join with him in War against them; setting before him a just fear of the
over-spreading Greatness of the Romans, and that their design was to reduce
all Kings and Princes under their Obedience, and to make the State of Rome an
Universal Monarchy; that Philip and Nabis were already ruinated, and it was his
turn to be assaulted next. So that those Princes or States which do desire too
great Monarchies, and seek to enlarge their Dominions, do give a just fear to
their Neighbors.

That War is just which is necessary, and then Arms are deemed pious, when they
are the last Refuge of those which use them.

In elder time, it passed for an Oracle of Wisdom, Decreseat Hispania, and non
Crescat Gallia.

If we do make a War against that great Disturber of the Peace of Europe, as
it is our Safety, so it is Prudence to make it speedily and powerfully: for if
we do not make it powerfully, we shall be like the poor woman who bought Coals
sufficient to roast her Pig, but laying them on one by one, her Coals were
wasted, and her Pig unroasted: And if we do not make it speedily, we shall
imitate that Emperick who gave Physic to a dead man.

The Latins prayed in aid of the Lavinians against the Romans, but they put
off their resolution so long, that when they were going forth of Town to give
Summons to them, News came that the Latins were defeated; whereupon Milonius
the Praetor said, We shall pay deerly to the Romans for this little way we are
gone. For if they had resolved not to have given Aid, they had not given
offense to the Romans by helping of them; and had their Aid come in time with
the addition of their own Forces, they might have gained the Victory. But by
delays, loss and misfortunes came every way. And whether this may not be the
Case of England, I submit it to your great judgment.

This is not such a War as was between the Etolians and Archadians, for a wild
Boar, nor for a Cart-load of Sheepskins, as was between Charles Duke of
Burgondy and the Switzers; nor like that between the Sco^s and picts, for a few
Dogs: but it is pro aris and focis. We fight to preserve our own Interest, and
to avoid Beggary and Slavery; which will unavoidably fall upon us, if the
Ambition of that aspiring Prince be not stinted. When England shall vigorously
appear against them, the French King will be necessitated to desire Peace, and
to do Justice. The apprehension of your Forces will be a terror unto him, our
Allies will be greatly encouraged, and they with united Forces will act more
powerfully. Our Fleets will give them such just fears, that they will be
obliged to employ some great part of their Troops to defend their own Coasts;
and will be necessitated to quit some of their new Conquests (as they have done
Messina) to secure their own Dominions.

The conquering of Villages and Towns, are like Bonfires of Straw; but if they
meet with a stout opposition, they are mortal as other men, and one good blow
will cause a reverter of all their new Acquests.

It Is storied, that Charles the fifth, after he had clasped Germany almost in
his fist, he was forced in the end to go from Jusprug as if it had been in a
Masque by Torch-light, and to give up every foot in Germany that he had gotten.
Which I doubt not will be the Hereditary fate of the late Purchases and
Conquests of France.

I know the Most Christian King has as many experienced Captains and
disciplined Soldiers, as any Prince in Europe; but that sorts to the honor of
the English, seeing they ever have had the better of it in all Rencounters, and
never left the Field but with Glory.

The French Valor lies to the eye of the lookers on, but the English Courage
lies about the Soldiers heart; and the Fury of the French, the first blast
being over, turns to Fear.

No King or Prince has such a spring and seminary of brave Military people, as
be in England, Scotland, and Ireland; and who will be ready to sacrifice their
Lives for their King and Country.

Where was Caesar in greater danger than in England? Where was there a Prince
that durst challenge him to a single Combat, but in England? The Romans
conquered Gallia in ten years, whereas they did not subdue England in 200
years; and not then, till they had conquered all the rest of the World: Because
they reserved the Conquest of England (as Conquerors use to do most commonly in
great Enterprises) for the last and greatest Conquest that they had to do.

If you will consult the Register of times, you will observe England never had
any Encounter with France, but it came off with Honor.

I shall give you a particular List of some of them in an Historical truth, no
ways strouted nor made greater by Language; that is becoming a General at the
head of an Army, when they are going to Battle, but not with me: And I shall
begin with that at Cressey, the first great Battle.

That Heroic King Edward the third, having been provoked by diverse Affronts
that Philip of Valois the French King had offered him, goes over in person into
France with an Army of 8000 men at Arms, and 10000 Archers; he takes with him
his Son the Prince of Wales and Duke of Guyenne, being but fifteen years of age
(called afterward the black Prince) to train him up in feats of Arms. Landing
in Normandy, he marches within ten miles of Paris; and after diverse Skirmages,
a Battle was appointed. King Edward encamped near a Village called Cressey; the
French Kings Army was above twice the number, consisting of above 60000, with
all the Flower of the French Nobility. The Battle began, the Fight grew hot and
doubtful, insomuch that the Commanders sent to King Edward (who was gotten into
a Windmill, where, as from a Sentinel, he might behold the face of the Enemy)
to come up with more power: the King asked the Messenger whether his Son was
hurt or slain; and being answered no, he replies, Then tell them who sent you,
that so long as my Son is alive, they send no more to me; for my will is, that
he have the honor of the day. The Fight on both sides was very furious; the
French King having his horse killed under him, withdrew; which being known to
the English, it added so to their Courage, that they soon after won the Field.
This Battle was so bloody, that there were none made Prisoners, but all put to
the Sword. The number of the slain French, surmounted the whole Army of the
English; for the number of the slain were about thirty thousand.

The next great Victory in France, was the Battle of Poitiers. The black Prince
being tapred up now to a good growth, was sent by advice of Parliament to
Gascony, the Truce being expired: He ravaged the Country as far as Tourane.
John the French King raises a potent Army more numerous than that at Cressey;
and going to find out the Prince of Wales, found him about Poitiers, not much
above 10000 men effective in his Army. The Prince finding the main strength of
the French Army consisted in Horse, he entrenched amongst the Vineyards; where
when the French Cavalry entered, being wrapped and entangled amongst the Vines,
the English Archers did so ply and gall them, that thereby being defeated and
put to rout, the whole Army was soon defected. In this Battle King John himself
was taken prisoner, whom the Prince brought into England, where he continued
four years: And as the French Historians themselves confess, he was so nobly
received, that he knew not whether he was a free King or a Captive. Besides
Lords and Nobles that were slain in this Battle, there were upon the whole more
French slain, than the whole English Army was in number.

We will now to Agencourt. Henry the fifth, that Mirror of Princes, being come
to the Crown, he cast his eyes toward France; and for claiming of his Title,
he sent the Duke of Exeter in a magnisicent Embassy to demand the Crown: but
receiving no satisfactory Answer, but rather a kind of Jeer, the Dauphin
sending him a Sack full of Racket-balls to pass away his time, he replied, That
for every one of those Balls, he had so many Fiery Bullets to shoot at the
proudest Terrets in France, as he should shortly find. And he was as good as
his word: for he presently got over, and encountering the French Army at
Agencourt, he gave it an utter Overthrow, and took more prisoners than his own
Army had Soldiers. And this King made so absolute a Conquest of France, that
Charles the seventh of France, like a poor Roy de Juidot, consined himself to
Burges, where (having cashiered his Retinue) he was found in a little Chamber
at supper with a Napkin laid before him, a Rump of Mutton, and two Chickins.

There were many other Warlike Encounters betwixt England and France, whereof
the stories are full; and it is observed, that the English at most were but
half, sometimes not the third or fourth part in number to the French, in the
Engagements. And though the Scots did always confederate with the French
against England, and when the King of England was in France, would for
diversion invade England, yet England bore up single and victoriously against
them both.

I must beg your pardon, if I cannot omit one story. Edward the third being
engaged in France with his Army, David King of Scots with about 60000 men
(being a Confederate with the French King) invaded England: Queen Philippa,
with the Archbishop of York, the Lords and the Knights of the North,
encountered the Kings Army and utterly defeated it: The Scottish King was taken
prisoner, and reserved as a Present for Edward the third, when he returned out
of France, to keep company with John the French King, taken prisoner by the
black Prince. And there were but six weeks difference between both Victories.

Nor were such high Exploits performed by the English on Land only, but by Sea
they have been as glorious. Philip the French King, not long before the Battle
of Cressey, to hinder Edward the third's return into France, got a mighty Navy
in equipage of 200 sail of Ships besides Galleys in the Haven of Sluice; where
of King Edward being advertised, prepared such another Fleet, and encounters
the French with such resolution and success, having the Wind and Sea for him,
that he thereby defeated the whole Navy, slew about 30000 men, and so returned
with mighty Triumphs, and the Admiration of all Europe.

In the year 1591. was that memorable Fight of an English Ship called the
Revenge, under the command of Sir Richard Greenfield; memorable, I say, beyond
credit, and to the hight of some Heroical Fable. This Ship for the space of 15
hours, sat like a Stag amongst Hounds at the Bay, and was seiged and fought
with in turn, by 15 great Ships of Spain, part of a Navy of 55 Ships in all,
the rest like Abettors looking on a far off. And amongst the 15 Ships that
fought, the great St. Philip was one, a Ship of 1500 Tun, Prince of the twelve
Sea-Apostles, which was glad when she was shifted off from the Revenge. This
brave Ship the Revenge was maned only with 200 men, whereof 80 laid sick; yet
nevertheless, after a Fight maintained 15 hours, and three Ships of the Enemies
sunk by her side, and 15 more of them so torn and battered that they perished
in the Sea before they could recover the Tercera; that gallant Ship never came
to be entered, but was taken by composition, the Enemies themselves having in
admiration the Virtue of the Commander, and the whole Tragedy of that Ship.

Nor does that Primitive innate Courage and Gallantry languish or decline in
them (as some think the World does, and as we find it does in other Nations, as
the Jews and Greeks) but it continues in the same height. The ancient
Stourness and Gallantry of the English, appeared in many Traverses of the late
War here in England. The French King confessed that the Brigade of English
before Dunkirk, though not the fifth part of the Army, did contribute most to
the taking of that Preditory Town.

And I doubt not but when his sacred Majesty of Great Britain shall be pleased
to give his Royal Fiat, we shall see the same valiant Blood is now channelled
in the English veins; and that every Royal Subject will be ready to take
Talbot's Motto upon his Sword, Sum Talboti pro defendendo Rege contra inimicos.

So that if the King of Great Britain will take into his Royal Consideration,
the Galamities and miserable condition that all Europe is in by the Oppression
of the French, and their designs of an Universal Monarchy, and potently act,
having such a Warlike People, with the rest of the Confederates; the Reduction
of France to its ancient Boundaries, would be no great work.

I doubt not but that the Parliament of England will give Aid cheerfully, (and
Sir Money is the Primum Mobile that moves the Spheres, which are the hearts and
hands of men;) his Majesty's Fame and Power will be admired, his Subjects
highly pleased, the Nations under his Scepter feared, and it will beget a
perfect Union between his Majesty and all his People; who in a grateful and
humble acknowledgement of his Royal Care and Protection of them, will bring to
his service a Magazine of Hearts, and to his Coffers a Treasury of Money, which
is the Sovereign Cordial that gives life to all Warlike Actions.

What the touring and ambitious thoughts of the French King signify, his great
Preparations by Sea do manifest to all Europe: for he has raised a greater
Naval strength in few years since he has applied himself to it, than ever yet
was raised in the world for the time. And if he shall yearly increase in power
at Sea as he has done for these twenty years last past, the whole world will
not be Elbow-room enough for his Ambition.

Having so prodigioully advanced in number of Ships, after he has gained more
Harbors and Ports, as it is his design, and bred up experienced Commanders and
Seamen (as no Prince can be more industrious) he will then pull off the
Vizard, and declare that all Kings, Princes, and States, must give Obedience to
his Monarchy, and become his Vassals.

Sir, it is certain, that those States whose Renown are greatest in Story, did
establish their Supreme Dominion upon the Power they attained at Sea. The
Romans did not impose upon the World their Laws, till they had forced the Sea
to receive and acknowledge them. Had they not set out Warlike Fleets, they had
never accomplished their glorious designs; they had never extended their
Fronteers beyond Italy, nor brought down the pride of Garthage, nor triumphed
over all the Crowns on Earth.

The Egyptians, the Persians, and the Grecians, considered the Sea as the best
Support of their Dominions. And whether the designs of the French King be not
as large and great by his Naval Preparations, as those of the Romans, Greeians,
or of the Egyptian or Persian Monarchs were; it is well suiting with the Wisdom
of the Kings and Princes of Europe to consider.

Be assured, Sir, if this Sea- Giant be not timely destroyed, but suffered like
the Crocadile yearly to grow in Magnitude, it will devour all Europe, and with
it it is Trade, Traffic, and Commerce. Therefore it is Europe's Interest, as
well as England's Safety, to destroy the Naval Power of France, which (with the
conjunction of our Allies) may be effected; who being once brought down there,
their Commerce will wax feeble, and by consequence their Power at Land will
soon abate: For we have observed, that until the Spaniards lost his Maratine
Forces, he maintained his designs for the Universal Monarchy very vigorously,
and never sunk till then.

The French King of late is become so potent at Sea, that if he should be
pleased to give trouble to you or to any other Prince, we m^st be at his
discretion how kindly he will deal with us. And, Sir, it is no wisdom in any
Prince, to depend upon the discretion of another.

That Prince or State which is Master at Sea, may make a descent at what place
they please, unless they be hindered by a Fleet of equal strength; and except
every Creek, Port, and sandy Bay, had a powerful Army to make opposition. If we
have an Army in one place (as in all places we cannot have) then they may by
reason of their Fleet, transport their Army to another place; and so take,
ransack, burn, and consume the Country round about: as Agathocles did, who
being besieged by the Carthagenians in Syracuse, put his Army into his Fleet
and transported it into Africa; and the Carthagenians, for security of
Carthage, and their own Dominions, were forced to raise their Seige and follow
with their Army.

Methinks the Miseries, Devastations, and Infelicities England heretofore
suffered by the Naval power of the Danes, might teach you wisdom for the
future. Sir, to deal plainly with you, it is impossible for any Mavitine Country
(as England is) though the Coasts thereof be never so well fortified, to defend
it self against a powerful Enemy that is Master at Sea; for a good Fleet of Men
of War under a wise and judicious conduct, need not fear to pass by the best
appointed Fort in Europe (though never so many great Artillery are planted in
it) with the help of a good Tide and leading gale of Wind.

The Duke of Parma besieged Antwerp, and finding no possibility to master it
otherwise than by Famine, laid his Cannon on the bank of the River so well to
purpose, and so even with the face of the water, that he thought it impossible
for the least Boat to pass by; yet the Hollanders and Zelanders, to sell their
Butter and Cheese at Antwerp where it was dear, passed in their Boats by the
mouth of the Duke's Cannon in despite of it, when a strong Westerly wind and a
Tide of flood favored them, as also with a contrary wind and ebbing water they
turned back again.

In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when Denmark and Sweden were at war, our
Eastland Fleet bound for Liefland, was forbidden by the King of Denmark to
trade with the Subjects of his Enemies; and he threatened to sink their Ships,
if they came through the Streights of Elsenore: Yet our Merchants having a Ship
of her Majesty's called the Minion to defend them, made their adventure, and
sustained some Vollies of shot, but kept on their course. The King made all the
provisions he could to stop or sink them at their return; but the Minion
leading the way, did not only pass without loss, but did beat down with their
Artillery a great part of the Fort of Elsenore; and the Fleet of Merchants
which followed went thorough without any wound received.

Sir, Imperator Maris, est Dominus Terrae: When Augustus and Mark Anthony at
Actium fought by Sea for the Empire of the World, Mark Anthony's Fleet being
defeated, all the People and the Soldiers submitted to Augustus, well knowing
they could never effect any thing by Land, as long as Augustus continued Master
at Sea.

Aladine a poor Fisherman, but famous for his great Actions at Sea, Abraham
King of Achen in Sumatra preferred him to be his Lord Lieutenant, and married
him to one of his Kindswomen, and gave him the care and protection of his Son
and Heir; Aladine having the Naval power at his command, he murdered the Son
and Heir, and usurped the Kingdom to himself, there being no resistance to be
made against him, because of his great power at Sea.

The State of Genoa, by the advantage of their Naval power, beat the Pisans out
of Sardinia, Corsica, and the Baleares in the Mediterranean, and having
vanquished the Venetian Fleet, they took the Island of Chioggia not far from
Venice. But the Genoesses being disabled in their Naval power by the oversight
of Peter Doria their Admiral, they lost their Islands in the Mediterranean to
the King of Aragon; Capha and Pera, and the Islands of Lesbos and Chio, with
some other Islands in the Greek Sea, to the Grand Seignior; and most of their
Holds in Tuscany (whereof they had a good part) to the Florentines; and had
nothing left them but Liguria, and the Isle of Corsica, and were enforced to
put themselves into the protection of the Spaniard to preserve the same.
Therefore, Sir, you may please to observe how highly England (being an Island)
is concerned in point of interest and safety, to advance their own Naval power,
and to abate that of others.

There are three great Naval powers in Europe; England, France, and those of
the United Provinces; if the King of England join with one of them, they will
give Law to the third: But what if France and the United Provinces should join
against England (as you have great reason to fear they will) if by his
Majesty's transcendent Wisdom and happy Conduct, they be not prevented; then
you can expect nothing but Confusion and Ruin to fall upon you. Therefore it
will be the very test of Prudence in this juncture, to retrench the power of
France by Sea; that being done, from his Landforces there can be no great
danger to you. At Land the Balance is indifferently even, but at Sea (which
ought to be your care) there is no counterpoize. The fighting and destroying of
his Land-Armies, does not weaken him at Sea; but when his new Conquests shall
be taken from him, or a Peace concluded, if he should put an Army into his
Navy, no Prince in Europe is able to hinder his Attempts; and those vast sums
of money which he raises out of his Subjects, if they should be employed in
Traffic, he being so potent at Sea, all States and Princes, especially
England, would be undone.

To strike the French King at Sea (where his strength lies) is to cut his
Sampsons locks; it is un Coup de Maistre; a Master blow; a War in his bowels. To
give him some light hurt, is dangerous to us, and to give our selves an
incurable wound; as the Horse did, who falling out with the Lion, bruised him
with his heel; but not long after his Carcass became food for the Lion. Great
Potentates are not at all to be touched; but if they be, they must be made sure
from taking Revenge.

Some considerate Princes have begun a War rather with the Sword than with a
Trumpet: So dealt the Aragonoies with the French in Naples; Henry the second of
France with the Imperialists, when he went to Brisac to surprise as many places
as he could, before the War broke out; Don John with the Netherlands; and
Philip the second of Spain with the English, when in the great Imbargo he took
all your Ships and Goods in his Ports. And may not the French King (if the
Capritio shall take him) before any denunciation or indiction of War, set upon
your Fleets of Merchants Ships at Sea? he having such powerful Squadrons of Men
of War in all parts, that no Fleet of Merchants with their Convoys, are able to
make any opposition, but they must be sunk or taken.

As it was the oversight of the Kings and Princes of Europe (if you please to
pardon the expression) to suffer France to grow up to that Potency and
Magnitude of Power at Sea; so it will be their wisdom and interest to act in
consort till they have destroyed it.

Methods and Arts TO Retrench the Potency OF FRANCE BY LAND and SEA, And to
Confine that Ambitious Monarch Within his Ancient DOMINIONS and TERRITORIES.
Humbly submitted to the grave Consideration of the KINGS and PRINCES of Europe.
1. ALL Kings, Princes, and States to associate, and vigorously to act in
concert against him, and to make France the seat of the War; if not, by his
Contributions and the oppression of his Armies (by which he maintains his own
Forces) they will all be ruinated, their Countries wasted, and themselves must
be submitted to his power. Whereas by making France the seat of the War, the
Soldiers will be enriched with the Spoils, support themselves at the cost and
charges of France, and the French King will be necessitated to draw his
Soldiers out of his new Acquests, for the defense of his ancient Dominions;
and so they will revert.

2. All Princes and States to call home their Subjects which are in the French
service, and by that means his Infantry will be weak and inconsiderable: For
from the slavery of that people, such is their unfitness for War, that whenever
they shall be confined to home for Soldiers, they will be constrained as well
as contented to live in peace with their Neighbors.

3. No Prince or State to suffer any Levies of Men or Horse to be made in any
of their Dominions or Territories, as they have done to the great recruits of
the French Armies, and to the ruin of themselves and Countries.

4. To interdict all Trade and Commerce with France, is a good Expedient; for
their Trade being obstructed, their power at Land will soon become feeble and
weak (the first giving life to the latter;) and if he shall lay Taxes upon his
people (their Trade being taken away) it may hazard the Obedience of his
Subjects, and his Soldiers will mutiny for want of Pay.

5. The three Estates General of that Kingdom must be re-established with their
Privileges. There being fourscore and ten thousand Gentlemen in France, if
they will draw their Swords and join with the honest Commonalty there, and with
the Confederate Princes which are now in War against France, (which will be a
generous and heroic act in them) they may deliver their own necks from that
Yoke of Slavery which now oppresses them, and all Europe from destruction. For
whiles the French King can exercise the despotical power over his Slaves
(rather than Subjects) and without control levy what sums of Money he pleases
from them, they must never expect to enjoy their just Rights and Liberties, or
any the Kings, Princes, or States his Neighbors, to live in Peace or
Tranquillity.

6. France must be opposed in all its endeavors for farther addition and
engreatning his Dominions, especially on his designs upon the Spanish and
United Netherlands; for should he gain the Harbors and Ports there, he would
be formidable, and an over Match for all Europe. Therefore if the Crown of
Spain had no Dominions in the Low Countries, it is their interest, and in true
policy they ought to preserve the United Provinces entire; and they ought to
venture all their Kingdoms, and to the very last of their men to prevent (if it
be possible) so formidable Accession of Naval power to the French. After which
no Plate-Fleet or Gallions could never come safe, nor consequently their
Monarchy stand much longer. And the King of Great Britain ought (be it spoken
with dew reverence to his person) to have the same Sentiments; for if the
French should become Masters of the United Provinces, farewell the Sovereignty
of the British Seas; farewell all Trade and Commerce of England; and his Majesty
may bid adieu to the best branch of his Royal Revenue, the Customs.

7. The King of Great Britain ought to make himself Protector of the Protestant
Kings and Princes in Europe; and the Cantons of the Switzers, and the Grisons,
are to be invited (for their security, and because they can give trouble to
France) into the Association: For though formerly with great reason (being
jealous of the House of Austria, because of their pretentions to them) they
held a good correspondency with France, yet now it is their interest all to be
jealous of the growing Greatness of the French King, and to be firm to the
House of Austria, and to hold a true Friendship with them.

8. A firm and sincere Friendship is to be established between the King of
Great Britain and the United Provinces: For they being the two great Naval
Powers in Europe, are by Providence so seated with admirable advantages, and
for the security of themselves and of the Spanish Netherlands; that when there
is a true intelligence preserved between them, their greatest Enemies cannot
prejudice either, but they can give a check to any aspiring Prince, and be as
an invincible Bulwark against the spreading and ambitious designs of France.

9. England must unite within it self, and settle a kindness and friendship
amongst themselves, (Concord or Division being the life or death of a State;)
for it is a Jergon of the French Cabal to disseminate Factions and Divisions
amongst them, that they may not contribute their Assistance to the relief of
oppressed Europe, or to obstruct the designs of the French King for the
Universal Monarchy.

10. Firebands are to be sent into France to raise Divisions amongst them, as
the French Cabal send their Engineers (to the disturbance of Europe) to make a
Combustion in other Princes Dominions, that he may with more safety drive on
his designs.

11. Councils must be adapted to present necessity; and it is imprudence to
expose security to apparent danger. In great concerns, it is not wisdom to rest
in the dull Counsels of what is lawful, but to proceed to quick Resolutions of
what is safe.

12. The Monarchy of France is to be cantonized into several Principalities,
which was aimed at by the Grandees of France in the time of Henry the third;
and had been effected, if the ambition of Philip the second would have given
way to it.

13. It Is the true interest of Europe to oppose the French designs; and in
case there be any occasion of making use of them against some others, not to
accept of their Assistance longer or further than public Utility requires it;
nor to suffer them to proceed after the danger is over. As it was practiced in
the Peace of Passaw, in the time of Henry the second, and that of Munster, in
both which the French were stopped in their full carreer by their own Allies.

14. All Kings, Princes, and States of the Protestant Communion, to enter into
mutual Leagues and Alliances, and to be incorporated into one Union; that by
their joint strength they may put a stop to the progress of the French Arms. It
will be prudence in them to rely upon their own strength, and not to depend
upon the Aids or Auxiliaries of others: 1. Because all the Councils of
Catholic Princes, are governed by the Jesuits and French Pensioners. 2. The
designs of the Conclave of Rome, and of the Jesuits, are to extirpate out of
Christendom the Protestant Religion; which they have concluded to effect by the
Arms of France (that are solely influenced by the Jesuits,) and to re-establish
the Papacy in its ancient Glory and Splendour: for the fall of the one, is the
exaltation of the other. 3. All Wars raised between Catholic Princes, are
contrived to be but as Decoys to draw Heretical Princes (as they are pleased to
call them) into Ruin and Destruction; and are used as delusary Mediums drawn
before their eyes, that they may more securely advance the interest of the
Mitre, and the designs of the Triple-Crown. If his Majesty of Swedeland
managed by France, his Majesty of Denmark, his Electoral Highness of
Brandenburgh, and his Highness of Zell, managed by the Imperial Court, will
take the pains to search to the bottom by what Artifices they have all four
been engaged in War, which has wasted their Subjects, ruined their Countries
and Estates; they will find it was the designs of Rome (managed in conjunction
with the Cabal of France) to bring Ruin and Confusion to them all. During the
late War, the Protestant States of the Empire have been so miserably harrassed
by Winter Quarters, Exactions, Burnings, and Contributions, that most of the
Protestant Imperial Towns have been almost ruined, while the hereditary
Countries, Bavaria, and many other of the Roman Communion in the Empire, have
been so little oppressed, that they scarce felt it. It Is a concluded Maxim of
the Rota, That where there is an Enemy compounded of several and distinct
interests, the best Medium to effect their Ruin, is to divide the Powers, and
to engage one against the other; by that means you will bring a Consumption to
their Forces, and a Ruin to their Estates; and you must fortify your selves
upon their Fronteers, that when you please you may make sudden Inroads into
their Countries. With what dexterity this has been practiced during the late
Wars in France, all Europe is very sensible.

15. To restore the Hugonots of France to the full exercise of their Religion,
according to the Edicts of Hen. 3. and Hen. 4. (which were confirmed to them by
Act of Parliament;) and for their security and the performance thereof, that
they have cautionary Towns put into their hands, as they formerly had. This
would be not only an Act of Piety to deliver those poor people from Tyranny
and Slavery, but an Act of Prudence, that he could not safely issue out with
his Armies to the disturbance and undoing of his Neighbors.

16. The Kings of Great Britain, Spain, Denmark, Sweden, and the States of the
United Provinces, ought to associate by Sea, and every one to set forth such a
number and Quota of their Ships as shall be agreed upon. If the Naval Forces of
France be at Sea, they must be fought (except the French King be Prince of the
Air, and can post his Ships at Sea, as he does his Forces at Land, that they
cannot be attacked, as it is said, though that imagination was confuted at the
Relief of Mons) if they be in Harbor, and will not take the Sea, they must be
fired, which under the favor of a good Wind and Tide may be effected,
notwithstanding their Castles and Forts.

17. To maintain Fleets constantly upon the Coasts of France, is necessary to
keep in his Ships outward bound, and to interrupt his Ships of the Indies; to
meet with the Fishers of New Foundland, and to sink and destroy them; to
forbid Strangers to bring him supplies of Pitch, Tar, Masts, Munition, etc. to
burn as many of his Maritine Towns, and the Shipping in them as they can; and
also such as are not far within the Land, as shall be within their power; and
to give leave by Letters of Reprizal to as many of the Subjects of the
Confederates, as will adventure to Sea. These Fleets are to be furnished with
such a number of men, as may be able to make an Invasion into such a part of
France, as shall be thought most convenient to the purpose: So the Heads of the
Parties in France must be consulted, and made to part with such places as shall
be taken, till the French King shall be constrained to submit to Reason and
Justice.

18. Notwithstanding the great noise the number of the French Ships make in the
world, yet they may be reduced by Sea; 1. Because they have no Ports in the
narrow Seas. 2. None very good on this side the Mediterranean, save Breast in
Britany, and the new-made Haven at Rochford upon the River of Clarent, but that
is so deep on the Bay of Biscay, as it is out of all Maratine course, except to
their own Country. 3. The Ports and Harbors which they have, are so far
distant from each other, that their Naval Forces may be destroyed by our Fleets
before they can unite. Therefore nothing ought to be more the care and
endeavors of the King of Great Britain, and of the United Provinces, than to
keep the French King from any more Ports or Harbors than he now has: for that
Prince which has many Ships and few Harbors, is of as little consideration,
as that Prince which has many Ports and Harbors, but few Ships. Nothing
multiplies Seamen, but Foreign Commerce; and nothing so much that, as plenty
of good Ports, Harbors, and safe Coasts; (of which, to the comfort of Europe I
speak it, France is wanting:) but if we delay to lower the Sails of their
Ambition, until they have furnished themselves further with Ports and Havens,
they will soon prove too great to be dealt withal. Therefore, I say, it is the
true interest of the King of Great Britain, and of the States of the United
Provinces, and for them indispensably necessary, to destroy the French in their
Naval strength; New-found-Land-Fishery, and their West India Trades, which are
their Nursery for Seamen. By this means their Navigation being destroyed,
their Trade will decay, and their Power at Land soon disband. No one Prince
has such advantages against the French, as the King of Great Britain has, by
reason of Tangier; which is so advantageously situated, that it surveys the
greatest Thoroughfare of Trade and Commerce in the world; no Ship can pass in
or out of the Mediterranean unobserved from thence. The French have more
business in and about the Streights, and frequent the Streights-mouth with more
Shipping of one sort or other, than any two Nations in Christendom; from whence
your Ships riding at Anchor, may weigh, or slip, and speak with all People that
pass in or out, and may sink or take all Ships which sail that way; none can
escape without a strong Convoy, which will eat up all their gains; and they
will think it more prudence, during a War with England, to suspend their Trade,
than with so much charge and hazard to prosecute it.

19. France being reduced in its Naval strength, it will be the interest of the
King of Great Britain, and of the States of the United Provinces, to stint
France for the future as to the number of Ships which he shall keep; as the
Pope, the States of Italy, Kingdom of Naples and Sicily, Grand Duke, State of
Genoa, and Grand Master of Malta, keep by agreement such a limited number of
Galleys and Men of War; that one may not give occasion of trouble or jealousy
to the other.

These Methods being observed, France may be compared to a man which grasps a
handful of fine Sand (in hopes to keep it;) if he holds it loose, all runs from
him; if hard, but little remains; which agrees with the Italian Proverb, Chi
troppo abbraccio, poco stringe; He who graspeth too much, retains but little.

Sir, I must tell you again, there is no trusting to the Charity of France;
Incredulity is the best sinew of Wisdom; Nihil credendo, and omnia cavendo,
tuti crimus: And the most Christian King will at last understand, that it is
easier to make Subjects than to keep them; for men may submit to the force of
Arms, but they will never obey but a just power. Present Successes are no
Hostages to secure those which receive them of a perpetual Felicity, and the
most uninterrupted Success cannot calcine an unjust action to the purity of
Virtue. Cruel Empires, though they be absolute, are not lasting. Upon uncertain
moments, do the fortune of Battles and the fate of Kingdoms depend.

But you were pleased to say, That I have no kindness for France; I do assure
you, Sir, I have that honor and regard for France, that whereas now there is
but one King of France, I wish there were twenty.

Sir, I am fearful I have stained too much Paper: I must with Apelles, Manum de
Tabula; I beg your pardon for this interruption, and am,

Sir, Your faithful Servant.

FINIS.

