D. IOAO. DE CASTRO THE FOVRTH VICEROY OF INDIA.
portrait W. Faithorne sculp:



THE LIFE OF DOM JOHN DE CASTRO, The Fourth Viceroy of INDIA.

Wherein are seen the Portuguese's Voyages to the East Indies; Their
Discoveries and Conquests there; The form of Government, Commerce, and
Discipline of War in the East, and the Topography of all India and China.

Containing also a particular relation of the most famous siege of DIO, With a
Map to Illustrate it.

BY IACINTO FREIRE DE ANDRADA, Written in PORTUGUESE, AND By Sr PETER WYCHE Knight.
Translated into English.

(...).

Hesio. London, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Sign of the Anchor on the Lower walk in the New Exchange. 1664.

TO THE QUEENS Most Excellent Majesty.
May it please your Majesty,
EVery Man's way of paying his Reverence and Devotion, being particularly his
own, and as peculiar as any thing he derives from his Temper; and the Splendour
of Your Majesty's Virtues and Perfections (of which to name any first were to
fail in Ceremony to the rest) being as Glorious and Unquestionable as Light in
the Sun, who, daily Prodigal of his Benign Aspects, is yet above being the
Theme and Subject of Praises; I have thought it suitable to my Zeal, and first
Employment had in Portugal, to tell my Fellow Subjects in plain English, the
Greatness and Glory of that Crown and Kingdom, which are Contractedly drawn in
the Life of one particular Portuguese, since the Ministers Actions have their
Spring in the King's Instructions, and the Prince's Zeal makes the Subjects
Apostles. And now Madam, the Praises of your Native Country, will come with
Advantage to the Eyes and Ears of the English, since your Majesty, so Endeared
before, as to make them Hope in Despair, and Join (such is the Miracle of your
Goodness) in one Form of Common Prayer for your Happy Recovery, (when so many
thousands so Sacrifize to their own Opinions as to be willing with their Lives
and Fortunes to pay for their Nonconformity) will be now looked upon as the
Queen of every particular Man's choice. The Life of the great Portuguese Dom
John de Castro, Dedicated in the Original to Prince Theodosius of Happy Memory;
Your Royal Brother, has Suggested the presumption of Begging for the
Translation, your Sacred and Auspitious Patronage, which only (in so Censorious
an Age) can protect in Print, and in Safety,

Madam, Your Majesty's most Loyal Subject and most Dutiful Servant, PETER
WYCHE.

THE Authors Dedication To Prince THE ODOSIUS, Of Happy Memory, Who was Heir of
Portugal, and Eldest Brother to Our Most Excellent Queen KATHERINE.
Most Serene SIR,
THE Scipios have met with their match in their Actions, not in their Fortune;
There were in Asia Darius's for Dom John de Castro to Conquer, in Europe not a
Curtius or Livy to propagate his Fame. The Bishop Dom Francisco de Castro,
persuaded me to write this History, (which the Press now publishes) though in
a Style inferior to the deserts of a Man, who came to be Great amongst the
Greatest, whose Virtues blossomed so soon, that they seemed rather Hereditary,
then Acquired; He Lived not out the Years of his Government, (in which almost
the same Numbers stood for Days, and Victories) though he was long Lived to his
Country; short to Nature. Yet now his Memory is under your Highness's
Protection, it is a question, if he were Happier in his Life, or Posterity,
being always a Conqueror, then over his Enemies, now over Time. I might here
take an occasion to publish your Highness's Virtues, but an Epistle is too
short, (as the Book would have been) for such a Subject. The general Cry of the
World, is to be the Book where all shall read them in a more impartial
Character; since our Hopes are, that your Highness uniting to the Pleasantness
of Study, the Glory of Arms, will for Fame and Courage be the first on the File
amongst our Portuguese Princes. God preserve the most Serene Person of your
Highness.

Lisbone 15th. of March 1651. Jacinto Freire de Andrada.

THE PREFACE.
1. Portugal, given by Alphonsus the sixth King of Castile (after a signal
Victory obtained against the Mahometans, Anno 1089.) in Dowry with his Daughter
Therasia to Count Henry, Grandchild to Robert Duke of Burgundy, (in Recompense
of his extraordinary (though but personal) assistance in the Battle, and to
have there so considerable a Strength, where the incursions of the Moors were
most frequent and terrible) has been maintained, enlarged (at home and abroad)
and recovered, by Courage and Policy not below those Deserts which got so
unusual a Match and Portion for a Stranger.

2. Count Henry took Viseu and Lamego from the Moors, yet left Portugal with
Neighboring Frontiers, for Southward it was bounded with the River Mondego,
(infested with the Invasions of the Infidels) Northward with the River Minho,
toward the Rising Sun it had the Province Beira, and toward the Setting, on
the Seaside the City Porto, which being the only Port, unpossess't by the
Moors, and chiefly frequented by the French, seems more reasonably then some
other Etymologies, to give the name to the Kingdom of Portugal.

3. Alphonsus Henriques, Son to Count Henry (as the fatal greatness of Rome
made its first King Romulus a Soldier) was not second to any in Story, in
Courage and Action; He defeated Albucaran King of Badajos, and took the City,
raised the Siege of Coimbra, besieged by King Eujunius, with three hundred
thousand men: In the year 1139. at the Battle of Orique (where impartial and
concurrent Histories count an hundred Moors for every Christian) he overcame
Ismarus and four more Mohammedan Kings, on which he was (as some affirm) after
the Fight saluted King by his own Soldiers; from that Action also, the Virgil
of Portugal Luis de Camoens (in the 53. and 54. Stanzas of his third Canto)
derives the bearing of the Arms of the Kingdom, which are five small shields
Azure, in a great shield Argent, left plain by his Father.

53.
Aqui pinta no branco escudo ufano,
Que agora esta vitoria certifica,
Cinco escudos azues esclarecidos,
Em sinal destes cinco Reys vencidos.
54.
En estes cinco escudos pinta os trinta
Dinheyros, porque Deos fora vendido,
Escrevendo a memoria em varia tinta,
Da quelle de quem foy favorecido.
Em cado hum dos cinco cinco pinta,
Por que assi fica o numero comprido;
Contando duas vezes o do meyo
Dos cinco azues que em Cruz pintando veyo,
Which the Right Honorable Sir Richard Fanshaw late Ambassador to Portugal,
in his Excellent Translation of that Heroique Poem thus renders,

53.
In his broad Shield which he till then wore plain,
A badge eternal of this glorious day,
Five small shields Azure he does now include,
In sign of these five Kings by him subdude.
54.
In these five Shields he paints the Recompense,
For which our Lord was sold, in various Ink,
Writing his History who did dispense
Such favor to him more then heart could think.
In every of the five he paints five Pence,
So sums the thirty by a Cinque fold cinque,
Accounting that which is the Center twice
Of the five Cinques which he does place Cross-wise.
Though the more Venerable Testimony of a Latin Record made of the Oath
Alphonsus Henriques took in the year 1152. (before the Bishop and Magistracy of
Combra, and the Bishop of Braga) about the Vision he saw before the Engagement,
says, he was proclaimed King before the Fight, as was foretold by Christ, who
at the same time commanded him to take for his Arms what he paid for the
Redemption of Man, and what he was sold for to the Jews, to which the King
added for his Crest Moses's Serpent, A Type of Christ; The words under the
King's Oath are, Gentem tuam invenies alacrem ad bellum and fortem and potentem
ut sub Regis nomine in hac pugna egrediaris, Nec dubites, sed quicquid
petierint libere concede. Ego enim Aedificator and Dissipator Imperiorum and
Regnorum sum; Volo enim in te and in semine tuo Imperium mihi stabilire ut
deferatur nomen meum in exteras gentes; Et ut agnoscant succ^ssores tui datorem
Regni, insigne tuum ex pretio quo ego humanum genus emi, and ex qno ego a
Judaeis emptus sum, compones: This Record also sets down a famous Prediction
delivered at the same time by an old Hermit to Alfonsus (as he then affirmed
upon Oath) concerning the Succession, Alienation and Restoration of the Crown
of Portugal; Bono animo esto, Vinces, vinces, and non vinceris, Dilectus es a
Domino, Posuit enim super te and super semen tuum oculos misericordiae suae
usque in sextam decimam generationem in qua attenuabitur proles, sed in ipsam
attenuatam ipse respiciet and videbit, which this Age has seen fulfilled
precisely and to the Letter, by the King of Spain's seizing on the Kingdom of
Portugal after the Death of King Henry the Cardinal (who succeeded the
unfortunate Sebastian) the seventeenth King, and by the happy Restoration of
the Royal Family in King John the Fourth of Glorious memory, Father to our most
Incomparable Queen Katherine. This Record was found engrossed in Parchment with
five Seals annexed in the Royal Monastery of Alcobaca, the Original was carried
to Philip the Second King of Spain, and is now in the Escurial; there remains
in Lisbone an Authentic Copy, and Dom Antonio de Sousa de Macedo has Printed
it in the second Proeme of his Lusitania Liberata, page 96, 97, and 98. This
first King took Saint Iren from the Moors, and (by the help of the Northern
Fleet sent to the Holy Land under the Command of William Long-sword) got from
them, after a long and bloody Siege, Lisbone: Afterward Beja and Evora, and
the greatest part of the Country on the South Side of Tagus, by the Portuguese
called Allentejo, he Died in the year of our Lord 1185. of his Reign 73. and of
his Age 91. a King so extraordinary in his own Person, in the unusual length of
his Life and Reign was necessary for the fast Rooting that Monarchy, which was
so gloriously to spread it self, as far as East and West extend.

4 Alphonsus was succeeded by his Son Sanctius the first, from whom the Crown
continued in the direct Descendency for above two hundred years, till John the
first Brother to King Ferdinand, the last of nine Kings, who in continual Wars
had employed their Pious and Victorious Arms in driving the Moors out of
Europe, so long so stoutly did they defend their Possessions.

5. King John (seeing all clear behind him) did then, Prudently and in
Compliance with that Innate hatred the Crown of Portugal had against the
Mahometans, pass over to Africa, where he took from the Moors the City of
Ceuta, as Emulous and Troublesome a Neighbor and Competitor to Spain, as
Carthage was once to Italy. After this advantage on the Africans, his third Son
the Infant Dom Henrique Commander of the Cavalliers of Christ (an order
founded by Dennis the sixth King of Portugal against the Infidels, on the
Dissolution of that of the Knights Templers) incited by the obligation of his
Office and Family, set upon the Discovery of the Western Coast of Arabia, of
which, in the expedition of Ceuta (cujus pars magna fuit) and other passages
made over thither, he had got the best Information he could find amongst the
Moors; He began his design Anno 1420. by sending forth every year two or three
Ships, which were to pass Cape Non, the furthest of the Spanish discoveries,
and by them so named, like Hercules pillars, from their despair of passing
further; In all the Voyages of twelve years they came but to the Cape Bojador,
(so named from its Launching out) which no man had the boldness to double,
because finding that Cape to shoot out Westward about forty Leagues further
then the rest of the Coast, and at the beginning of the Cape a Bank of Sands to
run the same way, the unexperienced and raw Pilots (used then to Sail by the
Shore) durst not stand off ^ix Leagues (which had avoided the Flats) and go so
far Westward. The Infant undaunted by the consideration of expense or danger,
continually set out Fleets and gave Orders to the most skillful and stout
Commanders to adventure the passing that then so formidable Cape; In these
Voyages Porto Sancto was, after a great Storm, recovered and found out, (and so
named from the Preservation), afterward the Island Madeira, so called from the
thick Woods upon it; with Resolute and Magnanimous perseverance, Vast and
Prodigious expense, unheard of Suffering and Danger, he at last past the Cape,
and in forty three years carried on his Discoveries from Cape Non in twenty
eight degrees and an half, of Northern Latitude to Cape Sierra Lione in 7 3/4.
of the same Latitude, which makes on the Shore 430. Leagues. In the Sea,
besides those already mentioned, were found out in his time the Canary Islands,
and those of Capoverde; He laid the foundation of that great Design, not
thought of by any of the Ancients, but Semiramis, Bacchus, and Alexander the
Great, and till now, above the narrow Souls of so many succeeding Ages; the
13th. of November in the year 1463. was the Day of his glorious Memory.

6. Alphonsus the fifth, Grandchild to John the first by his Son King Edward,
(who Reigned but five years) set to Farm at a certain Rate the Trade of Guinney
for five years to Fermon Gomes, on condition, that beginning from the Cape
Sierra Lione he should every year discover one hundred Leagues on the Coast; In
January 1471. he first came to the place in Guinney; by him called (and yet of
the same name) the Mine, and there began to truck for Gold; His discoveries
fell not short of his agreement, for they reached to Cape Saint Katherine (so
called because first seen on her Day) which lies in 2 and 1/2. of Southern
Latitude. From this most famous discovery of the Gold Coast he had (according
to the first rule of Sirnames) by Patent from the King given him that of Da
Mina, and for his Arms in a field Argent three Moors heads with Gold Rings in
their Ears and Nostrils, and Chains of the same about their Necks. In this
King's time were discovered in the Sea the Islands of Saint Thomas, of the
Prince, and of Anno Bon; He went Anno 1458. in Person with a Fleet of 220.
Ships, and about 25000. Men, and took Alcacer Leguer from the Moors; In a
second expedition got Anafe, in a third Arzilla and Tangier.

7. King John the Second took the Title of Lord of Guinney, and Built on the
Gold Coast the Fortress called Saint George of the Mine, thereby to take
Possession of the past and intended Discoveries, and to lay the first Stone of
a Church for the Conversion of the Pagans. Diogo Came by his Commission came in
the year 1484. to the Kingdom and River of Congo, where (according to his
Orders to raise Pillars of Stone (in stead of Wooden Crosses used before) in
the most Eminent places of his Discoveries, fixing to them an Escutcheon Royal,
and about it an Inscription in Latin and Portuguese, declaring the King, the
Time and Person employed in the Discovery) He set up a Pillar on the South Side
of the River, (how much more Glorious then the Imaginary ones of Hercules)
which was therefore called Rio do Padraon, (i. e.) the River of the Pillar; the
Discovery of the Kingdom of Congo was so considerable, as Diogo Came returned
with the news to the King, who in a little time fitted him out again; in this
Voyage he went 200. Leagues beyond Congo, and planted two Pillars, one called
Saint Augustines in 13. degrees of Southern Latitude, another which named the
place Capo do Padraon, in 22. degrees of the same Latitude. About this time was
discovered by Fernaon Do Po the Island yet called by his Name, and the Kingdom
of Benim, whence the first Guinney Pepper came into Christendom.

In the year 1486. there came into Portugal an Ambassador from the King of
Penim, to desire some Priests to instruct that Kingdom in the Catholic
Religion, this Ambassador told King John, that twenty Months Journey
(according to the slow Traveling of their Caravans) Eastward of their Country
was a Prince called Organe, who amongst the Pagan Princes of that Coast was
esteemed as the Pope is in Europe, by whom (according to ancient Custom) the
Kings of Benim were Confirmed in their Succession to the Crown, who instead of
a Scepter and a Crown, sent them a Staff, and to wear on their Head a Cover of
Copper, like an Helmet, and a Cross to wear about their Neck; The King
comparing this Relation with what some of his Friars had heard at Jerusalem,
from the Abissines, of their Prince's being a Christian, and his Kingdom
Southward of Egypt, upon consulting with Ptolomies Mapps, and his own
Discoveries, and the distance Eastward, concluded Ogane to be the Presbyter
John then so much talked off, that by his means he might get into the Indies,
and that by his Fleets following the Coast they might arrive at Ptolomies
Prasum Promontorium, now Mozambique.

8. This Story heightning his hopes and desires of getting to the Indies, he
sent May 1487. over Land Pero de Couilhaan to endeavor that way to come to
India, and Alphonso de Paiva with Letters to Presbyter John; the first going
from Grand Cairo in the Company of some Moors to Adem, (in the Streights mouth
of the Red Sea) thence crossed over to the Coast of India, and was at Cananor,
Calicut and Goa; at his return to Cairo, finding his Companion Dead, and
meeting with fresh desires of the King that he should find out Presbyter John,
he went again to the Red Sea, and from thence got to the Court of Presbyter
John, where the welcome Ceremony of his Reception was great, but his Return was
(according to Custom there to retain Strangers) out of hope. The prosecution of
the Discoveries on the Coasts was continued by sending out a Fleet, in 1486.
under the Command of Bartholomew Diaz, he placed his first Pillar in the height
of 24. degrees Southward, in a place then named Serra Parda, 120. Leagues
beyond the last of Diego Cam's, pursuing their Voyage they came to Angra das
Vottas, which lies in 29. After five days stay here putting to Sea again, bad
weather kept them 13. days with their Sails half-Mast high; when the Storm
ceased, concluding the Coast according to former Observation to run from North
to South, they stood in for the Land with an Easterly course, but being some
days without making it they went Northward, which brought them to Angra dos
Vaquieras, ( North of the Cape) not having here any Intelligence for want of an
Interpreter, and the fearful Moors leaving the Shore at the sight of so
unusual men, returning to Sea with the same course, they came to an Island in
33 1/4. Southward, where they planted a Pillar called the Cross, which also
gave the name to the Island. Here the Mariners weary and fearful of the great
Seas they found, began to complain and desire not to be put to tempt Fortune
further, but to return, having found a thing more considerable then any of the
former Discoveries, which was, That the Land being now observed to run
Northward, there must be in their Stern some great Cape which they ought to
strive to discover: The Counsel of the Chief Officers of the Fleet rose in this
Resolution, hardly granting Bartholomew Diaz's earnest request, to hold the
same Course for two or three days, and then finding no encouragement to
proceed, to Tack about; at the end of the Limited time, they came to a River
25. Leagues Northward of the Island of Cryz, in 32 2/3. called Rio do Infant,
John Infant Commander of a Ship being the first who went on Shore. Hence, the
Mariners renewing their Complaints, they returned and came in sight of that so
famous Cape, hid for so many Ages, which now did not only Discover it self, but
a new World; Bartholomew Diaz from the Storm and Dangers he met with in
doubling it, called it Cabo Tormentoso, but the King at the return of the Fleet
gave it the more Illustrious name of Bona Esperanza; They returned December
1487. having in sixteen Months seventeen Days discovered 350. Leagues on the
Coast. In this King's time was the Astrolabe found out by two of his
Physicians, (to whose thoughts he had recommended the Improvement of
Navigation) and one Martim of Bohemia, Scholar to the Great Regiomontanus.

9. King John Dying without Lawful Issue, the Kingdom came to Emanuel Son to
the Infant Dom Ferdinand, Brother to Alphonsus the Fifth, This was that great
Fortunate and only Emanuel of Portugal, so called not only from being Born on
Corpus Christi Day, 1469. but from his Mothers being delivered (after a sharp
and dangerous Labor) as the Procession came before her Palace; On which 'twas
said, If at Christ's Birth the Angels, at Emanuels, Christ himself assisted.
He was Born, with Arms so long, as standing upright, and holding them down,
they reached to his Knees, on which the Astrologers concluded his coming to the
Crown, and the extent of his Dominions, according to their Axiom, Brachia
usque ad genua extenta imperare desiderant, and aliquando imperant. Some
pretend without any force to the words to apply to him the Sybilla Cumea's
Prophecy in Virgils fourth Eglogue; He began to Reign at 26. years Old 1495.
and Fired with the high design of his Predecessors to Sail through the Ocean
to the Indies, he the next year concluded to send the great Vasco do Gama to
try for them; This year was spent in Councils and Preparations, and in the
following 1497. in the beginning of July, an unseasonable time, (but that great
Actions expect not Opportunities) the Fleet consisting of three Ships and a
Victualler, (after a solemn Procession of Prayers and Tears and general
Benediction) set Sail, the first Land they came at was (after five Months) the
Bay of Saint Helena lying in 32. degrees Southward; On the 20th of December,
they doubled the Cape of Good Hope; On Christmas day they passed by the Costa
do Natal, not arrived at before, and so called, from the time they came to it;
On Twelfth day they entered into a great River, therefore called Rio dos Reys;
following on their Voyage they came to another great River 50. Leagues
Northward of Sofala, where the Natives freely and friendly Conversed with the
Fleet, furnished them with fresh Provisions, and told them that Eastward there
were men of their Color who Sailed in such Ships, whom they often saw pass by
that Coast. On which Vasca do Gama called the place Rio dos bons Sinaes, and
set up a Pillar there called Saint Raphael, with this good news and security
(the best Warrant they ever had of their Hope) they came to Mocambique, where
they were at first well received by the Xeque, after assaulted by his
Permission, and betrayed by his Pilot; Palm Sunday they came to Mombaza, thence
went for Melinde, where they made Peace with that King, and had from him a
Pilot who carried them in 22. days cross that great Gulf of 700. Leagues, which
is betwixt this Coast of Africa and that of Malabar; the first place he arrived
at was Calecut, the design of his Voyage and end of his Instructions, having
particular Letters and an Embassage for the Samorin (i. e.) Emperor, who (as
Portugal was informed) was the greatest Prince and Lord of all the Spices of
those Parts; Vasco da Gama had twice Audience of the Samorim, settled the Trade
with him, and having placed five Pillars in his peculiar discovery of 1200.
Leagues from West to East, returned safe to Lisbone, 23 August 1499.

10. The news Vasco da Gama brought from the Indies of the hopes to recompense
so many passed difficulties, by the propagation of the Gospel, and the Spices
and Jewels of the East, encouraged the King to set out in the year 1500. a
Fleet of thirteen Ships, under the Command Pedralvarez Cabrall, who meeting
with a Storm at Capo Verde went out to Sea, to make sure of doubling the Cape
of Good Hope, and after a Months Voyage, came first to the other great
Continent of America, where (from the solemn Planting of a Cross) he named his
new discovery Sancta Cruz, but the common discourse of Interest, prevailing
against Devotion, the profit of the Wood brought from thence called it
Brasilia. Pedralvarez setting out from Porto Seguro, (so called by him from the
goodness of it) lost by foul Weather four of his Ships, in that great Ocean
between Brazil and the Cape, and after the extremities of a bad Voyage, came
but with six torn Ships to Sofala, thence Sailing along the Coast got to Quiloa
and Melinde, where he took two Pilots, with whom he crossed over for India,
delivered his Letters to the Samorim, Laded two Ships there, the rest in Cochim
and Cananor, (where he began Factories) and from those two places brought
Ambassadors to settle a Peace and Trade, arriving safely with them in
Portugal. After so great Discoveries, the probability of a Trade, and a
Resolution to set out every year a Fleet for the Discovery and Commerce of
India, King Emanuel enlarged the Title of the Crown, by Styling himself Lord of
the Navigation, Conquest and Commerce of Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia and India.

11. In the year 1502. this now so great a King, knowing Protection not to be
less glorious then Conquest, made Vasco da Gama Admiral of all the Seas in the
East, and sent him with twenty Sail to the Indies, whereof five were as a
settled Fleet to continue there, to protect the new Factories, and to go some
Months in the year to the Mouth of the Red Sea to hinder the Moors of Mecca
from coming out, who were the fiercest Enemies the Portuguese had, and who most
Labored to hinder their progress in India; for these getting into their hands
the Trade of Spices, the Moors who before furnished Christendom, by the way of
Cairo and Alexandria, foresaw the ill consequence of their loss. This Voyage
made Tributary the King of Quiloa, placed new Factories, revenged Injuries,
protected Allies, and made the Portuguese so famous in the East, as their
coming thither was not in a few Kingdoms and Provinces taken for the Era.

12. The Acquisitions and Trade arrived to that height, as in the year 1505.
Dom Francisco d' Almeyda, was sent thither with the Title of Viceroy, the
first so eminent Title given in these Parts; with him went diverse Gentlemen to
serve there, with the Obligation then begun and always continued to stay there
three years; in his Voyage he took Quiloa, built a Fortress, and left a
Commander there, burnt Mombaza, built also a Fortress in Anchediva, he sent his
Son Dom Lorenzo to find out the Island Zeilan, and the Maldives, which he
performed, and to intercept the Moors, who after the Portuguese coming into
India, and keeping a Fleet on the Coast of Malabar, carried the Spices laded at
Symatra, a new way they had found out, South of Zeilan, and through the
Islands, whence to avoid the Coast of India they crossed over the Gulf, till
they came to the Mouth of the Red Sea, or Persian Gulf: Dom Lorenzo was
afterward Killed in a Sea Fight, which the Viceroy's Vengeance made dear to
the Infidels.

13. On Palm Sunday in the year 1506. Tristaond' Acunha, parted from Lisbone
with a Fleet of fourteen Sail, and on it thirteen hundred Soldiers, after a
great Mortality caused by a Plague which happened among the men, the bad Air was
observed to cease, and the Sick and Infirm to recover in their crossing the
Line; in the Voyage they made Cape Saint Augustine in Brazil, and crossing the
great Ocean before they came to the Cape, discovered the Island then named, and
yet called Tristaon d' Acuna; One of the Ships, parted from the rest by a
Storm, first put in at a Port of Madagascar, called Matatana, where he got so
good Information of the place, as the News put Tristaon on the Discovery, which
he perfected, and going afterward for the Indies, in his way took from the
Moors a Fortress in Socotora.

14. After the business of Socotora, the great Alphonso d' Alboquerque (who
came with the Fleet from Lisbone) with seven of the Ships designed to go along
the Coast of Arabia, and after so many Ages to revenge on the Arabs their
Incursions and Possessions on the Continent of Spain; the first place he
arrived at in the Kingdom of Ormus was the City Calayate, where he accepted of
their Friendship, and forced four more to take his upon his own Terms, went on
persuing his Victories, and sending fear (his Harbinger) before him, till he
came to Ormus, where he made Peace with the King, upon condition to turn
Tributary to the King of Portugal, and permit him to Build a Fortress on the
Island; By the great Fleet which parted 1509. the Viceroy received orders to
return, and Alboquerque was possessed of the Government, which he Eternis'd by
taking the Cities of Calicut (the greatest and most powerful Enemy the
Portuguese had in India) and Goa, seated in the heart of India, (therefore
judiciously made the Residence of the Viceroys and Governors) went in Person
to Sumatra, and possessed himself of Malaca, so famous among the Ancients for
its Situation in the Aurea Chersonesus, and then the great Mart of all the
Eastern Merchants; In the time he spent here, he received Embassies and Offers
of Friendship from the Kings of Campar and Java, and from the King of Siam upon
the Continent, sent an Ambassador to the King of Pegu, and Ships to discover
the Spice Islands of the Maluccoes and Banda; He made the first expedition into
the Red Sea, and entered that Straight, Coasting Arabia till he came to the
Island of Ceibam, in the middle of that Gulf, being returned from settling
Ormus, he Died full of Glory and Deserts on Shipboard, at the Bar of Goa, in
the year 1515. and his own Climaterical.

15. The same year King Emanuel designing an honorable Repose, for Alboquerque
after so much Sweat and Toil in War and Victory, had sent Governor to the
Indies Lopo Soarez d' Albergaria with a Fleet of thirteen Ships, and
Instructions to make a Fortress upon the Island of Zeilan, whence according to
his Intelligence came all the Cynamon of those parts. At his first coming to
the Island in 1518. the King of Columbo, on the noise of the Portuguese Arms
and Justice, readily consented, but altered by the Jealousy and Interest of
the Moors of Calicut and Malabar, was afterward forced to yield a Fortress,
and become Tributary; In his Government Perez d' Andrade with four Ships went
to discover the Gulf of Bangala, and the Coast of China; He was succeeded at
the end of three years, by Diogo Lopez de Sequeira, who made a Voyage to the
Red Sea, according to his Instructions from the King, to find out the Coast of
Presbyter John, he came to the Island Macua, Inhabited by Christian Moors, and
to Arquico a Fort of Presbyter John's, where with mutual Tears and other
Expressions of Joy was the first solemn meeting of the Eastern and Western
Christians, of which, (that it was to come to pass) the Abissine Friars, said,
they had by them, ancient Pr^phesies.

16. King Emanuel Died in December 1521. after a glorious Reign of 26. years.
The first sent to the Indies by his Son King John the Third, was he who
discovered them, Vasco da Gama made Conde da Vidigueira, he went with the
second Title of Viceroy, which was not given of course to those who went to
Govern India, but (as the Romans chose their Dictators) bestowed on Men of
Eminent worth, or for extraordinary Emergencies and Achievements, so the Turks
preparations at Sues, and giving out, he would drive the Portuguese out of
India, were the cause Dom Garcia de Noronha was sent thither 1538. with the
Relief of four thousand men on twelve Ships, and the Majesty and Terror of the
Third Viceroy, as our Dom John de Castro was made the Fourth, upon his signal
Victory against the King of Cambaya, and raising the second so famous Siege of
Dio.

17. Dio famous for twice Baffling the Power and Policy of the East, and
situated at the entrance of the Sea of India, and in the passage thither from
Africa, Arabia, and Persia, was (according to some) Built by Alexander the
Great, intended to be the Mistress of the Sea and Land, and so called from the
word (...), which his Flatterers gave him as the Son of Jupiter Ammon, others
(without Searching into the reason of the Name) give it a more Ignoble
beginning, by saying it was only anciently Inhabited by Fishermen, but
afterward, like Venice grew great, rich, and formidable; It was a constant part
of King Emanuel's Instructions to those who served him in the Indies, (knowing
a Fortress here would be to India such a Curb as Argos in the hands of
Strangers was once to Greece) to try always to get footing in this place. It
was accordingly often (but in vain) attempted by all the ways force or
stratagem could suggest, but was only that, the Fortune and Grandeur of so
great a King could not atchieve; Dom John the Third, not so Covetous of the
Kingdoms, as Virtues and Victories of his Father, commanded the Governors not
to lay aside the design, without engaging for it in whatsoever expense or
difficulty, who were all so blindly obedient as to lie with great Fleets before
it, observing the places of advantage, sometimes falling on by open Force,
sometime by Design, yet all unsuccessfull; On which advice the King ordered the
War to be carried on in other places of Cambaya, that by desolating his
Cities, annoying his Ports, and obstructing the Trade, that King might be
forced to purchase his quiet by granting him a Fortress there; The Execution of
the Portuguese's Arms, and Cries of his Subjects, brought him to seek Peace by
giving, first the City Bacam, with its Jurisdiction and Revenues to the
Governor; afterward being pressed by so terrible an Enemy as the Mogul, and
the Rebellion of his own Subjects, he bought Protection and Assistance from the
Portuguese, by giving them leave to choose a place there, to Build a Fortress
on, which Martim Alphonso de Sofa Admiral of the Seas of India, employed by the
Governor to complete the Treaty, placed on the point which commands the Haven;
This was in the year 1535. It was not long before the King of Cambaia perceived
the Portuguese by their possession here to have their Feet upon his Neck, and
all the East to complain of the interruption of their Pilgrimages, and the loss
of their Trade and Commerce to Mecca, upon which the King listened greedily to
Coge-Sofar's persuasion of Besieging the place, on the security of being
assisted, by a great Fleet from the Turk, who designed to drive the Portuguese
out of India. This Siege began ( Antonio da Silvera being Governor of Dio)
July 1538. the first Army which came against the place consisting of six
thousand Horse, and thirteen thousand Foot, under the Command of Alucan, and
Coge-Sofar; and in September, Solomon Bashaw Admiral of the Turks came to their
Relief, with a Fleet of seventy six Vessels, full of Choice men, and a suitable
preparation of all other necessaries. There was not wanting by Sea or Land, the
personal and constant gallantry of Assaults, the subtilty of Stratagem, and
uninterrupted Battery of great Guns, against a few men taken unprovided; yet
did the Enemy raise the Siege himself, at the end of October, and the Viceroy
Dom Garcia de Noronha found him gone when he came to their Relief with one
hundred and sixty Sail.

17. The subjection all India was in, under the Fortress of Dio; the old
Animosities for the first Baffle received at that place, and Sultan Mahumed's
revenge for the Death of his Father Badur, killed by the Portuguese, begot the
second Siege of Dio 1546. the chief Story of our History, which, (if not much
prejudiced by a lessening Translation) may probably appear one of the greatest
Actions on Record. Here Envy cannot fasten that, with which she so
disparagingly blasted Alexanders Expeditions and Conquests in Asia, That he had
to do with unarmed and unpolisht Men, mastered to his hand by Vice and Luxury.
Courage, Discipline, Design and Arms were here in that height, as they seemed
not to be newly learned in the East, and must have prevailed against any one
but a Dom John de Castro, one so singular in all Virtues as he might Cope with
any of the ancient Heroes, and challenge a place in the Calendar of Saints,
whose constant Carriage and Influence over all India, is (besides the universal
consent of History) a strong argument for some successes, which might be
otherwise startled at as improbable; if any can be so, to that Magnanimous and
Hereditary preseverance in difficulties, which we have showed to be Entaild for
above an Age upon the Portuguese. To Atone the imperfections of the
Translation, and help the Reader in the passages of so famous and memorable a
Siege, I have procured, (and gratefully acknowledge it as an eminent favor)
the Ma^^ of Dio, from his Excellency the Marquess of Sand, now extraordinary
Ambassador in England from the King of Portugal, which I have inserted in the
proper place.

18. The Death of our great and glorious Dom John de Castro, left not India so
destitute, but the following Governors added Conquests to the State, Converts
to the Church; King John the Third was succeeded by his Grandchild Posthumus
Sebastian, Born with such restless desires to enlarge his Conquests against the
Moors and Infidels, as his thoughts had no other object. The wonderful success
of his Arms in the Indies, in getting ground on his Enemies; the defense of Goa
Besieged by Idalcan with 35000. Horse, and 60000. Foot; the keeping Chaul
against a Siege of nine Months, re-inforc'd with one hundred thousand Foot,
and 45000. Horse, managed with all the horror, resoluteness, and policy of
War, and the Counsel of the most Prudent about him, could not so defend him
against the subtle persuasions of his admiring Flatterers, as to stop his fatal
Voyage into Africa, Anno 1578. where after a hard March in the hea^s and
deserts, (second only to that of Resolute Cato's) engaging with incredicle
numbers of the Enemies, he is by some supposed to be the third King slain in
the Battle; though others, fond of their own Grief, and his Memory, tell
compassionate and tender Stories of his disguise and escape, and thinking, so
great a Light could not go out with out its last amasing Blaze, believe
Sebastian not yet Dead.

19. Henry the Cardinal, Son to King Emanuel, and great Uncle to Sebastian, was
on his Death by the Civillians, Nemine contradicente, asserted King, and
accordingly received by the Kingdom; his old Age, (which allowed him but the
Reign of one Year and five Months) and the Character of his Spiritual orders,
(beautified in him by the chaste and exemplary Austerity of a Prince) obliged
him to endeavor to settle the Succession, by appointing a meeting of the
States at Almeirim, there to hear the pretensions of those five Rivals, who
Courted the Crown; The Competitors were,

Antonio, Prior of Crato, natural Son to the Infant Dom Lewis, second Son to
King Emanuel, who for some Weeks carried himself as King at Lisbone, by coining
Money, and conferring Honors, till forced away by the Duke of Alva, fled to
Porto, thence got into France, and in the year 1589. (assuring Queen Elizabeth,
That all the Portuguese would unanimously acknowledge him if he got Footing
there) the Fleet designed for the West Indies, under the Command of Captain
Drake, appeared in his Favor, but the Portuguese answered not his expectation;
His only prejudice was his not being Legitimate.

Raynusius Duke of Parma, Grandchild to Edward (the fourth Son to King
Emanuel) by his eldest Daughter Mary, excluded, because the Fundamental Laws of
the Kingdom, provide (in case a Daughter Marry out of Portugal) against a
Strangers pretending in her Right.

Catharine, Duchess of Barganza, second Daughter to Edward, but with the Legal
advantage of having Married in the Kingdom.

Philip the second, King of Spain, Grandchild to King Emanuel by his eldest
Daughter Elizabeth, Married to the Emperor Charles the Fifth.

Emanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy, Grandchild to King Emanuel by his second
Daughter Beatrix, Married to Charles Duke of Savoy.

Philip the second, King of Spain, having chased Prior Antonio out of Lisbone,
was acknowledged King of Portugal, and went in Person to Lisbone in June 1581.

20. The Restoration of King John the Fourth, to the Kingdom and Crown of
Portugal, Anno 1640. is eminently observable; That the Possession of the King
of Spain for threescore years, had not made the Portuguese loose their Courage,
or Hopes to effect their desires; That the King of Spain should make the Duke
of Braganza, (whose pretenses to the Crown and affections of the People he very
well knew) Grand-master of the Artillary, who in dischage of his trust seemed
to refuse the offer of the Crown; That a secret entrusted with six hundred
should not miscarry; That the design should be perfected with only the Death of
the Secretary: And that its influence should be so general and powerful, as
the Castillians were every where, and almost at the same time laid aside
particularly in Brazil, where they were totally extirpated; And where
afterward the States of Holland found this policy of the Portuguese, seconded
by the Courage of their Ancestors, in taking the Reciffe in Pernambuck, January
1654. a place the States with a Fleet of fifty Ships had taken from the
Spaniard 1630. of such consequence, That whilst the Crowns were united in one,
the Recovery of it, was the great Debate of the Councils, attempted by the
Admiral Dom Antonio de Oquendo, 1631. Afterward for many years, by the
greatest Preparations and most eminent Persons of both Kingdoms; yet the
complicated Strength of Nature, and the Hollanders Fortifications (whom their
Experience had made the great Masters of that Art) made it impregnable against
all Attaques. The taking in of this by the Portuguese alone, when a King of
their own made them act like and for themselves, and the keeping of it against
the Force and Fleet of Count Maurice of Nassau, may at the end of a long
Preface excuse the Recital of many more performances of the Portuguese, (after
their Restoration) Notorious for the Wisdom of the Contrivance and Gallantry
of the Execution.

Peter Wyche.

WHITEHALL, Aug. 12. 1663.
Let this Translation be Printed.

Henry Bennet.

THE LIFE OF DOM JOHN DE CASTRO.
The First BOOK.
I Am Writing the Life of Dom John de Castro, a Man greater then his Name,
greater then his Victories; whose Memory is yet fresh in the East, descending
from Father to Son, a successive Book, wherein the Fame of his Actions is
preserved always Alive; and we will add to the general Acclamations of his
Glory this little shout, since Records keep not so well in Tradition as Writing.

1. Dom John de Castro, The first Studies of Dom John de Castro.
was, a Renowned Branch of an Illustrious Family: But first we will tell his
Virtues, then his Stock; the Nobility a man raises by his Actions, being
greater then that he acquires from his Ancestors. He spent his first Years in
that Learning and Virtue, his Age was then capable of; being so naturally
inclined to Learning, that he needed not be forced, but only put in the way.
Dom John, not being the Heir of his House, was intended for Study; Learning
being always the second Birthright amongst the best Houses of this Kingdom.
Dom John obeyed, not having then Liberty to refuse, or a School to take another
Lesson in.

2. He Learnt Mathematics of Peter Nonnius, He learnt the Mathematics.
the greatest Man Portugal knew of that Profession, and came to be such a
Master in the Science, as if he had intended to profess it. In this School he
was Companion to the Infant Dom Lewis, whose Familiarity he got into, both by
his Quality and Ingenuity: but as Dom John embraced Learning out of Obedience,
and Arms by Destiny, he looked upon the glory of the Schools as small, finding
himself intended for the Wars, both by his own Inclination, and by his
forefathers Example.

3. The repute of Dom Edward Menezes, Governor of Tangiers, was at that time
great, whose Name the Africans heard with terror, and we with respect; Dom
John looked more upon his Victories, then the Schemes and Circles of Euclid,
loving the Arts only as they waited on Courage.

4. Being eighteen years Old, He goes to (...).
finding himself more grown in Spirit then in Age, making an escape, he
Embarked for Tangiers, where (contrary to the Custom of such places) he bore
Arms nine years, as if he intended to spend his Life, in what was only a
beginning: on all occasions, in that War he behaved himself with Courage equal
to his Blood, and above his Years, deserving the joy of it from his Friends,
and envy from the Soldiery.

5. Dom Edward de Menezes respected him, Dom Edward de Menezes Knights him,
as if he had then read in this History, his Victories in Asia we are now
Writing; he would needs with his own hands give and receive the honor of
Knighting him, being proud so long before of this Son of his Discipline; and
considering, that so great Bravery deserved to be encouraged by the favors of
Princes, desiring that Valor should have due Rewards, equally favoring the
King, and Subject, he writ to the King Dom John the Third, that Dom John de
Castro had so served, and informs the King of his Desert.
that now no Place or Reward could be too great for him; that his Highness
ought to conferr some honor on him, because Kings make Soldiers by taking
notice of them, and it was just, that in the sight of so great a Prince, Virtue
should not remain unrewarded.

6. The King immediately sent for Dom John, The King sends for him, and rewards
him
by so honorable a Letter as if he had intended him no other recompense, with
that Dom John came to the Court, where he was as much Envied for his wounds as
for the favor shown him; The King made him Commendatory of Salvaterra, awaking
Deserts in others by the Value he had for them in him.

7. Dom John spent some time in Court, His behavior at Court.
without being drawn away to any youthful Vice, either by his Years, or
Example, appearing truly a Man all along, taking so well his Measures, that
neither his Maturity made him ill-humour'd, nor his Civility facil: He knew how
to play the Philosopher amongst the Varieties of the Court; shunning in that
kind of Life what had any show of Idleness, not any thing that arguesd
Discretion.

8. He altered his course of Life by Marrying the Lady Leonore Coutinho, He
marries Leonore Coutinho.
his Cousin German once removed, the Daughter of Leonel Coutinho, a Gentleman
of the Illustrious House of Marialva, Nobility so known and so ancient, that
our knowledge of that and the Kingdom bear both the same Date: He had no other
Portion but the Qualities and Virtues of his Bride; yet without the propps of
an Estate, did so maintain his Honor, that he was by all treated with the
respect of a Rich, and the pity of a Poor man.

9. Then presented it self the Battle of Tunis, The Battle of Tunis.
an Action more famous for the Victory, then Advantage, in which, Dom John de
Castro had no little share, in the Honor of Danger. We will give a larger
relation of its success, The King Dom John having engaged in it his Forces, The
occasion of it.
the Infant Dom Lewis, his Person. That notorious Rover Barba-Rossa had
infested all the Mediterranean with more Strength and Boldness then is
ordinarily heard of in a Pirat, finding Fortune so ready to assist his Daring,
that, amidst the Triumphs of Charles, only Barba-Rossa was the scandal of his
Victories; Seeing himself every day more advanced in Opinion, and Forces, he
went to serve the Turk, with whom, the report of our injuries had given him
credit; and buying his favor with the most Valuable things he had, got to be
Admiral of the Seas; coming often with great numbers of Galleys, he very much
infested the Ports of Naples and Sicily; the Valor of the Natives, or the
Protection of the Empire, (to which they were Vassals) not being able to defend
them; He made Slaves of i^finite numbers, (whereof diverse truckt their Faith
for their Liberty) laid waste Provinces, and burnt Ships, getting a very great
Name amongst the Infidels, by the miseries of the Christians, till forgetting
his beginning, his Prosperity made way for his ambition of Reigning, and he
usurped the Kingdom of Iunis by diverse Artifices, which Story be^ongs not to
our History. Charles, looking upon this Tyrant, having so much force of his own,
that he was abetted by a far greater Power, and that his Kingdoms lying so
near, it was not fit he should root himself at the Gates of his House; that the
Moors (who wanted not ^alour, but Discipline) being set on work by so
experienced a Soldier, would come to know their own Strength to the prejudice
of his Kingdoms; resolved with a very strong Navy to find him out, and to
divest him of the Protection of Tunis, because at the best scaping from thence
he must to Sea again, where, as a Pirat, he could only offend with straggling
Forces, which the weather, and fortune, might more easily Destroy. He drew his
old Soldiers from the Garrisons of Italy, (whom he supplied with new) made
great Leavies in High Germany and Flanders, Listed Italians and Spaniards,
besides Gentry and Nobility which served without Pay, and the Enterprise being
so useful and justifiable, and where the Emperor ventured his own Person,
there came many Volunteers to join with so pious and valiant Arms. The Emperor
Mustered the men he raised, in Sardinia, and found five and twenty thousand
Foot on the List who received Pay, besides very many others who served without
it, who made up a great part of the Army; every day he received diverse
Succors which increast his Camp.

10. The Infant Dom Lewis, The Infant Dom Lewis is there in Person.
a Prince worthy of designs matching his Courage, resolved to accompany the
Emperor his Brother-in-law in the expedition, and though very much dissuaded
by the King Dom John, with diverse Arguments, some taking in his affection to a
Brother, others the care for his Person; yet the Infant apprehending the
King's inclinations forwarder to excuse his Courage, then to accept his
Obedience, did with some Gentlemen depart privately; which when the King knew,
he sent him to Barcellona (where the Emperor then was) large Credit, and
ordered the Equipping 25 Carvels, and some other Ships, amongst the rest This
was the Vessel which in the invasion 1588. was c^ll'd the Caca-foogo.
one Galleone, which carried two hundred Brass pieces; the greatest that till
then ever Rode in our Seas: that, under the Command of Antonio de Saldanha,
they might be in readiness for the Fight, and out of respect to the Infant all
the Vessels of the Fleet were entrusted with Gentlemen of eminent Quality, of
whom Dom John de Castro was one, who in this Action did equally despise Danger
and Covetousness, as will presently appear by the ensuing relation.

11. Those Gentlemen who Embarked in this expedition, Gentlemen who were at the
Fight.
and who are come to my knowledge, were (besides Dom John de Castro) Dom
Affonso of Portugal, Son and Heir of the Earl of Vintioso, Dom Affonso de
Vasconcellos, Son of the Earl of Penel^a, Lewis Alvarez de Tavora, Lord of
Mogadoura, with his Brother Ruy Lorenco de Tavora, who was afterward Vice-King
in the Indies, Dom John de Almeyda, Son of the Earl of Abrantes, Dom Pedro
Mascarenhas, who also was Vice-King in the Indies, Dom Diogo de Castro
Governor of the Castle of Evora, Dom Fernand^ de Noronh^, Dom Fraucisco de
Faro, Dom Francisco Pereira, Ambassador from King Dom Sebastian to Castille,
Dom Affonso de Castelbranco, Lord High Bailiff of Portugal, Pero Lopez de
Sousa, John Gomez de Sylva, Page of the Lance, and Dom Lewis de Attayda,
afterward Earl of Attouguia, and Died in the Indies, being the second time
Vice-King there. All these Gentlemen served at their own Charge, carrying with
them Servants and Soldiers without any pay; their Clothes also and Liveries
showed with what delight they went to the War. All the Fleet came to Anchor in
the Port of Barcellona, and saluting the Emperor's Admiral, made a warlick and
pleasing sight. The Emperor came to the Portugal Ambassadors House, ( Alvaro
Mendez de Vasconcellos) which being on the Seaside was fitter to honor and
entertain the Entry.

12. The Dukes of Alva and Cordova, with many other Lords, came to the Seaside
to find out the General, and the Gentlemen with him, they all went to Kiss the
Emperor's hands, who received them with all the honor and welcome befitting
his place, very glad to be accompanied with our experienced and stout
Soldiery, to whom the half Moons, and Lances of Africa were no strangers. The
Emperor acquainted the Infant Dom Lewis with all his weighty Resolutions, not
only out of respect to the greatness of his Person, but to that of his
Judgment, well seen both in Court, and State; of whom I must here tell a pass
of Civility, for the value the Castillians put on it. Civility betwixt the
Emperor and Infant.
The Emperor and the Infant were together one Night, and at the going in of a
Door both Complemented for the precedence, the one would have the Stranger go
foremost, the other would put it upon Majesty; The Emperor taking him by the
Arm forced him to enter first, The Infant not willing to accept the honor,
nor able to refuse it, snatched a Torch from a Page. The Infant knew so well
how to please the Emperor, as he resolved to give him the State of Milan,
finding in him Qualities to deserve it, Valor to defend it. But the claims of
France, made the Dominion of that State so uncertain, as it lay many years
under the Decision of Arms.

13. I will not tell the success of that War, because the Story is from my
purpose, though Dom John de Castro behaved himself so in it, The Emperor would
have Knighted Dom John de Castro, who refused it.
as the Emperor would fain have Knighted him; an Honor, from which he justly
excused himself, as having had it before from other Hands, which, though not so
Royal, supplied that defect by their stoutness. The Emperor Commanded two
Thousand Crusades should be given to every Captain of the Fleet, A Crusade
worth 3 s. 8d.
which Dom John alone accepted not, serving more Ambitiously for Renown than
Reward. As the reward of Money.


14. Charles now Triumphing, like an other Scipio, after the War of Africa, saw
Himself at rest, amidst the Applause and Acclamations of Europe, styling
himself more fitly the Founder, than the Heir of his Empire. Our Fleet returned
to the Port of Lisbone, where Dom John found in the Embraces of the King, and
Salutations of the People, a greater reward than he had refused from Caesar; and
as one who knew how to despise his own Fame, he retired to his Country House at
Sintra, He retires to Sintra.
desiring to Live to himself, having so carried himself in his Country's
Service, that he neither forsook it, as an Unprofitable, nor Courted it as an
Ambitious Person: Here he past his time in a strange and new kind of Husbandry,
Cutting down Fruitful Trees, and Planting in their stead Wild and Barren ones;
by this perhaps showing, that in all he did he was so dis-interess'd, that from
the Earth he Tilled he looked for no return of benefit: but it is not much, if
he so little valew'd what the Rocks of Sintra could produce, when he scornfully
Trampled upon the Rubies and Diamonds of the East.

15. Dom John in the prime of his Age, found himself put upon Service by the
Examples of his own He goes the first time for the Ind^es.
Family; and, as the War in Africa, by the new Conquests in the East, See John
de Barro's History of India, Decade 5. Lib. 3. Cap. 8. No. 10.
was either slighted or forgot, (the World most Valewing the Fame which is far
fetched) He resolved to go for the Indies, whose Conquests stored the Kingdom
with Glory and Victories; He went on Board, without asking any employment or
reward, counting that Honor more his own he went to winn, than that he might
carry with him.

16 In that expedition, Dom Garcia de Noronha, his Brother-in-law, went
Governor to the Indies, who looked upon Dom John de Castro as one fit to
succeed him, though he then past but for a private Soldier; as soon as the
King knew Dom John's resolution, The King profers him a Reward, and ^ow he
accepts it.
he ordered him a Thousand Crusades yearly all the time he served in the
Indies, and by his Letters Patents the Government of the Fortress of Ormus,
which he, I know not if with greater ambition or temper, Ibid.
refused; the Memory of rewards rejected being rarer than of those accepted: an
Action more easily praised than imitated.

17. Dom John de Castro He carries his Son Dom Alvaro.
took Shipping with his Son Dom Alvaro then about thirteen, giving him for the
pass-time of that Age the Dangers and Tempests of so long a Voyage. Dom
Garcia's Fleet arrived prosperously at the Indies, where he found the Governor
Nuno de Cunha going with a Fleet to the relief of Dio, and to Fight the Turks
Galleys which lay before it; in that famous siege, Antonio de Sylveira held
out. Dom Garcia at once with the possession of the Government took on him the
Obligation of succouring the place, in which service Dom John de Castro offered
himself, He embarks himself for the relief of Dio.
and as a Soldier of fortune earnest upon it, put himself on the first Ship, as
if he foresaw those future Triumphs Dio called him to: but the retreat of the
Turks lost Dom Garcia the Victory, or rather gave it him without Bloodshed, if
less glorious, more secure.

18. Dom Garcia Died in a little time, to whom succeeded Dom Estevaon da Goma,
one who had in the Indies the Reputation of his Family, History of India, Dec.
5. Lib. 7. Cap. 1.
and was likely to have had the Fortune, had not his Government been so short;
He engaged in an Action, great in the danger, and the glory of it, which was to
pass the straight of the Red Sea, and burn the Turks Galleys which were
Building at Sues, with intent (as 'twas given out) to drive the Portugues out
of India: a design the Turk thought worthy his Power.

19. When all the Fleet was under Sail, there was not any Soldier of Courage
not inspirited by the hazard of so extraordinary an action of as much Fame in
the undertaking as Victory. History of India, Dec. 5. Lib. 7. Cap. 5.
Dom Estevaon de Gama set Sail with twelve great Ships, and sixty small Boats
the first of January 1541. here Dom John de Castro had the Command of a
Gallione, and pursuing their Voyage with Easterly winds, they all, though
scattered, saw the Coast of Arabia. The Governor Dom Estevaon da Gama He goes
to the Red Sea with Dom Estevaon d^ Gama.
made it about Monte Felix, and arrived at the mouth of the Straight, expected
the other Ships of his Convoy; here they had notice that the Enemies Galleys
were drawn on shore, Ibid.
and so watched that there was no Burning 'em without open force; which (for
the Flats and Shelves of that Port) would be impossible to our Round-bottom'd
Ships. Yet Dom Estevaon da Gama slighting the advice and danger, went forward
with some small Barks, (one of which, Dom John de Castro, (leaving his Ship)
Commanded.) Ibid.
They past by the Primero Islands, which lie in twelve degrees and and by the
Bay of Velha which is in almost thirteen, they Anchord in the Bay of Fortune,
which is in the same height. In all the Creeks and Bays from the mouth of the
Straight to Sues, was Dom John taking the height of the Sun, and making a
Journal, discoursing, sometimes like a Natural Philosopher, sometimes like a
Seaman; showing how blind the bare Experience of Pilots is, without the rules
of Art; here with as much Judgment, as he had Courage, he Learnedly canvas'd
the Reasons why the Red Sea was called so, and the Natural causes of the
overflow of Nile in the Summer; a Theme which has kept many Wits awake, yet
has Nature for so many years kept her own secret; but we reckon as the least
part of this Man's greatness, that which the Romans with so swelling Rhetoric
write of their Caesar, that he managed a Pen as Judiciously, as he did a Sword
Courageously. This and other Tracts, (of which we promise you more Light) writ
at Sea in Storms and Winds, he Dedicated to the Infant Dom Lewis, Ibid.
presenting him with the Fruits of that Learning they sucked in together.

20. From this Harbor they had a sight of Mount Sinai, where the Angels laid
the Relics of St. Katherine in a famous Repository of their own Building; Dom
Estevaon Knights Dom Alvaro.
at the sight Dom Estevaon da Gama Knighted Dom Alvaro de Castro, who in memory
of so great a Sanctuary took for his Crest the Katherine-wheel, which his
Family does Religiously give to this day; History of India, Dec. 5. Lib. 7.
Cap. 8.
we will give no particular account of that design, because the Vigilance of
the Turks hindered it from taking effect.

21. Dom John Dom John returns to the Kingdom.
returning to the Kingdom, (as if designedly giving the Palms of the East time
to grow, which were afterward to Crown his Victories) brought no other Riches
on shore but the Fame of his Actions; and being yet in his Sea-cloaths, (those
too scarce dry) was by the King chosen to be Admiral of the Navy of the Coast;
Is made Admiral of the Coast.
putting him on new Employment in recompense of his former Services. Dom John
immediately put to Sea in the year 1543. to Convoy those Ships which were
expected from the Indies, and plying too and again in his Station, spied a
French Corsaire, who had with seven Ships infested those Seas, and had made
Prize of some of ours, which had Embold^ed and Enriched him; as soon as Dom
John saw him, with his Fleet before the Wind he made up to him, and setting on
the Enemies Admiral, Boarded him, Defeats seven Ships of the Corsaires.
and after a brave Defense made him yield, two Ships he sunk, the rest by the
advantage of the Night saved themselves; the Circumstances of this Fight are
not to be found in Writing, the Carelessness of other excusing our silence.

22. Dom John in a few days saw our Ships, Brings in the Indian Fleet.
when by Saluting one the other they rejoiced for the overthrow of the
Corsaire; they came together over the Bar of Lisbone, the applause of his
reception being so general, that he seemed to have already weathered the storms
of Hatred, or Envy; an Happiness, or Misery, which Great men in their Graves
only purchase or avoid: In this success Dom John had no other reward than that
of the Victory; for when the Debt is great, Kings, not to be thought Niggards,
choose rather to appear Ungrateful, being more willing to confess the Vices of
their Person, than their Majesty.

23. 'Twas but a little time Dom John had to rest in the content of his
Victory, being forced for a business of greater moment, to put on his Arms
again, as I will (though against my Custom) more largely relate, taking it
higher, not to Disjoynt the History. That famous Pirat Haradin Barba-Rossa,
found himself almost quite broken with the loss of Tunis and Goleta, and more
after the loss of his Galleys, losing by Land the power of a Tyrant, and by the
Sea the strength of a Pirat; yet was not this Arch Enemy so much shaken, but
that Italy many years after sighed under his Lash; He had laid up in diverse
places the best part of his Booty, as an other plank to save himself upon; this
he presented to Solomon the Grand Signior, of Value enough, to efface, or
excuse, the disgrace of his Fleet, and Flight at Tunis; which was yet fresh in
Solymans grief, and memory; withal represented what he could do against the
Christians, that taking the Sea at first with only two Galliots ill fitted out,
his Valor and Success had made him so formidable and powerful, that with
their own spoils he entertained them with a sharp War, that the Jaols of
Africa would not hold the Slaves; that in the Kingdom of Naples, in all
Apulia, and the Terra de Lavoro, he had committed such Outrages, that neither
their Blood, or Tears were yet dry; that the Galleys of Sicily out of fear
rotted at Anchor; That, that Andrea Doria (so much sought to by the Princes of
Europe) could not but confess how often he was forced to Row for it, to escape
Barba-Rossa, that he feared not to Cite his Enemies witnesses of his Actions;
that the Emperor Charles (Nettled with so many Losses, seeing Barba-Rossa only
over-cast his Victories) did more like the impatient Man, than the Soldier,
join all the Forces of Germany, Italy, Spain, and Flanders, to Destroy him,
rashly exposing the best of his Kingdoms, to the chance of his either losing or
getting the Day, and though his Old Fortune left him not, he only got the
credit of the Battle without any pro^it, (for Dispossessing one Enemy of
Tunis, investing an other in it) neither was the Victory so entire that it Cost
him not Ships and Men, and with the expense of so great a force he had
exhausted the Exchequer of Spain; that now was the true time to ruin
Christendom, weakened with a great War, and grown careless with a seeming
Victory; that in the Straight of Gibraltar was the famous City of Ceita, (the
Port whence heretofore the Africans with Victorious Arms entered on their
Conquest of Spain) which the Portuguese held with weak Walls, and a poor
Garrison, more bent upon Disturbing their Neighbors, than securing themselves
from 'em, because heightened with their prosperity in the East, they slighted
things at home, like Rivers that are largest at their greatest distance from
their Springhead; that if the Grand Signior's Majesty were inclinable to bring
under his Dominion that so considerable a part of Europe, He would underatake
with a reasonable number of Galleys to possess him of Ceita; by which those who
were farthest West should Live in awe of his Empire. Thus discourst the
Corsaire, endeavoring with an others force to recover the Credit and Station
from which he was fallen. And as in Princes Courts, great Designs more than
possible are listened to, and Barba-Rossa's Experience and Valor had so good
security, proud and warlick Solomon began to give ear to a defign of so great
Importance, and so well laid for the peace and prosperity of his Empire: He
willingly heard Barba-Rossa persuading him that the Benefit of this Action
would outweigh the Difficulty; The Moors of Africa too kindled the Turks
indignation, who Lamented they could not breath quietly in peace with us, some
bewailing their lost Liberty, others the Effronts of their Prophet in their
ruind Mosques; for the remedy of these grievances, they strive to engage the
Turk upon his Zeal, and Greatness, which Motives concerning Religion, and
Majesty, might veil over the Ambition, and justify the Action.

24. Charles the Emperor Sollicitous what Barba-Rossa did in Constantinople,
The Emperor advises the King.
knowing that that Stock (whose Branches he had Lopt) was not so Dry, but that
it might with another warmth, produce fresh Poison, did all he could to know
what the Turk resolved about the invasion of Spain, and though the first Blow
was aimed at Ceita, yet (Victory never stopping where it begins) and unwilling
to be crushed in our ruins, He ordered the providing of Ships, Listing men, and
the doubling those Garrisons which were in the Ports of the Streights mouth,
writing to the King Don John his Brother-in-law the News he had, that they
might jointly provide for the resisting the common Enemy.

25. The news coming to Portugal, the King immediately fell upon Fortifying
Ceita, whose Defense was only after the rate of those Times; and we being
Conquerours in Africa, kept our Garrisons by our Neighbors fear. Dom Affonso
de Noronha was then Governor of Ceita, Desires aid of him against the Turk.
who was by the King entrusted with the Fortifications, and had sent him Men,
Materials, and Engeneers. The Emperor desired the King, that our Fleet might
come forth and join with his at Cales, under the Command of Don Alvaro Bacaon,
and so expect the Enemy in the Streights mouth, where, happen what would, the
protection of his Ports would secure their Retreat; upon Debate, the joining of
the Fleets seemed reasonable, that all the weight of the War might not lie
upon our Forces.

26. The King was busy in finding out one to Command the Fleet, and though
there were men enough in our Kingdom, whom the Experience and Dangers of our
Conquests had made Soldiers, yet Dom John de Castro's Name made it self room
amongst the first; it was his Pride neither to ask or to deny any Service for
his Country: We know that though King John loved his Valor, he cared not for
his Right, so that what he got by one Virtue, he lost by an other; and we
observed not that he had any Place or Preferment about the King, because so
free a Spirited man might be endured as a Subject, The King mak^s Dom John
General.
not as a Favorite. The Fleet was ready to Sail, a great part of the Nobility
of the Kingdom on Board, and the Soldiers expecting who should Command in so
considerable an Expedition, when on a sudden Dom John de Castro was named to be
the Man, to the general satisfaction even of his Competitors.

27. The King sent for Dom John, acquainting him with the News from the
Emperor, and with the Designs of the Turk, expressing to him with what Envy he
sent him upon so Honorable an Employment; but since it was the Royal Prison of
Kings, to conferr Honor, and not to be in a condition to deserve it; He
entrusted him with that Fleet, in confidence he would, with the Arms of the
Castro's quarter the Banners he wonn from the Turks; and leave them more
Honorable to his Posterity, than he received them from his ancestors; Dom John
kissed the Kings hand with a sense of his Favors, knowing how much better it was
to be esteemed, than countenanced by Princes.

28. He joins with the Emperors General.
On the Twelfth of August 1543. all the Fleet set Sail, and in few days with
favorable Winds came in sight of Gibraltar, where they found the Emperors
Fleet at Anchor, which received ours with all the Ceremony of the Sea, by their
often repeated Salutations Rejoicing and Affrightnings of the place. Dom Alvaro
Bacaon with the Chief Officers of the Fleet, came presently to Visit Dom John
de Castro on Board, where (when the Complements were ended) he gave him an
account of what he heard of the Enemy, and that according to Intelligence, his
first Onset would be upon Ceita; they then fell upon it, that the Fleets of two
such great Princes being joined, it lay upon both their Honors to Fight the
Enemy, They discourse about the Battle.
though he should be much stronger; that we Fought in our own Seas, and in
sight of our own Ports, which would be able in the Fight to furnish us with
fresh men, and our battered Ships would have a refuge at hand; that though the
Turks should get the Victory, they would be so broken, as not to be able to set
upon any place in the Straight, which, by Fighting, let the success be what it
would, they should secure; Besides, the Orders they had under Seal to find out
the Enemy, could not be understood otherwise with safety to their Honor and
Obedience. Having taken this so precise and bold Resolution, the Soldiers were
all on Fire, and the Chief Commanders Sollicitous in giving out their Orders,
Resolve to Fight.
and disposing for so great an Affair; when on a sudden advises came thick,
that Barba-Rossa with his whole Fleet was coming toward the Straight. Dom John
de Castro presently sends for his men who were on shore, Commands the Captains
to fit and trim their Ships, and sends word to Dom Alvaro he was weighing, who
coold of his first heat by an imaginary fight of the Enemy, writ to Dom John,
The Spanish General changes his mind.
that new accidents must have new Counsails; that by the Spies intelligence, he
knew Barba-Rossa's Fleet was double to the Armados; that 'twas neither
according to the Intention or for the Service of their Princes, to lose
themselves in so apparent a Danger; that while their Fleets were entire, the
Enemy could undertake no great matter, Endeavors to bring off Dom John.
and if in the Fight they should have the worst often, all the places of the
Straight would be the reward of the Victory; that 'twas much against his humor
to desist from Fighting, but the Service of Caesar was to be minded before the
Gallantry of particular Persons; that he desired him to bring all his Fleet
into Port, and as the Turk moved, they would more safely conclude what was to
be done. He persists in Fighting with the Turks.
Dom John de Castro answered the Spanish General, that he altered not his
Opinion at the fight of the Enemy, that their appearing timorous would
encourage the Turks, whose design being to get footing in Spain, the Fleets
ought out of honor to engage, much more out of a sense of the Effront; what
would the World say, if the Forces of two such great Princes joined only to
manage a defensive War against Barba-Rossa, letting the Turkish Banners Lord
it in our Seas, in sight of the Eagles of the Empire, and the Cinques of
Portugal; that he was resolved to expect the Enemy, not fearing to be Blamed
however the day went, because, if worsted, lost men answered nothing, and no
body would call Conquerours to question.

29. But neither had this Resolution force enough to sway the Spanish General
Dom Alvaro Bacaon; we are not certain whether he thought it the better or the
more secure way. And stays for 'em three days in the Straight.
Don John de Castro put himself in the Streights mouth, where he lay three
days: here he had advice, that the Enemies Fleet steered another course, by
Dissentions of the Chief Officers, or (as other Memorials have it) Barba-Rossa
had received new Orders from the Turk, to bring back the Fleet; yet the
Gallantry of Dom John de Castro's staying in the Straight, deserved envy from
the Living, glory from Posterity, since for the obtaining a memorable Victory,
not Courage, but Occasion was wanting; though this so generous resolution was
diversely taxed in Spain, those Branding it, who call all extraordinary actions
Temerity; yet I believe, those who most condemned it, would have been content to
have it themselves.

30. Dom John seeing, by the Enemies retiring, those places above their fear,
went to Ceita, to communicate some part of his instructions to Dom Affonso
Noronha, who received him with so many Shot, as the Spaniards in Gibraltar
thought the Fleet had been engaged, yet would they not weigh Anchor and come
forth; so alterable were they in their first, so firm in their second
resolution. Here Dom John had news that the Moors had laid close siege to
Alcacere Ceguer, He sends his Son to relieve Alcacere Ceguer.
a place our men kept in Africa at an unnecessary charge and danger; the
Governor was a Gentleman of the Family de Freitas, he immediately sent his Son
Dom Alvaro with part of the Fleet, and Orders to put relief into the Town, and
to continue in the Port till the Enemy sailed out first, which he did,
providing the place with Victuals and Ammunition; and the Moors Army consisting
of Hotheaded men, the heat of their first Onset being cooled, He returns to
Lisbone, and retires to Sintra.
they raised the siege. Dom Alvaro returned to the rest of the Fleet, which,
(having secured Ceita, and freed it from fear of the Turks) returned to
Lisbone, where the Fame of both his adventures was arrived before, which was
the greater, by lighting on Valor so unquestionable; but Dom John who counted
nothing great, and despised his own Actions, avoided popular applause by
retiring to Sintra, either out of Modesty, or Hight, not Valewing any thing he
did worthy of himself.

31. The King Dom John was about finding out one to Govern the State of India,
Martin Affonso de Sousa having staid out his Time, and instantly desiring a
Successor, the affairs of the East, upon diverse Emergencies declining, and he
unwilling that the glory of his Actions should be foiled by a mis-carriage in
the War, very well knowing that the Peoples ignorance might occasion such a
disgrace as might discredit many Victories; for so considerable an employment,
the King looked upon men differently qualified, upon some, who for the
antiquity of their Blood, without respect to their Deservings, used to Inherit
the great places, a second piece of Tyranny of the Nobilities invention, upon
others, who were mean in their Birth, but famous in Themselves, who lost what
was due to their Merits, because others had none; so as for so eminent an
employment deserts not well Born, or a bare Title would not do.

32. The King on these reasons irresolv'd whom to choose to trust with-the
weight of so great a Government; Is proposed by the Infant for Governor in the
Inlies.
asked the Infant Dom Lewis, whom, (as affairs now stood) He should make
Governor in the Indies: He told him the opinion he had of Dom John de Castro's
Temper, that, though in the business of the Streights, many thought he had
behaved himself too Daringly; yet 'twas certain, there is no Soldier but would
be glad to have been guilty of so Honorable a fault; that, though those who
envied him, accused him of being High and Cynical, because he begged no
Rewards, or Courted the Ministers of State, these faults were of so good a
kind, that Dom John's Vices might be more Valew'd than others Virtues; See John
de Barro's Hist. of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 1. Fol. 1.
that he knew none but Dom John de Castro, who could keep up the first
Discipline of the Indies, who served so unconcerned for his own interest, as if
he despised all earthly Rewards, and his Majesty were not a King of Men, but a
God of Vassals; that he did very much love Dom John de Castro for his
Qualities, but so impartially, that he should Value his Deserts (though
separated from his Person) in any other.

33. The King, (with whom the Infant's opinion had no little credit, seeing him
prize Dom John with a Zeal for his Prince, and Knowledge of his Friend) liked
the Hint the Infant gave him, The King chooses him, and speaks to him.
(whose Authority too had an influence over the minds of others) and sending
for Dom John de Castro to Evora, where the Court was, in the public Hall, told
him, I have of late been Sollicitous to provide one whom I might send Governor
to the Indies, and was of opinion I might find him in the Family of the
Castros, from whose Stock the Kings my Predecessors have always taken Generals
for their Armies, and Regents for their Provinces; I too flatter my self that
the Fruit of so generous a Root cannot degenerate; and that the rather, by
guessing what you will do by your former Actions, which have given you so just
a repute in the Kingdoms opinion, and my esteem, and for which I confidently
put into your hands the Government of the Indies, expecting that you will so
carry your self there, as I may give what you do, for a pattern to those who
succeed you. Dom John kissed the King's hand, better pleased with the Honor,
than the Employment, in so great a charge only Valewing the not seeking it:
There were diverse Opinions in the Court about this Election, some found fault
with it out of Envy, others out of Custom, and where they could not tax any
Defect in parts, they charged the excess; yet was it so liked of the most, and
best, that the King was glad he had pitched upon one, who so much pleased every
one.

34. The King gave him Orders presently to provide the Fleet, not letting any
Body else have to do with it, as is falsely writ by one Author, who tells us,
that Dom John went Discontented to the Indies, because he was not Complied with
in some particulars; a thing so thwarting our certain information, and the
little ambition of this Gentleman, who was more busy in what to deny, than
what to ask, as if the King had met with one he was not to entreat but obey.

35. He resolved to carry with him his Sons, He finds fault with his Sons rich
Clothes.
Dom Fernando, and Dom Alvaro, who being the Eldest, had bespoke some rich
Clothes, allowed of by his Years and Quality; Dom John passing by chance
through the Iubiteria, A street in Lisbone where the Whole-salemen sell Clothes.
saw a pair of Embroidered Breeches hang out, and stopping his Horse asked
whose they were? the man answering, that Dom Alvaro the Governors Son of India
bespoke 'em, Dohn John asked for a pair of Cisers, and cut 'em in pieces,
leaving this word with the Master of the Shop: Bid the Boy buy Arms. We read
not that the Discipline of the old Romans was more exemplary or severe.

36. Dom John quickly made ready the Fleet, The Ships and their Commanders.
without the oppression and complaints of the Poor, the Extorsion which great
Officers carry out by their Princes favor, being then not used, or not known;
the main of the Fleet was six great Ships, on which went two thousand paid men.
The Admiral called the Saint Thomas, on which the Governor went, who gave her
that name which he afterward called upon in the Field, justly imploring the
protection of the Apostle of the Indies in all his undertakings; the other
Captains of the Convoy, were Dom Ieronimo de Menezes, Son and Heir of Dom
Henrique, Brother to the Marquess of Villa Real; Iorge Cabral, Dom Manoel da
Silveyra, Simaon de Andrade, and Diego Rebello.

37. What time they set Sail.
All the Fleet set Sail the seventeenth of March 1545. and in a few days they
had been at Sea, 'twas told the Governor, that in his Ship there were about
two hundred who had their allowance of Diet, and nothing to do there; some were
not received because useless, others were offenders who got on Board by
stealth: The Officers were importunate with the Governor to put them on Board
the Hospital Ship, so to rid his own, and keep their Provisions for the
Casualties of so long a Voyage; but the Governor (more Compassionate than
Cautious, making his and the poor men's case the same) followed on his course;
in a little time Provision began to be scarce, on which the Mariners and
Soldiers were forced to complain of the Governor, The Governors compassion.
who with so Venturous compassion would to save a few, hazard all; most were of
opinion to Land those men on the Cape de Verde Islands, where the Of^enders
would be out of the reach of Justice, and the Necessitous kept from Starving;
but the Governor upon Reflection, that the Air and Soil of the Islands at that
time of the Year, When the Winds do not blow.
were in every ones opinion unhealthfull, resolved to protect the poor men in
his own Ship, hoping to preserve both himself and them, saying in their behalf,
It would be unhumanly done to deny them the Sea who fled from the Land; They
had but little Winds, till they met with the Trade winds on the Coast of Guine,
where the Governors Ship striking upon the ground, The danger his Ship was in.
was like to overset, those Seas, in the judgment of Mariners being clear, and
where the Card marked no Sands. Every ones Confusion was like his who drinks in
Death unexpectedly* the season and fear too heightened the danger, when the Ship
being all on one side, Not feeling the Rudder.
and not feeling the Rudder, began to be on float again; it might be chance,
but seemed a miracle. The Governor commanded 'em to shoot off three Pieces,
that the Ships which were on stern him might avoid the Sands, which, not
understanding the Warning came upon 'em; but with better Luck, than Skill,
though of the same Burden with the Admiral, escaped the Sands, finding in the
same place other Fortune, the cause of which pusled the Seamen.

38. The Governor, He arrives at Mocambique.
with the whole Fleet got together, pursuing his Voyage arrived at Mocambique,
where the Landing of, and the procuring conveniences for, the sick men was
what he chiefly minded, being in that assisted by his two Sons, Dom Alvaro, and
Dom Fernando, who then were Heirs apparent of his Charitableness, afterward of
his Valor; the time he staid at Mocambique, he observed, the Fortress the
State has there to be ill contrived in being too far from the shore, by which,
with difficulty it provided and relieved our Fleets, and being in a bottom was
commanded by many Hills, which also hindering the good Air, made it unwholesome;
He put this to those who either by Study, or Experience, had any Skill in this
Science, Changes the Fo^^^^ seating it better.
and all agreed that the faults in the Fortification were judiciously observed;
what was Debated was immediately put in hand, and with the choice of a
convenient Situation he ordered Materials and Workmen for a new defense; and
this going on in the Governors sight, the Gentry as well as others carried
Stones, some for Flattery, others to promote the Building.

39. The Fortress made tenable, and the Sick recovered by the fresh Air and
fresh Provisions on shore, He departs for Goa.
the Governor set Sail again, and having the Winds always favorable, cast
Anchor on the 10th. of September at the Bar of Goa; where, Martin Affonso de
Sousa, (by a Ship which went before) having had notice his Successor was near,
provided to receive him with such Jollity as might show the content he had, in
welcoming his Guest, and leaving his Government; he went presently in a Rich
Brigantine to meet him at Sea, whence he carried him to Antoni Correa's House
of Pleasure, whilst the Solemnity of his reception was preparing; there he
Feasted the Governor, Gentlemen, and Captains of the Fleet, with so much
Exquisiteness in the manner, and abundance in the meat, that it seemed he was
doing the last honor to his expiring charge. That night there were Balls and
Dancing, Rejoycings which the simplicity of old Portugal carried to the East.
Here the Governor staid two days, attended by all the Gentlemen of the place,
who forsook Martin Affonso de Sousa, even those who were his Favorites, and he
had raised from nothing, disciplined in the Oriental ingratitude of the
Indians, who cast stones at the setting Sun, and adore him rising.

40. When the Entry was to be, the two Governors were in a Faluque with gilded
Oars, and an awning of divers-colour'd Silks; the Castles and Ships entertained
'em with the horror of reiterated shootings, the Vivas and expectation of the
common people did without any cunning flatter the new Government; His arrival,
and reception.
they came to Land at a great place where the Common Counsel in a body expected
them, and when they were placed with all the Ceremony vanity for that purpose
has invented, one of the Magistrates made an Elaborate speech, in which the
State expected a great deal of happiness in the new Minister; after the
Governor had heard the public Flatteries, he listened to the private ones of a
great many, who with them made way for their particular Interest.

41. When the Solemnity was ended, What condition he found his Government in
and Don John possessed of the Government of India, Martin Affonso went to
Cochim, to provide for his return into the Kingdom; the Governor immediately
was engaged in the care of quieting the People, who were all in an Uproar for
the alteration of the Money, which the King's Officers had raised, to the
prejudice of the Subjects, and the scandal of the Neighboring Pagans; I Will
tell the occasion begun it.

42. There is current in India a low sort of Money, by the Alteration of the
Bazaruccos.
which they call Bazaruccos, which amongst Christians, Moors, and Pagans, had
always the same Value; this being of Copper, (which then came from Portugal
and bore no price) the Officers thought fit for the King's profit to raise the
price, the alteration of the Money was solemnly Proclaimed, and it began to
pass at the new Rate; but, as this Legal worth was not intrinsical, (the Value
coming from the Law, not from the weight) the Pagans (not subject to strangers
Laws) brought not in the usual Provision, and the people seemed to suffer by
their own orders; the Chief Officers backed it as the King's cause, standing
for the King's profit, in the Peoples destruction; the whole City cried out,
that the Kings of Portugal never encreast their Treasuries by their miseries,
nor used to Drink in Gold plate their Subjects tears; that the Pagans and Moors
made their Braggs that not being able by the Sword to ruin the Portuguese, by
their own Laws they Destroyed 'em, arming against 'em the ambition of their
Governors. The hunger and liberty of the Petitioners grew high, justified by a
good cause, and the Conformity of the common oppression; He hears the City and
People.
with these grievances the Magistrates of the City, with the poor, Women, and
Children, (some full of Complaints, the other of Arguments) went to the
Governor, who Commanding the people to be quiet, heard, as a Judge the
Magistracy, as a Father the rest, and hunger admitting of no long Cures,
ordered the next day for determining the business; thus he sent them away
satisfied, some believing that (as was the custom of India) it being his
predecessors Act, it would by him be counted unjust. The same evening he sent
for the King's Officers, His resolution about it.
and after hearing what they had to say for themselves, referred the matter to
the ablest Lawyers, and those best skilled in the policy of that State, who
unanimously agreed the decree to be Cruel, and very contrary to the Pious
intentions of our Princes; this opinion too was countenanced by Custom, and the
Peoples privileges, besides other Legalties, which (not to make our History
tedious) we lay aside. This Law being revoked by the Governor, Provisions
began to come in from the Inland-Country, and the people made him a present of
those Lives he had by the indulgent remitting the Tax redeemed.

43. Hidalcaon's first Embassy.
This business made an end of with so much repute to the King's Clemency,
Ambassadors came to him from Hidalcaon, who (after the Customary salutes and
giving him joy of his Office) desired the Delivery of a Prisoner on the terms
agreed on with his Predecessor, and this business coming to that height as to
engage the State in an open War, we will not leave its beginning unrelated.

44. Bazarb Prince of Balagate Dying, Meale's is the better cause.
when Nuno de Cunha was Governor, Meal, though in his Cradle, was Heir
apparent to the Crown, then was Hidalcaon the second Person in the Kingdom in
Power, and the first in Courage, having in the late War with the Neighbor
Princes given a large testimony of his Actions; Hidalcaon (as amongst this so
Barbarous a people Men reign oftener by making use of their Opportunities, than
by observing what is Right) seeing his own strength, and the Heirs incapacity,
pave his ambitions way to the Crown, began to try the hearts of the great Ones,
before whom with a great deal of Artifice he deplored the miseries of the
Kingdom, in so Infant a successor, under whom they must obey or endure, as so
many Kings all those he fancied; that the Princes with whom they had now Wars
would not let slip this occasion of ruining 'em, when they saw him who should
defend 'em in the Cradle; that where, there were so many, they ought to find
out one to save their Country; that he would be the first should obey him,
because the Government of the Kingdom could not wait those slow motions, by
which Nature gives a little one first Strength, then Understanding; that if
with unprofitable obedience they should adore Meal in his Nurses arms, he did
not doubt but by keeping their King, they would lose their Kingdom. He was
affable to the People, liberal to the Soldiers, as if he desired to Reign not
for himself, but for them: Ambitiously making use of, the whole Chain of
Virtues, not as necessary for Living, but Reigning. The great Ones at last
offered him the Crown, believing, he would always remember he was his Subjects
Creature, and ^etain constantly in his Memory so signal a grace.

45. Hidalcaon was Liberal and Stout, and without doubt would have been a great
Prince, had he kept the Kingdom by the same Virtues he put on to atchieve it;
but seeing himself obeyed, those affected Artifices not having any natural
motion, were at an end, and broke out into ambition and pride, the Vices of his
Person; He did not then speak of killing Meal, either out of a counterfeit
Clemency, or an unheard of Cruelty, intending perhaps that the poor Prince
should by a servile obedience confirm the Scepter he had usurped from him. The
Nobility of the Kingdom (repenting when 'twas too late, and seeing they now
could not without danger, be either Traitors or Loyal) consulted how Meal
might secure himself from the Tyranny of Hidalcaon, as if the unfortunate
Prince had had more right to his Life then his Kingdom; some years past in
these contrivances, in which Meal arrived at Age to apprehend his danger, and
considering that his presence reproached the Tyrants guilty Conscience, (who
plotted with his blood to quiet the memory of his usurping the Crown,) by the
Counsel of those who took the Kingdom from him, He went to Cambaya, where he
was well received, both King and People showing, how much they resented the
miseries of the Blood Royal; but, as such favors have more ambition in them,
then charity, they lasted not long, for, only the first days they treated him
as a King, the rest as one Persequuted, but Meal still continued in Cambaya,
counting more tolerable, the sleights of a Stranger, then the injuries of a
Tyrant.

46. In the mean time, Hidalcaon's great design was, to destroy those who gave
him the Crown, whom, for all they had a just title to his favor by being
accomplices in his Treason, he hated, because they put him in mind, either of his
Obligation, or faults, and being now jealous of his own Actions, he found that
Cruelty would root him faster then Clemency, so that his own Vice, and
necessity together made him doubly so; upon pretense of correcting faults,
either imputed, or forgot, (covering his Tyranny with a veil of Justice) he
inchroach'd upon the Estates of the great Ones, to Level 'em with the common
people, Confident, by pulling down the Nobility, to get into the poorer sort,
who (out of a natural dislike of their own Fortune) do always delight in the
fall of those above them; and they (seeing their patience worked not their
quiet) consulted how they might restore Meal, some were for Revenge, others
for Calling him in; they had their private meetings, where they took diverse
Resolutions, which fear, or the difficulty of the business, (harder to execute
then design) every day altered; their forced obedience being at last wracked to
the utmost stretch by new oppressions, they endeavored by Hidalcaon's Death to
redress their Error, and hide the shame of their former Treason; the Desperate,
not the Bold were of this opinion, because now Hidalcaon lived with the
strength of a King, and the circumspection of a Tyrant; He was assisted by the
people, who hating the King, loved the Cruelties he used against the Gentry,
who, for the disproportion of theirs, and the others Fortunes are always
obnoxious. The Plotters fearful of themselves, and that their hatred would
cool by delay, their base servitude too, turn Customary, seeing their own Force
not equal for the enterprise, laid out for assistance from abroad; they
bethought themselves of imparting the business to Martin Affonso de Sousa,
(then Governor of the State of India) desiring him to send for Meal from
Cambaya, and let him be at Goa; that though he refused the glory of restoring
him, he thereby would keep Hidalcaon in awe, and inclinable to serve the States
occasions.

47. Martin Affonso being persuaded, that 'twas more convenient to increase
then extinguish this Flame which begun to burst out, 'twixt Hidalcaon and his
Subjects, and that the weakening of a Warlike and Powerful neighbor would turn
to the States advantage; (Cloaking these conveniences with more plausible
pretenses, as the sheltering under our Arms a dispossessed and persecuted Prince,
an Action glorious abroad and profitable at home) resolved to find out Meal at
Cambaya, See John de Barro's Hist. of India, Dec. 5. Lib. 10. Cap. 11.
giving him notice of his Subjects inclinations for his Restoration, who would
be more eager when they saw the State protected both his Cause and Person. The
Moor upon the receipt of so unlooked for a message, (counting the pity, of men
not only different but contrary in Religion, extraordinary) betook himself to
the faith and favor of the State, and with his poor Family embarking himself,
arrived at Goa, where he was by the Governor received, with honors more
befitting his Blood then Fortune, by some construed to be done him, more for
effronting the Neighbor then respecting the Guest. Meale's arrival (who begun
now to Reign in the hearts of a great many) being voic'd all along that Coast,
his party began to be stronger among the Plotters, who now saw, his cause
sheltered under the protection of our Arms, and his name sounding better in the
peoples Ears.

48. Hidalcaon upon consideration, Hidalcaon's Embassage.
that the State (whose victorious Arms were the more dreadful by their
nearness) did not send for Meal only to secure his Person, but defend his
Cause, dispatched Ambassadors to Martin Affonso de Sousa, giving him notice
that he understood Meal was in his power, whom, he thought Fortune preserved,
to disturb the peace of the East; that he knew what Title some Seditious
spirits gave him, who being weary of Obeying, strove to set up new Lords whom
they might Command; that Hidalcaon would not tell what moved him to seize on
the Crown, because if Princes were bound to give account of their Pretensions,
there were no difference 'twixt King and People; that the right of Princes was
to be judged of God, not of Men; that 'twas the Worlds opinion now that there
was no difference in Princes titles, but only in their Persons; that he denied
not, that Contemptible and Cowardly Meal was of the Royal blood, but, that,
the fault Nature committed, Fortune would correct by giving the Kingdom to him
who was Daring and Stout; that nature to Lions only gave a Crown by their
Birth, Men she let winn it and wear it; that many things appear^d injust to the
World, because besides Custom; that for a man who was worthy of it, to possess
himself of a Kingdom, would at first be looked upon as a Scandal, afterward
as a Law; that Meal was the basest Fellow ever Born in his Kingdom, and he
the most Fortunate, and naturally all men hated natures Monsters, and loved
Fortunes prodigies: that we should examine our selves, how we came to Lord it
in Asia? what Kin we were to Sabayo, that he should leave us Goa? how near we
were Sultan Badour to Inherit Dio from him? whether Achem left us Malaxa by his
Will? and all the places which pay us Tribute all over the East? that he
desired us not to quarrel at that Title in him, that made us absolute Lords of
the World; that, we should let God alone with the Government of the World, and
being Born farthest West, not busy our selves to compose the Disorders of
Asia; that he would have us know, he had in his Kingdom Mines of different
Metals, that some furnished him with Gold for his Friends, others with Iron for
his Enemies; that in the last place, he desired the Governor to deliver him up
Meal, that, by the mercy he should use him withal, the World might see how
worthy he was to Reign, who so treated his greatest Enemy; that, his
Ambassadors had order to settle all that concerned the State.

49. Martin Affonso having received the Letters, and given Audience to
Hidalcaon's Ambassadors, understood by 'em, that they proffered for Meals
person an hundred and fifty thousand Pardaos, and the main Land of Bordez and
Salsete, very considerable to the State for its Revenue and Nearness to Goa.
Martin Affonso looked upon the business, as very weighty, and either Face
promising great advantages; the restoring of a Prince, and pulling down a
Tyrant, was a design worthy the Arms of Christians, by which the State would
purchase no ordinary reputation, letting the World see, that our Banners were
not displaid in Asia, either to usurp Kingdoms, or get Riches, since their
employment was that the Pagans and Moors of the East, should keep the true
Faith toward God, and Justice amongst themselves: On the other side 'twas
said, that if Meal after a long War should come to Reign, he could not give
the State more, then now without it Hidalcaon offered, and that the Moors by
their hatred and Religion being Enemies, the World would laugh to see us with
our own Blood, destroy one Infidel and set up an other; when too our happiness
depended on both their ruins, besides that our Arms came not to India to
defend the Enemies of the Faith, but to destroy 'em; that if Meal found no
Protection from the King of Cambaya, his near Kinsman, why should he look for it
from the Portuguese to whom he was an Enemy? that when he found himself
restored, and strong, the first Lance that was hurled against the State would
be his, because the Neighborhood of so brave men who made him King would be
suspicious to him, and the Memory of so great a good turn was enough to make
him Hate us.

50. Martin Affonso, on grounds not thoroughly weighed, resolved at last to
deliver up Meal, dispach'd the Ambassadors; and with them Galvaon Viegas an
Honorable Gentleman, with full Power, to settle the Contract, in the manner it
has been related, sending with the consent of the Ambassadors to take
immediate possession of the main Land, in virtue of Hidalcaon's profer.

51. In this condition did Dom John de Castro find the affairs of Meal, and
was sued to by a new Embassy from Hidalcaon, in confidence of the Capitulation
made with his Predecessor; The Governors answer.
but Dom John with different maturity answered Hidalcaon, that the Portuguese
were faithful to their Enemies, much more to their Guest; that the
propositions of his Predecessor, were more for a right understanding of the
cause, See John de Barro's History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 1. Cap. 2.
then to determine it; that the main Land belonged to the State by more ancient
Grants, and that it was just out of its Revenue to maintain Meal, in gratitude
to the Kings his Predecessors, who annexed it to the State, that he should
suffer him quietly to enjoy this little memory of his Right; that the States
securing his Person, was not yet Protection but Charity; that he should not
with overhasty Arms disturb the Peace, for then he would make sure what he
feared, provoking the State to take in hand the revenging of both; and because
his Ambassadors had hinted that, the denying Meal would necessarily make a
Breach, He put 'em in mind that most of the Fortresses we had made in India,
were founded on the ashes of destroyed Kingdoms; that the Portuguese were like
the Sea, which raises it self and grows greater in Storms; that for his part
as he sought not a War, so he could not deny one.

52. With this answer the Governor dismissed the Ambassadors, who, by his
firmness in delivering it, understood that neither fear or advantage would bend
him to give up Meal; Immediately he put himself in readiness to make or expect
a War, which coming from a neighbor Prince we might sooner feel the Blow,
then see the Sword. He gave orders for the raising of Horse, which were to be
about two hundred, and to serve under the same Colors, a more stout, then
orderly Militia: He entrusted the Guard of the City with the Train-bands, and
had Soldiers in pay ready for any sudden invasion of the Enemies. He set upon
the making ready the Fleet out of hand, which by the Voyages and Wars of his
Predecessor, and the poverty of the State, he found all in pieces, and the
strength of the Navy, being what is most considerable, here he wholly laid
himself out; He new fitted the Vessels which lay in the River, made three
Galleys, and six Round-bottom'd Ships with wonderful speed, not failing the
Officers in their pay, or his thanks; by which means the work went on,
diligence overcoming time; He named Captains of those Galleys and Ships, who
intended the work as their own business, an expedient, which did a great deal
toward the quickness of the dispatch, the goodness and plenty of Ammunion and
Provision, with which (in an opportune and short time) the Fleet was ready,
with this he so bridled the Neighbor Princes, as he hindered 'em from joining
with Hidalcaon, who had already solicited them to shake off the yoke, as an
advantage to the common Liberty.

53. Hidalcaon, Hidalcaon's first motion.
having notice of the Governors resolution, appealed to the Justice of his
Sword, endeavoring to carry the War from home, before Meale's presence raised
the people, who by their commands, and advantages in the War, would make the
cause their own: He presently on severe penalties forbid the Victuallers
carrying the ordinary Provision to Goa, which, having it all from the Inland,
was not furnished to endure so sudden a War; after this he sent Acedecaon a
stout Turk with ten thousand men, to take in, that part of the main Land, which
Lived under our Obedience.

54. But Dom John de Castro knowing, that first successes give reputation to a
War, The Governor goes in Person.
went out with two thousand Foot, and the Horse of the place to resist the
Enemy, and being persuaded by a great many Gentlemen, that he should not engage
his person in so unequal a party; that it was not for the honor of a Governor
of India to put on his Sword against one of Hidalcaon's Captains, nor to let
the World know he looked so much upon this War, especially having Gentlemen
who deserved the honor and danger of the Action; it was not possible to
dissuade him from his first resolution, saying with more confidence then his
Forces would bear, that he went out to Chastise, not to Overcome, and marching
two Leagues from Goa he came in sight of the Enemy, who, lodged at the foot of
a Hill with a River in their front, (which was to them instead of a Ditch and
Trench) with the advantages of their numbers, and Encamping, expected ours, who
though wearied with their March, re-inforcing themselves by the presence of the
Governor, or sight of the Enemy, begun to pass the River with more Resolution,
then Discipline, the Commanders could not stay, or order them, the most daring
cast themselves into the River, and the more cautious were by this put upon a
necessity; as to most of 'em to follow their Comrades example, past for
Discipline.

55. The Governor with admirable prudence commanded those who staid behind to
go over the River, knowing, that what was in the beginning a fault, was now the
Cure; and because that day he had not room enough to Order as a Commander, He
fights and routs the Enemy.
he Fought as a private Soldier. Our men run upon the Moors so furiously, that
discouraged, with the first Onset, they gave ground, and their Ranks, being
confused and broken by themselves, were disordered and overcome; Our men (which
seldom happens) seeing an Army routed without loss. The Moors loss was great
in their Flight, none at all in their Resistance; Ours were two Leagues
executing the Liberty, and cruelty of Victory, gathering up the Arms those poor
men flung away, as a burden, not a defense. The pursuit lasted as long as the
Day, the horror of the Night freeing the Enemies from that of the Victory; Our
Soldiers retreated, full of Blood, Honor, and Booty; the Governor kept the
Field till the next day, without censuring the Soldiers for that Disorder
which gave them the Victory, following the course of human judgments, which
never speak well of Losses, or blame Victories.

56. The Governor, He returns to Goa.
at his Entry into Goa, was received with an extraordinary applause, from that
people, so used to see, and slight Victories; and because, in this and many
other Fights which Dom John wonn, he called upon the name of St. Thomas, the
Apostle of the Indies, we believe they were got by the favor of so great a
Padrone, who, to recompense the piety, and honor the memory of Dom John de
Castro, was pleased, in the days of his Government, to discover that miraculous
Cross, found at Meliapor on the Coast of Choromandell; the wonderful Cross and
the Body of the Saint being as it were covered with the same Earth, His
veneration to the Cross.
and as Dom John de Castro worshipped this sign of our Redemption, with a due,
but a strange Reverence, (lighting always from his Palanquim or Horse when he
met the Cross, A kind of Sedan in the Indies, carried on men's Shoulders.
and putting himself on his Knees) this discovery will not seem to have been by
chance, since the mercies of Heaven come not by accident. We will give you the
relation of the Mystery, because it carries with it a successive miracle in
testimony of the faith of the East, cultivated in those Countries with the
Blood and Doctrine of our Portuguese.

57. After the wonderful finding the Body of this holy Apostle in the City,
The finding St. Thomas's Cross.
or rather ruins of Meliapor, (then called Calamina) the Kings, Dom Manoel, and
Dom John, being with a pious Zeal inflamed to revive those dead Ashes, which
had been there from the first planting Christianity by the Apostle, (though now
corrupted by the Doctrine of the Armenian and Chaldean Priests, who separated
from the Roman Catholic Church, did make those well-meaning Christians swallow
dangerous Opinions, which by the pains of our Missionaries have in part been
reformed) set upon Building a Church in the same place where the Venerable Body
of the Apostle was found, and opening the Foundations for the Fabric, found a
Cross (wrought in a Marble Pedestall) of four Spans long and three broad,
besprinkled with dropps of Blood, which might be thought to be newly done, (the
Cross was like that of the Knights of Aviz;) on the bottom of the Pedestall
were lesser Crosses of the same fashion with the biggest, sprinkled with the
same spots of Blood; on the top of the great Cross was a hovering Pidgeon,
there was Old writing about it, which, (being in an unknown Tongue, and not in
one continued sense) the Natives understood not; the oldest and most knowing
Antiquaries in different Languages were consulted with, but none could make out
the Character or meaning of the Writing, till a while after was brought a
Bramene from Narzinga, who expounded it in current Sense, and said thus;

Thirty years after the Law of the Christians came into the World, on the 21th.
of December, the Apostle Saint Thomas Died in Meliapor, where was the knowledge
of God, change of Laws, and the destruction of the Devil; This God taught
twelve Apostles, one of whom, with a staff in his hand, came to Meliapor where
he Built a Temple, and the Kings of Malabar, Choromandell, and Pandi, with
others of different Nations and Sects freely submitted themselves to Saint
Thomas's Law; time was when the Saint was put to Death by a Bramene, and with
his Blood made this Cross.

This Exposition, being an hired Interpreters, in a matter of so great moment,
our Nation did not too confidenly believe, but sent for an other Pagan Learned
in all the Oriental Languages, who, knowing nothing of the other Exposition,
decypher'd the Letters in the same manner, without any difference, the Copy of
the Print (as you see it here) was brought to the King Dom Sebastian in the
Year 1562.

(...)


Our Nation (with the greater expense in reverence to that place, which had
been the Depository of so Sacred a pledge) went on in Building the Church, the
Piety and Conflux of the people of Malabar was great too, at the sight of so
notable a Testimony of their Faith. The Church was in a short time perfected,
the Cross engraved on Marble (as we have said) served in place of Altar-piece.
Divine Service began to be said there, with the Decency so remote a place would
permit; and on the 18. of December, (the day of our A peculiar Feast in Spain
and Portugal, when the B. Virgin looked to b^ brought to Bed.
Ladies expectation) as Mass was saying in a full Congregation, when the Priest
began the Gospel, the Holy Cross too began to be covered with a great Sweat, A
famous Miracle of the same Cross.
letting fall no little drops on the Altar. That the signs of the Miracle might
be more Visible, the Priest stopped in the Sacrifice, wiped off the Humidity the
Cross breathed with the Corporalls, which (before a great many there present
immediately seemed dip't in Blood); the Holy Cross began presently to change
its Alablaster to a paler Color, which turned to an obscure black, that too
changed to an unusual bright Azure, which lasted as long as Mass, when that was
done it came to the natural Color of which 'twas found.

58. The same Miracle has successively for many years been seen on the same
day, and we know by good Authors and faithful Relations that it yet happens
sometimes, by which means, those Christians with a stronger Faith receive our
Doctrine. This Miracle, after much arguing on both sides, was cleared before
the Bishop of Cochim in open Court, the proceedings came to this Kingdom, in
the time of the King Dom Henry, the Cardinal, who, by the consent of Pope
Gregory 13th. confirmed the Miracle, which is now divulged in our own
Chronicles and foreign Authors. Dom John de Castro received How the Governor
was affected with the News.
the news of this Miracle with no ordinary show of Piety, protecting Saint
Thomas's Christians, oppressed with the slavery of Pagan Princes, who had taken
from 'em certain Grants and Privileges, which by the intercession of the Holy
Apostle had by the Kings their Predecessors been indulged 'em, but, by the
hatred of the Infidels, and corruption of the times were only remembered.

59. Hidalcaon gave not over infesting us on the main Land with his usual
incursions, which kept us on continual Duty, and hindered the Husbandmen from
Tilling, upon which the Governor resolved to strike where the Blow might be
most felt; He sends his Son Dom Alvaro against Hidalcaon.
He presently Commanded his Son Dom Alvaro to go out with the Fleet, he had
provided, with Orders, to do all the hurt he could in Hidalcaon's Ports, giving
the Soldiers all free Pillage, that the hopes of Plunder might make 'em not
mention some Arrerages the State owed 'em; and put by others from playing the
Merchants, a Corruption which stole upon a great many by the foul example of
their Superiors.

60. Dom Alvaro put to Sea with 900. Portuguese and 400. He goes out with six
Ships.
Indians on six Ships and some long Boats with Oars, and after a few days
Sailing spied four of Hidalcaon's Ships going with Stuffs and other Commodities
to Cambaya. Dom Alvaro presently commanded his Captains to come on Head him,
and the Boats to keep close to the shore, for fear the Enemy should out of
Desperatness run a ground; the Ships were Merchant men, and but few Soldiers
in 'em, who, seeing they could neither fly, His prize.
nor defend themselves, sent aboard the Admiral two Moor Merchants, who, with
reasons and tears, showed themselves not concerned in the difference 'twixt
Hidalcaon and the State, and profer'd a reasonable present toward the expense
of the Fleet; but neither the covetousness of the Soldiers, or the policy of
War would let them be heard, but the Ships were Boarded and sent to Goa, that
the Prize might be divided according to the Governors Proclamation. Upon the
arrival of those Ships at Goa, the people was stangely transported, seeing
Victories so got one upon the neck of an other; in the first they praised the
Courage of the Father, in the second the Fortune of the Son.

61. Dom Alvaro, Dom Alvaro proposes the Entry into Cambre.
seeing opportunity and weather on his side, and that the Soldiers were
contented because they had in hand the fruit of their late Enterprise,
commanded his Pilot to steer to the Port of Cambre, where, since the breaking
out of the War, Hidalcaon kept double Garrison; there were two Forts with
Ordinance planted at the entrance of the Bar, and the Chanel was so narrow
that without eminent danger our Ships could neither pass through, or ride
there. The General Dom Alvaro, put to the Captains of the Fleet the apparent
difficulties, which every one concluded of moment enough to be considered of,
alleging that voluntary undertakings ought not to be set upon with so certain
danger; that they should more to purpose carry on the War against Hidalcaon,
by Lording it in his Seas, and in his sight, taking away his commerce; that
there was more hazard then profit in what could be done by Land; that (as they
saw) the Chanel was so begirt with those Forts, our Ships must pass by the
mouth of the Canon; that the first Ship they should shatter, would hinder the
rest from passing. But Dom Alvaro urging, He resolves to invest.
that he was resolved to execute his Orders, which were, to get on shore and
burn the Enemies Ports; the Council replied by proposing, that he as General
should stay to Command at Sea, and that most of the Commanders of the Ships
would strive to pass the Bar, because if any thing should happen amiss to the
Admiral of that Fleet, Son and Heir to the Governor of India, what greater
Damage could the State receive, then the necessity of engaging in so just a
Vengeance? On which Dom Alvaro in a great deal of passion brake off the
consult, saying, that he cared for no Victories where his danger was not as
great as the least common Soldiers; that, out of obedience he was their
General, and in danger their Companion; that, he had instructions from the
Governor, to venture his own Person on every occasion, his Soldiers but upon
necessity; that he looked upon the Dangers they represented to be less then
those he came in chase of, because Honor was not to be purchased without
hazarding; that he came from Portugal to find out this Day, which he hoped
would be glorious for them all, and that in this Resolution he ask't not their
advice, only that they would consult about the manner of the falling on. The
Generals Gallantry, and Youth, did then excuse his Rashness, afterward the
Success; 'twas agreed that the men should go into the long Boats, and that at
the beginning of the Dawning when Daylight was not well broke, and so the
Enemy not sure of his aim, they should get on shore; He gets on shore.
they all that Night provided themselves, seeing in the Generals looks hopes of
Victory. The General (having left sufficient Guard on the Ships) got on shore,
with 800. Choice men, and with Fortune so declaring for him, that of a great
many Shot that lighted on the Boats, not one either killed or wounded a
Soldier, this accident being a Disposition to, or beginning of the Victory.

62. The City (which ran along a great Plain) contained five thousand Families,
the Houses by themselves, and not leaning on one an other, without any other
policy, The largeness and strength of the place.
union, or share of ground, then what every one took for his pleasure or
ability; and yet the Turrets and Balconies of every House, did altogether
present a rude Stateliness, as if Built with more Pride then Art; it had on the
North-side a little Mountain, whence ran some small Rivulets, with no name,
which, contributed both to the pleasantness and fertility of the Soil. The City
was anciently Inhabited by the Bramenes, now by Merchant Moors, a place amongst
the Eastern people always famous, then for Superstition, now for Wealth; it was
not defended by either Walls or Works, the Inhabitants being secure by the
Power of their Lords, or the Peace they preserved with the Neighboring
Princes; but at present, the War we had with Hidalcaon beginning Victoriously,
the Moors, saw the danger they were in, by example, and had drawn two thousand
paid Soldiers to Guard the City, who with the standing Militia, were
(according to their computation) sufficient for their Defense.

63. These came, with their Colors flying, and with so much resolution to
hinder our men from Landing, as for a good while they retarded us, obliging us
to Fight at a stand, The Enemies resistance.
and so close as our Soldiers could not make use of their Muskets, whose
first charge only, they received with notorious resolution. Here Dom Alvaro
notably showed his Valor and Conduct, encouraging his men to Fight, sometimes
by Speeches, sometimes by the Example of his own Actions. Ours at last saw
themselves so straightened as they fought more for Life then Victory. The
success, for an hour hung doubtful, till a great many of the Inhabitants,
wounded with their own fear, and our Swords, quitted the Field, showing in the
first encounter, Valor, above Men, in the second, below Women, a thing very
ordinary in raw Soldiers, where the greatest fear follows the greatest daring;
the rest by this example were getting off, in fear and disorder; here the Moors
received great loss, falling with little or no Resistance, those who dropped too
were so many as they hindered the rest from Flying.

64. Ours entered the City mingled with the Moors, Ours enter,
where the poor men stopped, overcome with the fondness and tears of Wives, and
Children, who then with useless compassion bore 'em company, rather Witnesses,
then Defenders of their Lives; some there were, who embracing their Husbands
let themselves be run through with our Lances, inventing fresh sadness by a new
remedy; Of our Soldiers, some Robbed 'em, some Defended 'em, some following
the disposition of the Season, others of their Nature; Out of desperate Love
some of those Women ran amongst our armed Squadrons to seek their Dead, seeming
not to value their Lives; full of tenderness for others Wounds, without any for
their own; and gain the City.
at last we gained the City with less loss, then danger, because resolving to
enter under the Enemies Canon, Dom Alvaro was more lead on by Courage, then
Discipline; the greater part of the Moors was Destroyed, some in the Fight,
most in the Flight; the Women showed more Courage, then their Husbands; These
lost their Lives, they could not defend, the others despised theirs they might
have saved; of ours there Died twenty two, the VVounded were more, of whose
number was the General hurt by an Arrow. 'Twas necessary to end one Cruelty to
begin an other, their Anger ceast, and their Covetousness began; Dom Alvaro
gave order to Plunder the City, where the Booty was as great as the Victory,
The Destroying and Plundring of it.
because, either out of Confidence or Carelessness the Moors had saved nothing,
and kept in the City those who were useless for the Defense of it, out of
contempt of our Forces, or not to dishearten their own. In fine, the Prize was
so great, that it could not all be carried aboard, the Soldiers took the best,
leaving the rest as Fuel for that Fire which was to Consume the City, by Dom
Alvaro given up to the merciless Flames; which did not a little strike the
Neighboring Colonies, that place being the Richest and most Tenable of all the
Coast, once, as it were, the Bulwark of the rest, now their Lamentable example.

65. The General with all the Fleet weighed Anchor, and steered for Goa to
unlade the Ships, Dom Alvaro returns to Goa.
(put out of their trim, by too great a Burden;) resolving to leave there the
Sick and VVounded, and return to carry on the War, which the Soldiers,
content with the Liberality, and Fortune of their new General, very much
desired. The news arrived at Goa before the Ships, the Governor very much
valued the Victory, the people the Plunder; not long after came intelligence,
that those who had escaped the Rout had been to acquaint Hidalcaon with the
lamentable Destruction of their City, who, while they vented their first grief
for their Children and Kindred, could not keep in the second calamity of their
Goods and Houses, where the devouring Fire had so mingled the Ashes, they could
not with peculiar tears, weep over their Dead; they told Hidalcaon, that if he
resolved to continue the War with such a people, they would go and Inhabit the
Deserts, where they should be out of sight of those Western Beasts, Born for
the reproach and ruin of Asia, they told and cursed our Victories one after
the other, which looked bigger in their Fears, then our Books.

66. Hidalcaon, considering the fortune of our Arms, the complaints, Hidalcaon
profers Peace.
and calamities of the Inhabitants, and many disaffected to his Service, whom
the War, and those Successes would more embolden, was inclinable to Peace,
thereby to remedy the Dissentions and Seditions at home, which might grow
stronger by the liberty of men in Arms; and communicating to his Council the
present condition of things, all were of opinion, they ought by a feignd peace
to cloak their grievances, expecting till time offered 'em a fairer opportunity
to set upon the State, joining their Forces with other Kings who were offended.
And the Moors fighting more for their convenience then quarrel, Hidalcaon sent
Ambassadors to the Governor, frivolously excusing the War he made, and
minding him of the benefit the State might receive by his Friendship.

67. The Governor, in public and in great State, gave audience to the
Ambassadors, The Governor accepts it.
answering them, that as he sought not for War, so he could not deny it; that
the felicity of the State consisted in having many Enemies, because with Spoils
and Victories it grew always greater; but, that he never denied Peace to any
one, who by his Actions, and faithful Friendship deserved it; that he would
deprive his Soldiers of the conveniences they looked for from that War; but
Hidalcaon must know the first day he was to pass for a King, was that in which
he treated Peace with the Portuguese. Thus did he dispatch the Ambassadors,
awed with so great a Courage; with the same neglect did he always manage the
Wars in the East, in which his Valor was equal to his Fortune.

68. He presently betook himself to the dispatching particular business, He
looks to the affairs of the State,
rewarding the Soldiers who had served him, whom he parted with as well
satisfied with the rewards he gave them, as his acceptance of their Service; He
put Commanders into the void Forts, which were unprovided by the King; making
so just an estimate of Deserts, that he was Debtor neither to convenience, or
the State, a virtue hardly arrived at by Princes, and very rare in their
Ministers.

69. He was not less fired with zeal for the honor of God, then for that of
the State, in the confusion of War, and the noise of Arms, applying himself to
matters of Religion, and matters of Religion.
as if he had been only sent to stickle for them. And the King Dom John,
knowing his Piety, as well as his Valor, commended to him the propagation of
the Faith, and Divine worship. Out of a Letter, which on this Subject the King
writ him, is well gathered, how both King and Minister were inflamed in God's
cause, of which we will here give a Copy, that the World may see our Arms in
the East, brought more Sons to the Church then Vassals to the State.

The King's Letter to Dom John de Castro.
FRiend and Governor. The great Concernment, which lies upon Christian Princes
to look to matters of Faith, and employ their Forces for its Preservation,
makes me advise you how sensible I am, that not only, in many parts of India
under our Subjection, but even in our City of Goa, Idols are Worshipp't, places
in which our Faith might more reasonably be expected to Flourish; and being as
well informed with how much liberty they celebrate Heathenish festivals, we
command you, to discover by diligent Officers all the Idols, and to demolish
and break 'em in pieces where ere they are found; Proclaiming severe
punishments against any one who shall dare, to Work, Cast, make in Sculpture,
Engrave, Paint, or bring to light, any Figure of an Idol, in Metal, Brass,
Wood, Plaster, or any other matter, or bring them from other places; and
against those, who publicly, or privately, Celebrate any of their sports, keep
by them any Heathenish Frankincense, or assist and hide the Bramenes, the sworn
Enemies of Christian Profession; whosoever of the fore-nam'd shall run into the
like Crimes, it is our pleasure you Punish 'em, with that severity the Law in
that case, or our Prolamation requires, without admitting any appeal or
dispensation in the least. And that the Pagans may submit themselves to the
yoke of the Gospel, not only out of Conviction of the purity of its Faith, and
fed with the hopes of Eternal Life, but be advantaged too, by some temporal
favor showed 'em, (which does very much work upon Subjects hearts) you are
with all Diligence to see that the new Christians, may henceforward have and
enjoy all the Exemptions and Liberties from Taxes, enjoying those Privileges,
and places of Honor, which the Pagans did hitherto use to do. We have too been
informed, that many Indians are forced to go in our Fleet, and are for that at
charges against their wills, desiring that so great Exorbitancy should be
remedied, we order that the Christians be exempt from that Oppression, and in
case the necessity be very pressing, you shall if they go, (with that trust we
look for, from your care, and diligence) provide, that they be every day
satisfied for their Labor; Having known too, from grave and credible Persons,
(and what we particularly resented) that some Portuguese buy Slaves for little,
that selling them to the Moors and other Infidel Merchants, they may get by
'em, which is done to the great Damage of their Souls, they being easily to be
Converted to the Faith, we command you to employ all your power for the
preventing so great an evil, by hindering such Sales, for the great service
which by it is done to God, and you will do to us, if with the rigor the case
requires, you remedy a thing which appears so foul to us. You are to take care
for the curbing the excessive liberty of some Usurers, who as we are informed,
are amongst you under the protection of an old Law of Goa, which we do at this
present, and you are also to revoke, taking it away from the Body of the rest,
as contrary to Christian Religion; you are to give order for the speedy
Building a Church in Bacaim, which is to be Dedicated to St. Joseph, and upon
our account to assign it rent for a Rector, some Beneficiaries, and Chaplains
who may officiate there; and because the Preachers, and Ministers of our Faith,
by going about to Convert the Pagans, are in Necessity, we think it fitting,
and it is our will to give 'em something toward defraying their Charges, and
only for that you are to lay a yearly Tax of three thousand Pardaos on all the
Mosques the Moors have in our Territories. You shall too out of our Customs and
Rights for ever give three hundred Bushels of Rice for the maintenance of those
whom the Vicar Miguel Vaz either has or shall Convert about Chaul, which
quantity we order to be put into the Bishops hands, that he (as he sees
necessity) may distribute it. We have too been informed that about Cochim,
Saint Thomas's Christians are cheated in their weights and measures by our
Merchants who sell Pepper there, and that they take from 'em the Surplusage
they (according to an old Custom) ought to have over and above the just weight,
and measure, whom for many respects, 'twere better to favor then oppress; for
that end you are to give order, they may enjoy their old Customs; you are also
to treat with the King of Cochim, that he cause to be taken away certain Pagan
Rites and Superstitions which his South-sayers use to practice in the sale of
Pepper, his advantage by 'em being very little, and the Scandal to the
Christians who contract there very great; and because we have been advised of
the Cruelty that King uses against those Indians who receive our Faith, by
seizing on their Estates, you must zealously endeavor the said Kings (to whom
we have writ about it) leaving that so Barbarous cruelty, which so much injures
the Souls and Bodies of his Subjects, which, being our Friend, he will do; you
on your part employing that care we charge you with. For that, which by your
Letters and Advises we have, concerning the delivering the people of Socotora
from the miserable Slavery in which they Live, we are of opinion so to remedy
it, that the Turk (whose Subjects they are) shall not with his Fleets infest
those Seas, you are to look how that is most conveniently to be done by the
advice of the Vicar Miguel Vaz, whose Experience, both in that and all other
business of moment that shall occurr, will very much help you. We know that
those who Fish for Pearl, besides other wrongs and oppressions they lie under,
suffer in their Estates, our Sea-Captains out of their little fear to God,
forcing 'em on very hard terms, only to Fish for them, upon which, (desiring
that none of our Subjects should suffer any Violence or Oppression) we order
you to see that those people be not so hardly used, and that our Captains usurp
not so unjust a Power; and further, for the avoiding the like grievances and
cruelties you are to look if those Coasts be sufficiently Guarded, and, if it is
possible for us to recover our Dues without having a Fleet there: and finding
it Feasible, you are to withdraw thence our Captains, commanding none to Sail
along those Coasts, by that means the Natives may enjoy their Estates, and
Cruelties and Extorsions be prevented; above all we recommend to you the
consulting with the Father Francisco Xaverius in what ever occurs, chiefly what
is to be done for the increase of Christianity on the Fishing Coast, that those
who are newly Converted may not be employed in the Fishing, if they be, it may
be upon knowledge that with their new Religion they have got new Manners, and
the great abuses they use in it may be Curbed. We have been likewise informed,
that those who from Paganism are Converted to our holy Faith, are ill used and
despised by their Kindred and Friends, who, with so great Outrage and so high
an Hand banish 'em their Houses, and seize on their Estates, that they are
forced to Live miserably in great want and necessity; that such things may be
redressed, you are (with the Counsel of the Vicar Miguel Vaz) to see they be
relieved at our Charge, putting, what is to be given 'em, in the hands of the
Rector who has care of 'em, that he may every year distribute it as is most
convenient. We know too that from Ceilaon, there came a youth to Goa, flying
the fury and anger of his Kindred, and being (as he is) of the Royal Family,
that he ought to succeed in the Kingdom, upon which, (for the encouragement of
those already, and those yet to be Converted) we have thought good that you
accommodate him (now he^s a Christian) in Saint Paul's College in the City,
where, at our Charge, such Lodgings, and necessaries may be provided him, as
are sit, not only for his maintenance, but pleasure, that our Grandeur with
Persons of his quality may be seen; besides, you are to endeavor to clear his
claim to the Kingdom; and what you find in the business, send us with the
proofs, that we may according to convenience provide; in the mean time it is our
pleasure, that with all imaginable severity you call the Tyrant to account for
his Cruelties against those who are Converted to our holy Faith; obliging him
to give satisfaction for so great insolence, that all the Princes of India may
see our love to Justice, and how we put upon our own score the protecting those
who cannot help themselves. And because, it is not fit Pagan Artificers should
(as hitherto has been allow^d 'em) Cast, Paint, or Work any Images or Figures
of our Lord Christ, or his Saints, to sell 'em; we command you to use all
diligence, for the hindering it, laying Penalties, that he, who shall be proved
to make any of the forementioned Images, shall (besides the having two hundred
Drubbs) lose his Estate, because without doubt it looks not well that Images
representing so holy Mysteries should pass through the hands of Pagan
Idolaters. We have it from the same hand, that the Churches newly begun to be
Built at Cochim, and Coulaon, want finishing, being uncovered and exposed to
all the injuries of the Weather; which is not only an ill sight, but prejudices
the Building; you shall therefore give Order, that (without sticking at the
charge) they may be gone on with, till Finished, by the work and design of the
best Architects and Overseers; you are too, to cause a Church to be Built in
Naraon, in Honor of, and with the Dedication to, the Apostle Saint Thomas, and
to look to the finishing of that already begun in Calapor, by the name of the
holy Cross; you are too, to make another in the Neighboring Island of Coraon,
for design and stateliness as you shall think convenient, there being nothing,
which, in the Pagans will more stir up Devotion for the matters of our holy
Faith, then the affection they see on our part. Besides which, we do more
straightly charge you with the founding Schools and Houses of Devotion, in all
places fit for it; whether, on certain Days, not only the Christians, but Pagans
may resort to Sermons, and Spiritual exercises, that so they may come to the
Love of our holy Faith, and the Knowledge of the errors in which they Live,
being illuminate with the Light of the Gospel; for which you are to choose
Ministers with those parts such a Ministry requires. And above all, earnestly
desiring that the Name of God may be known and worshiped, and his holy Faith
received in our State, we will, and it is our pleasure, that in the Territories
of Salsete and Bardez all the Idols, and infernal Worship, which has hitherto
been practiced there, be utterly rooted out; and that it may be done with the
less difficulty, and without the necessity of using any force or violence, we
command the Preachers in their Sermons and Disputations, to manage the hearts
of the Pagans with such prudence and zeal, that (by God's blessing) they may be
sensible of the good intended them, by bringing 'em to the knowledge of their
Errors, and delivering 'em from the miserable servitude of the Devil in which
they are, out of which, they only are to be freed by closing with our holy
Faith, the sole way to know that blindness in which Satan leads 'em, not to
consider how much the Salvation of their Souls concerns 'em; and because it
very much imports this business, that the undertakers of it be Men of a good
Life and Conversation, and able Scholars, you are to pick out such, from whom
we may expect the Effect we desire, and to recommend to 'em the care and
diligence requisite on their part; and on yours, you are to endeavor the
drawing of, and favoring all men, especially the Nobility and Great ones,
(whose example the multitude follows) and who being once reconciled to our holy
Faith, the difficulty will be but little to Convert the common people, who will
immediately be doing, what they see done by the Grand^es. Let them who turn, he
well used, (that more may be wonn) having favor showed 'em, not only in the
general, but in their particulars, be they never so poor and miserable. Of all
this, we thought fit to inform you, that, for the confidence we have of your
care and diligence, you might remedy all, from which, great Glory will result
to our Lord God; and we will reckon it to you as a peculiar service.

Dated at Almeirim the eight of March in the year of our Lord Jesus Christ
1546. By the KING.


70. Dom John put as much of this Letter in Execution, as his being always in
Arms would permit him; for the time of his Government was one continued
Battle, and the Soldiers, by the License of War, were readier to ruin the
Laws, then reform their Manners; yet will the History show us no slight
Arguments of his Zeal, recompens't extraordinarily by Heaven with signs and
miracles, one of 'em, which happened in the Molucca's, (annexed to his
Government,) I Will relate with my Customary brevity.

71. The light of the Gospel had shined in those Islands; (Saint Francisco
Xaverio as a faithful Labourer in the Lord's Vineyard, having in a great part
cleared those places of the Thistles and Briars of Infidelity) though we owe
the first Cultivating to that great Portuguese Antonio Galvaon, the most
Courageous Governor and Zealous Apostle of those Pagans, whose Prowess was
answered by its Fruits in the wonderful Conversion of Souls, who with their
Baptism received the easy Yoke of Christ, the Princes and great Ones, as well
as the People, being all Tunable to the Obedience of the Gospel. The Devil
perceiving that, in that Cessation of Paganism, A miraculous success in the
Mocuccas.
a Light appeared from Heaven discovering the ways of Life, armed against the
innocent Christians a Pagan thereabouts called Tolon, who had usurped the
Island of Moro. He with infernal Zeal began to persecute the new Converts,
forcing them by new Torments to turn Renegados from that Faith they had
professed; for which, many chose to shed their Blood in a happy Martyrdom,
others of weaker Faith yielded to the Torments. The Tyrants boldness increasing
to the Affronting of our Arms, obliged 'em out of obedience to the Faith, and
for the service of the State, to Chastise that Idolater. The persecuted, and
fearful, came with complaints to the Portuguese, in Ternate, who resolving to
bring down the Infidel, with more zeal then strength went to find him out at
his own Home. Their motion could not be so secret, but the Tyrant had notice of
it; who, by fortifying the entrance of the Island with Trenches and strong
Barricados, provided for his Defense; and in case our men should get those, he
had strewn Splinters and long poisoned Crows-feet in all the Avenues which led
to the City, over which, whilst ours in the heat of Anger, and Victory, past,
they must necessarily lose themselves. It happened, that after winning the first
Stacade, (which the Infidels probably quitted without any hot dispute, in
confidence of their second Stratagem) whilst ours, baited with the flight of
the Enemy, were incautelously passing on, there fell on a sudden, (a thing
miraculous) such a quantity of Ashes from the Sky as made ours stop, till,
after the Air was cleared, they pursued their Victory over the Crows-feet,
where the Ashes had made the way hard and sure; so the astonished Infidels
afterward related it, making use of the Miracle, for an argument of the truth
of that Doctrine they persecuted.

72. Thus did Asia yield to the Faith and the State in the time of Dom John de
Castro, who had in one hand the Gospel, in the other a Sword, and filled the
East with the discourse of so great an Action, as was, the Voluntary undergoing
a War for the defense of Meal, a persecuted Moor, whose Subjects had refused
him their Obedience, and the Princes his Allies their Protection.

73. Asia gave him but little time of rest in the Triumphs of his Victories,
Cambaya beginning immediately to rouse him with the Alarums of a new War; the
noise of it was already in the States intelligence; but being the most notable
piece of our History, we will relate it in a Book apart.

THE LIFE OF DOM JOHN DE CASTRO.
The Second Book.
THE Portuguese were more feared, then loved by the Princes of Asia, on the
Death of Sultan Badur King of Cambaya, whose private Faults and public
Punishments got him (by the Prerogative of the Blood Royal) the peoples
affection, either out of the natural Commiseration to Sufferers, or reverence
of Majesty, and hatred of our Government, not less abhorred as Foreign, then
Powerful.

2. Mahumud King of Cambaya, Heir to the Crown and wrongs of Badur, (who Died
in the Government of the great Nunho de Cunha) equally fired with glory, The
King of Cambaya consul^s how he may take Dio.
and revenge, did (as our Chronicles relate) design to take Dio from the
Portuguese; and (by the Confederacy of other Princes) to drive 'em out of
India, an undertaking, (as some of his own were of opinion) not very difficult;
their Arguments were, that the State was a monstrous Body, whose Head being in
the West, fed the Members so infinitely distant from it, by the interposition
of so much Sea, and Land; that Cambaya's strength was so great, that as well by
its Ruin, as Victories, it could crush the State, already weakened with so many
accidents. The great Ones, and Nobility of the Kingdom, were divided in their
Opinions; some, arguing from the first Siege, (their VVounds at it, and Memory
of it, being yet fresh) thought the Portugueses Arms fatal to Cambaya, and
though they took to heart the Death of Badur, yet by others patience in taking
Affronts, did they excuse their own; they taxed those, who were the first
Authors of making peace with the State, and those who now would have it broken;
the last, because they kept not their Faith; the first, because they were not
sensible enough of injuries. Others, (as when things are uncertain, it
frequently falls out) discoursed to the contrary; and found as many arguments
for War, as Victory.

3. Amongst all the rest, Is persuaded by Coge-Sofar.
the most Powerful and Obnoxious man of Cambaya, and who had got the best
share in the King's favor, with a great deal of Caution spurred on the War,
believing, the Heart-burnings which were against his Fortune, and the Envy of
the great Ones, would, being the fruits of Peace, cease in the common danger;
and by his Command and Power in the War, he should prefer others, who being
his own Creatures would be true to him; I Will give a short relation of the man,
because his name will often occurr in his History.

4. Coge-Sofar was by Nation an Albanese, and the Child of Catholic Parents,
What Coge-Sofar was.
though the Fruit degenerated from the Stock. He had served some time in the
Wars of Italy, more taken notice of for a brave, then a Soldier; in all
Mutinies and Tumults, picked out as the worst; for some years he led this loose
Life, without, either reward, or punishment; until, like a restless man, who
had rather seek then expect his Fortune, he changed his Profession; of a
Soldier becoming a Merchant, for being Cunning and Covertous, this was the
nearest and surest way to what he aimed. He begun in a little time, (knowing
the opportunity and seasons of Commerce) to grow great by his business, being
at once Liberal, and Covetous, for his own ends cunningly making use of both
Vice and Virtue. His Stock and Credit was at last so considerable, as Trading
up and down the Streights, with three small Vessels of his own, of different
Lading, he was met with by Rox Solomon, Admiral for the Sultan of Cairo, who
Boarded him, made him yield, and took what he had. The Prize was greater then
the Victory, and Solomon for the credit of his own reputation, treated him
Honorably, presenting him to the Sultan as a Prisoner of Quality, valuing more
his Person then his Booty. Coge-Sofar began to be as content with his
misfortune, as if it had been of his own seeking; He was experienced Soldier
enough by his Service in the Armies in Italy and Flanders; He spoke of the
Forces of the Christians with malice and undervaluing, as if intending to teach
the Sultan to know his own strength. The Sultan was by these Arti^ices brought
to look on the Slave as capable of great things, and begun first out of
curiosity to listen to him; afterward out of affection. Coge-Sofar with so sly
a flattery commended what ere he did, well, or ill, as it past but for
freedom, because making a show to be only zealous, not acceptable, he kept to
himself, the Soldan's favor, and avoided all public honors more out of
cautiousness then modesty. He came to be Treasurer of Cairo, a place of very
great trust, which he managed with prudence, and fidelity, Virtues so pris'd by
the Sultan, as if not till then known amongst the Infidels. At the Councels of
War his Vote weighed most, sometimes for his experience, sometimes for the
reason of it; in all designs against the Christians, particularly in those
which were to be carried on by others, He declared his sense with a great deal
of confidence, and by this means grew so great that he could not bear his own
Fortune, till, not minding the preserving himself by the same Arts he was
advanced, his Ambition and Pride burst forth; He possessed what places he could,
and more sollicitously looked after Preferments then Friends, whose help or
company he now Valew'd not, he desired to be known, only for the Soldan's
Slave, and for Master of the rest. He plotted the Destruction of the great Ones
on public pretensions, as if he aimed that two only were to Govern, till the
Moors, wearied of so base a patience, began publicly to complain and disturb
the Soldan's inclinations to favor Coge-Sofar, they very feelingly acquainted
him with their grievances, saying, they might now be very well excused from
setting out Galleys against the Christians, if their Slaves were to be made
their Master, when Turks of the best quality were by the Christians so cruelly
used, as to go up and down Italy and Spain dragging their Chains after 'em, and
had their Faces stigmatis'd with infamous Letters, in token of their Captivity,
that 'twas not to be born for so many great Bashaws to receive Laws from a
despicable Slave; that, though every day they with their eyes saw their own
Outrages, they could not digest those which were offered to their Prophet, by
a vile, irreverent and haughty Christian, not so much as going into their
Mosques; that now nothing more was to be done then the setting up Crosses in
the streets of Cairo, and commanding 'em to be adored.

5. These things were said with so much freedom, as they looked more like
conspiracy then complaint, and with particular grievances involving the cause
of Religion, (which ordinarily carries with it, its own Justification, and the
affections of the People) were willingly listened to by the Sultan, who put Coge
Sofar out of his Office, with command to change his Religion; so frail do even
the greatest Favorites find their Princes favor.

6. Coge-Sofar seeing himself falln, put on again his first Humility, and those
Artifices the necessity of the times taught him, and having now only the name
and memory of a Christian, easily changed, for the Poison of the Alcoran,
Evangelical Salvation, quitting the name given him in Baptism for that of
Coge-Sofar, by which we before hand called him, not knowing the first he had*
Coge-Sofar being a Mahomitan, began to winn upon the Moors in their confidence
in him; healing by gifts the hatred of those who envied him; by his new
Apostasy, (by which he Canceled the suspicion of his fidelity) the malice of
the people; carrying on his designs with a more sly ambition, which made him
more affable to his Enemies then to Strangers; but knowing the Soldan's
Fickleness, How he come to Cambaya.
fearing too a second complaint, not reckoning on reconciled favor as secure,
He treacherously one night Killed his mortal enemy Rox Solomon and his Son, and
putting together all the Jewels and Money he could, went away secretly for the
Service of the King of Cambaya, of whose Grandeur and Liberality he had had
full information, and how he valew'd Strangers, those especially who had any
experience in the Wars and Policy of Europe; the success answered his
forecast, for in a little time, either by his Fortune or Indudustry, he came
almost to engross Badur's favor, being his Companion in his Victories and
Losses, being in the last which befell him at his Death. So that now grown by
the King's bounty, to be in Power and Authority the greatest Subject, holding
also with Mahumed Heir of the Crown the same repute, for the reasons we have
already related, and to deserve the favor of the new Prince, by the love and
fidelity he showed to the Ashes of him who was Dead, he urged him to revenge
Badur's Death; it is reported, that he spoke to this purpose before the King and
Nobility of Cambaya.

7. The favors which for ten years I received of Sultan Badur (for which those
abroad admired his Grandeur, those at home envied my Fortune) are known to
every one. He cast his Eyes upon me, and like a Vapor raised me from the
ground, preferring me, a Stranger, and a Vagabond, before those who were born
in his Palace; of a Subject he treated me like a Friend, and loved me as a Son.
From this most Gracious Prince, (whose Ashes I reverence as my Lords, and weep
over as my Fathers) have the Portuguese under the sacred show of peace taken
away his Life, to the great Scandal of all other Kings, and no less Outrage of
his Subjects, unworthy to have been so, to so mighty a Prince, since we so
insensibly and ungratefully behave our selves; Feeding at our own home the
Murderers of our Monarck, who enjoy, as Inheritance, a place, which by so
heinous an offense they made their own, lately Strangers, now Patrons. You! Oh
Prince, Heir and Lord of this Empire, see your Subjects every day receive Laws
from these Insulters, it is for you to decide, whom we are first to Obey, our
King, or our Enemies; their boldness will grow greater by our patience, after
committing the foulest fault, what will they count little? where no Vengeance
is taken on injuries, who will stick to be the Offender? Lets at last awake out
of this so mortal a Lethargy. Lets put our Arms up to the Elbows in the Blood
of these so unhuman Usurpers. Lets bathe our Semitars in this Poison, that with
their Lives they may lose the glory of their so great boastings. The Portugal
Arms by the Blood of Badur, received the greatest repute, by the foulest crime,
and we suffer that Sword in their hands still, which cut off our King, that
with the same, they may usurp his Kingdme; Lets cast from amongst us those
Vipers bred furthest West for the infecting all Asia, as will be evident by
running over their Outrages, by them called Victories. And to begin with the
first of them, The Portuguese, having, with infinite danger, difficulty and
expense employed 75 years in discovering the Western Coast of Africa,
Bartholomew Diaz in the year 1486. and in the Reign of King John the second,
discovered the Cape of Good Hope, (so called by the King after the return of
the Fleet, from the hopes he had after that to discover the Indies so long
designed; but by Diaz at first named Capo Tormentoso, from the Storms and foul
Weather he met with there) K. Emanuel (who succeeded King John) in the year
1497. sent Vasco de Gama with a Fleet to the Indies, who past the Cape, and
Sailing by the Island of Mocambique, the Kingdom of Quiloa, Mombaca, and
Melinde, doubling the Cape Guardafu, (at the mouth of the Red Sea, and Cape
Rasalgate, at the Persian Gulf) arrived at Calecut the chief City of Malabar,
Camoens, Cant. 1. St. 12. of his Lusiade, says of him, Do^vos tambem aquelle
illustre Gama
Que para sy de Eneas toma a fama.
The illustrious Gama in the rear I name,
Who robbed the wandering Trojan of his Fame.


So rendered by the Right Honorable Sir Richard Fanshaw, (Ambassador to
Portugal) in his excellent Translation of that Poem.


Gama, (to whom, for the disturbing the peace of the East, the Seas gave so
fatal a passage) the Samorim of Calecut was the first his Sword cut off; the
Fleet of Meca, which under the protection of our Prophet, and the peace they
enjoyed by Sea, Sailed securely, was by this successful Rover set upon, and
made to yield, who for so many years like a Sea Monster had for his House the
Waters, and for his shelter the Winds, and Tempests. After him came Dom
Francisco de Almeyda went (with a great Fleet, and the first Title of
Viceroy,) to the Indies in the year 1505. April 6. His Son Dom Lourenco D'
Almeyda obtained against the Samorim of Calecut in ^ight of Cananor an eminent
Victory on the 26, of March 1506. The King of Calecut' s Armado consisted of
208 Sail, 84 great Ships, and 124 others Vessels (by 'em called Paraos) on
which were vast numbers of Moors and Naires; The Portuguese had but eleven
Sail, and on 'em 800 men, with whom they Destroyed the whole Fleet, which was
well furnished with Artillery. See the relation of this Fight, History of India,
Dec. 1. Lib. 19. Cap. 4.

The Samorim to revenge this loss, sent to the Sultan of Egypt, and the King of
Cambaya to assist him against the Portuguese, and joined with their Fleets, set
upon Dom Lourenco's in the River of Chaul, who (after his Ships striking and
springing a Leak) was Killed by a Canon shot, History of India, Dec. 2. Cap. 8.
Campens Can. 10. St. 29, 30.


Dom Francisco de Almeyda, who, in one day, and with the same stroke shattered
the Fleets of Egypt and Cambaya, who so behaved himself, as if in Eyes vem o pay
com Animo estupendo
Trazendo furia, and magoa per antolhos
Com que o paterno amor lhe est a movendo
Fogo no coracaon, aqua nos olhos
A nobre ira lhe vinha promettendo
Que o sanque fara^ dar pelos giolhos
Nas inimigas naos: Sentiloha o Nilo
Podelo ha o Indo ver, and o Gange ouvilo.
Camo. Can. 10. St. 33. Behold! the Father comes a Mad man like,
In whom for Mastry, grief with fury strives,
Whilst at one time paternal Love does strike
Fire on his heart, pumps water from his Eyes.
A noble anger whispers him, his Pike
Shall blood his Foes so that the Tide shall rise
In their drowned Decks Knee-deep; Nilus shall bear,
Indus shall see his blows, and Ganges hear.
Sir Richard Fanshaw's Translation.
Vengeance of his Son's Death, he would have drunk up the Blood of the whole
East, if Dom Affonso D' Albuquerque went from Lisbone for the Indies, was
Commander of a Squadron designed for the Coast of Arabia. See his taking
Malaca, History of India, Dec. 2. Lib. 5. Cap. 9. His reducing Ormus, see
History of India, Dec. 2. Lib. 10. Cap. 3. How he got Goa, see History of
India, Dec. 2. Lib. 5. Cap. 3.
Albuquerque who succeeded him in his Cruelty, See Camoens Can. 10. Sta. 40,
41, 42, 43.
and Government, had not taken the Sword out of his Hands; this Man was Born to
affront all our Monarchies, for by Conquering Malaca he Curbed all the
South-Seas; he reduced Ormus the Mart of all the Riches of the World; See John
de Barro's Dec. 2. Lib. 6. Cap. 5.
took Goa from the Sabayo to make that the seat of his usurpt Empire, and
without the Armies of Xerxes or Darius, made Tributary more Kingdoms then he
had Soldiers; He was puffed up with the thoughts of taking the Body of our
Prophet from Meca, debated the changing the course of Nilus to drown Egypt,
undertaking out of his ambition the doing two such notorious Outrages, one
against Heaven, the other against Nature. I will not go about to relate the
ambition of so many, as by our wrongs have grown famous, because I fear neither
my time or memory will allow it, do but look with your sight or judgment on the
remotest parts of the East, and you will see so inconsiderable a Power giving Laws
to the greatest part of the World; they Sailed from that part of Africa which
runs along from the Cape of Good Hope to the Streights mouth of the Red Sea,
possessing on that shore Mocambique, Sofala, Quiloa, and Mombaca, and passing
the Cape of Guardafu, looking into the mouth of the Red Sea, go in sight of
Adem, Xael, Herit, Caxem. The Cities of Dofar and Norbete on the Cape of
Fartaque, first dreaded their Fleets, afterward, Curia, Muria, Rozalgate; here
lies the City of Ormus, not far off the Island of Quexiome, Curiate, Calayate,
Mascate, Orfacaon, and Lima; then they come to the Capes of Mocandoon, and
Iasque, which form the mouth of the Persian Gulf, which reaches to the River
Indus; next pass by the Cape of Guzarate, and Cinde, in our Cambaya, whence as
far as Cape Comori their Fleets sail all along India, for the space of three
hundred Leagues, beginning from our City of Cambaya, they rove by Madigaon,
Gandar, Baroche, Surrat, Reyner, Moscarin, Damaon, Taraper, Bacaim, Chaul,
Bandor, Cifardaon, Galanci, Dabul, Cortapor, Corepataon, Tamega, Banda,
Chapora; they first got Goa the residence of their Governors, now they have
the Coast of Canara, with Onor, Baticala, Bracalor, Bracano, and Mangalor; then
got they that Chief part of Malabar, which their Fleets allarm, where is the
Kingdom of Cananor, and in that Catecoulaon, Marabia, Tramapataon, Maim,
Parepataon; with no less insulting they keep in awe the Empire of Calecut, with
its Havens of Pandarane, Coulate, Chare, Capocate, Parangale, Tanor, Panane,
Balcancor, and Chatua. In the Kingdom of Cananor, and Cochim, they Domineer
without Control, in Porca, Coulaon, Calecoulaon, Dotora, Birinjaon, Travancor.
The dread of their Arms reaches as far as the famous Cape Comori, before
which lies the renowned Island of Ceilaon, where they lade their Ships with
sundry sorts of Druggs. The Bay of Bengala, or Mouth of the Ganges, does not
escape them, where they are in sight of Tacancuri, Manapar, Vaipar, Calegrande,
Chercapale, Tutucuri, Calecarem, Beadala, Canhamorra; they over run Negapataon,
Nahor, Triminipataon, Tragumbar, Coloraon, Calapate, Sadrapataon; They scare
with the quantity and bigness of their Vessels Biznaga, and the stormy Coast of
Orixa, and all that distance which lies from Segopora, to Oristaon, and the
mouth of Ganges; they Sail by the Cape of Negraes, Arracaon, and Pegu, with
those so many and so famous Islands; they go along by Vagatu, Martavaon,
Tagala, and Favay, Tanacari, Lungur, Tairaon, Queda, Solungor, going as far as
their Malaca, which commands all that Archipelago, after that, doubling the
Cape of Sincapura, they come to an Anchor in the Ports of the Kingdoms of
Syaon, Camboya, Champa, and Cochinchina, and going as far as the Kingdoms of
China, venture to look upon that so reserved Empire, which never admitted of a
Trade with Strangers; there they Built the famous City of Macao, whence they
instill the Mysteries of their Faith into the Chinese, making their Trade a
step to their Religion; from hence they Rove amongst the numberless Islands of
Iapaon, visiting Tava, Timor, Borneo, Banda, Maluco, and Lequios, so as the
Portuguese Ships with a restless Sailing Coast the greatest part of the World
for the space of more then nine thousand Leagues, to so difficult a Voyage
animated by their Ambition, and guided by their Fortune. I have tediously run
over all the Coast of Asia, where by the influence of Power or Trade the
Portuguese Arms have made themselves known, because the World does, from such
scattered Conquests, falsely conclude their Power, and I their Weakness; for
Portugal, being a small Kingdom furthest West, and in continual War with
their Neighbor Africa, where they consume themselves both by what they Winn or
Lose, their Fights, and Garrisons being always an expense of men, not being
able to stay where they were Born, in hatred of the Soil and Clime which gave
them a being, they go Roving up and down the World, as if Men, Land and Winds
were theirs; I now leave it to the judgment of the most ordinary
understanding, how little so divided a strength is to be feared, which in their
Prosperity will be spent by their Victories; what cause have we to dread the
Government of these Mad men, who with one Arm in Asia, and the other in the
West, strive to grasp the World? they have in India many Princes under 'em, but
not one Friend, they all adore and hate their Rulers, because the Portuguese
made peace with none but after Victories, and Outrages, so as not their
affections, but their wrongs unite 'em, and they all do Homage while they
cannot offend. But what will it be when they shall see Soltan Mahamud take the
Field with an Army? what doubt is there but that all the Injured will be our
Soldiers? by force of Arms they have made many Kings Tributary, and supposing
they now are Protected by them, a good turn is sooner forgot then an injury.
The Grand Signor Selim, sees the Wounds his Ianizaries received at Dio, yet
gaping, and one so little used to receive affronts will not let slip the
opportunity of revenging the first, by beginning the War, or seconding you in
it, who is ambitious also of having the greatest part of the World under his
Empire. The Samorim has not one Port, which since the Portuguese came into the
East, has not been the Theater of their Victories, and scarce has he one
Subject who has not been wounded by their Swords. Hidalcaon sees every day his
Territories of Bardez and Salsete running with Blood, and when the Governor
made an unjust War against him, he brought Meal to Goa to countenance, by his
pretended justice to an another, the ruining him; all the other Princes will
take Arms against the common Enemy, that they may enjoy the ancient Liberty
they lived in. For my part I offer my Children, my Estate, and my Person
toward this War; if I fall in it, Badur by my Blood shall see my Loyalty,
and be the success good or bad, I shall not count Death less Honorable, then
Victory.

8. Coge-Sofar's Arguments were, for the Odiousness of the cause, The Sultan
approves them, and commits the design to him.
and the Authority of his Person, well approved of; The King, after magnifying
his Loyalty, commits to him (as to one who out-went all the rest in his Zeal,
and Conduct) the design: He immediately quickens the preparations by diverse
messages to the Neighboring Kings, putting them in mind of the Affronts had
been put upon 'em, and offering them his Princes arms in favor of their
grievances. He dispach't Ambassadors to Constantinople, inviting the Turk to
redeem the credit of his Arms by beating the Portuguese out of India, a thing
which as much concerned their Religion, as Policy; He made way for the Succor
he ask't of him, with a present of so great Value, as 'twas more likely to
stir up the Turks ambition against his Riches, then that he should send him
Auxiliary Forces to maintain 'em.

9. Dom John Mascarenhas was then Commander in chief in Dio, Dom Ioh
Mascarenhas Comman^^ in Dio.
great by his Birth in Portugal, by his Virtue, in the East, a man who
deserved as well from his Fame, as Fortune* He, by private intelligence knowing
Coge-Sofar's designs, and that all his preparations threatened that Fortress,
writ what advise he had to Dom John de Castro, and that he wanted Men,
Ammunition, and other necessaries; neglects which so many years Peace wink't
at; He advises the Governor,
or, 'twas perhaps, that our men thought themselves secure, by the reputation
of the former Victory; he added too, that the Soldan^s Levies were very
forward, and the Enemy near, and that Winter would shortly come, which would
shut out all Relief.

10. When Dom John de Castro received this advise, he had already sent two
hundred Soldiers to the Fortress, under the Commands of Dom John, History of
India, Dec. 6. Lib. 1. Cap. 6.
and Dom Pedro de Almeyda, Sons to Dom Lopo de Almeyda; the other Commanders
were Gil Coutinho, and Luis de Sousa Son to the High Chancellor of the
Kingdom. And that he might know the condition of the Enemy, He dspatch't two
Envoys, Who writes to the Sultan.
(experienced in the Coast and Inland of Cambaya) with Letters to Sultan
Mahamud, in which he told him the advice he had, of the Levies, and
preparations he had made, of which, he hoped, for an account from him, because
like a Friend he would accompany him in his design, which he could at present
very easily do, having ready at Sea a very strong Fleet, and in the Fortress of
Dio stout Soldiers with an Overplus of Provision, who had much rather enrich
themselves with the spoils of War, then be at the pittance of an idle Peace;
He charged too those he sent cunningly to observe the Enemies Forces, what
Auxiliaries he had, and what the people said, that so by that, they might Dive
into the bottom of the design. But whilst our Envoys are setting Sail, we will
forbear speaking about the business of Cambaya, to make room for the successes
in the Molucco's, which depend on this Government.

11. The Molucco's were many years under the obedience of our Laws, Discovered
and Conquered by the Arms of this Crown, which were the first of Europe came to
those Islands, assigned to us by the partition the Pope made 'twixt the Kings
of Portugal and Castile; the King Dom Manoel, had on his side the right of
Arms and Laws; The Kings of Portugall's right over the Molucco's.
these Islands not coming to Portugal by Conquest only, but by Inheritance. In
the time of the King Dom Manoel, the last and first of the Name, the Church and
State equally flourish't in those Islands, the light of the Gospel, in the
eclipse of Paganism, shining there through his Zeal; many Kingdoms received
from this so happy Prince their Religion and Government. This King Dom Manoel,
History of India, Dec. 5. Cap. 10. Lib. 10.
(Baptiz^d in Goa) was amongst others King and Lord of the chief Islands of the
Molucco's, who well grounded in the Mysteries of our Faith, returning to Govern
and Instruct his people, Died without any Heir, in Molucco; and out of
Gratitude, for the benefits received of this Crown, left, by Solemn will,
(Confirmed by all the Formalities of the Law) the King Dom John the third, Heir
of the Kingdoms of the Molucco's, to be successively annex't to the Crown of
Portugal. These Islands first discovered with Pains, defended with our Blood,
and possessed with so much Right, have we seen parted with (against the opinion
of the best Lawyers and Geographers) to Castile.

12. The Governor Dom John de Castro found in Goa Cachil de Aeyro, The
Governor gives 'em to Cachil Aeyro.
one of great Power in the Molucco's; who had for his Service deserved well of
the State, and was the nearest Allied to the Royal blood of the last Prince Dom
Manoel, but, by many accidents so poor, as he came to India to recommend
himself to our Charity. The Governor, thinking his misfortunes not deserved by
his Blood, (believing too that the memory of our Kings would be more honored
by giving away, History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 1. Cap. 4.
then receiving a Kingdom) invested him in the Crown of the Molucco's, with
this caution, that in him, and his Posterity, the exercise of the Regality
should depend on Portugal. Amongst the Kings of India, some, made so great a
gift a piece of Prodigality, others of Pride, but all stood amazed that we
should take so much pains for what we gave away so easily.

13. Whilst this was doing, things in the Molucco's, were not a little
disturbed, The Castilians come thither.
by the arrival of three Castilian Ships, which, falling from their intended
course, got sight of those Islands, and, (to refresh themselves after a Storm
at Sea, and carry their Prince more certainty of their discovery) Landed in the
Island Tidore; I will not relate the Resistance our men made 'em, because that
happened under an other Government, and is Written by a better Pen; I Will but just
tell what fell out in Dom John de Castro's time, who sent Fernaon de Sousa de
Tavora to the Molucco's to dislodge the Castilians, who, invited by the Plenty
and Richness of the Soil, had a mind to enjoy the Fruits of other men's Labors,
and disturb the Peace, and Trade of those Islands, to which, by Conquest and
Inheritance, we had a double Title. Who was their Commander.
Ruy Lopez de Villalobos, a man more wary then Valiant was Commander of the
Castilians, he had proudly boasted of the strength of the Emperor Charles the
Fifth his Master, and, of the advantage, which from his Friendship those Pagan
Kings might receive in their Wars and Trade, had too handled the report of us
with a great deal of Disparagement; and, (things hoped for, being in the
opinion of men, greater then those at present) some of the Islands listened to
the Castilian, pleading for it, either slight or forgotten Grievances.

14. Fernaon de Sousa, Fernaon de Sousa arrives at Molucco.
sent by the Governor, arrived about this time at Molucco, who upon
information, how things stood, by Iurdaon de Freitas, (Commander in chief of
the Fortress) perceived the Castilians party grew greater, in hopes of Succor
and Money promised from Spain; As soon as Ruy Lopez had notice of Fernaon de
Sousa's coming, and of the business he came about (desiring artificially to
excuse or delay breaking with us, till the assistance he hoped for, came from
Spain) he sent to Visit him, The Castilian goes about to amuse him.
and by a plausible Letter, minded him, that they were amongst Pagans, who,
that they might be their own Masters, Coveted our falling out; that we already
had Wars, and Enemies enough in India; that we were very few to plant so great
a World; that he profer'd us his Sword, with that to keep the Pagans more in
awe; that, as Spaniards they were good Soldiers, and as Catholics they were
better Friends; that he was to consider, Peace with the Emperor more concerned
Portugal then the Cloves of the Malucco; that those differences betwixt the
Subjects, might prove like Mines, which often play a great way off the place
they were Sprung at.

15. To this Letter, composed of Rodomontados and Flatteries, Fernaon de Sousa'
s answer.
Fernaon de Sousa's answer was, that he was but a little man, but as short in
his Resolution as his Stature; that those Islands were his Masters the King of
Portugal; that he was able with the same Sword which got 'em to defend 'em;
that he very well knew him to be a Spaniard, and a Catholic, but that being
so, did not warrant him to take away his Cloak; that the Emperor would not
make War with Portugal before first reading in the Chronicles of Castile, how
it fared with his Predecessors; that what he was to do, was, either to embarque
for India, or put himself with his men into the Fort, thence he would provide
him with safe Shipping for Spain.

16. The Castilian, The Castilian continues his first motion.
by this so peremptory Letter, saw that Fernaon de Sousa would not by
slow-working Physic Cure the distemper, and, neither able to resist him, nor
willing to obey him, writ to him the second time, for a suspension of Arms,
that they might advise their Princes how things stood, and they make an
accommodement of this affair; for, if before employing that diligence there
should be any Blood shed, it would lie upon both the Kings to revenge their
Subjects injuries; that there were betwixt Portugal and Castile many pretenses
and grievances which Peace covered; that he was not desirous to revive that
Fire which was Buried in the Ashes of a long Amnesty; that if the Castilians
went away with complaints in their Mouths, their own injuries might easily
bring them back again; that, though broken with the Sea, and their Sufferings,
if obliged to unreasonable conditions, their own Gallantry would inspirit 'em,
with more vigor then their present necessity.

17. Fernaon de Sousa, by the intrigues of this Letter, and other intelligence,
knowing, that the Castilians aim^d at doing their business by delays; answered,
that leaving off Arguments he should prepare to defend his right by the Sword.

18. Ruy Lopez de Villalobos, by this answer finding himself, The Captains see
one the other.
either detected or scorned, chose rather to be overcome by reason, then force,
and immediately writ to Fernaon de Sousa that the next day, only with three
Companions they might meet at Sea, to conclude on the terms of Passage and
Shipping he had proffered, which was accordingly done, Fernaon de Sousa coming
from the Fort in a Boat very richly adorned, and steering to the Castilians,
who staid for him, they spent a great deal of time in the tedious Ceremonies of
concluding who was to go into the others Boat; the Castilian went into Fernaon
de Sousa's, where their Salutes and Civilities made way for the business in
hand.

19. Fernaon de Sousa with a great deal of moderation insisted on the reasons
of his pretensions, Their agreement.
which were engrost and allowed of, by the Kings of Portugal and Castile, See
the Copy of this agreement, History of India, Dec. 4. Cap. 1. Lib. 7.
and which Ruy Lopez de Villalobos was glad to see, our right being his
discharge; they concluded, that within three days the Castilians should come
into our Fortress of Ternate, where passage should be provided 'em for India,
with liberty to carry away the Goods, Commodities, and Arms they had, and that
the King of ^idore, of their Faction, should continue as before in our favor;
the Solemnities which ended this agreement were a great Banquet, and merrily
Drinking their Kings healths, a civility they often afforded 'em; Fernaon de
Sousa (as the custom is in India) added presents to the entertainment, giving
Jewels to the Captain and his Companions, so leaving 'em more satisfied with
their Merchandise, then dispatch, for the pleasantness of the Cloves made up
the Disgusts of their reception.

20 Fernaon de Sousa, The Castilian keeps ^ot his promise,
having sent away the Captains, returned to the Fort, very well satisfied that
he had so much, to the advantage of his own Honor, and the State, plaind so
perplexed a business; on the third day, (the day appointed for the Castilians to
come to our Fort) Fernaon de Sousa made all the Pompous preparations he could,
to show the Pleasure with which he expected his Guests, whom he went out to Sea
to seek, which when Ruy Lopez was advised of, he sent off a Boat from shore,
desiring him to put off the business till the next day, for he was then
encountering with some difficulties, which from him he should be acquainted
with. What Fernaon de Sousa does in the business.
Fernaon de Sousa, taking this delay to be design, and that the Castilian kept
not touch with him, and receiving the message at Sea, commanded his men to Row,
and with more passion then prudence went alone amongst the Castilians; Ruy de
Lopez saw it, and with a Guard of fourscore Musketeers came to wait for him at
the Seaside, whence carrying him to his Lodgings, told him what a Tumult had
happened amongst his men, for Dom Alonso Henriquez, Captain of a Ship, cloaking
his own interest with the zeal of serving his Prince, refused to stand to the
agreement, and had about him (who upheld his party) his Friends and some
mutinous Persons, possessing the King of Tidore and others with extravagant
Jealousies thereby to increase his Faction, calling his Sedition, Zeal, and the
Generals moderation, Cowardice, for delivering up the Arms and Banners of
Spain, which with his Life he had sworn to Defend, and depriving the Emperor
of the Command of such plentiful Islands, and the poor Soldiers of the fruit
and reward of so dangerous a Voyage; that the Portuguese, a proud Nation, and
always Cross to theirs, would Laugh at our so tame a surrender: But that he
knew all that bravery to be falsely grounded, for 'twas neither the service of
Caesar, nor the love of Honor, which moved 'em, but the desire of the Cloves,
of which they had gathered great quantities, and could not trust us, that we
would let 'em carry to Spain the news of that Commodity, whose worth would pay
'em for all the dangers and troubles they had run through; Fernaon de Sousa and
the rest, (who said as he did) hearing this, as to that particular, took off
their fears, and (the Castilians gallantry only covering their interest) the
next day they rendered themselves at the Fort, forgetting the high words in
which they had Ranted.

21. But the noise of Cambaya's Arms allows not a Digression for less
concernments, Coge-Sofar's proposition to the Captain of Dio.
Coge-Sofar did absolutely superintend this War, the good Event of which he
laid partly in his Forces, partly in his Stratagems. Whilst he brought together
his Baggage and supplies, (which for their greatness required several
opportunities) he writ to Dom John Mascarenhas, that he was desirous to take
away that Scandal which disquieted the Peace made betwixt the Soltan and the
State, that with mutual Friendship they might enjoy the Fruits of so just an
agreement; History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 1. Cap. 2.
that we had, by the Articles, agreed a Wall should be made 'twixt the Fortress
and the City, which was then not done, not to show any Jealousy in so young a
friendship, but now, when so many years Peace had carried away any unjust
affection, 'twas fit to satisfy the people who desired that separation, as a
mark of the Liberty they lived in; that when on that side we slighted the Wall
of the City, 'twas out of Anger, and the liberty of Victory, and the
Inhabitants could not endure to be every day minded of their Ignominy by so
scornful a Memorial; that when no Symptoms of hatred were in their minds,
'twas not well to preserve them in scattered stones; that we being but
strangers in Dio, 'twas not for us to give Laws like Masters; that the Citizens
would take it very ill that what their Kings allowed 'em, their Neighbors
should take away; that we ought from others Subjects to seek for Friendship,
not Obedience; that the Sultan had given him that City, which he resolved to
enlarge with new Inhabitants, who should see that Fortress was not a Bridle,
but a Defense to those who Lived there; that 'twas but fit the Portuguese
should give the people all possible satisfaction to secure a Peace founded on
oppression.

22. Dom John Mascarenhas by this Letter perceived that Coge-Sofar sought for
pretenses to break, for, to permit the Building of the Wall, helped his design;
to deny it, justified the War; whereupon he answered him, The Captains answer,
that in so well grounded a Peace as was 'twixt Mahumud and the State, 'twould
be more secure to throw down, then go about to build up Walls; that the Wall
would neither endanger us nor secure them; that 'twixt the Fortress and the
City there was an other manner of defense which Guarded it, which was the
Loyalty of the Portuguese; that he gave him joy of his new Seigniory, that he
might reckon on the Portuguese as of his other Subjects; that what he proposed
was to be referred to the Governor of India, who was setting out a Fleet to
come and Visit the Fortress; that upon his arrival he would acquaint him with
his proposition; and immediately advised the Governor how things stood, and
advice to the Governor,
who by the Envoys he sent to Cambaya had already a more perfect knowledge of
the intended Siege, receiving but a dubious answer from the Sultan, who neither
owned, nor denied the Action, unseasonably repeating past offenses, as if
(without disturbing the Peace) he would commence a War.

23. The Governor, Who succ^^^^ Dio with Men and Ammunition.
giving himself wholly up to this business, and considering the importance of
the place, resolved for its defense to engage all the strength of the State,
without sparing expense, danger, or diligence. He very feelingly recommended
the succor of Dio to the Cities of Bacaim and Chaul, which were the nearest to
him, putting them in mind of their Honor, Reward, and Duty; in Goa he ordered
the providing a great Carvel with Ammunition and Provision, and two hundred and
fifty Soldiers, who finding the Seas high, with a great deal of difficulty
recovered Bacaim, and striving to cross over to Dio, were by strong and
contrary Winds shattered and forced back.

24. Coge-Sofar not having his Forces together, The T^^chery Coge-Sofar set
upon.
set upon us by other ways. With large gifts, and greater promises, he bought
out the fidelity of one of our Soldiers, that in the dead of the Night he
should either fire the Powder, or poison the Cistern, or if he could not
compass either of those designs, he should endeavor, through the House in
which he Lived (fit for that mischief by its joining to the Wall) to let the
Moors into the Fort. History of India, Cap. 6. Lib. 1. Dec. 6.
The Soldier being timorous, or irresolv'd, acquainted an intimate of his (a
Moor) with the business, who (the reward for discovering Treasons being surer
then for Executing 'em) told it to the Commander in chief, he having, by two
other hands had it, and considering how foul the fault was for the example of
it, and not sufficiently proved for the punishing it, that the Offense deserved
not pardon, nor the Conjuncture allowed not the punishment, sent away the
Soldier with Letters to the Governor, acquainting him with what proofs he had
of the suspected Treason.

25. Dom John Mascarenhas making sure of a War, What preventions Dom John
Mascarenhas made.
gave order (whilst a pretended Peace gave Color to a Trade) to buy up what
Provisions were in the City, DIO
map of the island of Dio a care which for some time kept off, or relieved
their Starving; for the security of commerce was soon altered, by a Captains
coming into the City with five hundred Turks, more to dispose, then make a
War. He brought fresh Letters for the Commander from Coge-Sofar, in which both
warily and earnestly, he pressed the making up of the Wall; Dom John Mascarenhas
would not now return any answer to 'em, telling the Turk, the Portuguese
granted no Petitions, which were writ by men with Muskets on their Shoulders.
That day was not the first of War, being the last of Peace; for on the next
Coge-Sofar entered with eight thousand men to begin the Siege, cutting off from
us all succor by Land; what was to be expected by Sea, the storms of Winter
began now to hinder; the worst Enemy the Fortress had. Illustre ^em (...) and
batalhas. Famed for Sieges and Pitched fields, Came. Can 10. Sta. 35.
This being the place where the Portuguese acted so great wonders, we will in
short inform you of its situation.

26. The Island of Dio, renowned for the Richness of its commerce, The
de^scrption of Dio.
deplorable for the ruin of its Inhabitants, famous for the report of our
Victories, lies in a Bay, and on a Point, which bounds the Kingdom of Cambaya,
in the height of twenty two degrees Northward. The Natives do fabulously speak
of the antiquity of its Foundation, allowing it a more noble, then certain
beginning; keeping the Records in their Traditions for want of writing: The
Port was always the chief Scale of the Bay, frequented by Ships which went to
Mecca, which Voyage, Religion and Trade make very grateful to the Moors. The
City, is by a Channel which goes about it, divided from the main Land; it is by
situation strong, and by helping out nature with art, is made more tenable. The
Channel which surrounds it, has two Outlets, one toward the North, which
shallow, and full of Sands is of no use; the other toward the South
inconvenient too for the Cragginess of the Rocks which form it; it has on the
forepart of the Isle an other Channel where Ships may Anchor, and by this is
the best passage to the City. It Is not of that figure, The famous Portuguese
Historian who has writ their Voyages to, and Conquests, in the Indies; often
quoted in this Translation.
John de Barros describes it of, having been altered by the differency of Moors
who have possessed it, each of them Fortifying it a new way, as they were taught
by their judgment or the variety of Times.

27. Coge-Sofar came into the Town with eight thousand men, (many of 'em Turks
who served him for Pay) sixty great Pieces, ('among which were eighteen
Basilisks) Ammunition and Provision for his men, as foreseeing the length of
the Siege; Great Canon so called.
He had too in his Camp a thousand Ianizaries, who had more then ordinary Pay;
who, out of their Habituated insolence slighted the design, condemning Coge's
fear for bringing Forces together, and disturbing the Grand Signior's Arms
against four pitiful Christians, defended by a rotten Wall, against whom,
neither Honor was to be gained by Fighting, or Plunder by Conquering.
Coge-Sofar neither commended, or condemned the Turks courage; but (better
taught by his fear, or experience) looked upon the Victory as not so sure; in
opening his Trenches, planting his Batteries, forming his Squadrons, he showed
himself a Soldier; and when he was laid down before the Fortress made this
short Speech to the Turks.

28. Friends, Coge-Sofar Speech to his men.
and Companions, it is not my design to teach you, either to fear or despise
those few Portuguese, whom you see besieged within those Walls; for though
Soldiers, yet are they not more then men. Fortune has hitherto, bore 'em
company, or served 'em all over the East; and the Fame of their first Victories
has helped 'em to the rest. With a few men they make War upon the whole
World; and by the course of things, an Empire (kept up only in the Opinion, or
by the weakness of the Conquered) cannot last, without Forces; they have scarce
five hundred men in the Fortress, most of whom are Garrison Soldiers, who of
custom use to be the poorest, or most useless; by Land they can have no relief,
what is to be had by Sea, the Winter cuts off; they want, by the security of
their Peace, or Pride, (out of which they despised every thing) Ammunition and
Provisions: being but few, the same men must always be upon that Wall, not
having one Soldier in reserve, to supply an others place; they have not
Pioneers to repair the Breaches of our Batteries, and their Duty amongst so few
must necessarily make 'em yield; they are insolent upon the Damage they did
the Grand Signior's Galleys at the siege of the same Fortress; it concerns so
many honorable Turks, and Valiant Ianizaries as are here to go on, for the
honor of your Nation and Empire, as the most justifiable cause of this War;
for though Cambaya has Armies and Soldiers, it is not for the Grand Signior's
repute, with Foreign force, to revenge his injuries. I therefore put you upon
this design, that none else might Rob you of the glory of so just vengeance;
this same Ground you now tread upon, covers the Bones of your Comrades,
Kindred, and Friends, who (methinks call upon every one of us by Name) telling
us the Deaths and VVounds, they from these Murderers received, hoping by your
Prowess to rest revenged. These are those who killed Badur, ungrateful for
benefits, presuming too far on the Majesty of so great a Prince; the revenging
of whom, will be acceptable to all Kings, necessary to us who are his Subjects.

29. Having made an end of his Speech, either desiring, more to justify the
War, He sends again to the Captain of Dio.
or gain time for the expectance of supplies, he tried Dom John Mascarenhas
with harder terms, resolutely insisting on the Building up the Wall, and
demanding that the Ships of the Soltan, (his Master) might Sail freely up and
down without passes from our Generals, an affront, which, the Sultan bore as a
Friend, but could not endure as a Prince: History of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 7.
Lib. 1.
He further required that the Merchants Ships might not be obliged to put in at
that Port; which was a Liberty he ought to grant for the benefit of Trade. Dom
John Mascarenhas returned answer, The Captains answer.
that, friendly Treaties were not to be made amidst Drums and Guns; that, 'twas
the Custom of that Fort to give Laws to every one, not to receive 'em from any;
that he hoped shortly to Banish him for a breaker of the Peace, when to his
grief, he should accept of worse Conditions which should be writ with the very
Blood of his Ianizaries.

30. The Governor, by this time, had, with strange Expedition, made ready nine
Vessels, telling the Soldiers who went on 'em, that in so Honorable a design,
only his Favorites were to be trusted; that he would now change the
Confinement of his Place, for the liberty of any Soldier; that, though he was
resolv^d in Person to go raise the siege of Dio, he could not dissemble the
Envy he had to those who were first to Grapple with the Turks, and presently
calling for his Son, Basiliscos medonhos, and lioens
Trabucos feros, minas encubertas,
Sustenta Mascarenhas con baroens
Que taon ledos as mortes tem por certas
Ate que nas mayores oppressoens
Castro libertador, fazendo offertas
Das vidas de seus filhos, quer que fiquem
Com fama eterna, e a Deos se sacrifiquem.
Drakes, horrid Basilisks, Engines of Wood
As bad as either, secret Mines and Plots,
Has Mascarenhas with his men withstood
Meeting their certain Deaths with willing Throats,
When in the utmost stress of Flesh and Blood
Castro their freer his two Sons devotes,
That everlasting honor they may gain,
And sacrifices to their God be slain.
Camo. Can. 10. St. 69.
Dom Fernando, told him in the public Hall; I send you Son with this relief to
Dio, The Governor sends his Son Dom Fernando to Dio.
which (as I Am informed, is now besieged by a great Army of Turks;) for what
concerns your own Person take no care, for, for every stone of that Fortress
would I venture a Son, I charge you to remember from whom you come, who are by
Kindred your Ancestors, by their Exploits your Example; strive to deserve the
Name you Inherit, considering that by Birth all are equal, and men only
differenc't by their Actions, and that I tell you, he who returns most
Honorable shall be my Son; That Is the blessing our Forefathers left us, to
Dye gloriously for our Laws, for our King, and for our Country. I put you in
the way of honor, it is in you now to winn it. With that he gave him his
blessing, and recommended him to Diogo de Reynoso, one of the bravest
Cavalliers who came for India; In this relief was Sebastion de Sa, Son to John
Rodriguez de Sa, who, in this occasion, and others gave remarkable proofs of
his Courage, there went too with him, Dom Francisco de Almeyda, Son to Dom
Lopo, to be a Companion to two Brothers he had in Dio; there were in the same
relief, Antonio da Cunha, Pero Lopez de Sousa, Diogo da Sylva, Iorge
Mascarenhas, Antonio de Mello, and many other Gentlemen, who then pursu^d
dangers as if they fled from 'em.

31. The Governor writ a very civil Letter to Dom John Mascarenhas, telling
him how much greater it was on this occasion to be Commander of Dio then
Governor of India; that he had in that relief sent him his Son Dom Fernando,
that if ever he returned into the Kingdom, he might amongst the Vanities of
his Old age tell of his being a Soldier under him; that he might be confident,
all the strength the State could make should be engaged in the Defense of that
Fortress; that there were on those Ships many young Gentlemen, whose
forwardness it behoov'd him to temper, because men Besieged were only to stand
upon their Defense; that he had there sent him, as much Ammunition as would
expect a second Relief, two Engineers, and a great many ordinary Workmen (with
Instruments and Materials for that purpose) to make up the Breaches of the
Enemies batteries: In which Dom John de Castro showed not only the zeal of a
public Minister, but the experience of a Soldier, by foreseeing their
extremities and preventing 'em.

32. Dom John Mascarenhas had Commanded a Bridge (which went from Saint James's
work for the convenience of the Garrison over to the other side) to be broken
down, and the making of a Drawbridge in stead of it. The Cap^ain of Dio
disposes of the Commands of the Fo^^.
Saint James his Tower he committed to the charge of Alonso de Bonifacio Clerk
of the Customhouse, Saint Thomas's work to Luis de Sousa, St. John's to Gil
Coutinho, that which was over the Gate to Antonio Freire, and another work of
Saint James's which commanded the River to Dom John de Almeyda and his Brother
Dom Pedro de Almeyda, Saint Georges to Antonio Pecama, the Fause-bray to John
de Venezeanos, and the Curtain to Antonio Rodriguez; amongst those Officers he
divided one hundred and seventy Soldiers, History of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 7.
Lib. 1.
He and thirty more were Supernumerary to help upon occasions. Dom John with so
few men expected so great an Army as came against him; providing with so much
security for his Defense, as if the danger was neither feared or unexpected. He
ordered the Ammunition and Provision to be kept very strictly, because the
hindrance of the Weather, and the Enemy, made the receipt of any more
uncertain. He set the Slaves and those who were not fit to bear Arms, to bring
Lances, Powder, Stones, and Provision to the Works, that the Soldiers might
not be taken up in any thing but Fighting; in this Work he employed too the
Children, the Old men, and the Women, so that there was not in the Fortress
Person, or Sex idle or unserviceable, and calling them together upon the Parade
of the Fortress, he smilingly spoke to 'em;

33. Those Turks, and Ianizaries you see from hence, and speaks to his
Soldiers.
are come to winn of us the Honor they lost in the first Siege, yet are they
not more considerable then those who were beaten, nor we less then those who
overcame; I confess to you I envy the meanest Soldier who kept this place,
because the memory of his Valor does yet honor his Posterity, whom we know
not so well by their Name, Country, or Birth, as by being the Sons, or
Grandchildren of those who so gloriously fell, or triumphed in Dio. The
greatest honored their Families, the meanest begun theirs. Fortune has
brought us upon such an other action; those stout Portuguese had not Buried
with 'em all the glory of Fighting, they have left us what will make us famous.
Let not the inequality of our Forces fright us, for Renown is not to be
purchased by ordinary dangers; we have Sailed five thousand Leagues only to
find out this Day, and in it to gain that honor neither Kings or Countries can
give us; for Kings give Rewards, not Deserts; we want not Provision or
Ammunition to hold out the Siege till Relief arrives, and though in this Season
the Seas are high, yet have we a John de Castro (who with his Sword in his
mouth will come under the Waves to help us) and so many other Gentlemen and
Persons of Quality who will think themselves injured if without them we gain
the honor which is before us; after which we are not to look for any thing
more from Fortune, being to be put on their List who have memorably served
their King and Country, for the keeping up of whose Honor we are come from
farthest Westward thus remote; and (what is above all) we Fight against the
Enemies of our Faith, and in so just a cause cannot want owning, since we serve
the God of Victories.

34. When the Speech was ended, there was in the Turks Camp heard a great
Shooting, by which Coge-Sofar welcomed a Relief of two thousand Foot, which
were come to him from Cambaya, all old Soldiers, who made the succor more
considerable by its quality, then number; there came with these two of the
Mogull's Commanders, Persons very much Cried up by their own men. The same day
there came in a great part of the Nobility from the Court, which at some
distance from the Leaguere, Lodged themselves in Rich Tents, There comes in
more Relief to the Enemies.
with such Order, as wanted nothing of the Discipline of Europe; Our men, by
not valuing their Lives, put off the Terror of such great preparations,
encouraging one the other by Discourses suitable to the occasion, taking
Counsel of their necessity how to behave themselves.

35. The next day (which was Maunday Thursday in the year 1546.) They begin to
batter the fort.
there appeared betimes in the Morning near our Fortress a solid work of Earth,
with its Skit-gates, and in them some great Pieces, and on top of the work a
great many Sacks of Cotton, covered with Raw hides to resist the Fire, a thing,
which for the little noise and time it was contrived in, much startled our men,
and did not look like the design of a Confused and Barbarous multitude, who,
whilst the Siege lasted, showed as much Valor, as Discipline; they presently
began, with a great deal of success, to batter our Fort, dismounting four of
our Gunns, which did the greatest Damage to their Battery.

36. That days good fortune Counseled 'em for the rest, A Stratagem of the
Enemies in a Ship.
making in five Nights as many Forts, at a proportionable distance, to give by
the several Breaches a general assault, which so few Defendants so divided
would not be able to withstand; the success might have answered the design, had
not our Fort which lay on the Sea, and commanded theirs, done 'em so much harm,
that they thought fit to look to their own Reparations before our Offense; the
great Gunns were silent for two days, in which they contrived a second Fabric
to secure their first. History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 1. Cap. 8.
They put to Sea a Tall Ship, full of Powder, Stone-pitch, and other
Combustible matter, this they laid on the first Deck, as a Stratagem prepared
for a second design, over this they made a false Deck, capable of two hundred
Fighting men, as if with them designing to Scale: The Ship so lay, as to
command that part of the Fort, whether, they concluded, our men upon their
advantage of place to Fight on, and numbers, would probably come, when in the
heat of the Conflict, quitting the Ship, they would set her on Fire, which
lighting on the Fort, might burn it without any Damage or Danger to their own
men; and that presently entering on the ruins the Fire had left, they would on
them cast up an other, whence they might batter our Fortress, and by this new
work secure their former, and so their Gunns play securely. A Stratagem
grounded on Soldier-like conclusions.

37. Dom John Mascarenhas had (by some Spies he had in the Camp) notice of the
Machine and design, and calling to him Iacome Leyte, Commander at Sea, a
Soldier of great trust, told him he would not Rob him of the honor belonged
to his employment; that he thought the first Achievement of this Siege ought
to be his, and acquainting him with the advice he had, gave him Orders to be
ready in the second VVatch. Iacome Leyte put to Sea at the hour appointed in
two Boats with thirty Soldiers, and Rowing quietly till he came up with the
Ship, began to cast in her a great many Pots of Powder. Set on Fire by our men,
The Moors at once saw their danger, and the Fire burning 'em, and running to
their Arms, distracted by fear and sleep, did faintly and confusedly defend
themselves, hindering one an other by the Noise and Tumult so unexpected an
Onset had caused: some began to throw themselves into the Sea, who showed the
way and example to the rest; at last, with Complaints and Clamors they left the
Ship, giving the Alarm to the whole Camp. Iacome Leyte had time enough to make
fast a Cable to the Ship, and tow her after his; and brought to the Fort.
The Captain received him with Praises and Embraces, making more of this
success, because it so happily began the War. The Moors, though with eminent
danger, continued their Battering, for every stone they unloosned of the
Fortress, paying Soldiers, and Canoneers, their Battery did no considerable
harm, only Saint James's Bastion, being the weakest or the most Battered, was
open in two places, and the Breaches wide enough to enter upon assault; though
those within defended themselves with Retrenchments, and by Night stole Earth
to make up the Breaches.

38. The Battery continued not without Execution, the Wall being in many places
open, every where shattered, and not a Soldier could peep through the
Battlements, who was not peirc't with the Enemies Arrows, or wounded with their
Shot, which was so thick as it appeared to be a continual Discharging,
Coge-Sofar little valuing the spending Ammunition, or venturing Soldiers, as
being sufficiently furnished and stock't with both; He was too, answered by our
Gunns from the Fortress, and with more Damage, for the Moors being in
multitudes, not a Bullet was spent in vain.

39. The Turks were earnest to go on upon the Assault, because in many places
the Battery had done Damage enough to scale the Wall, yet did Coge-Sofar keep
them off, expecting more Force, or willing by continual Duty and Wounds to
abate the height of our men, whose eagerness he hoped by slow Fighting to tame,
and waste the Forces, Ammunitions, and Patience of the Besieged; an Argument
not altogether out of the way, for the Winter, which had begun furiously, took
away the possibility of that succor which was necessary, and wanted from the
first day, for the carelessness of Peace and sudden invasion of the Enemy had
made ours unprovided to endure the weight of that War, their confidence in
that kind being so extravagant, that since the siege Antonio da Sylveira held
out, the place was only kept by the repute of that Victory; and Dom John
Mascarenhas had no more then forty Barrils of Powder for Canon, and twenty for
Muskets, scarcity of Provisions, as well as of Men, who saw the War before
they expected it, the Defendants were but two hundred, most of them
Garrison-Souldiers, who were to have their first credit by that Siege.

40. The Captain was not a little troubled at the State of things, and the
uncertainty of relief, which, it concerned him as cautiously to keep from his
own as the Enemy, neither would he in the beginning of the Siege stint the
Provision, and Ammunition, seeing, one way, the ill consequence, (...)
the other, the necessity of doing it; when the VVatch came to tell him there
appeared nine Sail, which seemed by their Built to be Ours, the transport of
this News brought all the Soldiers on the Wall. History of India, Dec. 6.
Cap. 9. Lib. 1.
The distance, and closeness of the VVeather made them of different Opinions,
but within an hour they made the Colors of the Squadron, and presently after
the Admiral with the King's Arms, which by contrary Winds was working it up
toward our Fortress; they all had their Pendants flying, and Flaggs of
defiance in the main top; they immediately saluted the Towers, who returned
them the same Sea-civility. The Moors from the Shore made many a Shot at them
whilst they cast Anchor; They first unladed the Ammunition and Provision,
afterward the Soldiers, and last of all Dom Fernando went on shore, which was
either the Fathers advice, or the Sons gallantry.

41. The Commander in chief, having received those Gentlemen as Companions of
his Fortune, knowing of Dom Fernando's coming, went to seek him on Board, and
met him on the steps of the Fortress as he was coming up, he took him in his
Arms, and spoke to him as time and place required, Dom John Mascarenhas
receives him.
offering him his own Lodging, which Dom Fernando would not accept, desiring
him to reserve that honor till they had Peace; that for the present, that part
of the works where was the greatest danger should be his Chamber; that his
Sleep would do him no good, one step from the Wall; Dom John Mascarenhas again
embraced him, wondering, in so Green years, to meet so Manly a temper.

42. There came in the Ships good store of Powder, Arms, and Provision, with
which they might hold out the Siege till fresh Relief; neither did the
Governor forget to send Physic and Regallos for the Sick and Wounded. The
Commander showed the Soldiers the Governors Letter, in which (as we said) he
secured him of his coming, for which he was providing with the greatest
diligence and strength the State was capable of, which put new hearts into the
Besieged, and made them look with an other Face upon the exigencies and
preparations of the War, which was like to continue, Coge-Sofar receiving
every day supplies, and laying new designs, for which he had from diverse
places brought Engineers, who were, by ambition and reward, put upon new
inventions, which made our men more sollicitous for the danger they saw not,
then for that before 'em.

43. The Governor, (...)
after having dispatched his Son Dom Fernando, gave Order for Proclaiming a
War at Fire and Sword against the King of Cambaya, as one who was perjured,
and had broke the Peace betwixt him and the State: this he did with Warlike and
Legal solemnities, thereby to publish, and justify the motives of a War,
which kept in suspense the judgments of the whole East. He writ to the
Inhabitants of Bacaim, minding them, that as nearest, they were obliged to
succor Dio, that other places helped in the States danger, they in their own,
the Gunns which battered Dio, shaking the Houses of Bacaim; that he was
providing to go raise the Siege, and use all imaginable Hostility against
Cambaya, because the State never had a defensive War with the Kings of the
East; that he desired 'em to be ready to accompany him with Ships and Men, as
was to be expected from so many Honorable Citizens, and Loyal Portuguese; that
he left it to themselves what they would do for the Service, looking that every
one out of Loyalty and Love to his King, should out-go his possibility.

44. He writ in the same manner to all those places from which he could receive
any help, finding them disposed to the Service, and for that to the spending
their Estates: an happiness which we must reckon upon as peculiar in his
Government, as on diverse occasions the History will show. He fell upon
providing the Fleet with a great deal of earnestness, He borrows of the
Merchants.
and finding the State too poor for such an expense, ask't great sums of the
Merchants upon his word (which was the Gold and Diamonds he only laid up) a
Pawn on which all men of Trading offered him what they had; I know not if now
amongst men of Power Estates of that nature go current for so much. He ordered
public and private Prayers to be made, He goes to God by public Prayers
beseeching God, since it was his own, to protect the cause of the Faithful,
relying more upon Sacrifice, then Arms; his ordinary discourse was with
Experienced men about the business of Dio, and was more inclined by the reason,
then the authority of the Votes.

45. Our Arms in Dio did not grow rusty. The Commander having advice that there
was expected to be put into the Army a great Caravan of Provisions, which were
to be Laden on the Coast betwixt Balsar and Damaon, upon it sent forth the
Sea-Commander Iacome Leyte with three Ships, to lie about the Island Dos
Mortos, who by Night getting over the Bar and Sailing along the Shore, They
take a great deal of Provisions from the Enemy.
took by it a great many Vessels which came to furnish the Army, he put the
Moors to the Sword except some he kept to hang at the Yards Arms when he came
over the Bar; which he did, presenting the Army with a Lamentable sight, who
had too the Confirmation of what had past by the Fire they saw burning the
Vessels, the Provisions were brought into the Fortress, which were what they
then most wanted.

46. Coge-Sofar had already lost a great many men, without seeing the Fortress
or minds of the Besieged shaken to flatter his hopes of getting it. Out men
walked upon the Wall with wanton Ornaments and Feathers, to show their
pleasure in, or contempt of the War they were engaged in. Coge-Sofar, seeing
us with so inconsiderable a strength Masters at Sea, and that the Provisions
his Army had came by stealth or in danger, ordered the setting out Fleet from
Surrate, which met with three Ships of ours coming from Bacaim and Chaul to
furnish the Fortress; the Portuguese fought very desperately, but by the Odds
of their strength, most of them Died, who sold their Life at such a rate, that
the Moors had no cause to rejoice in either the Prize or Victory. Dom Fernando
de Castro ask't leave of the Commander in Chief to go with some Ships to their
help, which he did not grant, knowing 'twould be labor lost, for the Enemy
stole out and presently retired.

47. Dom John Mascarenhas thought of advising the King by Land how things were
with him; The Captain sends News over Land to the King.
there was fit for that purpose an Armenian, skill^d in the Language and
Customs of the Moors; he was sent away in a light Brigantine, which was to set
him on shore on the Coast of Por, thence in a Iogues clothes (which is amongst
them a Religious and poor Habit) he was to go to Cinde, and from thence to
Ormus with Letters to the Captain; He travell^d in the company of some Basora
Merchants, who by the River Euphrates carried him to Babylon, where he was to
stay for the Caravans to go over the deserts of Arabia.

48. Coge-Sofar carried on his works with no less danger then toil, and with so
Cruel and Barbarous a resoluteness, that he used the Bodies of those Pioneers
our men Killed, for filling up the Ditch; using so inhuman a Discipline, to
cover perhaps the loss which now began to be known in the Army, though made
up by daily Reliefs which continually filled the Camp. Coge-Sofar, where the
advantage was most, planted sixty great Pieces, of which there were
Basilisks, Salvages, Names of Canon.
Eagles and Camells, besides less Gunns which exceeded that number; He secured
the five works he had raised with new VValls, and covered the Pioneers with
crooked Traveses of so many vvindings that our Guns could not come at 'em; The
Enemies command the Fossee.
The Moors by this means commanded the Fossee of the Fort, where they had
planted eighteen Basilisks, which played for a fortnight together, with so much
Damage, as our men for their last remedy defended themselves with the very
ruins, making Forts retrenchments and reparations of the stones which had been
thrown down.

49. We had now lost fourscore men, and had more then an hundred VVounded,
besides the scarcity and badness of the Provisions had made many sick; most of
the Ammunition was spent, and by it our men brought into a great deal of
danger, which Coge-Sofar having notice of by some Slaves who run away from the
Fortress, ordered the Batteries should be re-inforc't, believing the hearts of
such shattered Forces could not hold out; History of India, Dec. 6 Lib. 2. Cap.
1.
and as one, who would divide with his Prince the smiles of Fortune, sent to
the Sultan, who was at Champanel, to come to the Camp, to put the Fortress on
the first assault into his hands; upon the credit of that promise the Sultan
came with ten thousand Horse, The Sultan comes with a great Army.
and most of his Court, he was received with a Vollee Royal, seconded with
diverse Instruments of War and Mirth, Music which ours heard, as abating
their Courage, and grating their Ears.

50. Our men believed that the Mirth in the Camp, so Solemnized with repeated
Vollees, was to welcome those Turks they looked for; Dom John Mascarenhas
presently commanded Fernaon Cavalho Commander of the Fort next the Sea, to set
out a little Boat to know what past amongst the Enemy, (the Spies he had in the
Camp, being either Treacherous, or Discovered) which was done that very Night,
and a Moor brought us, who told us of the Sultan^s coming, Coge-Sofar's
promises, and the confidence they had of their design. The Commander freed the
Moor, and bid him from him desire the King of Cambaya to stay in the Army, for
he hoped to come and Visit him in his quarters. The Moor rejoyc't at his
Liberty, and wondered at the Captains answer; being brought before Mahumud, and
repeating the Captains words, he told him, the Portuguese had their Fort thrown
down, and their Hearts whole.

51. Coge-Sofar commanded they should continue Battering, and bid Simaon Feo
(one of ours whom he had against the Law of Arms detained Prisoner) tell Dom
John Mascarenhas, that he wondered to see him so pent up, without Sallying out
to Fight in the Field, as did the brave Cavallier Antonio da Sylveira, that his
actions very much disagreed with his words; our men answered the message with
Bullets from the Wall; the Battery lasted five hours, not without doing a great
deal of Damage to the Buildings, which were tottering before; yet our Shot
returned it with more loss, and better fortune, for a Bullet at random killed
a Moor in the Sultan's Tent, as he was discoursing with him; and the Eastern
Moors credulously addicted to Omens, the King looking upon what had happened, as
a warning of some mischief which was coming (perhaps dissembling his fear by
his Superstition) immediately went out of the Field, He retires and jews
Iuz^^caon in his place.
leaving behind him Iuzarcaon, a stout Abessine, who in the Mogull's Wars
served against Sultan Mahumed, and now as a Soldier of fortune, was by some
advantages persuaded to take pay in this War.

52. The King, having left the Tents, stouter in Peace then Fight, and retiring
to his pleasure House of Melique on the same Island, did hasten relief, which
daily recruited the Camp. Dom John Mascarenhas, who in so close Siege knew no
certainty of the Enemies designs, was talking with the Cavalliers and
Gentlemen how much it concerned 'em to get some advice. Diogo de Anaya
Coutinho, A f^mous action of Di^go de Anaya.
(a Gentleman who Lived upon his Pay, yet of bravery becoming his Birth)
hearing this discourse, offered himself to the Captain, and let down by a Cord
from the top of the Wall, protected by the darkness of the Night, went to the
Enemies quarters, he had not gone far, but he spied two Moors talking hard by
him, he scrupled to set upon 'em, because to carry off two was impossible, to
fight with 'em inconvenient, but advising with the occasion, History of India,
Dec. 6. Lib. 1. Cap. 9.
he Knocked down one of 'em with his Lance, and closing with the other (who by
Crying out biting and struggling defended himself) carried him to the Gates of
the Fortress, where he found the Corpse of Guard, who with Praises and Envy,
brought him and his Prisoner to the Captain. I will now relate a Circumstance
greater then the action, Diogo de Anaya had borrowed a Headpiece of a
Soldier, and missing it when he was in the Fortress, thinking he had lost it
in striving and closing with the Moor, went by the same Cord down the Wall,
and looking it in the sight of an incenst Army, found it, and brought it back,
not less rash then fortunate.

53. By the News the Moor brought, the Captain knew, that Coge-Sofar and
Iuzarcaon, this stout, the other desperate, had both mutually Vowed to Mahomet
to take Dio, or perish in the design; that, if they could not brook us when we
were Friends, they should not endure us when Conquerours. By their continual
Battering many of their great Guns burst, instead of which they sitted others,
shooting impetuously against Saint John's, Saint Thomas, and Saint James's
Bastions, Commanded by Dom John de Almeyda, Lovis de Sousa, and Gil Coutinho,
who slept always in their Armor, in danger constant, unwearied in duty.

54. Saint James's Bastion was the weakest and most battered, and the Turks in
that fought with our men upon very little disadvantage. There was not in the
Portress Parapet or Battlement which was not thrown down, and from Saint John's
to Saint James's Bastion all the Curtain was open, which made the duty of the
Day be seconded by the labor of the Night, it being not possible, yet
necessary for so few Defendants, so broken, to repair in a few hours the ruins
of a Fortress so every where Battered, yet did they unanimously betake
themselves to that Labor, they could neither master or excuse.

55. The Women of the Fortress helped to bring Materials for the making up the
Breaches, The courage of the Women of Dio.
going without any fear upon the Wall, stumbling at Lances, Swords, and
Bullets, mastring their Nature and Sex, as if they wore men's hearts in a
disguise: some there were who put on Arms and braved the Enemy, running from
their Needle to a Lance, from their Couch to the Wall; of all the rest Isabell
Fernandez deserved the greatest glory, whom (instead of Praises to honor her
Memory) our VVriters call the Old woman of Dio, famous by this name in the
Annals and Memorials of the East. This great Matron spent part of her Estate in
Junkets and Regallos, History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 2. Cap. 2.
with which in the heat of the dispute she fed the Soldiers, animating 'em
(with Arguments above the courage and judgment of a Woman) to defend
themselves by Fighting. This diligence of the Matrons (which readily and
seasonably put 'em upon any thing, were it servile, or hazardous) was in fine a
lightning their Labor, and an example in Dangers.

56. Coge-Sofar, seeing that the mischief his Arms did by Day our industry
repaired by Night, contrived a design more subtle in the laying of it, then
useful by the success. Against Saint Thomas's work, (which by its make and
place lay most obnoxious) he resolved to cast up an other which should equal or
command it, that by Battering it from above he might throw down the
Battlements, so hindering the Defendants from Fighting, and from making up their
Breaches by night, his Guns being so Levelled by day as to be sure of their
aim. He presently ordered whole mountains of Earth, and brush Fagotts to be
brought to fill up the Ditch, and strengthened the Counterscarp with bodies of
great Trees, to keep up the Earth. The multitude of Pioneers who were in the
Camp made up an other Army, who without fear or time carried on the work. In
the interim the Guns from our work played to the great loss of the Enemy, for
the Workmen being so thick and exposed, not one Shot from the Fortress was
lost.

57. Coge-Sofar, considering the greatness of the loss, gave order they should
work by Night, when our shootting being without aim and at Rovers the Execution
would be less, commanding them to make the most Noise, where they Work't least,
that our Canoneers led by their Ear, might point their Ordnance as the Sounds
and Ecchos reached them. This was known to Dom John Mascarenhas, who filled the
Fortress with Lights that the Pioneers who work't on the security of the Night,
might be exposed to the same danger as by day; but Coge-Sofar (who had learned
Experience in the Wars of Europe) gave order for the making of crooked and
covered Trenches, by which the Moors more securely went on with the raising
their Fort, and we vainly to our loss spent store of our Bullets.

58. The Captain was not a little troubled at it, for if that work went forward
there would not be any secure place in the Fortress, the Enemies Canon
commanding our Fortifications; so that between the Besiegers and Besieged there
would be no advantage of place, and that of numbers the Moors had eminently
above us. Upon debate of the matter in Counsel every one knew the danger, none
the remedy. Some, with more Courage the Prudence, were for our men's Sallying
forth with apparent danger to interrupt their work, not considering the hazard
they run upon, to be greater then that they freed themselves from; but few
consented to this advice, yet none could give other. Some Sallies ours made but
to little purpose, for the Numbers and Vigilance of the Enemy secured with a
great Guard the Posts of the Workmen. But in great Straights danger being
usually the best Counselor, Dom John Mascarenhas bethought himself of an
eminency in the Fortress, which was higher then Saint Thomas's Fort, from
whence our Guns might play; here he made some Pieces be planted, which did so
lucky Execution, as in a few days they beat down that Machine, which in its
raising and falling cost the Blood of those who Built it. But this Hydra being
of so many Heads, with the same ruins Coge-Sofar set upon the filling up the
Ditch, which was easier for him, being a Work that needed neither measure,
design, or forecast.

59. Two thousand Pioneers began with the materials of the Fort to fill up the
Ditch, and whilst 'twas doing a great body from the Army with Darts, Arrows,
and Musket Shot, kept our men from coming to the Wall. The work increast as
did the danger of the Besieged, for the Fortress being ruined above, the plain
ground with but little raising would be equal to the Wall. The Captain laid
about to frustrate his design, and being irresolv'd how, some Old men (brought
up in the Fortress) told him that by their quarters there was a Sally-port in
the Wall, which length of time had covered with loose Earth; that, by that,
without any danger, and with a great deal of ease, might be stole away the
Earth they brought to fill up the Ditch. The necessity demanded speedy
Execution, the Captain commanded men to Digg, and found a Sally-port fit for
his purpose. Our men Sallied out in the Night, and stole the Rubbish which was
undermost, History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 2. Cap. 3.
leaving a hollow superficies which covered the hollowness, solid in appearance
to the Enemies, and as the ground was exposed to the violence of the Weather it
sunk of it self, with the fall of all that imaginary Superstructure in sight of
the Enemy.

60. Coge-Sofar had presently intelligence of the way we took to delude that
which cost him so much pains, and coming to that place (out of impatience to
see all his designs Counterplotted) there came out of the Fortress a Bullet
shot at random which took off his Head, Coge-Sofar Dies of a (...)
in the middle of a Squadron of Turks. There was in the Army a general
resentment for the loss of so great a Soldier. Our men saw them with
inarticulate Lamentations, and dragged Colors bury the Body, with all the
Military and Civil ceremony the vanity of War could teach 'em: His Son
Rumecaon swore presently by the Blood of his Father, to be revenged of it,
grief and anger being amongst them the last Sacrifice offered to their Dead.

61. Rumecaon succeeded his Father in his Enmity, and Charge, Rumecaon his Son
succeeds him.
carrying on the War with the Obligation of a General, and Resentment of a
Son, engaged both by his grief and office. He commanded the filling up the
Ditch should in six several places be gone on with, the Army being hourly
furnished with Pioneers, Provisions, Munition, and Soldiers, and the work
every where rising, which Rumecaon hastened on, as a disposition to a general
assault; by comparing designs, he too bethought himself to go on with
contrivances that his Father had begun; He made six covered approaches, all
which ended at the Sally-port of our Fortress, by which ours had taken away the
Earth, these met upon a wooden Bridge, which we had made there, out of design
under it to steal the Earth; upon this they were making the Fabric we spoke
of, charging the Bridge with Stones and Timber, of such a bigness as the weight
sunk it, and it presently fell to the ground with the loss of those who were at
work under it. The Commander seeing this, ordered the shutting up of the
Sally-port, the use of it being taken away, and to avoid any sudden invasion of
the Enemy, who without any interruption work't on; while we were Hammering out,
any Plot, or open Force to defeat so dangerous a Fabric, on confidence of
which, the Moors (by their Festivals and Shouting) seemed already rather to
enjoy then expect the Victory.

62. Those cares were seconded by others of no less weight, for there were not
now in the Fortress two hundred Fighting men, some being wore out by Duty,
others by Sickness, and Wounds, and had more need of recovering their strength,
then exposing it in second dangers. Amongst the common Soldiers distrust made
way for fear; Provision, and Ammunition were scarce; the stormy Seas and cruel
VVinter cut off all hopes of relief; for, either to send for it or receive it,
the Season was not convenient.

63. John Coelho was Vicar of the Fortress, The Vicar John Coelho goes to the
Governor.
who had besides the Virtues of Priesthood resolution enough to go upon any
danger; He offered himself to the Command, (which was very acceptable to him)
in spite of storms to venture to Sea, and touching at Bacaim, or Chaul, as an
Eyewitness to acquaint the Commanders how things stood, thence too, by
Corriers over Land to give the Governor intelligence, promising on his Habit
to return with the first news to Dio as a faithful Companion of their
Fortunes. The Commander presently provided him a Catch with twelve Mariners,
where we will leave him wrestling with the Waves, till we are to give an account
of the success of so stout and pious a Voyage.

64. The Moors by force work't in filling up the Ditch, imperious and cruel
Rumecaon commanding them to Dye, or continue Working; for their reward,
receiving in the very act, a miserable Grave. They at last came to lay the
Ditch plain, and against Gil Coutinho's works where it could not be filled,
they laid cross great Masts, with planks fastened to 'em, which they made use of
for a Bridge, under that to ruin the Wall, which our Guns could not hinder
'em in, for they were covered.

65. Dom John Mascarenhas immediately ordered great Chains, to throw them from
the Wall on the Bridge, there hung at 'em Sacks of shreds dipped in Gunpowder,
Saltpeter, and other Combustible matter, which being thrown, fired so
violently on the Bridge, as presently to ruin it. Rumecaon came to make good
the work with new Planks, more VVork-men, and Soldiers, these defended the
place, the others continued Laboring; which our men endeavored to interrupt
by their Canon and Musket shot, which did very much hurt the Enemy; but
Rumecaon went on so obstinately, that he made fresh men pass over the Dead, who
though forced upon it, overcome the danger by their Obedience. By so chargeable
a way of working, he at last came to fill up the Ditch.

66. Rumecaon, Propositions offered to our men by Rumecaon.
by the few Defendants who supplied the Posts, knowing how the case stood with
us, had a mind to sound our Inclinations, believing in so dangerous a
Conjuncture, Reason and Nature would teach us not to throw away our Lives. At
the beginning of the Night, those on Saint James's work heard one calling to
the VVatch in Portuguese, saying, he was Simaon Feo, who upon some
extraordinary business would speak with the Commander in chief. History of
India, Dec. 6. Cap. 4. Lib. 2.
Dom John Mascarenhas had presently notice of it, and entering into discourse
with the Soldier, he told him, that he was Simaon Feo, sent by Rumecaon, who
had a mind, out of his affection to the Courage of so great Soldiers, to save
their Lives, they now desperately defended; that they saw the Fortress every
where Ruined, the greatest part of the Soldiers sick, or VVounded, without any
hope of relief, in want of Provisions and Ammunition; that we should not by
perishing obstinately, discredit by the rashness of a few, the greatness of our
Actions; that we would give up our selves, he desiring for his own glory to
keep alive so brave Enemies; that he would give us all Honorable terms,
leaving us the disposal of our Estates, and Ships for our passage, which if
we accepted not, we were to look to endure the rigor of War, and that
Licentiousness which in Onslaughts is Authorized by Indignation and Victory.
Dom John Mascarenhas answered him, that the Fortress the Portuguese kept needed
no VValls; that in the open Field they would defend it against the strength of
the whole World; that on the first assault he should learn this truth, that
he ought to bethink himself of sending to the Sultan for more men, and better
Soldiers; that the Portuguese scorned such small Victories; that he hoped with
Heads of Turks to make up the ruins of the Fortress; that if he vvanted
Provisions, he would go look for 'em as Booty in his Camp; that as long as his
Soldiers were Armed, they could want nothing in the possession of their
Enemies; that he hoped shortly through his armed Squadrons with Sword in hand
to cut out the happy passage he offered him, he told Simaon Feo, that, though
he was obliged to repeat an others words, he should not return with an other
message, for he would make him be Shot from the Wall.

67. Rumecaon seeing we fed upon Dangers, hard Duty, The Enemy assaul^s ^a^nt
Io^'s work.
and Hunger, affronted too by so slight an answer, resolved to give the first
assault; There broke upon us a Dismal day, (which was the nineteenth of July
in the year 1546.) the Enemies Army at the Dawning, being seen round the
Fortress. Iuzarcaon with fifteen hundred choice men fell upon Saint John's work,
Commanded by Luis de Sousa, with whom were Dom Fernando de Castro, Sebastion de
Sa, Diogo de Reynoso, Pero Lopez de Sousa, Diogo da Sylva, Antonio da Cunba,
and other Gentlemen and Soldiers not passing thirty; These with so much
Bravery expected the first shock of the Enemy, that they beat back the first
fourscore who began to Scale, who by their Out-crys, Blood, and Fall, showed
the loss they had received; Others presently came after them, finding the dead
Bodies had made their Scaling easier; Iuzarcaon encouraged them, by minding 'em
of their honor, their reward, and their vengeance. The striking on the Air by
the Guns, and Clamours of men, made an hideous impression on the Walls of the
Fortress. The Battery was continued against the other works, the assault
against Saint John's, and Saint Thomas's; that those who in themselves were but
few, might being divided, sooner yield.

68. Rumecaon with his Turks assaulted Saint Thomas's work, And Saint Thomas's.
kept by Dom John de Almeyda, and Gil Coutinho; his men picked out for their
Valor, and of a proud Nation fell on so furiously, as though run through with
our Lances, they gave not over Scaling, seeking for Victory in their Death;
they had the advantage of numbers, we of place, and those who had bestrid the
Wall, must either Enter Victoriously or Dye wounded, Retiring being more
dangerous, then Fighting. The Enemy with fresh men continually reinforced the
Assault; Ours, always the same, were too hard for the first Assailants, and
match for the last. The Women came to their help with Arms, and Powder, putting
on that Courage which was rather seasonable then natural; some of 'em with
Regallos and Drinks put Life into the Soldiers, and not able to show their own
strength, did increase it in others; there were of them, who animated 'em with
Speeches, deserving to have had in so great hearts the force of men; and
amongst the actions of this Siege we shall relate theirs as most unusual, if
not as the greatest. There was seen at the foot of the work a Mountain of Dead
bodies, some with their Wounds bleeding, others burnt with the Fire; some at
their last Gasp, 'twixt anger and grief, cried for Vengeance; sometimes too it
happened, that those who went to Vindicate 'em Died first. Our men that day did
wonders, which were more easily seen by their success, then they can be by
Writing; for in particularizing accidents the truth is uncertain, most of all
in the chances of War, where anger, fear, and other passions so captivate the
judgment, that each particular man can hardly be a faithful Historian of his
own Actions.

69. Dom Fernando de Castro that day gave proof of a Courage befitting his
Birth, What resistance our men made.
and above his Years. Sebastian de Sa left us a famous memory of his Valor,
till having his Knee shot through with a poisoned Arrow, and falling down for
Dead, History of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 4. Lib. 2.
not being able to maintain the Fight, he would not forsake it; He was at last
by his Camrades, full of grief and envy, carried off, having before
sufficiently revenged his Blood on the Enemy. Every one in fine behaved himself
so Stoutly, as that one day was enough to make 'em Soldiers. After Fighting
two hours they seemed but to begin the assault, Rumecaon carrying himself as if
in one day he intended to make an end of the War. He commanded every Nation
to Fight by themselves, either the more to Spurr 'em on by Emulation, or that
they might better observe Orders; he himself, Commanding and Fighting, by his
Voice, and Example made 'em stand to it, and not glutted with the Blood he saw
spilt, Praised the forwardest, and Vilify'd the backward'st, carrying out
'midst the horror of Arms, his anger with prudence. Dom John Maescarenhas
behaved himself not only as a Commander, but a Companion where the greatest
danger was, Fighting, and Commanding so prudently, that he came off owing
nothing to Courage, less to Conduct.

70. Rumecaon, The Enemy re^^res with loss.
seeing the great numbers of Dead which were about the Works, and that his men
kept back when commanded to come on, commanded the sounding of a Retreat,
carrying off in great haste the Dead and VVounded, so to keep from his own
their Loss, and from us our Victory; yet we had it from themselves, that they
lost in this assault five hundred men, the VVounded were many more; there Died
of ours but one Soldier, the VVounded were less then twenty. By this
disproportion it is seen that the Victory was not only obtained by Human force,
but that God maintained the cause as his own; our Arms being the happy
Instruments of his Power, of which the History will yet give us greater proofs.

71. Upon the Enemies retiring the Commander in Chief summoned our men to a
second Labor, which the Necessity, or Victory made them easily digest. The
Breaches of the Fortress were of force to be made up; the Stones and Mortar,
being the soft Beds which our Soldiers had to recover their so decaid strength
with; they all went willingly and cheerfully on the Service, led on by the
example of the Commander, who after the Enemies, Conquered his own Nature. The
Fortress in the morning appeared in part repaired, our men by their working
recovering themselves, as if they had been at rest; the weight of their Arms
not permitting them to make any difference 'twixt Day and Night. The Enemy was
by this assault so broken, as he durst not in many days come to Blows with us,
his experience making him more Cautious or Cowardly; He now and then faced the
Fortress with some inconsiderable Piqueering, to shake us with continual
Alarums, or by our taking our Posts, to observe the inclinations of our minds;
yet did he not leave off Battering, intending by a long Siege to weaken us:
but the Camp daily increasing with new Recruits, and the Sultan declaring his
concernment for this War, Rumecaon resolved to give the Fortress the second
assault.

72. And considering the loss he had received, though Fighting with so much
advantage of numbers, he looked upon the slaughter of his men as having higher
Causes, for which 'twas fit to appease the Prophet. Iuzarcaon falls to
Superstition.
He immediately commanded the bringing forth of a Banner which had in it the
Picture of Mahomet, and that the Army with that should go so many times in
Procession about the Mosque, and with other barbarous and ridiculous Expiation
should appease and reconcile Mahomed, History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 2. Cap. 5.
whose displeasure retarded their Victory. Fernaon Carvalho, Commander of the
work toward the Sea, saw the Army that night go in Procession with great
store of Lights, and by times heard Noise and Clamours which presently ended in
a sudden silence, again bursting forth into Groans of a confused multitude,
their Sighs and Out-crys were seconded by Instruments of War, and in this
Superstitious vanity were many hours of the Night entertained. Fernaon
Carvalho was troubled at the strangeness, and could not guess for what it was;
but acquainted Dom John Mascarenhas with what he saw, who guest it a
preparation for an assault, abetted by some Barbarous ceremony and
Superstitious rite, with which they hoped to reconcile the anger of their
false Prophet.

73. The Commander in Chief made ready for this second storm of the Enemy,
finding in such shattered Forces, all his Soldiers heart-whole, the Wounded
and Sick quitted their Beds and Cures, more eager to go upon Dangers then
recover their Health. Dom John Mascarenhas with Courage and Judgment ordered
and disposed what was necessary for their defense; An other assault.
Daylight was hardly broke when the Enemy appeared before the Fortress with
Clamours and doleful Noises, which by the sounding of Warlike instruments were
in the silence of the Night made more Dreadful; The Army came up divided into
three Squadrons, and had carried before 'em (amongst the rest) a Ba^ner in
which was the Image of their Prophet, that both Religion and their King's
honor might animate them; at the same time they fell upon Saint John's and
Saint Thomas's work, and Antonio Pecanha's Guard with so much sury as they
neither saw or feared danger, but were by ours so received, as they were with
more haste forced back, then they came in to the Onset, many falling down Dead,
most of 'em Wounded, and others burnt by Fire. Iuzarcaon and Rumecaon were
heard to incite others to Scale the Works, who under shelter of the Vollees of
Muskets, infinite Arrows, and other Shouting, did go on afresh. 'Twas here the
assault was Kindled in a great deal of heat, the Turks earnest to recover their
lost Credit, were by rage and shame put upon Fighting, obstinately getting up
through Fire and Sword, like men who less valued their Lives then the Victory,
so as they got to be on the same ground with ours, Fighting man to man upon the
Work.

74. Louis de Sousa, Dom Fernando de Castro, with the other Gentlemen and
Soldiers of their Company did that day give new repute to our Arms, so
behaving themselves as Rumecaon represented 'em to his men, sometimes for their
example, others as their shame; the Turks were continually relieved, Ours,
always the same, showed themselves as stout against the last as first; the
Fight grew hot every where, of the Enemies a great many were Killed and
VVounded, yet did their rage or anger, either hide or slight the loss; for, on
the Body of him who fell did an other plant himself, to fling his Lance, or
Fight more firmly, the heat and impatience of Victory inventing new Subtilties
or never heard of Cruelties.

75. They at last entered Saint Thomas's work, The Turks enter Saint Thomas's
work.
which for a good while they kept, as some fell others coming in their place.
'Twas here the fury of the Enemy was great, as well as their Slaughter. Dom
Francisco, and Dom Pedro de Almeydo showed themselves Brothers as well by their
Soutness as Blood, withstanding the shock of so many Enemies all the time of
the assault.

76. The Turks of Rumecaon's Division fought with ours Body to Body, upon
equality of ground, and advantage of numbers, the danger heightning our
Courage. Few of those who entered the work got off Alive, but having this Door
open toward Victory they endeavored though with eminent danger to keep it so.
This being the first honor the chance of Arms had in the War conferred on
Rumecan, he with praises and promises raised the pride of the Turks. 'Twas
noised amongst ours the work was lost, which Alarm, whether 'twas craft, or
chance, might have lost the Fortress; for those who fought in other places
almost all forsook their Posts to relieve the work they gave for gone; those
chiefly who Guarded the Houses toward the Rock, came so furiously to the
Relief, as the rest had time to Breathe, who by their Duty and VVounds were now
wearied and broken.

77. Dom John Mascarenhas went about the Posts, assuring them all, that the
work was yet ours, and how Courageously 'twas maintained; that Rumecaon stood
looking on the Slaughter of his men, who cast themselves weltring in their
Blood from the Wall, and by their fall made sure of their Deaths. The Storming
continued, and on both sides Death and Wounds seemed to add to their Courage
and Bravery, which Iuzarcaon observing, and believing those few Defendants the
Fortress had, were employed in those Bastions which were attaqu'd, (...)
leaving the Battle, with some Soldiers surrounded the Wall, and coming to
the Fause-bray, which without art Nature had made defensable by the height
and cragginess of the Rock on which too the Sea beat, seeing it unguarded,
without either Soldiers or Watch, guest that the situation made us secure of
it, and sending for a Senjack with a hundred Turks and scaling Ladders they
begun to Scale there without being either seen or resisted; for the Soldiers
who had the Guard there, upon the news Saint Thomas's work was lost, quitting
the Post they kept, with more Courage then Discipline went to relieve it.

78. The Turks boldly clim'd the Rock, making their way to some Houses, joining
to Saint James's Church, which gave them passage to a Gallery where they
planted Ladders for others to come up by. Iuzarcaon stood without encouraging
'em, believing he had stole both the Honor and Victory from Rumecaon. History
o^ India, Dec. 6. Cap. 6. Lib. 1.
The Turks won those Houses, and were going down into the Fortress, and one of
'em more resolute, or diligent than the rest, went into a Married woman's House,
and asking Money of her to save her Life, the poor Woman surpised with fear,
made as if she went forth to procure it, and going into her Neighbors told her
in a fright, the danger they were in, this, startled at the News, acquainted an
other, The Courage of a ^spain^
who with Manly prudence and courage took up a Sphere, and going to the House
where the Turks where, saw one of 'em at Door watching how things went abroad,
and coming up to him, laying on with her Sphere, forced him to retire within
the Doors, with so much Mastery of her judgment in the danger she was in, as
she had the Caution to lock the Door, and the Courage to wait on the Turks, and
hinder their coming forth, worthy certainly to have her memory Recorded amongst
the most famous Champions.

79. The women who Lived thereabouts being seized with so just a fear, went to
look out the Commander in Chief, crying, Turks in the Fortress; they found him
with three Soldiers running about the Works; hearing women's Voices, not less
Prudent then Courageous, He commanded them to be silent, and took them with him
to show him the House where the Turks were, The Captain comes in to her help.
dispatching one of the Soldiers with commands to draw off some from the
Works, where the Enemy was less pressing, without saying any thing of the
danger the Fortress was in to those who were Fighting; he likewise sent off an
other Soldier to bring him all the scattering men he found from Duty; by the
way he light upon Andre Bayaon with an other, and coming to the House where the
Turks were, he saw the Woman, who kept 'em fast, and, with more then masculine
Courage disputed their coming forth; so unfortunate as to have no reward in her
Life, so no name in our History.

80. Dom John Mascarenhas looking on the so extraordinary Valor found in a
Woman, as an Omen of the Victory, having it from her, that the Turks were
Locked up in the House, sent a Abessine (who by chance was there) for a Pan of
Powder, and because he moved slowly, should him by the Arm, when at the same
instant from the Leads of the Church, (where were gotten some Turks) came a
Bullet, which Killed the Abessine, who kept it off from the Captain. There
presently came a Soldier with Powder, which Dom John Mascarenhas taking out of
his hands, forcing open the Doors, threw in amongst the Turks, the Fire burnt
most of 'em, and the Bullets which with certain aim they Shot from within mist
him, which was interpreted to be by chance, by some others, providence.
Behaving himself that day like Commander and Soldier, covered with his
Buckler, and having his Sword in his hand, with four more he set upon the
Turks, and by dint of Sword drove 'em to the Gallery, And drives out the
Soldiers.
where he so pressed 'em, as to make 'em throw themselves down the Rock, with no
less danger then that they fled from, most of them Killed or coming off Maimed
by their fall.

81. Dom John Mascarenhas had now News, The Turks get upon the Church.
that on the Leads of the Church there appeared a great many Turks with two
Banners planted, beginning to Shoot our men from above as they came on; here
'twas the danger was great, for there being no other then Firearms, Fortune
out-went Courage. We were less then sixty, the Turks more then an hundred. Dom
John Mascarenhas seeing, that by keeping the place they increased, sent for
Scaling-Ladders, chance and necessity so ordering it, that in his own Fortress
he was forced to become the Assailant. Our men fastened a little Ladder to the
Wall, and the first Soldier who Ventured on it was by the ^ances of the
Turks immediately thrown down; they then brought bigger and clapping 'em to the
Wall, the Commander in chief striving first to get up, was by the Soldiers
just violence kept from passing. Our men got up by the VValls of the Apostle
Saint James's Church, confident by the place, of the Victory; the advantage of
place made great Odds in their Fighting, the Enemy had firm footing, Ours by
their hanging in the Air broke two Ladders, for their strife and heat who
should first get up was an other War. The Commander by his words and
example animated the Soldiers, which he did more out of his Duty then
Necessity. The Conflict was obstinate and resolute, some of our men fell back
Dead, none came off VVounded. The impatience of getting ^oom to Climb vvork't
more upon those who stood below, then the Wounds they saw their Camrades
receive; for, though in so long and dangerous a Siege they had not too much of
the War, they cut one an other with unheard of Cruelty.

82. Iuzarcaon encouraged and relieved his, with fresh men so, as in a little
time he filled the place where they fought, (which was the Leads or Roof of the
Church) with Soldiers. Ours at last, after a sharp contest, at the price of
their Blood got upon the Wall, showing in the inequality of place and numbers,
a difference in Courage. Three long hours the dispute lasted, And retire.
in which time the few who were there so behaved themselves, as that one Action
deserved a particular History, yet find we not their names Recorded, who by
their Blood challenged so distinct a memory. The Turks were almost all Killed,
some by their fall, others in the Fight, and supposed to be their best men, who
were singled out for so great an Action.

83. The Commander hearing the assault lasted yet on the Works, carried off his
men to refresh 'em in a second danger, and visiting the Posts, found our men so
engaged in keeping off the Enemy, that after four hours the assault seemed but
to begin; The Dead at the foot of the Works were so many as they wanted ground
to lie upon, whose Bodies made the Scaling of the Wall easier. Rumecaon
without, encouraged, or reproached his men, as he saw the bravery or coldness
of their Courage in Fighting; provoking 'em by Rewards, and Punishments; on all
occasions of this Siege showing both Resolution and Discipline. Dom John
Mascarenhas gave not over Ordering, and Providing what was necessary every
where, so as the Soldiers in no danger found him wanting; On that day which
was the Apostle Saint James's, it appeared the Saint would show us the Victory
was his, and that he was not now less Powerful against the Moors in Asia, then
he had been before in Spain.

84. The dispute continued hot and dreadful on both sides, Iuzarcaon (taking
it to heart, not to compass the Scaling of the Fortress which had cost him so
dear) came with those men under his Command, to put more Life into the assault,
when by a Bullet from the Fortress, which hit him on the Breast, and past
through him he fell down Dead; Iuzarcaon's Death.
And being a Person of such Value, for his Courage, and the place he held, the
News was immediately disperct through the Army, when it came to Rumecaon's Ears
(was it Fear, or Compassion) he received it with no little Resentment,
immediately Commanding the sounding a Retreat, to bring off Iuzarcaon's body, a
loss could not be concealed from his men, and being greater then any they had
before sustained, they now thought the Victory not worth what it had already
cost, and if they should atchieve it, doubted who would remain to enjoy it.
That their Prophet apparently showed himself angry with them, since he could
endure to see his Banner so ignominiously torn. To these Considerations they
added others which spoke against their Generals fortune, and the cause of the
War; laying to his charge that they had the worst of it. Rumecaon by diverse
Artifices remedied these jealousies, Palliating his own loss, and Enhauncing
ours, laying before 'em the Sul^an's Favor, and their own Fame, as the most
considerable part of that reward they were to look for. And that of many Turks.
We lost in that assault seven Soldiers, and had thirty VVounded; on the
Moors side the Dead were above one thousand, and the Wounded near two.

85. Dom John Mascarenhas, after ordering the Burial of the Dead, and the
looking to the Wounded, (in which he spared no Care, and less his Estate, which
he profusedly spent, without keeping account) did by a Brigantine send the
Governor word how things stood, and of his want of Men, Ammunition, and
Provisions. Sebastion de Sa, The (...) in Chief advises the Governor.
at the instance of the Commander in Chief, and Friends, went on the Vessel,
though with these words in his mouth, that only on the work where he was
VVounded, could he recover his Health, which every one desired he should
preserve, because his Actions in that Siege deserved no little Fame, and a much
longer Life; He recovered Bacaim when his Vessel was almost sunk, was received
and entertained by Dom Ieronymo de Menezes, Captain of the Fortress there, who
presently dispatched the Letters to the Governor, with what advice he had from
Dom John Mascarenhas.

86. Dom John de Castro was at that time very Sollicitous how things went at
Dio, because the Winter kept him from having any News, or sending any Relief;
yet did he, without sparing Cost or Danger, even under the Waves, succor it,
How the Governor was concerned to rel^eve Dio.
(when most straightened) with Men and Ammunition, as will be immediately seen
by the History. He had (with an intention to go in Person to raise the Siege at
Dio) made march the whole strength of India, and the success seemed as it would
answer the design, for the Kings of India made him very honorable Offers, and
the Gentlemen and Soldiers presented themselves without Pay or Reward.

87. About that time, which was the beginning of July, History of India, Dec.
6. Cap. 7. Lib. 2.
arrived at the Bar of Goa, the Ship, Holy Ghost, Captain, Diogo Rebello, she
had been of the Governors Conserve, and by bad vveather had VVintred in
Melinde, and though she came with some of her men Sick, the Air of the Land,
the Governors care, and the excess of joy for the business of Dio, made them
in a little time recover their health; Dom John de Castro was glad of so
seasonable a Relief to increase the Fleet; yet came no News from the Fortress,
which the people construed to be an Argument of some ill success; when arrived
the Letters sent by the Vicar, The news of the Vicar comes.
by which the Governor understood, the straightness of the Siege, the
strength of the Enemy, and the want Ours were in of Men and Provisions, and
the time rather requiring Execution then Counsel, he resolved with part of the
Fleet to send away his Son Dom Alvaro de Castro, against the opinion of the
Mariners, who in the beginning of the VVinter counted the attempt too
hazardous. Yet Dom John de Castro would not be Overruled, He sends his Son Dom
Alvaro with relief,
by the love of a Son, or the apprehensions of the Season, but resolved upon
sending Relief; which being known by the Soldiers, and Gentlemen, they came
to offer themselves, even those who by their Years and Command were exempted;
of their number was Dom Francisco de Menezes, who, after having had great
Commands, offered as a common Soldier, to go with the Relief, the Governor
took him in his Arms desiring him to stay to go on the Fleet with him, but
seeing him resolute to go in that Succor, and first of all Dom Francisco de
Menezes with seven Ship.
gave him seven Ships, with them to try to make his passage; Dom Francisco put
with them to Sea, and with him were a great many brave Soldiers, and some
of his Kindred, who out of love to Honor bore him Company.

88. Three days after departed Dom Alvaro, reconciled to his Father, upon his
complaint, Dom Alvaro parts with Nineteen.
that he had sent before him, his Brother Dom Fernando, as if by Birthright he
claimed the first dangers. There Embark't on this Relief a great part of the
Nobility, whom, the pleasure of the design, and the company of the General,
made to undervalew the ^urks, and Storms. The Governor gave his Son his
blessing, and put him on Board, with great tenderness from the people, for
offering up his Sons for his Country, toward which, then toward his own Blood,
he showed himself a more indulgent Father. The Governor having given his Son
some private Instructions, commanded him (though by his General-ship otherwise
dispens't) to obey Dom John Mascarenhas, and so writ him word; Dom John de
Castro having always a true Value for other men's Merits. The Ships of the Fleet
were Nineteen, whose Commanders were, The Commanders who went with him.
Dom lorge de Menezes, Dom Duarte de Menezes, Son to the Count of Feira, Luis
de Mello de Mendoca, and his Brother Iorge de Mendoca, Dom Antonio de Attayde,
Garcia Rodriguez de Tavora, Lopo de Sousa, Nuno Pereira de Lacerda, Athanasio
de Freire, Pero de Attayde de Inferno, Dom John de Attayde, Bathasar de Sylva,
Dom Duarte Deca, Antonio de So, Belchior de Moniz, Lopo Voz Coutinho, Francisco
Tavarez, and Francisco Guilherme.

89. The Governor having dispatched this Fleet, The Governors preparations.
was busy in preparing for that himself resolved to go upon, laying out for
Provisions and Money, which he took up upon his Credit, the only Treasure he
kept by him in India, with which he Commanded the Hearts and Estates of all
men, as we shall prove by the visible Arguments of example.

90. The Ladies and Maids of Chaul, The Women of Chaul present their Jewels.
possessed by the same generous Spirit, contributed all the Jewels and Gold they
wore, and with a Liberality above Women, without either obligation, or asking,
sent 'em to the Governor, and with 'em word that they had less tenderness then
envy for their Children and Husbands who went with him. We read not in the
Annalls of the Cesars, a braver Action of the Roman Ladies.

91. When the present came, there was accidentally in Goa a Lady of Chaul (by
name Catherina de Sousa) who putting all the Jewels she had in a little Box,
with this Letter sent 'em to the Governor. Sir, Knowing the Women of Chaul
have presented your Honor with all their Jewels for the carrying on this War,
The present and Letter of a Lady.
though I am now in Goa, I would not be without my share of that honor, which
belongs to me, as one of that place. I send your Honor my Jewels by my
Daughter Katherine. Guess not by the smallness of their number, how many may be
in Chaul, for I assure you I am she who have the fewest, having divided 'em
amongst my Daughters; and your Honor may believe, that the Jewels of Chaul
alone, without being Exhausted, are sufficient for ten years to continue the
War. The favor I beg of your Honor is, presently to spend mine in Don
Alvaro's expedition, because I hope by the intercession of our Lady he will get
such signal Victories as will excuse your Honor's Voyage and Trouble: this I
beg in my Prayers, and that our Lady by Hers will so add to your Honor's
Life, as you may return into Portugal to the presence of your Lady-wife and
Daughters. Dated in Goa, at my Daughter Donna Maria's House, this Eleventh of
July. I would, (were there need of it) for your Honor's Service, pawn my
Daughter Katherine. I know not, whether their love to their Country, or their
a^fection to the Governor produced these extremes. We have seen as much
necessity for it, but not so great Bravery as in Dom John de Castro's time.
Many Gentlemen, after having been Generals, and now Old men leaning upon
Staffs, came and offered themselves for Soldiers, there not being any one
grown stiff by his Years or Command.

92. After both Reliefs were gone, History of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 7. Lib. 2.
the Governor was uniting the strengths which remained, and disposing the
Government of the City in his absence. All the Exigencies of the State found
him ready with one hand in Peace, the other in War. And the Fortress wanting
Ammunition, and Provision, (besides what was already sent) he Laded a great
Carvell, which being a heavy Vessel would have much ado to endure the Sea. Some
Soldiers had refused to go upon her, counting it danger without reputation to
strive with the Elements. The importance of the business made him desire to
entrust the Carvell with some Person of Quality, whose honor would lessen the
danger. He imparted the business to Manoel de Sousa de Sepulveda, a Gentleman,
for his Courage and Judgment, very much indear'd to him; who told him, Antonio
Moniz Baretto had Gallantry and Industry enough for greater things; that
though, for some slight Quarrel against him as Governor, he would not sue
for, yet would he not deny the King's Service in so great an urgency; that he
would feel him, and bring the answer of his Resolution. So it was, that Antonio
Moniz, Antonio Moniz accepts of a Voyage to Dio.
understanding the Governors pleasure, and that he put him on a Voyage whose
difficulty only made others refuse it, presently embraced it. We will in its
proper place tell the success and danger he met with.

93. There was by the Vigilance of the Governor entered some Relief into the
Fortress, by which the Danger and Duty lay upon more Shoulders, yet were they
not in any proportion to the Enemy, because the last Recruit which came to the
Army, consisted of thirteen thousand Foot, There come an other Iuzarcaon to
continue the Siege.
under the Conduct of an other Iuzarcaon, in Valor not Inferior, nor in
Fortune love the first. He brought express Orders from the Sultan to streighten
the Siege, and Letters from him to Rumecaon, that he could not stand by and see
four contemptible Fellows, from the Worlds end, affront the Kings of Cambaya at
home; that they should all Dye in the design; that he had rather have a
desolate then a subjected Empire; that half the Portuguese being already Buried
in the ruins of the Fortress, if they could not force 'em to yield as Men, they
should as Lions kill 'em in their Dens. Rumecaon gave no other answer, then by
showing (sometimes for his glory, sometimes for his excuse) our Walls, and
Works, every where thrown down, being very much transported that the Sultan was
not satisfied with what he had done, and more provoked with despair, then
reward, he promised to satisfy him by Death, or Victory; and being more obeyed
for his Cruelty then Command, The Enemy makes a Bastion.
he ordered the making of a Bastion before Saint James's work, which was with
incredible haste performed, and furnished with Men and Ordnance; and commanding
our Works, our men could not appear without being fech't off by the Enemies
Bullets.

94. The Commander in Chief was not a little troubled at it; Ou^ mer throw it
down.
for if Rumecaon should (as his design was) Storm on that side, our Defendants
would not be able to resist him, without lying open to the Enemies shot.
Resolved therefore to throw down the Work, he recommends the Execution of it to
two Brothers, Dom Pedro, and Dom John de Almeyda, who Sallying out about
Midnight with an hundred Soldiers, found the Moors, some sleeping, others
careless on confidence of the place and hour. Charging them on a sudden, in a
little time they made a great Slaughter, for, forgetting themselves they run
upon our Lances and Swords, not aware of Death or Enemy. Those who by flying
could provide for themselves, with Groans and Cries gave the Allarum to the
Camp, without being able to affirm any thin^^ for certain. In the same
confusion came the news to Rumecaon, who (as dangers by Night appear bigger)
concluded this Exploit of ours was grounded on some great Recruit arrived by
stealth, which escaped his Sentinels. He called the Officers to Counsel whilst
the Army betook themselves to their Arms, and resolved with all his strength to
relieve the Bastion. He wasted the time of Action in Orders and Preparations,
and coming to the place found the Work on the ground, the Guards killed, and
our men Retired; an Action of no less fortune then concernment. There Died of
the Enemy three hundred, of our not one.

95. Rumecaon presently ordered the raising thick Walls of Earth against Saint
John's work, to be Guarded by a Troop of Moors, who by turns took the Watch,
and on the top of 'em he planted some Canon to Batter the Work at a more
convenient distance. Dom John Mascarenhas, Vigilant in preventing the designs
of the Enemy, The Courage of fourteen Soldiers.
put out through a Skit-gate fourteen Soldiers, in a stormy and dark Night,
who charging on a sudden the Moors, drove them from their Posts, whilst the
Laborers with Pick-axes and other Instruments threw down the Work, which being
told Rumecaon, he resolved with open force to storm the Fortress, ordering for
the next day a general Assault, on which he made a Speech to his Soldiers,
encouraging 'em, by the affronts they had received from so few Enemies, brought
Low by Duty, Hunger, and VVounds, that those who fell there were more
honorable then those who survived, to be to the World an infamous testimony
of an ignominious War; that it was in them, to save their King's Honor, to
revenge their Companions and to leave a glorious Fame of themselves in the
East; that they ought to be confident of the Sultan's thanks, for he would not
fail to reward 'em, and take a particular account of all their VVounds; that if
any would venture to govern the Generals staff, he promised as a private
Soldier to be the first should Scale the Wall.

96. Thus he left 'em fired with glory and revenge. Next morning by break of
Day, at the Noise of warlick Instruments, and with their Colors flying (the
Displaying of which was observed by ours) the Army marched, A general assault.
and coming to the Walls began to plant Scaling Ladders round about the
Fortress, with the advantage of innumerable and different Shots, of Arrows,
Bullets, and other Arms, which came from the Body of the Army. The horror too
of the Fight was increased by confused and repeated Noises, which, Violently,
raising their Spirits and confounding their Judgments, hindered both Command and
Obedience. The Moors boldly Scaled the Walls, as did the Turks on the other
side, as if they envied each others danger, all strove to be the first at
hazards, and blows. Ours, though but few (every one his own Commander, and
encourager) so behaved themselves as if each single man had been to answer for
the reputation of all. The first who came to the top with their Blood and Lives
paid for their daring, but were immediately with the same eagerness seconded by
others, some pricked forward by their own Courage, others by the General, who
from below as he discovered in 'em, heat, or fear, praised or reproached those
who Scaled.

97. The Moors cast Granados, Pots of Powder, and Balls of Wildfire in such
quantity into the Works, that our men Fought in the Flames, which catching
their Clothes burnt them alive. The Commander in chief strove to avoid this
danger with some Barils of water, How our men kept off the Fire.
which did partly extinguish or mitigate the heat of the Fire; but the Enemy,
knowing how much hurt it did, used in all their assaults the same artifice,
against which ours found out a more easy then effectual remedy, many Clothing
themselves with Leather, which the Fire did not so soon seize upon, Dom John
Mascarenhas with Hangings he had of gilt Leather (the Walls being naked) helped
to Clothe many of the Soldiers.

98. The War grew hot, and the Fortress (hid in Clouds of smoke) was hardly
seen, 'twas only discoverable by a weak Light, the continual Flashing of
Shooting, what was seen, and what was heard was full of horror; there were at
the Foot of the Wall innumerable Bodies, some Dead, others Gasping, and all
that was before the sight, or judgment, was a foul Spectacle, of Deaths,
horror, and wounds. 'Twas in all the Works on both sides Fought with great
Courage, though with disproportion of Numbers 'twixt the Besiegers and
Besieged. The work Luis de Sousa defended, (where was Dom Fernando de Castro)
was near lost, the assault taking it with the most Breaches, and being attaqued
by the Choice men of the Army: Yet did the Defendants give glorious marks of
their Valor, Fighting with such Courage in the Flames, as they showed
themselves, besides Valiant, insensible. Dom Fernando de Castro did here render
himself singular by Actions above his Years, proving Courage stays not for Age.
The Portuguese did that day things worthy a better Pen, and larger History. The
very Turks were testimony of their Prowess, saying, the Franks only deserved to
wear Beards.

99. During the assault the Work toward the Sea shot often amongst the Enemy,
who Fighting in Companies were more exposed, and received no little loss, which
Rumecaon taking notice off, The Enemy retires,
seeing his Colors torn, and his best men Dead, and that without the loss of a
stone the Portuguese had maintained the Breaches of their Fortress, commanded
the sounding a Retreat, less sensible of the loss, then shame. That day was at
several time happy to our Arms; With the Death of three hundred.
for the Enemy losing on the place three hundred, and carrying off two thousand
VVounded, there was missing none of ours, though some lost much Blood. The
Commander in chief immediately looked after the VVounded; the tenderness with
which he used them being the chief remedy; By helping the infirm, not only with
Expense, but grief and Fellow-feeling; he showed himself in Peace their Father,
in War their Companion. Their danger was presently succeeded by their
Labors, for by Night they all repaired what the Batteries had thrown down by
Day, and all with such Cheerfulness undertook the Task, as if they came to rest
themselves by carrying Stones, Earth, and Fagots.

100. Rumecaon seeing the hazard and difficulty of taking the Fortress by
Scaling, History of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 2. Lib. 8.
commanded the filling up of the Ditch from Saint John's to Saint James's work,
a thing he put the Ianizaries upon, who proud of their Repute and Courage did
ambitiously covet the most eminent dangers of the Siege. Rum on goes about
filling up the Ditch.
There were Dead already four hundred, leaving their name and grief for 'em
great amongst the surviving, who carried on the Work, which proved to 'em of
little advantage and great danger; for our Guns took 'em off, and a great many
of the VVork-men; whose Bodies by a Cruel and Barbarous discipline were thrown
in to fill up the Ditch, the Work being of Fagots and Earth, went on, Kneaded
with the Blood of the poor men who Labored in it. They planted some Pieces
with which they did harm to our works, chiefly Saint Thomas's, where they took
from us the use of a great Gun, and the Battery looked disposed for greater
Execution.

101. About that time the Vicar John Coelho, with nine Soldiers in a little
Boat arrived at the Fortress, The Vicar returns to Dio.
for though he found the Seas high, and the Winds contrary, pains and
necessity over-came the danger; He reported the Governor was with all
diligence preparing to come to raise the Siege; that he had already sent great
Recruits; that there were five hundred men in Bacaim, who hoped with the first
opportunity to cross the Gulf; that many not brooking any delay had already
ventred to Sea. This news went about the Fortress, and was by the Soldiers
entertained with Dancing and Music; every one looking out to Sea took the
Clouds for Ships, so credulous are men upon any glimpse of hopes. The Moors had
the news of our Recruits, and before our men should grow in Numbers with the
force they expected, a general assault was ordered, and they resolved to enter
the Fortress, or by their Deaths, Blood, and Perishing, show the World and the
Sultan, the fault was not theirs.

102. That day with three and twenty Canon, A fresh assault.
and some Basilisks they began to Batter, which they continued till Sun
setting, and the next day till three in the afternoon. They threw down most of
the Walls, so that Ours could not by any Reparations or Traveses shelter
themselves from the continual discharging of the Enemies Musketeers. The Turks
by the ruins of the Battery got presently on Saint Thomas's Work, yet did the
Captain Luis de Sousa, Dom Fernando de Castro, and Dom Francisco de Almeyda,
with other stout Soldiers who kept it, receive them with such fury on their
Lances, as they forced them back, some Dead, others Maimed. There presently
followed fresh men, whom our Swords made company for the former. The like
fortune had the Fight in the other Works, the Moors loss, and our men's courage
being the same. The Battery had so razed our Fortress, that the Moors (as in a
pitched Field) fought with Ours upon the same advantage of ground, Levelled by
the ruins, but by their Numbers and Fireworks did outdo us. Ours that day
deserved immortal memory for many hours enduring the weight of so unequal a
Fight; for those of the Enemies, who were wearied or wounded, were relieved
continually by fresh men; the Portuguese being always the same showed no
difference of either Courage or Time.

103. Dom John Mascarenhas went about all the Posts commanding, How our men
keep off the Enemy.
and Fighting, one while their Captain, another their Companion, and seeing St.
Thomas's work in the greatest danger, being most charged by the Enemy, sent for
a great many Pots of Powder, by those so honorable Matrons, who despising
danger and labor, came seasonably through Lances and Bullets, to their help,
with unheard of example, and with encouragements to the Soldiers full of great
judgment and courage, whilst others animated them with Regallos and sweetmeats
as if they coveted or deserved equal fame with them. We had the wind in our
faces, which, raising clouds of Dust from the loose ground the Enemy stood
upon, almost blinded our men, who only by that accident run the hazard of being
lost, yet Fighting with their Eyes shut they received the Moors, more intent
upon offending the Enemy, then providing for themselves. The Enemies fought
desperately, Rumecaon every moment minding them of their Kings and their own
honor.

104. Iuzarcaon with the Soldiers he commanded, Iuzarcaon falls upon Saint
John's work.
with so great a resolution fell upon St. John's work that our men were in no
little danger: for after throwing down the first who came up, others with so
much fury got upon the Walls, that for many hours they maintained the Fight
equal, till wounded with our Swords, some Dead, others faltring in their
Courage, lost the place and their Lives. Here was the resistance and danger
greatest, for upon our men, whose force was already wearied and shaken, came
other fresh Moors, yet, as if they had kept their strength and courage for the
greatest pinch, they repuls't the last as the first.

105. In Antonio Pecanha's Post the Fight was not less stout or fortunate, The
great loss of the Enemy.
and without particularizing accidents, we may by the success judge the fortune
of the Day: for the Enemy left sixteen hundred Dead, besides the innumerable
number of the VVounded: an incredible thing of a few more then two hundred
Soldiers, as were ours: so we find it writ in the Relations and Histories of
that Siege, which being ours do with a more wary Pen write their own praises.
We came off with the loss of three Soldiers, and thirty Wounded.

106. The Fortress by the Battery which preceded this assault was every where
Ruined and Open, and we to repair it wanted Time, Materials, and Men; yet did
Ours steal the hours of their rest, working by Night, and throwing down the
Houses of the Fortress, made use of their Stones and Timber, making a kind of
sudden and stolen Defense, more becoming the time then the necessity.

107. Ammunition and Provision was wanting, The strengths of the Fortress.
there was no more Powder then what was every day made, a little, and ill
Dried, a want which the Moors began to know, and had thereby the hearts to
continue the Siege, they had likewise advice that the scarceness of other
necessaries was answerable, for Wheat was at three Crusades an Alquiere, About
one third of a Bushel.
and yet the want of it greater then the price; the Sick instead of Hens eat
Crows, which coming to feed on the Dead bodies, the Soldiers killed, and at an
exorbitant rate Sold, the Famine came at last to that height, as they spared
not Dogs, Cats, and other such Food, unwholesome and unclean. Yet did they with
such miserable Diet recover their strength, undervaluing dangers, and duty, by
the greatness of their minds overcoming the passions and affections of Nature.

108. Pans for Powder (which the Militia of India use by Sea and Land, How the
want of Pots of Powder was supplied.
and in this Siege were of no little Execution) were as well as other offensive
Weapons wanting, which was supplied by putting together two Gutter-tiles, the
Concave inward, and Pitched without, at which hung lighted match, and being
thrown amongst the Enemy, diverse were burnt by 'em: by this easy invention did
ours hasten the Victory.

109. The Commander in chief desired to get some intelligence concerning the
practices of the Enemy, who slye, and designing, did yet with strange
reserv'dness keep from us his designs. Besides it was advised from the Fort
next the Sea, that most Nights some Moors came as far as the Bridge of the
Fortress, where they stopped, as men who for some end came to survey, and be
acquainted with the situation; their silence, the time of Night, and the
continuance of it, evinc't their diligence not to be casual. Upon which, Dom
John Mascarenhas persuaded Martim Botelho (a Soldiers of trust) with ten
Camerades to go one Night upon the Bridge, and endeavor by Force or Craft to
bring off one of those Moors* Martim Botelho, with the others about Midnight
went out at the Skit-gates of the Courtain, carrying only Swords and Bucklers,
and being arrived at the set place, (not to be discovered by the Moors) they
lay with their Faces on the ground, and listening a while, heard some coming
toward the Bridge, rising, they suddenly set upon the Moors, who were
eighteen, and seeing themselves so unawares attaqu'd, did at the first Onset
turn their backs, Nob a Town in Palestine.
leaving only on the place a Nobite, who with a Lance stoutly defended
himself. Martim Botelho seeing it greater concernment to take, then to Kill
him, Our men get intelligence,
put by with his Sword a thrust of his Lance, and closing with him brought
him fast in his Arms to the Fortress, where his Reception was with that
honor the Action merited.

110. The Commander by the Prisoner knew the Enemies intentions, what News of
the Enemy.
and made use of the advice to prevent some Stratagems the Turks were
contriving, besides he told him there were missing in the Army five thousand
men cut off by us, not to name Officers of note; that the Soldiers of the
greatest Authority despaired of the design, hearing we should as soon as the
Sea was down be Relieved; but that Rumecaon was by the losses he had
sustained more obstinate in carrying on the Siege, as one engaged by his
honor, and by his promise given to the Sultan; that by the advice of a Turkish
Engineer of Dalmatia, he had commanded the undermining Saint Thomas's work,
Saint Thomas's work mined.
(where was Dom Fernando, with Diogo de Reynoso, and other Commanders and
Cavalliers) which was done in so great silence as our men could not make out
the design, because perhaps they believed that Fireworks were not as much
used in Asia, History of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 9. Lib. 2.
as Europe; but the Chief Officers of the Army being Turks, they brought as
well Discipline as Courage.

111. Whilst they were vvorking in the Mine, Rumecaon commanded 'em to seem to
sap diverse places of the Wall, that we being intent upon the common danger,
might not guess at the secret one. And by an other Plot to divert our
attention, he ordered the making some wooden Horses to be placed before Saint
Thomas's work, as if by them he intended to take it by Scaling, and resolving
to fall on the tenth of August, on the Ninth he commanded the drawing off some
Guns which he had Planted. And that we might not by wondering at that find
him out, He endeavored by an other design to make us more secure. Rumecaon
endeavors to keep it from us.
He that night sent an Absessine subtly instructed to the Fortress, who
coming to the Wall, counterfeiting a Panick fear, cried to the VVatch to take
him in, that he might discourse things of great concernment with the Commander;
being let in, and listened to by Dom John Mascarenhas, he discreetly began his
Speech, cursing the desperateness of his condition, that being Born of
Christian Parents, he had like an abortive fruit of Catholic Plants abjured
the Faith of his Fathers in which he was bred; that now with his Eyes opened
he came to Knock at the Door of the Church, that the Latin Priests might bring
back to the Sheepfold of Christ, so lost a Sheep; that this was the miserable
relation of an uncompos'd Life; that about the affairs of Cambaya, he could
assure him the Sultan had news that the Mogull with a great Army was entered
the Confines of his Kingdom, putting all to the Sword; that Iuzarcaon, who had
lately brought thirteen thousand Foot to the Camp, had orders to join with
Rumecaon, and both together go against the Enemy; that with the resolution he
commanded the drawing off the Canon, but that he should be provided the next
day to look for a general assault, because the Turks would not without some
Noise end that War. Dom John Mascarenhas commended and confirmed his
resolutions of turning Catholic, besides the taking kindly his intelligence,
and again let him down the Wall, to acquaint him with any new thing that happened
in the Camp.

112. The news of raising the Siege, with the certainty of the assault which
was to be given, was Noised about the Fortress, and the Soldiers for joy put
on that day their Bravery, some rejoicing at the approach of the Enemy, others
at the end of the War. The Commander in chief found a great forwardness in all
the Soldiers to expect the assault, for all thinking 'twould be the last of so
long a Siege, every one coveted to give the latest memory of his Actions.

113. Dom Fernando de Castro kept his Bed of a Fever, and hearing of the
intended assault, Dom Fernando came sick upon the Works.
rose, his Gallantry offering violence to Nature; Dom John Mascarenhas,
sometimes as his Commander, others as his Friend went about to hinder it; but
Disobedience here passing for Virtue, he rather offended against Health then
against Honor, putting on his Armor and coming to the Works.

114. The day of the glorious Saint Laurence broke, Dedicated by his happy
Martyrdom to Fiery trials. The Gentlemen with so much transport of joy came to
their Posts as if already in possession of Reward and Victory. They presently
saw at a distance the Enemies Army marching Orderly, and dispersing it self
round about the Fortress. The Enemy makes show of an other assault.
Our Canon played with no little Execution, the Enemy, Soldier like, enduring
the Charge, rather then discompose the Order he marched in, till he had gained
his Post, and planted Ladders to begin the assault; they fell on the Works with
great resolution, hoping by Fighting to amuse us, that the confusion of the
Conflict might cover the Stratagem of the Fire they had laid. Our men showed
great Bravery, as if in haste to rest themselves in Victory, promised in the
issue of that Day.

115. The fury of the Sword, without any fear of that of the Fire, was kept
off, in Saint John's Work; the Enemy fought carelessly, till the sign of
springing the Mine arriving 'em they all at the same time retired; the same
fear, equal and sudden in 'em all, discovered us the Plot. The Commander in
chief cried out immediately for 'em to leave the Work; that the Mine, now known
by the sudden retiring of the Enemy, might without any hurt take Fire. Every
one by leaving his Post obeyed their Commander, only Diogo de Reynoso with
disorderly Courage kept the place, calling them Cowards who quitted it. At
those words all returned to their Posts, rather following example then reason.
The^ Min takes Fire.
The Mine immediately with a most hideous report took Fire, and those stout
Defendants lay Dead in that place, they had kept alive. Fernando hum delles,
(ramo d' alta pranta
Onde o violento fogo com ruido
Em pedacos a muro no ar levanta)
Sera aly arrebat ado, and ao Ceo subido.
Fernand (this lofty Cedars highest bough
Where with a hideous crack a close Mine sprung,
The unrooted Wall into the Air will blow)
Shall in a sheet of Fire to Heaven be flung.
Camoens Can. 10. St. 70.
Here Died Dom Fernando de Castro at the age of Nineteen, raised from a
sickness Nature might have past over, but Courage made it mortal. Dom Francisco
de Almeyda lost his Life, keeping up the courage and misfortune of his Family.
Here lay Buried Gil Coutinho, Ruy de Sousa, and Diogo de Reynoso, who with his
Life paid for so many Deaths, he so generously, but fatally was instrumental
to. Dom Diogo de Sottomajor, flying with a Lance in his hand, fell upon his
Feet in the Fortress, without any hurt by the Fire, or his fall; some lighted
in the Enemies Camp, about sixty men were lost by this mischance; thirteen who
came off which their Lives, were wounded or deformed by the Fire. Others more
largely write the accidents of this Fire. We had rather, then grieve the
attention of those who read the History, amongst the chances of this so famous
Siege, silently pass over this unfortunate Day. Our men wondered to see the
Execution of smothered Powder should be so great, that the stones of the
Fortress blown up by the violence of the blow should Kill a great many in the
Enemies Camp, the Fire rather following the impulse of Nature then the
prescribed Limits of the Engineer.

116. After some time, when the Fortress was cleared from smoke, Rumecoan
commanded five hundred Turks to enter at the ruins of the fired Work, the rest
of the Camp in whole Companies seconding 'em. The memorable Courage of five
Soldiers.
Yet met they with five stout Soldiers who resisted 'em, for a good while
sustaining the weight of so strange a Combat; so unheard of a truth, as there
goes as much Courage to the Writing, as Action, though qualified by the
confession of our Enemies themselves, and by the reverence of so many Years.
History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 2. Cap. 10.
Dom John Mascarenhas with fifteen more came to that quarter to their Relief,
where he beheld two Spectacles, one challenging Compassion, the other
Amasement, and relieving the five, all together made so stubborn a Resistance,
as to stop the fury of a Victorius Army; such a thing as, related only with the
bare truth, out-does all the Greeks or Romans have in their Histories or Fables.

117. 'Twas given out in the Fortress that the Turks were Masters of the fired
Work, upon which, some Soldiers who fought in the other Posts came thither, as
where the danger was greatest. The false report happily saved the Fortress, for
they made a Body capable of resisting thirteen thousand Foot, so many (as our
Histories reckon) were they, who went on upon the Min'd work. The Courage of
Isabel Fernandez and other Women.
The Women, taught not to value their Lives, brought Lances, Bullets, and Pots
of Powder, and the Magnanimous Isabel Fernandez, with only a Bill in her hand,
did by her Actions animate the Soldiers, though much more by her example and
words, crying aloud, Fight for your God, Fight for your King, Cavalliers of
Christ, for he is on your side. The Enemies, by the success of the Mine, having
so fair a Door open to Victory, resolved that day to conclude the business,
encouraged by their General, and the opportunity, now Fighting as owned by
fortune. Those who were on the Work, (out of ambition to be the first in so
eminent an Action) behaved themselves the more resolutely, and being Ianizaries
and Turks, would have for themselves only the honor of the Day. Rumecaon
commanded the re-inforcing the assault in other places, that against so
inconsiderable a strength, diversion might facilitate the Entry.

118. The Fortress was often lost, the Enemy being numerous and fresh, Ours,
besides their being but few, spent with the labor of so unequal resistance.
The Vicar John Coelho, The Vicar encourages the Soldiers.
holding up a Crucifix, came to encourage 'em, saying, that God whose cause
they maintained was the giver of Victories, at which sight those Loyal, and
stout Champions, put in Breath again, seemed more then men in their Courage,
for not one had any weakness or sense for his Wounds, continuing the Fight with
the same vigor, and boldness, as they begun it.

119. Now was the Day declining, and the Turks closely mingled with Ours, now
mortally Burnt, out of the same Wounds each man poured his own, and an others
Blood; and by a whole Armies charging on so few Defendants, our Soldiers
received many thrusts in the same place. What we relate with truth, may seem
heightened. The great things the Portuguese did that day let the whole East
speak, I believe, every Stone of famous Dio will be for 'em a silent Epitaph;
Our Pen shall not be ungratefully silent of the Names of those five Cavalliers
we spoke of, The names of the five Soldiers.
who were, Sebastian de Sa, Antonio Pecanha, Bento Barbosa, Bertholomew Correa,
and Mestre John a Surgeon. With the Fight ended the day. Rumecaon commanded
the sounding a Retreat, after losing seven hundred men in the assault, the
Wounded were without number, of whom very many Died (for want of looking to) in
their Cure; the multitude tyring out the Chirurgions and making scarce the
remedies. Mestre John only Died of those five Cavalliers who kept the Work,
torn in pieces by his many Wounds, which he sufficiently Revenged, unwilling to
leave the Fight, or obey his Friends, who would have forced him to retire, as
one so considerable for his Profession, not less for his Courage. The peculiar
Courage of Isabel Madeira.
His Wife Isabel Madeira came to bind up his Wounds, and after Burying him with
her own hands, with few tears, and great grief, went with the other Matrons to
work in the ^renches; Ib.
so great a Courage, as has been but seldom seen in the most resolute.

120. Upon the Enemy's retiring, Dom John Mascarenhas gave order for the
Burying the Dead, which were in the ruins of the Work, removing them from one
Grave to an other; for the straightness of time and place they were Buried all
together, so honorable Ashes being without Funeral honors, and Officious
tears; yet rest they, in so poor a Grave, more mist by their Country, then
those who in Alablaster urns have left of inglorious Lives an idle Memory. Dom
Fernando de Castro was laid in a Depository by himself, that if the Governor
his Father would carry his Bones to any other place, he might make him a more
Stately, but not more glorious Monument. After the Commander in Chief had with
pious Earth covered his Companions, he fell upon repairing the Breaches the
assault had left in the Walls, helped in it by the Women, who had their share
of labor and danger, not reserving time and place for the grief and tears of
their Sons and Husbands, whom they had seen expiring before their Eyes, and had
themselves Buried, by unheard of examples smothering the inclinations of
Nature.

121. After repairing the works with Stones, yet warm with Blood and Fire, The
Commanders resolution.
the Commander in Chief called to Council those few Companions who had survived
the Storming, representing to them the compassionate condition they were in;
the greatest part of the Defendants being Dead; those who remained, Sick or
VVounded; the Arms all in pieces; the Provision stinking; the Ammunition
consumed; the Fortress thrown down; the Seas, by reason of the VVinter, more
innavigable; the Enemy vigilant, and hourly Recruited, besides his knowledge of
all these wants; all which considered, he begged of 'em, that, without any
regard had to their own Lives, they would consult with him, how best to Salve
their Kings, and their own Honor; that they would bethink themselves, how the
World stood looking on, and that the whole East had their Eyes upon 'em, as
being in a condition to deserve the greatest Fame, or Infamy; that if 'twere
not in their power to get the Victory, 'twas in it to deprive their Enemies of
it, every one having the power of Dying bravely; that they would purchase
greater honor, cut in pieces, then the Moors if Victorious; that he had called
them together to impart to 'em his Resolution, hoping every one would approve
it, which was, that, wasting that little Provision and Ammunition they had,
burning what ere might be Pillage, breaking their Guns, with Swords in their
hands they should Sally forth to find the Enemy, Ib.
then could not that be called a Victory, where neither Plunder or Prisoners
were to be had. There was not a Soldier, who, having heard Dom John
Mascarenhas, thought it not long till so generous a resolution was effected.
Let Rome say, if in her Annalls she finds Recorded so great an Action of her
Fabios, Scipios, or Marcellus's.

122. Whilst this was in debate, Alvaro quando o inverno o mundo espanta
E tem o caminho humido impedido
Abrindoo vence as ondas, and os perigos
Os ventos, and depois, os inimigos.
Camo. Can. 10. St. 70 Alvar, when Winter swathes the Earth in Snow,
And has on humid Gates cold Padlocks hung,
These burst, through dangers to seek dangers goes,
And fights the Elements to fight the Foes.
Sir R. F. Translation.
Dom Alvaro de Castro was struggling with the storms of Winter, Dom Alvaro de
Castro's Voyage.
for, it being then the four and twentieth of June, a Season when those Seas
are not Navigable, He, sollicitous for the danger the Fortress was in, not
valuing that of his Fleet, did by force of Oars sail even under the Waves; The
Whirl-winds were so Tempestuous, and the Seas so High and Counter as they
swallowed up the Ships; some with the force of the Weather broke, others losing
their Masts and Tackling, lay without Steerage at the mercy of the Sea,
Shipping in water on both sides, without any Government of their Helm. Dom
Alvaro, resolute in the relief of Dio, turned too and again, finding himself
every moment so under water, as with the Ships rolling the Sea beat off her
Rudder; yet by his impatience, with some Ships of his Convoy got shattered and
torn into Bacaim, the rest recovered different Ports, History of India, Dec. 6.
Lib. 3. Cap. 1.
and Bays. Here Dom Alvaro found Dom Francisco de Menezes forced back again
with the same VVeather, after several times venturing into the Gulf, which he
found so High and Stormy, as for saving the Bottom he was forced to cast
Overboard all his Lading of Ammunition and Provision.

123. Antonio Moniz Barretto at that time came in with his great Carvel of
Provisions, Antonio Moniz arrives at Bacaim.
which (so general was the Storm) had been often times lost, and on his arrival
delivered her up to Dom Alvaro, with a resolution in a little Vessel he found,
in despite of the Seas to go for Dio, so seasoned with one danger, as to
venture on an other. The storm that day increasing, the Ship began to drive,
and spent two Cabells; the Vessel being of such consequence, as having in her
all sort of Provision for relieving the place, Dom Alvaro endeavored to help
her, but do the Mariners what they could, so great was the Storm they could not
get to her, yet did Antonio Moniz Barretto put himself in a little Boat he by
chance found on Shore, and, though those from the Land saw him a thousand times
under water, the Vessel being light, and yielding to the Seas, Lived in 'em; at
last he arrived, made fast a Cabell to the Carvel, Saves the Ship of Provisions.
and against every ones judgment, with more fortune then reason, towed her
after him, and concluding that only such a Vessel, little and light, could make
her way through so great Seas, Ib.
on which the beating and shock of the Waves would make a less impression, he
privately bought it of a Merchant, and with some Mariners whom he paid what
they ask't, embark't on her. There was casually standing on the shore Garcia
Rodriguez de Tavora, who seeing Antonio Moniz resolution, desired him, to take
him with him, Moniz excused it, saying, 'twas not convenient he should have so
eminent a Person for his Companion, Two Gentlemen go for Dio.
who would eclipse him: that only for himself he would have that danger,
without any other going in his Boat. Garcia Rodriguez assured him he would
every where confess, 'twas he who carried him, and give it him under his hand;
so scrupulously in those times did they manage points of honor. Antonio Moniz,
satisfied with that modesty, permitted Garcia Rodriguez to come on Board.
Miguel de Arnide, a Soldier of a Gigantick body, and not less in Gallantry
then Stature, seeing them put out to Sea, cried to 'em from the shore, What
Gentlemen do you go without me to Dio? Ib.
here is no room for you, answered one of them, but the stout Soldier, with his
Clothes on, Leaping into the Sea with a Musket in his mouth, swom toward the
Boat, and Antonio Moniz seeing so great Bravery staid to take him in, saying in
one so good a Companion he carried a good Recruit to Dio.

124. The dangers of the Voyage.
Those Gentlemen were at Sea in so bad VVeather, as all that day and night they
Sailed at the mercy of the Winds, the Boat, with her Helm lach't, and keeping
no course, obeying the Seas; the Waves sometimes drove 'em on shore, at others
made them lose what they had got, they were with a Bonnet brought to their main
Yard, turning up and down as the Seas carried 'em, which filled them so full of
water, as very hardly did they free her with Bucquets; in that perplexity and
danger past they the Night, all worn out with their continual Labor, by the
darkness of the Night and closeness of the VVeather not knowing where they
were; The day broke, but with little difference from the Night, and they were
still striving with the Waves, till about Evening they came in sight of the
Fortress, so Battered, as, for the ruins, they hardly made it; they came at
last to an Anchor, without the Sentinels taking notice of it, They arrive at
Dio.
on which they conjectured the Fortress was lost; Antonio Moniz called so loud
to 'em, as being heard by those within, they went with the news to the
Commander in Chief; here it is said, that the Sentinel asking who is there, a
Soldier answered, Garcia Rodriguez de Tavora, The generous jealousy of two
Gentlemen.
which Antonio Moniz taking ill, replied, that he was the man came thither,
and, if Garcia Rodriguez had not civilly and modestly tempered Antonio Monits
just resentment, the Jealousy, (though time and reason were above so slight
Quarrels) might have caused a greater Breach. Dom John Mascarenhas came to
receive 'em, and with embraces told 'em, how much he valued their so seasonable
Relief; he ask't Antonio Moniz where Dom Alvaro de Castro was, who in the
Soldiers hearing answered him aloud, Sir you have him here with sixty Sail in
Madrefabat, They tell news of Dom Alvaro.
and with the first fair weather you will see his Streamers; but between
themselves he told him, that, after often putting to Sea, being forced back
again, he was yet at Bacaim, but so impatient of his stay there, that he would
not wait for the time of year to come to his Relief; this news was so
entertained, that the Soldiers with Dancing and Capering forgot their past
Sufferings, in their hopes of the Recruit at hand; and those who had served
under Dom Alvaro, upon their experience of his Gallantry, warranted his coming,
in spite of the Seas and Winds.

125. Dom John Mascarenhas entertained his Guests on Saint John's and Saint
Thomas's works, where were the most ruins, Courting them, who had so well
deserved from greater dangers, with those pastimes of War. Our danger was not
at that time less, though less apprehended. Antonio Monits sent back the Vessel
he came in to his Cousin-german Luis de Mello de Mendoca, who had begged it of
him; there went on her some maimed Soldiers, with Letters for Dom Alvaro de
Castro from the Commander in chief, in which he gave him an account of all had
past, The Commander in chief advises Dom Alvaro,
telling him in short the straights we have before related. The Boat came back
to Bacaim to the great joy of those who saw her, to hear the Fortress yet held
out for the King, though that was allayed with the dreggs of so many being
Killed, of whom the most resented was Dom Fernando de Castro, who left behind
him in so green Years so ripe a Memory. Dom Alvaro received it with the
constancy of a Soldier, comforting himself with having his Sword in his hand
to revenge him: and immediately that Evening commanded the Fleet to put to Sea,
with orders to go away directly for Dio, who puts forth from Dio.
and that no Ship should look after an other.

126. Rumecaon in the interim, seeing greater Execution done by Mines then
Assaults, Rumecaon goes on with the Mines.
and having heard, by some Slaves who fled from the Fortress, of our Famine and
Danger; of the grief ours were in for the miss of so many eminent Persons who
were lost in the Mine, and of the scarcity of Ammunition and Provision,
resolved to continue Mining, which was done with less Danger, and more
Execution, and in pursuance of the design, commanded them to Sap at Saint
James's work, and that part of the Wall which runs about it. All was done by
crooked and covered Galleries, to hide the design from us, and secure the
Workmen. Dom John Mascarenhas, cautious, and fore-warned, arguing from the
short truce of the Enemy, that he was working in some other new Mine, afraid
too of Antonio Pecanha's work, gave order for the Repairing it, and the opening
some place to Listen at, by which he found they were working at that part of
the Wall, Our men labor to prevent 'em.
which the Enemy found so strong, as to be proof against his Tools; an
extremity he with Fire and Vinegar overcame. A proof the Enemies we had to do
with in Asia, wanted neither Courage or Discipline, as some falsely write, who
to lessen our Victories, take the Eastern Moors to be Raw and Barbarous; that
day they begun to destroy the Wall, and presently Rumecaon commanded, that
'twixt Saint Thomas's Work and the round Tower the Mine should be made, which
our men knowing, Counter-mind, and made up a strong Wall within; and wanting
Materials, and VVork-men, those honorable Matrons helped in so difficult a
Work, to favor the wounded and sick, who could neither endure nor excuse the
Labor.

127. Rumecaon having perfected the Mine, resolved under protection of that, to
make a general Assault, and calling to him the Officers of the Army, and those
who were chose to Scale the Wall, it is reported he made 'em this Speech. Those
ruins you see, besmeared with the Blood of our Fellow Soldiers, Rumecaon
encourages his men for an other assault.
must this day be our Grave, or our Quarters; they who keep those shattered
VValls are an hundred men, whose strength is by hunger and wounds so abated, as
we only Fight with the shadows of those who have been men, who miserably
Sacrifice to our Semitars Lives without Blood. All that honor, they with
unhappy Courage have won in this Siege, is to be Ours; for, from the end of a
War are the Achievements named, and the World gives always the Courage to the
last success; Let Us make an end of winning the Fortress, Let Us climb that mount
of Triumphs, we shall with only one Victory revenge infinite Affronts; Let Us
deliver this Slave Asia from Prisons, and Taxes, Let Us free our Seas, which
groan under the weight of their Fleets; we shall by this Assault make an end of
so glorious a design, and the East will for whole Ages joyfully remember so
glorious a Day.

128. Having ended his Speech, he spoke to, and animated particular Persons,
They fall upon Saint James's work.
with motives seasonable to the Time, and Persons, designing rewards to those
who should first Scale the Walls, as would have done the most prudent and
experienced Commander of Europe. On the same day, the sixteenth of August, the
Enemy with all their strength marched out of their Quarters, and dividing
themselves orderly about the Works, left the main Body of the Army to fall upon
Saint James's, where they hoped to open the Gate for Victory. Here they
gathered Tumultuously, with rude Cries in their mouths, and letting fly, in
great abundance, Arrows, and Darts, to summon our greatest strength to the
Defense; here the Fight was at the hottest, till in the height of it, the
Enemy, seeming to yield to our resistance, as on a sign given, suddenly
retired; Our men who had been fore-warned, knowing the cheat of their feigned
fear in which they went off, quitted too the Work, looking for the springing of
the Mine, which the Moors made play, and being resisted by the Counterforts and
Scarp of the Wall, History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 2.
which met with it, it sprung Recoyling toward the outward face of the Wall,
and the Curtain flying, carried it with so great violence upon the Moors, that
above three hundred were Killed, and many more Maimed.

129. The Fortress was for some time hid in the Clouds of Powder, and Smoke, so
as neither side knew their loss; as soon as the Air grew thinner, the Enemy
came on in Troops to get upon the spoils and ruins of the Fire, with so much
confidence of Victory as they hindered one the other, droven on out of
Covetousness of reward, or Ambition of honor; yet did Ours receive them on
their Lances, sending 'em back VVounded to those whom the Mine had destroyed;
after them came on others, also after a long dispute repelled by ours, who were
Galled with the multitude of Arrows, Darts, and Balls of VVild-fire which came
from the Camp, with which they spoilt some of our men, and hindered the
Soldiers, attent on both dangers, from the Defense; yet so Burnt and VVounded,
not one quitted the place he kept, where they so Heroically behaved themselves,
as is witnessed by the success and inequality of the Fight. The fire, the Moors
cast into the Works, was so great, as Ours fought in live Flames, which the
Commander in Chief remedied, by bringing Barrels of water, which mitigated, or
put out, the fired Clothes, and Bodies. The Enemies greatest force being drawn
hither, here it was our men made the greatest opposition, which made the Fight
the more terrible, Recruited every moment by the Moors with fresh men, and
Re-inforc't with the presence and voice of the General.

130. Antonio Monits Barretto, and Garcia Rodriguez de Tavora gave here eminent
proofs of their Courage, Ib.
enduring, with more then ordinary constancy, the weight of the Enemies,
showing, in the extremities both by Land and Sea, the same Gallantry. A great
share of the honor of the day is due to those, never enough praised Matrons,
companions not only in their labor, The women continue their Courage.
but danger. The good Old woman Isabel Fernandez, with a Bill in her hands, by
her words, but more by her example animated the Soldiers; and the others,
amongst the Arrows, Lances, and Bullets, either showed their own Courage, or
assisted it in others.

131. In the other works, they were not idle; for to facilitate, by the
diversion, the entrance at Saint James's, where the Mine sprung, there was
Fighting in all. Rumecaon gave order to Batter the Church in the Fortress,
which, by being high, might be thrown down, believing too the offense in that
place would be more sensible; but ours had so received the Enemy, as they now
coldly and remissly went to Scale the Wall, kept back by the horror of our
Execution amongst 'em.

132. Rumecaon out of impatience Commanded the founding a Retreat, The Enemy
retires with loss.
leaving above five hundred Dead, without number the Wounded. Any one of ours
might content himself with the honor he that day gained. That stout Soldier
Miguel de Arnide so signalis'd himself, as he proved even that Body too little
for so great a Soul, and accompanying so vast a Growth with proportionable
Strength, who ere was reached by his first blow, excused him from a second.
Mojatecaon, who was come to the Army with a great Recruit, and spoke with
scorn of the valor of the Portuguese, Mojatecaon praises our men's Valor.
by the experience of that day forming an other judgment, said they were
worthy to command Kingdoms, and that the Worlds good fortune consisted in
their being so small in number; for Nature had, like Lions, made them few,
Locking them up in the Denns of the West.

133. We lost that day seven Soldiers, those who were Scorch't were twenty
two; and now the well were so few, as not to be enough to help the Wounded,
less able to repair the ruins of the Fortress, for which, time, Materials and
Men were vvanting; but Rumecaon finding so tough resistance in the Assaults,
had an other opinion of our strength. At this time three of our Slaves ran to
the Enemy, Rumecaon has intelligence from three of our Slaves who ran away.
who brought before Rumecaon, told him, there were not threescore Soldiers
in the Fortress, who could bear Arms, and those very much wore out with
Hunger, and continual duty of Labor, and Centries; in whom nothing was to be
found but obstinacy without force. Rumecaon, on the certainty of this news,
resolved the next day with all his strength to storm us, acquainted his men
with the condition we were in, and gave order they should all hear it from the
Slaves mouths, Ib.
who running up and down the Army merrily spread the relation of our
necessities.

134. As soon as the Day broke, the Army had orders to give the Assault; He
gives an other assault.
at which, as at the last of the War, every one would be present, some put on
their Bravery, believing they went rather to Triumph then to Fight. They came
out of their Tents with their Colors flying, playing on diverse Instruments,
which seconded by the noise of the Camp, formed Barbarous, and hideous Echoes,
and having, by the intelligence we have spoke of, overcome their fear, as soon
as they came in sight they advanced to Saint Thomas's work, which being almost
all thrown down helped them up by its ruins. The first company who fell on,
with confidence of Victory, were Turks, who, by our men's casting amongst them
some Pots of Powder, Our men's stout resistance.
were forced being all on Fire to retreat. Others came on with the same fury,
and after a long dispute, as the first, gave back, of whom our Swords had drawn
Blood; but Rumecaon not doubting but so continual resistance would spend us, as
Iron which is blunted by cutting, by the slaughter of his own men guessing at
our weakness, Commanded his Soldiers to go take possession of the Fortress,
which had now none left to oppose 'em. Here tumultuously fell on a great Body
of the Moors, engaged on by their own credulity or the words of the General.
These at their first speed got upon the Wall, and began body to body to Fight
with ours, many and fresh, against a few, already wearied and wounded; yet
deriving Courage from their gallantry; and necessity, the last found them as
Valiant as the first. Some of the Enemies falling down, others came in their
places, which often lost the Fortress. Here fell in Dom John Mascarenhas,
animating, as a great Commander, his Men, and Fighting, as the stoutest
Soldier, himself; and provided for all the chances of War, had ready all
sorts of Arms; which our men made use of, being by those stout Women, put into
their hands. Luis de Sousa Commander of that Work, showed that day great
Gallantry. Antonio Moniz Barretto, Garcia Rodriguez de Tavora, Dom Pedro, and
Dom Francisco de Almeyda, did things worthy a larger History, Ib.
and all the Cavalliers, and Soldiers, who were in the Action, purchased a most
deserved Name.

135. Rumecaon by the Slaves information, believing he should find free
entrance, Rumecaon falls upon Saint John's work and retires.
Commanded his men to fall upon Saint John's work; but those few Defendants
there were, so behaved themselves, as the Enemy was forced with loss and shame
to retire. Rumecaon, amazed at what he saw, said, we were the Instruments of
Heavens anger against Cambaya, and the second time, with certain Barbarous and
Ridiculous expiations, went about the appeasing Mahomet; and because in
storming, he lost a great many men without success, and the Soldiers now grown
Cowardly, did on the apprehension of their being so daily Butchered, slight
their obedience, he set upon Mining again, as a way more effectual or more
secure; and first he commanded the opening some Loop-holes in the Wall, which
divided the Army, and our Fortress, by which our men received no little harm,
Fighting as in a plain Field, without the protection of the Wall, which was
thrown down; and the showring of Muskets without any intermission annoyed us.

136. He commanded his Soldiers to Batter the Cistern with a great Gun, He
endeavors to break down the Cistern.
because that being broke, as in a necessity past Cure, thirst would destroy
us; this Cistern is at the entry of a Street, which we call the Cova, and
was the Moors old Ditch, where those who were not fit for Service retired;
here fell store of Bullets, not without doing mischief to the poor people who
fled thither for Protection, and endangering the Roof which covered the
Cistern. The Commander in Chief prevented this fear by ordering an high defense
of Wood lined with Earth, which secured the apprehensions of either
inconvenience, making holes too in the common joining of the Houses, next the
Fortress, by which they supplied one the other securely.

137. The Moors in the interim work't in the Mine, which was carried to Saint
James's work, and being by Ours found out, they on the inside put strong
Abutements, and opened some Vents, that the Fire might spend it self, at the
time of springing the Mine, it met with such resistance in the Scarp, that
carrying with it part of the Work, it played without the Fortress, An other
Mine plays with loss to the Enemy.
Killing great numbers of those Soldiers and Miners, who were employed in it,
not one of Ours miscarrying, by the Courtain of the Wall holding firm; it might
be by chance, but that so extraordinary, as it appeared a miracle. The Moors,
when the Mine played, did by whole Companies get up on the ruins of the Work,
where they were Resisted by our men, vvorn out by Watching, weakened by their
Fasting and Wounds, and more in Heart by the greatness of their Courage, then
the force of Nature, The great danger ours were in.
yet so animated by honor and danger, as they seemed to Fight with fresh, and
entire strength, keeping off the wild Current of the Enemy with his own loss;
The place was of reception for more to Fight upon, and the danger encreast by
the inequality of the numbers. The noise of Arms, and confusion of Cries,
interrupted all Commanding, and Obeying; of the Moors many fell, but by the
diligence of the Commanders, others came in their place, by which they gave
Ours no respite, who from a far were thrown at by Darts and Arrows, and Fought
closed hand to hand. Thus did they for many hours hold out the Fight. The Enemy
gained so much as to plant three Colors on the Works, The Enemy plants three
Colors on St. James's work.
which their great numbers of Musquetteers defended; thence they descended by
the Wall to the Apostle Saint James's Church, which joins to the same Work,
and placed themselves on the Top of it, so that one half of the Work and
Church was kept by the Moors, and by us the other.

138. The night came on, and not Peace but Nature put an end to the dispute;
yet did they with wandering and uncertain blows blindly continue the Battle.
The Commander in chief gave presently order for the casting up a weak Work
(which more divided then protected us from the Enemy) which was made by
stealth, and with Swords in their hands; the Soldiers had no other Lodging
then the place they fought on, where, not on their Arms, could they securely
take a little repose, neither had they convenience of time or place to dress
their VVounds. The Commander indulged himself no rest from his Arms, less from
his Thoughts; He that night Commanded the Levelling a Canon at the Door of the
Church, which commanded the Work, and with that galled the Moors, who while
they kept possession of what they had got, received no little loss, till by a
high Rampire they covered and secured themselves.

139. The danger by Sea, was not less then that by Land; Luis de Mello departs
from Bacaim.
for immediately, upon the arrival of Antonio Moniz's Carvel to Bacaim, the
next day (the fourteenth of August) Luis de Mello with fifteen Companions
embarked on her, and after him Dom Iorge, and Dom Duarte de Menezes with
seventeen Soldiers in a Fly-boat. History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 3.
Dom Antonio de Attayde, and Francisco Guilherme, each in a Ship of his own,
with fifteen Soldiers. Luis de Mello presently put to Sea, but for the
contrary Winds made but little way, the further he got off from the shore, he
found the Seas higher, and the Carvel being but little, and loose, and the
Waves so great, as by the force of the Storm to break over and flower her, The
dangers of his Voyage.
she ship't the water on both sides, which the Mariners, every moment
overwhelmed, freed with Bucquets, upon which both Grumets, and Soldiers,
grown fearful, and out of heart, desired Luis de Mello to stand for his Port
again, saying, that with men they could Fight, but not with the Elements; that
'twas now not Courage, but Obstinacy, to lose themselves for nothing; that
against the wrath of God no Bravery could carry it out. Luis de Mello went to
quiet 'em, alleging, that Antonio Moniz past in the same Vessel and same
Storm; that he had not with him better men then he, nor did the Seas show him
more favor; that none without danger achieved great things; that when their
Friends, and Camrades were Fighting with the Turks, they were not to wait for
calm Seas, and fair Winds to go and relieve 'em; that though the Waves
swallowed the Ship, he would, on his Sword swim to Dio; that they should go man
the Sails, for God would help.

140. The terror, and shame of these words, did for the present quiet 'em, so
as that Evening and Night, they were striving with the Storm, expecting every
Wave should overset 'em, and now wanting strength to furnish their Duty, seeing
the Tempests likely every minute to grow bigger, Mariners and Soldiers agreed,
by force to compel Luis de Mello to Tack about, which being told him by one
Gomez de Quadras, a Soldier under his command, he took all the Arms, and
laying 'em up in the Gun-room, with his Sword in his hand said, who ere spoke
of going back, should be answered by Stabbs; He resist^ those who would return.
that none of their Lives was more Valuable then his, that they should be
afraid where he was lost, to lose 'em; that they should look forward, toward
Dio, for that now, neither their honor, nor safety had any other Port. The
Soldiers seeing this resolution, and the Mariners more afraid of the
Commander, then the Storm, pursued their Voyage, with water always on Board,
and drinking in Death, as if every puff of Wind had been to Bury 'em; thus were
they Sailing in continual Shipwreck, till in the Evening they came in sight of
the Fortress, whence they were perceived with Joy and Amasement. He arrives a^
Dio and ^ells news of Dom Alvaro.
The Moors at their coming over the Bar plied 'em with Shot, but they came
without any hurt under the Fause-bray, where the Commander came with an
Over-joy to receive 'em; who, was by Luis Mello assured, that Dom Alvaro de
Castro could not be two days behind, news by every one entertained with such
Rejoicing as reached the Moors, on which they concluded the Relief was now at
Sea, and Rumecaon resolved to streighten the Siege. Luis de Mello with his men
were quartered on Saint James's work, the most part of which was held by the
Enemy, and which he had Garrisoned with the best men of his Army, put there to
Dye in defense of what they had got. The other Gentlemen arrive.
The next day arrived Dom Iorge, and Dom Duarte de Menezes, having escaped with
the same resolution, as Luis de Mello, the same dangers; with this Recruit,
more considerable in quality then number, the War seemed to put on an other
face.

141. The new Guests importuned Dom John Mascarenhas to let 'em see the Enemy,
by setting on the driving him out of Saint James's work, which he easily
granted, and resolved to bear them Company. All provided against the next day,
and when it broke, A sight in St. James's work.
got upon those Walls the Enemy had made for his Defense; charging the Moors so
Vigorously, as they forced them from that place, maugre the Courage and
Opposition they maintained themselves with; The noise before the news reached
Rumecaon's Ears, who coming with all his Force to that place, again engaged
with Ours, on equality in the ground, but advantage in the number; Here both
sides fought it out, Hand to Hand, and Body to Body, wounding one the other
with short Weapons, every one with his Blood and Life maintaining the ground he
stood upon. Ours with so inferior a party showed so much Gallanty, as the
Moors without the Works stood looking on with fear and wonder; yet, the Enemies
force having so much the Odds, he regained that part of the Work he had won
before, and re-inforcing it with a double Garrison, ordered the giving a
general Assault to the Fortress. The Fight was every where at the same heat,
many of the Moors dropped, some taken off by the Sword, others burnt with the
Fire; but when the dispute was at the hottest, the day began to over-cast with
a great storm of Wind, Rain, Thunder, and Lightning, as if in the Air was
kindled an other new Battle.

142. The Moors, seeing our Match put out by the Rain, and that neither our
Pots of Powder, nor any other Fireworks could do them any mischief, looking
upon the course or variety of the Weather as Divine favor, came under covert
in the midst of thick Rain, upon us without fear, and with Shouts, and Cries, as
if they had Heaven on their side. This was the day, in which our men showed the
greatest Courage, and the Fortress was in the greatest danger; The danger the
Fortress was in, and the Courage of our men.
because the Moors run upon our Lances and Swords, either Brutish, or Valiant.
Six hours lasted this so resolute Assault, till the day turned clear again, and
our men began to make use of their Pots of Powder, with which they Burnt not a
few, whose sight cooled the others Courage, making them Fight more Cautiously
till the close of the Day, and Rumecaons sounding a Retreat; Rumecaon retires
with great loss.
when he left, four hundred Dead, and above a thousand Wounded; of ours seven
Died, the Wounded were more. All the Gentlemen of the Recruit were in this
Assault, giving the same proofs of their Courage and Birth; Dom John
Mascarenhas played by turns the prudent Commander and stout Soldier, always
present in danger, without prostituting his Command. Our men past that night
with Watching, having for their so near Neighbors the Enemy, who had, for the
straightness he held the Besieged in, received new Honors from the Sultan, The
Enemy is recruited.
and a Recruit of five thousand Foot was come to him, with many Turk-Officers,
whom Rumecaon desired should be presently brought to face our men, that by
showing them with whom he had to do, he might justify his Actions.

143. The day after the Assault, came over the Bar Dom Antonio de Attayde, The
other Gentlemen arrive at Dio.
and Francisco Guilherme, who found not the Seas less Boisterous then those we
have spoke of; who reported Dom Alvaro de Castro could not be missing a day,
having made the Fleet set out with this Order, that no Ship should stay for an
other. The Soldiers, for this News and Recruit, kept Holyday with Music, and
continual Dancing, which made the dangers of the Siege go only for a pass-time.

144. Rumecaon, having notice there were already arrived some Recruits at the
Fortress, Rumecaon despairs of the design.
and thinking when the Weather opened, the Portuguese would not be backward to
assist one the other in the greatest Dangers, began to despair of the design,
seeing hardships shook not our men's Resolutions, History of India, Dec. 6. Lib.
3. Cap. 4.
and that his Soldiers in their Discourses did not allow the cause of the
War, accusing the Breakers of that Peace we kept so inviolably; He was afraid
of some dispositions he saw for a mutiny, which, by aggravating the miserable
condition of Ours, and the infallibility of their Victory, he Labored to
prevent. He paid the Soldiers, and commanded the They are Judges, Preachers,
and Governors of Colleges.
Cacizes to Preach the certainty of Glory for all those who Died in this War,
and the Rewards, which for defending their Country, they were to receive from
the Sultan, not forgetting to join the Temporal, with the Spiritual. And Mines
not being so Dangerous as Storming, and of more Execution, he resolved to go on
with them; on this design, he commanded the opening a great Mine, in that tract
of the Wall which from Saint John's work goes until it end in Antonio
Pecanha's Centry-house; but our men being cautioned (though subtle, and
contriving Rumecaon, sap't under the other Works, He opens an other Mine,
which is prevented.
commanding his men by night to make a noise there, by that diversion to keep
from us his intention) Dom John Mascarenhas had notice of the Mine, against
which, as at other times, he secured himself, the Gentlemen working to prevent
it, whose example eased the Labor of the Soldiers.

145. When 'twas time to spring the Mine, the whole Army moved, It plays and
our men defend the Breaches.
and begun to surround the Fortress; there came before two Sanjacks commanding
a Company of Turks, who were to enter at the Breaches presumed upon at the
playing of the Mine, which with a hideous Noise carried into the Air the whole
face of the Wall; The Turks, though blind with Smoke, and Dust, (the force of
the Fire had raised) ran presently on, but found the opposition of an other
Wall, the Fire either had not reached, or had proved too strong; yet seeing
Antonio Pecanha's Watch-house open in three places, carrying thither their
Arms, they endeavored to gain it; but our men, as to the weakest place came to
its Relief, stopping the Current of the Enemy.

146. Here the dispute was for a while close and hot, the Besiegers and
Besieged, as it were Fighting in a plain Campagnia, and Rumecaon believing,
that there was all our force, Commanded 'em to fall on the other Works, where
too the Portuguese entertained 'em with their Swords. The Enemy that day shot
infinite Bullets into the Fortress, which, though That was almost razed, did no
harm, an accident which for its rareness looked like a miracle. The Enemy
retires.
The Fight lasted some hours, the Enemy retiring with his usual loss, we with
our ordinary good fortune.

147. Rumecaon, who now thought himself reproached by the length of the Siege,
as one who to justify himself, went in quest of dangers, and difficulties, the
next day in Person fell upon Saint Thomas's work, commanding several Officers
to Scale the other works, which made those days Storming go for a successive
assault. Rumecaon falls upon St. Thomas's work.
The Moors fought here, more Desperately then Valiantly, making haste, though
run through with Lances, and Swords at once, to Dye, and Kill; readier to
offend, then save themselves, seeking Death as the gate to that imaginary
Glory, promised 'em by the Cacizes, who in favor of the design, and to beget
in the Soldiers a contempt of their Lives, continually pressed that Diabolical
incentive. In this heat, did they for some hours endure the Crisis of the
Battle, with the loss of fourscore, upon whose Bodies they continued Fighting,
forced on by the grief and loss of their slain Camrades. They in fine behaved
themselves with such resolution, as to keep that part of the Work where the
Fight was, planting on it their Colors, covering themselves with Trenches and
Barricados.

148. The dispute in Saint James's work was not cooler, the Enemies had twice
got it, but met with so gallant a resistance, How it went in St. James's work.
as at no little expense of Blood they again lost it; The fire the Enemy cast
amongst us here was so much, that our men fought in Flames, having no other
remedy for their Relief, then to cool themselves in Barrils of water. Antonio
Moniz Barretto, was, with but two other Soldiers on the Work, repelling the
fury of the Enemy, and Moniz, stepping off to allay the heat of the Fire in the
Barril, was seized on by one of 'em, saying, Ah Signior Moniz, will you let the
King's work be lost? I Am all on Fire (answered he) and go to bathe in the
Tubbs, if your Arms (replied the Soldier) are well enough to Fight, all the
rest is nothing; whose hints Moniz accepted, so pleased with the Soldiers
courage as he got him his discharge, and brought him with him for Portugal,
generously confessing his own backwardness, to the others advantage, and always
calling him by an honorable Title, The Soldier of the Fire; neither do the
relations of this Action, make him known to us by any other name.

149. In this, and the other Works they this day fought, The Enemy retires
again.
with equal courage and danger, which we will not particularly relate, because
the Circumstances do so agree, as looking like the same thing repeated, the
Writing, and Reading would be tedious; yet, though the relation of this Siege
does not by its variety delight, who will deny this Action to be one of the
most famous in human Story, which as so was valued by the most Warlick nations
of Asia, and Europe? Upon the Enemies retiring, we fortified our selves in the
ruins of the Fortress, where we were continually on our Guards.

150. Dom John Mascarenhas the next day, sent out Antonio Correa with twenty
Companions in a Carak, Antonio Correa goes out to look for some Prize.
a Soldier of great Courage, whose Birth (but by his Actions, which deserve,
or suppose it Eminent) we know not. He got over the Bar, and Coasting the
Island as was commanded him, without any Prize returned; but as stout Soldiers
satisfy not themselves with brave unless successful Actions, Correa (more
desperate then obedient) returned to tempt Fortune five times on the same
Errand; but that which seemed chance, was Mystery, and Heaven decreed or
permitted the stout Soldier should be obstinate in the design, who is to blame
himself if his own fault procured his misfortune. He in fine, with too
importune Curiosity, returned, to provoke or know his Fortune, and standing up
with the Island, perceived a Fire at a distance, which made it seem less, but
Rowing toward that place, leaving his Companions in the Boat, went on Shore,
and walked a while alone, till the light of the Fire discovered twelve Moors,
who were warming themselves about it; immediately he returned pleased to his
Companions, bidding 'em leave their Boat, for now they had in their power the
Prize they sought for, yet the Soldiers, either forgetting themselves, or
Ministers of an higher providence, went not with him, making way for their
Commanders fortune, who seeing the Soldiers base resolution, went alone to the
Moors, having heart enough to go attempt that danger, he could not master; on a
sudden he set upon the Moors, who surprised with so unlook't for an Assault,
Sets upon twelve Moors, who take him.
some fled, the rest, but Faintly and Timerously stood to their Defense, but
coming to themselves, and seeing themselves Hack't but by one man, began with
more resolution to resist him, those also who were fled came back to join in
the Defense, and while Antonio Correa was at blows with some of 'em, others
behind mastered him, and after taking him, like a Beast kept him Tied, and so
carried him to Rumecaon, in credit of their Prize, showing the VVounds they had
received.

151. Rumecaon commanded he should be loosed, asking him how many men were in
the Fortress? He is carried before Rumecaon,
if the Governor intended to come to Dio? with what force, and in what time
his Son was expected? he with great assurance answered him, that there were in
the Fortress six hundred men, who were every day earnest with the Commander to
lead 'em forth to the Camp; that they very shortly looked for Dom Alvaro to
come with fourscore Vessels, who upon his arrival would Sally forth into the
Campagnia, because some Galleys he brought with him wanted Turkish Slaves; that
the Governor was preparing greater Forces, because at once he would determine
the business of Cambaya. Rumecaon who knew the truth of our strength, envied so
brave a Soul in so low Fortune, and esteeming him as a Soldier, who in Chains
despised him, ask't him to turn Moor, that he might in a better Religion have
better Fortune, Who persuades him to change his Religion.
and know the difference there was 'twixt serving a rich Monarck, and poor
Pirates. The stout Cavallier scandalis'd at the Affront of so base Civilities,
told him, The Portuguese were always ready to shed their Blood for their
Religion, and King; that Mahamed was an Impostor, infamous for his Actions and
Doctrine; that if there were in Cambaya any Renegados, they were of other
Nations, as was his Father Coge-Sofar, whom, as a Monster of the place he was
Born in, his Parents and Country owned not as their Son.

152. Rumecaon not able to endure from a Slave the affronts of his Religion and
Person, How he uses him.
kindled with Zeal and Contempt, commanded, that before taking away his Life,
he should in his presence be beaten and spit upon, believing the Punishment not
so much to him as the scorn, then ordered, he should in disgrace and deri^ion
go naked through the Streets, a Barbarous inventor of so new a Punishment,
first against Man, then against Humanity; yet did this Soldier of Christ (like
one, now a Soldier of an other Militia) with a softer Courage overcome by
suffering. Rumecaon, after these affronts, saying, his Prophets honor demanded
satisfaction in Blood, He commands he should be Beheaded.
commanded he should be Beheaded, and the Palm, he deserved as a Soldier, he
obtained as a Martyr; his Head was put upon a Pike, and set, where from the
Fortress our men might see it, who as Soldiers, out of a natural but unjust
Compunction vowed to revenge his Blood, as Catholics, envied his Death. The
next day, those who were in his Company returned, whom the Commander,
respecting the time, would neither see or punish; yet did they expiate their
fault, by venturing on all occasions, like men who loathed Life without honor.
Many of 'em accused by their Conscience, designed their own Death. The Moors at
a distance mocked and geer'd at us, pointing at Antonio Correa's Head,
recompensing so many losses with that satisfaction, and grown by it more
daring, did in contempt of us some extraordinary Actions.

153. Between Saint Thomas's and Saint James's work was our Colors planted;
which one of the Moors (believing he could without danger effect it, the Wall
being Low, and not Guarded) had a mind to take away; coming by stealth and
unseen of our men, getting up by the Ruins, he got hold of the Staff, and
though he by forcing moved it, yet could he not carry it away, and quitting out
of fear his hold left it Leaning; seeing how little his first attempt cost him,
returned with the same Caution in quest of the Colors, and as he was reaching
out his Arm to take hold of it, History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 5.
one of our Soldiers with a Musket Shot Killed him. This happened in face of
the Camp, who for his first exploit entertained him with Shouts and Praises,
now looked upon him falling with a profound silence. Ours ran in great haste to
cut off his Head, which they so planted, as with it to confront Antonio
Correa's.

154. The Moors who were fortified in Saint Thomas's work, went on at the
purchase of their Blood, getting ground inch by inch, carrying always before
'em Mountains of Earth, and Boughs, with which they covered and fortified
themselves. Dom John Mascarenhas commanded the bringing a great Canon to the
Church door, which lying higher then the Moors, had 'em for a mark, from whence
he so furiously Galled 'em, as to break their Defenses, and with the loss of a
great many, make 'em Dislodge.

155. The Fortress was now razed, The extremities of the Fortress.
and the Portuguese instead of Walls defended their own Ruins, the Enemy
within the Works at the gates of Victory; of the Provisions, some the time
had Corrupted, the rest for their quality were Unwholesome, from whence
proceeded so malign Diseases, as the well received more hurt by the Infection,
then from the Enemy.

156. Dom Alvaro de Castro was departed Bacaim with fifty Ships, Dom Alvaro
is forced back.
(so they call any Boats in India be they European Carvels, or Vessels with
Oars) and being Over-laded with Ammunition and Provision, not able to Live in
so great Seas, they were, shattered and loose, forced to alter their course,
and recover diverse Bays and Creeks, as the vveather drove 'em. Amongst those
Ships which were scattered by the Storm, was that commanded by Athanasio
Freire, who standing in for the Land, was cast into the Bay of Cambaya,
almost quite sunk, and in such a condition, as by common consent they agreed to
run on Shore at the first Land they made, counting Life more prisable then
Liberty; accordingly they run a-ground near Surat, where they were taken
Slaves, and carried to Sultan Mahumed, who sent 'em away Prisoners, and
commanded 'em to be put in the same Dungeon where he kept Simaon Feo with
other Portuguese.

157. Ruy Freire who came in Conserve with Dom Alvaro, Ruy Freire arrives at
Dio.
in a Ship of his own, and Soldiers paid at his own Charge, did better keep
the Seas, and Sailing that day and the next in the Storm, came in sight of the
Coast of Dio, whence he lay in for the Fortress, and coming over the Bar got
to an Anchor under the Fause-bray, where he was by every one welcomed, and told
the Commander in chief the news of Dom Alvaro's coming, as much expected as
necessary, not then knowing any thing of his going back, of which we shall give
an account.

158. Dom Alvaro de Castro, Dom Alvaro keeps on his Voyage.
and Dom Francisco de Menezes, were with the general Storm forced back to
Agacaim, all shattered; where they quickly fitted themselves, and with most
part of their Fleet ventured to Sea again, and overcoming the fury of the
weather got sight of the other Coast near Madrefaual, whence they made at a
distance a great Ship which came stealing by our Fleet. Dom Alvaro commanded
the Captain to make up with her, as did two Ships more of the Company. The Ship
presently stroke Sail, being the King of Cambaya's, and coming from Ormus, she
sent off two Merchants who came and presented Dom Alvaro their pass, signed
before the War; He takes a ^hip of Cambaya.
who seized on the Ship, and sent her to Goa, that the Governor might
determine if she was to be made Prize; The Commodities in her were Coral,
Chamlots, Pintados, and Carpets, all which were judged to be lost. Dom Alvaro
de Castro holding on his course arrived at the Bar of Dio with forty Ships,
with their Wast-cloths, Streamers, and Pendents, making a show both warlick and
pleasant. He arrives at the Fort^e^s with forty Ships.
He saluted the Fortress with all his Guns, which, with the sounding of Drums
and Trumpets returned him the like answer. The Commander in chief made the
Gates of the Fortress be opened to receive Dom Alvaro, all the Gentlemen, and
Soldiers too, came to receive and welcome the Fleet, His reception by the
Commander in chief.
on which besides Dom Alvaro in Person, came Gentlemen and Cavalliers of
eminent condition; they brought Ammunition and Provision for some time, the
Governor not willing to have it at the Courtesy of the Seas, to deny or give
passage to a second Relief. Dom Alvaro took up his quarters in the Work where
his Brother Dom Fernando fell, those who formerly had been under his Command
came to serve under Dom Alvaro, and most of the Gentlemen, some as having bore
a part in the sorrow for his Brother, others in his Victories; all too would
take the word from him, as Admiral at Sea, not one being vvilling to be
exempted from his Command, a thing contrary to the Time, and more to
Discipline; yet Dom Alvaro told the Commander, he came to receive orders from
him, which Dom John Mascarenhas taking for a Civility, answered with the same
Courtship; but Dom Alvaro showed him his instructions, which were not the
least part of the other excellencies of the Governor, to say, that, though by
the Jurisdiction of his Place, and the King's Commission, he himself was
exempt from any subjection which belonged not to the Governor of India, he
sent his Son Dom Alvaro to receive orders from Dom John Mascarenhas, the great
Honor he had gained in that Siege so requiring it; a temper in a man truly
great, where he had already lost one Son and ventured an other, to covet none
of that Fame, he with his Blood helped to purchase, greater doubtless in this
Neglect, then afterward in his Victory.

159. Rumecaon knowing of Dom Alvaro's arrival, said, there were now Prisoners
in the Fortress to honor his Triumph, and commmanded his men to work more
eagerly in the Mines. Both advise the Governor of the condition of the
Fortress.
Dom Alvaro immediately dispatched his Ship to the Governor with Letters,
intimating in what condition he found the Fortress, and Dom John Mascarenhas
advised him of all had past. There were now six hundred men in the Fortress,
all Soldiers of repute, whom, Dom John Mascarenhas thought capable of greater
things, then only a Defense; he commanded the planting three great Guns against
the Enemies Posts, with which he so furiously Battered 'em, that Rumecaon, as
intent to defend himself as spoil us, re-inforc't his Fortification.

160. There was in the former assaults, Buried in the ruins of Saint Thomas's
works, a great Gun of an extravagant bigness, which the Commander was earnest
to get up into the Fortress, and employing Ropes and Machines, found it
impossible, desiring so at least to secure it, as the Enemies might make no use
of it, he ordered it to be tied there with great Cords. The Moors continued
digging under the Walls of the Work, and striking on the bottom Stones, by the
failing of the Foundation the VValls fell down, the great Gun remaining tied
and suspended in the Air. The Enemy falls on again and retires.
The Moors came presently on to enter the Work, but found in their way Dom
Francisco de Menezes, with others about him, who engaged the Moors in a very
hot dispute, and that being the first day of their seeing the Enemy, they
charged him with such Vigor, as he was forced to retire, leaving many of his
men on the place. In the height of the Fight, some of 'em fasting a great
Cabell to the Gun dragged it off, unseen of Ours, who engaged in the Fight, did
not take notice what the Moors were doing.

161. Dom John Mascarenhas did vigilantly attend the designs of the Enemy, Our
men resolve to go out and seek him.
more afraid of their Mines, then being Assaulted openly; which coming to the
knowledge of Dom Alvaro's Soldiers, warned by the late example of Dom Fernando
de Castro, and other Gentlemen, and Soldiers, who were Burnt to Death, they
all agreed to Sally out and Fight the Enemy, fearful where the danger was
doubtful, resolute where 'twas certain.

162. They said they would not by their useless obedience be Burnt to Death,
when they might Dye in the Field, with Victory or Revenge; that knowing how to
Fight like men, they would not perish like Beasts, fastened to their danger;
that of two, they rather chose that they might overcome, then that they could
not avoid. The Commander goes about to dissuade 'em,
Dom John Mascarenhas, first by Reason, then by the Authority of his Place, and
Person, did what he could to dissuade 'em, but in vain, because (as their crime
had some semblance of Virtue) they were proud of it, and expected rewards and
praises for their Disobedience. Dom Alvaro de Castro helped to keep 'em back,
much disgusted by so foul an obstinacy, as do Dom Alvaro and Dom Francisco
saying, the King would be more sensible of the disobedience of one Soldier,
then the loss of a Fortress; that it belonged only to the Commander to Govern,
to them to Obey and Fight. Dom Francisco de Menezes told 'em they were the
first who would Defame the name of Portuguese; that they would go with their
Honor lost, their Lives in no little danger, and though they escaped the arms
of their Enemy, they could not free themselves from the just anger of their
King, whom, by so base a Mutiny, they in the Person of his Commander, despised.
For all this, with a fatal resoluteness did they provide to give Battle,
saying, no fault could be such, as Victory would not excuse, and if they were
lost, they were exempt from reward or punishment; that they stood up for the
honor of the State, whose Custom, was rather to take places on the Moors, then
lose its own.

163. All the mutinous Soldiers could be brought to, The Soldiers hold their
resolution.
was to put off their Sallying forth till the next day, having left 'em for
their Counselor that so short time to consider, what was best for their
safety, and honor; They, by a fatal unanimity, all rose resolute and ready for
the Fight, telling the Commander if he would not command 'em, they would
amongst themselves choose a Head. The Commander in chief and Gentlemen to
prevent greater mischief resolve to go with 'em.
Dom John Mascarenhas, seeing himself now forced to go along with the unruly;
and that standers by would judge more advantagiously of the daring, then
prudent; resolved in Person, with Dom Alvaro, and most of the Gentlemen, to
follow 'em; the Commanders by a new Discipline obeying, and the Soldiers
commanding.

164. There were in the Fortress (as we have said) six hundred men, of whom one
hundred staid to maintain the Posts, of the rest, Dom John Mascarenhas made
three Battallions, two he gave two Dom Alvaro de Castro, and Dom Francisco de
Menezes, the other he took for himself. Our men Sally out, and in what order.
They immediately Sallied out of the Fortress, and at the first charge got the
Posts the Moors had made in the Ditch, who on easy terms quitted 'em. By this
shadow of Victory began our ruin; for our men ambitious, and out of order,
assaulted the Wall. History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 6.
The first who got up was Dom Alvaro, seconded by two Brothers, Luis de Mello,
and Iorge de Mendoca, who came up after him; Dom Francisco de Menezes entered at
an other place; and amongst the first were Antonio Moniz Barretto, Garcia
Rodriguez de Tavora, Dom Iorge, and Dom Duarte de Menezes, Dom Francisco, and
Dom Pedro de Almeyda.

165. Rumecaon, Iuzarcaon, and Mojate^aon, The Enemies resistance.
came with numerous Companies to receive ours, 'twixt whom the Fight began,
maintained on our side with more Courage then Discipline; Dom Francisco de
Menezes was forcing back the Moors, who not able to endure the weight of the
charge lost ground apace, till relieved by a great many others, they stopped the
Current of our men. Dom John Mascarenhas climbing up the Wall, at the same time
with the other Officers, The Captain chides the Mutineers.
seeing diverse of the mutinous Soldiers, standing at the foot of it, without
the hearts to get up, with sharp words, did aloud upbraid, first their
Disobedience, then their Cowardliness, who without a word followed him,
striving to answer by their Actions, and presently charging the Enemies who
were engaged with Dom Alvaro, made 'em quit part of their ground; but the party
being so inequal, the Moors began to recover, so charging Ours, as to put 'em
to disorder.

166. Dom Alvaro behaved himself, The Courage and Discipline of Dom Alvaro.
as his Birth, Repute, and Courage promised, not being at a loss in Discipline,
hard to be kept up when the day is lost; He was, as much as possible, Ordering
and Leading off his men, Retreating honorably with his face always toward the
Enemy, who had cut off some of his men, and the rest, not able to endure the
force of the Moors, were leaving him; which Iorge de Mendoca perceiving, though
Wounded, took Dom Alvaro in his hands to help him up the Wall, and not able by
the bleeding of his Wounds to perform it, He gets upon the Wall, and with a
blow of a Stone falls down.
was helped by his Brother Luis de Mello; Dom Alvaro being upon the Wall,
received a blow with a stone, which made him without any sign of Life fall down
on the other side.

167. After Luis de Mello had helped Dom Alvaro, Luis de Mello is shot through
with a Bullet.
he likewise saved his Brother, who was with Garcia Rodriguez de Tavora,
Antonio Moniz, and other Gentlemen, repelling the fury of the Moors, till shot
through with a Bullet he fell down for Dead; his Companions carried him off,
and laid him on the Wall, thence was he brought to the Fortress, afterward
conveyed to Chaul, where he Died of his Wound, deserving, by his singular
Courage, if not a more glorious Death, a longer Life.

168. Dom Francisco de Menezes, as he was Fighting stoutly, Dom Francisco de
Menezes' s Death.
was taken off with a Bullet, at whose loss his men began disorderly to retire;
here was the Execution greatest, for the Moors knowing our men's confusion
charged 'em more Vigorously.

169. Dom John Mascarenhas in this misfortune behaved himself with Courage, The
prudence of the Commander in chief.
and Prudence, some times Leading off his men, other times facing the Enemy,
(whilst the Mutinous were retiring) by this course avoiding no little mischief;
and having now secured the Walls, there went a report the Fortress was lost, on
which the Soldiers like Routed men, began every one to disperse; in this so
dangerous Conflict, Dom John Mascarenhas cried to his men, shaming them with
their going off, and Fighting so courageously that only with a few who stood to
him he kept off the Enemy. The Gentlemen who were in the Fight, got a loud name
in so unhappy a Day. Lopo de Sousa at the foot of the Wall defended himself
against a whole Company of Moors, making them often retire, with such Bravery,
that they charged him at a distance, till by a Dart which past his Breast he
fell down Dead, leaving his Blood sufficiently revenged. The Gentlemen who were
that day taken notice of.
Antonio Moniz Barretto, Garcia Rodriguez de Tavora, Dom Duarte, and Dom Iorge
de Menezes, who had seventeen Wounds, made the Victory dear to the Enemy.

170. Rumecaon endeavoring to make the best of our Rashness, Mojatecaon falls
upon the Fortress and retires.
commanded Mojatecaon with five thousand men to march to the Fortress, to
intercept those who were flying in the Rout, and falling upon Saint Thomas's
work, he found Luis de Sousa there, who with Canon and Musket Shot, Killed
great numbers of his men, yet the Moors emboldned with the heat of Victory,
continued Scaling, but were so stoutly resisted, as with notorious loss to
retire. The Commander in chief Rallies the Soldiers.
Dom John Mascarenhas took such pains, as he Rallied those men who were
scatteringly going off, and making of them a close Battallion, led 'em on to
the Fortress, meeting by the way many of the Moors, who being careless in the
security of Victory, he so Courageously charged 'em, as many left their Lives,
more the Place. There were lost in this miscarriage five and thirty men, of
whose number were the Gentlemen we have spoke of; Our loss by this miscarriage.
the Wounded were above an hundred, but in so unbridled a design, the loss was
not so much as the disobedience. The Commander in chief went presently to look
out Dom Alvaro, whom he found yet Speechless, and by the judgment of
Chirurgions in danger of Life, which lasted those days Philosophy calls
Decretory or Critical; yet his pain abated, and Dom Alvaro recovered his
health, to the satisfaction of those, who loved him for the quality of his
Birth, and Person. Nuno Pereira was in the Fight, who behaving himself with
known Courage, came off with fourteen Wounds; History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3.
Cap. 7.
he desired leave for his Cure to go to Goa, having there a Family, and being
lately Married to a great Fortune, most of which he spent in the King's
service, till (as we shall tell hereafter) he lost his Life.

171. Rumecaon reflecting on this so unexpected Victory, Rumecaon is encouraged
by the success;
got by our men's unruly Courage, had more hopes of success, and a stronger
resolution to see the end of the design; for which he begun to find his men's
obedience more pliable, having by this days experience lost a great deal of
that fear they had of our Arms; he presently sent the Sultan news of the
Victory, which was at Court solemnis'd with public Rejoycings; and Rumecaon
received from the King the honors of a Conqueror, being for the future better
supplied with Men, Ammunition, and Money, on the coming in of a great part of
the Nobility, in hopes to go share in his Fortune: goes on with his Mines and
we with our Reparations.
He presently commanded his men to go on with the design against our Work,
stealing the Earth from underneath, that being unfurnish't the weight might
sink it, by the failing of the Foundation on which it rested, Dom John
Mascarenhas deluded this Plot, by ordering an other Fort to be made within,
which took a less compass, and by containing less Earth was fitter for defense.
This could not be hid from Rumecaon, who brought thither a great party of
Moors, these with Stones, Darts, and Balls of Wildfire, did without
intermission charge our Workmen, some sure of their aim in those places the
Wall discovered, others by casting over it, by which they Wounded our men, more
intent on their Work then Defense, to avoid which, the Commander gave order
they should by hidden Lights work by Night, laying the Stones by the marks and
observation they had taken by Day.

172. Rumecaon high, and confident, on the countenance the War showed him in
the last Fight, in contempt of the Governors coming, every day expected, began
(as one who would in his imaginary Victory already enjoy the ease of Triumph)
to Build a new City; Builds a new City.
whether 'twere to put his men in heart, or as a Credulous man, he grounded
upon the prosperity of his imagined successes. He made Palaces for himself,
with that Order and Grandeur, the wantonness of Peace would have allowed off;
He set out quarters for the Officers, by that, obliging 'em to defend their own
Dwellings, showing in the Fabric, no less Skill, then Pride: He ordered the
laying Boats across in that place of the River which goes from the Custom-house
to the Town of Rumes, which being made fast with great Cabels, he filled
equally with Earth, over which, (as on a Bridge not steady, but secure) the
Carts which provided the City had an easy passage. Upon Rumecaon's confident
setting upon so costly a Fabric, 'twas Voic't in many of the adjacent and
remote Kingdoms from Cambaya, that we had lost our Fortress, which report
pleasing the ears of the Moors, and Pagans, spread all over the East, till the
Sultan received the Complements of many Princes who gave him the joy of the
Victory. The sound of this News was with fear and silence listened to in Goa,
and though at large, and without an Author, came to the Governors ears, who by
the privacy and caution with which it went from one an other, did argue its
probability.

173. This misfortune so much feared, The sollicitousness of the Governor.
seemed confirmed by the slowness of advice from Dio, neither was there any
certainty what was become of Dom Alvaro's Fleet; those who would put by such
thoughts in the Governor, seemed rather to slight, then deny the news, and he
as most concerned, seeing the necessity of encouraging the people, seemed not
to lay it to heart, contradicting the News he feared, by the Face he put upon it.

174. This sollicitousness took up the Governor, Dom Manoel de Lima arrives
from the Kingdom, at Goa.
(only diverted by the business and preparations of the Navy, which, omitting
no diligence, he intended) when News was brought him, there was come to the
Bar a Ship from the Kingdom, Captain Dom Manoel de Lima, who was parted from
five more of the same Conserve, all under the Command of Lourenco Pirez de
Tavora; the others were Commanded by Dom John Lobo, John Rodriguez Pecanha,
Fernand Alvarez da Cunha, and Alvaro Barradas. The Governor thought Dom Manoel
de Lima's arrival very considerable, for the Person, and the necessity; he came
Commander of the Fortress of Ormus, which the King had given him to put by some
animosities which were 'twixt him and the Governor Martin Affonso de Sousa,
whose return from India he expected, to demand satisfaction of him for some
injuries. These disgusts the King took up, concerned as a Father in the peace
of both his Subjects. Dom Manoel would presently have been gone for Dio, with
three hundred Soldiers at his own Charge; but the Governor dissuaded him,
desiring his Company in his Fleet, and his Courage and Experience in the
management of the present Design.

175. The Governor being more then ordinarily perplex't about the business of
Dio, The Governor receives news from Dio.
thinking no good of the want of advice, the Admiral, which carried Dom Alvaro,
arrived at the Bar of Goa; She came in with her Wast-cloaths and Streamers,
and by her joyful Salutes, endeavored a far off to tell the news she was
fraught with. The greatest part of the people ran to the Seaside, to enquire
after their Children, Friends and Kindred, and those least concerned, after the
common interest of the State. The Captain was carried to the Governors Palace,
satisfying by the way many repeated and troublesome questions; He found the
Governor with the Bishop Dom John de Albuquerque, and Friar Antonio do Casal
Guardian of the Fanciscans. The Governors first question was, His piety and
joy a^ the receipt of 'em.
if the Fortress yet held out for the King his Master? to which the Captain
answered, it did and would do; At which news the Governor falling on his
Knees, with his Eyes to Heaven gave God thanks, not without shedding some
tears, vvitnesses, of his piety toward God, and his zeal for his Prince, and
receiving presently his Letters, His stout behavior at the news of his Son Dom
Fernando's Death.
he heard the Death of his Son Dom Fernando, which he received with so great
constancy, as those about him perceived no alteration in his Words or
Countenance, as if to appear a Father, had been weakness, and to have the
common affections of a man, dishonor. He thank't the Captain, and sent him to
cheer the City with the news; then retired, and in private wept for his Son,
expecting time to grieve in, without less^ning his place or courage. The same
day came into Port the Ship which brought Nuno Pereira, who Died at Sea of his
Wounds. The body was Buried, with the Funeral solemnity due to the Person,
accompanied by the Governor, Nobility and People; the Gentleman leaving behind
him a most endeared Memory.

176. The next day there was made a solemn Procession to thank God, A
procession for Thanksgiving.
at which the Governor assisted, Clothed in Scarlet, comforting (a thing
unheard of) the people for the Death of his own Son; He knew by this Ship, of
our men's disorderly and obstinate Sally, which occasioned so many Deaths, and
of the danger Dom Alvaro was in, moderating, or smothering his grief for it, as
one who less valued his Sons Lives, then their Reputation.

177. On the same day he dispatched Vasco de Cunha, He sends relief to Dio.
that Sailing along the Creeks and Bays of the Coast, he might bring together
Dom Alvaro's Fleet, and carry it into Dio* by him in his Letters, he
Congratulated with Dom John Mascarenhas for the honor he had gained, not less
for himself then the State; assuring him, that in few days he would come and
see him at Dio, with all the strength the State could furnish, for which he
spared no cost or diligence; and that while the Fleet was setting out, he would
send him a Recruit, sufficient to secure the Fortress, and bridle the Enemy,
which he speedily effected; for presently after Vasco de Cunha, he sent away
Luis de Almeyda with six Carvels, and four hundred Soldiers, with Ammunition
and Provision, and plenty of other things which the necessity of the Siege
required; and so indefatigable was his diligence in providing himself, that in
a very short time all his Fleet was ready to Sail, only wanting the relief of
Cananor and Cochim to put to Sea; for with such affection and obedience, was he
forwarded by every one, as the Ladies and Gentlemen of Goa, came and presented
him with their Children and Estates; that Fleet carrying with it as many
blessings from the people, as others use to carry tears and complaints.

178. Vasco da Cunha following his Orders, Vasco d^ Cu^ha comes to (...).
was bringing together the Ships, which he found in the Creeks shattered by the
Storm, and with them recovered Bacaim, where he found the Commander Dom
Ieronymo de Menezes ready with fifteen Ships to go and relieve Dio; engaged
anew by his resentments of his Brother Dom Francisco's Death, of which we have
given an acccount, yet had he some days deferred his going, upon certain
advice, that the Bramatuco would in his absence come and Besiege that Fortress,
History of India, Dec. 6. Cap. 8. Lib. 3.
a diversion procured by the Sultan, in favor of the Besiegers. Dom Ieronymo
looking upon himself more obliged to defend Bacaim, then relieve Dio, delivered
his Ships to Vasco da Cunha, who setting Sail with 'em, met at Sea Luis de
Almeyda with six Carvels, He, with Luis de Almeyda goes into Dio.
all of them in Conserve went into Dio, making show by the number of the
Vessels of a more considerable Recruit, yet was the Fortress secured from
Famine and Danger, and the Soldiers being paid and furnished, the War was
less feared then desired.

179. Now was the VVeather fair for us, Luis de Almeyda goes to look for the
Mecca Fleet.
and the States Ships began to Command at Sea; Dom Alvaro, as Admiral, ordered
Luis de Almeyda with three Carvels (all of 'em under his Command, in two of 'em
went Captains Payo Rodriguez de Aravjo, and Pedro Affonso) to stand for the
Bar of Surat, and expect the Mecca Fleet, which would strive to recover that
Port; who pursuing his Voyage, within few days saw two Ships crossing the Gulf,
one great one, the other of a less Burden; as soon as Luis de Almeyda spied
'em, with all the Sail he could make, he stood up with 'em; the Ships came
before the Wind, and seeing our Carvels tack't about, but our Ships being
light, and better Sailers, with all their Canvas abroad, were up with 'em
presently. Luis de Almeyda Boarded the great Ship, which had for Captain a
Ianizary, a Kinsman of Coge-Sofars, who relying on the bigness of his Ship, his
Guns and Men aboard, provided for his defense, provoking on all parts a very
hot dispute, the Blood run down on both sides, the Moors fought out of
necessity, Ours out of duty, and having the advantage of Courage and Discipline
entered the Vessel, he takes two Ships,
where the Moors, inspirited with despair fought to Dye revenged, till with the
Death of the most considerable, the rest yielded. They found the Ianizary full
of Wounds, whom Luis de Almeyda made be carried aboard his Carvel, and his Cure
attended. The other Ship on a slight resistance was made yield by Payo
Rodriguez de Aravjo. he goes with 'em to Dio.
After this action, Luis de Almeyda, while his Commission lasted, plied too and
again in that Station, in which time he took some Boats of Provision going to
furnish the Army, making others run on Shore, by which the Camp begun to feel
some scarcity. With the Ships he had taken he presently came into Dio, with the
Moors hanged at the Yard-arms, torturing infinitely the Camp by so sad a
spectacle. Rumecaon offered two and thirty thousand Pardaos for the Ianizary
Captain, Dom Alvaro refuses to release a Ianizary, and commands to hang him up.
who (as we have said) was of Kin to him; but Dom Alvaro commanded he should be
hanged, saying, he came not thither to Sell, but spill Blood, and that by the
Moors he would get nothing but their Heads. Rumecaon was scared with his anger,
the Turks with his contempt. Dom Alvaro, not to let his Soldiers Swords rust
in the Scabbard, till there was a time of Action, sent forth some Ships of
Bacaim and Chaul, to take the little Vessels which furnished the Enemy, Our men
take fourteen Barks from the Enemy.
which succeeded so happily as they took fourteen, bringing them in with the
Moors hung at the Yards, which was now less resented then trembled at, seeing
our anger and vengeance had neither Limits or Compassion.

180. Dom John de Castro, in the mean time, resolving with himself to Chastise
the King of Cambaya, by whose example the Princes of Asia would Live in peace
and reverence of the State, desired first to sound and try others men's
judgments, that by their approving the design, he might find 'em more forward
in the Execution of their own Councels; The Governor in Council declares his
resolution of going to Dio.
for this he called before him the Ecclesiastical and Civil Government of the
City, with the Gentlemen and Soldiers of Eminency, to whom he declared his
Resolution to go in Person to raise the Siege of Dio, and to Fight Rumecaon in
his own Quarters; that though all knew it; in their particulars, he had a mind
to tell it 'em in common, that in the approbation of the Commonwealth, he
might carry with him the Justice of the cause as part of the Victory. Upon
hearing the Governor, every one was affected, in the first place with his
Modesty, that subjected an Independent Minister; then his great Zeal, that upon
the yet reaking Blood of his Children, sacrifis'd his own Life for the Service
of his Country. Upon giving their Votes in the business, their discourse was
various; Dom Diogo de Almeyda Freire, Commander in Chief in Goa, whose
experience was, by his Years and the chances of War, enlarged, did thus
deliver his Opinion.

181. The small force we now have, Dom Diogo de Almeyda's opinion to the
contrary.
is by their ignorance of it formidable to our Enemies, all Asia reputing our
strength, more by our Victories, then our Soldiers, so that the Fame only of
what is past, keeps us up at present. Your Excellency has in this Fleet
brought together all the Power of India, in which we can hardly reckon two
thousand Portuguese, and with so little Noise we design to fright the whole
World. This Tree of the State (on whose Branches hang so many Trophies gained
in the East) has its Roots by infinite Leagues severed from its Body; its best
way of preserving 'em, is by being underprop't, with Peace with some, and Awe
from others. We can never perform what is expected from our joined Forces, for
one Victory will add but little to our Reputation, and only one loss Destroys
us. We have already Relieved our Fortress, and to what end on a Wound already
Cured, to spend the Medicine which is to serve for others? what new Prudence
teaches us in one only Fight to venture what has been got by so many
Victories? we have an Army sufficient as we are to maintain us so, not strength
when we are lost to repair us. No great Soldier without necessity ever gave a
Field-battail, for where on both sides the loss uses to be equal, the
Conqueror only keeps the Field and a useless Glory. At Dio we neither covet,
or can possess any thing but the Fortress; with what blind Madness go we then
to purchase that with our Blood which is our own already? what new Colonies
have we to Plant the Island? from what part of the World can we bring others
who are not Moors or Pagans, as fickle in their Loyalty to the State, as those
who now oppose us? We go to Fight Turks and Moors, exceeding us in Numbers,
equal in Arms, and Discipline; if we have the worst of it, we have no place to
save our selves in, for the Country is theirs; if we have the better on it, no
advantage will come of the Victory. We have with our Fleets Conquered India,
with them must we keep it, having the advantage of Vessels and Mariners. If we
look for Victory only in Fights, lets slight our Garrisons, and dismantle our
Cities; if it is told me, it is for the States honor, to destroy a Kingdom for
an affront, if all who have taken Arms against us, had received strict
Punishment, the East had been already unpeopled. Shall we blame Affonso de
Albuquer que for not Burning Ormus, after so many Hostilities and Treacheries
of its Kings and Governors? shall he forfeit the great Name he achieved
there, because for the Affronts and Quarrels of the Samorim, he destroyed not
Malabar? shall Nuno de Cunha stain that Renowned fame for not making War upon
Cambaya, after the Treason of Badur? shall we set upon Destroying the Turk for
his Bashaw's daring to Besiege our Fortress? shall we set out our Fleets
against Achem, because he has so often invaded us in Malaca? shall we put to
Fire and Sword Hidalcaon, for his taking every day our Provisions, and
infesting our Lands of Bardes and Salsete? what despair drives us to offer the
innocent States throat to the Enemies knife. This Fleet, so terrible in
appearance, so weak in effect, is a bridle to Rumecaon, to Ours a Defense; but
upon Landing so few Soldiers, the East will see into the secret of our Forces,
and all the Princes endeavor to break down those weak Prisons in which we keep
'em Fettered. Quintus Fabius Maximus's winning many Battails was the glory of
the Roman Empire, his avoiding one was its preservation. The first Conquerours
built us a House, we have nothing to do but to keep it. If by storming Dio the
Enemy have lost an Army, what wants that action of Victory? what of Punishment?
Offense is undertaken with equal strength, Vengeance with far greater; for to
get satisfaction for one Affront, we are not to venture a fresh injury, the
rather, because Fortune is in nothing so absolute as in the chances of War.
Victories are many times gotten by light accidents, and lost by others. Will it
be then just to put to the Contingency of Success the Scepter of the East,
founded, with the dread and envy of Nations, upon so many Victories? If we lose
this Fleet in which is amas'd together the whole strength of India, what
Treasures has his Majesty laid up to set forth an other? we shall begin again,
to Petition, or Conquer the Princes of India; we shall bring back to its
Infancy this Empire now grown Old; we shall Live on the Courtesy of those
Crowns we have provoked, remaining their miserable Vassals, of whom we were
once Masters.

182. Dom Diogo de Almeyda's Reasons satisfied those of his own Opinion, The
Governors answer.
moved those of the contrary; yet Dom John de Castro, secure in the Resolution
he had taken, thus Discourst against 'em. That no ruling Nation was content
with a defensive War amongst her Inferiors; that the State had made her self
in the East Arbiter of Peace and War, most of the Princes of Asia coveting
under our shelter to Live secure; that all the Forts we had in India were to be
maintained by the same Arms which wonn 'em; that the respect, the Moors and
Pagans had for us, would last no longer then they knew we could put up an
Injury; that all those Princes stood looking on our Punishing Cambaya, and
durst not yet with their Auxiliaries come in to its Relief out of fear to be
crush^t in its Ruins; yet if they saw us contented to make up the ruins of our
Fortress, and bind up the Wounds they have opened, they would come again to
uncover 'em, and aim the second blow at the heart of the State; that Reputation
was the Soul of Empires; Patience in particulars a Virtue, in Crowns a Ruin;
that we had in this Siege lost so many gallant Gentlemen, so many Cavalliers
and Soldiers of Honor, as the Wounds they received would cover with Infamy
the Surviving, if they saw 'em not Revenged; what account could we give the
World of this Siege, but of our patience in enduring it; that the State by Fame
more preserved her self, then with all the Spices of the East; which were only
a valuable Commodity when we got 'em, not by Commerce, but by Tribute, That, to
conclude, he would not suffer the first weakness of our Arms to happen in Dom
John de Castro's time; that he was resolved to Fight, the Blame should be
solely his, every one should have a share in the Victory. The Governor out of
hopes of Success, or height of Courage, spoke these words with a Spirit
presaging his foreseen Triumph.

183. The Arms in Dio were not idle, for neither did the losses received, or
our hopes of relief, fright stout and resolute Rumecaon; He knew the strength
the Governor would bring in Person, (greater in report then appearance 'twould
be) yet did not for that unbend his resolution of carrying on the Siege, and
expecting the worst of Fortune. He commanded his men to under-mine the
Watchtower over the gate, Rumecaon begins an other Mine,
where Antonio Freire had his Post; and though they work't with most profound
silence, by diverse Stratagems diverting our attention, the Commander in chief
(whom no Casualty, or Accident took unprovided) found out their work, which as
at other times he prevented. The Moors on the 10th. of October played the Mine,
which sprung without any hurt on the outward face of the Wall; which he plays
without any loss to us.
the Fire giving back by the resistance of our Counter-forts, and the Moors saw
within a new Wall raised, wondering at our foresight of all their designs, and
that neither strength, or industry profitted 'em against so stout and cautious
Enemies. Though Rumecaon found by Experience there was less Fruit then Labor
in the Mines, yet to weary out our men, or keep his own in good Discipline, he
began to open others, which too being known, were prevented, of which we speak
nothing, because they had no memorable effect, and to avoid the tediousness
things so alike have in their Relation.

THE LIFE OF DOM JOHN DE CASTRO.
The Third BOOK.
1. DOM John de Castro, (on the seventeenth of October of the Year one thousand
five hundred forty and six) delivering up the Government of the City to the
Bishop, The Governor parts for Dio.
Dom John de Albuquerque, and Dom Diogo de Almeyda Freire, set Sail directly
for Bacaim, where he designed to expect other Recruits and Provisions, which
were not yet arrived, making it a point of honor that the Governor of India
should not be one day Besieged in Dio, but with Caesar's Fortune, Come, See,
and Overcome.

71.
Eyes vem despois o pay, que as ondas corta
Co restante da gente Lusitana
E con forca e saber, que mais importa
Batalha da felice and soberana
Huns paredes subirodo escusaon portas
Outros a abrem, na fera esquadra insana
Feytos faraon tan dignos de memoria
Que naon caibaon em verso, ou larga Historia.
72.
Este depois en Campo se apresenta
Vencedor forte e intrepido ao possante
Rey da Cambaya e a vista che amedrente
Da fera multidaon quadrupedante.
Came. St. 71, 72. Can. 10. 71.
Lo, now the Father follows with full Sail,
And the remainder of the Lusian force,
He with strong hand, and head of more avail
Gives a brave lucky Battle to the Moors,
Where no way is he makes one with his Flail,
And where there is the Rampires are his doors;
Such that days fe^ts, so terrible the blows,
They will not stand in Verse, nor lie in Prose.
72.
Then lo, he to ^he great Camlayan King
Presents himself a Victo^ in the Field,
Pale fear into the face of him does fling,
And of his furious Horse, which ground shall yield.
Sir Richard Fan. Transtlation. 2. The Fleet consisted of twelve Gallions, The
Fleet and Commanders.
of which the Admiral was the Saint Denis, on which went the Governor, the
rest were Commanded by Garcia de Sa, Iorge Cabral, Dom Manoel de Silveyra,
Manoel de Sousa de Seputueda, Iorge de Sousa, John Falcaon, Dom John Manoel
Alabastro, John de Barro'; Hist. of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 9.
Lewis Alvarez de Sousa. The Vessels with Oars were sixty, of which the chief
Commanders were Dom Manoel de Lima, Dom Antonio de Noronha, Miguel da Cunha,
Dom Diogo de Sottomajor, the Secretary Antonio Corneiro, Alvaro Perez de
Andrade, Dom Manoel Deca, Iorge da Sylva, Luis Figuera, Ieronymo de Sousa,
Nun^, Fernandez Pegado Ramatho, Lourenco Riberio, Antonio Leme, Alvaro Serraon,
Cosme Fernandez, Manoel Lobo, Francisco de Azevedo, Pero de Attayde Inferno,
Francisco da Cunha, Antonio de Sa Native of Romania, Vasco Fernandez Captain of
Goa, and Commander of fifteen Fly-boats, Barks, and other Vessels, on which
went the Canarins brought up in Goa, and in company other Ships of Cananor and
Cochim.

3. The Governor in six days come to an Anchor at Bacaim, Arrives at Bacaim
where Dom Ieronymo de Menezes, his Brother-in-law, and Commander of that
Fortress, came to him on Board, comforting one the other, in the loss of a
Brother and a Son. The Governor unwilling his Arms should want employment,
sent forth with six light Ships Dom Manoel de Lima, to take, in the Bay of
Cambaya, some of those Vessels which Recruit, and Victual the Enemies Camp. He
there plied for some days to and again, in which he took sixty Vessels of
Provision from the Moors, whose Bodies he ordered to be mangled, and towing em,
put'em to Float in the mouth of the Rivers, for the Current to carry'em to the
Island, where they might be seen with horror and amasement of the incenst
Portuguese, inventing every day new Cruelties. Dom Manoel, when his Commission
was expired, came in, with threescore Moors hanging at the Yardsarms, a sight
which sacrifis'd more to Vengeance then Humanity. The Governor, rejoicing at
those Preludiums of the War he had undertaken, sent Dom Manoel de Lima out
again with thirty Ships, and Orders to put to Fire and Sword all the Coast of
Cambaya, that the memory of their Punishment might be Recorded in their Ruins.

4. Lourenco Pirez de Tavora Commander of the Ships which came from the
Kingdom (as has been said before) put in, Lourenc^ Pirez goes after him,
with most of the Ships of his Squadron, at Cochim, there hearing the news of
the Siege, he immediately parted for Goa, believing he should find the
Governor on Shore; and upon knowledge of his being parted with the whole
Fleet, set Sail directly for Dio, preferring the King's Service to the
advantages of his Voyage. His example was followed by most of the Gentlemen who
came that year from the Kingdom, the ruins of our Fortress being the first
place they Landed at in India; Amongst whom was Dom Antonio de Noronha, and
other Gentlemen,
(Son of the Vice-King Dom Garcia) with threescore Soldiers at his own
charges: these were the Riches the Gentlemen of those times came for, to the
East; wounds being then more prisable Commodities then now Diamonds. The
Governor by those Ships received Letters from the Infant Dom Lewis, whose
Copies we will put down, to show the King's and Infant's attention to the least
actions of Ministers, (forming a true judgment of 'em, by Rewards, or
Punishments, to be even with 'em) and the simplicity of the style, so free from
the humor and height of other times; whose Memory to the Lovers of that Age
will not be tedious.

The Infant Dom Lewis's Letter.
5. Honorable Governor. By your Letters to my Lord the King, and my self, I
have seen an account of your Voyage from your parting from Mocambique till your
arrival in India, and what you did there till the departure of the Ships; the
condition you found the Country in, the quality of the Persons, the
Licentiousness of Trade, the weakness of the Fleet; how you behaved your self
to Hidalcaon in the business of Meal; how in the affairs at Ormus; and how to
those Gentlemen, who were permitted by Martin Affonso to carry thither
Commodities; and what more you said in those Letters; and because my Lord the
King answers all those things particularly, I will not do the same but in
short. Yet cannot I forbear telling you, how I was here on Shore frighted at
the danger you escaped about the Island Comaro; 'twas seriously a great and
wonderful fortune, and which I take as a good Omen, it seeming to me, God in
that would show you he was to preserve you in the difficulties of India, for
which no less a miracle is necessary, then that showed you in your scaping so
eminent a danger, for which I have given hearty thanks and am glad to hear Dom
Ieronimo de Noronha bore you Company in it, since God has likewise preserved
him, and it is for a man of his honor to share in the extremities and troubles
of his General. As to the other things you write me, My Lord the King's answer
being particular, and I present at the dispatches, 'twere I think too precise
to write 'em to you over again; for by his Letters you will see his satisfaction,
in the way you design in those parts for his Service, and in the good opinion
the Country has of you, which he particularly commends to your care in all
businesses; what in that I have more to tell you, is, that I Am very much
satisfied with your management of affairs in that place, and with your words as
well as actions, for by those it is seen the crossing so many Climates has not
altered you from your self, or my constant opinion, which, you are not content
in showing, by your actions, but your words are a pledge you will continue
doing the same, of which I Am very well assured, that what by humane power can
be compast you will truly perform. His Majesty is not less satisfied with your
manner of writing, for your Letters came well digested, they contained nothing
superfluous, and by 'em is sufficiently seen what I said before, that you both
know what you are to do, and have a desire and earnestness to do it, without
any temporary respect of interest or affection, which I not a little rejoice at
to hear from you; for though I am sure of your actions, it is yet a sign of the
great abundance of your heart and virtue, your coveting to say so, which makes
me confident God will perfect all your good desires, and bring you out of that
Country, to your great satisfaction and honor, for he cannot be unsuccessfull
who designs nothing but the service of God and his King; and though that is to
be purchased with no ordinary difficulty, let me mind you, that it is there
resides merit, and that Our Savior Christ was by that to enter into his Glory;
and if things appear to you above your Mastery, remember, it is there God puts
in his helping hand, and seconds those who serve him with your attention; and
that men of themselves can furnish nothing but will and diligence, which made
Saint Paul attribute to himself nothing but the planting, because God is to
give the increase, as he will give it to all those undertakings you plant with
that zeal, I Am secure you have in all your actions; therefore be not frighted
at great things, or slight little, poise equally, and remit the end to God
Almighty; and though some things succeed not as you desire, be not transported
by despair, while you act with a just zeal, and clear intention, because God
often permits his servants to commit errors, thereby to merit by their patience
and trust in him, and for the increase of their experience and perfection; do
justice according to your Conviction, always taking, as you use, counsel and
advice in business; preserve your self in that clearness you practice in the
temporal enjoyments, and advantages of that Country, then happen what will, all
will tend to a good end. Be very exact in what relates to Divine worship for
the Conversion of the Infidels, for that is the Armory must chiefly defend
India. Endeavor to Banish thence men's extravagant expenses, the
Effeminateness and Luxury they Live in, and the excess of Clothes and
Furniture, disposing them to it mildly, and winningly, by your own and your Sons
example; and by Countenancing and Favoring those whose practice is contrary;
and if those things be above your reforming let it not trouble you, because the
corruptions of time, must by time have their amendment, and cannot be remedied
on a sudden; continue therefore your good intention, managing things according
to the disposition of the time and persons you have to do with, so, I hope in
God, he will (as you desire) direct all things, to his, and my Lord the King's
service and your honor. For your request, of my soliciting your stay there
may be short, I perceive you have no little reason for your desire, but my
opinion is, it cannot be set upon till seeing your Letters, which God willing
we shall receive this year, I therefore deferr answering that point till the
next year. I have spoke to the King in the business you writ me about your Son
Dom Alvaro, his Majesty knows him well, and is well informed of the qualities
of his Person, and desires to honor and favor him, yet for some reasons his
Majesty has commanded to be writ you; and as himself writes, that this year he
signs no Grants, he has thought fit not to answer that till the next; in the
mean time, he has sent Commands for conferring on him that honor, you 'l find
in his Letters Patent. IN me very careful of putting him in mind of all that
concerns your Sons, and hope in God 'twill be so ordered, that you shall
receive from his Majesty honor and reward, as also your Sons, whom he desires
to use according to your Deservings; and you may be confident his Majesty very
well knows your will to serve him, and is very much satisfied with your way of
doing it hitherto. I spoke to his Majesty about Affonso de Rojas, and on your
consideration he immediately granted, what I ask't him, but (as I said) because
he tells those who go to the Indies that this year he signs no Grants, he has
diferr'd Affonso de Rojas business till the next, and says, he will then
reward him. I Will take care by the grace of God, to send you the Letters Patent,
and am very glad of the good News you tell me of Affonso de Rojas, and am apt
to believe, that being Mr. Olmedo's Brother, and in our Company, he must prove
an honest man. What you sent me on the Ships which came, was delivered me, I
was very glad of it, and value it as coming from your hands.

Almeirim the twenty sixth of March 1547. The Infant Dom Lewis.


6. Dom Manoel de Lima setting Sail from Bacaim went by Night into the River of
Surat, The hurt Dom Manoel does about Surat.
and getting up with the Tide came in sight of a great Village, which, though
not Inhabited by the Abissines, had its name from 'em; the Village was on the
East side of the River, spread on a great Plain* and, though in an open place,
had two thousand Families, History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 9.
defended (without any other Fortification) only by some Trenches, on
confidence perhaps of their first beginning the War, and the strength of that
Army they had in the Field. Dom Manoel went on shore, and our men, in the same
order they Landed, fell upon the Enemy with more Courage then Discipline. The
Moors were stout enough to expect, not to resist, less scared by their
apprehension of our men, then the horror of their own who first fell; whose
Blood so frighted 'em, as they turned their backs. Many were cut off in the
Flight, few in Resistance; the Slaughter was great, the Soldiers Sword sparing
neither Sex or Age. Dom Manoel commanded his men to Fire the Houses, burning
together Town and Estates; Covetousness was below their fury; only one Moor had
his Hands ordered to be cut off, who was left Alive not to carry the News
without signs of Victory.

7. The Fleet went out of the River, He destroys the City of Antote,
and Coasting along two days came in sight of the City of Antote, famous for
its proud Buildings, and rich Inhabitants, whom their commerce by Sea had well
enrich't; these, warned by others sufferings, resolved to Defend their Houses,
or Dye in 'em, valuing so equally their Lives and Fortunes. Dom Manoel got on
Shore, though not without loss; for the Moors waited for us, showing themselves
Soldiers in their Resolution, not in their Conduct, who charged us divided
into Companies, with wandering and uncertain Shot, betraying the same fear in
their Resistance, they did afterward in their Flight. Dom Manoel got ground of
'em, till he forced 'em into the City, where, at the sight of Women and
Children, they were made stand by their Compassion; here our men thought they
had to do with Enemies, for they fought, with the Bowels of Fathers, Cowards in
defending their own, stout in protecting the Lives of others; but their Courage
not being natural, and proceeding from tender or timorous affections, their
compassion yielded to their fear, which gave us possession of the City,
Children, and Victory; and Dom Manoel, more designing Ruin then Conquest, gave
up the City to the Flames. The cruelty out-went the destruction, for many
Bramenish young Ladies, exempted from crime by their Sex, from the Sword by
their faces, in Color and Beauty not inferior to those of our Europe, were
not spared in the Victory.

8. Dom Manoel de Lima went Coasting all the Bay of Cambaya, destroying the
Towns, And other places, and retires.
so depopulating every place, as to seem not to be glutted, with Blood or
Victory; at last retires with more Glory then Booty, and found the Governor
with all the Fleet together at the Island Dos Mortos, the next day (the sixth
of November) they set Sail for Dio, the Ships went light, and with the
multitude of Pendants and Streamers, made a pleasant and beautiful sight.

9. At the Fortresses making the Fleet, The Governor arrives at Dio.
such was the general satisfaction, as of men who after such a deluge of Blood,
saw those who brought 'em Peace in Victory; the Fortress was round about full
of Colors, the razed Ruins putting on contentment. The Commander in chief gave
order for Shooting off all the Guns; answered by the Governor from Sea with an
amazing Vollee, seconded by Instruments of War and Music, solemnizing so
frightfull a day with cheerful Vespers, the Moors too discharged a great many
Pieces, showing their joy or contempt for the Governors arrival.

10. Dom John de Castro kept that Night at Sea, He holds a Council at Sea.
and sent for on Board, the Commander in chief, Garcia de Sa, Manoel de Sousa
de Sepulveda, Iorge Cabral, and other Gentlemen of the Council, whom he
acquainted with the resolution he came with, to Fight the Enemy, upon which he
ask't no man's Opinion, because the Governor of India drew not his Sword to
Defend but Chastise, but in what manner he should fall upon the Enemy, he
desired all their Counsels; Garcia de Sa, with such reasons, approved, and
praised his fixed Resolution, as for his Person, and their weight were very
taking with the Governor. They discourst about the way of Fighting, and
concluded of it, which was a secret till the Execution. 'Twas ordered the men
should in the silence of the Night, be put into the Fortress; and on their
Landing, Music, Trumpets, and Shooting from the Ships should keep the design
from Rumecaon. The men in three Nights by Ladders of Cords got into the
Fortress; which was done with so much Caution, as not to be discovered by the
Enemy.

11. Rumecaon, (...) discourse.
on the approaching danger showing himself most Resolute, told his Soldiers,
if the Governor resolved to come out and Fight in the Field, the Moors would
march into the Fortress through the Gates, not over the Walls; that he hoped
with the Portuguese Colors to sweep the House of their Prophet; that they
fought for the Liberty of so many Princes, who sigh't under the heavy
Oppression of Tribute, and Servitude; that they should reserve their Courage,
in one day to revenge the Injuries of so many Years; that the State was crush't
under the weight of so many Victories; that Fortune had so ordered it, to bring
'em together, at one Blow to cut 'em off. The number of his Army.
The Turk heightened this insolence, by Commanding all the Soldiers should have
double Pay; his Army was of above forty thousand men, most of the Officers,
Turks, old Soldiers, famous by the report of their Courage, brought thither by
extraordinary Pay. There were come lately to the Camp seven hundred Ianizaries,
who proudly desired to Fight by themselves, that the Moors might see who gave
'em the Victory. Rumecaon supplied the Posts, and placed the main Body of his
Army, His ordering 'em.
so as to attend that place where he thought our Fleet would Anchor; neither
did his Confidence disturb his Discipline. Thus expected he to be falln upon by
us, ready for Defense, doubtful of Success.

12. The Governor having now got all the Soldiers into the Fortress, found
diverse Opinions about falling on the Enemy, and all the Arguments striking on
the Contingency of Success, they could not be approved or rejected, without the
knowledge of what is to come, known to no body. Garcia de Sa, by the Authority
of his Years Courage and Birth, discourst again about the convenience of
Fighting; but Dom John de Castro commanding silence said, The Governor
resolves to Fight.
that the Lot was already cast, that by the Valiant he should be well thought
of, and from Cowards he cared not for approbation; that those without should
expect the success to give their judgments. He spent that Evening in disposing
the Soldiers for the next day, not to alter by delay their Courage or
Resolution; His orders to* the Fleet.
He gave order the Fleets Boats should for a sign expect three Roquets to be
fired from the Fortress, and, at the same time our men resolved to Sally forth,
Row toward that place of the Enemy which was most Obnoxious, with Drums and
Trumpets sounding, crediting what they could their intentions of Landing,
History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 10.
covering the entrance of the Boats with Lances, which would make the Stratagem
probable, and that the Governors Boat should, by its place, Flagg Royal, and
Adornments, be known at a distance; a Stratagem, which either gave, or
furthered our Victory.

13. The day broke, which began the eleventh of November, Dedicated to the
memory of the glorious Saint Martin, Bishop of Tours, who might, as a Saint
favor, as a Soldier fight for us. The Governor, with the first Light, came
with his Generals staff on the platform of the Fortress, his white Armor added
so much to his Majesty, as his Charge was respected in his Person; Mass was
said at an open Altar, that they might beg Victory of the God of Hoasts; the
Governor and Major part of the Soldiers received the Sacrament, and the
Guardian of the Franciscans proclaimed a Plenary indulgence to all those who
Died in the Battle; when this was done, he commanded the pulling down the
gates of the Fortress, and the Dressing breakfast for the Soldiers with 'em,
that the Generals confidence and the despair of any shelter, might equally
assist the Victory, making them stand to it out of glory, or necessity; He thus
spoke to the Soldiers. His Speech to the Soldiers.
We are going now to a Battle, in which, if Conquered, we shall honor our God
with our Lives, if Conquerours, our King with our Victory; The strength of the
Enemies Army, is Turks and Ianizaries, who like Soldiers of fortune desire
War, hate Fighting; the other part consists of diverse Nations, brought into
one Body by their Pay, but not to be forced by it, to be all unanimous. These
are not stouter then their Fathers, and Ancestors, there is no reason they
should be more Fortunate, all of 'em have by our Arms been Mastered* This
Empire of Asia is the Child of our Victories, we have Nursed it in its first
Cradle, ^let's, now it is grown up, maintain it, that after long succession of
time* it may point to the World the glory of this Action; for me to encourage
you to Fight, were to forget my self we were Portuguese.

14. The order he put his men in, The order he put 'em in.
was this, he gave the Vanguard to Dom John Mascarenhas, he claiming the
greatest danger in recompense of his former; He had five hundred Portuguese,
six hundred Canarins, and five hundred The people of Malabar is divided into
No^bility called Naires, and into Commo^lty, called Poleas, 'twixt whom the
difference and distinction is so great, as if a Naire be but by chance touched
by a Polca, he is bound by certain ceremonies to cleanse himself from that
Contagion; The Naires have their Women in common, being bound from Marriage to
be always ready to follow the Samorim, (i. e.) Emperor to the Wars, without
the partial concernment of Wives and Children; their Heirs are their Brothers
or Sisters children; they must be of descent, the Emperor not having the power
to make one; their Temperance is admirable, as is their Courage in incountring
dangers or difficulties.

The Po^eas are Tradesmen, and so bound to one Trade, as it is of necessity
entailed on the Family; a Carpenters Son cannot be a Tailor, nor a Tailor a
Carpenter; They are too Slaves and Laborers to the Naires; if any women Naire
mingles with a Polea she is counted Damned, and immediately put to Death. See
Barro's History of India, Dec. 1. Lib. 9. Cap. 3.


Naires. Dom Alvaro de Castro commanded five hundred Portuguese more, part of
whom were the Gentlemen, and Offiers of his Fleet. Dom Manoel de Lima had five
hundred more; the Governor had the greatest Body, which was of about eight
hundred Portuguese, with some Canarins, and Malabareses.

37.
Dous modos ha de gente, porque a nobre
Naires chamados saon, et a menos digna
Poleas tem por nome, aquem obriga
A ley naon mesturar a casta antiga.
38.
Porque os que usaraon sempre hum mesmo officio
De outro naon podem receber consorte
Nem os filhos teraon outro exercicio
Se naon o de seus passados ate morte
Para os Naires he certo grande vicio
D' estes serem tocados, de tal sort
Que quando algum se toca per ventura
Com ceremonias mil, se alimpa et apura*
39.
Dest a art o Iudaico povo antigo
Naon tocava na gente de Samaria
Mais estranhezas inda do que digo
N'est a terra vereys de usancavaria
Os Naires sos saon dados ao perigo
D' as armas sos defemdem da contraria
Banda o seu Rey, trazendo sempre usada
Na esquerda adarga, et na dereita espada.
40.
Bramenes saon os seus Religiosos
Nome antiguo, et de grande preminencia
Observaon os preceitos taon famosas
De hum que premeyro pos nome a sciencia
Naon mataon cousa viva, et temerosas
Das carnes tem grandissima abstinencia
Somente no Venereo ajuntamento
Tem mas licenca et menos regimento.
41.
Geraes saon as molheres, mas somente
Para os da geracaon de seus maridos
Ditosa condicaon ditosa gente
Que naon saon de ciumes offendidos
Estes, et outros costumes variamente
Saon pelos Malavares admittidos
A terra he gross a em tratta et tudo aquillo
Que as ondas podem dar da China ao Nilo.
Camo. Can. 7. St. 37, 38, 39, 40, 41. 37.
Two Ranks they have of people, Nobles which
Are Naires styled, and those of base degree
Called Poleas. To both the Law prescribes
They shall not marry out of their own Tribes.
38.
And those who have been bred up to one Trade,
Ont of another may not take a Wife;
Nor may their Children any thing be made
But what their Parents have been all rheir Life.
To touch a Naire with their Bodies shade,
A scandal is to his Prerogative;
If themselves chance to touch them as they meet,
With thousand Rites himself he washes sweet.
39.
Just so the Jewish people did of Yore,
The touch of a Samaritan eschew:
But, when ye come into the Country, more
And things of greater strangeness shall ye view.
The Naires only go to War, before
Their King, they only stand a Rampire true
Against his foes. A Sword they always wield
With their right hand, and with the left a Shield.
40.
Their Prelates are called Bramens (an Old name
And (amongst them) of great Pre-eminence)
Of his famed Sect, who Wisdom did disdain,
And took a Style of a more modest sense.
They kill no Living thing, and highly blame
All flesh to eat, with wondrous abstinence;
But other flesh their Law does not forbid,
Yet they as prone thereto as if it did.
41.
Their Wives are common, but are so to none
Save those, who of their Husbands kindred are;
(O blessed Lot, blessed Generation,
On whom fierce Jealousy does wage no War.)
These are the Customs, but not these alone
Which are received by those of Malabar;
The Land abounds in Trade of all things, Isle
Or firm-land yields from China unto Nile.
Sir Ric. Fanshaw's Translation. 15. The Moors daily increased the Camp, The
Fleet Rows to shore.
and very lately were arrived Alucaon and Mojatecaon with five thousand
Soldiers. The Governor commanded the Signal agreed on, of Firing the Roquets,
should be given the Fleet, which, upon understanding it, betook themselves
Lustily to their Oars, and being close to Shore discharged all their Guns in
the Moors quarters. The smoke for some time hid the Ships, which made the Enemy
fall on, not where the fear was, but where he apprehended; sollicitous in the
imaginary, careless in the real danger. Rumecaon came there to resist 'em
Rumecaon with the main Body of his Army, charged there to hinder our men from
Landing. The Governor at that time, with Scaling Ladders in readiness to clap
to the Wall, The Governor Sallies out of the Fortress.
sallied out of the Fortress. Dom John Mascarenhas with his men encompast the
Ditch, to get up at that place where Diogo Lopez de Sequeira's work was.
Antonio Moniz Barretto, who was of this Body, The unfortunate Gallantry of
three Soldiers.
trusted with his Scaling Ladder three Valiant Soldiers, whose Blood was the
first was spilt in that Victory they Lived not to enjoy. They were come but
that year from the Kingdom, in Lourenco Pirez de Tavora's Fleet, Natives of the
Town of Torraon, and brought recommendatory Letters to Antonio Moniz from his
Mother, which they delivered as they were going to engage; He joyfully received
'em, telling the Soldiers, if they came off Alive, he would do 'em good
Offices with the Governor; to which they unanimously replied, that, only for
that day they needed his favor; that their Carriage should cut out their
passage for the future; that they begged him to trust 'em with the Scaling
Ladder, and be confident, they would Plant, History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 4.
Cap. 1.
and Defend it, with their Lives. Antonio Moniz seeing in such ordinary
Soldiers such extraordinary Gallantry, confidently delivered it 'em, saying,
he trusted 'em, with the Ladder, and his Honor; and as soon as with
unfortunate Courage they had planted it, a shot at random took off their Heads.

16. I Will here give the Story of a strange Challenge, A strange Challenge.
which I should pass over were it not as Famous, as Compassionate. Dom John
Manoel, and John Falcaon, Gentlemen of a great expectance, were for some
slight Jealousies (which in the Worlds opinion are heavy, as they are taken)
fallen out, and resolved to justify their Pique in the Field, making Valor or
Chance judge of their quarrel; The seconds, who engaged with less pre-occupy'd
judgments, endeavored to decide the quarrel by a more honorable Duel,
alleging, the Governor was ready to engage; that a Challenge always a Crime,
would be now a Scandal; that by the Edict they would forfeit their Lives; that
Dom John de Castro, was not, though thought so, so indulgent a Father, he bore
with faults, but not with insolences; that they might salve their Honors,
where they ventured their Lives, by agreeing, that he who first, and with most
Courage scaled the Enemies Wall, should have in the particular and common
Fight, the clearest Reputation; so by their Witty courage, inventing how to Dye
with Rewards, and how to Fight Duels without a Crime, both the Enemies accepted
the proposal, desiring their Kindred, and Friends, to hold their Ladders as to
men who were to Fight for the States and their own honor; at the same time
both began to climb. Dom John Manoel laying one hand on the Wall had it cut
off, relieving himself with the other, that too by a stroke was taken away, and
putting his Elbows to it to secure his hold, his Head was cut off by a Semitar.
John Falcaon at the same instant seized on the Wall, and having mastered it,
while he stoutly defended himself was cut in pieces. The Braves in the Army
were of different opinions, who of these gave greatest marks of their Courage;
in favor of both, we will say, he who gives all for it, owes no more to honor.

17. Dom John Mascarenhas began with his men to plant Ladders, How Dom John
Mascarenhas behaves himself.
many getting up with as much Resolution, as Fortune, for though received with
Lances, they overcome the resistance; these had the honor to be the first in
the Danger of being alone in the Camp, sustaining the weight of the Moors till
their Companions came to 'em; how those who first scaled the Walls behaved
themselves, may be guest by their posture of Fighting, the Moors fought on firm
ground, Ours suspended in the Air. Dom Alvaro de Castro, and Dom Manoel de
Lima, got over the Wall in several places, receiving most hurt in the stoutest
Resistance; while they fought scattered, they lost some men, closing they made
more room for the getting up of their Soldiers.

18. The Governor in the plain Field, met with greater Danger, The danger the
Governor was in on the Bridge.
then there was in Scaling; for he marched toward the Bridge, defended by a
great Body of men, and great Pieces planted on it, the importance of gaining it
equaled the danger. The Governor eminently hazarded himself in falling on, his
Courage was singular, his Fortune miraculous; for the Moors often put their
match to the prim'd Guns, and not one took Fire, a success, by the Miracle
opportune, His miraculous deliverance.
by the Accident unusual, yet would not Heaven have the whole Victory, for the
coming of the Turks in greater numbers to the defense of the Bridge, with
Muskets, Granados, and Pikes, stopped the fury of our Soldiers, some turned
their backs to the Bullets, God perhaps, by that, showing us, what we are when
left to our selves; the Cowards fled, the Valiant stood to it; Dom John de
Castro, below none in Courage, above all in Prudence, with some who followed
him closed with the Enemy, crying aloud, Victory, He cries out Victory,
the Turks run away: This noise was spread with so happy Ecchos, as our men
once more Rallied, and came to their Colors; the Turks fearful, or Credulous,
left the Field, this shout of the Generals being the gate of Victory. Our men
did here the Execution of Conquerours, and now that past for truth, what was
before stratagem. The Governor pursuing his Fortune, went up and down the
Field, and, as Victory is exempt from Rashness, and Fear without Counscel, Dom
John surrounded almost with the Enemies whole Army, cried out Victory, and the
Moors run away, without loss, and pursues it.
but out of order: In fine, we had by him before the Battle the Victory; Those
who engaged with the Governor unanimously affirm, that he was the first got
upon the Wall, and none but himself contradicted this testimony, who freely
said, Lourenco Pirez de Tavora clim'd first; What he says of Lourenco Pirez.
slighting repute so weakly proud, and desiring to be excused from stealing
honor, he knew so well how to purchase.

19. Rumecaon, upon advice of his men's disorderly Flight, came in with a Body
of Turks, to stop, or interrupt the Victory; and retarding the fury of our
Soldiers by the advantage of his Numbers, poised the Battle. The obstinacy of
the dispute lasted some time; The Standard Royal was twice shot down, at which
sight the Governor impatiently cried out, what means this Portuguese? shall
they take out of your hands the Victory? shall they carry off the Standard? The
Gonour fights in Person.
and charging the Enemy under cover of a Buckler which had sticking in it two
Arrows, with words and actions so encouraged the Soldiers, as with their fury,
to make the Moors give ground, and the last fly, by the fright of the first.

20. Dom Alvaro de Castro, and Dom Manoel de Lima being joined, raised the envy
of their Soldiers and Enemies; they charged Alucaon, and Mojatecaon, Valiant
Turks, and the Chief Commanders of the Army, who, for no little time, made the
Victory doubtful; The blood Died the Arms, Died the ground, the rude noise of
the Moors, did like a fresh danger fright the Camp, the horror and confusion
so mastered the Senses, as many before feeling their Wounds, felt themselves
Dying. Number at last yielded to Courage, and the Turks with infinite loss
quitted their ground. Dom John Mascarenhas charged Iuzarcaon, Rumecaon Rallies
in the plain Field.
whose Post he gained, not with less Valor, or worse Fortune. Rumecaon,
without losing his Courage or Judgment by the first loss, expected the second,
forming his Squadrons in the open Field, out of necessity, or confidence, for
in so numerous an Army the fright was more predominant then the loss; and as in
extremities it is usual to accuse Fortune, Rumecaon in the hearing of our men,
with superstitious Cries and Noises made his Atonements, as if so to appease the
indignation of the Heavens.

21. Dom John de Castro, The Governor and his Son fall on him.
unwilling to lose one moment of so glorious a Day, joined his small Army, and,
giving the Vanguard to his Son Dom Alvaro, faced the Enemy; who resolutely
expected him, and putting out the Horns of the Half Moon in which he was
formed, came begirting our Infantry; yet Dom Alvaro, as if he would have to
himself the glory of that Day, fell upon the Enemy with so much Gallantry, as
he was the first of his men who Wounded the Moors, charging or opening with his
Sword and Buckler a close Squadron. The Enemy in the first charge maintained
the Field, Dom Alvaro breaks him.
afterward unable to endure the weight of the Battle, retired in Disorder;
our men Routing the disordered Ranks, rather chased, then Destroyed the flying
Enemy. Here the Victory began to be notorious; but Rumecaon with a great
Batallion of Moors, and Ianizaries, made Head against our men, who spread upon
the pursuit, neglected or not minded Discipline.

22. Here was Dom Alvaro given for lost, The danger and resoluteness of Dom
Alvaro.
for his scattered Soldiers, unable to make any Resistance, marched off,
leaving the Enemy the Camp, and Victory; nor were his Persuasions, or resolute
Fighting, of force enough to Retain some, or Rally others, on so slight
accidents depends the fortune of War. Antonio Casal a Friar, Fre. Antonio
Casal plants a Crucifix.
(whose Religious courage is by Authors recorded) with a Crucifix lifted up, by
pious, and moving Arguments, began to rebuke and animate our men, showing 'em
the Image of Christ exposed again on the Cross to second injuries, it happened
that a Stone cast at random, so unnail'd an arm of the Crucifix as to leave it
hanging, the holy Figure showing it self in the same prospective, inclined to
the Believers, History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 2.
falln to the Infidels; Our men more animated by Heavens then the States
injuries, showed in a different cause, different Courage, more engaged by the
Outrages offered their Creator, Our men are encouraged.
then by the fevere Commands of their Monarck. On a sudden they all Rallied,
and recovering strength, were rather Instruments then Authors of the Victory.
Rumecaon upon the Routing of his men retired, and Dom Alvaro engaged with him
at the same time entered the City, Rumecaon retires, and Dom Alvaro enters the
City.
more hindered by those who fell, then by the resistance of the Living, who did
not now defend themselves.

23. At that time came up Dom Manoel de Lima, Manoel de Lima joins him,
as Courageous by Land, as Sea, who, where he was placed broke the Enemy, till
joining with Dom Alvaro, and both entering the City, did bloody Execution on the
Moors, who Routed, and Scattered, strove to save themselves more by Flight then
Resistance, and the face of War looked more like Plunder then Fight, our men
found Moors, not Enemies; many of 'em creeping into their Houses hid their own
Estates, as stoll'n from the Victory; others cast away their Arms to fly
nimbler. Dom John Mascarenhas, and Dom John Mascarenhas.
at an other place entered the City, ending that day so glorious a Siege.

24. The Governor fought still in the Camp, sollicitous for his men's Victory,
secure in his own, when News came to him, that the Town was delivered, but
Rumecaon Rumecaon offers Battle again.
(like a Mine) played again, retarding the Victory, with eight thousand
Soldiers, so disposing himself, as to give or expect Battle, so great were
their Numbers as with the leavings of the Field to manage a new War. About
that time Sallied out of the City, Dom Alvaro de Castro, Dom John Mascarenhas,
and Dom Manoel de Lima, to joy with the Governor for the Victory; when they
saw Rumecaon in the Field with an other Army. The Governor, that his suspense
might not be mistook for fear, with the same Courage of the first, engaged in
the second Battle, putting his men into three Squadrons, two fell upon the
Enemy in the Flank, he himself in the Front; this was the order of his charging
the Enemy, The Governor defeats him.
who more Desperate then Resolute received our first shock, afterward fought
without Courage or Confidence, and being seconded by his men with a faint and
forced Obedience, left us on slight resistance the Field; though in all the
Actions of Siege and Fight, Rnmecaon showed himself no less Soldier then
Valiant; but in adversity, Fame is sooner deserved then purchased.

25. The Moors opened their Front, the Governor (like an impetuous River
carrying all before it) fell upon them undefended; now was the Execution
without Fighting, the Moors looked like Enemies by their Flying, not by their
Defense; The Victory gotten.
and our men falling upon some Companies not yet broken, they, as for their
advantage Disordered themselves, flying from one another with as much, rather
more apparent Danger then from us; others not to pass for Enemies threw away
their Arms, as Instruments which might mind us of their Offense and our
Vengeance; there were in fine, in that Tragedy acted all those affections fear
puts on. Rumecaon Rumecaon' s Death.
seeing all lost, put himself in a poor Garment amongst the Dead, exempting
himself from Rage and Victory; but a Stone from an unknown hand, by his Death
saved his waiting on the Triumph. Many stood to be the Authors of his Death, as
formerly of Galba's, who had more Murderers then Wounds; and in our own Age and
Kingdom have we seen the like accident.

26. I purposely omit the particular accidents of this Battle, because none
can be praised without injury to others, we will only give a short relation of
the Officers, and most eminent Personages, out of reverence to their Place, and
Quality; besides in the confusion of a Battle it is difficult with the exact
Rigor of truth to particularize accidents; and it is certain, those whose Pen
finds out the Atoms of the most occult Carriages, endeavor to help out the
History, or are very sharp sighted in finding out Events. It Is enough for
knowledge, that so famous an Action credited then our Arms, now our Memory, and
I believe that of all the designs in Asia no Siege out-went, or Battle equaled
this.

27. The numbers of the Enemies Army cannot with certainty be affirmed, Diverse
opinions of the Enemies numbers.
because with different Calculation, some raise 'em above sixty thousand,
others say less, neither could the Moors who were taken Prisoners, make any
exact judgment of those they lost; but by all accounts, the disproportion of
the Armies was so notorious, as was sufficient to amase the World with the
report; and in foreign Histories we find the Victory writ with more applause
then in our own Memorials; and if our Country imitated the Roman Empires
gratitude toward her Sons of desert, she would in proud Statues let the World
read Dom John de Castro's actions, which like Annals of Brass should be public
Volumes to all Ages; we find not that his Reward was suitable to his Merit,
Congratulating for his Victory.
perhaps to raise it, he here met with the usual misfortune of Heroes, yet
enjoyed he as a more durable recompense, the glory of his Name. The Princes of
Asia, by ambitious Embassies gave him the joy of the Victory. The Chamber of
Goa called him Duke, either to mind him of it, or to seem to desire it. The
King Dom John honored him with the Title of Vice-King of India, the Fourth the
State had there. The same Earth which covers his Ashes, Buries his other
Rewards, his Posterity only Inheriting the glory of so great an Ascendent.

28. The Governor laid aside the King's share of the Booty, many Colors, and
forty Pieces of great Canon, amongst which was that, we now have in Saint
Gillians Fort, which keeps the name of the place whence 'twas taken. He
delivered up the City to Plunder, The plu^der of the City.
not reserving for himself the point of a Lance, a constant despiser of the
Riches of the East; 'twas for this and other Virtues, Our assistance from
Heaven.
the Governor (as the Moors affirm) was always assisted by some Divine power,
for on the top of the Church they saw a Virgin, whose brightness they were not
able to behold, History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 4. Cap. 1.
at whose sight their hearts failed, on which they quitted their Arms, some out
of fear, others out of reverence. This favor from Heaven is not above belief,
if we consider the justice of the Cause, How many the Moors lost.
and piety of the General. There Died of the Moors five thousand, amongst them
were Rumecaon, Alucaon, Accedecaon, and other Turks of Name; the Prisoners were
six hundred, who afterward honored the Triumph; Our dead and wounded.
we lost of Ours thirty, the Wounded were near three hundred.

29. The Governor had but few days rest in the repose of Victory, being
immediately seized on by the Anxious care of Re-building, rather founding the
Fortress from the first Foundation; a Work, for the Necessity of it
indispensable, for our Straights impossible, for the expenses of so long a War
had drained the States Revenues, so pawned besides, as only to be redeemed by a
Peace of long continuance; The Governor Builds up the Fortress.
yet the Governor, not Disheartened by these difficulties, went about beginning
the new Fabric, with a new design; for in the judgment of the Skillful, 'twas
requisite to enlarge the Situation, to make the Walls thicker, the Bastions
nearer, to Build Magazins in a dry place for the keeping Ammunition, and
Provision, that it might be preserved well conditioned, which it had not been
formerly, but by the moistness of the Soil corrupted. Materials could not be
bought, or brought, without pay, or wages; Stone-cutters, Pioneers and Workmen
ask't satisfaction for their Labor.

The Governor had neither Plate, or Jewels to serve his occasions, so as to be
forced to try other Pawns, Valuable by his honor, not their own nature. He
commanded the Bones of his Son Dom Fernando to be taken up, to send 'em in an
unheard of Pawn to the City of Goa, but the Earth having not quite corrupted
the Body, he cut off some hairs of his own Beard, Pawns for it the hairs of his
Beard.
on which he ask't twenty thousand Pardaos of the Chamber of Goa; his affection
for his Country finding him out a strange way, never light upon by those Loyal
Decios, Curtios, and Fabios, of whom Rome yet proud, preserves their Memory in
the Ruins of her Empire. The pawn was accompanied by this following Letter.

A Letter writ from Dio by the Governor Dom John de Castro to the City of Goa.
GEntlemen, Magistrates, Judges, and People, of the most Honorable and always
Loyal City of Goa; I writ to you some days since by Simaon Alvarez one of your
Citizens the news of the Victory God gave me against the Commanders of the King
of Cambaya, and that you might without any allay enjoy the pleasure and
satisfaction of the Victory, I spoke not in my Letter, of the great streights
and necessities I was in; but now I think fit, no longer to dissemble, and to
give you an account of the urgencies which are upon me, and to desire your
assistance to supply, and remedy things of so great moment as are now in my
hands; for the Fortress of Dio is so beaten down to the ground, as not one foot
of the Wall can serve again, so as it is not only necessary this Summer to Build
it up again, but with such Skill, and in such a form as the King of Cambaya may
lose his hopes, of being at any time able to take it. To this trouble is added
an other as great, or greater, to me incomparably above all others, which is
the trouble and perplexity the Lasquerins put me to for their Pay, which I have
secured to 'em, else would they be all gone, and I should be left alone in the
Fortress; which would put me into no little danger, and consequently all India;
for the Commanders of the King of Cambaya, with those men who are left of the
Defeat, quarter at Suna, two Leagues from this Fortress, and the King every day
sends 'em Horse and Foot to increase their Camp, as if they would return and
try their fortune by giving an other Battle, wherefore I am in great want of a
considerable sum of Money, and, because it concerns the service of our Lord the
King, and complies with your Honor, and Loyalty, I earnestly beg of you to
remember your old Custom, and great Generosity, which obliged you (as good and
Loyal Subjects) always to relieve the urgent necessities of his Majesty, and
for the great and intimate affection I have for you all, you would lend me
twenty thousand Pardaos, which as a Gentleman I promise, and on the Holy Gospel
swear, before a years end to see you Repaid, though I should be set upon, by
greater necessities, and extremities, then those by which I am at present
environed. I commanded the taking up my Son Dom Fernando, whom the Moors killed
in this Fortress (fighting for God, and our Lord the King) to pawn to you his
Bones, but they were found so, as 'twas not fit to take 'em out of the ground,
by which I am without any other Pawn, but part of my Beard, which I hear send
you by Diogo Rodriguez de Azevedo, for as you know, I have neither Gold, Plate,
Household-stuff, or any thing of Value to secure your Estate, only a plain and
naked truth given me by God Almighty. But that you may more certainly rely on
your Payment, and it may not be thought by some, that (what has at other times
fallen out) some intervening accident may keep you from it; I here send you an
order for the Treasurer of Goa to be paying you out of the Tax for the Horse,
engaging all can be made of it, till you are re-imburst; for the manner of the
paying it you are to fix it with him; Excuse me for not affecting words to
heighten to you my extremities, being, from what I have said before firmly
persuaded, that you will in this Conjuncture, do what you can, and above your
abilities, without any other mediation, then your accustomed Nobleness, and our
reciprocal Affection. I recommend my self, Gentlemen, to your Goodness.

Dated at Dio the twenty third of November, Year 1546.
30. Upon the Messengers arrival at Goa, the people furnished him with more
then he demanded, seeing they had a Governor, so little proud as to ask, so
great as to defend 'em; The Citizens of Goa return 'em.
they returned him those honorable Pawns, which are at present preserved in
the hands of the Bishop, They are yet preserved.
Inquisitor General, his most deserving Grandchild, who put 'em in an Urn or
Pyramid of Crystal, set in a Basis of Silver, on which are Engraven several
Disticks, which make an ingenious Memory of so famous an Action; this
honorable Relic remaining with his Posterity, to make Hereditary the virtues
of Dom John de Castro. With the Money was carried the following Letter.

The Chamber of Goa's Letter in answer to the Governors. History of India,
Dec. 6. Lib. 4. Cap. 4.

MOst Illustrious, and Excellent Captain General, and Governor of India, for
the High and Mighty, and most Excellent Prince our Lord the King. Diogo
Rodriguez de Azevedo, arrived at this City on Monday the sixth of December, and
the next day delivered a Letter to the Chamber from your Illustrious Lordship,
which was read with no little pleasure, and satisfaction, because, by it we
were assured of your Health, which good news we always covet to know, and
desire increase of, and for it, this City, and People, in general, and by
themselves, give God many thanks, and are confident in our Lady, the Virgin
Mary, the Mother of God and our Advocate, that as long as the people of India
has your Illustrious Lordship: for their Captain, and Governor, we shall
never want the Divine assistance in our affronts and troubles, in recompense of
your most Catholic and modest Life, your Carriage, and Actions of most
commendable Virtue, on which hope we now enjoy our present quiet; for, the late
and glorious Victory achieved by your prudent Conduct, great Courage and
Magnanimity, the raising the Siege of Dio, the routing and defeating the King
of Cambaya's whole Army, besides above twenty thousand others, Moors, Turks,
Rumes, Coracos, and Renegade Christians, Germans, Venetians, Genuese, and
French, and diverse other Nations, (considerable numbers of whom were Killed by
our Lances and Swords, as this City is assured by honest men and eyewitnesses)
these good Services are certain signs, that for the future, by God's grace and
protection, we need not fear any other troubles which shall appear from a fresh
Army of the King of Cambaya, or other Neighhouring Kings and Potentates, or
whole India, who are certainly our implacable Enemies, besides being Infidels,
and haters of our holy Catholic Faith, from neither of whom can we have any
secure or firm Peace, though some show of a double and cousening Friendship. As
for the Loan, which in the name of our Lord the King you ask of us, the Cities
answer is, That we the Inhabitants will now and always do our duty in serving
his Majesty with our Estates, Lives and Souls; and because the Cities, and
every particular man's design is to serve your Illustrious Lordship with an Eye
that such a Loan is very much for the service of our Lord the King, whose the
City is, and we are all, with a great deal of diligence and care, from the day
that Diogo Rodriguez de Azevedo delivered his message, to the present (which is
the seven and twentieth of December) have we raised twenty thousand, one
hundred and forty six Pardaos, and one Tanga, at five Tangas the Pardao, which
the City lends, that is Citizens* and People, as also the Bramens, Merchants,
Traders, and Goldsmiths; and by our Letters we assure your Lordship, that this
City, and its honorable Inhabitants, are bound for your service to lay down
our Lives more cheerfully then for our own honor and interest. As for the
Pawns your Lordship sent us, the City and Inhabitants think our selves injured
by your Lordship to rely so little on us, and our Loyal^ies; for in a business
that so concerned the service of our Lord the King, and his Royal State, such
honorable and glorious Pawns were not necessary, our Loyalty obliging us to
serve the King, and present necessity, after that your Obligations on us, and
your Lordship great affection and love to this City and Inhabitants, for which,
and what besides we confess owing to you, we kiss your hands, and beg of God
Almighty your enjoying perfect health, and prosperity, in much honor, and
great Victories over the Enemies of our most holy Faith. My Lord, Diogo
Rodriguez de Azevedo returns to carry you back your Pawns, and he, and
Bertholamew Bispo Procurator of this City bring you the Money, which the City,
and People lend you, of their good and free will; they carry too, the order you
sent hither to the Treasurer for the payment of the Money; and our desires, you
would accept all, as from Loyal Subjects, we profess to be to our Lord the
King, and men obliged to your Lordship.

Dated at the Chamber the twenty seventh of December, 1547. and I Lewis
Tremessaon Clerk of the Chamber gave order for the writing it, and signed it,
by the authority I have so to do. Pero Godinho, John Rodriguez Paez, Ruy
Goncalvez, Ruy Dioz, Iorge Ribeiro, Bertholamew Bispo.


31. The works at the Fortress went on with so great satisfaction to the
Officers, The work go on at the Fortress.
and Laborers, as it advanced without time, and the pay of Workmen and
Soldiers was so punctual, as the State was only poor; for the Governor,
besides what the City lent, the Ladies, and Gentlewomen, sent him in a Cabinet
their Diamonds, and Jewels, by which Female impotency sacrifis'd both to Glory
and Vanity; an offer which expected neither interest, or recompense; whence is
seen, how much better the People supply the Virtues, then Tyrannies of Regents.

32. He commanded Dom Manoel de Lima with thirty Ships to go along the Coast of
Cambaya, And the War against Cambaya.
and Burn all the Villages, to show the Sultan, his Revenge was not satisfied
by the Victory; but not to put in at the City of Goga, because the intelligence
said, that there were imbody'd all those who escaped from the Battle. Dom
Manoel, Dom Manoel de Lima wageth it.
(who again looked for good fortune in that Bay) went Sailing along the Coast,
and in a few days of being out, was surprised by so violent a Tempest, as to be
forced by the necessity of the Storm, Goes to the City of Goga.
to put into the Port forbidden by his instructions. The Citizens having their
imaginations filled with the late dangers, at the sight of the same Arms which
wounded 'em quitted the City; the Soldiers, as well as the unserviceable
Rabble, History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 4. Cap. 3.
in the same distemper flying to the Mountain. There was at Anchor in the Port
a Moorish Vessel, belonging to the Qamalake, (one who was in good
correspondence with the State) which observing the flight of the Moors haled to
our men to fall upon the City. Dom Manoel not understanding the sign, concluded
that in defiance they bid him Battle, and 'twixt anger and impatience making
ready, perceived the City emptying, and the poor people running in confused
multitudes toward a small Mountain, which was in sight, believing the
distance, and cragginess of its situation would secure 'em from being fallen
upon by our Soldiers; Dom Manoel found out the design of the Ships hawling,
and put to it, 'twixt the opportunity, and his obedience, brought the business
to Council; and amongst Valiant Soldiers, Gallantry being the best interpreter
of Orders, 'twas voted they should enter the City, because the Governors
instructions could not take in all accidents, who, if there, would be the first
should leap on shore; the Counsel was immediately followed by Execution; Dom
Manoel, almost without any resistance entered the City; the pillage of the
Soldiers was great, and what was below the coveting, was committed to the
Fire, which burnt Estates and Houses; the Damage was greater then the Victory.
Which he Sacks and Burns.
Dom Manoel took three Baneans Prisoners, by whom he was told, that all the
Inhabitants had saved themselves in a place of the Mountain not far of; he
resolved to invest it, that the fugitives and opposers might have the same
Punishment; at break of Day he went to the place, taking with him for guides
the Baneans, forced by miserable necessity to deliver up their Children and
Kindred; and those who thought themselves secure in the shelter of the
Mountain, saw over their Heads the Sword, before the Enemy. The slaughter
differenc't not cause from cause, person from person, natives and strangers,
guilty and innocent with their Lives paid for their own or an others offense.
From Persons the affront past to Religion, he caused many to be Hanged up in
the Temples of their Idols, an outrage in the Superstition of their Religion,
inexpiable. He cut the Throats of all the Cattle, sprinkling the Mosques with
Cows blood, an Animal, which as the depositary of Souls, they adore with
adominable worship.

33. Dom Manoel de Lima returned to his Ships, He returns on Board, and is in
dange^.
and ventured to cross the Bay, where without a Storm he feared Shipwreck; for
the Tide is there so unruly, and impetuous, as is sufficient to loosen the
Vessels. In Sailing he came in fight of the City Gandar, peopled by Pagan
Merchants, rich by its Commerce, weak by its Inhabitants. This was in the first
Onset yielded, and burnt, He destroys Gandar.
the Natives discovered their Estates as a ransom for their Lives, which
neither by opposing nor yielding could they save, for the anger, rather
inhumanity of the Soldiers more coveted blood then booty. He destroyed many
other places of the Bay, whose ashes and ruins for many years kept up the
memory of their Destruction. Those Natives who survived the miseries of their
fellows, retired to the Inland of the Kingdom, where in secure poverty they
preserved themselves.

34. Dom Manoel returned for Dio, Returns for Dio.
where he found the Governor employed about the new Fortifications, in whose
sight the Works advanced; diverse businesses re-demanding him at Goa, he had a
mind to leave the Fortress in a state of defense. Dom John Mascarenhas, either
wore out, or satisfied with the difficulties of the Siege, before his time was
out resigned, his Government, desiring that year to return for the Kingdom, to
enjoy that Fame of which he so well deserved. The Governor endeavored to
dissuade him, fearing none would accept it after him; for by the late Victory
and alteration of the Trade, the Spurrs of honor, and profit, were Blunted,
the greatest incentives men Bow under. But Dom John Mascarenhas's resolution to
go for the Kingdom, Dom John Mascarenhas leaves his Command.
in Lourenco Pirez de Tavora's Fleet, put the Governor upon finding out a
Commander for the Garrison, which some Gentlemen had refused to be, out of
Dislike to a place which had been the Seat of so many Victories, perhaps out of
the hazard there is to succeed Persons of extraordinary Eminency; Dom Manoel de
Lima offers to continue in it.
yet Dom Manoel de Lima offered to remain on the place, out of either
complacency to the Governor, or confidence of himself.

35. The Governor in the mean time provided for his passage to Goa, and
ordered Antonio Moniz Barretto with some Ships to look out for the Fleet of
Cambaya, Antonio Moniz takes some Ships.
which (by his private intelligence) he knew were to Visit the Coast of Por,
and Mangalor, which Moniz meeting at Sea, Boarded, and carried into Dio, their
Lading helped to bear the States charges. The King of Cambaya in his resentment
of so many losses, burst forth into a most barbarous Revenge, The barbarous
revenge of the King of Cambaya.
commanding two of our innocent Prisoners, taken during the War, to be Killed,
taking his satisfaction for so great Outrages on so little shadows.

36. The affairs of Dio being concluded, fortune began to alarm the State with
new accidents; The Governor had from Ormus repeated intelligence, News from
Ormus.
that the Turks with a mighty Army had thrown out of Balsora Mahomet As-Cnam, a
Loyal friend to the State, who summoned our Arms, as Auxiliary forces, to
resist the common Enemy. The dangers, and consequences of having so unruly a
Neighbor, were of no difficult discovery, for whom and us the World, much less
the State, would be too narrow; The importancy of Balsora was weig'd, as a
Foundation laid for greater designs; whose situation we will briefly acquaint
you with. The description of Balsora.
Balsora is a Colony of four thousand Families, seated in Arabia the Happy, in
twenty four degrees of Northern Latitude, not far distant from the River
Euphrates. It Is from the Fortress of Ormus two hundred Leagues, from Babylon a
little above forty. Ships go from Ormus thither along the Coast of Persia,
having on that side more convenient Ports and Watering. It Is inhabited by
Moors, Schismatics from the Turks, for though all Worshippers of Mahomed, yet
differ in their Belief; these following the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Persian, whom the Devil in different Cups makes to drink of the abominations of
Mahomed; here the Turks fortified themselves, (...) themselves in it.
and began to gain upon the Neighboring Arabians, on some by Arms, on others
by Benefits, setting up a new Prince in Balsora, who being of the Race of their
ancient Kings was liked of by the Arabs, and would be faithful to the Turks,
whose Liberality, under a show of friendship, Veyl'd their ambition of ruling.
This man's pretensions, whom the Turks saluted for King, others write at large,
I omit the relation, as importune to the Reader, and from the design of the
History.

37. The Governor resolved to send Dom Manoel de Lima for the Fortress of
Ormus, Dom Manoel de Lima goes for Ormus,
(which came to him by the Death of Dom Manoel da Sylveita) that as the
Perquisits of the place he should take on him the obligation of managing the
War against the Turks; the Fortress of Dio, being once more left as a Stone of
offense, rejected by the Builders; for no Gentleman would remain there, with
only the care of the Fortifications, Dom John Mascarenhas carrying away with
him the glory of the danger. I know not if the affairs of India are now held in
the same respect. The Governor was troubled the Theater of so many Victories
should be laid aside, And Dom John Mascarenhas returns to his Command in Dio.
which Dom John Mascarenhas hearing, offered that Winter to continue in the
place, a thing taken very well by the Governor, who told him, whilst the
Fortress was finishing, 'twould be Walled by his reputation; and that it may be
known how facil this so great Personage was in confirming other men's deserts,
I Will set down a Letter he writ to his Son Dom Alvaro, What the Governor writes
of him to his Son Dom Alvaro,
upon Dom John Mascarenhas going to Goa to take passage for the Kingdom. There
comes by this occasion Dom John Mascarenhas, the same the Pagans, and Moors
take him for, I who am a good Christian make the same confession of his
Courage, having, in all the Fights found him always at my side; He goes to
embark for the Kingdom, I ask it of you, to entertain him, as you would my own
Person, and not to consent he should Lodge any where but with you, which yet is
below his merits, I hope in God he will in a little time return to these Parts,
to correct my Defects. He also writ largely to the King of every man's Desert,
and to the King of every one.
said nothing of himself, betraying his partiality for other men's services, his
ingratitude for his own.

38. Order being taken about Dio, the Governor left Dom Iorge de Menezes with
six Ships, He leav^s Dom Iorge on that Coast.
to hover the rest of the Summer about the Bay of Cambaya, and gave him
instructions to proclaim in all the adjacent places, That all the Moors, and
Pagans might return to Inhabit the Island, for under shelter of his Justice,
their Persons and Commerce should be secure, enjoying their Ancient peace and
freedom; and truth being credited by Courage, the Pagans as much sought for
the protection of our Arms, as Laws, there coming in great numbers of Merchants
and Inhabitants to improve the Trade, counting that Peace secure, which begun
on the confines of War.

39. The Governor took Shipping for Goa, Embarks for Goa.
expected there by the general applause of all people, the articulate Ecchos of
his Victory; in ten days he came into Port, where the Bishop, the Commander in
chief, and Magistrates came to Visit him, Arrives, and is vis^^ed at Sea.
desiring him to stay at Pangim, whilst the City prepared the Triumph they
intended for his Reception, that the World might not think 'em uncivil,
barbarous, or ungrateful; that so deserved a Triumph, was not the ambition of
the Person, but glory of the State; that Kings carry away the advantages of
Victories, Subjects the honor; that he might scorn the Reward, without
refusing the Memory.

40. The Governor suffered himself to be overcome by the kindness of the
People, A Triumph is decreed him.
as one who could not slight the honors of a Triumph, without injuring those
who bore him Company in the achievement, nor limit the popular Rejoicing,
without envying the common prosperity; their festival Solemnities having their
excuse in our Fortune, their example in the Caesar's. The fifteenth of April of
the Year 1547. was appointed for the day of the Triumph, the first, and last,
our Arms ever saw, used to purchase Fame without glory. The City Built in Saint
Catherines Basar, a great Arch, covering the Materials with diverse Carpets.
The gate of the City was from the top of the Wall thrown down, The Fabric of
it.
the Stones appearing humble, or grateful; the Hangings of the Walls were of
Rich cloth of Gold, greatness could do no more, the general satisfaction was
not content with less. In many places the Adornment was of diverse Colored
Velvets, that the Gold might set off the Majesty, the diversity of Colors the
pleasantness. On the Walls on each side the Gate were two gilded Lions,
upholding in their Paws the wheels of the Castros, History of India, Dec. 6.
Lib. 4. Cap. 6.
always Famous, now Triumphant. There run along by the Arch a dilated Thicket
of Trees, which with intermitting shades, qualified the heat, without hindering
the light. The Sea appeared all covered with Ships, Galleys, Boats, and
Brigantines, which came from the Neighboring Islands, all with their Streamers
and Wast-cloaths. There was in the Court of the Palace a Fortress, designed for
the Model of Dio, within it some Guns charged without Bullets, and other
Firearms, a pleasant Representation of former Horrors. In the same Fortress
was hid exquisite Music, which with Tunables voices kept time in singing the
praises of the Governor, delighting by their sweetness, the Ear, by their
words, the Judgment. The general correspondency in the adorning the Streets,
was as if designed to show the Riches of the East; The Embroidery, as common,
was looked upon with scorn. The Clothes of the Citizens were in all kinds such,
as if the People had Triumphed; Neither, if their hearts could have been seen,
would the applause of their souls have seemed less, being the voluntary
Demonstrations of inartificial affections.

41. The Governor came from Pangim in a little Gally, The Governors entry.
differenc't from the rest by its Adorning; he had with him the old Cavalliers,
his Companions in the Expedition, who shared equally of the glory and danger.
The Galleons of the Fleet went on Head, in their Stern followed the Vessels
with Oars, with their Sails furled in the Brayles, and all shadowed with the
Verdure of several Boughs, appearing from the Land, a loose Wood, or moving
City. When they came in sight of the Fortress, by the horror of their Salute,
the War seemed rather real then apparent; the Guns also from the Shore, gave
'em so terrible an answer, as the senses could not distinguish whether it were
a Fight or Triumph; all the Fleet opened to make way for the Governors Gally.
He was richly Clothed, giving the Season its due, and became them as well, and
sprightly as his Arms; He had on, a French suit of Crimson Satin, with Gold
twist about the Slashes and Seams, and not to forget he was a Soldier, he put
on a Coat of Mail wrought on Cloth of Gold with Buttons of Plate, Feathers in
his Hat, and the Guarniture of his Sword Gold. Upon the Key, the Officers of
the Militia, Nobility, and Magistracy of the City waited for him, with whom he
entered the first Gate, where one of the Consuls made him a sober Speech in
Latin, showing, that by the advantage of his Valor we had humbled the proudest
Scepter of the East, whose Ruins would be his Fames best Trumpets; that
Portugal had now secured the State, born again in his Arms, who fought as well
for Religion, as Empire, so laying his designs, as the Voice of the Gospel
reached Parts so remote; that now the Moors and Pagans could not but believe
that God to be Great, who was the God of so great Victories; that after long
Revolutions of time in the East, men Sailing by would point at the place of the
Battle, the Destruction of Cambaya going in Tradition from Nation to Nation,
from Kingdom to Kingdom; that Parents would tell it their Children, to fright
'em with the memory of former Dangers; that now our Colors gloriously Rolled
up, might rest in the Temple of Peace, having opened that of Victory. He
discoursed largely upon the passages of his Government, yet in the thoughts of
the people, was rather sparing, then extravagant in his Virtues, greater in the
Eyes of strangers, then in our praises. The end of the Speech had its Cadence
in the Harmony of differing, and agreeing Instruments; immediately were Shot
off some Guns, charged instead of Bullets with diverse Comfits, They receive
him under a Canopy.
which falling at a little distance, made a pleasant, though running Banquet
for the common people. The Magistrates of the City received the Governor under
a Canopy, The order of the Triumph.
and presently a Citizen of quality, reverently bowing, took his Hat from his
Head, putting him on a Crown of Triumph, and in his hand a Palm. The Guardian
of the Franciscan's Order walked before, with the Crucifix he held up in the
Battle, the Arm unnail'd, and hanging, (a Signal by which the Divine Majesty
not only in that but this Age has secured to us our Kingdoms and Victories Dom
Antonio de Sousa de Macedo (now Secretary of State in Portugal) in the third
Chapter of the third Book of his Lusitania Liberata (Printed at London 1645.)
says, The design of shaking of the King of Spain being Completed, by Killing
the Secretary, and Proclaming John the Fourth Duke of Braganza (at that time at
his House in the Country) the Nobility, in the King's absence desired the
Archbishop of Lisbone to Govern the City; who going in solemn Procession to
the Palace, as he past by Saint Anthonies Church, and was praying to the Saint
to intercede for the good of the Kingdom, and his Native Conntry, the Arm of a
rich Crucifix which was carried before him, Miraculously unnail'd and held it
self forth to the people, who received the Miracle, with acclamations crying
out, God stretches out the hand of his power to free the Portuguese, and
decide their cause against the Castillian, who had said, he only desired God
should be Judge. This is the Miracle hinted at by the Author, and compared to
the Crucifixes having an Arm unnail'd in the Battle, as was related in the 22.
Parag. of this Book.
) there followed the Royal Banner of our Cinks, beheld by the Moors and Pagans
with fresh admiration; immediately came the Standarts of Cambaya, dragged on
the ground in the sight of Iuzarcaon, and other Commanders pinioned, who
represented the Tragedy of their Fortune, for them compassionate, to us
pleasant; there were seen six hundred Prisoners, dragging their Chains after
them, after them the Fieldpieces, with different and numerous Arms. The Ladies
from their Windows sprinkled the Triumpher with distilled waters of diverse
Spices. The Officers through whose hands past the Gold, and other rich
Commodities, came and made him voluntary offerings, the equal disposition of
their affections being more Valuable then the Triumph. The beautified, and open
Churches showed their acceptance and thanks. In this order he went to Visit the
Cathedral, the Mother Church of the East, where the Bishop, and Clergy received
him with the Hymn Te Deum Laudamus; being entered into the Sea, with Religious
offerings he acknowledged the Author of Victories, and it being now late, with
little Ceremony retired to the Palace, one days time being too narrow for the
Majesty of the Triumph.

THE LIFE OF DOM JOHN DE CASTRO.
The Fourth BOOK.
THere were but few Kingdoms in the East, which in the Government of Dom John
de Castro did not Alarm that State, by diverse Rumors of War, by either Arms
against us, or against one the other, inviting our Forces to make Peace, or
forward the Victory; the East also saw him often girt his Sword for the cause
of Religion.

1. King John had sent to the Island of Zeilan some Franciscan Friars,
Franciscan Friars go for Ceilan.
exemplary in their Lives and Doctrine, that by Martyrdom and Preaching, they
might bear witness of the truth of the Gospel, that being our Prince's greatest
concernment, whose Banners Asia saw oftener displayed in reverence to Religion,
History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 4. Cap. 7.
then ambition of Empire. These Friars on their Landing in the Island were by
the King of Cotta civilly entertained, the Sun of Righteousness beginning once
more to rise in the East. That Paganism began to Listen to the Voice of Heaven,
and that Barren ground to answer the pains by its Improvement, by the coming in
of infinite Sheep to the Sheepfold of the Church.

2. Those Ambassadors of the Gospel went forward, to give News of the Light to
the King of Candea, They preach the Faith in Candea, and the King hearkens to
it.
in the heart of the Island, whom they found Courteous in the entertainment of
their Persons, flexible to the obedience of their Doctrine; He was instructed
in the mysteries of our Belief, that with a stronger Faith he might wash in the
waters of Baptism. He gave the Friars ground, Materials, and Money, for the
Building a Church; that being the first Fortress the Conquest of the Gospel
raised in the Island against the delusions of Idolatry; for of the Preaching of
the Apostle Saint Thomas (if it reached so far) neither had their
Understandings any light, nor their Country memory.

3. That Prince showed himself obedient to the precepts of our Religion, He is
inconstant.
but not constant, for the fear of his Subjects revolting on his change of
Doctrine, made him, not to lose what he Esteemed, forsake what he was Convicted
of; for as a Plant not yet Rooted, the force of human persuasion inclined him
either way. The Religious men endeavored to take those Rubbs out of the way of
Life, He Friars encourage him.
by assuring him that under the protection of our Religion, and Arms, he might
secure both Crowns, for the State was at that time Governed by Dom John de
Castro, who for the propagation of the Faith used to venture his Blood, for his
Friends, the State.

4. The King listened to the proposition, saying, if the Governor would send
him Relief, His resolution.
he would not only himself profess the Faith, but preach it to his Subjects.
One of the Friars carried this resolution to Goa; the Governor, The Governor
desires that Conversion, and sends to him Antonio Moniz.
certify'd of the cause of his coming, desired the Conversion of that Prince,
as his greatest business in the East, not less zealous in giving Children to
the Church, then Victories to the State. He immediately dispatched Antonio
Moniz Barretto with seven Fly-boats, and Orders, that if he found any of our
Ships at Sea to carry 'em with him; writ honorable Letters to the Prince,
which he accompanied with several Presents: but leaving Antonio Moniz at Sea,
we will (to observe the order of time in the Relation of successes) speak of
the taking of Baroche.

5. The Governor had dispatched from Dio, Dom Iorge de Menezes, to commit all
imaginable Hostilities in the Bay of Cambaya, to show the Sultan the edge of
our Arms was not Blunted, by their former Execution. Dom Iorge took some
Vessels of Provision going to furnish the Enemies Ports, that those the Sword
had spared, might be made an end of by Famine. He came one Evening in sight of
the City Baroche, whose stately Buildings presented him with the Politeness of
Europe. 'Twas situated on an Eminency surrounded with Brick-walls, The
Situation and Fortifying of Baroche.
which were more for show, then defense; yet were there diverse Bull-works to
be seen, made not without some in-sight in Fortification, furnished withstore
of Ordnance, which commanded the entrance into the Haven. The height of the
situation discovered the Gates to be of square Stone polish't, and the
correspondency of Turrets and Windows, argued the wealth and policy of the
Inhabitants. The Trade of the place was in very fine Silks, a Commodity
exported thence to many Ports of the East. Madre Maluco was Lord of the City,
Madre Maluco Lord of it.
and had Tributary the Neighboring Villages, which, by their fertility and
bigness, made him up a moderate Seignory.

6. Our men had by chance taken a little Boat of Fishermen, Natives of the
place, who upon enquiry told what we have related of the City, and upon Dom
Iorge's desire to know what Garrison was in the place, had said, that Madre
Maluco had carried all the Soldiery to Amadabat, the Sultan's Court, and at
present were remaining only some Artisans, and other Tradesmen. Dom Iorge
thinking the occasion opportune for assaulting the City, though his strength
was not proportionable to such a design, yet (events depending on accidents)
resolved to run his Fortune; and to amuse the Inhabitants in security, steered
an other course, Sailing by a different Rumbe, taking along with him the
Fishermen, to be his Pilots in the entrance. At night the whole Fleet tacking
about, Dom Iorge enters by Night.
stood up with the Port, and getting all on Shore, (the Enemies confidence, or
negligence, being unprovided of any Defense, or Sentinel) fell upon the
Unarmed, and weak Multitude, when the Night, Confusion, and Sleep, run 'em upon
the danger they avoided, miserably wandering, they shunned their own as Enemies,
flying from those who fled themselves. The skreeks of the Children stirred not
up in their Parents any Compassion, less Vengeance, for the sudden fear gave
'em over to the basest affections of Nature; the Cries and Laments of the Women
discovered them, their, Ah me, being their greatest danger; those who by flying
into Houses escaped the Sword, were in them consumed by the Fire, the poor
people having no remedy against, but choice of their Death; the Invasion, and
Sack was at the same time; the Slaughter, as in a Fight without resistance; the
Plunder, as in a City forced to deliver. Dom Iorge in fine purchased in this
Action, Fame without Danger, Victory without an Enemy; yet doubt we not that
had he found more Opposition, his Courage would have achieved what his Fortune
effected. He commanded the City to be Burnt, where, in a few hours, the
Nobility and People, Gardens and Houses became compassionate Ashes, without any
distinction of nature, or separation of place. He put on Board some of the
smaller Guns, broke in pieces the great. This Action being so famous amongst
our Soldiers, as to give him who was called Menezes, the Surname of Baroche,
as the Ruins of Carthage gave Scipio the name of Africanus.

7. Maluco came with five thousand Horse; soon enough to deplore, too late to
help, Maluco comes too late.
and seeing the Fire and Sword had left nothing in its own shape, returned
impatiently to the King of Cambaya, as one whose green Wound very sensibly
smarted. He represented to him the Destruction of the City, as an Outrage
aggravated by being the latest of so many; The Sultan seemed touched with this
new accident, and Vowed once more to set upon Dio the stone of offense, on
which was broke the strength of so vast an Empire; but while the Heart-burnings
of Cambaya vent themselves in an imaginary Revenge, we will speak of the
Spirituals of Candea, which as Seed choked up by Thorns came not to produce
any Fruit.

8. Madune King of Cotta came to know that the King of Candea endeavored by
the change of his Religion to get the protection of the State, (who as those
Pagans are zealous observers of their errors) sought for arguments to persuade
him, The King of Co^ta against the King of Candea's Conversion.
that Idolatry was necessary for his Crown, telling him, his new Belief would
make his Subjects rebel, History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 4. Cap. 8.
the Neighboring Kings his Enemies, himself Ungrateful to his old Gods, who
had for so long prospered the Scepter of Candea in his Royal Progenitors; that
the Governor of India must of necessity be the most Insolent man upon Earth,
who suffered not the World to have any other King, or God, but that, he Obeyed,
and Adored; that he denied not the Portuguese Religion, to be either better, or
more fortunate, since they served the God of Victories; yet 'twas sufficient
for him to serve the Gods of the Country he was Born in, without coveting a
better Posterity, or greater Fortune then his Predecessors; besides, who knew
that the Governor under pretense of Religion designed not the usurpation of
his Scepter; that he ought not to receive on the Island, men of such a temper
as could not be satisfied, without being the Lords, to be any where; that if
the Franks promised him, to furnish him with a better Creed, and enlarge his
Territories, what sound judgment would credit so unusual goodness in men he
never saw, especially when they were not so great despisers of Temporalities,
but to come from the end of the World to Domineer in Asia? that if example had
with him any Authority, he should find more Kingdoms destroyed by 'em, then
indoctrinated; that 'twas true, their Ioques (by them called Priests) did
willingly Dye for their Religion' but did it, either out of an ambition of
Name, or prodigality of Life; if there were not in the West more Fools, then in
other Parts, who were all possessed with that dangerous obstinacy of instructing
the World; that in fine, he Counseled him as a King and Ally to cut off the
Relief he expected from the Franks, in expiation to his old Gods, justly
incenst to be thrown off for a foreign Divinity; that were it their Pride in
pretending to come and enlighten his Understanding, or ambition to usurp his
Kingdom, the Circumstance of either fault deserved this Punishment; that in
prosecution of it he would assist him with Arms, and Soldiers, making that a
common Cause, which was the Outrage of all their Idols.

9 The unfortunate Prince not able at once to throw off the weight of his old
Errors, The King of Candea consents.
suffered himself to be persuaded by the Arguments of his Barbarous, and
Treacherous friend; his Eyes yet darkened with the Clouds of Idolatry, not being
able to endure the Dawning of the Light of Truth, and immediately, wanting
prudence or resolution, conspired in Madune's Treachery, like a Diseased
Frantic, angry with the Physicians: In fine, they expected their Guests,
resolved to put in Execution their plotted malice.

10. Antonio Moniz being parted from Goa, Antonio Moniz Voyage.
found some of our Ships in several Ports, which, according to his Orders, he
joined to his Fleet; having doubled the Cape of Camorim, and past the
Quicksands of Manar, he steered for Baticalou, to go from thence by Land to
Candea. He had with him twelve Fly-boats, out of which he took one hundred and
twenty select Soldiers, and with them marched, in the security that he was
going to a Prince, a Friend, and one obliged by the State, above all, if not
yet a Convert, at least grateful, and a well-willer to the truth of that
Doctrine we professed; at his coming to Candea, He comes to Candea, and finds all
things altered.
by every ones being in Arms, the Treason could not be kept so close as that
Antonio Moniz had not notice of it by diverse advices, and by their pretending
to divide his Soldiers, so to Kill 'em more securely; besides, the King in
Person would not see 'em, perhaps, not to discover by his Affections, his
Timorous, and guilty Conscience. Antonio Moniz marched presently out of the
City, Commanded all the Impediments and Baggage to be Burnt, to be thus more at
liberty, to Defend and Retreat, and assembling his Soldiers spoke to 'em;

11. Friends and Companions, you all know the Treason plotted against us by
this Pagan King, whom we come to serve and assist; He endeavors to resist.
I have intelligence they will set upon us by open Force, having now a reason,
or cause to hurt us, they had not before, that is, that we have found out their
Treachery. None of us has any more Life, then he can Defend; Courage, and
Discipline may save us; we expect no Relief, for it lies in our selves; and the
Infidels will not persist in their Treason, if they find it Costly; and what is
it? if in this Conjuncture we do that for our selves, we came to do for them,
that is, lose our Lives. The passages which go to Baticalou, where our Fleet
is, must be supposed Lined with the Enemy, wherefore I am of opinion, for us to
go to the King of Ceitavaca, a faithful Friend to the State, where we shall
find entertainment and secure protection to go from thence in quest of our
Fleet.

12. As soon as Antonio Moniz began to march, the Enemy appeared in Companies,
Is set upon by the Enemy.
charging us with Arrows, Darts, Stones, and other such Weapons, with which
they Wounded some of our men, and made account by this importune way of
Fighting to Destroy us without danger. The Enemy appeared to have a Body of
eight thousand men, Commanded by their Officers (by them called Modeliares)
expert in that wild way of charging and retiring, out-going us in number and
agility, and without doubt would one by one have Destroyed us, had not our
Muskets made 'em stand off, from which they received no little Damage, and
greater fear, for scared, by seeing some drop down Dead suddenly, the rest
followed us with more fear and caution; they thus continued Gawling us all that
day, one while Venturous, another Cowards; with this unequal and troublesome
chase, they gave us a flow, but un-interrupted charge.

13. By the coming on of the Night our men had more security, then repose, The
difficulty he was in.
for they were so disquieted with wandering and roving Shot, that the poor
Soldiers could not take any little rest upon their Arms, eating their Biscuit
with their Eyes toward the Enemy, and their Hands on their Weapons; so past
they till the next day, when they discovered the Pagans, more Venturous and
Daring, for that first horror our Firearms bred in 'em, was either quite lost
or moderated. They at last arrived to the confidence to charge us with short
Arms, on which Antonio Moniz was forced to stop his March, and sometimes front
'em, in this we cut off some of their men, and took Prisoner, amongst the rest
one of their Modeliars, who by his Habit and Arms seemed to Command the party,
as also, by their venturing and daring to recover him, making several Charges,
in which they were worsted, yet so constant in their resolute attaquing us, as
our men quite worn out could no longer maintain it.

14. Some were of opinion to face the Enemy, His prudence in moderating his men.
and either by Fighting free themselves, or Dye revenged; but Antonio Moniz
told 'em, that the greatest proof of their Courage would be enduring, and the
only way to save 'em; that they had already Conquered the greatest part of the
way; that Marching with care and in a Body, they could not receive much
Damage; that the greater the danger was, more would the pleasure be, when they
should tell it gloriously, and securely. Thus did the Commander encourage 'em,
and Bridle the despair of so tedious a Resistance, till the coming of the Night
made 'em some amends for the Days difficulty; for the Pagans being also broken,
gave our men some time to rest; yet at break of Day did they assault us more
furiously, ashamed perhaps to find amongst so few so stout opposition. They now
came on more boldly on our men, who defended themselves, though with less
strength, with their usual Courage.

15. Antonio Moniz commanded one to break the Modeliars Legs he had taken
Prisoner, and cast him in the way, whom his own men, leaving off Fighting,
immediately went to Relieve, moved by their affection or pity, to see their
Leader or Companion, in so compassionate a condition; Our men, were for some
time as if without an Enemy, yet suddenly Fired with Commiseration, or
Revenge, did they violently fall upon us in a narrow passage, which ended in a
Bridge made over a great River not to be Foarded; here Antonio Moniz showed
extraordinary Courage, facing the Enemy with nine more, His courage in Fighting.
till his Soldiers got over, and when he had 'em on the other side, broke a
part of the Bridge, a diligence, which stopped the Pagans passage, and pursuit.
Antonio Moniz by so Heroic a defense got not popular applause, yet the few who
know how to Value extraordinary Actions, His retreat.
voted this Retreat worthy the Fame of a signal Victory; they got at last to
the King of Ceitavaca, where they had kind, and hearty Reception, and recovered
their Hunger, Wounds, and hard March in a free and courteous Hospitality, who
offered 'em his Forces to revenge so just a quarrel.

16. The poor King of Candea repenting of the Crime, The King of Candea repents.
the persuasion of a Neighbor Prince induc't him to commit, and abhorring the
Treachery, as hatched in an others Breast, sent a Messenger to Antonio Moniz
with ten thousand Pardaos for the expense of his Fleet, Sends a Messenger.
and a Letter, that the sorrow was his, the mischief an other man's; that coming
to him when an Infidel, he should not now forsake him when a Christian; that
the God on whom he began to believe, was therefore so great, because he
pardoned offenses; that he ought not to suffer those tender Flowers which were
Blossoming in the Garden of the Church, to be unsheltered, exposed to the
scorching of Idolatry; that his coming in Arms being to weed that Wood of Pagan
superstitions, he should not wonder to get off hurt by the Briars, and Thistles
of Infidelity; that, the God they Preached to him, being so Gracious, did not
in his Justice, without Mercy save the World; that Earth ought not to despise
him, who was not cast off by Heaven; that he entreated him to come to his
Succor, who was ready to Sacrifize all he had, for his Protection, and his
Life for Religion.

17. Antonio Moniz on this Letter resolved to return to Candea, Antonio Moniz
defir'd to return,
looking on the Interest of Religion to be more considerable then the hazard of
his Life; but the Soldiers cleaving fast to the Plank they escaped on, would
not quit the protection of a Prince their Friend, saying, His men are against
it.
The first cheat was a false Traitors, the second would be a Credulous, and
Incantelous Commanders, that they would not return to trust that Viper which
had once bit 'em; for if when obliged by a voluntary relief he would have
Killed 'em, what would he now do when provoked by their affronting his bafled
Army? that they would thank God for one Miracle without asking an other; that
the Governor sent them not as Apostles, but Soldiers; that if they went to
Dye for the Faith, they might go without Arms, but their Calling was not to
Preach, but with their Sword defend Religion. Antonio Moniz seeing the
Soldiers cooled in their Zeal, and obstinate in their Obedience, considering,
that if God would save that people, he would find out the means, resolved to
recover his Fleet; He goes to his Fleet.
and while he is at Sea, we will to the business of Hidalcaon, which we have
Retarded.

18. Hidalcaon alarmed by Meale's being in Goa, Hidalcaon sends Soldiers upon
the Continent.
endeavored by the Cure of Arms to purge those Disquiets, and because the War
of Dio had weakened the State, thinking to surprise the Governor in the
confidence, or carelessness of his Victories; knowing also his absence from the
City of Goa, he fell upon the Territories of Bardez and Salsete, in the
security of Peace unguarded; He sent four thousand Soldiers, who without
drawing their Swords took possession, making the Peasants bring in their Fruit,
and the Annual Customs they paid the State. The news of their Incursion reached
Goa, and caused no little trouble by taking them unprovided to resist the
Enemy. They resolved to expect the Governors return, History of India, Dec. 6.
Lib. 4. Cap. 9.
whose name was sufficient to take down Hidalcaon's Pride, only in the Interim
to Garrison the Fortress of Rachol, with this small Curb to bridle the invasion
of the Enemy.

19. Upon the Governors arrival at Goa, he bestowed the first Days on the
pleasure of his Success, but would not pass any more in ease, as one who
counted Peace a Vice, War his Profession; He immediately went to Agacaim,
thence dispatched Dom Diogo de Almeyda Freire with nine hundred men to Dislodge
the Enemy, who with four thousand Soldiers quartered in the Neighboring
Villages; They retire for fear of our^.
when the Moors heard our men were on their March, without staying to hear our
Drums, or see our Colors, they retired to the Mountain, out of respect (as was
thought by all) to the Victories of Dio, whose Fame had seized the whole East
with fear and reverence. The Campagnia was again brought under our Obedience,
enjoying with the Jealousies of War, an insecure Peace, as was to be expected
from a Malcontent and Neighbor Prince. Hidalcaon, taking himself affronted
by his men's Flight, made the reputation of his Arms an other cause to raise
War, and sent eight thousand Soldiers to take in that ground which was in
dispute, whilst he was making greater Levies, with an intention (as he gave
out) where his Kingdom lay at stake, to venture his Person; but whilst Goa is
unalarm'd by the noise of his Forces, we will speak of the affairs of Malaca,
and Maluco, disposed by the Governors prudence, and finished by his Fortune.

20. Bernadim de Sousa was sent Governor to the Maluco-Islands, which by their
distance from the heart of the State, were of a more fickle Obedience, John de
Barro' s History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 1. Cap. 8.
both for the Subjection of the Natives, and Libertinism of the Governors, who
behaved themselves as Absolute and Independent. Iordaon de Freitas had sent the
King Aeyro to Goa, The king Aeyro sent Prisoner to Goa.
in Chains unbecoming a Crown, and with a false Process drawn against him;
which Dom John de Castro commanded should be proved according to Law, and
absolving the poor King from the imputed Crimes, Absolved by the Governor,
after a Royal entertainment, restored the injuries of the innocent Scepter
with favor, and honor, Commanding Bernadim de Sousa to give him possession of
the Kingdom, with more reverence then had been used to other Kings, by our
Governors, that that Nation might take notice of the States clemency and
justice, which held the Scales even betwixt Friends and Subjects.

21. Bernardim de Sousa arrived at the Island of Ternate, and getting on Shore,
Is brought to Ternate.
went into the Fortress, without those Ceremonies, the ambition of that people
Customarily used in the reception of their Governors. Iordaon de Freitas who
read in the sudden coming of his Successor, and his own guilty Conscience,
the Process of his extravagancies, was not a little disquieted, knowing Dom
John de Castro's impartiality, that permitted not the Governors, to do, or
receive any injuries from the Confederate Kings, and that by Aeyros being
Justified, he must necessarily be Condemned; yet gave Bernardim de Sousa
possession of the Fortress, to whom immediately repaired Aeyro's Children, more
to know their Fathers punishment, then expect his return, so Timorous are men's
judgments in their desires; Bernardim de Sousa bid them go fetch him to Shore
in such State, as it might appear, he rather went to plead Services, then
answer Accusations. His Children, though not trusting to the pleasure of such
unexpected News, went running to the Seaside, followed by multitudes of the
people, who looked upon, as a thing unusual, Justice against one so Powerful,
admiring the equality of our Laws, so indifferent to Natives, and Strangers.
Aeyro came on Shore, saying, we had against our selves, given him the Victory,
and that he would with his A sign of Admiration amongst them.
Finger in his mouth always speak of the Governors excellencies; He carried in
his hands the Fetters he had on at his departure, making pass-time of the
memory of his grievances; by this Justice things in the Malucos were for many
years in a grateful Obedience.

22. Malaca at that time enjoyed a most profound Peace, settled by the
friendship and commerce of the Neighboring Princes; D^verse Kings conspire
against Malaca.
yet the King of Viantata finding he had Force enough to set upon any great
design, was by strength, and ease put in mind of many forgotten grievances,
which his Predecessors had received from the Kings of Patana, and having good
correspondence with the Princes of Queda, Pam, and other Borderers, found a way
to bring 'em into a League, making them take their parts in revenging an others
Injuries; they put to Sea a great Fleet, and by Capitulations agreed, that the
King of Viantata should be satisfied in being revenged on his Enemy, and they
go away with the Booty of the War for Venturing their Lives in an others
quarrel.

23. In this Conjuncture, How the Commander behaves himself.
Simaon de Mello was Commander of Malaca, and on knowledge of the Breach
betwixt those Princes, writ to Diogo Soarez de Mello, who was in the Haven of
Patane, to come to that Fortress, for all those Kings being Friends to the
State, he had rather arbitrate then side in their differences; besides, it was
in Policy, reason to let 'em be broke by a War, that being drained, they might
Live with more Subjection under the peace and obedience of our Arms,
considering time might furnish 'em with an opportutunity, and their strength
with Courage, our Dominion over them being a sufficient cause for them to hate
us, and for a War, a strong Army looked for no other pretensions.

24. Diogo Soarez not refusing the advice dispatched some Ships Laden for
China, The King of Achem Lands, and immediately retires.
and parted himself with two little Galleys for Malaca. The King of Achem was
at this time with twenty great Vessels looking out for Prizes, with the force
of a Prince playing the part of a Pirat; He took some Junks of Provisions, and
at Sea behaved himself insolently to some Ships of his Friends, his success
heightened his confidence, Landing by Night in the Port of Malaca, only to say
he had set footing on ground that Lived under our obedience, and with this
glory wonn solely by stealth, He immediately returned on Board.

25. The City was in an Uproar, and the fear and night increased the danger,
many flying from their own shadows; the Cries of the fearful only reached the
Fortress, for they were surprised with fear without danger. The Commander in
chief sent out Dom Francisco d' Esa with some Soldiers, who going into the
Colony of the Chelins, saw in every ones fear and confusion the face of a War
without an Enemy, who was by this time on Board, carrying with him only the
imaginary vanity of having Landed; Simaon de Mello was as sensible of the King
of Achem's Cowardice, as if it had been an Outrage; so sacred were the Walls of
that Fortress, as if to march toward 'em had been an Insolence, to look on
them a Crime; He presently set forth a light Vessel, to find out the King of
Achem's course, whilst he put to Sea two great Carvels, and six Fly-boats to
find out the Enemy. Diogo Soarez de Mello with the two Galleys we spoke of came
at this time into the Haven, as if steered by our Fortune to help the Victory.
Dom Francisco d' Esa was named Commander of this Squadron, who, The Fleet goes
out to find him.
though ill fitted out, like one who hastens to a sudden quarrel, put to Sea,
with instructions, that if in ten days he saw not the Enemy, he should return
to Port, not having Provisions for longer time.

26. They Sailed eight days without sight of the Armada, and arriving at an
Island had news the Enemy was come to an Anchor at Queda, The Commander hears
News of him, and resolves to follow him.
a Voyage of two days. Dom Francisco resolved to proceed, but the Soldiers
mutiny'd, alleging, 'twas like a raw Commander to chase a flying Enemy; that
their Provisions were already spent; that they came not to Fight with Famine;
that if by the Governors orders they were limited to ten days, The Soldiers
mutiny.
their Obedience would be better then the Victory; yet Diogo Soarez de Mello,
Diogo Soarez quels 'em.
though Inferior in Command, higher in Authority, said, what Captain soever
tack't about, he would set upon him first, for he should do the King better
service in sinking disobedient Soldiers then valiant Enemies. One fear thus
laid with an other, they set Sail for Queda, where they heard the Enemy was in
Port eight Leagues off, Dom Francisco resolved, having him so near, to pursue;
here was the Soldiers murmuring greater then before, though less insolent,
seeing the hazard of their fear out-go that of the danger, so as they followed
the Admiral with greater signs of satisfaction then ever, either to Gild over
their former apprehensions, or their souls, presaging the Victory, created more
honorable affections.

27. That evening they saw the City Parlez, They see, and set on the Enemy.
where the Enemy was at an Anchor, in a Bay formed by the River, at a little
distance from the City. The Commander of the Squadron made some of his sound
the River, and with Boughs laid out the Chanel, to avoid the Shelves, and
knowing by the soundings there was water enough for the Carvels, lay in, as the
Enemy with two Galleys, and other Ships, was coming to find out our Fleet; for
he was told by his Spies, who from the Shore had only seen the great Carvels,
(the Fly-boats, and Galleys being covered by the shelter of a crooked winding
Point made there by the River) there were none but Merchant men. The Enemy had
sent before two Galleys, which were Convoys to a Fleet of Fly-boats, and
finding those Soldiers they imagined Merchants, strove to tack about, but the
River being narrow, and they coming before the Wind, could not do it, before we
first came up with 'em; being in a little time come to Grapling, the Arms and
River were Died in Blood. Diogo Soarez with fifty Soldiers Boarded the Admiral
Galley, Diogo Soarez takes the Admiral.
and found in the Moors such resolute resistance, as all Died, not one yielded,
the rest fought with as brave resolution. The Victory was known by the Vessels,
not by the Prisoners, it seemed by so honorable obstinacy that none would
outlive his freedom; the Enemies resistance was the proof of our men's
Courage, who fought not only with men Valiant, but Desperate.

28. The King of Viantana, The Emb^ssage of the Confederates.
and most of the Confederates had in the mean time received so good
satisfaction from the King of Patane, as a Peace was tied with stronger Knots,
and knowing out Fleet was gone to Sea, by that, concluding the Fortress was
left without sufficient Garrison, they designed to try if that occasion would
make their way to free Malaca of so troublesome a Neighbor, and made Bold by
their hating us, and Cowardly by their fear, they designed in the semblance of
Peace, to disguise a War; they sent an experienced Commander to Simaon de
Mello, to Condole with him for the King of Achem's destroying our Fleet, and
advise him, that on the joy of the Victory he was joining more force to come
upon the Fortress; that he having so few Defendants, Courage must necessarily
yield to multitudes, since numbers and opportunities give Victories; that as
Friends to the State, they desired leave to Land at that Port, and with their
Lives redeem the Fortress from so inevitable Ruin, that the World might see
they were better Friends in exigencies, then prosperity; besides so Cautelous a
message, the Envoy had instructions to observe what Soldiers were in the
Fortress, and find out by the Governors countenance what Courage or Fear he
betrayed at the news of the loss of his Fleet; the Heart being a more faithful
interpreter of the affections, then the Tongue.

29. Simaon de Mello perceiving the offer Treachery, and the Messenger a Spy,
The Governor of M^laca's answer.
resolved to beat 'em at their own Weapon, making use of Stratagem against
Stratagem; He gave 'em thanks for their offer of so seasonable succors, and in
return of so great friendship, Challenged from 'em the usual gifts for good
news, for just then he had received fresh advice of the Victory his Fleet had
obtained against the King of Achem; and that he had in the Fortress Men and
Ammunition to spare, for their service against their Enemies; that the King of
Achem went flying out of that Port; that in the persute the Portuguese had some
difficulty, none in the Victory. These words were Credited by the security of
the delivery, and the Moor being Dismissed, Credulous and Discontented at the
Governors resolution, and the Victory of the Fleet, reported to those who sent
him, that the Governor either understood the design, or was above the
apprehension.

30. Simaon de Mello as things stood was not a little Disquieted, News wan^s
from the Fleet.
for the stay of the Fleet made the News possible, and accused himself for
being rash and inconsiderate, to engage the strength of that place against an
Enemy, whose Peace brought us no profit, or Ruin glory; for having overcome
him, when we were Inferior in force, 'twould be but a small proof of our
Valor to worst him when equal; thus discourst the Governor, as if without a
fault there could be no miscarriage; there were gone on the Fleet the
Inhabitants of Malaca, whose Wives, and Children, with untimely tears bewailed
the Victory, The people complain.
they knew not of; complaining of the Governor, who with other men's Lives
acquired glory; when an honorable Peace was more suitable to the States
exigencies, then an unprofitable Victory; the popular Tumult had grown to
Libertinism, if Franciscus Xaverius (whom India then honored as a Penitent,
the World now reverenceth as a Saint) had not B^idled the people, Franciscus
Xaverius quells 'em.
by Preaching to them patience in adversity, not only as a Virtue, but Remedy,
cautiously, but compassionately encouraging 'em, with the hopes of better News,
which then looked more like a Friends comforting, then a Prophets prognostics;
when, on the day of the Fight, as he was Preaching the ways of Life in the
presence of a great Multitude, he was suddenly raped into a profound Extasis,
as taking in the Heavenly secrets in a soft silence, till waking from the
Mysterious intermission of his senses, His pleasant Voice burst forth,
Fore-tells the Victory,
in Commanding us prostrate before the Altars, to give thanks to the Author of
Victories, for at that time had God with our Arms destroyed the Enemies Fleet;
the people out of reverence to the Divine interpreters foresight, with
grateful and pious tears praised God in his Saint, from the extremes of grief
beginning a more secure content. That very Evening as he was in a Chapel
instructing the people, and the manner of it.
he so particularly related the passages of the Battle, as if acquainted with
the success from the Author of the Victory; we believe the glorious Saint was
the Intercessour, and Oracle of this happiness, whose presaging Soul had by
diverse other Divine revelations a foresight into hidden secrets. Malaca
afterward enjoyed an hono^rable Peace, secured by the Victory we have related;
but the Governor in Goa with his Arms reaking in the Blood of one Battle, was
summoned to an other.

31. Martim Affonso de Sousa, (as we have said before) left things, betwixt
Hidalcaon and the State, disposed for an open Enmity, in which Dom John de
Castro could not refuse satisfaction without a War, or give it, with his
reputation. Upon the Moors retiring, the Territories of Bardez and Salsete were
under our Obedience, and the fruits of Husbandry grew under the protection of
our Arms. Hidalcaon seeing the Land before his face, Hidalcaon's perplexity.
and that likewise the Injury was continued in a Retention, by him counted
unjust, did every day by Arms mind us of his Title; alarmed also by Meale's
being in Goa, (a Poison which seized on the heart of the Kingdom) and
considering his stoll'n, and sudden Inroads, more provoked then weakened the
State, and that by keeping from us Provisions, he impoverish't his Subjects,
and inrich't his Neighbors, from whose Ports we were furnished; He consulted
how to set upon us in open War, in which he would venture his Kingdom and
Person, leaving the fortune of a Battle to decide the justice of his or our
Arms; and being grown Rich by Peace and Tyranny, the expense of that War he
was to make at his own Doors, He sends Forces on the main Land.
was easy. He immediately sent eight thousand Soldiers to get possession of
the Land in dispute, whilst more Forces were raising to maintain what they
recovered.

32. The Governor on the first advice of the Inroad sent Dom Diogo de Almeyda
Freire with nine hundred Portuguese, some paid Canarins and a Troop of Horse,
to go meet the Enemy, staying himself in Pangim, to come with the rest of the
Forces to his Relief, if Hidalcaon came in Person, a report cast out by the
Moors, which they would have persuaded us, or were persuaded of themselves; Dom
Diogo de Almeyda departed with those men, Dom Diog^ de Almeyd goes out to him.
and made a Halt at the Fortress of Rachol, before which he had some light
Scarmishes with the Enemy, who would not engage, or accept the Battle we
offered, knowing perhaps we could not endure a long War for want of
Provisions, and inconvenience of the ground, which was Marish and out into
Rivulets, where we could not Lodge dry, or make use of our Cavallry in all
places of the Campannia, in some for the wet which hindered our passage, in
others for the unevenness; which were disadvantages more easily Conquered by
the Moors, who being Natives of the place better knew the passes, and from
their Birth were used to the difficulty of treading the Boggs with nimbleness
and agility, besides being of the Country were more plentifully provided. Dom
Diogo seeing at last, 'twas at the Enemies choice to Fight or Retire, The
Governor orders him to retire,
and that he wanted Provisions, advised the Governor, who sent him Orders to
retire with his men into the Fortress of Rachol, whilst what was to be done was
resolved.

33. The Governor returned from Pangim to Goa, where he put to Council the
State of things, and debaits the War in Council.
and his desires of quelling Hidalcaon with a sharper War to avoid the
troublesomeness of so repeated Inroads, so to have his hands at Liberty to
attend other business, which he could not do, leaving so importune a Neighbor
armed, and unpunish't; yet all were of opinion to diferr the War till a fitter
opportunity, which would be the next Summer, when our men might Encamp on dry
ground, and with more force, Recruited with the Soldiers from the Kingdom,
expected by the next Ships; the design of Action not being haste, but Victory.

34. The Governor though warlick, It Is deferred till an other time.
and impatient, subjected his will to his understanding, expecting a time to
call Hidalcaon to a more severe account for his insulting; which being agreed
on, he ordered Dom Diogo de Almeyda Freire to retire with his men, leaving a
sufficient Garrison in the Fortress of Rachol, so to bridle the courses of the
Enemy. The Governor indefatigable in the exercise of Arms, being without a
real Wa^r past his time with the Representation of one. He every day went in
the Field, He exercises War in Peace.
where he commanded the Soldiers to throw the Bar, fence, form Squadrons,
encouraging some with Rewards, others with Praise, increasing those Virtues by
emulation and exercise; making a quiet and politic Government; a School of
Arms, these were the Dances and Comedies, where the people Recreated themselves
with useful and warlick passtime; the frequency of these preludes so well
Disciplining the Soldiers, as no occasion of a real War, no Accident, He
countenanceth the Soldiers.
or Alarm found 'em wanting. Passing once through the Street called our Lady of
Light, he saw in a poor House quantity of Arms in a Press kept so clean and
bright, that their Luster and Order in which they were disposed so much pleased
him, as stopping his Horse, he ask't who Lived there; the Master himself happened
to answer him, who was Francisco Goncalvez, a Soldier of Fortune. The
Governor, after commending his curiosity, and well employing his time,
commanded thirty Pardaos to be given him to cleanse his Arms, though in his
Government there was but little time for Arms to gather Rust.

35. 'Twas now August, and the Governor, as foreseeing future exigencies,
Receives advice from Dio.
lost no time in providing and fitting the Fleet, when Francisco de Moraes
Commander of a Vessel arrived at the Bar of Goa, with Letters from Dom John
Mascarenhas, advising him, that the Sultan of Cambaya had joined all the forces
of his Kingdoms, and gave it out he intended to lay a second Siege before the
Fortress, that 'twas necessary this Summer to show him our Arms, that being
employed to secure things at home, he might forbear his disturbance abroad,
chiefly, if our Fleets took from him, the liberty of Sailing, and advantage of
Commerce, he would be brought to see, that his Peace with the State, was that
on which depended his prosperity.

36. The Governor assembled the Magistracy of the City, He communicates it to
the Senate, and desires their help.
to whom he communicated Dom John Mascarenhas's Letter, desiring their help to
quell, or reduce this Enemy; though this contribution came immediately on the
former Loan, yet was the Governors proposition so well taken by them all, as
they offered him Lives and Estates, They offer him their Estates,
as if the States service had been the Breeding, and Inheritance of their
Children, India had not so happy a time in the other Governments. Dom John de
Castro desired of them ten thousand Pardaos, which the people readily
furnished; and some rich Citizens Wives, and the Women their Jewels.
sent him a considerable quantity of Jewels, with a Letter full of honorable
Complaints, for his not accepting and spending them, when first offered; the
Ladies of Chaul also, though second in example, showed themselves more splendid
in their Offer; yet the Governor, sparing in the use and expense of so Loyal
presents, returned them, with a grateful acceptance, paying them for so
Liberal and Opportune a Service in the honors conferred on their Husbands and
Children; He advised the Inhabitants of Bacaim and Chaul of the Commander of
Dio's intimation, He advises Chaul and Bacaim.
of the charges of the Fleet, and his necessity of their Assistance, who so
willingly complied with the King's occasions, as if they took new occasions of
danger and expense, in payment of former Services.

37. As the Governor was busy in ^itting and providing the Fleet, he received
News that two Ships from the Kingdom who had Out-sail'd their Conserve were
come to an Anchor at the Bar of Goa. That year there came from the Kingdom
six Ships, Ships arrive from the Kingdom.
without any to command the Squadron; the Commanders of those which arrived
were Balthazar Lobo de Sousa, and Francisco de Gouvea, of the four which were
missing, Dom Francisco de Lima in the Saint Philip, who came with a Commission
to be Admiral of Goa, Francisco da Cunha in the Zambuco, these two departed
late in the Year, and arrived at the Bar the three and twentieth of September.
The Commander of the other Ship called the Burgalese was Bernando Nazer, who
Wintred in Sacotora, and came to Goa the latter end of May. The other was
Commanded by Dom Pedro da Sylva da Gama Son to the Lord Admiral, designed for
Malaca, and by the unskilfulness of the Pilot lost amongst A^goxa Islands; yet
the men escaped, who got to Mocambique, and thence Ship't on several Vessels
came to India. These Ships brought the Governor orders to enlarge the Fortress
at Mocambique, The orders they brought.
upon the News of the Rumes, are Natives of that part about Constantinople
called Romania, (which the Turks now call Rumeli) from the privilege granted
by Pope Sylvester to Constantine the Great, upon his removing the seat of the
Empire; to call Constantinople, Rome.
Rumes coming thither, and 'twas necessary to secure the Inhabitants, and Port
(which was the chief Scale of our Ships) taking from the Enemy the possibility
of hindering our Trade with Sofala, and Cuama.

38. The Governor had three thousand Portuguese Soldiers, and some
Auxiliaries of Naires from Cochim, the greatest Army he ever had in India, and
considering Hidalcaon War resolved against Hidalcaon.
(taking his opportunity when no Body was left in Goa able to resist him) might
in his absence molest the State, He resolved to find him out in the Inland, and
force him to Fight; having for so necessary a War, his time and strength
Limited; He acquainted the Magistrates of the City, and Heads of the Militia,
with this resolution, who all agreed in the seasonableness of the occasion. The
Governor more then ordinarily quick in Execution, having his men ready,
divided the Soldiers (as the manner of India is) into five Squadrons, The
order of his men.
commanded by his Son Dom Alvaro, Dom Bernardo, and Dom Antonio de Noronha,
(Sons to the Vice-King Dom Garcia de Noronha) Manoel de Sousa de Sepulveda, and
Vasco da Cunha. Dom Diogo de Almeyda Freire went also with two hundred Horse,
and the Inhabitants of Goa, to whom joined themselves the Bores of the Country,
in all one thousand five hundred. Francisco de Mello with three hundred
Portuguese, and some foot of the Natives, was Commander of the Fortress of
Rachol, to whom the Governor sent word to come and join him at Margaon.

39. At this time came Ambassadors to Goa from the King of Canara,
Ambassadors from Canara come to the Governor.
desiring a League with the State, to assist him in disturbing his Borderer
Hidalcaon. This Kingdom, is for the greatness of Empire, the most famous of
the East; for the story of its beginning, the most fallen, telling a thousand
Apocryphal traditions, which flattery makes use of to adore the Prince. The
Governor gave Audience to the Ambassadors, He hears, and dispa^cheth the
Ambassadors.
with Ceremonies suitable to the King's ambition, and the States grandeur; and
immediately concluded a Friendship on conditions honorable for both Crowns.
Hidalcaon understanding the Governors resolution, Hidalcaon retires his men.
retired his Inland Garrisons, as if avoiding the blow of the first invasion,
endeavoring to weary out the State with a sudden and incursive War, to them
easy, to us intolerable.

40. The Governor had intelligence the Moors were got together at Ponda,
protected there by the Artillery of their Fortress; some of the Commanders were
not for the Governors following the Enemy who fled, this opinion was
Countenanc't by the most experienced Soldiery; but Dom John de Castro,
unwilling to put on his Arms in vain, The Governor follows them.
Commanded the marching on, s^^ing he would at his own Home chastise Hidalcaon;
this resolution was agreeable to the Soldiers who believed, that in the
Fortune of the General was much of the Victory. The Camp that day marched two
Leagues, and was in the Evening in sight of the Enemy; who with a Body of two
thousand men, had made an halt on the other side of a River to hinder their
passage.

41. Dom Alvaro de Castro who Commanded the Vanguard leap't into the River, Dom
Alvaro Fights in the Vanguard.
at the same time Wading and Fighting; the Enemy charged them with their
Muskets, and Killed some of his men, yet without hindering, or retarding the
rest who went forward; most of the Commanders in diverse places past the River,
and gotten over found Dom Alvaro engaged with the Moors, The Moors fly.
who already were so pressed as to give ground; for not intending to Fight in the
open Field, we having Conquered the River, they gave over opposing us, retiring
in good order to their Fortress of Ponda. The Governor commands his men to
follow.
The Governor commanded his men to follow 'em, which they did that day over
Crows-feet, which Wounded many; when come to Ponda, they saw all Hidalcaon's
Officers drawn up in a posture, to give or accept Battle. The Governor
keeping the same pace of his March, commanded his men to fall on; the Moors
seemed in their resolution to distinguish the person of Dom John de Castro, and
as if yielding to the report of his Name quitted the Field, where only his
respect got the Victory. They retire to the Mountain.
The Enemy retired to the Mountain, where the difficulty of the way kept off
the persute. Dom Alvaro went into the Fortress, which he found forsaken; many
moved for the sleighting it, but the Governor voting more Haughtily, ordered
that Refuge should be left for the poor Fugitives. 'Twas done in scorn, yet
looked like compassion.

42. The Land was once more under our obedience, without a firm Peace, or
continued War. Hidalcaan was strong enough to hinder us of the Crop, but not
enjoy it; and now fought more for his Reputation then the advantage of the
Campagnia. He returns to Goa.
The Governor returned to Goa, where the Fleet was ready to go Northward,
having no other place to rest in but the Sea, or Field; and the season calling
on Board, and success satisfying the Soldiery, neither proclamation or
diligence was necessary for their Embarking.

43. The Governor put to Sea with one hundred and threescore Vessels, Goes
again to Dio.
Commanded by Dom Alvaro de Castro, Dom Roque Tello, Dom Pedro da Sylva da
Gama, Dom John de Abranchez, Dom Iorge of 'Eca, Dom Bernardo da Sylva, Vasco da
Cunha, Francisco de Lima, Francisco da Sylva de Menezes, Dom Iorge de Menezes
Baroche, Manoel de Sousa de Sepulveda, Cide de Sousa, Duarte Pereira, Diogo de
Soufa, Garcia Rodriguez de Tavora, Dom John de Attayde, Dom John Lobo, Gaspar
de Miranda, Dom Bras de Almeyda, Iorge da Sylva, Dom Pedro de Almeyda, Pedro de
Attayde Inferno, Antonio Moniz Barretto, Cosme Eanes Secretary, Melchior
Correa, Sebastion Lopez Lobatto, Antonio de Sa, Alvaro Serraon, Dom Antonio de
Noronha, Diogo Alvarez Tellez, Antonio Henriquez, Aleixo de Abreu, Antonio
Diaz, Balthazar Diaz, Balthazar Lopez da Costa, Damiaon de Sausa, Manoel de Sa,
Fernaon de Lima, Alonso de Bonifacio, Antonio Rebello, Antonio Rodriguez
Pereira, Melchior Cardoso, Cosme Fernandez, Nuno Fernandez, Francisco Marquez,
D^arte Diaz, Diogo Goncalvez, Francisco Alvarez, Francisco Varella, Luis de
Almeyda, Francisco de Britto, Goncalo Gomez, Gregorio de Vasconcellos, Gomez
Vidal Captain of the Governors Lifeguard, Antonio Pessoa Purveyor of the
Navies Provision, Goncalo Falcaon, Goncalo de Valladarez, Galaor de Barros,
Gaspar Pirez, John Fernandez de Vasconcellos, Fernand' Alvarez, John Soarez,
Ignacio Coutinho, Ioaon Cardoso, Ioaon Nunez Homem, Ioaon Lopez, Lopo de Faria,
Manoel Pinto, Lopo Soarez, Manoel Pinheiro, Lopo Fernandez, Manoel Affonso,
Marcos Fernandez, Nuno Goncalvez de Leaon, Pero de Caceres, Pero de Moura, Ruy
Pirez, Pero Affonso, Pero Preto, Luis Lobatto, Simaon de Areda, Francisco de
Cunha, Simaon Bernardez, Thome Branco chief Pilot of the Coast, Coge Percoli
Interpreter; the Ships also which came from Cochim, were Commanded by our men;
there were in this Conserve some Ships of particulars, who out of kindness to
the Governor freely served the State.

44. The Governor with all the Fleet came to an Anchor at Bacaim, Arrives at
Bacaim.
whence he sent some Spies to Cambaya, to observe the Enemies force and design,
whose strength was in all those Ports talked of with fear and amasement, and
the Guzarats out of pride, or credulity, gave it out, the Sultan might at that
time bring the State under his Lash; here the Governor had intelligence, that
Caracem, Son-in-law to Coge-Sofar, on presumption of the Neighborhood of the
Army, was with a small Garrison in the Fortress of Surat; Dom John de Castro
desiring to set on some of those places which took shelter under the Enemy,
sent his Son Dom Alvaro with sixty Sail, to go up the River of Surat, Sends Dom
Alvaro to Surat.
and to employ some Person of trust to observe the state of the Fortress, or
get intelligence with what Provisions or Garrison Caracem was there, and if he
thought he could by Scaling take the Fortress, immediately to give an assault,
for by the print of his footsteps he would come to his Relief.

45. Dom Alvaro arrived with his Fleet at the first Road lying in the mouth of
the River, Dom Alvaro sends Dom Iorge before,
and presently sent off Dom Iorge de Menezes Baroche with six Fly-boats to
survey the Fortress. Dom Iorge went up the River, Rowing softly, till coming in
sight of the Fortress they Shot at him; those in the Boats, either out of fear,
or caution, immediately went about, though Dom Iorge haled 'em to stay. Here
was the greatest danger where none was apprehended; for from a Colony of the
Abessines, which lies upon the River, came repeated Shot, which Dom Iorge
observing went on Shore, and entering the Village, gained the Guns of the
Redouts with so great courage and presence of mind, as to carry 'em on Board,
maugre the resistance of those who came to the rescue; this security heightened
the opinion of our strength, the Enemy perhaps measuring our force by our
daring.

46. Dom Alvaro having sent Dom Iorge before with the Fly-boats, and two other
Captains.
sent after him two more, Commanded by Francisco da Sylva de Menezes, and John
Fernandez de Vasconcellos, who desiring some intelligence from the Shore, came
to Anchor at a Road a little short of the Colony of the Abessines; whence they
sent off some Mariners to water, who getting on Shore walked about a
Canon-shot. Caracem, at the report of the Guns, (which as we now said were Shot
from the Abessines Colony) sent five hundred Turks to their Relief, who found
the Posts lost, and the Guns on Board, and Marching on were discovered by the
Mariners who were getting water, and gave the Alarm to Francisco da Sylva that
the Enemy appeared, Francisco da Sylva, seconded by John Fernandez de
Vasconcellos, went to their Relief, and forming a close Body, invested the
Turks, and Routed 'em, some remaining Dead on the place by the Shot of our
Musquetteers. Dom Iorge in his return, Their success.
seeing the Boats at an Anchor, and our men Fighting on shore, turned his Ships
head to the Land, and came seasonably to charge the Enemy, who retired flying,
leaving some of their Companions dead on the place. This Victory cost us one
Soldier.

47. Our men got on Board, They return to Dom Alvaro.
and in Company of Dom Iorge went toward the Fleet, who reporting his success
and observations to Dom Alvaro, 'twas thought by the Officers, the achievement
was not seasonable, the Fleet being discovered, and the Coast alarmed; only Dom
Iorge obstinately insisted, that they ought to fall upon the Fortress, his
height of mind being the best argument; but the contrary opinion was so
strongly urged, that the most happy success could not have been faultless.

48. While Dom Alvaro was in the River of Surat, What the Governor did at
Bacaim.
the Governor at Bacaim dispatched diverse affairs, and being Facetious as
well as Valiant, gave out He was going to surprise the Sultan in Amadabat,
where in sight of the Turks who guarded him he would roast him Alive, and this
report being, by so great Victories, History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 5. Cap. 7.
credited, 'twas current amongst these timorous and credulous Moors. The
Governor to advance their fear or his own gallantry, bespoke some great Spits,
as one who in the interval of more weighty business delighted in Witty
diversion. The Soldiers of those times used to wear at their Girdles little
bright Axes, which served to cut the Rigging and Tackling of their Prizes, as
also to break open Chests and Bundels, this was the true use, the first a
pretense. The Governor not liking Arms designed for so mean service, and
seeing by chance Fausto Serraon de Calvos a spruce Soldier, pass by with an
Ax, told him, that only a Sword became men of honor; Sir, answered the
Soldier, without this Ax your honors Spits will be of little use, because we
shall not be able to Roast the King of Cambaya whole.

49. The Governor went to join his Son at the Bar of Surat, He goes to join
his Son.
where he had intelligence the Fortress was Relieved; from thence with all his
Fleet together he went to Baroche, from that Port dispatched Francisco de
Sequeins (Commander of the Naires of Cochim) to sound the River, and see what
was to be done, informing himself by his sight of the conditions of the
Fortress. This Captain went up the River till he came in sight of the Sultan's
Army, which or'e-spread a very large Plain; the report was, he had brought into
the Field two hundred thousand Soldiers; the truth is, the multitudes were so
great as to cover that and the adjacent Campagnia. He reported what he had seen
to the Governor, who heightened to see himself so feared, would for the credit
of his own Fame face the Enemy; He gave orders for the weighing of the Fleet,
and Sailed up, till he cast Anchor in sight of an Army whose numbers drunk up
Rivers; and going on Shore, laid out his ground and presented Battle to the
Sultan. So stout an Action, as amongst the most memorable of the World ought
not to be the second. The Sultan, neither accepted or denied Fighting, but
expected to be fallen on as well as found out; he saw the Governor, but would
not see his Sword. Dom John de Castro, hunting after new glory in extraordinary
Actions, assembled the Officers and Gentlemen of name, to whom he spoke to this
purpose.

50. We have before us the greatest King of Asia, Makes a Speech to his men.
and greatest Army, Fortune is seeking out occasions to make us glorious, that
after this Victory, we may lay up our Arms in the obedience of the East. I
allow the great inequality betwixt the Armies, but we count not our Troops by
number, but gallantry. Those are the same we so lately beat at Dio, we need not
give 'em new Wounds, only make the Incision greater of those which are yet
open; their numbers heighten their fear, seeing all ways of saving themselves
Obstructed: if but yesterday when they held us Besieged they left us the Field,
how will they stand in our way when Victorious? They who have lost their own
honor, are but ill maintainers of their Kings; our strength is greater then
the Enemies, on our side fight Fame and Victory; I believe there is none here,
who would part with his share of this days glory.

51. The Gentlemen and Soldiers dissuaded the Governor from so hazardous an
attempt, The Gentlemen's and Officers answer.
for in so disproportionable Forces the very Victory was blameworthy; that
great men trusted more to Reason then Fortune; that he should look to his
preservation having an overplus of Fame; that 'twas enough to have Landed, and
on his own ground bid the Sultan Battle. The Governor suffered himself to be
overcome by those Reasons, more apprehending the fault, then danger. Dom Iorge
desired five hundred Musquetteers with them to Skirmish with the Enemy; but as
they had put by Dom John de Castro's full Blow for the Battle, he seemed
unwilling to give the Sultan so slight a Wound; He staid three hours in the
Field without the Enemies moving, He stays three hours in the Field, and goes
on Board.
then re-imbark't his Soldiers, so unscar'd and full of security as if in one
of the States Ports; the most glorious Action we ever performed without Blood.

52. The Governor from Baroche crossed over to Dio, The hurt he does.
and sent some Ships into the Bay of Cambaya to destroy those places on the
Coast our Sword had pardoned; these spoiled the Gardens, and Groves of
Plam-trees Planted for the Inhabitants maintenance and recreation; burnt store
of Ships, pulled down Stately buildings, whose destruction and memory is yet
preserved in their waste Ruins.

53. The Governor recovered Dio, Arrives at Dio.
where the Commander in chief came to receive him at the Seaside, and the
Natives of the Island made Holy Day, as proud to be under the subjection of so
Valiant an Enemy. Dom John Mascarenhas put him in mind of the leave he had
obtained to go for the Kingdom, Dom John Mascarenhas resigns the Government of
the place.
which the Governor was unwilling to grant, nor could deny; some Gentlemen had
refused the Government of the place, fearing, as appeared, not to have the same
opportunities as their Predecessors. Lewis Falcaon, who came from being
Governor in Ormus, came then into Port, before him had come to the Governor
some complaints of his Carriage, tolerable, because not discrediting the
Courage and Justice of his Government. The Governor in private acquainted him
with the accusations laid to his charge by his Enemies, which as a Friend he
was willing to forget, could not as a Magistrate; that he might by new Services
silence all former miscarriages, remaining in that Fortress, which had so on it
the Eyes of his Majesty and the whole World. Lewis Falcaon accepted it, The
Governor gives it to Lewis Falcaon.
thanking the Governor for so honorable Correction, offering besides to spend
in the place what he had got in Ormus, or possessed in the Kingdom. Dom John de
Castro, with signal favors, commended, and provoked this Gallantry.

54. Upon concluding the business of Dio, the Governor set Sail directly for
Bacaim, Sets Sail, the mischie^ he does.
going in sight of the Coast of Por, and Mangalor, where he Burnt the Cities of
Pate, and Patane; the Inhabitants to avoid the Lash, saved their Lives and part
of their Estates in the Mountain, wanting Courage or Conduct to defend
themselves or Dye in their Houses; one hundred and fourscore Vessels which lay
in several Ports were Burnt by his Order, the poor owners with unprofitable
tears looking on. The cries and groans were heard at a distance, and despised by
Anger, and Victory. The Governor gave order, His compassion.
to spare some Old men, and Children, who could not save themselves;
Compassion, importune to the Soldiery, pleasing to Huma^ity; the Booty was
given up to the Fire, the Prize not being so notable, as the desolation; many
other places on that Coast, of no name, were Destroyed; this Siege of Dio being
more famous for Vengeance then Victory.

55. The Governor went from hence to Bacaim, He goes to Bacaim,
resolving to spend the rest of that Summer in the War of Cambaya; thence he
sent some Spies to observe the March of the Enemy, who informed him, that in
the Court at Amadebat there was not a Family without tears; and that the Sultan
by a severe Decree had forbid the mentioning the Siege and Battle of Dio, as
if Laws could command grief and memory. The Governor heard by the same Envoys,
is sensible of the not taking Surat,
that the Fortresses of Surat, and Baroche, were quitted at the sight of Dom
Alvaro's Fleet, and that he might by Scale have taken them, had he not been
hindered by the disswasions of his Officers; which Dom John de Castro took so
to heart, as if 'twere necessary to divine opportunities, and his temper burst
forth into words, which accused the Commanders of the Fleet of neglect and
remisness.

56. The Governor employed the short Leisure he had at Bacaim in writing for
the Kingdom, puts the King in mind of those who had served him.
making so honorable mention to the King of those who had served him, as
amongst so many eminent Virtues, this zeal, or gratitude seemed to be singular,
and the Soldiers thereby improved in Courage, having security that their
General would not be wanting in his Zeal or Rewards.

57. Hidalcaon considering that the States strength was, Hidalcaon renews the
War.
though Triumphant, broken with so many Victories, came in again to get
possession of the Inland with an Army of twenty thousand Foot, under the
Command of Casa Batecaon, a stout Turk born in Dalmatia, experienced in the
Languages, and Discipline of Europe; He without any opposition subjected the
Country, forcing some few of our Soldiers to retreat to the Fortress of
Rachol, who advised Goa of the strength of the Enemy.

58. Upon this advice, Dom Diogo de Almeyda, by Counsel of the Bishop, The
Commander at Goa desires to go against him.
(then Governor) and of some Gentlemen and Soldiers, resolved to dislodge the
Moors with the standing Militia, before they Encamp't themselves, and
increasing in strength and boldness faced the Walls of Goa, the Metr^politan
City. The men who were to go with him being appointed and ready to March, the
Magistracy and Government of this City came expostulating and protesting
against their going; that the Head of the State was not to be ventured on so
disproportionable Forces; The City hinders him.
that the Governor was at Bacaim with a Fleet full of Victorious Soldiers,
able to chastise the Enemy, against whom he would bring, as a second Army, his
Fame and Fortune.

59. The dispute continued so hot betwixt the Soldiers and Citizens, as to
come near Sedition, Advises the Governor.
and Mutiny, these standing for the preservation of the City, the other on the
reputation of our Armies; the difference was at last decided and composed, that
the Governor being so near, should be acquainted with the business, who
understanding the Civil Government intermedled in ordering the War, chid
sharply their animosity, allowed and confirmed Diogo de Almeyda's resolution of
finding out the Enemy, sending him orders to stay with his men at Pangim, where
he would in few days join him.

60. Dom John de Castro had scarce laid down his Pen, He immediately goes on
Board.
with which he writ for the Kingdom, when he again took in hand his Sword; the
same day he received the advice, he commanded a great Gun to be Shot off to
warn the Fleet to be in readiness to weigh, and the next, set Sail with the
whole. Armado, and Coasting went in sight of the City Dabul, Goes in sight of
Dabul.
famous for the marks our Arms had before left there, and now the chief Scale
of Hidalcaon's Ports; at a distance were seen a great many Gardens, Orchards,
and proud Buildings, which showed the Luxury and Grandeur of the Inhabitants;
the City contains about four thousand Families, has two Forts, and some
Redouts which defend the entrance into the Harbor, and though the Action
required much Deliberation, the Governor resolved on the undertaking.

61. The Fleet that Evening went Coasting in sight of the City, observing its
Anchorage and Defense; the next Morning by break of day the Governor commanded
his Son Dom Alvaro with two thousand men to go into Boats and get on Shore, Dom
Alvaro gets on Shore.
he being one of the first, who amongst many repeated Shot got footing; here
was the Enemies resistance in hindering, or retarding our passage; the Battle
was for some time without inclining, the place and cause heightning their
Bravery in Fighting; the Cries of Women and Children in their Ears, made them
receive Wounds without pain or fear; the Dead who fell were not an example for
their Fear but Vengeance. The Blood ran down on both sides, and the
resoluteness of both parties made the success Contingent, when the Governor
with the rest of his men came in, The Governor follows him, and takes the City.
and charged the Enemy so home, as he began to abate in his Defense; they were
by degrees giving ground, till by a declared flying they left us the Victory.
The Governor mingled with the Moors entered the City, where many Died in sight
of their Wives they could neither forsake nor defend. The slaughter was
succeeded by Covetousness, the Booty was not inferior to the Victory; the
Vessels of the Fleet could scarce take in the pillage. The City in a few hours
was Consumed by a Lamentable fire, its deplorable Ruins once more preserving
the memory of this and a former Destruction. We lost in this Action five
Soldiers, the Enemy two hundred, the number of the Wounded was greater.

62. The Governor leaving the City in Flames reimbark'd, and steered for
Agacaim, Arrives at Agacaim.
where he expected Dom Diogo de Almeyda with one hundred and fifty Horse, and
the standing Militia, and with store of Barks to pass the men; the Governor
staid here one day, to inform himself of the Enemies force, and design, and on
the next (the Apostle Saint Thomas's Eve) resolved to fall on the Moors, and in
the Battle invoke the name of the Saint, not to deprive him of the honor of
the Protection of India, purchased by his Preaching, and shedding his Blood on
the Cross of his Martyrdom.

63. The Enemy was quartered at a Town called Morgaon, not far from Agacaim;
He falls on the Enemy.
the Governor having notice of it, formed his men into two Battallions, he
gave the first to his Son Dom Alvaro de Castro, the Companion of his Victories,
with him were the Naires of Cochim, and Citizens of Goa; the second (which he
kept for himself) was made up of all the Gentlemen and Soldiers of the Fleet,
who in their Wings had the City-horse, in this order did he March, sending some
Horse before to discover the Camp.

64. The Moors were spread without Order or Discipline, as men who neither
feared nor expected an Enemy; some of their Soldiers, who went up and down the
Camp, spied our Colors, and by their sight, or intelligence, They fly.
knowing the Governor looked out for 'em, went in a fright to advise Cala
Batecaon, aggravating our strength, which their fear, and the distance made
greater. The Turk alarmed at the approach of so Victorious Arms, was not Master
of more consideration, then by his Flight to be an example to his men; they
left in their quarters, Tents, Provision, and Baggage, and what meat was for
Supper, then almost ready; for the difficulty of our March a most necessary and
pleasant Booty. The Governor by this Flight began to be in possession of the
Land and Victory.

65. The Moors went over a deep River, only to be past by some Loggs of Wood
laid across instead of a Bridge, which the Enemy to hinder our persute cut in
pieces, yet in so much haste, as the Earth which fell down, left open a
passage, not without difficulty, though without danger. Dom Alvaro, follows 'em.
Dom Alvaro in this place set upon passing the River, beginning to wade by few
at a time, as the straightness of the ground permitted.

66. The Enemy was not so out of himself as to lose the occasion of Fighting on
so eminent advantages; He turned with his men to the River, They turn.
showing us that so cautious fear was Stratagem. The Moors charged our men as
they were passing, and so were timorous, few, and disordered; The Governor,
with his Voice, command, and presence, encouraged them to go over, but fear
o'recame their Obedience; the first turned back, not without loss of Blood, and
with worse marks then their Wounds. At this time the Governor's impatience
attempted the River in different places. Dom Diogo de Almeyda waded it with a
Troop of Horse, finding where he went better Foording, and Fortune, for he fell
in with the Moors General who was on Horseback, ordering and encouraging his
men, whom he set upon with great Bravery; The Turk with the shock fell to the
ground, but rising again without loss of his judgment laid hold on his Semitar,
and went after Dom Diogo, who though he lost not his Saddle, was for a while
with the force of the Blow dis-inabled, but coming again to himself the second
time charged the Turk, Dom Diogo kills the General.
and (though two Soldiers endeavored to rescue him) left him with many Wounds
measuring the ground.

67. The other Commanders, though with difficulty, crossed the River, put upon it
by the Governors example, whom they saw engaged with the Enemy, and was more
envied then obeyed by his own Soldiers, who scattered and disordered, some
cautious, others heady cast themselves into the River; but when all his men
were over, he so Vigorously charged the Enemy, as not able to endure the shock
of the Battle he gave ground. The Governor Fights,
The Governor, sparing no accident favorable to his Fortune, so pressed the
Moors, grown fearful and out of order, as in a little time to Rivet the
Victory. got the Victory.
Few of ours Died, the Wounded were more; the Slaughter was great amongst the
Moors, and greater in the Chase then Fight, for our men making no Prisoners,
did with the same stroke take off those who resisted or yielded. Dom Alvaro de
Castro by Commanding, and Fighting, never more appeared the Son of such a
Father, then in this Action; The other Gentlemen and Cavalliers so equally
behaved themselves in their Courage, as not one deserved to be named second. On
Saint Thomas's day, and by his mediation.
By the calling on Saint Thomas, and on his Day, was this Battle won, who gave
the Eastern Catholics an eminent proof of his Patronage. This so memorable
Defeat is yet, so many years afterward, sung by the young Ladies of Goa, who
in the easiness of unforc't Verses, have invented Praise without artifice or
flattery.

68. The Governor disbanded his men, and went to rest himself at Pangim,
excusing keeping Christmas at Goa, in a just contempt of Palms, and martial
Triumpes, since his Name was now in the Vogue of the World above all other
applause; He dispatcheth Ships for the Kingdom.
here he dispatched the Ships of Burden which were to go for the Kingdom, on
which went Dom John Mascarenhas, a Man more constant in the difficulties of
Asia, then in the adversities of his Native Country; Dom John Mascarenhas's
praises.
he was received by the King and Nobility, with extraordinary honors, yet were
not his Rewards answerable to his Services; He was of the Council of State to
the King Dom Sebastion, afterward one of the Governors of the Kingdom. He
Married Dona Elena Daughter to Dom John de Castellbranco, by whom he left a
most Renowned and Loyal Posterity.

69. Dom John de Castro thought not Hidalcaon yet sufficiently Curbed by our
Arms, The Governor carries on the War.
and resolved with a sharper War to bring him under; He secured with a strong
Garrison the Territories of Salsete, leaving there Dom Diogo de Almeyda with
six score Horse, and one thousand Foot of the place, and ordered some Ships to
lie in the Rivers of Rachol, to defend the Neighboring Villages, the Laborers
having quitted the grounds, seeing their Dominion, by the fickleness of War,
casual and uncertain. The Governor also understanding how easy it was to pull
down a declining Kingdom, What hurt he does.
carried on the War against Hidalcaon, desiring the States Rivals might take
warning by his Punishment; He embark't those Soldiers he had always in
readiness, by being their Companion in dangers, and Father in difficulties, and
setting Sail, went along all Hidalcaon's Coast, which he so impartially
Destroyed, as not to leave one place to comfort an others miseries, none was
freed by their resistance, some by their distance.

70. There was another Dabul called the upper, He destroys upper Dabul.
two Leagues from the Shore, which by its strength and distance, was the Rich
depository of a great many Estates; but the protection of the Inland was not
sufficient to exempt it from the Fortune of the rest, for the Goververnour
marched to it, giving the first danger of the Vanguard to his Son Dom Alvaro,
(these were the favors of that Father, and those times) who coming to the
place, found the Moors had secured their Persons and Estates in the Mountain,
nothing being left to recommend the Victory; what was, served only for
Destruction, for the Buildings which could be no Booty paid fort by their
Ruin. The Mosques and Temples were thrown to the ground, and the Idols broke
and prostrate, our Anger not differencing stone from stone, and the Moors and
Pagans bewailed with the same tears their Gods and own miseries; The fury of
our Arms went to the Desolating the Campagnia, and the Campagnia.
destroying the Flocks, and Groves of Palms, that the War might be attended
by Famine, a Sword not to be escaped by Flight or Resistance. All was in fine so
wasted, as the difference between the Villages, and Campagnia, was not by the
sight, but memory.

71. The Governor retreated to Bacaim, Goes to Bacaim.
whence he designed his Arms for the War of Cambaya, setting forth some
Vessels to Endammage all that Coast, and make Prize of the Meca Fleet, which
came to an Anchor in the Ports of that Bay; Spoils Cambaya.
this was happily performed by Dom Antonio de Noronha, and Dom Iorge Baroche,
who by their Prizes, and Victories, raised the States strength, and reputation;
our Arms in Dom John de Castro's time being so feared or respected, that most
of the Princes of Asia, Borderers, and Remote, became (to defend, or secure
their Kingdoms with the protection of our Forces) by voluntary Obedience the
States Tributaries; of this truth the Kings of Campar, and Caxem were no
slight Arguments.

72. Our Chronicles (and Foreign with greater amasement) relate that famous
Seige of Dio, held out by Antonio da Sylveira, by whom the Turks Arms in India
received the first, or greatest Baffle; A Character of Rax Solimon.
Their General in this expedition was Rax Solimon, who, after the loss of a
great part of his Armado in the Siege, See John de Barro's History of India,
Dec. 5. Lib. 4.
for fear of our Ships at Anchor in the Port, retired Flying, and left on Shore
his Baggage and Wounded; and seeing he could not atchieve what he promised his
Master, (whose Pride, and Imperiousness used not to receive satisfaction for
miscarriages, or misfortunes) ventured, rather then his Head, His coming to
Adem.
his Loyalty; He went into the Port of Adem under Color of Friendship, where
the King sent to Visit him, with Regallios and Refreshments from Shore, but was
cautious and vigilant to preserve the City, for the Bashaw's Force and Loyalty
was suspicious. The Turk, who saw his Treason feared or discovered, designed to
surprise the City by Scaling, but was afraid of the Fortress of the place, and
Courage of the Arabians, and on that, had Recourse to an other Stratagem, more
base, and more secure, which was to excuse himself to the King for not coming
into the City, in fear to lose the favorable Wind; that he desired to see him
on Board, for he was to communicate to him some business from the Grand Signior
to the great advantage of his Kingdom. The poor King, facil, or credulous in
the good of his State, went immediately to meet the Bashaw at Sea, secure in an
innocent Conscience; but the Tyrant forgetting Faith, and Humanity, made him
with Scoffs and Derision, (a cruel delight in so foul a Treason) be Beheaded in
the Galley. Beheads the King.
'Twas easy for the Bashaw upon the Death of the King to seize on the City,
frighted and confused at the violent Murder of their Prince; and because the
Turkish Neighborhood cost the State blood, and trouble, we will in brief give
you this relation of the place.

73. It is situate on the Coast of Arabia the happy, The situation of Adam.
in twelve degrees, and fifteen minutes of Northern Latitude, protected by a
little Mountain, which with some Castles defends the entrance of the Harbor;
it lies in the mouth of the Straight, the Port bold, capable to Anchor Ships of
any burden, though exposed to Westerly winds, which are the Monsones in Summer.
Art and Nature have made it Tenable by Land, securing it from the ambition of
the Neighbor Princes and the incursions of the Mountainous Arabs, who molest
the Country with troublesome Inroads; there is in the Port a little Island,
tolerably Fortified, called by the Natives Cira, before it is an other safe
Harbor, sheltered from many Winds, where the Mecca Fleet use to come to an
Anchor. There are no Rivers or Fountains to water the ground, it does not
sometimes Rain for two or three years, whether it be the nature of the Clime,
or some hidden Judgment, so as they fetch their water at a distance with
Caravans of Camels. The chief Commodity of the place is Rubarb, but that which
brings in most profit is the Anchorage of Ships which pass the Straight. The
Nation is Warlick and Cruel, goes willingly to the War, though more for
Plunder, then Victory.

74. The Bashaw having seized on the City, Soliman seiseth it.
and seeing himself, though an Intruder, obeyed, began with diverse Oppressions
to break the people, unarming 'em, that their fear, and subjection might make
them more easily Governed; he Cut off, and Confiscated without any reason those
who were Eminent, their Lives being a fault, their Estates a crime; the poor
Peoples suffering was more their Virtue, then Cure, for the Tyrant was
irritated at the so servile patience of the innocent. Marzaon succeeded him in
the Government of the City, as also in his Tyranny, being so Cruel as quite to
wear out the patience of the miserable Inhabitants, who resolved rather to
endure him as an Enemy, then Governor; The Inhabitants offer it to the King of
Campar.
They found out ways to offer their City and Obedience to the King of Campar,
saying, they would with any Relief fall upon the Turks, grown careless, in a
peaceful and almost hereditary Dominion, much more in their Contempt of those
men, who (as they thought) had lost all memory of their Liberty, and Injuries.

75. The Neighboring King, with words full of Compassion and Gratitude
accepted the offer, The King (...) it, and what he does.
whether out of ambition, or humanity; He selected out of his Army, a thousand
Soldiers well-deserving of so honorable an Action, and would himself be their
Companion, and Commander; they began to March in the silence of the Night, and
being come to the City, the Couspiritors possessed 'em of a Gate, at which they
entered, makiug themselves with a weak resistance Masters of the Castle. Marzaon
with five hundred Turks Fortisy'd himself in the Palace, more certain of the
Danger, then the Cause, and Authors; The first light discocovered the King,
History o^ India. Dec. 6. Lib. 6. Cap. 1.
Commanding his men, who presently dispatched a Trumpeter to Marzaon, to tell
him, he had ancient pretensions on that City, and now the Election of the
Inhabitants, who under the Oppression of the Bashaw's intrusion, were so tied
up in their Voice and Liberty, as not to pronounce the name of their natural
Prince; that he came to their help as Sufferers, but much more, as his own
Subjects; that if he would leave the City, he would use him as a Friend;
permitting him to carry away his Arms and Baggage, if not, Justice and Victory
should give him a double Title to his own Subjects.

76. The Turk finding out the conspiracy of the Arabs, What the Turks do.
and wanting Strength and Provisions for his Defense, obeyed necessity, and
Marched out with Colors flying and Drums beating, to possess himself of a
Castle eight Leagues off, designing from thence with Relief from Bacora to
reduce the City to its former slavery; He began to fall upon the Caravans of
Adem, which furnished the City, which receiving water, and provisions from the
Mountain, was in a few days brought to great Streights; for if any Provisions
came in, they were few, dear, and stolen. The deplorable people with tears in
their Eyes weighed in the same Scale Famine, and Tyranny, evils which only
afford a miserable Choice. They (...) Recruited.
The Tyrant recruited his party with continual supplies, which the King could
not with equal Force oppose, and discoursing with the Magistrates on the ways
of saving the City, they put him in mind of the Fame of our Victories against
the Turks, and our Fidelity in protecting our Confederates. The Inhabitants
send ^o Ormus.
They resolved to dispatch a small Bark to the Governor of Ormus, who was then
Dom Manoel de Lima, offering him a Fortress, and the Revenues of the
Custom-house, withal letting us understand the danger the State would be in,
if the Turk got footing in the City.

77. 'Twas reported Marzaon in a short time expected considerable Relief from
Balsora, and if forborne till his Recruits arrived, would by open force fall
upon the City; on which the King of Campar showing himself a Soldier, in his
Discourse and Courage, unwilling that Stock should take faster Root, resolved
with three thousand Choice men to Besiege the Fortress, which with greater
Resolution then Fortune he engaged in, being Killed in the first assault. The
Arabs seized with fear at the Death of their King, left the Siege to Bury the
Body, though upon that oecasion, Revenge had been more opportune then Piety.

78. The Vessel which went for Ormus at the entrance of Cape Rosalgate met with
Dom Payo de Noronha, The Messenger meets with Payo de Noronha.
who with twelve small Galleys guarded that Straight, and understanding the
Arabs pretensions, thought that Relief worthy some great Commander, and writ to
the Governor of Ormus, that if he designed not that honor for himself, not to
refuse it him; Dom Manoel sent him two Ships more, and some select Soldiery,
with them to go and secure the City whilst he was making greater Levies, and
after an honorable reception, Counseled the King of Campar's Ambassador to
ask a Fleet of the Governor of India, who was one would not deny protection to
the States friends, especially against the Turks whose War was looked upon as
the Inheritance of our Arms.

79. Dom Payo arrived at Adem, Dom Payo arrives at Adem.
where he was received with what affection and greatness they could show to
their own Prince, and the City delivered him, as Defender and Governor; They
planted our Colors, for which all vowed solemnly to Dye, letting themselves
Blood in their Breasts, Barbarous, but Loyal demonstrations and ceremonies,
protesting they would hold out the City as a Member of the State, to which they
were by obedience Vassals; by affection, Children; but Dom Payo so carried
himself, (...) himself (...).
as to forfeit the reputation of our Arms in the East; in favor to so great a
Family we will omit the particulars of the Story, though by an other Pen
written with more Liberty in ordinary History.

80. The Citizens of Adem though ill protected by Dom Payo, The Inhabitants
send to Goa.
lost not their devotion to the State, holding out the City with only the name
of Portugal in their mouths; and either not having or not desiring other
protection, resolved to send one of the Blood Royal to the Governor, to advise
him of their condition, on whose extremities he might raise a new Name, by not
sleighting the glory of helping the afflicted; that the Prince of Adem would
receive Laws and his Crown from the State, to whom he would turn Feudatary,
with a grateful, and honorable Tribute.

81. Dom John de Castro was overjoyed to hear, the report of his Name and
Victories, The Governor rejoices.
reached the Ears of Princes so remote, heightning not only their Reverence but
Subjection; the message gave extraordinary content to Goa, seeing their
Governors fortune bring the State the felicity of the first discovery of
India, since where other Arms were scarce heard of, his were Obeyed.

82. The Governor gave the expedition to his Son Dom Alvaro, Sends his Son.
who had so well deserved in all he undertook, as it looked not like the
election of a Father, but of a public Minister; diverse old Cavalliers desired
to accompany him, whom the Governor by a modest decree took off, commanding
their stay in Goa, because he should want 'em for more important business, yet
such was their eagerness on the expedition, as they looked on the decree as a
common grievance; the fault of those times seemed to be the ambition of
dangers; the Governor satisfied 'em, and was content to see such Emulation
begot under his Discipline. With what Fleet.
He presently gave order for the Equipping and Victualling thirty Galleys, and
made Commanders of 'em, Dom Antonio de Noronha, Son of the Vice-King Dom
Garcia, Antonio Moniz Barretto, who went Governor of the Fortress to be made
in Adem, Do^ Pedro d' Eca, Dom Fernando Coutinho, Pero de Attayde Inferno, Dom
Joan de Attayde, Alvaro Paez de Sottomajor, Fernaon Perez de Andrade, Pero
Lopez de Sousa, Ruy Diaz Pereira, Pero Botelho Porca Brother to Diogo Botelho,
one of the Infant Dom Lewis's Family, Alvaro Serraon, Luis Homem, Melchior
Botelho Over-seer of the Revenue, Gomez da Sylva, Antonio da Veiga, Luis
Alvarez de Sousa, Ioaon Rodriguez Correa, Diogo Correa, who came with the
Ambassador of Adem, Diogo Banho, Pero Preto, Alvaro da Gama, and others.

83. But few days before the Fleet weighed, An other Embassage from Caxem.
came to Goa an Ambassador from the King of Caxem, from whom his Neighbors
the Fartaques had usurped a considerable part of his Kingdom; He reigning on
the Southern Shore of Arabia, and knowing Adem was to be relieved by our
Armado, concluding that with the same Fleet we might restore him, writ to the
Governor, that the Restitution of Caxem would not be less Laudable in the
World then the defense of Adem; Represented what secure entertainment our Fleet
had found in his Ports, reckoned up those which at several times had Anchored
there, on which he was suspicious to the Turk, offered also besides his Loyalty
a reasonable Tribute. The Governor, considering that by those succors our
Arms came into repute, The Gove^nour's answer.
and got friends to the State, ordered the same Fleet should countenance Caxem;
the atchieving both the one and other design being but the same Voyage and
expense; and because the Siege of Adem stood in need of speedy supplies, the
Governor foreseeing the main Body of the Fleet would arrive too late, and so
frustrate the aim and design, sent away Dom John de Attayde with four Vessels
to make his way into Adem, and hold out the Siege till Dom Alvaro's arrival.
Dom John de Attayde set Sail, the fresh North-west Winds endammag'd one of the
Ships, which arrived shattered, the rest persu'd their Voyage.

84. The Besiegers and Besieged in the mean time fought resolutely in Adem,
(...).
drawing Blood on both sides; The weight of the War light upon some Portuguese
of Dom Payo's Fleet, who showed from a mean Origin glorious Courage, so
engaged in the resistance, as if they had defended their own Country, not a
strangers Dominion; these suffis'd to retard for many days the Turks Victory,
and being Soldiers of Fortune, our Chronicles in ungrateful silence obscure
their Names, as if Virtue of necessity were to have noble Progenitors, and
these were for their own Actions less honorable then others for other men's; I
believe the great Ones have with injuring Nature set up new Laws, not making
only Estates but Deserts hereditary.

85. Things in Adem being (as we have said) in that Contingency, (...).
there appeared a Fleet of Turks of nine Galleys Royal, and some small Vessels,
which faced the City, and coming to Anchor out of the Bay, got to Shore, where
they Pitched their Tents and Fortified their Encamping, advising the Bashaw to
join 'em with his Army. The Arabs on sight of so great numbers come against
'em, came remissly to the Defense, some Pusillanimous, others out of Heart,
thought the Courage and Strength of the Enemy insuperable, and at private
meetings blamed the King's am^ition of dilating his Crown with the Blood of his
innocent Subjects, not content with the fortune of his Predecessors; but the
Portuguese amongst 'em, observing the brightest Fame work't out of
difficulties, forced on the Arabs, convincing the Resistance to be necessary
and possible, offering themselves afresh to be the voluntary Companions of
their Fortune; enough to put new Courage in 'em, upon which they vowed to Dye
in their defense, not so much out of Obligation as Example.

86. The Turks Besieged the City, Lay Siege.
by raising two Batteries with pieces on 'em of an extravagant bigness, two
amongst the rest (by them called Quartaos) carried a Bullet of four Palms
circumference, which made more Ruins, then Breaches in the Walls, and from the
danger taught the Besieged discipline; who made their Retrenchments and
Traverses within, by which they entertained, and blunted their assaults, and
made the Turk's Victory doubtful, Dom Payo calls off our men.
and costly. But Dom Payo de Noronha (carried away by some resolute fatality)
deprived the Arabs of the Victory, ours of the Honor, sending private Orders
to all the Portuguese to come and join him, thus forsaking the defense of a
Prince, a Friend, and Feudatory, not complying with the obligation of either
his Birth o^ Office. Most of the Portuguese obeyed, only Manoel Pereira, and
Francisco Vieira, two Soldiers of Fortune, said, the City was the Kings of
Portugal, and they would lose their Lives in the defense; it appears, the Wars
of those times seemed to require first Courage, then Discipline; these two held
out the City till the last day, and gained more repute in its Ruins then the
Turks in their Victory.

87. As soon as the Arabs understood the Portuguese were Retreated, What the
Arabs do.
(all hopes of Defense being desperate) they began to parley; but the Prince
commanded 'em to give over Treating, saying he had rather be beaten out, then
give up the City; that the Turks should not without some stains of their Blood,
win those Colors of the Kings of Portugal. Loyalty which deserved better
Assistance from our Arms. The Enemy, knowing the Division and Coolness of the
Inhabitants, continued his Assaults, which brought on again the Speech of a
Surrender, which the Prince always broke off, constant to himself, and the
State; but danger, famine, and despair, prevailed with some of the Inhabitants
to give up a secret Gate to the Enemy, at which he entered the City. The Prince
fighting with Royal, but Unfortunate courage, disengaged with his Life, the
Loyalty he had promised to the State; Manoel Pereira, and Francisco Vieira,
saved a young Prince whom they carried to Campar, comforting the Subjects with
that tender branch of its prostrate Trunk.

88. Dom John de Attayde, Dom John de Attayde's success.
(whom we left with three Ships at Sea) continued on his Voyage, and having
favorable Winds, in few days saw the Coast of Arabia; He stood for the City
Adem, and Rowing into the Harbor, got amongst the Galleys which were there at
Anchor, but the Easterly winds yet reigning, got out to Sea again. The Turks on
the sight of our Ships immediately weighed, and by the advantage of their Oars
gave us so hot a Chase, that the two Ships commanded by Gomez da Sylva, and
Antonio da Veiga, were almost under the Prow of their Galleys, and seeing it
impossible to fly, much more to resist, ran their Vessels on the Shore which
was near them, and by that means escaped with their Lives. Dom John de Attayde
who was in the best Ship, bore up what he could against the Wind; seeing
himself often lost, till by the Night coming on he stood for Abexim, under
which Shore he carin'd his Ship in the Island of Mete, which lies over against
the Cities of Barbara, and Zeila; those who saved themselves by Land got to the
protection of the King of Campar, where they found Manoel Pereira, and
Francisco Vieira, who acquainted them with the success we have now related;
they were entertained and provided of all things with plenty and affection.

89. Dom Alvaro de Castro seeting Sail with the whole Fleet, and going before
the Easterly winds, Dom Alvaro's Voyage.
made a short Voyage, and got so far as to recover the Islands of Canecanim
where he met with Dom John de Attayde of whom he knew the loss of Adem, and how
the Turks chased him, from whose Galleys he had by the favor of the Night
freed himself. Dom Alvaro with the Gentlemen and Soldiers of the Fleet,
betrayed a just resentment at the News, valuing less the loss of that State,
then the foil of our Arms, because both amongst Natives and Strangers the
sinking in opinion is always Eternis'd. The King of Campar's Ambassador, and
Brother-in-law, who was in our Fleet, becomingly resented the Deaths of his
Brother-in-law, and Nephew, yet was not a little comforted with the knowledge
they were not in Arrerages to Honor or Loyalty, and on those considerations
showed as strong a mind, as if he had been to calm an others sorrow. Dom Alvaro
consulted with the Officers of the Fleet what was to be done, He calls a
Council, and what he resolves.
and all were of opinion, since the relief of Adem had been ineffectual, to
divert their Arms in favor of the King of Caxem, (as the Fleet had
instructions) on whom the Bordering Fartaques had surprised the Fortress of
Xael, which commanded a Haven, the principal Scale of those few that petty King
had; a design more advantageous then difficult.

90. Dom Alvaro commanded to Steer to Xael, Goes to Xael.
and coming to Anchor in sight of the Castle, the Fartaques, out of either fear
or friendship received peaceably our Armado; The Fort was Built of Turfs, with
four so little Works, as five and thirty Soldiers, who were there in Garrison,
were enough to Man it; These men on sight of our Fleet, sent out a Woman (who
understood and spoke Portuguese) to ask for the Commander in chief and tell
him, the Fartaques were friends to the State, that if we came to demand that
Fortress, they would immediately quit it; many concluded the proposition
acceptable, for of so few Enemies and without Name we could not expect Glory,
or Booty; most Voted, that for the Authority of our Arms we should summon 'em
to Surrender on discretion. The woman well understanding this resolution, and
ill satisfied with our answer, replied, that the Fartaques knew how to defend
both their Lives and the Castle. The Moors upon that took down the white Flagg,
and planted an other Red one, Ours immediately discharged some Canon-shot, but
so at Rovers as to do no Damage; Dom Alvaro, with all his men surrounded the
Fortress, which he commanded should be Scaled in diverse places, securing those
who went on with his Muskets from below; and the charge being uninterrupted
the Moors durst not appear. Resolve^ to Scale it.
Fernaon Perez was the first, who began with a Ladder to clime, carrying with
him his Colors which he planted and maintained on the Wall; almost at the same
instant got up Pero Botelho, with the same hazard and fortune as the former,
these cleared the Scaling for the rest.

91 Antonio Moniz Barretto, Dom Antonio de Noronha, Dom John de Attayde, and
others, went to a Gate of the Fortress, which was stop^t up with Bushes, and
found it impossible to enter, till our men went on the inside and dis-ingag'd
it; the Fartaques retired to two Works, whence with desperate Courage they
defended themselves, refusing their Lives offered 'em by Dom Alvaro, which they
seemed willing to lose out of revenge, The Arabs (...) till they all Dye.
or to credit that force they could not resist; stoutness being even amongst
these Infidels the most Cardinal virtue. The Moors in fine fought till they all
fell, such Barbarous obstinacy not deserving the name of Courage, where there
was no hope of Victory or Revenge; of our men five Died, the Wounded were above
forty.

92. When the Fortress was gained, The place is g^in'd.
(an action more considerable to the Prince, then famous for us) Dom Alvaro
delivered it to the King of Caxem's Ambassador, who showed then his gratitude
for so signal a favor, in Victualling the Fleet, afterward, in holding
faithful correspondence with the State; and the Season of the year being
almost spent, Dom Alvaro went to Winter at Goa, where he was received with
applause above the Victory, a Ceremony, the Governor indulged as a Father, and
Dom Alvaro pris'd as a Soldier.

93. Lourenco Pirez de Tavora came with five Ships in Company to the Bar of
Lisbone, Lourenco Pirez arrive^ at Lis^one.
having had not only a short, but happy and prosperous Voyage; we told of Dom
John Mascarenhas's coming on them, full of fame and deserts; the news of Dio
being immediately spread amongst the People, every one, according to his
capacity judged of the patience of the Siege, and resolution of the Battle.
History of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 6. Cap. 7.
The common people were endless in the praises of Dom John de Castro, as men
without envy for persons, or fortunes, above 'em; the Gentlemen, and great
Ones, abetted or consented to the universal Acclamations; an unusual virtue, to
be able to endure the fame of Peers; and there was not one so ambitious, who
coveted for himself a greater Name, or more illustrious Achievements.

94. The King and Court put on their Robes, Rejoicing for the news of Dio.
and appointed a day to give God thanks in the Chapel with Pious and Royal
offerings; there was a Learned Sermon, in which were set forth the Praises and
Virtues of the Governor. The King acquainted the Pope, and the greatest
Princes of Europe with the Victory, who all gave him joy as for the most famous
Action of the East; Dom John de Castro in his Letter to the King desired leave
to return to the Kingdom, showing how little Sollicitous he was of Dignities,
What the Governor asks for the good News.
who left the greatest, and that a total neglect might not be branded as a new
ambition, begged of the King two Acres of ground which join to his
Country House at Sintra, and end in a little Hill, which to this day is called
The Mountain of good News.
Monte das Alvicaras. The King in the honors conferred on him, seemed to
consider his Services, and in his Reward respected his Fortune, all which is
seen by his Letter, of which we here give you a Copy.

The King Dom John the Third's Letter.
95. VIce-King and Friend, I the King heartily salute you. The King'^ thanks to
him.
The Victory God gave you against the Officers of the King of Cambaya, was of
as eminent satisfaction to us, as it is fit we should have for such, and so
great a Conquest, and for so great mercies and favors, History o^ India, Dec
6. Lib. 6. Cap. 8.
as you in it received from our Lord, for which he is to be ever praised; there
is also much due to the Prudence, and great Courage you showed in that day, as
to what you did in the great and speedy Relief you sent to the Fortress of Dio,
exposing in so extravagant a Season your Sons to Sea, by which is seen how much
more predominant our Service is with you, then the natural affection of a
Father, which we value, as it is reason we should, seeing, you not only Routed
so great Forces of the Enemies, but secured all India, ^y the great
apprehensions our Enemies have of so signal a Victory; which service, there is
as much reason we should Rank as it deserves, as we should have for it the
requisite satisfaction; we had no little discontent for the Death of your Son
Dom Fernando, both as he was your Son, and as he gave proofs in that Age, what
he would have been in all his Life after; and since he Died so honorably, and
in so eminent service for God, and us, you ought less to resent his loss, and
give God thanks he was pleased he should so Dye, as we know you did, showing,
by your forgetting the Death of your Son, your remembering what was suitable for
our Service, of which things we shall always be so mindful, as not only to
impute 'em to you by our great satisfaction for 'em, but by our special grace,
which is now to have a beginning in the rewards we conferr on you and your Son
Dom Alvaro, reserving the completing of 'em for the end of your Service, which
we are confident, and take for granted, will be such, as that has been you
have already rendered us, and in the confidence and experience we have of it,
though very much desiring at present to comply with you in all things, yet
considering how much it is for our Service, (and seeing by your Actions how
much more you prise that, then all other business of your own) we have thought
good not to give you leave to return as you desired of us; and for that purpose
recommend to, and command you, to receive it well, and that you will serve us
in that Charge other three years, at the end of which we will in God's name
send you leave to return, and we hope he will enable you so to do; yet though
it be so much for the advantage of our Service, that you should continue
serving us for that time in those parts, if you think your return necessary, we
should be glad of your writing to us, and expecting our answer.

Pero de Alcacova Carneiro writ it in Lisbone the 20th. of October 1547. The
King.


I believe the Queen Dona Katherine's Letter, requires our no less attention,
where the Subscription is not only Royal but also the Discourse, giving
judgment on the Actions of the Victory, with the Prudence of a Man, and
Gallantry of a Soldier.

The Queen Dona Katherine's Letter.
96. VIce-King, I the Queen heartily salute you. I have read your Letter in
which you give us a particular account of what you have done, and ordered in
all those things you thought to be for the service of our Lord the King, and
for the defense and security of those Parts, and that all was so conformable to
what you are, and to the opinion his Majesty has of you, we have as much
satisfaction, as it is reasonable; both to see his Majesty is so well served by
you, and for the signal honor you have purchased. As to the great care and
diligence, you upon your Arrival employed in the repairing, and providing the
Fleet, 'twas a great beginning, and of absolute necessity for the remedying so
weighty affairs as afterward presented; and we are assured how great soever
the pains you took in it were, your content of having been so well employed,
will be greater; you aimed right in the War you made upon Hidalcaon, because
by that was clearly seen the contrary to what you say, is there the received
opinion; that he could receive no harm by a War with the Portuguese, (which
must be the reason he so often begun it) nor have any benefit by Peace with
'em, which made him not care to break it; and if he knew who you were, and how
much more prevalent honor then profit is with you, he would not have made you
the offer he did about Meal, but the little impression it had on you, and your
evident undeceiving him, will make him know it. As to the business of the
Siege, and War of the Fortress of Dio, the mercy of our Lord God was eminent
in the Victory he there gave you against so great Force, and numbers, of the
Enemies of his holy Catholic faith, as were there from so remote Parts met
together, and it is an evident sign of his own Arms upholding the State in those
Countries; and for all, we give him the praises, as are reasonable, and we
acknowledge to be due; and it much adds to the great satisfaction, our Lord the
King, and We have for so great a Victory, to see with what prudence, and
conduct you provided all things necessary for the obtaining it; how stoutly you
behaved your self in the day of Battle, and with what diligence you relieved
that Fortress, exposing for it your Sons in so Stormy weather; the Notion his
Majesty and we have of all these Actions, and of the great benefit which is the
consequence of 'em, is very proportionable to their quality and greatness; and
we hope his Majesty will show it so, in the honor and thanks he intends to
return you, because all is your due; and he gave no small sign of it, by his
pleasure and satisfaction immediately to begin it, as you will see by his
Letters to you and your Son Dom Alvaro. We were not a little discontented at
the Death of your Son Dom Fernando, as well for our knowledge how you must take
it, as for the loss of his Person, which (as he showed in that Action) was
eminently great; but we so well know you, and your great Prudence and Virtue,
as to be certain, that at whatsoever time our Lord God should take him to
himself, you would conform to his Will, and accept it at his Hand; especially
it being then, when for the defense of his Faith, and in so signal Service for
his Majesty, he Died so honorably, and was not wanting to the Obligation of
being what he was, which are very convincing reasons that you ought so to take
it, and very much less resent his Death. As for what you solicit us in, about
your return, in which your Wife Dona Leonor (whom we were very joyful to see,
for the deserts of her Person and Virtues, and out of the great affection we
have for her) has spoke to us in your behalf, as in a business she so much
desires, we should be very glad if we could in that gratify your self and her
with the good liking and satisfaction of our Lord the King; but for the good
Service you have done his Majesty, and the great miss might be there of your
Person in such a time, he has thought good to make use of you there for three
years longer, as you will see by his Letter; and we assure our selves, that for
those considerations you will take it well, and we very much desire you it may
be so, and hope in our Lord he will give you health and vigor to perform it,
and will assist and strengthen you in all your difficulties, because the result
of 'em is so much for his Service, and he knows the main design his Majesty
has in desiring it should be so, is because of his knowledge that his Service
will by you there be unfeignedly promov'd; and by your remembering, amongst so
many troubles and so important businesses, those things of Ours, you took into
your care, it is evident, how great a desire you have in that, and all other
things to serve us, which we so look upon as is reason; for what concerns Diogo
Voz we have in an other Letter writ to you, what we desire should be done. We
were very much pleased with that perfume of Benjoim de Boninas, and with all
the other things you sent us by Lourenco Pirez de Tavora, all being so good, as
they seem to be sent with that good Will which we esteem the most, and take all
very well of you; and about those Servants of Ours, and Persons, who, (as you
write us) have served well there, and about those things, you think it
necessary to provide, we will mind our Lord the King, as you desire, it should
be done. That which his Majesty has to look too, in the Rewards he ought to
bestow on all those who have there ferv'd him, is to take notice of what you
have writ to him, and of what you desire, as it is reason he should; we take
very well of you, the good Character you give his Majesty of those our
Servants, who were present at the Action of Dio, and also the many Favors, and
great Civilities, we know for our sake you showed them.

Pero Fernandez writ it in Lisbone the 30th. of October 1547. The Queen.


The Letter the Infant Dom Lewis writ him, is not less considerable, as being
from a Prince who knew how to make so profound an estimate of Deserts and
Virtues.

The Infant Dom Lewis's Letter.
97. Honorable Vice-King. I received your Letter which came in Lourenco Pirez
de Tavora's Fleet, in which you tell me you received mine I sent by Lewis
Fiqueira, and I take very well of you, your telling me, the advice I gave you
seemed good to you, and the more, your putting it in practice, and, though I
had not known you, I had sufficient cause to believe it was so, by hearing what
you do there, and seeing you write so plainly your difficulties, Poverty, and
Abstinence, weapons by which are overcome the World, the Flesh, and the Devil,
who reign so absolutely in those parts of India, a Victory, greater then that
of the King of Cambaya, or of all the Force of the Turk; for which as long as
you Live you ought to fear nothing, but be confident in our Lord God, that he
will assist you, as he has lately done in the Defense and Battle of Dio, for
which Victory you have great cause to praise him, who has made you an
Instrument of so much Service to himself, and to my Lord the King, of so much
honor to your Self, and to all the Portuguese, to the absent, as to those who
were present. And certain it is, that in that expedition, from the first day
you had the News of the Siege of Dio, till that of yours and our Victory,
(according to my reach) you have done what could be done, by a Stout, and
Prudent Commander, as well in your speedy Succors, as in exposing your Sons as
the marks of Fortune, to the dangers of the Winter and Seas of India, that
others might less apprehend 'em, by which is clearly evinc't, how much a
greater share the Service of my Lord the King, and the Obligation of your
charge, have in you, then the natural affections of a Father, which are those
most Tyrannically overruled our Nature. And by the patience you showed in the
Death of your Son Dom Fernando de Castro, you have eminently cleared this
opinion. It Is certain I resented it for my self and you, and by the certain
signs I saw in him of an extraordinary Courage took it for a very great loss;
and believe God designed in that to recompense him, by taking him out of this
so troublesome Life by so honorable means, and so much for his glory, which
ought to be no little part of your Consolation. Your Son Dom Alvaro de Castro
employed not his time ill when through so many difficulties, and dangers he
relieved the Fortress of Dio, at that time, when its only remedy was his
Arrival, and, for his Behavior there, his falling on the Enemies Posts, and
all the rest of his Carriage, I do for my self, and you, give him many
blessings. And to return to your resolution of venturing your Person, and the
State of India, for the relief of Dio, 'twas well taken, for had you not done
it, there had been the same hazard; and your arrival at Dio, your ordering your
Fleet, your commanding the Landing of your men when the Battle was to be
given, and your way of Fighting, all this seems to me to deserve that we now
and ever give praises to our Lord God, and that his Majesty should conferr on
you many honors, which he has already begun as you will see concerning your Self
and Son; He also ought and will do the same to those Cavalliers, and Gentlemen,
who served under you in that expedition, especially to Dom John Mascarenhas,
who behaved himself in the weight of that Siege like an honorable Commander,
and brave Cavallier. I was very glad to see your manner of writing to his
Majesty, about the Service the Gentlemen, and Cavalliers who went thither, did
in the business of Dio, by which it appears, you even scores with their
deservings. Always do so for my sake, and be glad to praise Persons; for it
being certain, there will not want those men who will speak ill of them, (which
you ought to punish where you find it) it is but reason the good should extol
them, that those you cannot there Reward, his Majesty may by your information
do it. I spoke (as you writ to me) about your return, which his Majesty granted
me not, and gave me for it two Reasons, and in my opinion, though you have many
to countenance your desire of returning, his Majesty has many more to desire
your Service for three years longer in that Government, which you ought to be
glad to do, to serve God, for the great mercy he showed you, and his Majesty
for his confidence in you, and satisfaction in your Service; Rely on God for
his giving you strength to grapple with the great difficulties and disorders of
India, and I trust in him, that after such a performance you will return to fill
these tops of the Rocks of Sintra with Chapels, and Trophies of your Victories,
and that you will visit and enjoy 'em in a profound repose. I speak not to you
about particular businesses, because my Lord the King has writ to you in what
concerns his Service in answer to the general Letter you writ him, which came
in a very good style, and well digested.

Dated at Lisbone the 22th. of October 1547. The Infant Dom Lewis.


98. It Is apparent by these Letters how well the Royal Family took the Services
of Dom John de Castro, the King denied Dom John the leave he ask't to come and
rest himself in the Kingdom for the good of his Country and the East, he added
to his Government three years more, with the Title of Viceroy. He Lived not to
enjoy, though deserve, this addition of honor; He had given him ten thousand
Crusades, as a Gratuity toward the Defraying charges, and Letters Patents for
his Son Dom Alvaro to be Admiral of the Seas of India, an employment he
Computed by fewer Years then Victories.

99. The King Dom John by the advices of the Viceroy, understood, that the
security of India required always Forces ready, for all occurrences of the
State, and that the defeat of Cambaya, (whose Ruin was an example for the
rest) had created hatred as well as reverence in the Neighboring Princes; on
these and other considerations he sent this year for India six Ships, The King
sends six Ships for India.
which parted in different Seasons. Martim Correa da Sylva, who brought a
Commission for the Fortress of Dio, was Commander in chief of the first three
which parted in November, the other Commanders were Antonio Pereira, and
Christovaon de Sa; The Admiral Ship, having on the Coast of India adverse Winds
fell off from her course, and not able to reach Goa, recovered Angediva, whence
she sent to the Viceroy to provide her with necessaries, being forced to
Winter in that Port. Christovaon de Sa's Pilot knew better to shape his course,
for as soon as he made the Coast of India, he bore up to get the Wind of Goa,
and saw Land about Carapataon, whence he came directly for the Bar.

100. As soon as the Viceroy knew there was a Ship come in from the Kingdom,
One come^ to Goa.
he gave orders for Landing the Sick, and went in Person to visit and provide
for 'em. And certain it is, that amongst all the Excellencies of this
extraordinary Viceroy, we may Rank his Charity in the Front, it not being a
Customary virtue in a Soldier, much less in a public Minister; He received
his Letters, in which he found those honors and gratuities we have related,
these he looked upon as payment, those as a recompense, for which the Gentlemen
gave to each other the joy, as satisfied the Viceroy should continue his
Government three years longer, in whom they knew the State would have a Man,
the Soldiery a Father.

101. Dom John de Castro found himself less spent by his Years then the
Difficulties of so long a War, The Vice-King falls Sick.
which made him succumb under the pressure of so perplex't a Solicitude; He
fell Desperately ill, and his Sickness in few days betrayed mortal Symptoms,
which he, by the Vexatiousness of repeated accidents perceiving, unburdened
himself of the weight of the Government: He called for the Bishop Dom John de
Albuquerque, Dom Diogo de Almeyda Freire, Quits the Government.
the Doctor Francisco Toscano, Chief Chancellor of the State, Sebastiaon Lopez
Lobatto his Auditor General, and Rodrigo Goncalvez Caminha, Overseer of the
Revenue, to whom he delivered up the State, in Peace with the Neighboring
Princes, secured by so many Victories. He sent for the Magistracy of the City,
the Vicar General of India, the Guardian of Saint Francis, Friar Antonio do
Casal, Saint Francisco Xaverius, and the Officers of the King's Revenne, before
whom he made this Speech.

102. I am not ashamed Gentlemen to tell you, He speaks to the Council.
that the Viceroy of India wants in this Sickness those conveniences the
meanest Soldier finds in the Hospitals; I came to Serve not to Traffic in the
East, I would to your selves have pawned the Bones of my Son, and did pawn the
hairs of my Beard, to assure you I had no other Plate, or Hangings. There was
not this day Money enough in the House to Buy me a Hen; for in the Fleets I set
forth, the Soldiers fed upon the Governors Salary, before the King's pay, and
it is no wonder for the Father of so many Children to be poor. I request of you,
during the time of this Sickness, to order me out of the King's Revenue a
proportionable maintenance, and to appoint a Person of your own who may provide
me a moderate allowance. And asking presently for a Missal, he took his Oath on
the Gospel, The Oath he takes.
he was not then Debtor one Crusade to the King's Revenue, or had received any
thing from Christian, Jew, Moor, or Pagan, or for the carrying out the
Authority of his Place, or Person, had any other Household Stuff then what he
brought from Portugal, and that he had here spent the Money he had got in the
Kingdom; that he had not where withal to Buy an other Quilt, then that they
saw on his Bed; that he had only made a Sword for his Son Dom Alvaro to return
into the Kingdom, and set the Hilt with some Jewels of small value. That he
desired they would enter a Protest of this, that if at any time the King found
it otherwise, he might punish him for perjury. This Speech was writ in the
City-Books, which, they who succeeded might read for their Instruction, with
whom I believe the Memory is more pregnant then the Example.

103. As soon as the Viceroy perceived himself summoned to a sharper Conflict,
avoiding the importune diversion of Human cares, He re^^res with the Father
Xaverius.
he secluded himself with the Father Saint Francisco Xaverius, providing for so
doubtful a Voyage so secure a Pilot, who all the time of his Sickness, was his
Nurse, Reconciler, and Governor; As he had got no Riches to make a new
Disposal of, he made no other Will then that he left (at his coming to Govern
India) in the Kingdom, in the hands of Dom Rodrigo Pinheiro Bishop of Angra,
to whom he had Communicated it; and receiving the Sacraments of the Church, His
Death.
he gave up his Soul to God the sixth of June one thousand five hundred forty
eight, in the eight and fortieth Year of his Age, and almost three of his
Government of that State. The Riches he gained in Asia were his Heroic
actions, which Posterity will read in this Book with a tender Memory. In his
Study were found three pieces of small Money, and a Discipline which seemed to
have been often used, and the Locks of his Beard he had pawned; He ordered his
Body should be Deposited in Saint Francis Church in Goa, thence to be
Translated to his Chapel at Sintra; They immediately consulted on his Funeral,
His B^ri^l, and the grief at it.
which was to be not less Compassionate then Solemn, deserving the Illustrious,
and common Tears of the whole State.

104. After some years his Bones came to the Kingdom, His Bones come to the
Kingdom.
where they were received with reverent and pious applause, as being the last
benefit his Country received with his Ashes, and on the Shoulders of four of
his Grandchildren carried to Saint Dominicks Convent in Lisbone, Are Deposited
in Saint Dominicks in Lisbone.
where for many days were made costly Exequies; thence they were the second
time Translated to Saint Dominicks Convent at Bemfica, where (though in an
others Chapel) Translated to Bemfica.
they remained some years in a decent Depository, till his Grandchild
Francisco de Castro, Bishop, and Inquisitor General, made for them a Chapel,
and place of Burial; for Design, Matter, and Adornment, but to the King's
Monuments, not second to any; the relation of it will not perhaps seem tedious,
out of respect to the Memory of the Grandfather, and Piety of the Grandchild.

105. Saint Dominicks Convent of Bemfica is two Miles from Lisbone, Where they
now are.
named so, from a Neighboring Village. 'Twas always in the possession of the
Kings of Portugal, where for the freshness of the Air, they had a
Country House, which they went to for Diversion of business, or the exercise of
Hunting. King John the First, finding himself indebted to God for so many
Victories, amongst other Acts of Thanksgiving, gave this Palace to the order of
Saint Dominick, with the Adjacent grounds, Gardens and Orchards, the twenty
second of May, one thousand three hundred ninety and nine, for the Founding a
Convent, which was not only Founded but Augmented by our Kings. The Founder
obliged himself, by his Letters Patents (preserved in the Archives of the
Convent) to protect, and defend the cause, the persons, and goods of the
Religious, Sollicitous in God's cause, Courageous in his own. King John the
Second endowed it with a great Revenue, which the House now enjoys under the
Name of the Fifth of the Islands, without imposing any new Obligation, which
might render the Alms less Liberal, or Acceptable; the King Dom Emanuel, though
Distracted with greater Cares and Buildings, left in the Sacrifices of this
Temple, a Religious memory, ordering that twice in a Week should be Sung two
Masses to the Angels, in the behalf of those who were at Sea; this was in that
Age the Astrolabe of his Discoveries, and the Abetter of the Victories in the
East. The Queen Dona Katherina, looked upon this House as her private Chapel,
offering here from her own Oratory, Relics of Veneration, and Value, amongst
others, in a great Silver Cross a piece of the holy Cross, which offering from
Royal hands does assure the Certainty of so inestimable a present; Our Princes
conferring on this House temporal and spiritual benefits. King Philip the
Second, augmented with an honorable Alms, those it before enjoyed. This
Convent has always been for the strictest observers of the Religion, who under
the name of Recolets allow no Swerving or Indulgence from the first
institution; hither as to a School of Virtues, use to retire the most eminent
of the Order, some to avoid, others to be at rest after their Prelacies, in a
holy leisure to be untaken up but by God, and to reform their Affections.

106. In this Convent, Illustrious for its Foundation, and Discipline, rest the
Victorious Ashes of Dom John de Castro, in a Chapel, and Monument of a
Religious greatness. The Chapel is Consecrated by the name of Corpus Christi,
has the great Door into the Cloister of the Convent, and over that in a
Scutcheon of Relieve the Arms of the Founder; the wideness of the Door takes in
forty Palms, the height above seventy, a proportion the Architects name Dupla,
and the work is Dorick. It Is only of one Isle of polish't Marble, the Pavement
also is of diverse Colored and Polish't stones; there goes about it within, a
well-orderded, and proportionable Pedestal, which sustains the Decency of an
uniform Building; it contains six Arches (with Pilastres between) upon their
Bases, and with their Capitals; there goes also a Cornish round about, it has
six Windows, proportionable to the rest of the Architecture. On the high Altar
is a Tabernacle, (in which is always kept the blessed Sacrament, lighted by two
silver Lamps) behind it an Altar-piece, both of Carved work, with great Flowers
all Gilded, and on the top, a Picture of our Savior's last Supper; behind the
high Altar, and Altar-piece is the Quire for the Novices, for whose better
Breeding, and Service of God, is made a House with twenty Cells, and diverse
Offices which form the Body of a distinct Convent. The Roof of the Chapel above
the Finishment of the Cornish is also of Stone, divided into Compartments with
rich Mouldings. Of the six Arches which make the whole, the two first are on
the plain of the Altar; on the Gospel-side is a Door goes up to the top of the
Building, and the Founder's Lodgings; on the side of the Epistle, is an other
goes into the Sachristy. The other four are taken up with four costly
Monuments, with Urns of Burnish't stones which rest on the Backs of Elephants
of black Marble.

107. In the first Arch which joins to the plain of the Altar, on the
Gospel-side is the Monument of Dom John de Castro, in which before 'twas closed
were laid his Bones with the following Epitaph.

D. JOANNES DE CASTRO XX. PRO RELIGIONE IN UTRAQUE MAURITANIA STIPENDIIS
FACTIS; NAVATA STRENUE OPERA THUNETANO BELLO; MARI RUBRO FELICIBUS ARMIS
PENETRATO; DEBELLATIS INTER EUPHRATEM ET INDUM NATIONIBUS; GEDROSICO REGE, PER
SIS, TUR CIS UNO PRAELIO FUSIS; SERVATO DIO, IMO REIPUB. REDDITO, DORMIT IN
MAGNUM DIEM, NON SIBI, SED DEO TRIUMPHATOR, PUB. LICIS LACHRIMIS COMPOSITUS,
PUBLICO SUMPTU PRAE PAUPER TATE FUNERATUS, OBIIT VIII. ID. JUNII ANNO 1548.
AETATIS 48. Under the Arch adjoining to this, rest the Bones of his Wife Dona
Leonor Coutinho.

108. On the Epistle-side of the Altar, under an Arch over against that where
is Dom John de Castro's Monument, rests his Son Dom Alvaro, where his Bones
were put in the same manner, on him is writ this following Epitaph.

D. ALVARUS DE CASTRO MAGNI JOANNIS PRIMO-GENITUS, CUI PENE AB INFANTIA
DISCRIMINUM SOCIUS, PUGNARUM PRAECURSOR, TRIUMPHORUM CONSORS, AEMULUS
FORTITUDINIS, HAERES VIRTUTUM, NON OPUM: REGUM PROSTATOR: IN SINAI VERTIGE
EQUES FELICITER INAUGURATUS; A REGE SEBASTIANO SUMMIS REGNI AUCTUS HONORIBUS;
BIS ROMAE, SEMEL CASTELLAE, GALLIAE, SABAUDIAE LEGATIONE PERFUNCTUS, OBIIT IV.
KALEND. SEPTEMBER. ANNO 1575. AETATIS SUAE 50. In the next Arch to this lies his
Wife Dona Anna de Attayde, under the Body of the Chapel is made a Vault, with
six stone Arches, in one of which is an Altar to celebrate Mass, the rest have
Repartments for the Bones, and Bodies of the Dead.

109. The Bishop, Inquisitor General, Founder of this Chapel, gave (for the
maintenance of those Religious who are to perform the Duties of it) to the
Convent of Bemfica two hundred and forty thousand The Portuguese keep their
accounts in the least Money they have, which are Reis, whereof 400. made a
Crusade, which is worth 3 s. 6 d.
Reis yearly, to be paid out of the Chamber of this City of Lisbone, which are
thus distributed. One hundred and twenty thousand Reis for three Masses to be
daily Celebrated; fifty (though given before) for the Anniversaries he shall
appoint in his Will; forty; for the Fabric and providing the Chapel; thirty,
for supplying the necessities of those Religious men who reside in the
Novic^ate for the looking to, and cleaning the Chapel; which besides this, he
Adorned with many rich and devout Pieces, and gave to the Sachristy all things
necessary for Divine Worship, as well Ornaments for Holy Days as Work-days,
Linning, Candlesticks of all sizes, Lamps, and other such like necessaries, all
in abundance and perfection.

110. Dom John de Castro, Dom John de Castro'^ Family.
as Illustrious for his Family, as Virtues, was Born in Lisbone the 27th. of
February of the year one thousand five hundred; He was second Son to Dom Alvaro
de Castro, Governor of the House of Civil, and to Dona Leonor de Noronha, the
Daughter of Dom John de Almeyda second Earl of Abrantes; Grandchild to Dom
Garcia de Castro, who was Brother to Dom Alvaro de Castro, the first Earl of
Monsanto, these two were Sons to Dom Fernando de Castro, Grandchildren to Dom
Pedro de Castro, and great Grandchildren to Dom Alvaro Pirez de Castro, Earl
of Arrayolos; and first Constable of Portugal, Brother to the Queen Dona Inez
de Castro, Wife to King Dom Pedro the Cruel. This Constable, was Son to Dom
Pedro Fernandez de Castro, called (in Castile) the Man of War, who coming into
this Kingdom, begun here the Illustrious house of the Castros, which has
preserved it self in so much greatness; Dom Pedro by the Male line descended
from the Infant Dom Fernando, Son to King Dom Garcia of Navarre, who Married
Dona Maria Alvarez de Castro, the only Daughter of the Earl Alvaro Fanhez
Minaya, the fifth Grandchild in descent from Lain Calvo, from whom this Family
derives its beginning. Dom John de Castro when very young Married Dona Leonor
Coutinho his Cousin-German once removed, greater for her Quality, then Portion,
with whom retiring to the Town of Almada, he by an Antidated old Age avoided
the ambition of the Court; He went to serve at Tangiers, where he gave the
first, but extraordinary proofs of his Courage, though of his Actions there, we
have more from his Fame then our Knowledge. He returned to Court, re-call'd by
the King Dom John the third, and the Kingdom being too narrow for his
Gallantry went to India with Dom Garcia de Noronha; He accompanied Dom Estevaon
de Gama in his expedition to the Mouth of the Red Sea, and made a Journal of
his Voyage, a useful and acceptable work to Seamen. On his return to Portugal
he retired to his Country House at Sintra, recreating himself by Reading, in
his Solitudes, and employments always Exemplary; He put on his Sword again to
follow the Eagles of Charles the Emperor in the Battle of Tunez, where he
raised his name with new Glory; when this design was over, hiding himself from
his own Fame, he again retired to Sintra, knowing how to avoid, not keep
himself from employments. The King Dom John made him Admiral of the Navy of the
Coast, a Service where his Courage was answered by Success; He went last of all
to Govern India, where, by the Victories we have related, he secured, and
brought into reputation the State. When the designs of War spared him, he in a
large Card described all the Coast betwixt Goa, and Dio, marking the Flats, and
Shelves, the height of the Pole in which the Cities lie; the depth of Water,
Anchoring, and Creeks which form the Havens; the Trade-winds, and Nature of
those Seas; the force of the Currents, the swiftness of Rivers, disposing the
Lines in different Tables, all, with so minute and exact Geography, as only
this Work might serve to make him Famous, if he were not so eminently, for his
great Fortitude. He looked the same in his streights at Home, and prosperity in
the East, appearing always the same Man in diverse Fortunes; his Ambition was
to deserve all things, and ask nothing; He equally did reason and justice to
all men, unbyast in his Punishments, but so Justifiable, that the Complaints
were more against the Law then Minister. He was free to the Soldiers, sparing
to his Children, showing more civility in his Office, then Nature; He used with
a great deal of Ceremony the Actions of his Predecessors, honoring even those
he put not in practice; without prostituting his Civility, he preserved his
Respect. He appeared above the Great ones, and Father of the Meanest; such was
his Life, as by that, more then by Punishments, he reformed extravagancies; his
first Zeal was always in God's cause, then in the States; he past no Virtue
without Reward, some Vices without Punishment; amending not a few, some by
Favors, others by Clemency. John de Barro' s Hist. of India, Dec. 6. Lib. 1.
Page 4.
The presents he received from the Prince of Asia, he put to the King's
Revenue, a Virtue all praised, few imitated; the maimed Soldiers found him
Sollicitous in their Cure, and Compassionate of their Condition; He obliged
every one, yet seemed obnoxious to all; He kept the Soldiers (as what would
prove the Ruin of the State) from Merchandising; He set upon no Action, which
he did not atchieve, being ready in Execution, mature in Counsel: amidst the
employments of a Soldier, he preserved the virtues of a Religious man, was
frequent in visiting Temples, a great honourer of Churchmen, merciful and
liberal to the Poor; had great Devotion to the Cross of Christ, which he
Reverenced in its Figure, by a low inclination without any difference of time
or place; and so Religiously was he fired with the Worship of this most holy
Representative, as he rather chose to Build a Temple to its Memory, then raise
a House to his Posterity, leaving it on his Fatherly blessing to his Son Dom
Alvaro, that if he found in the favor, or justice of the King, any recompense
for his Services, he should with that Build a Convent for the Franciscan
Recollets in the Mountain of Sintra, and name the House The invocation of the
Holy Cross. Dom Alvaro de Castro, Heir apparent to the virtues of so pious a
Father, gave order for Building the Convent, not so great for the Majesty of
the Pile, as for the Sanctity of the Penitents who Inhabit there. Being the
first time sent from King Dom Sebastian Ambassador to Pope Pius the Fourth, he
obtained of him to privilege the Altar of the Convent for all Masses, and on
the day of the Invention of the Cross, Plenary indulgence to all those who
prayed for the pressing necessities of the Church, and designedly for the Soul
of Dom John de Castro; so singular and unusual a grace as we have not known
granted to Sovereign Princes. It is apparent, the Fame of his Victories was as
loud in Italy, as that of his Virtues, attested by so Illustrious a testimony
from the Vicar of Christ; for these and other Virtues we believe he now enjoys
in Heaven nobler Palms in a more eminent Triumph. He had three Sons, His
Children.
who all exposed themselves to the dangers of War, as their Fathers blessing;
Dom Miguel the Youngest, who in the Reign of King Dom Sebastian went to the
Indies, and Died in the Government of Malaca; Dom Fernando burnt in the Mine at
Dio; Dom Alvaro, The praise of Dom Alvaro de Castro.
with whom he seem^d to share his Palms and Victories, the Son and Companion
of his Fame, who returning to the Kingdom without any other Riches then the
Wounds he received in the War, Married Dona Anna de Attayde, Daughter to Dom
Lewis de Castro Lord of the House of Monsanto; He was a particular Favorite to
King Dom Sebastian, entrusted by him in the greatest Affairs and places of the
Kingdom, went on diverse Embassies to Castile, France, Rome, and Savoy: Was of
the Council of State, and sole Superintendent of the Exchequer, and in the
midst of so eminent Offices, Died Poor, though he Deceast a Favorite.

The END.
An Index of the Most Observable things in this History.
A.
Adem.
A City of Arabia, the Situation, lib. 4. number. 73. page 242. Rax Soliman
seiseth on it by Treachery, lib. 4. number. 74. page 243. Is succeeded by Marzaon
ibid. The Inhabitants offer it to the King of Campar ibid. He desires aid, and
offers a Fortress there to Dom Manoel de Lima, lib. 4. number. 76. page 245. The
Inhabitants receive Dom Payo de Noronha, who comes to relieve them, lib. 4.
number. 79. page 245. Being forsaken by him, they give notice of it to the
Governor, lib. 4. number. 80. page 246. The Gallantry of some Portuguese in this
War, lib. 4. number. 84. page 248. The Turks besiege the City, lib. 4. number. 86.
page 249. They enter by Treachery, lib. 4. number. 87. page 250. How the Arabbs
forsaken by us, behave themselves, lib. 4. number. 87. page 249.
Dom Affonso de Noronha.
Governor of Ceita, lib. 1. number. 25. page 13. He receives Dom John de Castro
with great ceremony, lib. 1. number. 30. page 17.
Agacaim.
The Governor Dom John de Castro arrives at the City, lib. 4. number. 62. page
237. Falls upon the Inhabitants, lib. 4. number. 63. page 238. They fly, lib. 4.
number. 64. page 238. Dom Alvaro de Castro persues them, lib. 4. number. 65. page
238. They face about, lib. 4. number. 66. ibid. Their General falls, lib. 4. number.
66. page 239.
Dom Alvaro Bacaon.
Admiral of the Emperors Navy, lib. 1. number. 25. page 13. Visits Dom John de
Castro on Board, lib. 1. number. 28. page 15. They discouse about the Fight ibid.
Resolve to engage ibid. Dom Alvaro changes his Opinion, lib. 1. number. 28. page
16.
Dom Alvaro de Castro.
Goes to the Indies with his Father, lib. 1. number. 17. page 8. Is Knighted by
Dom Estevaon da Gama, lib. 1. number. 20. page 10. Returns with his Father to the
Kingdom, lib. 1. number. 21. page 10. Goes to relieve Alcacer Ceguer, lib. 1.
number. 30. page 17. Goes again to India with his Father, lib. 1. number. 37. page
20. Goes against Hidalcaon, lib. 1. number. 59. page 38. Sets Sail with six Ships,
lib. 1. number. 60. page 38. The prize he takes ibid. After destroying the City of
Cambre, returns for Goa, lib. 1. number. 65. page 42. Goes with relief to Dio,
lib. 2. number. 88. page 108. The Commanders who go with him ibid. The
difficulties of the Voyage, lib. 2. number. 122. page 127. Is forced back to
Bacaim ibid. Sets forth from thence for Dio, lib. 2. number. 125. page 130. Is
forced back again, lib. 2. number. 156. p. 148. Sets Sail again, and puts in at
Agacaim, lib. 2. number. 158. page 14^. Takes a Ship belonging to Cambaya ibid.
Arrives at Dio with forty Ships ibid. His reception by the Commander ibid.
Takes his Post on the Work, where his Brother Dom Fernando was Killed, page
150. Advises his Father of the state of the Fortress, lib. 2. number. 159. page
150. Is against the Soldiers Sallying forth on the Enemy, lib. 2. number. 162.
page 152. But seeing their resolution bears them company, lib. 2. number. 163.
page 152. His Courage and Discipline, lib. 2. number. 166. page 153. He gets upon
the Wall, and being hurt with a stone falls down as Dead, page 154. Refuses a
great Ransom offered him by Rumecaon for a Janizary Captain, lib. 2. number. 179.
page 161. The Governor, being arrived at Dio, gives him 800 Portuguese for the
Fight, lib. 3. number. 14. page 178. His Courage in the Action, lib. 3. number. 17.
page 183. The danger he is in, lib. 3. number. 22. page 185. He enters the City,
page 186. The Governor his Father makes him a Commander against Hidalcaon,
lib. 4. number. 38. page 226. He fights in the Vanguard with extraordinary
Courage, lib. 4. number. 41. page 227. Makes the Enemy fly ibid. Goes to Dio with
his Father the Governor, lib. 4. number. 43. page 228. Goes to Surat, lib. 4.
number. 44. page 229. Sends Dom Iorge de Menezes to get Intelligence, lib. 4. number.
45. ibid. And after him other Commanders, lib. 4. number. 46. page 230. He enters
Dabul, and takes the City, lib. 4. number. 61. page 236. He sets upon the Enemy in
Morgaon, lib. 4. number. 63. page 237. They fly, and he persueth, lib. 4. number. 67.
page 239. He destroys an other City called Dabul, lib. 4. number. 70. page 240.
Goes with relief to Adem, lib. 4. number. 82. page 240. The Fleet he carries, 247.
The success of the Voyage, lib. 4. number. 89. page 250. Calls a Council, and what
is resolved, page 251. Falls upon Xael, lib. 4. number. 90. ibid. Gets the
Fortress, and return to Goa, lib. 4. number. 92. page 252. The praise of Dom
Alvaro de Castro, lib. 4. number. 110. page 272.
Dom Antonio de Attayde.
Goes from Bacaim, lib. 3. number. 139. page 138. Arrives at Goa, lib. 2. number.
143. page 141.
Antonio do Casal.
In the Battle of Dio encourages the Soldiers by holding up a Crucifix, lib.
3. number. 22. page 185.
Antonio Correa.
Sallies out of the Fortress of Dio, to take some of the Enemies, lib. 2. number.
150. page 145. Sets upon 12. Moors, who take him Prisoner ibid. Is carried
before Rumecaon, lib. 2. number. 151. page 146. Who persuades him to change his
Religion ibid. The affronts they put upon him, lib. 2. number. 152. page 146. He
is beheaded for his Religion, ib. p. 147. The Moors in scorn and derision show
our men his Head ibid. Our Soldiers set up the Head of a Moor to confront
Antonio Correa's, lib. 2. number. 153. page 147.
Antonio Moniz Barretto.
Is content to go with a Carvel of Provisions to Dio, lib. 2. number. 92. page
110. Arrives at Bacaim, lib. 2. number. 123. page 127. His Courage in saving the
Carvel, page 128. Goes for Dio ibid. The difficulties of the Voyage, lib. 2.
number. 124. page 129. Arrives at the Fortress ibid. The brave Jealousy betwixt
him and Garcia Rodriguez de Tavora ibid. His Valor on several occasions, lib.
2. n. 130. 134. 167. 169. p. 133. 135. 155. 158. Is incited by a Soldier, whom
he got released from the Service, and brought with him for Portugal, lib. 2.
number. 148. page 144. Goes to look out for the Ships of Cambaya, and takes some
of them, lib. 3. number. 35. page 197. Goes to Candea to further the Conversion of
that King, lib. 4. number. 4. page 205. His Voyage, lib. 4. number. 10. page 209.
Arrives at Candea, and finds things changed ibid. Endeavors to return, lib. 4.
number. 17. page 210. Is fallen upon by the Enemies, lib. 4. number. 13. ibid. The
difficulties of his March, lib. 4. number. 13. page 211. His prudence in
moderating the Soldiers, lib. 4. number. 14. ibid. His bravery in Fighting, lib.
4. number. 15. page 212. He retreats ibid. Upon a Letter from the King of Candea
would return, lib. 4. number. 17. page 213. The Soldiers are against it ibid. He
gets to his Fleet ibid. Returns to Dio with the Governor, lib. 4. number. 43.
page 228. Goes to Adem with Dom Alvaro, to be Commander of the Fortress to be
Built there, lib. 4. number. 82. page 247. His Courage at Xael, lib. 4. number. 91.
page 252.
Dom Antonio de Noronha.
Son to the Viceroy Dom Garcia, Ships himself for Dio, with 60. Soldiers at
his own charge, lib. 3. number. 4. page 169. Takes some of the Mecca Fleet, lib.
4. number. 71. page 241. Goes to Adem with Dom Alvaro, lib. 4. number. 82. page 247.
His Valor at Xael, lib. 4. number. 91. page 252.
Antonio Pecanha.
Commander of Saint Georges work in Dio, lib. 2. number. 32. page 78. His Courage
in Fighting, lib. 2. number. 73. page 100. Is one of the five Soldiers who
stoutly resist the Enemy, lib. 2. number. 119. page 124.
Antote.
A City destroyed by Dom Manoel de Lima, lib. 3. number. 7. page 174.
Athanasio Freire.
Going for Dio run on Shore hard by Surat, and was carried before Sultan
Mahamud, lib. 2. number. 156. page 148.
Azedecaon.
One of Hidalcaon 's Commanders, lib. 1. number. 53. page 32. Routed by the
Governor Dom John de Castro, lib. 1. number. 55. page 33.

B.
Balsora.
IN Arabia the Happy, its description, lib. 3. number. 36. page 197. The Turks
fortify themselves in it, page 198.
Barba-Rosla.
A famous Pirat, lib. 1. number. 9. page 3. Persuades the Turk to make War upon
Christendom, lib. 1. number. 23. page 11. Comes with a Fleet toward the
Streights, lib. 1. number. 28. page 15. Seeing Dom John de Castro 's resolution
alters his course, lib. 1. number. 29. page 16.
Baroche.
Its situation and strength, lib. 4. number. 5. page 206. The Trade of the
Inhabitants ibid. Madre Maluco Lord of it ibid. Dom Iorge de Menezes enters it,
and sets it on fire, lib. 4. number. 6. ibid. Madre Maluco comes too late to its
help, lib. 4. number. 7. page 207. Dom Alvaro coming in sight of it, the Fortress
is quitted, lib. 4. number. 55. page 234.
Bastion.
The great Ruins of Saint James 's Bastion, lib. 2. number. 54. page 89.
Coge-Sofar raises a great Work before Saint Thomas 's, which does much Damage
it, lib. 2. number. 56. page 90. Juzarcaon falls upon Saint John's, lib. 2. number.
67. page 90. And Rumecaon upon Saint Thomas 's, lib. 2. number. 68. page 96. The
Turks enter the Work, lib. 2. number. 75. page 101. It Is reported to be taken,
lib. 2. number. 76. page 101. The Enemy makes a Bastion over against Saint James
's, lib. 2. number. 93. page 111. Our men throw it down, lib. 2. number. 94. page
111. The Turks get upon Saint Thomas 's, lib. 2. number. 102. page 116. The Enemy
falls upon Saint James 's, lib. 2. number. 128. page 132. And upon Saint John 's,
and retires, lib. 2. number. 135. page 136. The Enemy plants three Colors on St.
James 's, lib. 2. number. 137. page 137. Here they fought Courageously, lib. 2.
number. 141. page 140. Saint Thomas 's work fallen upon, lib. 2. number. 147. page
143. The success in Saint James 's, lib. 2. number. 138. page 138.
Beard.
The Governor pawns some hairs of his Beard to the City of Goa, for the
Building up again the Fortress of Dio, lib. 3. number. 29. page 189. The Citizens
of Goa return them, lib. 3. number. 30. page 192. Where, and how they are
preserved to this day ibid.
Bento Barbosa.
One of the five Soldiers who stoutly resisted the Enemies in Dio, lib. 2.
number. 119. page 124.
Bernardim de Sousa.
Commander of the Molucos, lib. 2. number. 28. page 215. He carries with him
Cachil Aeyro ibid. They arrive at Ternate, lib. 4. number. 12. ibid.
Bertholomew Correa.
One of the five Soldiers who Courageously kept off the Enemy in Dio, lib. 2
number. 119. page.. 124.

C.
Cachil Aeyro.
THe Governor invests him in the Crown of Maluco, lib. 2. number. 12. page 65.
Goes a Prisoner to Goa, by order from Jordaon de Freitas. lib. 4. number. 20. page
215. The Governor absolves him ibid. Returns to Ternate with Bernardim de
Sousa, lib. 4. number. 21. ibid. Is restored ibid.
Calabatecaon.
A stout Turk of Dalmatia, lib. 4. number. 57. page 235. One of Hidalcaon's
Commanders ibid. Retires from Agacaim, where the Governor enters, lib. 4. number.
64. page 238. Returns to put his men in order, lib. 4. number. 66. ibid. Is killed
by Diogo de Almeyda, page 239.
Cambre.
Dom Alvaro resolves to enter Cambre, lib. 1. number. 61. page 39. Resolves to
invest it ibid. Goes on Shore, page 40. The greatness and strength of the
place, lib. 1. number. 62. page 40. Resistance of the Enemy, lib. 1. number. 63. page
41. The City is at last wonn, lib. 1. number. 64. ibid. Its destruction, and
pillage, page 42.
Campar.
The King of Campar accepts the Subjection, offered him by the Inhabitants of
Adem, lib. 4. number. 75. page 244. Sends men against the Tyrant Marzaon ibid.
Enters the City by agreement, lib. 4. number. 76. ibid. Goes out afterward
against the Tyrant, and Dies in the Battle, lib. 4. n. 77. p. 245.
Candea.
A Kingdom in the Island of a Zeilan, lib. 4. number. 2. page 205. The King
receives the Preaching of the Gospel ibid. Is inconstant, but the Friars
encourage him, lib. 4. number. 3. ibid. The King of Cotta disswades him from
changing his Religion, lib. 4. n. 8. p. 208. The King of Candea consents, lib.
4. number. 9. page 209. Afterward repents of what he has done, lib. 4. number. 16.
page 212.
Charles the fifth, Emperor.
Resolves to find out Barba-Rossa, lib. 1. number. 9. page 4. A pass of Civility
betwixt him and the Infant Dom Lewis, lib. 1. n. 12. p. 6. Would have Knighted
Dom John de Castro, but he excused it, lib. 1. number. 13. page 7. His reward to
the Commanders of the Fleet, which Dom John refuses, lib. 1. ibid. Advises
the King Dom John of the designs of the Turk, lib. 1. n. 24. p. 13. Asks
supplies of him to resist him, lib. 1. number. 25. page 13.
Catherina de Sousa.
Writes to the Governor, and offers him her Jewels for the carrying on the
War, lib. 2. number. 91. page 109.
Caxem.
The King of Caxem sends for help to the Governor, lib. 4. number. 83. page 247.
The Governor sends Dom John de Attayde with four Ships. ibid.
Cealaon.
The King Dom John the third sends some Franciscan Friars to preach the Gospel
in Zeilan, lib. 4. number. 1. page 204.
Coge-Sofar.
Persuades Mahomet King of Cambaya to take Dio from the Portuguese, lib. 2.
number. 3. page 54. Who this Moor was, lib. 2. n. 4. ibid. How he came to Cambaya,
lib. 2. number. 6. page 56. His arguments for the design of Dio, lib. 2. number. 7.
page 57. His proposition to the Commander of the Fortress, lib. 2. number. 21.
page 70. He strives to gain it by treachery, lib. 2. number. 24. He comes to Dio
with an Army, lib. 2. number. 25. page 73. His Ammunition and Provision, lib. 2.
number. 27. page 74. His Speech to his men, lib. 2. n. 28. ibid. He makes
propositions again to the Commander of the Fortress, lib. 2. number. 29. page 75.
Recruits come to him, lib. 2. n. 34. p. 79. He begins to Batter the Fortress,
lib. 2. number. 35. page 80. The stratagem he laid in a Ship, lib. 2. number. 36.
ibid. Which the Portuguese defeat, lib. 2. number. 37. page 81. He continues his
Battery, lib. 2. number. 38, 39. 48. 51. page 82. 86. 88. He makes an Oath to take
Dio, or perish in the design, lib. 2. number. 53. page 89. He Dies with a Musket
shot, lib. 2. number. 60. page 92.
Compassion.
The Compassion of the Governor Dom John de Castro, lib. 1. number. 37. page 20.
number. 38. page 21. lib. 4. number. 54. page 234. number. 100. page 262.
Cotta.
A Kingdom in the Island of Zeilan, lib. 4. number. 1. page 204. The King
receives the Franciscans ibid. It dissuaded from changing his Religion, lib. 4.
number. 8. page 208.
Cross.
The Governor Dom John de Castro's Veneration to the Holy Cross, lib. 1. number.
56. page 33. The finding the Cross of St. Thomas, lib. 1. number. 57. page 34. The
miracle of that Cross ibid. How the Governor was affected at the News, lib. 1.
number. 58. page 37.

D.
Dabul.
A City of Hidalcaon 's, lib. 4. number. 60. page 236. Entered and Destroyed by
the Governor and his Son Dom Alvaro, lib. 4. number. 61. page 236.
Dabul the upper.
Another City of the same name Destroyed by the Governor and his Son, lib. 4.
number. 70. page 240.
Dio.
The description of the Island, lib. 2. number. 26. page 73. Coge-Sofar begins to
Batter the Fortress, lib. 2. number. 35. page 80. The Enemies command the Ditch,
lib. 2. number. 48. page 86. A postern found in the Fortress, by which the
Commander repairs some Breaches, lib. 2. number. 59. p. 92. After that he Shuts it
up, lib. 2. number. 61. page 93. The scarcity in the Fortress, lib. 2. number. 62.
ibid. The courage and resistance of the Portuguese, lib. 2. number. 69. page 97.
Another Assault, lib. 2. n. 73. p. 100. The Turks get upon the Church, where
Dom John Mascarenhas goes to help, lib. 2. number. 81. page 104. They fight there
with great Courage ibid. The Enemies retire, lib. 2. n. 82. p. 104. Many of
them Dye, lib. 2. n. 84. p. 106. The Valor of fourteen Portuguese Soldiers,
lib. 2. number. 95. page 112. A general Assault, lib. 2. n. 96. p. 113. How the
Portuguese prevent the fire, lib. 2. number. 97. ibid. The Enemy retires, lib. 2.
n. 99. p. 114. With what loss ibid. Another assault, lib. 2. n. 102. p. 116.
The Portuguese' s resistance, lib. 2. number. 103. ibid. The great loss of the
Enemies, lib. 2. number. 105. page 117. The wants of the Fortress, lib. 2. number.
106. page 148. What provision they make in the want of Pots of Powder, lib. 2.
number. 108. ibid. The Enemy makes as if he would give another Assault, lib. 2.
number. 114. page 121. Notable courage of five Soldiers, lib. 2. number. 116. page
123. Their names, lib. 2. number. 119. page 124. The Portuguese repair the Mines,
lib. 2. number. 126. page 130. The Enemy gives another Assault, lib. 2. number. 134.
page 135. The Portuguese's stout resistance, ibid. The danger in which they
are, lib. 2. n. 137. p. 137. n. 142. p. 141. The defend the Breachers of the
Mine, lib. 2. number. 145. page 142. The extremity the Fortress is in, lib. 2.
number. 155. page 148. The resolution of the Portuguese to Sally out and find the
Enemy, lib. 2. number. 161. page 151. They go on in their Resolution against the
opinion of the Commanders, lib. 2. number. 163. page 152. Their last Sally, and
their Order, lib. 2. number. 164. page 153. The Enemies resistance, lib. 2. number.
165. ibid. The Portuguese's loss in this Disorder, lib. 2. number. 170. page 155.
After this the Portuguese take fourteen Vessels carrying Provisions to the
Enemy, lib. 2. number. 179. page 167. The unfortunate Gallantry of three
Portuguese Soldiers, lib. 3. number. 15. page 181. The Victory, lib. 3. number. 25.
page 187. The number of the Enemies loss, lib. 3. number. 27. page 188. The Booty
and Plunder of the Castle, lib. 3. number. 28. ibid. A Canon brought from Dio and
put into Saint Gilians ibid. The number of the De^d, page 189. The Governor
re-builds the Fortress, lib. 3. n. 29. ibid. n. 31. p. 194. Dom John
Mascarenhas leaves the place, and the Governor entrusts it with Lewis Falcaon,
lib. 4. number. 53. page 233.
Don Diogo de Almeyda Freire.
Commander in Chief in Goa, lib. 2. number. 180. page 162. Is against the
Governors resolution of going to Dio, ibid. He remains in the Government in
his absence, lib. 3. number. 1. page 167. Visits him at Sea when he returns, lib.
3. number. 39. page 199. Is sent by the Governor against (...) lib. 4. n. 19. p.
214. n. 32. p. 222. Comes to the Fortress ^f Rachal ibid. Where he retires his
men ibid. Goes out against Hidalcaon, lib. 4. number. 38. page 226. Destres to do
so upon an other occasion, lib. 4. number. 58. page 235. The City hinders him,
ibid. He advises the Governor, lib. 4. number. 59. page 236. Who stays for him
at Agacaim, lib. 4. number. 62. page 237. He kills the Enemies General, lib. 4.
number. 36. page 239. He continues in the Country Salsete with some Horse, lib.
4. number. 69. page 240. The Viceroy resigns the Government of the State to him
and the Bishop, lib. 4. number. 101. page 263.
Diogo de Anaya.
A famous Action of his, in getting intelligence from the Enemy, lib. 2. n. 52.
p. 81.
Diogo de Reynoso.
The Governor recommends his Son Dom Fernando to him, lib. 2. number. 30. page
77. He helps in Saint Thomas's work, lib. 2. number. 100. page 119. His too great
Courage is the occasion of the loss of a great many men in the Ruin, lib. 2.
number. 115. page 122.
Diogo Soarez de Mello.
Being in Patane, is sent for by Simaon de Mello to come to Melaca, lib. 4. n.
43. p. 216. Whether he goes, lib. 4. number. 24. page 351. He goes out with Don
Francisco d' Eca against the King of Achem, lib. 4. number. 25. page 217. He
pacifi^th the mutiny of the Soldiers, lib. 4. number. 26. page 218. He makes the
Enemies Admiral Galley yield, lib. 4. number. 27. page 219.
St. Dominicks de Bemfica.
A (...) near Lisbone, lib. 4. number. 105. page 265. The Bishop (...) General
Builds a rich Chapel there, lib. 4. number. 106. page 266. (...) And Dom Alvaro de
Castro 's lib. 4. number. 108. page 268.
Dom Duarte de Menezes.
Governor of Tangier, lib. 1. n. 3. p. 2. Knights Dom John de Castro, lib. 1.
number. 5. ibid. Informs the King of his deserts, ibid. Goes from Bacaim, lib. 2.
n. 139. p. 138. Arrives at Dio. lib. 2. n. 140. p. 139. His Valor in the
Fight, lib. 2. number. 169. page 155. A Duel between Dom John Manoel, and John
Falcaon, and how stoutly they behaved themselves against the Enemy, lib. 3.
number. 16. page 182.
Dom Estavaon da Gama.
Succeeds Dom Garcia de Noronha in the Goment of India, lib. 1. number. 18. page
8. Goes to the Red Sea, lib. 1. n. 19. p. 9. Knights Dom Alvaro de Castro, lib.
1. number. 20. page 10.

F.
Fausto Serraon de Calvos.
THe witty answer he gives to the Governor, lib. 4. number. 48. page 231.
Fernaon Carvallo.
Sends to get Intelligence by order from the Commander of Dio, lib. 2. n. 50.
p. 87. Advises the Governor what he saw amongst the Enemies, lib. 2. number. 7.
page 99.
Dom Fernando de Castro.
Goes to India with the Governor his Father, lib. 1. number. 35. page 19. Goes
with Relief to Dio, lib. 2. number. 30. page 76. Arrives at the Fortress, lib. ^.
number. 40. page 83. His Reception by the Commander, lib. 2. number. 41. ibid. He
asks him leave to Sally out against the (...) Enemy, which he denies him, lib.
2. number. 46. page 86. His C^^^age, lib. 2. number. 98. page 1^4. (...) sick he goes
to help in Saint Thomas's work, lib. 2. number. 11^. page 1^^. He dies in the
Blowing up of a mine with other Gentlemen, lib. 2. n. 125. p. 122. Where his
Body is laid, lib. 2. number. 120. page 125. The Governor commands his Bones to
be taken up, to pawn them to the City of Goa, but in vain, lib. 3. number. 29.
page 189.
Fernaon Perez.
Is the first who scales Xael against the Fartaques, lib. 4. number. 90. page 252.
Fernaon de Sousa.
Is sent by the Governor to Maluco, lib. 2. number. 14. page 66. Answers the
Letters of de Ruy Lopez de Villalobos Commander of the Castillians, lib. 2. n.
15. p. 67. n. 17. p. 68, Goes in Person to parley with him, lib. 2. ib. Their
agreement. ibid. His behavior, upon the Castillian's breaking his word, lib.
2. number. 20. page 69.
Dom Francisdo d' Eca.
Goes from Malaca against the King of Achem. Commanded by Simaon de Mello, lib.
4. number. 25. page 217. Hears where he is, and has a mind to follow him, lib. 4.
number. 26. page 218. The Soldiers mutiny ibid. He comes in sight of the Enemy,
lib. 4. number. 27. page 218.
Francisco Guilherme.
Goes from Bacaim, lib. 2. n. 139. p. 138. Arrives at Dio, lib. 2. n. 143. p.
141.
Francisco de Mello.
Governor of the Fortress of Rachol, lib. 4. number. 38. page 226. He sends to
the Governor to join with him against Hidalcaon ibid.
Dom Francisco de Menezes.
Goes with Relief to Dio, lib. 2. number. 87. page 108. Arrives at Bacaim, lib. 2.
n. 122. p. 127. Afterward at Agacaim, lib. 2. number. 158. page 149. His Courage
in Dio, lib. 2. n. 160. p. 151. He is against the Portuguese resolution of
Sallying, lib. 2. number. 162. page 152. Goes along with them in the Sally, lib.
2. number. 164. page 153. He Died by a Bullet, lib. 2. n. 168. p. 154.
Francisco Vieira.
And Manoel Pereira another Soldier of fortune stay in Adem, upon the
departure of Dom Payo, and Fight stoutly, lib. 4. n. 86. p. 249. They save a
Prince in the Defeat, whom they carried to Campar, lib. 4. n. 87. p. 250.
Saint Francisco Xavier.
A faithful Labourer in the Vineyard of our Savior, lib. 1. number. 71. page 50.
He quiets the people of Malaca, lib. 4. number. 30. page 220. He fore-tells the
Victory, and the manner of it, page 229. He is Assistant to the Viceroy Dom
John in his Sickness, and till his Death, lib. 4. number. 103. page 264.

G.
Gandar.
A City on the Coast of Cambaya, destroyed by Manoel de Lima, lib. 3. number. 33.
page 318.
Dom Garcia de Norunha.
Going to govern India carries with him Dom John de Castro, lib. 1. n. 16. p.
8. He Dies in a little time, and is succeeded by Dom Estavaon da Gama, lib 1.
ibid.
Garcia Rodriguez de Tavora.
Goes to Dio with Antonio Moniz Barretto, lib. 2. number. 123. page 128. The brave
Jealousy betwixt them, lib. 2. number. 124. page 210. His Courage in the Fight,
lib. 2. number. 130. page 133.
Guil. Goutinho.
Commander of Saint John's work, lib. 2. number. 32. page 78. The care and courage
of his Fighting, lib. 2. number. 53. page 89. He is blown up in a Mine, lib. 2.
number. 115. page 122.
Goga.
A City on the Coast of Cambaya, whither Dom Manoel da Lima goes, lib. 3. n.
32. p. 195. Plundered and Burnt ibid.

H.
Hidaldaon.
HIs first Embassy to the Governor Dom John, lib. 1. number. 43. page 24. Who
this Moor was ibid. How he seiseth on the Crown, lib. 1. number. 46. page 26. His
trouble upon Meale's coming to Goa, lib. 1. number. 48. page 28. Offers great
Conditions to the Governor Martim Alfonso de Sousa for the Person of Meal,
lib. 1. number. 49. page 29. His first coming against the State of India, lib. 1.
number. 53. page 31. He treats upon a Peace, seeing the fortune of the Portuguese
arms, lib. 1. n. 66. p. 43. The Governor accepts it, lib. 1. number. 67. ibid. He
sends Soldiers upon the main Land, lib. 4. number. 18. page 214. n. 31. p. 222.
His perplexity ibid. He retires to Ponda, lib. 4. n. 39. p. 226. The Governor
follows him, lib. 4. number. 40. page 217. Makes him retire to the Mountain ibid.
He renews the War, lib. 4. n. 57. p. 235. His losses, lib. 4. number. 61, 62, 63,
64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, and 70.

I.
Jacome Leite.
DEfeats a Stratagem of Coge-Sofars, lib. 2. number. 37. page 81. Takes store of
Provision from the Enemy, with the Slaughter of many of his men, lib. 2. number.
45. page 81.
The King Dom John.
Sends for Dom John de Castro from Tangie; and Rewards him, lib. 1. number. 6.
page 3. What he gives him at his first going to India, lib. 1. number. 16. page 8.
Makes him Admiral of the Navy of the Coast, lib. 1. number. 21. page 10.
Afterward of the Fleet against the Turk, lib. 1. number. 26. page 14. His
confidence in him, lib. 1. number. 27. page 14. He elects him for Governor of
India, lib. 1. number. 33. page 18. The Letter he writes him, lib. 1. number. 69.
page 44. His rejoicing for the news of the Victory of Dio, lib. 4. number. 94.
page 253. Another Letter he writes him, and the Rewards bestowed upon him, lib.
4. number. 95. page 254. He prolongs his Government three years more, with the
^itle of Viceroy, lib. 4. number. 98. page 261. He sends six Ships to India, lib.
4. number. 99. page 262.
Dom John de Albequerque Bishop.
He remains in the Government with Dom Diogo de Almeyda, in the absence of the
Governor, lib. 3. number. 1. page 167. At his return visits him on the Sea, lib.
3. number. 39. page 199. Receives him in the Sea with a Te Deum Laudamus, lib. 3.
number. 41. page 203. The Viceroy at his Death resigns the Government to him, and
Dom Diogo d' Almeyda, lib. 4. number. 101. page 263.
Dom John d' Almeyda.
And his Brother Dom Pedro entrusted with Saint James's work at Dio, lib. 2.
number. 32. page 78. They Sally out against the Enemy, and their Execution, lib.
2. number. 94. page 111. His Courage in the Fight, lib. 2. number. 53. 68. 75.
Dom John d' Attayde.
Goes to Adem with Dom Alvaro de Castro, lib. 4. number. 82. page 247. The
Governor sends him to Caxem, lib. 4. number. 8. page 248. The success of his
Voyage, lib. 4. number. 88. page 250. He is met with by Dom Alvaro, lib. 4. number.
89. ibid. His Courage at Xael, lib. 4. number. 91. page 252.
Dom John de Castro.
His first Studies, lib. 1. number. 1. page 1. Applies himself to the
Mathematics, lib. 1. number. 2. page 1. He goes to Tangiers, lib. 1. number. 4. page
2. His behavior at Court, lib. 1. number. 7. page 3. He Marries Dona Leonor
Coutinho, lib. 1. number. 8. ibid. He goes to Tunis, lib. 1. number. 9. ibid.
Returned from that Expedition, he retires to Sintra, lib. 1. number. 14. page 7.
His first Voyage to the Indies, lib. 1. number. 15. page 7. In the company of Dom
Garcia de Noronha, lib. 1. number. 16. page 8. He goes with Relief to Dio, lib. 1.
number. 17. page 8. He goes to the Red Sea with Dom Estevaon da Gama, lib. 1. number.
19. page 9. He makes a Iournal of the Voyage ibid. He returns to Portugal, and
the King makes him Admiral of the Navy of the Coast, lib. 1. number. 21. page 10.
He defeats seven Ships of the Pirates ibid. Brings in the Fleet from India.
ibid. The King makes him Admiral of the Navy against the Turk, lib. 1. number. 26.
page 14. He discourses with Dom Alvaro Bacaon, the Emperors Admiral, about
the Action, lib. 1. number. 28. page 15. They resolve to Fight ibid. He continues
in that opinion against the Spanish General ibid. Expects the Enemy three days
in the Streights mouth, lib. 1. number. 29. page 16. Goes to Ceita, lib. 1. number.
3. page 16. Returns to Lisbone, and retires to Sintra, ibid. The King makes him
Governor of India, lib. 1. number. 33. page 18. He takes care for providing the
Fleet, lib. 1. number. 34. page 19. He reproves the fine Clothes of his Son, lib.
1. number. 35. ibid. He departs for India, lib. 1. number. 37. page 20. He arrives at
Mozambick, lib. 1. number. 38. page 21. He departs thence for Goa, lib. 1. number.
39. page 22. His reception there, lib. 1. number. 40. ibid. The condition he finds
India in, lib. 1. number. 41. page 23. His answer to Hidalcaon about the business
of Meal, lib. 1. number. 51. page 30. His preparaetions for the War, lib. 1.
number. 52. page 31. He goes against Azedecaon one of Hidalcaon's Commanders, lib.
1. number. 55. page 33. He fights him, and routs him ibid. He takes care about the
affairs of the State, lib. 1. number. 68. page 44. And about matters of Religion
ibid. He sends men to Dio, lib. 2. number. 10. page 64. He writes to Sultan
Mahomet concerning that Fortress ibid. He sends Recruits to Dio, lib. 2. number.
23. page 72. Afterward his Son Dom Ferdinando with fresh Recruits, lib. 2.
number. 30. page 76. Writes a civil Letter to Dom John Mascarenhas, lib. 2. number.
31. page 72. Proclaims War against Cambaya, lib. 2. number. 43. page 84. Writes
to all the places, and borrows Money to relieve Dio, lib. 2. number. 44. page 85.
Makes public Prayers ibid. His sollicitousness about the R^cruits, lib. 2.
number. 86. page 107. He sends his Son Dom Alvaro, lib. 3. number. 87. ibid. And Dom
Francisco de Menezes, lib. 2. ibid. The preparation he makes, lib. 2. number. 89.
page 108. number. 92. page 110. Hears news from Dio, lib. 2. number. 175. page 158.
The piety and cheerfulness with which he receives it ibid. His constancy on the
news of the Death of his Son Dom Ferdinando ibid. He makes a Procession for
Thanksgiving, lib. 2. number. 176. page 159. He declares in Council his resolution
to go to Dio, lib. 2. number. 180. page 162. Which is spoke against, lib. 2. number.
181. page 162. Yet he resolves to go, lib. 2. number. 182. page 165. He departs
from Goa to relieve Dio, lib. 3. number. 1. page 167. His Fleet, and the
Commanders, lib. 3. number. 2. page 168. He arrives at Bacaim, and makes War upon
Cambaya, lib. 3. number. 3. page 168. He goes into Dio, lib. 3. n. 9. p. 175. He
holds a Council at Sea, lib. 3. number. 10. ibid. Puts his men into Dio ibid.
Resolves to Fight, lib. 3. n. 12. p. 177. The orders he gives to the Fleet
ibid. He speaks to the Soldiers, lib. 3. number. 13. page 178. The order he puts
them in, lib. 3. number. 14. ibid. He Sallies out of the Fortress, lib. 3. number.
15. page 181. The danger he is in, and how he frees himself, lib. 3. number. 18.
page 183. He cries out Victory, and persues it ibid. He fights in Person, lib.
3. n. 19. p. 184. He falls upon Rumecaon, lib. 3. number. 21. page 185. Gets the
Victory, lib. 3. number. 25. page 187. Is congratulated for the Victory, lib. 3.
number. 29. page 188. He re-builds the Fortress, lib. 3. number. 29. page 189. He
pawns the hairs of his Beard ibid. The Citizens of Goa return them with the
Money he ask't, lib. 3. n. 30. p. 191. He goes on with the work at the
Fortress, lib. 3. number, 31. page 194. He sends Dom Manoel de Lima to make War
on the Coast of Cambaya, lib. 3. number. 32. ibid. After him Antonio Moniz to look
for the Ships of Cambaya, lib. 3. number. 35. page 197. Has news from Ormus about
Commotions there, lib. 3. number. 36. ibid. He sends Dom Manoel da Lima thither,
lib. 3. number. 37. page 198. He writes to the King Dom John about the deserts of
the Soldiers, ibid. page 199. Imbarks for Goa, lib. 3. number. 39. ibid. Arrives
there, and is Visited at Sea, the Triumphorder'd him, and the Description of
it, lib. 3. n. 39. p. 199. n. 40. p. 220. His entrance into the City, lib. 3.
number. 41. page 201. One of the Magistrates makes him a Speech ibid. He goes to
the Bishops See, and acknowledges God to be the Author of Victories, lib. 3.
page 203. He endeavors the Conversion of the King of Candea, and sends Antonio
Moniz Barretto thither, lib. 4. number. 4. page 205. He sends Dom Diogo de Almeyda
against Hidalcaon, lib. 4. number. 19. page 214. And after him other Forces, lib.
4. ibid. Consults about the War against Hidalcaon, lib. 4. number. 33. page 223.
Which is deferred till another time ibid. He exercises his Soldiers, lib. 4.
number. 34. page 223. And encourages them ibid. Receives advice from Dio, lib. 4.
number. 35. page 224. Which he communicates to the Council, and desires their
help. number. 36. ibid. Advises Chaul and Bacaim, lib. 4 number. 36. page 225.
Resolves upon a War against Hidalcaon, lib. 4. number. 38. page 226. The order of
his men ibid. Ambassadors come to him from Canara, lib. 4 number. 39. page 226. He
gives them Audience, and dispatcheth them ibid. He persues Hidalcaon, lib. 4.
number. 40. page 227. He goes to Goa, lib. 4. number. 42. page 228. He returns to Dio
and his Fleet, number. 43. ibid. He arrives at Barcaim, lib. 4. number. 44. page 229.
He sends his Son Dom Alvaro to Surat ibid. His gallantry to fright the Moors,
lib. 4. number. 48. page 231. He joins with Dom Alvaro at the Bar of Sutat, lib.
4. number. 49. ibid. He goes in sight of the Sultan, and presents him Battle
ibid. His Speech to the Soldiers, lib. 4. number. 50. page 232. The answer of the
Gentlemen and Officers, number. 51. ibid. He stays three hours in the Field, and
returns on Board, lib. 4. number. 51. page 233. What mischief he does the Enemy,
number. 52. ibid. He arrives at Dio, lib. 3. n. 53. p. 233. Upon Dom John
Mascarenhas's resigning the place, he delivers it to Lewis Falcaon ib. He
imbarks for Bacaim, lib. 4. number. 54. page 234. Whence he writes to the King,
putting him in mind of those who had served him, lib. 4. number. 56. page 235. The
reward he beggs of him, lib. 4. number. 94. page 253. Takes Shipping for Goa, and
goes in sight of Dabul, lib. 4. number. 60. page 236. Takes the City, lib. 4. number.
61. page 237. Arrives at Agacaim, number. 62. ibid. Falls upon the Enemies, number.
63. ibid. Fights in Person, lib. 4. number. 67. page 239. Gets the Victory ibid.
Dispatcheth the Ships for the Kingdom, lib. 4. number. 68. page 240. Continues
the War against Hidalcaon, number. 69. ibid. He Destroys the upper Dabul, number.
70. ibid. Goes to Bacaim and spoils Cambaya, lib. 4. number. 71. page 241. The
Inhabitants of Adem send to him for Relief against the Tyrant, lib. 4. number. 80.
page 246. The Governor sends his Son Dom Alvaro to them, lib. 4. number. 82. page
246. Ambassadors from the King of Caxem come to him, lib. 4. number. 83. page
247. The Governors answer, and the Relief he sends them ibid. He receives
Letters from the King Dom John, from the Queen Dona Catherina, and from the
Infant Dom Lewis, lib. 4. number. 95, 96, 97. page 254. The King prolongs his
Government by the Title of Viceroy, lib. 4. number. 98. page 261. There arrives a
Ship at Goa from Portugal, lib. 4. number. 100. He receives Letters, and finds
there his Honors and Reward ibid. He falls Sick, and resigns the Government,
lib. 4. number. 101. He sends for the Governors, and speaks to them, lib. 4. number.
102. The Oath he takes before them ibid. Knowing the danger of his Sickness,
retires himself with Saint Francisco Xaverius, lib. 4. number. 103. His Death,
Burial, and the general grief, ibid. His Bones come to Portugal, and are
Deposited at Saint Dominicks in Lisbone, and from thence are carried to
Bemfica, lib. 4. number. 104. page 265. The Family of the Viceroy Dom John de
Castro, lib. 4. number. 110. page 269. His Children, lib. 4. page 272.
John Coelho.
Chaplain in the Fortress of Dio, offers himself to go to the Governor, lib.
2. number. 63. page 94. His news comes to him, lib. 3. number. 87. page 107. He
returns to Dio, lib. 2. n. 101. p. 115. He encourages the Soldiers in the
Fight, lib. 2. number. 118. page 114.
John Falcaon.
The challenge between him and Dom John Manoel, lib. 3. number. 16. page 181. How
it is made up ibid. Upon the Wall he is cut to pieces ibid.
Don John Manoel.
His challenge with John Falcaon, and how it is composed ibid. Upon the Wall he
has his hands and head cut off ibid.
Dom John Mascarenhas.
Commander of Dio, lib. 2. n. 9. p. 64. Advises the Governor Dom John de
Castro of the designs of Coge-Sofar ibid. The proposition the Moor makes him,
lib. 2. number. 21. page 70. His answer, and second advice to the Governor, lib.
2. number. 22. page 71. The provisions he makes against the War, lib. 2. number. 25.
page 72. His answer to another proposition of Coge-Sofars, lib. 2. number. 29.
page 76. He disposes the Posts of the Fortress, lib. 2. number. 32. page 78.
Speaks to the Soldiers, lib. 2. number. 33. ibid. How he received Don Ferdinand
de Castro who came with Relief, lib. 2. number. 41. page 83. Sends news over-Land
to the King Dom John, lib. 2. number. 47. page 86. His care and vigilance, lib. 2.
number. 58. page 138. 154. His design to defeat an other of the Enemy, lib. 2.
number. 65. page 94. He repairs the Breaches of the Fortress, lib. 2. number. 71.
page 98. He helps to beat the Turks out, lib. 2. number. 79. page 103. Does it
with great Courage, lib. 2. number. 80. ibid. His brave Resolution, lib. 2. number.
121. page 126. He advises Dom Alvaro de Castro of the Streights of the
Fortress, lib. 2. number. 125. page 130. How he receives him at his Arrival, lib.
2. number. 158. page 149. He advises the Governor of the success of the
Fortress, lib. 2. number. 159. page 150. He disswades the Portuguese, who desire
to Sally out upon the Enemy, lib. 2. number. 162. page 151. But seeing their
Resolution, goes along with them, lib. 2. number. 163. page 152. The prudence of
his Carriage, lib. 2. number. 169. page 154. He puts his Soldiers in order, lib.
2. number. 170. page 155. How he receives the Governor, lib. 3. number. 9. page 175.
What men the Governor assigns him for the Fight, lib. 3. number. 14. page 178.
His behavior in it, lib. 3. number. 17. page 182. n. 24. p. 186. Enters the City,
lib. 3. number. 23. ibid. Resolves to leave his Government before his time be
expired, lib. 3. number. 34. page 196. He accepts of it again, and remains there,
lib. 3. number. 37. page 198. Advises the Governor of the Resolutions of the
King of Cambaya, lib. 4. number. 35. page 224. He resigns the place, lib. 4. number.
53. page 233. He takes Shipping for Portugal, lib. 4. number. 68. page 240. His
praises ibid.
Mr. John the Surgeon.
One of the five Soldiers who stoutly resist^ the Enemy at Dio, lib. 2. number.
199. page 125.
Dom Jeronimo de Menezes.
Commander in chief of Bacaim, lib. 2. number. 178. page 160. He assigns fifteen
Ships to Vasco de Cunha to carry them to Dio ibid.
Jordaon de Freitas.
Commander of the Malucos, lib. 4. number. 20. page 215. He takes the King Aeyro,
and sends him to the Governor ibid. He resigns the Government of the Malucoes
to Bernardim de Sousa, lib. 4. n. 21. ibid.
Dom George de Menezes.
Goes out of Bacaim, lib. 2. n. 139. p. 138. Arrives at Dio, lib. 2. number. 140.
page 139. The valor of his Fighting, lib. 2. number. 169. page 154. By the
command of the Governor he stays in the Bay of Cambay^, lib. 3. number. 38. page
199. He takes from the Enemy some Barques of Provisions, lib. 4. number. 5. page
206. Fat^s upon the City Baro^he, lib. 4. ibid. Which he Destroys and Fires,
lib. 4. number. 6. page 207. He takes the Surname of Baroche ibid. Goes for Dio
with the Governor, lib. 4. number. 43. page 228. By order from Dom Alvaro he goes
to Surat, lib. 4. number. 45. page 229. He goes on Shore, and with great Valor
enters, a ^illage, page 230. He comes to the Soldiers help whilst they are
Fighting, lib. 4. ibid. He desires five hundred Musquetteers of the Governor
to face the Sultan, lib. 4. number. 51. page 233. He takes some of the Mecca
Fleet, lib. 4. number. 71. page 241.
Isabell Fernandez.
A stout Matron, commonly called the old Woman of Dio, lib. 2. number. 51. page
90. Her courage upon diverse occasions, lib. 2. number. 117. page 123. number. 130.
page 133.
Isabell Madeira.
Her particular Courage in the War of Dio, lib. 2. number. 119. page 124.
Juzarcaon.
A stout Abissine, whom Sultan Mahomet leaves in his place at the Siege of Dio,
lib. 2. number. 51. page 88. He vows to win the Fortress, or perish in the design,
lib. 2. number. 53. page 89. He falls upon Saint John's Bastion, lib. 2. number. 67.
page 96. He invests the Fause-bray, lib. 2. number. 77. page 102. He is killed
with a Bullet, lib. 2. number. 84. page 105.
Another Juzarcaon.
He goes to continue the Siege of Dio, lib. 2. number. 93. page 111. Falls upon
Saint John' s work, lib. 2. number. 104. page 117. Comes out of his Quarters to
Fight with the Portuguese, lib. 2. number. 165. page 153.
Letters.
The King Dom John' s to the Governor Dom John de Castro, lib. 1. number. 69.
page 44. Catherine de Sousa' s to the Governor, lib. 2. number. 91. page 109. The
Infant Dom Lewis's, lib. 3. n. 5. p. 170. The Governor's to the Citizens of
Goa, in which he asks 20000. Pardaos upon the hairs of his Beard, lib. 3. number.
29. page 190. The answer, lib. 3. number. 30. page 192. The Governor's to his Son
Dom Alvaro, about Dom John Mascarenhas, lib. 3. number. 37. page 199. Another of
the King's to the Governor, lib. 4. number. 95. page 254. The Queen Dona
Catherine' s to him, lib. 4. number. 96. page 255. The Infant Dom Lewis' s to
him, lib. 4. number. 97. page 259.

L.
Infant Dom Lewis.
LEarns the Mathematics, lib. 1. number. 2. page 1. Goes to Tunis with the
Emperor his Brother-in-law, lib. 1. number. 10. page 5. The Civility that passed
between him and the Emperor, lib. 1. number. 12. page 6. He propounds Dom John de
Castro for Governor of India, lib. 1. number. 32. page 18.
Lewis de Almeyda.
Is sent by the Governor with six Carvills to relieve Dio, lib. 2. number. 177.
page 159. He arrives at the Fortress, lib. 2. number. 178. page 160. He is
commanded by Dom Alvaro de Castro, to look for the Mecca Fleet, lib. 2. number.
179. page 161. He takes two of them, and goes with them to Dio, ibid.
Lewis Falcaon.
Comes from his Government of Ormus to Dio, lib. 4. number. 53. page 233. Dom John
Mascarenhas leaving the place, the Governor gives it him ibid.
Lewis de Mello de Mendoca.
Goes from Bacaim to Dio, lib. 2. number. 139. page 138. The dangers of his Voyage
ibid. He resists those who would go back, lib. 2. number. 140. page 139. He
arrives at Dio, and tells news of Dom Alvaro ibid. Is Lodged on Saint James' s
work, page 140. Dies by a Bullet, lib. 2. n. 167. p. 154.
Lewis de Sousa.
Commander of St. Thomas 's work, lib. 2. number. 32. page 78. His care and Valor
in Fighting, lib. 2. number. 53. page 67. 74. 98. 102. 134. 170.
Lopa de Sousa.
Fights stoutly at Dio, and is Killed by a Dart, lib. 2. number. 169. page 155.
Laurenzo Pirez de Tavora^
Commander of the Fleet which came from Portugal, lib. 2. number. 174. page 157.
Comes to Cochim, and goes to Dio, lib. 3. number. 4. page 169. Is the first gets
upon the Wall, lib. 3. number. 18. page 183. He returns for Lisbone, lib. 4. number.
93. page 253.

M.
Malaca.
THe conspiracy of diverse Kings against it, lib. 4. number. 22. page 216. The
King of Achem comes thither, and immediately retires, lib. 4. n. 24. p. 217.
Against whom Simon de Mello is sent forth by the Governor, lib. 4. n. 25.
ibid. The Embassage from the Confederates, lib. 4. number. 28. page 219. Simon de
Mello's answer, lib. 4. number. 29. page 220.
Malucos.
The wonderful accident happened in them, lib. 1. number. 71. page 51. The King of
Portuguese' s right to them, lib. 2. number. 11. page 65. The Governor gives them
to Cachil Aeyro, lib. 2. number. 12. page 65. The Castillians go thither, (...) 2.
number. 13. page 66. Their behavior with the Portuguese, lib 2. number. 19. page 68.
Dom Manoel de Lima.
He arrives at Goa from Portugal, lib. 2. number. 174. page 157. Desires to go
presently for Dio, and is dissuaded by the Governor, page 158. With whom he
goes, lib. 3. n. 2. p. 168 Is sent by the Governor with six Ships into the Bay
of Cambaya, where he takes several Prizes, lib. 3. number. 3. page 169. Does a
great deal of mischief about Surat, lib. 3. number. 6. page 173. Destroys the City
of Anto^e, lib 3. number. 7. page 174. And other places on the Coast, lib. 3. number.
8. page 175. He arrives at Dio, and the Governor assigns him five hundred
Portuguese for the Fight, lib. 3. number. 14. page 178. His Courage in the Fight,
lib. 3. number. 17. page 20. ^4 He enters the City with Dom Alvaro, lib. 3. number.
23. page 186. He makes War on the places of the Coast, lib. 3. number. 32. page
194. Goes to the City of Coga, which he Sacks and Burns, page 195. D^stroys
Gandar, lib. 3. number. 33. page 196. Returns to Dio, lib. 3. number. 34. ibid.
Offers to stay on the place, on the Refignment of Dom John Mascarenhas ibid.
Goes for Ormus, lib. 3. n. 37. p. 198. The King of Campar asks Relief of him,
and offer's a Fortress in Adem, lib. 4. number. 76. page 245.
Manoel Pereira, see Francisco Vierra. Martim Alphonso de Sousa.
Governor of India, lib. 1. n. 31. p. 17. Changes the Bazarucos, lib. 4. number.
42. page 23. Sends for Meal to Go, lib. 1. number. 47. page 27. Resolves to
deliver him up to Hidalcaon upon their agreement, lib. 1. number. 50. page 30.
Martim Botelho.
With ten Companions goes to get Intelligence amongst the Enemy, lib. 2. number.
109. page 119. The news he brings, lib. 2. number. 110. ibid.
Marzaon.
Succeeds Rax Soliman in the Segniory of Adem, lib. 4. number. 74. page 243.
Fortifies himself in the Palace against the King of Campar, lib. 4. number. 75.
page 244. Delivering up upon Conditions, goes out of the City, lib. 4. number. 76.
ibid. The hurt he does ibid.
Meal.
Disquiets Hidalcaon, lib. 1. number. 44. page 25. Goes to Cambaya, number. 45. ibid.
Martim Alphonso de Sousa being the Governor sends for him to Goa, lib. 1. number.
47. page 27. His Reception by the Governor ibid. Who afterward by agreement,
intended to deliver him up to Hidalcaon, lib. 1. number. 50. page 30. The
Governor Dom John de Castro defends him, lib. 1. number. 51. ibid. Is the cause
of War with Hidalcaon, lib. 4. number. 18. page 213.
Miguel de Arnede.
A Gigantique Soldier who goes to Dio, lib. 2. number. 123. page 128. The manner
of his Embarking ibid. His courage and strength in the Fight, lib. 2. number. 132.
page 134.
Mines.
Saint Thomas' s work is undermined, lib. 2. number. 110. page 119. The Mine is
sprung, lib. 2. number. 115. page 122. The persons that perish in it. ibid.
Rumecaon makes others, lib. 2. number. 126. page 130. The Portuguese endeavor to
prevent them, page 131. The Enemies fire them to their loss, lib. 2. number. 137.
page 137. They open other, which the Portuguese prevent, lib. 2. number. 171. page
156. Afterward fire another without any loss to the Portuguese, lib. 2. number.
183. page 166.
Mozambique.
The Governor Dom John de Castro arrives there, lib. 1. number. 38. page 21. He
changes the Situation of the Fortress ibid. He receives Orders to enlarge it,
lib. 4. number. 37. page 225.
Money.
The complaints of the people upon the alteration, lib. 1. number. 42. page 23.
The Governor hears the City and People concerning it, ibid. His Resolution
about it, page 24.
Mojatecaon.
Praises the Valor of the Portuguese, lib. 2. number. 132. page 134. Goes out
against the Portuguese, lib. 2. number. 165. page 153. Invests the Fortress, and
retires, lib. 2. number. 170. page 155.

N.
Nuno Pereira.
HIs Courage and Fighting at Dio, lib. 2. number. 170. page 155. Goes to Goa, and
in his Voyage dies of his Wounds, lib. 2. number. 175. page 159.

P.
Dom Payo de Noronha.
GOes with twelve Ships to the Straight of Rosalgate^, lib. 4. number. 78. page
245. Offers to go to Adem to help the King of Campar ibid. Arrives at the City,
number. 79. ibid. Calls off the Soldiers, lib. 4. number. 86. page 249. Was not
obeyed by Manoel Pereira, and Francisco Viera, two Soldiers of fortune, who
Fight stoutly ibid.
Pate and Patane.
Cities upon the Coast of Cambaya, burnt by the Governor, lib. 4. number. 54.
page 234.
Dom Pedro de Almeyda.
With his Brother Dom John de Almeyda Sallies out upon the Enemy in Dio, and
the hurt he does, lib. 2. number. 94. page 111. His Courage in Fighting, lib. 2.
number. 75. page 101. n. 134. p. 135.
Pedro Nunez.
A great Mathematician, and Master to Dom John de Castro, lib. 1. number. 2. page
1.

R.
Rax Soliman.
ADdmiral of the design, at the first Siege of Dio, lib. 4. number. 72. page 241.
Goes as a Friend into the Haven of Adem ibid. Beheads the King ibid. Makes
himself Master of the City, lib. 4. number. 74. page 243.
Ruy Freire.
Arrives at Dio, lib. 2. number. 157. page 148.
Ruy Lopez de Villa Lobos.
Commander of the Castillians, who went to the Molucos, lib. 2. number. 13. page
66. Endeavors to delay Fernaon de Sousa, lib. 2. number. 14. 16. page 67. Parlies
with him, lib. 2. number. 18. page 68. Their agreement ibid. Breaks his promise,
and Fernaon de Sousa 's Behavior upon it, lib. 2. number. 20. page 69.
Rumecaon.
Succeeds his Father Coge-Sofar in the War, lib. 2. number. 61. page 93. Goes on
with a Machine his Father had begun, ibid. Offers the Portuguese conditions,
lib. 2. number. 66. page 95. Falls upon Saint Thomas 's work, lib. 2. number. 68.
page 96. Commands the several Nations to Fight by themselves, lib. 2. number. 69.
page 98. Retires with loss, number. 70. ibid. Falls to Superstitious prayers, lib.
2. number. 72. page 99. He resents the Death of Juzarcaon, lib. 2. number. 84. page
105. His answer to another Juzarcaon, whom the Sultan sent to continue the
Siege, lib. 2. number. 93. page 111. Goes about filling up the Ditch, lib. 2. number.
110. page 115. His stratagem to divert the Portuguese, lib. 2. number. 111. page
120. Retires with loss, lib. 2. number. 119. page 124. Goes on with the Mines,
lib. 2. number. 126. page 130. Incourageth his Soldiers for another assault, lib.
2. number. 127. page 131. Commands them to batter the Church, lib. 2. number. 131.
page 134. Retires again with loss, lib. 2. number. 132. ibid. Has advice by three
Slaves which ran away from the Portuguese, lib. 2. number. 133. ibid. Gives
another assault, lib. 2. number. 134. page 135. Endeavors to beat down the
Cistern, lib. 2. number. 136. page 136. He comes off from another assault with
loss, lib. 2. number. 142. page 141. Despairs of the design, lib. 2. number. 144.
page 142. Opens another Mine, which is prevented, ibid. Retires again, lib. 2.
number. 146. page 143. number. 149. page 144. He falls on another time, and retires,
lib. 2. number. 160. page 151. He is encouraged by his good success against the
Portuguese, lib. 2. number. 171. page 156. Continues Mining, ibid. Builds a new
City, number. 172. ibid. Offers a great Ransom to Dom Alvaro for a Janizary
Commander, lib. 2. number. 179. page 161 He makes another Mine, which Fired
without any loss to the Portuguese, lib. 2. number. 183. page 166. His discourse
about the Governors coming, lib. 3. number. 11. page 176. What Army he has, and
how he orders them, ibid. He resists the Portuguese at their Landing, lib. 3.
number. 15. page 181. He orders his men in the Field, lib. 3. number. 20. page 184.
Dom Alvaro routs him, and he Rallies, lib. 3. number. 21. page 185. He retires,
lib. 3. number. 22. ibid. Offers a new Battle, lib. 3. number. 24. page 186. Dies,
lib. 3. number. 25. page 187.

S.
Sebastian de Sa.
GOes to Dio with Dom Fernando, lib. 2. number. 30. page 76. Is wounded by a
poisoned Arrow, lib. 2. number. 69. page 97. He carries advice from the Commander
in chief to the Governor, lib. 2. number. 85. page 106. Is one of the five
Soldiers who stoutly resists the Enemy in Dio, lib. 2. number. 119. page 124.
Ships.
Their number, and their Commanders which went along with the Governor Dom
John de Castro, lib. 1. number. 36. page 20. The time of their departure, number. 37.
ibid. The danger the Governors Ship was in, ibid. The Ship Holy Ghost,
commanded by Diogo de Bello, arrives at Goa, lib. 2. number. 87. page 107. A Ship
of Cambaya, taken by Dom Alvaro de Castro, lib. 2. number. 158. page 149. Ships
arrive at Goa from Portugal, lib. 4. number. 37. page 225. The order they
brought, ibid.
Simaon Feo.
Comes with a message from Rumecaon to the Commander of Dio, lib. 2. number. 66.
page 95. The answers he gives him, ibid.
Simaon de Mello.
Commander of Malaca, lib. 4. number. 23. page 216. Sends out Dom Francisco d' Eca
against the King of Achem, lib. 4. number. 25. page 217. The Embassage to him from
the Confederates, lib. 4. number. 28. page 219. His answer, lib. 4. number. 29. page
220. His trouble for want of News from the Fleet, lib. 4. number. 30. ibid. The
people complain, and are quelled by Saint Francisco Xaverius, by his
foretelling the Victory, ibid.
Sultan Mahomud.
King of Cambaya, consults how he may take Dio, lib. 2. number. 2. page 53. He
approves ^oge-Sofar's reason for the design, lib. 2. number. 8. page 63. ^omes to
Dio with a great Army, lib. 2. number. 49. page 87. Retires upon a Moors being
Killed, whilst he was talking with him, lib. 2. number. 51. page 88. Sends another
Juzarcaon to continue the Siege, lib. 2. number. 93. page 111. Rejoices for the
good success of Rumecaon, lib. 2. number. 171. page 156. His barbarous Revenge,
lib. 3. number. 35. page 197. He raises a new Army for another Siege. lib. 4. number.
35. page 242. The Governor Dom John de Castro faceth him, and presents him
Battle, lib. 4. number. 49. page 232. Which the Sultan refuses, lib. 4. number. 51.
page 233. He severely commands silence about the Siege and Battle of Dio, lib.
4. number. 55. page 234.
Surat.
Its Territory entered, and destroyed by Dom Manoel de Lima, lib. 3. number. 6.
page 173. The quitting of the Fortress, upon the sight of Dom Alvaro 's Fleet,
lib. 4. number. 55. page 234. The Governor resents the not taking Surat, ibid.

T.
Tunez.
DOm John de Castro 's expedition thither, lib. 1. number. 9. page 3. The occasion
of it, ibid. The Gentlemen who were in the Fight, lib. 1. number. 11. page 5.

V.
Vasco de Cunha.
IS sent by the Governor with Relief to Dio, lib. 2. number. 177. page 159.
Arrives at Bacaim, lib. 2. number. 178. page 160. Arrives at Dio, ibid.

W.
Women.
THe Courage of the Women in Dio, lib. 2. number. 55. page 68. 79. 117. 130. The
particular Courage of one Portuguese Woman, lib. 2. number. 78. page 102. The
women of Chaul offer their Jewels for the carrying on the War, lib. 2. number.
90. page 109. Those of Goa offer their Children and Estates for the Relief of
Dio, lib. 2. number. 177. page 160. And for the Re-building of the Fortress, lib.
3. number. 31. page 194. And upon other occasions, lib. 4. number. 36. page 224.

X.
Xael.
DOm Alvaro goes to the City, lib. 4. number. 90. page 251. The Fartaques offer
him a Fortress, ibid. Dom Alvaro designs to Scale it, page 252. Fernaon Perez
is the first who Scales, ibid. The Fartaques defend themselves till Death, lib.
4. number. 91. ibid. The place is gained, ibid.

FINIS.
By the Composers not current Reading the Copy, some Faults have crept into the
Impression; the mistake of one Letter in some Tenses, and the putting Or
instead of Nor to answer neither happens often, but is easily Corrected, as are
the mistakes in names of Persons and Places.

Errata.
PReface, p. 2. l. 36. read petentem, p. 11. l. 35. read nor Tears, and so
throughout the Book, p. 13. l. 4. read but in Peace, ibid, l. 7. read strove,
p. 14. l. 10. read his Hight, p. 15. l. 1. read affrightning the place, p. 16.
l. 36. read have owned it, p. 33. l. 3. read ran, p. 37. l. 8. read an
Altar-peice, p. 76. l. 6. read to punish, p. 102. l. 29. read Spear, p. 134. l.
36. read Sentinells, p. 160. l. 15. read Bramaluco, p. 168. l. 32. read came,
p, 173. l. 25. read your Company, p. 195. l. 8. read Zamaluke.


