The doleful Fall OF ANDREW SALL, A JESUIT OF THE FOURTH VOW, From the Roman
Catholic Apostolic faith;

Lamented by his Constant Frind: with an open rebuking of his Embracing the
Confession, Contained in the XXXIX. Articles of the Church of England.

Superiorum permissu. 1674.

THE RECANTATION OF ANDREW SALL, A JESUIT OF THE FOURTH VOW; ( Who had taught
Divinity Eighteen years in Spain) MADE IN S. JOHN'S Church in Cashel in IRELAND,
Before the most reverend Father in GOD, THO: Lord Archbishop of that Diocese:
MAY 17th. 1674.
Attested by the Secretary of the said Arch Bishop.
WHereas I Andrew Sall, have been born and bred in the Communion of the Roman
Catholic Church, followed a Religious life, and completed my courses of
Philosophy and Divinity in Colleges of the Order of Jesus in Spain, and was
employed in teaching the said Faculties many years; I acknowledge, that since
(by occasion of this Function) I applied my self to a stricter Inquiry and
Examining of Matters: And by frequent reading of the Holy Scripture, Fathers,
Councils, and Histories of the Church, my Knowledge was furthered, and my
Judgment ripened: I begun to doubt of the Truth of several Articles, introduced
by the use and authority of the Roman Church, repugnant to Human Reason, and
not warranted by Divine Writ; as Transubstantiation, Indulgences, Purgatory,
Worship of Images, etc. yet smothered my Scruples; partly fearing the severity
of that Country against Opposers of their Tenets, partly amused with a
Supposition, That the Church and Pope of Rome were infallible in their Decrees
touching Faith, and so might stand with security to their Declarations. But
having arrived in this Country, Disputed often and closely of Religion with
several Persons, eminent in Learning and Integrity; but principally with the
Most Reverend Father in God (and mine truly in Christ by the Gospel) His Grace
Tho Lord Archbishop of Cashell, present; who mindful of the Duty of a good
Pastor, did procure to bring into his Fold this Sheep, with unspeakable
Constancy, and indefatigable Charity; suffering, for Six years of continual
battery, my obstinate Resistance, until at last, by means of his solid
Doctrine, and of the Example of his pious and upright Life (to the Glory of GOD
be I permitted to say thus much here) the LORD was pleased to give me a more
clear sight of the Errors I was in: yet a full Assent I delayed to give;
partly fearing that the weakness I feeled may be of my Capacity, rather than of
the Cause I maintained, partly frighted with the Confusion and Dangers I
conceived might wait upon my deserting of the Romish Communion, and so betook
my self to a most diligent study of the Case, leaving no stone unmoved, for to
quiet the trouble of my Conscience, reading with indifferent Eyes the best
VVriters on both sides, and though I heartily wished, to find the Cause I
hitherto maintained justified, for not to run into the terrible inconveniency
which Human Considerations represented unto me in a Change; yet assisted by
Divine Grace, and taking for Rule of my Actions, the Service and Will of God,
and the Interest of Eternity, I resolved constantly to adhere unto the Party,
which with better ground would render me secure of this higher Emolument. When
being in these Considerations, suddenly issued out our Sovereign Lord the
King's Proclamation for Banishing the Roman- Clergy: wherewith I saw my self
betwixt two extremities, either to continue further in the Country with my
Ambiguities, in disobedience to my Sovereign's Command, or to go into Spain,
and there be forced to Preach and practice Doctrines my Conscience did not
approve of; and so for a speedy Resolution, after earnest Prayer to God for the
assistance of his Divine light, in so weighty a Matter, I penned down for
better Consideration the Reasons I did hear, read, and conceive against. The
RomishTenets Controverted, I did also carefully peruse, and seriously reflect
upon the XXXIX. Articles, Canons, and Liturgy of the Church of England: and all
considered well, I did conclude the Way of the Church of England to be safer
for my Salvation, then that of the Roman Church.

Wherefore I resolved to declare, as I do hereby seriously and in my heart,
without any Equivocation or mental Reservation, in the presence of God and this
Congregation, Declare, that I do give my full and free Assent to the XXXIX.
Articles of the Church of England, for Holy and Wise, and grounded upon the
infallible Word of God; acknowledging the Romish-Tenets against them to be
false and superstitious, especially that of Transubstantiation, as forcing upon
Christians a belief of monstrous Miracles, repugnant to Human Reason, and not
grounded upon Divine testimony, nor necessary either for verifying Christ's
Words in the Institution of this blessed Sacrament; or for the effects of it:
Not for verifying the Words, whereas Christ says in the like tenor, that He
is a true Vine without real alteration either in his Person, or in the Vine;
nor for the Effects of the Holy Sacrament, Christ being able to annex unto the
Receiving of Bread and Wine, what spiritual Graces he pleases, without
alteration of the Elements; as he does afford the spiritual Grace of
Regeneration in the Waters of Baptism, without alteration in the substance of
the Water.

And least an Imagination of some temporal or sinistrous intention in this my
Declaration, upon the present Conjuncture, may hinder the Spiritual benefit
which Souls may reap by it, I have grave Testimonies to show, and did already
show them to my renowned Lord the Archbishop's Grace, which assures I did
enjoy in Spain (and may now enjoy with more advantage, going thither upon the
Account I was to go) such degree of Honor and Commodity, as possibly I may not
expect elsewhere; so as looking upon a Voyage thither (continuing my former
Profession) nothing occurred to my mind but Honor, Applause and Pleasure; and
turning my eyes upon my present Resolutions, mountains of Crosses and Dangers
did fright me: But in this perplexity I have chosen rather to suffer Crosses
here, with satisfaction of Conscience, than to enjoy Honors that other way,
accompanied with the tortures of a checking Conscience, and the unworthiness of
a dissembling Life.

Wherefore I humbly beseech your Grace, that I may be admitted into the
Communion of this Church, and that I may be absolved for my so long continuance
in Error, resisting the powerful Calling of God; which granted, I hope, by the
Grace of Almighty God assisting me, that I shall never withdraw my self. For
further confirmation of all this, I have hereunto subscribed my Name,

ANDREW SALL

Copia vera Examinata eum Original. per me

Carolum Robinson.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
A Hundred to one, you will be inquiring, who is the Author: but what need you
care for that, can not you feed on a dish of partriges unless you know who killed
them? there were many profitable Books written by Anonimi, let it satisfy you
that I have reason to conceal my name. The substance of the work is the thing
to be examined by you, to know the Author matters nothing.

I desire not, that Athist^^ read my writings, such, as (...) not in God, can
make no (...) fit of Godly things; for my part I make more Esteem of a Pagan,
that adores stocks, an^ stones, thinking there is a Deit ^ in them, then of
A^hises. Neither is it my aim tha^ Maho metans or Jews read this work; the
first not believing Christ to be the Son of God, (though they hold him to be a
holy Prophet and borne of a Virgin) the other believe not the Mesias is yet
come whose Fathers Crucified him, when he was borne and came among them, and
made Evident by wonders and miracles, that he was the true Son of God: and
the now living Jews as blind and obstinate as their Fathers, tred their
stepps spitting on the Crucifix and whipping it in their Chambers, and
stobbing with poyniards the H. Sacrament with horror and extreme Malice,
whereof there are Many Authentic Histories.

My wish is this Book be only read by Roman Catholics, and by Protestants; the
first will likely be well satisfied with this my endeavors; and from the
protestant reader I only pray, that he will be pleased with atention and
without prejudging to read all, and after to speak with God alone about the
state of his own Soul, and what Religion he will Choose for his eternal
salvation.

The argument I do not handle Scholastically conceiving not that the better
way to have my sense rightly understood; I am for the way of fact declareing
ingeniously what happened in England upon the coming in of both Religions;
what kind of men were isntrumental in bringing them in; what their manners,
virtues or vices; who of them were of Sanctity, and who not; who of them
wrought Miracles, which are Evident signs of true Religion, which was brought
into all Kingdoms Countries and Provinces by Sanctity, and Miracles.

I deny what Sall falling from his faith (who gave me the occasion of writing)
afirms, to wit. That the Roman Catholic Religion is repugnant to human
reason. It were to make Religion fabulous and foolish, to say it is contrary to
wisdom and reason, for what can be oppositt to wisdom and reason, but folly
and fables? As Scripture (by which soly many Protestants will have Religion
tried excluding tradition even Apostolical it self, though it be Verbum Dei
non Scriptum) is the Word of God supernatural written in paper with the hands
of his holy scribes by Revelation; so is Reason Gods natural Word, and Gods
truth written by his own hand in our souls: Signatum est super nos Lumen
vultus tui Domine. Does not all this prove a great agreableness between
Religion and reason, whereby is clearly evinced that Religion is not repugnant
to human Reason.

Have not Pagan Philosophers even by the light of reason without any other
teaching perceived in many things what is honest, and what dishonest, what
just, and what unjust, what virtue, what vice? this is that light in man's
soul, which S. Basil calls: Iudicium quoddam natural per Bas, homilia a^^
populum.
quod ab iniquis bona facile discerni^us. And S. Augustine accounted so much of
reason, that he said: Recta ratio vertus est. And S. Aug. de util. Credendi
Cap. 12.
if Caluins Authority were worth any thing he says: Semen Religionis est in
mente humana. But I pray you hear S. Paul telling you, the Philosophers were
unexcusable for not having made the right use, they could, and should have made
of the knowledge they had of Cod, by the light of reason. Because, says Ad Romans
Cap. 1.
he, whereas they knew God they have not glorified him as God, or given
thanks: but are become vain in their cogitation and their foolish heart has
bin darckned. How have these Philosophers known God? not by faith; but by the
light of reason, and knowing him so, they should have (as the Apostle teaches)
glorified him as God.

I show in this Book the number of Catholic Archbishops, that sat upon the
Chair of Canterbury to have bin sixty one; many of these have bin nobly borne,
and many of them very learned and virtuous. (twelve have bin canonized saints.
Your number of Protestant Archbishops have not (as I think) bin above six, as
Parker, Whitgift, Grindal, Branckfort, Abots, Laud, and Sheldon, all of them
lowly born, and as we hear meanly Learned, of their virtues we heard
Little. And could those few and less learned and virtuous know more of Gods
verity, and holy will, then so many Eminent Catholic Archbishops? what in
Gods name would make any man think so.

You had fifty two Catholic Monarchs of England Kings, and Queens. (I speak
nothing here of seventy small Kings, when England was divided into seven
Kingdoms) many of these have bin of the Gallantest Princes in Christendom, as
Egbert that first reduced England to a Monarchy, Ina, Edgar, Canut, William the
conqueror, Henry the second, Edward the third, Henry the fifth, and Henry the
seventh; many of them virtuous, and Godly Princes, and some of them acknowledged
for Saints by all the Church of God: the Protestants have had but five in all,
the first a Child of nine ye^ars ( Edward the sixth) the second, a Woeman (
Queen Elisabeth) a Cruel a woeman, who put to death Queen Mary of Scotland the
present Kings great Grandmother (which was an open Murder and so Esteemed by
all the world) as also in the time of her reign 200. Priests and Religious
men soly for their Religion; A woeman drunken Ap^c. Cap. 17.
of the blood of Saints, and of the blood of the martyrs of Jesus. A woeman,
fitter for Bravery then devotion; thee other three, King James a lerrned and
wise Prince; his Son Charles, a sober and good King; the last our present
Souveraigne King Charles the second, of him let those speak that shall survive
him. But certain it is, Protestant Historians will not prefer those Protestant
Princes, in virtue, valor, glorious atempts, and magnificence to the Catholic
Princes.

To speak of both Religions, Catholic and Prorestant, and which of them is
safest for salvation. I offer you here a remarkable reflection, and
consideration, as thus; Ask of the Mohammedan, the Jew, and of the Scismatick
Christians, as the Ruthenians, Armenians, and all of the Greeck Church, yea and
of the Lutherans, and Calvinists that disagree among themselves, which is the
best and safest Religion; they will all say, after their own, the Roman is the
safest, which is an Evident Jugment, that the Roman is the fafest of all, much
like that the grave Judges gave for the Lacedaemonians, when all the Provinces
of Greece claimed for the Palm and praise in the glorious victory they obtained
against the Persians. Those excellent Judges, before whom the cause was
brought, demanded of every one of them, whom they thought to have deserved
best after themselves; and all answering, that the Lacedaemonians; the wise
Judges gave sentence, that indeed the Lacedaemonians had deserved best of all the
praise and glory of all, in that victory. In the same kinde^ and for the same
reason the Romish Religion preferred by all after themselves, before all
others, is realy to be preferred to all as the best and safest.

I will here make an end, requesting you my protestant Reader to lay aside
passion, and read the contents of this little work. ( Sall's confutation) with
as great diligence as you can for your own good; if you are a Zealous
Protestant, you will do so, for of those I found many so great frinds of
truth, as they would change their own Religion, if they were once persuaded
it were not true, and some of them I have known, that after diligent searching
out for truth in Religion, and finding it, (where it was to be found) in the
Roman Catholic Church, Embraced our Religion, and after all their life time
bestowed sincerly all pains and care for the Conversion of their once
Brethren in Protestanisme.

I never esteemed, or loved men cold in their own Religion, (some I have
known of that kind Catholics, and Protestants, who tuned their faith to the
times, and wordly respects.) I have bine aquainted with some zealous, learned
Protestants and good moral men, with those I willingly conferred, and have
been dear to some of them. One there was a Protestant Archdeacon of the
Dioces I lived in, he had also a temporal estate, and was Rector or parson
of a great Parish of some thousands of souls, wherein I had care of the
Catholic souls; of all those he had but a few to look unto, scarce a dozen
besides his own family, the sharing between us was, that he had the flees,
and I the flock, and so far we were from Envying one another, that we joy'd
in any thing, that happend well to each other: he was one of the best moral
men I have ever known, a mild, courteous and merciful person. It was my good
luck (and truly agreat pleasure) to have found an occasion of doing a good, and
great service to one of his Infants after his death, in the first year of the
wars, which I did (God is my wittnes) with all hearty willingness, and I have
bin informed that the Mother then at Dubblin, (a well bred Creature) hearing of
my kindness to her Child said, that worthy Churchman, and my husband have much
loved one another, and he has showed his affection, by effect to the Child of
the deceased: I pray God I may not dye before finding an occasion of serving
that frindly man, or some one of his Relations. I should be glad this little
work of mine might fall into the hands of such Protestants, as my dear frind
was. However it happens, I have this satisfaction, that my mind is to serve all
men, of what Religion soever in the way of salvation; and even so courteous
Reader Commending you to the protection of the Allmighty.

I remain sincerly your humble servant in Christ Jesus N. N.

The Judgments, and Approbations of a venerable and learned Prelate, three
Professors of Divinity, and a Licentiat, and Bachelor of the same Faculty,
given of the Book entitled The Doleful Fall of Andrew Sall, etc. in their
letters written to the Author thereof.
Ad auctorem qui deploratissimum Saalis Jesuitae lapsum in Haeresim reparare
voluit.
ABsorptum me ac pane in tua sanpuinolentae Iphigeniae vulneribus consepultum
gravissimus deploratissimusque illius perditissimi Saalu e Triumphali
Societalie Jesus curru lapsus excepit e que mei^ maeroribu^ in suir apuit
admirationem: un^le tam praecipiti miserrimi viri casu^i statim ind^^m,
mutilatumque mente and animo esse continuo judicavi. Habet tamen
infaelidissimus ille homuncio, quo a lapsu erigatur, sanetur, mentique
readatur, medicam modo tuam, b^^mum misericordissime pati manum; propinatumque
a te singularis medicaminis poculum, dum reliquiae anteacta vitae ei adhuc
supersint, non refug^ epotare stomacho velit* ausim affirmare nec fideli^rem
nec expertiorem unquam reperiet medi^um; nec a quo praesentius maloque
eradicando aptius propinetur Antidot^on^: in cajus confectione nullus quamvis
expertissimus desiderare ullum. poterit ingrediens, quo deficiente ad Pristinam
Sanitatem facilius redire posset ille usiser, quaerat ipse vel in caelo sursum
vel inferno d^ or sum, vel etiam retroacta scrutetur saecula; nullum suo
perniciosissimo malo profligand^ praestantius tu^ porrigetur rem^dium adeoque
ni ipse perditissimis malesuaedae animae tortoribus nuntium confestim mittat:
conclamatum esse quis dubitet? sitque ita illius a seipso perditio. Tu sane vir
desideriorum quidquid a quovis exspectare potuit Deo and proximo satisfacturus,
executus es. hocque constanti tibi potetit esse solatio, quod ^leum, and operam
non sis omnino perditurus: sat enim scio etiam adhuc ^astituris tuum profiturum
Antidotum, and qua tu illud charitate confeceris, ^adem te ad triumphalem Jesus
eurrum, u^de nullus in posterum timendus est casus, e vehendum, duplicique
propria nempe and profligatissimo Saali destinanda de corandum coroua, Amen
occinit

Tuus tibi aeternum devinctus, P. O. D.
22. Apr. 1675.
Most honored Lord.
I Have now at last to my own great satisfaction (notwithstanding many
interruptions) exactly perused your Lordships excellent book of a sorrowful
subject, rightly entitled The Dolefid Fall of Audrew Sall, and find it all
along, worthy your Lordships pen, it is learned, strong, convincing, and (which
God certainly directed your hand to write) so powerfully moving, that it cannot
but touch a harder heart, them this fallen Sall carries in his breast, galled
(no doubt) with anguish, torment, and affliction. Honored Lord your zeal and
pains spent upon this wretched Apostate will have an ample reward hereafter. I
hmbly kiss your Lordsps. hands and am ever

Most honored Lord Your Lordsps. most sincere and faithful Servant E. W.
12. May 1675.
The Judgment of a Praelate of Eminent Dignity.
My Lord,
I Have read your Lordsps. Book which is undoubtedly an excellent good one,
full of Piety and Learning sufficient to show any one their errors, and
although it should have no effect on that perverse Soul, I doubt not but it
will do good to many others.

My Lord, Your Lordships humble Servant P. H. N.

DOcet nune experientia, quod olim m^nuit Apost^lus, Haeresim ut cancrum
serper^. Inf^cit ill^ subtili veneno, non tantum vulgu^ ignarum, sed etiam
lectiora a Ecclesia membra, qu^postquam a reliquo corp^re pracisa sunt, pergunt
^tiamnum pestiferum virus spargare, qu^ secum incautos in interitum trabunt.
Sed pr^vida Dei cura novis mor^i^, nova etiam remedia opponit, suscitando
spiritum ac zelum in viris Apostolicis, qui salutaribus scriptis ac monitis
gliscenti errorum contagio strenue obsistant. Hoc singulari Studio, atque
industri^^ pr^stat Author hujus operis, qui non tantum infami^ Transfugae impia
dogmata, fraudesque dissoluit, sed etiam primos Haeresum Architectos suis
coloribus depingit, eorumque malas arts ac calumnias omnium oculis accurate
exponit, ^e porro innocuum Christi gregem in fraeudem inducant. Hinc ego
divinae gloriae, and animarum saluti oportunum fore ceuseo, si viri de sua
Patria, and Ecclesia optime semper meriti, doctissima lucubrationes in publicam
lucem pr^dea^t. Datum 27. Martii, 1675.

J. C. S. Th. Professor.

Illustrissime ac Rme. Dne.
GRatias humillime ago pro exemplari novi Operis impressi, quod Gratiae vestra
munificentia cum litteri^ ad me perv^nit. Quoad meum de illo judicium, non
possum sane non probare singularem Authoris zelum ac eruditionem, qui plurimas
depromit folidas, pias, ac convincentes rations, quibus non tantunt ille
Apostata, sed quilibet non pertinacissimus ab errore ad veritatem, caecitat^ ad
lucem revocari posset et deberet. Munit quoque firmatque in futnrum ceteros
Fideles, ne fallaci aliorum exemplo, et errore a primaevae Fidei firmitate
abducantur. Praestat denique parts omnes very et Apostolici Pastoris,
praebendo ovibus Christi Sal vera Doctrinae et sapientiae, ne Salis infatuati
corruptela inficiantur.

Rogabo diuinam bonitatem ut Ecclesiae su^ tales pastores perpetu^ prospiciat,
et Gratiam vestram eidem diutistime conseruet. 2. Maji, 1675.

Illustrissimae ac Rmae. Gratiae Tuae Servus in Christo humillimus R. A.

Illustris. Reverendis. Dne.
Recepi and perlegi Librum restrum contra Sallum Apostatam magna voluptate,
opus doctnm and eximium. Invenient in eo sapientes and viri Docti multa quae in
vasti^ voluminibus praevie legerunt, and nonnulla plurimi, quae nunquam ante a
viderunt. Plurae omitto quae in libri laud dicenda occurrunt. vnum mihi
summopere placet D. Vest: Ill^n. tam sepe uti^ipsorum Authorum Protestantico^um
attestatione ad eorundem sequaciumque confusionem etc. Sum Illm. Dne. Illme:
and Rererendssimae D. V. obsequentissimus famulus.

7. Maij, 1675. J. O. S.

My ever honored Lord.
I find my self highly obliged for the gift you sent me your book against
the Apostate Sall. You send the Joseph of your old age to Egypt to recover your
revolting brethren who exercise the fury of their Ignominious fall on their
own persons by spiritual self murder in deserting the Army of the living
God to assist the Goliath that upbraids him; the heavens I hope will
plentifully power down blessings on your endeavor to convert that persecuting
Saul to a Penitene Paul, to turn that deformed Serpent into an Araons rodd,
which may flourish by repentance and plentifully feed in the house of our
heavenly Father Rather then a prodigal child in a starving condition in the
desert of heresy. Live long therefore our faithful leremie to lament the common
captivity, the pollution of our sometime Glorious temple, the destruction of
sweet Sion, and the shamfull flight of Sall infatuatum, who after many years
travells desperately cast himself out of the ship (which can be tossed but
never overcome by the storms of persecution without which there is noe safty)
into the bottomless gulf of perdition etc.

Your Lordships humble Servant J. O. D.
23'th April, 1675.
Fugam Saalis a sancta fide, Sacroque; in quo vixit, ordine, damnant,
redarguuntque Sanctus Ambrosius and Tertullianus.
MAgni periculi res est, si post Prophetarum Oracvla, post Apostolorum
Testimonia, post Martyrum vulnera, veterem fidem quasi novellam discutere
praesumas, and post tam manifestos duces, in errore permaneas. Sanctus
Ambrosius de sanctis Nazario and Celso. Etiam de Olivae nucleo mitis and
opimae, and necessariae asper Oleaster oritur: Etiam de papavere ficus
gratissimae and suavissimae, ventosus and vanus Caprificus exsurgit.

Tertull. de praescript.

I. CHAPTER. A Distribution of the contents of this work.
O Sall tell us what domineeringspirit^ of Darkness, what black Tentation has
drawn you out of the house of God? O misguided soul! thou have forsaken the
Arc to drown thy self in the deluge: harken unhappy man flying out of the
Temple, harken to God crying upon thee. Quid est, quod dilectus meus Ierem.
cap. 11.
fecit in domo mea scellera multa? What is it that my beloved, has in my House
done much wickedness? as if God would say in a complaining way, what have I
done to this man, that he is become so wicked and ungrateful? O Sall
Apostatans a fide feetsts i^ d^m^ Deiscelerae mul^ae!

First. what sin so abominable; as Abjuration of holy faith? which is a
spiritual rebellion, a treason against heaven, a separation from God
eternally, a declared war against the holy Trinity.

Secondly. Deserting your faith, without which there is noe salvation, you have
damned your own soul for all Eternity; And what does it pr^fit^ Matt. cap. 16.
a man, if he gain the whole world, and sustain the damage of his soul, or
what permutation shall a man give for his soul.

Thirdly. The scandal and occasion of sin, you have given to the Catholic
People deserting them in time of trial and persecution, when they most needed
constancy and good example in you and in all Churchmen of the Catholic
Communion, is a sin crying to heaven against you. Woe be to the world by
reason of scandal, and woe to that man by whom scandal comes; does not
Christ himself say? Matt* cap. 18.
He that shall scandalize one of those little ones, that believe in me; it is
expedient to him, that a milston be hanged a bout his neck, and that he be
drowned in the depth of the Sea.

Sall read diligently the Scriptures, and you shall find noe sin more
forewarned, more forbidden, more detested, and more threatened then scandal,
except Idolatry, woe be then to the Sall for having scandalized so many
thousands, to whom you have before brooken the bread of life, and preached
holy Doctrine; if but one of those shall forsake the Catholic Religion by your
evil example, eternal woe will fall upon you: Thy error is a stumbling block
and tentation to the plain simple People: In Ecclesia Dei Vincent. Lyri*
nensis lib. ad* versus prophanas novitates Hares. cap. 1: 21.
(says a Father) tentatio est populi, error Magistri, and tanto major
tentatio, quanto ips^ esset doctior, qui peccar^t. In the Church of God the
Error of the Master is a tentation to the People, and by so much greater is
the tentation, by how much the Master, that gives the scandal, is the more
learned. But my confidence is in amiable Jesus, that he will in his mercy
preserve those little ones, that know not so much as you (those innocent
souls.) Tanquam f^umentum in area sua, ^ qua tu Sall superbiae leuis palea
evolasti carens pondere fortitudinis in fide. As wheat in his Barnflower, out
of which Sall like light chaff of pride thou have flowen away wanting the
weight of fortitude in thy faith.

Look well about you straying lost man, and consider what you have done: you
have fled away from the Camp of Israel to the tents of Philistim; you have
stained (as much as in you lay) the fame and renown of the Order of the
Society of Jesus, you are the first of that Order, of our Country that ever
fell: you have defamed your Nation, you have poluted the ^and of Saints, ( qua
hactenus carebal Monstris.) But such sliders back, and Apostata's as you (and
latly some others) will make our holy I land an Africa: you have in this your
Apostasy despised the power of Allmighty God; you have belyed his truth; you
have again Crucified Jesus; the Angels you have made angry; the Saints you
have dishonored; and men you have offended and scandalized. Dic crgo mihi jam
Sall hominum miserri me, si non feceris scelera multa in domo Dei?

But whither glorying and boasting in that which is your shame (your Apostasy)
(so runs the rumor of you) whither will you turn your face* where will you
hide your self from the wrath of God? where can you find an azile of safty?
who will defend you? who will take your part in the day of Extremity? you are
become, (for which my heart is much grived) lud^brium and fabula in g^ntibus.

Do not say my words are bitter, it is your great sin against heaven makes
me bitter and to quarrel with you; for my custom has been all my life,
pacem habere cum hominibus, and cum vitiis bellum: I follow S. Augustins Rule:
Diligere homines, and interficere errores, naturam amar^, and culpam odio
habere, quia ea faedatur natura, quam homines amamus: So that my Anger against
you at present is piety? and shall pray to be so understood in this whole
tract or confutation of your flight from the Catholic side: for how can I be
longer a frind, to him, that is become a declared Enemy to God and his Angels
by a public Abjuration of holy faith?

In the first place, the manner of of abjuring your Religion (under the Title
of a Recantion etc.) is vile and infamous; could not you have performed this
ungodly bussiness in that Archbishops Chamber (a work of darkness should have
been Smoothered in silence and darkness) noe, but you must have used a
solemnity in facie Ecclesiae Protestantic^, to have many witnesses of your
Ignominys; would any man become bankroote (a great infamy to a Merchant)
Publish his mind to the world? If an incontinent woeman should put out in the
Marketplace a Declaration, that she was to make sale of her body, soul, and
honor, would not all of that sex cry upon her, a shame upon the strumpet,
caute si non cast.

This much to the Title, of what Sall has done, now to what was done, (the
Uggly Abjuration) whereof much is to be said and spoken.

1. What drew Sall out of Gods House.

2. What guide led him the way.

3. Having forsaken the Catholic Religion, what Religion is he become of.

4. Who are the Doctors he has parted with; and who they, he has now
embraced.

5. What Company has he forsaken, and who are they he sticks unto.

6. A discussion upon some principal parts of the Recantation.

7. Certain advertisments to said Sall.

8. The Authors hearty Exhortation unto him for his speedy returning to his
Mother the Roman Catholic Apostolic Church.

Those points I will handle, as briefly as the Importance. Of the matter will
require, and shall endeavor by Gods blessing to give the pious and indifferent
Reader all rational satisfaction.

II. CHAPTFR.
TO the first query. What drew Sall Ad primum.
out of Gods House?

He answers for himself, that he determined this change on a serious examen
and ponderation, he had made upon the XXXIX. Articles of the Confession of the
Church of England, for the safty he found in them for salvation; hear
himself speak in his Recantation. After ernest prayer (says he) to God for
the assistance of his Devine light in so weighty a matter, I penned down for
better consideration the reasons I did hear, read, and conceive against the
Romish tenets controverted; I did also carfully peruse, and seriously reflect
upon the XXXIX. Articles, Canons, and Lithurgie of the Church of England, to be
safer for my salvation, then that of the Roman Church.

You see gentle Reader this man pretended fear of his salvation, if he
remained in the Catholic Communion, and past to that of the Protestant
Religion, for the Devine Doctrine, and satisfaction he found (as he says) in
the XXXIX. Articles of the English Confession.

Truly Sall I took you for a better Devine then to have changed so rashly, and
unlearnedly the party you professed formerly to be of, for any light, truth, or
sanctity, could be found in said XXXIX. Articles (I mean those of them
different from the Catholck Religion.)

One of these Articles ( vigesimus secundus. Cui titulus est de Purgatorio)
runns thus. Romana Doctrina de Purgatorio, Indulgentiis, Veneratione,
Adora^ione, taem Imaginum, quam Reliquiarum, ut and de invocatione Sanctorum
est absurda, and inaniter inventa, nec ulla Scripturae authoritate nititur, sed
potius Dei verb^ repugnat. That is to say: The Roman Doctrine of Purgatory,
Indulgences, Veneration, and Adoration as well of Images, as of Relics, as
also of the Invocation of Saints is absurd, and vainly invented, nor is it
grounded upon any Authority of Scripture, but is rather repugnant to the Word
of God. Sall this is a false profane, heretical Article of thy new Chosen
faith. Whereas the Worship of Images and Relics, (we Catholics, do Worship,
but not adore Images and Relics.) The Doctrine of Purgatory, Indulgences, and
the Invocation of Saints is warranted by Scripture, and Apostolical Tradition,
and has been from age to age, from the very time of the Apostles maintained,
taught and defended by ancient Fathers and Doctors, Nominatim the four most
famous of the Church, Gregory, Ambros, Augustine, and Jerome, as also by the
general Counsels, and the continual practice, and use of the holy Church: and
those who opposed themselves to those tenets and to the Doctrine, derived
touching them, have been condemned in all times as Heretics; Ergo this
Article, you Embrace for a Theoreme, and principle of faith (for so it is in
the English Church) is an heresy, and you an heretic, and so I must esteem
you to be.

If it were my purpose to sift and examine one by one such of these XXXIX.
Articles, as ars different from the Catholic Doctrine, I should not be in
great trouble to prove them to be, (what indeed they are) false and heretical:
but that is done to my hand by a pious learned person, bred in the Protestant
Religion, and for a long time a zealous defender of said XXXIX. Articles; but
after a long and due Examination of the substanc^ of them, he refuted them so
substantially, as to this day noe man of the Church of England has answered
him: I observe in this place, that this Gentleman spent a great deal of time
in deliberation (about seven years) before Adjuring said XXXIX. Articles,
which he once believed, (as you do now Sall) as Articles of faith, which
belief and Doctrine he sucked from his Cradle; much more time I say, he had
bestowed, and deliberation in quitting them, then you have done in deserting
the Catholic Religion, and its holy Communion, in which you were bred and your
parents before you, which can not be spoken but to your shame and infamy: The
light and grace God gave to Mr. White (the Gentleman I speak of) led him out
of Babylon in to Jerusalem; and you without great musing on the weightiest
matter, can ever concern you, the damnation, or salvation of your soul are
fled from Jerusalem to Babylon.

The Title of Mr. Whites Book.

Schismatis Anglicani redargutio Authore Alexandro White ex eodem Schismate
per Dei gratiam ad fidem Catholicam Converso. Viro, qui coripientem dura
cervice contemnet, repentinus ei superreniet interitus, and came Sanitas non
sequetur Proverb. cap. 29. Lovani typis Jeronimi Nempaei 1661. This Book, Sall
if you have it not already, you will find with some of the Priests there.
Such is my opinion, and of the Devines of my side of the sound substance of
this Book, and the Reasons, and Arguments, and Authoritys of Scripture,
Apostolical Tradition, Counsels and Fathers he produces, that I presume
without all vanity to give a Challenge on the behalf of Verity and the Roman
Catholic Church, to you, and to the Protestant Archbishop of Cashell, I say,
I give a Challeng to you both, and all that Profess the XXXIX. Articles in the
three Kingdoms, to make answer to this Book; This is not a Thrasonical
defiance, such as Mr. Jewel, Bell, and others, Protestant Divines made to all
the Catholics in the world of disputing with them about Religion (but the
place of disputing must have been in England, they being sure the state would
not allow thereof) this Challenge is only for answering this Book, wherein Mr.
White has distroy'd the Babell tower of your XXXIX. Articles, which you will
never build up again; This man's Arck has cast down your Dagon; he has
impeached your new English Creed (the XXXIX. Articles) af a treason against
heaven and verity.

I pray you Sall if you have any memory as yet left of me, peruse seriously
and sedato animo this learned Book, one of two effects it will have; that
either it will convert you, or confound you. Now if your ArchBishop, and you,
and the rest of your Devines shall refuse this Challeng, do not vapor
hereafter, of the light Doctrine and Sanctity of your XXXIX. Articles, nor of
your own maistership in Devinity for 18. years in Spain.

My Reader you have heard Sall tell why he went out of the Catholic Church;
But S. Augustine gives another kind of answer wherefore such men go a way from
us. Habent (says the Saint) calumnias suas August. Tom. 8. in Psalm. 118.
Conseio^ 26. 1
Haeretici, habent and Scisma^ici, quos omnes superbia de membrorum Christi
compage proecidit. When men begin highly to prise their own learning and to
censure and contemn the Doctors of Holy Church, general Counsels, and even
the high Priest himself (the Pope) in matters of Religion (as Sall has now
done) and to interpret Scriptures according to their own brain and fancy,
then swelling with vanity they break out of the pales of the Church. Nature is
strong in such kind of men, and grace weak; and so they easily fall into
sin. Quia quod Creatura peccare non possit, habet ex bono gratiae, non ex
condition nature: Poor Sall this presumption has pulled you out of the
Temple, yea periit ipse Angelus superbia tumidus, and propria potestatis
delectatione corruptus; this has been, and is your disease: Smoth the matter
the best you can, pride will be found one of the greatest motives of your
departure from us.

III. CHAPTER.
What Guide led Sall out of the Ad secundum
House of God? it was likly the private Spirit of Protestanisme, a kind of
Serpent, that with hissing whispers infects the brains of curious men, this
spirit has much helped to loose the man. Doctor Whitaker esteemed agreat Devine
in the English Church defines this private spirit to be an inward In Contro*
1. q. 5. C. 3. contrae Bellarum.
perswation of the truth from the Holy Ghost, in the secret Closset of the
believers heart. Sall with this deceiving guide you made your fatal
Transmigration from our side; I would faigne know where in Scripture or the
ancient Fathers did Whitaker find a ground for such a definition of his private
Spirit, he found it nowhere, and therefore likly he made it in a dream.

This Spirit has not been known to the ancient Fathers, and Doctors of the
Church, for full fiftien ages they heard nothing of it, nor do any of us
claim it; it is only a privilege of your Church, a pleasant Imagination, that
makes your people madd. Exempli Gratia. A Protestant, with whom I conferred
about Religion some years past, told me in plain terms, he needed noe light
or assistance from Saint Augustine, or Saint Paul himself for to understand
Scripturs, being certain Jesus, who redeemed his soul, would have a care,
that he should not err in expounding of Scripture or any thing that touched
his salvation; I demanded from him* could he prove by Scripture, he had that
infaliable spirit or sacred light, he answered he could, and cited that place
of David. Signatum Psalm. 4.
est super nos Lumen vultis tui Domine. The light of thy Countenance O Lord is
signed upon us. I told him that Lumen was commonly expounded to be ipsa ratio,
by which man is the image of God, as he might read in the Book of Genesis, and
that by this light man was in his nature distinguished from a brute, and that a
Turck and a Pagan also had this light as well as he, and by a good
consequence had an infalible private spirit of expounding Scripturs as well as
he. I also assured him that his own Devines would tell him the light
understood by David was noe other then reason, which is the image of God,
whereto we are created like, which was fixed in our understanding, that we
may see and know, there is a God, that ought to be served, adored, and loved,
and that he will reward his servants. Next, said I, it is absurdity to say, that
a Pagan which denis Scripturs, should have a spirit to expound the Scripturs,
which follows from your opinion. But this and all I could say, could draw noe
other answer from the man, then that he was sure he had himself from God an
infalible spirit of rightly understanding the Scripture. In which he walked
Religiously according to Doctor Whitak^rs definition of the private Spirit.

We Catholics, that have nothing to do with this private Spirit, do firmly
believe, God has given a special Grace, and infalible Spirit of expounding
the Scripture, and defining Theorems of faith to general Counsels assembled
together in the Holy Ghost; ( Vbi duo vel tres congregati sunt in nomine meo,
ibi ero in medio illorum.) That likewise the Pope has this infalible Spirit,
quando loquitur ex Cathedra; but private men, be they ever so great Saints or
learned, we do not allow this infalibility unto them, though we doubt not,
but the Doctors of the Church, who submitts themselves in all to the Church are
specially assisted by the Holy Ghost in interpreting the word of God.

The pride of this private Spirit makes Protestants to make noe account of the
ancient Fathers and Doctors, nor of general Counsels, or any diffinition or
determination of the Church; Ex. G. the second Counsel of Nice defines the
Doctrine of Tradition in this manner. Si quu Traditionem Ecclesiae sive scripto,
sive consuetudine valentem non curaverit, anathema sit. The private spirit of
Doctor Whitaker spurning at this Council said. General Counsels may err.
Behold one Doctor of the English Church does blast with a breath, all the
authority and creditt of this general Council: Tell me Sall is not this a
Spirit of pride in Doctor Whitaker a little Pigme contesting with so many
tale Giants of Sanctity and learning, all the Biphops, and great Doctors of
that famous Council?

If we produce the Authority of Fathers, and Saints excellently learned, as
Cyprian, Gregory, Ambross, Ierom, Augustine and others, behold the Father of
Protestanisme, your prime Doctor Luther (whom your Church terms a holy man and
the Hely-as of Germany) speaks resolutly. Gods Word is above all, the Devine
Majesty makes for me, in so much, as I regard not, if a thousaad Augustins,
and as many Cyprians stood against me. Was this man in his senses, Luth. Tom.
2 contra Henricum Regem Angliae.
when he vapered in this kind? but how did Luther prove the devine Majesty
made for him? by noe other means, but by his private infalible spirit, which
he supposed (though by Scripture he could not prove it) he himself had, and
those Saints had it not. See now Sall if you are happy in having Luther a
monster of sin with his private Spirit on your side, and Cyprian, Augustine,
and the rest of holy Doctors against you, whom you have forsaken to stick unto
Luther.

By this private Spirit you Protestant Domineer over all sorts of men,
interpreting Scripture as you please, and who interprets otherwise, be they
universitys, Doctors, Fathers, Counsels, yea and the very high Bishop of old
Rome himself, all err; and why so? because they have not the private Spirit
of Protestanisme: what a rediculous thing this is, even Common reason teaches
us.

By this private Spirit you Protestants admit for Canonical Scriptures all you
please, and you declare Apocriphall what you please; by this Spirit you take
what Traditions you please, and by the same reject what you please: by this
Spirit you dis^anon the Books of the Machabees, Ecclesiasticus, and others,
those said Books have bine acknowledge S. Aug. in doct. Christ. l. 2 c. 8. Can.
47.
for Canonical by Saint Augustine, and the third Council of Africa.

You will doubtless tell me, that your chiefest Doctors Luther and Calvin had
this infallible Spirit in expounding the Scriptures, and yet they give quite
contrary interpretations, of one and the same passage of Scripture, as this:
Hoc est Corpus meum. Luther understands Matt. cap. 26.
that Text Secundum Litteram, and says it is so of faith to be understood, and
condemns for Heretics the Sacramentariant, Swinglians, and Calvinistes, who
understand that place figuratively.

Luther has this saying Englished; I do Luth. Ep. ad Har vagium Tom. 7.
Wit: f 380. and art 28. contra Lovanienses Tom. 2. Wit. f. 503.
protest before God and the world, that I do not agree with them (the
Sacramentarys) nor ever will, while the world stands, but will have my hands
clear from thee blood of those sheep which these Heretics do drive from
Christ, deceive and kill. And again in the same place: Cursed be the Concord
and Charity of Sacramentaryes for ever, and ever to all Eternity. Luther he
understands the above cited place literally, and possitively affirms, that the
body and blood of Christ is realy, and substancially in the Sacrament of the
Altar. (He likewise affirms (but erroniously) that bread is there with the body
of Christ: Calvin takes a quite Contrary way, and affirms possitively the Body
and blood of Christ is not realy and substantially in the Sacrament but
figuratively, see as he expounds this Text: Hoc est Corpus meum, thus. Hac est
figura Corporis mei: now what is more different then the Body of Christ to be
realy in the Sacrament, and the Body of Christ not to be realy in the
Sacrament: Sall reconcile the best you can these two great Doctors of your
Church, for plain reason tells us, if the Spirit of one of them be true, the
other must be a lying Spirit. And those are the men, these Monsters of
incontinency and pride covered with all sort of vices, are the Doctors and
Masters you have now chosen.

Seeing then this private lying Spirit approves of expounding Scripture at will
and pleasure, allowing only such exposition of Gods Word, as sorts well to the
supporting of their own errors; seeing it tramples all Authority, of
Counsels, Fathers, and Doctors, who expounded Gods Word differently from the
Protestant Church; seeing it ingenders, contrariety in Doctrine, even in the
injoyers thereof, (as was now showed in Luther and Calvin) through each man's
misconstruction of Scripture: To conclude seeing the exorbitancy, pride and
petulancy of this Spirit is such, that it expects, that all men should receive
from it (as from a second Moses) the Tables of our Evangelicall Law; I pray
sit down and saddly consider what you have done in following this pestiperous
Spirit, and wandering with it have separated your self from your holy Mother
the Church.

IV. CHAPTER.
BEfore resolving any thing upon this Ad tertum.
quere (to wit, of what Religion is Sall become having forsaken the Catholic
Religion.

I must tell you he has been weakly armed against the evil temptation that
overcame him, he has not been a tale strong oak resisting the storm satan
raised against him, but a wavering reed without strength or stay: he stood not
stiffly upon the Rock of Peter, but yielded without fighting; Tempore
tentationis recessit: harken weak pusilanimus Sall to old Tertulian telling
you; Quod Hereses apud Tertul. prescrip. cap. 2.
eos multum valiant, qui infide non valent. That is, that Heresies are strong
against those, who are not strong in their faith: To vanquish a coward, that
makes noe resistance is but a small Glory and Victory for a Champion, the
tentation that mastered you, was like to such a Champion, Illa tentatio vicit
te, non quia non potuit ipsa vinci and repelli, sed quia tu, qui victus es,
nullarum virium fuisti. That tentation mastered you not because the tentation
was strong, and could not be vanquished, but because you, that was vanquished,
was of noe force or resolution.

Tertulian speaks much to the same purpose in those terms: Hereses de
quorundam infirmitatibus habent, quod valiant, non valentes si been valentes
fidem incurrant. That is to say, Hereses take their force from the weakeness
of some, but would have noe force if they encountered men strong in faith, You
have been indeed cast down, because you would not stand and fight, for I dare
affirm there are hundreds of simple honest laymen Catholics borne in
Ireland, would have rather suffered torments and death it self, then abjure
their faith as you have don, for that they would have made good use of the
Grace God has given them, as you have not done, but like a languishing man
have yielded to that black* temptation, over which they would have tryumphed:
It was exellently said of the formentioned Tertulians: Nemo saepiens est nisi
fidelis, nemo major nisi Christianus, nemo Christianus, nisi qui usque ad finem
perseveraverit: Behold this Sage Father holds noe man wise, but a man strong in
his faiih, noe man great or noble but a Christian, noe man a Christian, but he
that continues stout and faithful to God in Combatts and temtations, and more
especialy when the storm of persecution rises; upon this trial you fainted
and forsook your Master, and your Religion, and now of what Religion I beseech
you are you? I am, say you, a Protestant, a true Child of the Church of
England; but of what Sect or kind of Protestants are you, is a new Queere, for
under this Notion of Protestant, pass Lutherans, Calvinist, Moderat, and Rigid,
Swinglians, Anabaptists, Phanaticts, or the last Sect, which calls themselves
Quakers.

Shall I speak my mind to you, having gone out of the Roman Catholic Church,
and quit the faith therein professed, all along from the Apostles times till
this day, you are of noe Religion; for all the rest is but Paganism, Judaysme,
and Heresy. This assertion is evident out of the great Doctor of Nations in his
Epistle to the Ephesians where he says plainly: Vnus Dominus, una Fidos, unum
Baptisma, Ad Ephesians. cap. 4.
One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. Ergo there are not two faithes to be saved
in, but one only, and that the Roman Catholic Faith; that noe man can be saved
without this sole only faith Saint Paul teaches clearly in his Epistle to the
Hebrews as thus. Sine fide autem imposibele est placere Deo, the words
following give evidently the (reason) Credere enim eportet accedentem ad Deum,
Epist. ad Hebr. cap. 11.
quia est and inquirentibus se remunerator sit. But without faith it is
imposible to please God, for he that comes to God, must believe that he is,
and is a rewarder to them that seek him.

That the Roman Catholic Faith, is that only true faith, wherein men are to be
saved, is evidently confirmed, for that it is taught and defended only in the
Roman Catholic Church, which has the true signs and propertys of a true
Church, for that she is one only, and can not be many; that she is visible;
and visibly dispersed over the whole world, and therefore Catholic and
Universal; that she is infallible and can not be deceived, nor deceive,
depending in her Doctrine upon the infallible Revelation of God, being assisted
with Christ's promise of the perpetual presence of the Holy Ghost with her,
and consequently can never fail or fall into error; that she contains not
only the good, or the elect in this life, but also diverse wicked members, as
the barn does both wheat and chaff; that likewise she has continued
perpetually visible from Christ to our days by manifest Successions of Popes
and Bishops, known to the world, and shall so to the end; that there is noe
hope of salvation out of this Church, and without this Faith, though aman live
otherwise never so well, or give never so much Alms, or give even his blood,
or suffer never so much for Christ his name.

We know there are some that say, and hold, that Catholics and Protestants
can be saved each in his own Religion; But that is a desperate Opinion, and
the refuge of a very Carless Conscience, if not void of all faith: Noe
Catholic is of this mind, they are only Protestants that say so, for we
Catholics hold with the Fathers of the Church, that salvation is only, (as
before was said) to be found in the Catholic Church, among others Saint
Irenaeus and Tertulian near the Apostles time, and after them Epiphanius,
Theodoret, and Saint Augustine, do specially treat of this matter. The reason
is evident, in as much as Catholics, and Protestants do disagree in
substantial Articles and Theorems of Christian faith, their disagreements
being known to be in above a hundred points great and small; partly about the
Godhead of Christ; his Church, head, members, and Authority thereof in his
descent to hell; remission of sins; all which are Articles of the common
Creed; partly about the Sacraments both of their nature, number, force, and
efficacy; about the Real Presence, the effect of Baptism, external
Sacrifices, Purgatory, and the Invocation of Saints, praying for the dead,
faith and works, manner of Justification, and the like. All which are known
to be very substantial points.

It is therefore very absurd, and plainly tending to a secret kind of Athisme,
to uphold the Catholic and Protestant Religion do not differ in substantial
points; and the differrence being supposed (as it must be) it is an Heresy to
hold the Catholics and Protestants may be saved each in his own Religion and
Profession; but Catholics can be saved in theirs, which can not be said of the
Protestant and his for being out of the Arc, Debet perire (as Saint Jerome
says) regnante deluvio.

Consider therefore Sall having departed out of the Catholic Church, what
Eternity you may wait for, an Eternity of Flames, darkness and inconsolable
lamentation, Vbi ignis and Sulphur, and spiritus procellarum pars calicis
eorum: this shall be your inheritance.

I must confess learned men, unless careless, are not so easily intrapped by
Heretics; for all this I see with all your Mastership of Philosophy, and
Divinity in Spaigne you have bine deluded and circumvented by the Protestant
Archbishop of Cashel, who likly is not an unlearned man; he has not been
carless in working your eternal ruin and undoeing, and it is usually the
principal care of Heretics to pervert true believers as Tertulian does
excellently teach. Studium est (says he) Heriticis Tert. d^ praeser. cap. 42.
sua variare, nostra subvertere; de verbi autem administratione quid dicam; cum
hodie sit negotium illis, non Ethnices convertendi, sed nostros evertendi: hanc
magis gloriam captant, si stantibus ruinam, non si jacentibus Elevationem
operentur, quoniam and ipsum opus eorum non de suo proprio edeficio venit, sed
de veritatis destructione; nostra suffodiunt, ut sua edificent.

This Archbishop has thrown you, that stood before in true faith and the way
of Salvation; he has done just according to what Tertulian tells you: Quod
non sit negotium Hereticis Ethnicos convertends. That it is not the bussiness
of Heretics to convert Ethnicks, which is most true, and for the better
satisfying you therein, inquire I beseech you of said Archbishop, if any of the
English Protestants Divines, since the Subscribing and Establishment of the
XXXIX. Articles in that Kingdom did ever pass into Japonia or to any other
Province or part of the Indies, to give and spread the light of the Gospel
(of which they boast so much themselves to be the true and only expounders and
Preachers) to convert Heathens and Idolaters, you shall not I think find one.
But of the French Nation two of the Geneva Minions and Ministers navigated into
the French quarters possessed by them in the Indies, but lived so
incontinently, and lewdly, and so disagreed among themselves in their
principles, that one of them was forced to write to Beza of their fruitless
progress in those parts, who answered him, it was not Gods pleasure the word of
God should be Evangelized by them to those blinded Idolaters, and so prayed
them to return from their Mission, and leave that work to the Jesuits whom
he calls Locusts, Beza's own words are: Neque vere nobis hic Beza
dediversiis Ministrorum gradibus printed Londini CI^. 10 XCIIII. cap. 19. page
309.
curiose inquirendum puto number ad omnes gentes pervenerint Apostoli nec etiam
magnopere nobis de legatione ad remotissimas aliquas gentes laborandum, quam
nobis domi and in propinquo sit satis superque, quod nos and Posteros exerceat,
has igitur potius tam longinquas peregrinationes Lucustis illis etc. Jesus
Nomen ementientibus relinquamus etc. Neither are we (I think) to inquire very
ceriously whether the Apostles came to all Nations, nor are we to take great
care of any Mission to every remote Nations, seeing we have at home, and near
at hand that may exercise us and those that may come after us, therefore let us
leave those foreign preregrinations to those Locustes that falsely bear the
Name of Jesus etc. Sall you may see how much Beza differed from the Apostolic
zeal and Spirit in his uncharitable, and profane disclayme in all care of
converting Heathen Nations to the Faith of Christ, leaving that (professedly)
to the Jesuits. This Resolution in him Dr. Saravia (a learned Calvinist)
condemn's for unchristian in these words. Responsionem hujusmodi a Domino Beza
non expectabam, nec a quoquam Theologo, cui Ena^gelii Predicatio cordi sit, ut
esse debet, etc adserere judico impium and ab omni Christiana Charitate alienum
That is, I did not expect an answer of this nature from Mr. Beza, nor from any
Devine, that takes to heart the preaching of the Gospel as he should have
etc. And I Judge it Impious and far from Christian Charity to be of that
Opinion. Saravia means Beza's Opinion.

But of Catholic Devines and Missioners rightly ordered and sent by the Church
of Rome, very many have gone into America, and other Provinces and Countries to
denounce the word of God, and many of them have made great Conversions. for
example, did not Saint Francis Xaverius the most glorious starr of the Society
of Jesus convert so many thousand thousands of souls in I^ponia, and wherever
he came? and therefore justly deserved the glorious Title and Name of Apostle
of the Indies; are you not confounded in your soul when I name Saint
Xaverious, the true Spiritual Father in Christ by the Gospel of so many
thousand thousands of Pagans (not such a Father in Christ as the Protestant
Archbishop of Cashell whom to your eternal infamy you call your Father in
Christ by the Gospel.) While you desert the Catholic Religion he professed,
as also the order; (of which both he and you somtymes have been members) this
Saint did not hold for safe Articles of Salvation your XXXIX. Ariicles, he did
not reject the Doctrine of Purgatory and Indulgences, and the Worship of Images
and Relics, prayers to Saints, and for the dead, and the like, as you have
shamefully to your eternal perdition done, he would have died for maintaining
these Articles of Faith: will you in the mean time dare say Xav^rius is not a
Saint, and Citizen of the triumphant Jerusalem? if you deny he is a Saint; his
Virtue and Miracles gives you the Lie; and if you venerate him for a Saint (as
I think in your heart you do) you must grant he dyed in a true saving Faith,
without which he could not be a Saint! what Faith? the Roman Catholic
Apostolic, and therefore in the Roman Catholic Church, he is a Canonized
Saint. Now granting him to be a Saint, Sall consider well if you have don
wisely in forsaking the faith Xaverius a great Servant of God professed.

Now Sall if you will be pleased to take a little pains in running over Doctor
King Bishop of Londons Legacy, or motius in Changing the Protestant Religion,
and becoming Catholic, you will confess your self to have committed a great
and unexcusable folly in your Choice and Change in Religion, the rather that
said Doctor King makes evident that your chiefest Doctors Luther and Calvin
were Patrons of Arianisme, which he proves thus: Is it not Vidi Enchirid
precum Ann^ 1541.
confessed that Luther was so adverss to the blessed Trinity, that he would
not brook this verse to stand in the Latanys, holy Trinity one God have mercy
upon us, affirming the word Trinity to be a human Invention and to sound
coldly; and hence it is that Luther in these ensuing words disgorgeth forth his
poison against the most sacred Trinity: Anima mea odit OMOUSION; and optime
exigerunt Ariani, ne vocem illam prophanam and novam regulis fidei statui
liceret. That is: My soul even bated the word Homousion, or consubstantialis;
and the Arians justly urged, that this profane and new word should not be
inserted within the rules or principles of our Faith. Now to Calvin, we do
find (said Doctor King) Calvin to tread the stepps of Luther in disalowing
that former prayer; Holy Trinity one God have mercy upon us. For thus Calvin
writes: Precatio, sanctae Trinitas unus Deus miserere nostri mihi non In
Epist. 2. ad Polonus de Trinitate page 700.
placet, ac omnino Barbariem sapit. That is, that prayer holy Trinity one God
have mercy upon us pleases me not, for it wholly taste^h of Barbarism.

Said Doctor King further teaches in these motives; that foul deceipts and
sleights and falcifications are practiced by Protestant writers; that your
XXXIX. Articles of Protestancy are Heresies; that true Miracles have been
wrought for proof of the Catholic Religion, but never any for Protestancy;
that there is unity in Catholic Religion, and disagreements in Protestancy;
that the Doctrine of Catholic Religion tends directly to Virtue, of Protestancy
to vice and liberty. When you shall attentively read this learned man's motius,
why and wherefore he quitted the Protestant Religion and became Catholic, you
must hold your self for a madd man for having forsaken the Catholic Religion
to become Protestant.

The last motive (the 12. which is most to be considered of all, in order to
safty) is that Salvation may be had in the Catholic Religion, even by the
Confessions of Protestant Devines and Writers, (and likely some of them have
signed the XXXIX. Articles) whence he Derives an undeniable Consequence, that
the Catholic Religion is the safest: he discourses to this purpose; both the
sides and the learnedest of both the sides Confess and agree salvation can be
obtained in the Roman Catholic Faith, that same faith which has been
professed and maintaned, by Popes, Catholic Bishops, and Catholic
Congregations directed and governed by them in Spiritualibus; in Confirmation
of which the Catholic Saints in our Littanys, are acknowledged for Saints by
the Protestants; but all the Catholic side hold that Protestants cannot be
saved in their Religion, (the Religion of the XXXIX. Articles.) Ergo (says
Doctor King) it is Wisdom and the safest way to Embrace the Catholic
Religion, acknowledged by both sides, for the safest to Salvation.

I will conclude this discourse in giving you Doctor Kings own words upon this
subject (with which he coucludes his book of motives) excellent persuading
words.

But here do present unto us, (says Doctor King) two Porismata or
resultancyes, out of the premises of this passage. The first, that all true
reason persuades The 12 Motive page 165. 166. 167.
me to implant and ingraft my self in that Church, which I find to be
ackowledged, for the true Church, promising salvation t^ her members, even by
her adversarys. For if I dye Catholic (my life being agreeable thereto) both
Catholics and Protestants warrants my S^lvation; but dying in the Faith of
Protestancy, the Protestants alone (and this in honor of their own Religion)
assure me of it, for there is never a learned Catholic writer in the world
(an observation much to be weighed) who grants, that a Protestant dying with
a positive, settled, and coutumacious neglect of the Catholic Church and Faith,
can be saved. This then being ^hus, shall I in so great a bussiness leave a
certainty for an uncertainty? God forbid. We Protestants expeot to be believed
in other our positions and Doctrins; why not then in this? Since then the
Protestants do teach, that Catholics (so dying) are in state of Salvation, I
am resolved, my Brethrens wrytings shall have that powerful Influence over
me, as what themselves do heerin teach, I will (through Gods Grace) put in
Execution. And so my will shall become in this point, a ready and serviceable
handmayd to their Judgments.

The second. The wrong, which we Protestants commit, in afflicting the
Catholics, and in unnaturally be^rampling upon their dejected estates, only
for matters of Religion. Alas! by our own Doctrine, they are neither
Babylonians, nor Egyptians; both they and we being (as we teach) Israelits;
why then should Israel thus persecute Israel? Are we not become the gaze of
Christendom, thus to fight without an Enemy? thus for Kindred to wound its
own Kindred, yea often the Father the Son? so turning our own Swords into
our own Childrens breasts; we still inciting his Majesty to greater severity
(a Prince of his own Disposition, of the most benign, merciful, and
commiserating nature, that the world at this day enjoys) and all this for the
Catholics living in that Faith and Religion; in which our selves teach, they
may be saved; thus do we make the confessed hope of their Salvation^ to be
the sole cause of their pressures and callamityes. Good God! who would think,
that Christians, the chiefest Articles of whose Faith are either reputed but as
indifferencyes, or (which is more) believed for true Doctrine by their
oppressors; whose Church is acknowledged to be the D. Morton ubi supra.
Church of God houlding the foundation of the Gospel; the M. Hooker ubi supra.
family of Jesus Christ; it being noe several M. Bunni ubi supra.
Church from theirs, nor theirs from it; houlding D. Field ubi supra.
a saving Profession of the truth in Christ; in which many D. Covell with
theother doctors ubi supra.
dying are by their adversaries registered for most glorious Saints; Should
never the less be persecuted by either Christians of their own Country (yea
their own flesh) for their only persevering in the a foresaid Church, with
Confisca^ion of goods, restraint of body, some^ymes with sheeding of most
inno^ent blood, and suffering a cruel death: Obstupecite ( e) coeli super hoc,
and portae ^jus desolamini vehementer.

Here now I will stay my pen, making this last motive, as a fitting
Catastrophe for all: Since that Closure, ( i) Hierem cap. 2.
and end is warrantable enough, which evicteth from the ingenious Confessions
of the most learned Protestants, that I may be saved in that Religion* wherein
I am, resolved to dye.

I think Sall you can not meet with a stronger argument, then Doctor Kings
unanswerable discourse, for bringing you backagaine to your Mother the
Catholic Church.

V. CHAPTER*
TO the fourth Quere. ( Who are Ad quartum.
the Doctors Sall parted from, and who those new ones he embraced) It is
easily answered; he has quitt the four great Doctors of Gods Church, holy
Saints, Gregory, Ambrosse, Augustine, and Jerome, and all the ancient Fathers,
and Catholic Doctors: how famous these four Doctors were, for great Sanctity,
Learning and Authority, is sufficiently known over all the world: They have
been the Lights, Pillars, Champions, and Ornaments of the Church, profound in
humility, flaming with Charity, Conspicuous in their Conversation, sublime in
their Comtemplation, zealous in converting Souls, and defending the House of
God; they have been such, as Saint Paul desires Gods Servants to be:
Abnegantes impietatem, and secularia desideria, Ad Titum cap. 2.
sobrie just and pie viventet in hoc seculo, expectantes beatam spem and
adventum Gloriae magni Dei, and salvatoris nostri Jesu Christ's. Cum quo jam
triumphant in Caelo. That is, denying Impiety, and wordly desires, living
soberly, justly, and Godly in this world, expecting the blessed hope of the
great God, and our savior Jesus Christ; with whom they now triumph in heaven.

What more glorious then Gregory, and what more humble then he set on the holy
Chair of Peter; noe less praised and honored for flying and hyding himself
from that highest Dignity on earth, then in enjoying it?

Did the world see a more holy and stouter Bishop then Ambross? what Combats
had he with Emperors, and potentates for Piety and Religion, and in all had
the Victory.

Soon after being consecrated conferring with the good Imperour Valentiniane
the elder about great affairs of Church and Common Wealth, he complained in a
grave speech, (for he was very eloquent) that Potentates in those days much
oppressed the People, instigated thereunto by wicked members, that were about
them; this worthy Emperor was noe way offended with this Christian, and
Priestly Liberty, but praising Ambross his Candid mind, said to him: Noveram
prius hanc tuam Ambrosi libertatem, macte igitur vertute, age quod tui muneris
est, cnra, ut res Christiana consistat incolumis, ut vetteris Religionis
Disciplina incorrupta perseveret doce, quae amare, doce quae sugere debeamus.
That is; Ambross, I knew your Liberty, take Courage, do what appertains to a
good Bishop, have a care, that the great affair of Christians be safe and
sound, that the Discipline of the ancient Religion persever untoucht, teach us
what we ought to love, and what to fly. O wise and Godly Emperor! thus began
Ambross with a holy freedom and so persevered till his dying day.

One of the greatest Combats he had for Religion, and the Glory of God was
with Iustina the Empress a perverse Arrian, and a fervent protectrix of that
Sect. This Lady after the death of her husband Valentinian (in whose life time
she dared not declare her self to be what she was an Arrian) she began to
belch out the poison within her and to afflict sharply Saint Ambrose. She
furiously angry against the holy man for opposing himself to the Arrians
resolved to have him bannished, thinking by that means to pull down a strong
Pillar of Gods House and to raise up Arrianisme: she made account she was
able to accomplish her wicked undertaking, her Son Valentinian the Emperor
being young, and in her power and Disposition; to him she complained that
Ambrose had contumeliously dishonored her, here upon the young Emperor (who
much loved his Mother) became incensed against the good Bishop, and commanded
him (being there unto incited by his Mother, and others of that Religion) to
come to court and dispute with some of the Arrians, but he refused to come,
saying he would not honor obstinate Heretics with any conferrence or
Disputation, they being obliged to believe as the Universal Church did,
otherwise were liable to punishment according to the laws made against
Heretics in that case; this denial being made, the Empress procured a
peremptory command from her Son to Ambross, to deliver up a Basilica or
great Church to the Arrians for their Communion, and a band of Soldiers
(employed to that effect) were to bring him prisoner, if he refused it. The
Saint was then praying God in the Church, and singing Psalms with his flock,
the people though unarmed proffered to defend their Father, but he would have
noe resistance made (he was sure the Angels of God attending their Lord in
the House of Prayer would defend him, and so it happened for the Souldery did
not lay hands on him, but asked him with all mildness and humility in the
Emperors name a Church for the Arrians,) but he flattly denied what the
Emperor demanded, and said he neither would, nor could deliver to the
Empress Gods inheritance, his Church to be poluted by Heretics, that in this
matter he could not obey the Emperor, and that he feared not prison, or
death it self in so good a quarrel: It was then he spoke that Devine and
magnificent Language: Soluimus, quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari, and Ambr. Tom. 3.
and 5. Epist, Oratin Auxentium de Basilicis tradendis*
quae sunt Dei, Deo; tributum Caesaris est, non negatur, Ecclesiae Dei est,
Caesari utique non debet addici, quia jus Caesaris esse non potest Dei Templum;
quod cum honorificentia imparatoris nemo dictum potest negare, quid enim
honorificentius, quam ut imperator Ecclesiae Filius esse dicatur? quod cum
dicitur, sine peccato dicitur, cum gratia dicitur. That is* We have paid to
Caesar, what was Caesar's, and to God, what was Gods; tribute is due to Caesar,
it cannot be denied the Church is Gods, it can not be given to Caesar, because
the Temple of God cannot be Caesar's right; which noe man can deny is said with
honor to Caesar. What is more commendable and honorable then for the Emperor
to be called a Child of the Church, which is spoken, without sin, and without
offense of Caesar, and with great Grace and respect.

After this by a letter to his sister Marcellina he gave an ample account of
what had past in this bussiness, and said these words. Mandatur denique tradi
Ambr. Tom. 3. E. L. Epist- 33. ad Marcelinam Sororem.
Basilica, respondeo: nec mihi fas est tradere, nec tibi accipere imperator
expedit, allegatur; imperatori licere omnia, ipsius esse universa, respondeo:
noli te gravare Imperator, ut putes te in ea, quae Divina sunt imperiale
aliquod jus habere, noli te extollere, sed si vis diutius imperare, esto Deo
subditus, scriptum est, quae Dei, Deo; quae Caesaris, Casari. That is: It was
commanded by Caesar a Church should be given up, I answer, I have noe power O
Emperor to give a way a Church, nor is it expedient for you to receive it. It
is aleadged, all things are lawful to the Emperor, that all apertaine to him.
I answer: do not trouble your self O Emperor, do not think you have any
imperial right to those things that are Devine, do not extol your self but
if you have a mind to reign long, be subject and obedient to God: for it is
written quae Dei, Deo; quae Caesaris, Caesari.

What speech was ever spoken by a Bishop more sound and glorious then that of
Saint Ambrose to Auxentious the Arrian: Imperator bonus intra Ecclesiam, non
supra Ecclesiam est. That is, a good Emperor is within the Church, not above
the Church. And after said to the Emperor himself: Domum-privati non potes
jure temerare, Domum Dei existimas auferendam) You cannot rightly violate a
private man's House, and do you think the House of God can be taken away? and
said further: Ad Imperatorem pertinent Palatia, ad Sacerdotem Ecclesiae;
publicorum tibi moenium jus Commissum est, non Sacrorum. That is: The Palaces
appertain to the Emperor, Churches to the Priest. To thee O Emperor the
right and defense of the wales of the City is committed, not of Churches, or
holy Places.

Saint Ambress his mind is clear and evident by his words, to wit, that he
acknowledges the Emporour Lord of Palaces, and of the Wales of the City, but
not of Churches, for he allowed no power or Jurisdiction to the Fmperour, over
or in the Church.

Sall you see how Ambrose by this undaunted generous answer denied to yield to
the Emperor one Basilica or Church, for the Liturgy of the Arriaens the
Empress being of that Religion, and you have joined in Communion and Religion
with those Protestant Bishops and Clergymen, that made and signed the XXXIX.
Articles, and delivered up to Queen Elizabeth all the Churches in England, and
all Eeclesiasticall Jurisdiction and power over themselves, and all the people;
in Spiritualibus, which I am a shamed to write; with those I say, you have
joined, denying to the Pope, (against all piety and reason) over that Kingdom
and People all Spiritual Superiority, and therein you separate to your great
shame from Saint Ambrose.

The next conflict Ambross had, was with Maximus who had killed the young Prince
Gracianus, the holy Bishop goeing to seek the body of the dead Prince, behaved
himself like a noble and stout Prelate; he excomunicated the Tyrant for
sheding Innocent blood, and commanded him to do severe penance for so
cruel a Murder.

After this, Ambrose had a great encounter with the Emperor Theodosious, which
fell out in this manner.

Theodosius, after defeating the Tyrant Eugenius, who was killed in the fight,
(which victory he atributed to Saint Ambrosse's prayers and power with God)
being transported with an implacable anger against the Citizens of
Thessalonica for the death of one of his Courtiers slain by that People in a
tumult; to revenge this man's death, he invited the People to the Spectacula,
or usual pastymes in those days, and gave order to the armed Souldery to
inviron and Massacre the innocent multitud, without Distinction of Age or sex;
there were slain by this blooddy Edict seven thousand Souls.

This butchery being ended the Emperor took his way for Millan, and thinking
according to his ordinary custom to go to the Church, Saint Ambross with a
Godly anger opposed himself, and denied him ingress giving him a severe
reprehention in this kind. Quid (inquit) tentas Caesar? quid moliris? tune
Domini Templum post tam Crudelem innocentium hominum stragem intrare audes?
noli Caesar, noli Priorem iniquitatem tuam haec te-meritate aug^re; exhorresco,
hoc tam immane facinus, and tuum gladium civium Innocentium, tam iniqua morte
cruentnm videre non possum? Glamat (Caesar) de Terra ad Caelum contra te
Sanguis innocentum. That is: What do you atempt Caesar? what are you about to
do? do yon dare to enter Gods Tem^le after so Cruel a Massacre of Innocent
People? Caesar do not, do not augment the sin you have committed with this
new Temerity; I abhor thy cruel Act, and I cannot endure to see your sword
blooddy with the unjust death of so many innocent Citizens: Caesar the blood
of the Innocent Cries to heaven against you.

What did the Emperor in this encounter, receeving so sharp a rebuke? he
revered the reprehention and the liberty of the holy Bishop, and began to
lament bitterly his great sin, and so retired to his Palace, not daring to
enter the Church; I may in this place say: O Incomparabilem Pontisicis
dignitatem! O Imperatoris pi^tatem insignem! Soon after came on the feast of
the Nativity, when the Emperor much afflicted for his being kept out of the
Church, sent Rufinus prefect of the Palace, to have the Excomunication taken
of, this powerful Courtier made account the Saint would instantly yield, but
the Bishop would not hear him, wherefore the Emperor wholly compunct and
penitent, came in person to Ambrose, humbly demanding he would give him
Entrance into the Church, on that holy Feast, that he^ might partake of the joy
the poorest men in the City enjoyed: but the Bishop said: Quid agis Caesar?
quid poscis? number tam immane scelere tuo dignam penitudinem ostendisti? tuum
est, (said Caesar) remedia dare, meum accipere, imper^ quid fieri velis; non
obsisto: hoc solum ambio, ut cum Deo meo in Gratiam redire possem. That is.
What do you Caesar? what seek you from me? have you done condign penance
for so great a sin? It is (said Caesar) your part to command and praescribe
a remedy, and myno to receive the same: Command what you will have done, I
shall not resist; this only I seek, that I may be reconciled to my God.

Then Ambrose seeing and admiring Caesar's most Christian example in contrition
and obedience received him into the Church with great joy of all the People.
Was ever under the heavens a more noble and pious contention then this between
Tbeodosius and Ambrose? I have enlarged my self a little longer, (though I
hope not unprofitably) upon this rare History, and example of the zeal and
fortitude of a good Bishopl, and of the piety and obedience of a good Emperor.

Had we in this age but a few Ambroses, they would (I dare say) make the
Church of God, and the Monarchy of the world more Godly, and happier then now
they are.

And how to Saint Augustine. Was there ever from the Creation of the world a
more learned and humble man then this Saint? What Heresiarch in his time lifted
up his head, that he did not refute and knock down? do not all learned men
at this day draw from him, as from a Spring and Fountain all Wisdom and
Learning? Who among men was a greater defender, of verity and the Church then
he? What quantity of vollumes and books has he set forth to this effect? no^
Doctor profounder, none more learned, nor more penetrating hard questions and
difficultyes, in Scripture, Fathers, and Divinity then he, but in nothing more
glorious then in his humble Books of Confessions. Are not you Sall confounded
in your soul for parting from this great Catholic and most holy and learned
Doctor, and adhering to those new unCatholick Bishops of England with their
XXXIX. Articles (for the most part of them condemned Heresies) who have but the
titulary name of Bishops, and noe holy Order at all, and consequently cannot
confer holy Orders on others, wherefore as was well observed by a late Author,
the Church of England is noe Church, because it wants Priest and Sacrifice.

What shall I say now of holy Hierome, the great Oracle of the world for
expounding Scriptures, to him from all Places, and Provinces, Fathers and
learned men did write for clearing and resolving deep difficultyes, and obscure
senses of the Scripture; who a greater Enemy to his body then this Saint? Who
more mortified? what an austere life did he lead in the Wilderness of Syria?
where he cried out in this Language.

O quoties ego ipse in eremo constitutus, Epist: 22. ad Eustochium.
and in illa vasta solitudine, quae exusta solis ardoribus, horridum Monachis
prestat habitaculum, putabam me Roman is interesse deliciis. Sedebam solus,
quia amaritudine repletus eram. Horrebant sacco membra deformia, and squalida
cutis situm Aethiopicae carnis obduxerat, quotidie lachrimae, quotidie gemitus,
and si quando repugnantem somnus imminens oppresserat, nuda humo vix ossae
harentia collidebam. De cibis vero and Ipotu taceo: cum etiam languentes
Monachi aquae frigidae utantur, and coctum aliquid accepisse, luxuria sit. Ille
igitur ego, qui ob gehennae metum tali me carceri ipse damnaveram, Scorpionum
tantum socius and ferarum, sape choris intereram puellarum. Pallebant or a
jejuniis, and men's desideriis aestuabat inifrigido corpore: and ante hominem
sua jam carne praemortuuu^, fola libidinum incendia bulliebant. Itaque omni
auxilio destitutus, ad Jesu jacebam pedes; rigabam lacbrimis: crine tergebam:
and repugnantem carnem hebdomodarum inedia subjugabam. Non ^rubesco consiteri
infelicit atis meae miseriaemquin potius plango me non esse, quod fuerim.
Memini me clamantem, diem crebro junxisse cum nocte, nec prius a pectoris
cessasse verberibus, quam rediret, Domino increpante. tranquilitas. Ipsam
quoque cellulam meam. quasi cogitationum mearum consciam, pertimescebam, and
mihimet iratus and rigidus, solus deferta penetrabam. Sicubi concava vallium,
aspera montium, rupium ptaerupta cernebam, ibi meae orationis locus, ibi illud
miserrimae carnis ergastulum: and ut mihi testis est Dominus, post multas
lachrimas, post coelo inhaerentes oculos, nonnunquam videbar mihi interesse
agminibus Angelorum: and laetus gaudensque cantabam: post te, in odorem
unguentorum tuorum curremus. That is. O how living and lamenting in the desert,
and vast Wilderness, which scorched with the burning of the Son gives a
horrible kind of dwelling to the Monks, and notwithstanding in my mind I was
enjoying the delights of Rome: I sat alone replenished with bitterness. All
the parts of my body covered with sackcloath gave me a kind of horror; and my
withered skinn was black like the Flesh of an Ethiopian, nothing but tears and
sighs day and night, and if sleep coming on did oppress me resisting it, I
laid on the naked ground my bare bones hardly hanging together. I say nothing
of my fare and drinck, when Monks fainting and languishing used noe other
drinck then cold water, and to eat any thing that was hott, or saw the fire,
was among them esteemed a great delicacy and wantonness. I therefore, who for
the fear of hell condemned my self to such a prison, companion only of
Scorpions, and wild beasts, seemed to be in my thoughts present at the
sporting, and dansing of the Ladys of Rome. My countenance was pale with
fasting, and yet my mind in a cold body was flaming with burning desires of
Concupisence. In this anguish and lamentable Condition, destitute of all
comfort I sat down at the feet of Crucified Jesus, I watered them with tears,
and dried them with my havre, and tamed the Rebellion of my Flesh with the want
of fooding for many weeks. I am not ashamed to confess the misery of my
unhappy Condition. I remember well, I have often joined the day with the night
weeping and crying to God, and knocking my breast with strokes and blows,
until tranquillity and quiet returned, and that the Lord was pleased to give
me ease in my Tentations. I feared my cell it self, least it should have
known my inward thoughts; and all alone angry and sever against my self, I
penetrated the desert; there I beheld the depth of the valleys the asperitie of
the mountains, and the precipice of the high rocks, there was the place of my
prayers, and the prison of my miserable Flesh, and as my Lord is my wittness,
after many tears, and after my eyes being fixed upon heaven I thought somtymes
I was present with Hosts of Angels, and joyfully I did cry to thee my God, I
will run after thee, and after the odor, and smell of thy ointments.

O Sall behold I present upon a Theater great Jerome a mortified Monk of the
desert, of austere Sanctity, Lean, Pale, and consumed with fasting and
penance; bring you now to the view of the world the Doctors and Masters you
have chosen, wanton gross vagabond Monks, running out of their Monasteryes
with their nuns and wenches, and that having abandoned all Religious
Authority, contemn and mock Jeroms Mortification; Let the world see thy great
master Luther with his nun Chatharin Borin, as also Buser, Peter Martyr, and
Ochinus with their runaway nuns. And Calvin the Adulterer and Sodomyte, and
Beza another Adulterer and Sodamyte with his maid Candida, and fair boy
Audebertus, forgett not Bale the Carmelite, with his lusty wench Dorathea, and
many more of that kind. A shame he upon thee Sall to forsake Jerome a man of
God, an Angel of the Desert, and spectacle of Mortification, to join with
those Monsters of Impurity; do you take this to be a sign of your
Praedestination?

As for Matter of Doctrine how different Ieroni was from those you join with,
you may learn by an excellent Epistle of his to Pope Damasus: the Saint being
solicited in Syria by several Sects to join with them in Communion, writes
thus to the foresaid Pope.

Quanquam igitur tua me terreat magnitudo S. Ter. Epist. ad Damasum Papum de
Apostas.
invitat tamen humanitas, a Sacerdote victimam salutis, a Pastore presidium
ovis flagito, ego nullum primum; nisi Christuns sequens beatitudini tue and
Cathedrae Petri, communione consocior: supra illam Petrans aedificatam
Ecclesiam scio, quicunque extra hanc domum agnum commoderit, Prophanus est, si
quis in Area Noe non fuerit, peribit regnante deluv^o. And says in the end of
the Epistle. Quamobrent abtestor beatitudinem tuam, per Crucifixum Mundi
salutem, per Homousion Trinitatem ut mihi Epistolis tuis, sive tacendarum, sive
dicendatum Hypostaseon detur Authoritas.

You see here Sall a pure and rational Submission of this learned Doctor to
Pope Damasus in Matters of Faith; what could be more humbly said by him, then
those words. Ut mihi Epistolis tuis, sive tacendarum, five dicendarum
Hypostaseon detur Authoritas.

Was this his deference to Damasus (though a learned pope) for being a more
subtle Fxpounder of the sense of Scripture then Jerome? Noe, but because that
Damassus was sitting upon Saint Peter's Chair,,, ad quam error non habet
accessum.

Sall you see that Saint Jerome revered the Pope as the Fountain of all
Spiritual Iuridiction under God, he recognyzed him as such, a head of Gods
House and Family, and you with your new Bishops and Clergy own and acknowledge
King Charles, though a great Monarck, yet a pure layman. ( Ad quem pertinet
tantum jus maenium.) Supreme head of the Church of England in Ecclesiasticis;
this is an express Article of your Faith (the XXXVII. of your XXXIX. Articles)
wherein all Authority in Spiritual, and Ecclesiastical Matters and causes
(properly apertaining to the Pope) is conferred on the Kings of England.

Nicolaus Sanderus a famous Doctor N. Sanderus de Scismati. Anglieano lib. 3.
Leges depotestate Regia in rebus Ecclesiasticis Anno 1. Elizabethe, Latae.
of Divinity shows the latitude of this Usurpation out of the English Laws
made in Parliament. Ita (inquit) habet lex: Omnia Privilegia, praeeminemiae,
praerogativae, superioritates spirituales, quae ab ulla potestate, vel humano,
vel Ecclesiastice Iure, haberi, aut exerceri possunt, quoad visitationem,
correctionem, seu reformationem Cleritotius, seu quarumcunque personarum
Ecclesiasticarum; ad cognitionem etiam ac punitionem omnium errorum, Haerefum,
Schismatum, abusuam, etc. volumus in posterum, quod Regio Sceptro in perpetuum
sint annexa.

Decernimusque Reginam, suosque Haeredes, ac in regali dignitate Successores,
habere, habiturosque efse deinceps, omnimodam potestatem nominandi and
substituendi quoscunque voluerint, qui eorundem vice ac auctoritatate, candem
Jurisdictionem Ecclefiastieam exerceant pro beneplacito suo; personas visitent;
Hareses, Schismata, errores and abusus castigent; aliudue quiduis juris vel
potestatis exerceant, quod ab ull^ unquam Ecclesiastico Magiftratu exerceri
potuit aut oportuit.

Decernitur item; ne clerus ad synodum ullam, aliorum quam Regiis literis and
mandaris conveniat; neve ullum Canonem, Legem, Constitutionem Synodalem seu
Provincialem, vel faciat, velexequatur, sine expresso Majestatis suae consensu
and licentia hujusmodi Canones faciendi, promulgandi, vel exequendi sub poena
carceris, and mulcta pro Reginae arbitrio Imponenda.

Decernitur, ne quis exeat regnum, ditionesque suae Majestatis ad ullam
Visitationem, Consilium, Conventum aut Congregationem, quae Religionis causa
uspiam fiet; sed ur talia omnia, Regia auctoritate intra regnum fiant.

Item, ne Episcopi, vel ullius Nominatione vel Electione, vel ulla Auctoritate
alia quam Regia creentur; neve Iurisdictionem, potestatemque Episcopalem
teneant aut exerteant, nisi ad beneplacitum Reginae; nec aliter nisi per ipsam,
and a regali MAjestate derivatam auctoritatem.

Such says he is the Law:

All Privileges, Prehemenensies, Prerogatives, Spiritual Superiorityes, which
can be had or exercised from any power or any right human or Eeclesiasticall,
as to Visitation. Correction, or Reformation of the whole Clergy, or of any
Eeclesiasticall Persons whatsoever; to the knowing and punishing of all Errors,
Heresies, Schism, Abuses, etc. We will hereafter, that they be annexed to the
Royal Scepter for ever.

And we decree that the Queen, and her heirs and all her Successors in the
Royal Dignity, have, and possess, and shall have hereafter all power of
nominating and substituting whosoever they shall please, to exercise by their
Authority and Order, and according to their good pleasure may exercise the
same Ecclesiastical lurisdiction; that they vissit persons; that they correct
Heresies, Schisms, Errors, and Abuses; and that they exercise all right and
power, which could or ought to be exercised and practiced by any
Ecclesiastical Judge or Magistrate.

It is determind and enacted; that the Clergy may not meet or assemble
themselves in a Synod, otherwise, then by the Royal Letters, and Mandats; nor
may they make any Canon, Law, Constitution, Synodall or Provincial, or execute
any such, without the express Consent and allowance of her Majesty, and license
of making such Canons, and of promulgating, or putting them in Execution, and
this under the penalty of imprisonment, and of fine, or mulct to be imposed
according to the Queens pleasure.

It is further determind that none may part out of the Kingdom, and her
Majestyes Dominions, to any Visitation, Council, Meeting or Congregation which
shall be any where made for Matters of Religion; but that all such things be
done within the Kingdom by Authority Royal.

Likewise that Bishops be created by noe other Nominatiou or Election, or any
other Authority whatsoever, other then by Royal Authority; nor that they hold
or exercise Episcopal Jurisdiction and power, but only ad beneplacitum Reginae
that is according to the Queens good pleasure; and that they have noe Authority
but dependant of her, and derived from the Royal Majesty.

Sall you see here all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical power and Jurisdiction
given by the Parliament to Queen Elizabeth, go now I pray you and read all the
Annalls and Church Histories of the world, and then tell me was ever any thing
heard of in the World, more profane and impious, then men, that held
themselves to be Bishops to agree with such a Parliament, and to hold for ( an
Article of Faith) a woeman to be head of the Church, in Ecclesiasticis and
Spiritualibus. Whereas Saint Paul commanded women should not so much as
speak in the Church. Mulieres (says Epist. 1. ad. Cor. cap. 14.
the Apostle) in Ecclesiis taceant, non enim permittitur eis loqui, sed
subditas esse, sicut and lex dicit: siquid autem volunt discere, domiviros suos
interrogent. Turpe enim est Mulieri laqui in Ecclesia. That is: Let women
hold their peace in the Church: for it is not permitted them to speak, but to
be subject, as also, the Law says. If they will learn any thing, let them
ask their husbands at home. For it is a foul thing for a woeman to speak in
the Church. The Apostle teaches the same writing to Timothy: Mulier in
silentio Epist. 1 adTim. cap. 2.
diseat? cum omni subjectione. Docere autem Mulierinon permitlo, neque dominari
in virum; sed esse in silentio. Let a woeman learn in silence, with all
subjection. But to teach I permit not unto a woeman, nor to have Dominion over
the man; but to be in silence.

The Matter went quite otherwise in England after the XXXIX. Articles came in
force, forasmuch as Bishops themselves could not speak in the Church without a
woemans, ( that is the Queens License), nor exercise any power, Jurisdiction or
function Episcopal, which looks like a kind of abomination.

Sall I see you are gone a way in Opinion with those Bishops and Clergy that
reverenced to much that Queen, and loved women to much, and continency to
little; Et idto prophanus factus es negans comedere agnum cum Sancto Ieronimo
in Donio Dei, and eligens comedere cum impio Calvino extra Ecclesiam; renuis
cum hoc Sancto in arca contineri, hinc miser peribis deluvio regnante. And
therefore you are become profane and denying to eat the Paschall Lamb with holy
Hierome in the House of God, and Choosing to eat the same with impious Calvin
out of the Church, you deny to be in the Arck with Saint Hierome wherefore
miserable man you shall perish in the deluge.

Sall I shall pray you to ponder maturely the important saying of Saint
Augustine Disputare (says the Saint) contra id quod totum per orbem frequentat
Ecclesia, insolentissim. a in sania est. That is. To dispute against that which
the Church houlds over all the world, is a most insolent madness.

You have don this in siding with the XXXIX. Articles, and opposing your self
to the four Saints, Doctors of the Church and to general Counsels and to the
sense of the Church, and its diffinitions and determinations, wherefore sit
down and consider well if a kind of madness has not ceasd upon you.

Gentle Reader, you see these ancient Fathers, and Doctors tells us clearly
that Sall has deviated from the right way of settling himself in true
Religion: the ready and sure way, (when he began to doubt) was not in reading
many Authors, when one Contradicts, and impugnes the other, nor of making notes
of that kind he speaks of in his Recantation, for it is more easy to gather
doubts, then dissolve or resolve them, it is more easy to rays up dust, then to
lay it down again: the certain and infallible way of searching true
Religion, and settling therein without all fluctuation and danger, is, that a man
leave his own Judgment, and rely upon the Authority of the Universal vissible
Christian Church, (what private man or Doctor, be he ever so well learned or
holy, is so wise as the whole Congregation of the Church?) as is commanded by
Christ himself, I mean a Church descending from age to age, from the
Apostles. For a public Direction in this to all, who are troubled about any
dark question in matters of Faith. Saint Augustine gives a good Counsel to Sall
and all men, (the same he gave to Cresconius: Quisquis August. Lib. 1. contra.
Crescon cap. 33.
(said he) falli metuit hujus obscuritate questionis Ecclesiam de ea
consulaet. That is, Whosoever fears to be deceived by the obscurity of this
question, (wherabout we two do contend) let him go and ask the Church
thereof. Saint Augustine must needs mean the Governors and the chief Pastors of
the Church. We are to keep herein to the found Rule of old Tertulian, which
if we do, we will not be deceived in Theorems, and Articles of believing:
Caeterum Terrul. depraescript. cap. 28.
(said he) quod apud multos unum invenitur, non est Erratum sed Traditum,
audeat ergo aliquis dicere illos Errasse qui Tradiderunt. That is. That which
is found one and the same with many, is not an error, but a Doctrine delivered
from hand to hand, and who will dare say those have erred, that delivered this
Doctrine.

Sall look upon the Succession of Pastors in the Church from age to age, down
from the Apostles, and your work is surely done, for in that Church you have
true Faith: for defect of such Succession Tertullian provoked the Heretics to
prove their descent: Edant (said he) Heretici origines Ecclesiarum suarum,
evoluant totum ordinem Eptscoporum suorum per Successionem ab initio
decurrentem, ut primus Epsicopus aliquem ex Apostolis, vel Apostolicis viris,
qui tamen cum Apostolis perseveraverit, babuerit Authorem and Antecessorem. Had
Sall examined the English Church according to this sure Rule of Tertulian he
had never taken up a place among them.

Having said so much of these four great Doctors of the Church, and their
Virtues, let us now see what kind of men were the new Doctors Sall has closed
with; for comparing their lives, and manners with one another, we shall
(according to that of the Philosopher unum quodque magis apparet contrario
juxta si posito) be the better able to Judge who were the true Dostors, chosen
by God to teach the Doctrine of Salvation: who knows light, knows darkness, quia
eadem est potentia cognoscitiva oppossitorum, unde visus, qui cognoscit lucem,
cognoscit and tenebras. Let us therefore examine a little the Doctrine, lives, and
manners of the new men Sall has chosen for his Doctors and Masters.

VI. CHAPTER. Of the Doctrine and manners of Luther and some other principal
Heretics.
THe Description of their Lives and Proceedings, who for an age and more under
a fair pretense of Reformation have impugned our ancient and long before
continued and universally professed Catholic Faith, (alas in many Provinces
and Regions they have almost extinguished it) will be a necessary Instruction
to shun such men, and abominate their Doctrine, and to contract noe kind of
amity with their Desciples and followers.

God has ever more, out of his Devine, and sweet Providence, chosen for
Reformation of his Church (when decayed in Discipline or Doctrine) men in their
lives, not dissolute or licensious, but auster and sanctified, such were
Moses, Elias, and many of the old Patriarcks and Prophets, such the Apostles,
and after them many Bishops and Apostolical men, all those brought in Faith,
and chased out Idolatry by Virtue, Sanctity, and Miracles: Take great heed
(says our savior) of false Prophets, etc. And againet do men gather grapes
from Thorns? or Matthew. cap. 7.
figgs of Thistels. Certainly Sall you could not gather grapes from those
Thorns, nor figgs from those Thistels you are fallen in love with; they were
other kind of men that God used to assume for sowing the seed of heavenly
Doctrine, and teaching the Devine lesson of Salvation: he said not to
Plagitious, wanton Moncks and Priests running away with nunns, and wenches,
(such as your new Apostles and Doctors were:) Euntes ergo docete emnes gentes:
Baptizantes eos in Nomine Patris and Matt. cap. 28.
Filii and Spiritu Sansti, docentes eos servare omnia quaecunque mandavi vobis,
and ecce ego vobisoum sum omnibus diebus, usque ad consumationem seculi. That
is: Going therefore teach ye all nations: Baptising them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to serve all
things whatsoever I have commanded you, and behold I am with you all days,
even to the consumation of the World. These words our savior spoke to the
eleven Deciples in the mount, holy and sanctified men chosen by God to enlight
and sanctify the World.

This charge of converting Souls requires ( in its own Nature) by all means
men of Virtue and Integrity; Quiae Sancta Sancte tractanda and a Sanctis: If
those great reformers, which keep agreat noys in the world, (they vapor much of
a justifying faith but of good works they have noe care quite against Saint
Paul's sentiment, Who would have, that they which believe be careful to excel
Epist. ad Tit. cap. 3.
in good works.) If those reformers (I say) have bin virtuous and mortifyd men,
we here are to examine, and shall begin with Luther, the Father of
Protestanisme and principal Doctor of the Church of England; who is most
highly praised, and esteemed generally by Lutherans and Calvinists through all
the Provinces and Countries they have infected; they all reverenced Luther, as
being sent by God, as the light of the Gospel, and Doctrine Evangelicall:
Bishop Jewel a chief pillar of Protestanisme in Jewel in his defense of the
Apolog. printed 1571. MrFox Act. and Mon. printed 1563.
England, called Luther a most excellent man, sent from God to lighten the
whole World in the middle of darkness; Mr. Fox likewise (esteemed in England for
a holy man and a Church Historian) said, it pleased the Lord to reform and
reedify the desolate Ruins of his Religion by the industry of Martin Luther,
sent, and set up by the mighty spirit of God; And Mr. Whittaker agreat Devine
of the English Church said of Luther: We reverence Luther as a Father, and the
Lutherans and Swinglians our very dear brethren^ in Whit. in his Answ. to the
Tenth reason of Ed. Campian printed 1566. Centur 25. printed 1604. l. 4. c. 1.
p. 490. Initio.
Christ. Other Protestant Authors go much further in his praises. Osiander a
famous Protestant writer says thus: Natus est hoc anno 1483. Incomparabilis
vir Dei piae memoriae D. D. Martinus Lutherus Islebicae in Saxonia, per quem
Deus noster Germaniae Evangelii Lucem restauravit. That is: Luther, that in
comparable man of God of pious memory was borne in the year 1483. at Islib in
Saxony, by whom our Lord has restored to Germany the light of the Gospel.
Others call Luther the Elias, conductor, and Chariot of Israel to be
reverenced most after Christ and Saint Paul, and accordingly he was honored
with this Verse:

Christus habet primas, habeas tibi Paul secundas:
At loca post illos proxima Luther habet.
All of them affirm Luthers calling was extraordinary and immediately from God,
but they were never able to show unto the World any Miracles he had wrought
for confirmation of his mission, the usual mark of such as are extraordinary
missioners of God. I will begin with the Doctrine of this chief Master, Elias,
and trumpet of the Gospel as they name him.

VII. CHAPTER. Of Luthers Doctrine.
HIs Doctrine, which is the foundation of Protestancy, tends for the most part
to Unchristian liberty, and the enervation of Virtue and Christian discipline.
I Will set down here some points thereof which are wicked and scandalous.

Thus then they lie:

1. That there is noe sin but incredulity: Lib. de Capti. Babylon Cap. D.
Bap. it is.
Neither can a man damn himself, do what misschief he can, except he will
refuse to believe.

This Article alone opens a gate to all Impiety and bids good works a Dieu.

2. The Ten Commandments apertaine Sermon. de Moys.
nothing to us, that is to say Christians.

This is directly against our saviors Words; Sivis ad vitam ingredi serva
Mandata.

3. It is a false opinion and to be abolished In prefat ad novum Testa.
that there are four Ghospells: For the Gospel of John is only fair, true,
and the principal Gospel.

Luther says this because the other three Ghospells speak much of good works:
and must we discard three Ghospells for the word or Authority of this beast?

4. If the Wife will not, let the Maid Sermon. de Matrimon.
come.

Is not this a strange abomination!

5. It is as necessary for every man to Lib. de votis conjng. and in Acert.
Art. 16.
have a wife, as it is to eat, drink, or sleep.

What chaste ears can hear this abomination: how many thousand and thousands
of holy men in Monasteryes and in the deserts, and in the world, have lived
chaste and like Angels? wherefore it was well said by a certain Author: fortior
est castitas hominum, sed felicior Angelorum.

6. Christ and Saint Paul did not Counsel, Lib. de votis Monasticis.
but dessi^ade Virginity unto Christians.

O Diabolically.

7. Matrimony i^ more excellent then virginity. Lib. de votis Evang.


Against all the Fathers, none would affirm this but a monster of incontinency.

8. All Christians are as holy, and as just, Ser A. de Trin. de B. Maria and
coment. Epist. 1. Petr,
as the Mother of God, and as the Apostles were.

Coms not this Article and such impious words from the mouth of a man possessed
by the Devil?

Take more of Luthers Theorems.

1. That Free Will in Christians, is only Of Free Will.
a thing of name, and can cooperat nothing at all.

2. That the Adultery of David, and treason Gods Cooperation to sin. Priesthood.
of Judas was as much wrought by God, as the vocation of Paul.

3. That all Christians and Priests have equal Authority to absolve sins

4. That a woeman or a Child or any Women may absolve.
other Christian (receiving authority from men the Community) may as well
absolve a man from his sins, as any Bishop, or the Pope himself.

5. Fides, and sine, and ante Charitatem 2. ad Galat.
justificat.

Et fides nisi fit sine ullis etiam minimis operibus non justifi^at, imo non
est fides.

That is: Faith without and before Charity does justify.

And faith unless it be, without even the least good work, does not justify;
nay, it is not faith.

These dangerous and impious Theorems and Articles you may find gathered out
of Luthers own works by Doctor Sanders, Puteolus, Goclaeus, Eckius, Bishop
Fisher, Surius, Staphilus, and other writers.

I will give you here Luthers opinion, that it was not lawful to fight against
the Turks.

In Epistola contra duo Mandata Imperialia. That is: In his Epistle against the
two imperial Edicts: He purposely crosses the Emperors aid against the
Turk, saying: Oro cunctos pios Christianos, ne ullo modo sequantur vel in
militiam ire vel dare aliquid contra Turcas, etc. That is, I beseech all Godly
Christians that they follow not by any means the Emperor in the war nor
contribute any thing against the Turcks, etc, And he says elsewhere: Vt libere
animum meum aperiam, hoc aperte Luth. in determine. Doctorum Paris. Impres,
Norimberg 1625.
de me praedico, quod tam invitus Turcam gladio impeterem, quam Christianum
fratrem. That is: That I may freely speak my mind, I say openly, that I would
as unwillingly strike a Turck with my sword as a Christian brother.

By this favorable opinion to the Turks, he was so gratfull to them, that the
Turkish Emperor (to the great shame of Luther hearing thereof) demanded the
Christian Ambassador how old Luther See Belforest in cosmog. lib: 2. c. 7. col.
579.
was, and wished him younger, promising to be his good Lord.

Some of the above mentioned points of Luther, when the Author of the defense
of the Censure had proved at large, one by one to be the true Doctrins See this
plainly reported by Manlius Luthers own Scholar in loc. commu. page 639.
and verifiable out of Luthers own Books, then he proceeds to this sound
Conclusion and Consideration thereon.

That if a Christian man can not damn himself by any sin unless he will
refuse to believe: If to keep Virginity, and resist the pleasures of the flesh,
be neither much commendable, (for that marriage is far better) nor
profitable, nor possible; for so much as a wife is as necessary as meat,
drink, or sleep: and further yet, when a man has taken a wife, he may upon
causes lie with her sister, or with the next of her kind: and if these will
be obstinate, he may take the maid instead of the Mistress, and with all this,
may be not withstanding as holy and just as ever was Peter, or Paul, or the
Mother of Christ: If all this be true, ( as Martin Luther warranteth us) who
can complain ( says the defense of the Censure) of the hard way to heaven?
who can say the Gate is straight, as Christ our Savior did?

If these things be so, are not they great fools that mortify their bodies
austerely, fasting and praying? Christ our Savior said: Regnum Caelorum vim
patitur, and violenti rapiunt illud. But Luther says that saying of Christ is
but a fable, for so much as by only believing you are as holy as the blessed
Virgin the Mother of our Savior for according to his Articles of Justification
by faith only, he holds fasting, praying and good works have noe influence
upon Salvation.

But nothing of Luthers Doctrine is more impious and abominable, then his
abollishing the Mass upon a conference he had with the Devil, to whom in
the end he yielded: This made Mr. Walsingham a prudent man, in his Search
into matters of Religion, say to Doctor Downham (who much praised Luther for a
holy man) I also esteemed Luther to have binne a man of God, but now ^ find
him by what the Author of the defense of the Censure says, to have been a very
bad man, and to have opposed himself against the Church of Rome by instigation
of the Devil himself, with whom he had much conference as is proved out of
his own works. And surely Sir (says he to Doctor Downham) I think it
concerns me to be of some better faith, and Religion, then such as should
have the original and beginning from the Divill; for what concord can there be
between Christ and Belial, light, and darkness?

Luther himself setts forth his conference with the Devil in these words.
Contigit me sub mediam noctem subito expergefieri, Luth. Tom. 7. VVlte. pridted
anno 1558.
ubi Satan mecum caepit ejusmodi Disputationem; audi inquit Luthere Doctor
perdocte, etc. That is. It happened ( says Luther) upon a certain time lib.
de Eissa privata etc. unct. Sacerde fol. 228
that I was suddenly awaked about midnight, then Satan began this
Disputation with me, saying: Harken right learned Doctor Luther. (Nosti te
quindecim annis Caelebrasse Missas privatas pene quotidie, etc.) Thou know,
thou have celebrated private Mass, for the space of fifteen years, almost every
day, what if such Masses were horrible Idolatry? What if Christ his body and
blood were not present there, but that thou only did a dor^ Bread and Wine?
Whereunto I answered (says Luther) that I was an anointed Priest, received
Unction, and Consecration from a Bishop and did all these things as from the
Commandment and Obedience of my Elders, why then should I not consecrate?

There passed after other arguments of Satan against the Mass, and Luthers
replies, and among others, Luther said that he celebrated Mass in the
intention and faith of the Church, and that the Church did rightly believe and
think: But (says Luther) Sataen e contra fortius and vehementius instans, age,
prome vbi Scriptum est, etc. That is: Satan urging and replying more
vehemently, said, go toe show me where it is written that an ungodly and
unbelieving man may consecrat in the faith, and intention of the Church (where
has God taught or commanded this?) To which interogations and arguments of
the Devil, Luther confessing that he could not answer, did yield in all
points here touched by him, except in only one, which was against the real
presence.

It is remarkable that the deuines of Hospinian in bis Histir. Sacram, part. 2.
printed Tiguri 1612. fol. 20.
Wittenbargh publishing their reasons of abrogating the Mass, delivered the
very same reasons and arguments that the Devil brought against the Mass in his
conference with Luther, and among the rest this argument. Confugiebatis ad
Mariam and Sanctos, illi erant mediatores inter vos and Christum, sic erepta
est gloria Christo. That is. You rann to Mary and the Saints these were the
mediators between you and Christ and so glory, and honor is taken away from
Christ.

Here you see gentle reader that Luther yielding to the Devils reasons and
arguments abollished the Mass, and that the Wittenberg Devines have made use of
these arguments made by Satan, and that Luther himself afterward used the
same arguments against the Catholics: And as Mr. Walsingham says in his search
into matters of Religion, that the same Articles are now held in England;
namely against the Mass, against the Ordination and Consecration of Priests,
against the Real Presence, against Private Receiving, and Communicating, about
the Faith of the Church, about honoring and invocation of our Lady, and other
Saints: And what is yet more marvelous to me here, is that the Devil
alleged such arguments against Papists Religion, in favor of Protestants, as
though he had loved the Protestant Religion, and hated that of the Catholics,
which they would say, is a good sign, that the Catholic Religion is the
truth. And realy the Catholics in all reason ought to think so.

Now let any man think with himself of what spirit a man so conversant with
the Diuill was, (who says) Diabolus frequentius, and propius mihi condormit,
Incollo. Mensal. Germ. Edit. fol. 281
quam mea Catharina. That is: That the Devil does sleep with me offtener and
nearer unto me, then my own Catharin, that is to say, my own wife Catharin
Boren) or could write any thing of true Religion and Piety: and how dangerous a
point it were for a man to rely much upon him, that was so beset with contrary
Spiritts and Devils. For as the Spirit of Christ can not but persuade, good
things, and true Doctrine: So cannot the Spirit of the Devil but persuade bad
things, and falls Doctrine, either openly, or covertly, for it is the Devils
function and profession to deceive all men, and lead them to damnation.

The Matters of Luthers conference with the Devil faling out to be odious and
shamfull, sundry excuses are Cherke in his reply to the Censur printed 1581.
Fulke in his treaeice against the desence os the Censure printed by Thomas,
Thomas p. 234. Lavat. in his Hist, Sacra. printed Tiguri 1553. sol. 24.
pretended in answer thereunto. Mr. Charke and Mr. Fulke do answer that by
Luthers foresaid discourse of his Disputation had with the Devil, is meant
only a spiritual fight in mind, and noe bodily conference: Is it possible two
Doctors of Divinity in the English Church would give so weak an excuse? did
not Lavather himself confess it to have been an apparition Luther being
awak't? did not Luther himself discribing his Disputation with the Devil say
(as above:) Contigit me sub mediam noctem subito experge fieri. That is. It
happened upon a certain time that I was suddenly a waked about midnight, then
Satan began this Disputation with me, etc. and says further that the Devil
speaking to him, he burst forth all in sweat, and that his heart began to
tremble and leap, and said further: ( Voce forti and grave utitur) The Devil
has a base and strong voice, etc. Does he not further write and affirm how
that Oecolampadius, Empser, and Luth. Tom. 7. Wit. prented 1558, de Missa
privata and uuct. Sacerd. fol. 230.
others were slain with such horrible encounters? Will Fulk and Charke tell
us, that the Devil killed Oecolampadius, Empser, and others in a temptation. But
Mr. Sutlyffe? tells us, that Luther in his aforsaid discourse of this matter
only declared his dream: What? but his dream? Mr. Sutlyffe? is there in
Luthers whole discourse hereof, so much as but mention of any dream? Does he
not most directly to the contrary say: That he was first sudden awakt, and
that then after Satan began the Disputation with him. Do men dream waking?
again does not Luther affirm of Empser and Oecolampadius to have been slain
by such horrible encounters argue more then a dream? Are men I pray you slain
by dreaming? Mr. Sutlyffe your answer is like a dream, and did you think to
delude us in this manner so grossly with an untruth?

VIII. CHAPTER. Of Luthers Pride, and contempt of the Fathers: and belying them.
LVther says the name of free will Luth. in colloq Latin. cap. de libero
arbitrio
was most odious to all the Fathers: Nomen (says he) Liberi Arbitrii
Odiosissimum fuit Patribus. Which is a foul lie, for that noe one thing is
more frequent with all the Fathers then that man has free will. Did not Saint
Augustine S. Aug. in Lib. de libero arbitrio. Itorum de gra. tia and libero
arbitrio Item in Lib. de Vera Relig. cap. 14.
write against the Manicheans, who denied free will. The Saint asserts free
will in many of his books. Among others he has this special assertion: Est
igitur liberum arbitrium, quod quisquis esse negaverit Catholicus non est. That
is: There is free will, which who denis is not a Catholic. Does not Saint
Augustine expressly say in one of his Epistles: Valet liberum arbitrium ad opera
bona, si Divinitus adjuvetur, quod fit humiliter petendo and faciendo. That is,
Free will is able to do good works if it be devinely aided, which is done by
humbly asking grace and making use thereof, Can there be a clearer expression
of free will made then this. Again the Saint says: Lex jubere novit, Epist. 95.
gratia juvare, nec lex juberet, nisi esset voluntas, nec gratia juvaret, si
sat esset voluntas. That is: The law knows to command, and grace to help or
assist. Nor would the law command if there were not a free will to be
commanded, nor would grace help free will, if free will alone could work
without grace. By this true Doctrine the pestiferous Calumnyes of Luther are
repulsed and confuted, to wit, his assertion that there is noe free will, and
that the name thereof is odious to the Fathers, and that the Papists teach a man
may keep and fulfill the commandments by the proper forces of nature without
Gods grace. Papistae (says he) docent posse hominem propriis naturae viribus,
sine gratia Dei, mandata servare. That is: The Papists do teach that a man may
keep the commandments of God, with the propper forces of nature without Gods
Grace. Which is manifestly contradicted by all the Fathers, and all Catholic
Devines and Schools: Read Bellarmin Lib. 5. de gratia and libero arbitrio.
Cap. 4. and 5. Read Coccius who sets down this Article: That after the Fall
of Adam, noe man can do any thing, by the propper forces of nature, but has
need allways of the help of Gods Grace. And besides all Scriptures aleadged
for the same, he cites above an hundred Greeck and Latin writers that
confirm the same. You see by this what a lying impostor Luther was in belying
the Fathers touching free will, and the need of Gods Grace in doing any good
work.

There never lived an Heretic that more contemned the veneration and authority
of holy Fathers, then this proud and wanton Monk. He falls upon Saint Hierome,
a famous Doctor of the Church in this kind. Hierome Luth. in collo. Germ. cap.
descriptis patrum. Iteus in collo. Latino cap. de Patribus Tom. 2.
may be read for History, but as for faith, and true Religion, there is not one
word to be found thereof in his writings. And again: Hierome does treat indeed
of Christ, but only in name: But of faith, hope, and charity, he says nothing
at all. O impudent, petulant, abominable Luther, that writ so intolerable a
calumny against Holy Hierome.

That Saint Hierome, who writ so many tomes, especially commentaryes upon
Saint Matthew, upon the Epistles to the Gallatians, Ephetians, and Titus, upon
the Psalms, and some of the Prophets, that writ many holy works, that writ in
a fair style against Heretics, (Monsters and liars as Luther was,) as
Vigilantius, Helvidius, Jovinianus, Montanus, and the like: See Bellarmin de
Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis ab anno Domini 300. ad annum 400. Where you shall
find a great number of Books, and works Saint Hierome writ, and now can any
man imagine, that Saint Hierome, that writ so many Godly things and
especially against Heretics, And that there is not one word as Luther saeys to
be found in his writings concerning faith and true Religion, and that the Saint
does treat of Christ but only in name: But of faith, hope, and Charity, he
says nothing at all.

Will you hear Luther speaking of the Luth, Tom. 2. Wit. Anno 1551. Lib. de
Servo Arbitr. page 434. Luth. in collo' Cap. de Patribus Ecclesiae.
ancient Fathers, and the most famous of them, who contradicted, his Protestant
licentious Doctrine? first he impudently affirms all of them to have been
blind, and most ignorant in Scriptures, and to have erred all their life time.

Of sundry Fathers, in particular he speaks thus. In the writings of Hierome
there is not a word of true faith in Christ and sound Religion. Tertulian is
very superstitious. I have held Origin long since accurssed of God. Of
Chrysostom I make noe account. Basil is of noe worth, he is wholly a Monk, I
wey him not a hair. Cyprian is a weak Devine. He adds further that the
Apology of his Scholar Philip Melancton does farre^ exceed all the Doctors of
the Church, and even Augustine himself. Is not this a Luciferian pride in this
Appostata to despise all the venerable Fathers in this kind; and yet this
wicked Friars authority and Doctrine, is the first foundation of Protestancy:
let them look well to their Religion, I think they have need.

As Luther abolished the Mass, and began his work of opposition to the Romish
Church, by the conference and direction of Satan: so he endeavored also to
prove that he took of Satan's spirit in his actions, and writings. We have
now showed how scornfully he has reviled the Fathers, let us now see how
petulantely he abuses a great Monarch King Henry the eight. I talk (says he
to King Desen. p. 16. sol. 337. sol. 337
Heury) with a lying scurrill, covered with the title of a King, a Thomisticall
brain, a clownish wit, a doltish head, a bugg, an hypocryte of the Thomists,
most wicked, foolish and impudent Harry. This glorious King lies stoutly like
a King. And hear now must I deal not with ignorance and blockishness only,
but with obstinate and impudent wickedness of this Harry: for he does not How
intolerable is this in a runegate Friar,
only ly like a most vain scurre, but passes a most wicked knave, in
detorting of Scripture. See whether there be any spark in him of an honest
man. Surely he is a chosen vessel of the Devil, I would to God piggs could
speak, to judge between this Harry and me. But I will take asses that can
speak. Judge you (ye Sophists of the Universityes of Paris, fol. 339
Lovan, and Cullen) what this Harries Logic is worth. I am ashamed See the
pride of an Apostata against three famous Vniversitys
( Harry) of thy impudent forehead, which art noe more a King now, but a
sacrilegious thief against Christ's own words. I will feign here certain
fools and madmen, to the end I may set out my King in his colors, and show
that my bedlam King, does pass all bedlamness it self. What need had I of
such piggs to dispute with all? Thou lie in thy throat foolish, and
sacrilegious King. This block my L. M. Harry has taught together with his
asses and piggs, and now he is mad and cries, and foameth at the mouth.
Neither could I with all my strenght make this miserable King, so filthy and
abominable a spectacle to the world, as he by fury makes himself. What
harlot ever durst brag of her shame, as this most impudent mouth of his does?
This fool must have a Dictionary to learn what a Sacrifice is. Oh unhappy
that I am, to be enforced to loose time with such monsters of folly, and cannot
get a learned man to contend with me. So he.

And I leave infinite dispilefull, slanderous, and scurrill words, which this
impudent Apostata uses against his Majesty. And some care so dishonest, as I
am ashamd to English them, as where he says: Jus mihi erit Majestatem,
Auglicam stercore fol. 333
conspergere. And again: Sit erg^ fol. 337
mea haec generalis responsio ad omnes sentinas insulsissime hujus larvae.
Again: Haec Luthers Spirit in railing speech.
sunt robora nostra, adversus quae obmutescere coguntur Henrici, Thomistae,
Papistae, and quicquid est faecis, sentinae, latrinae impiorum and sacrilegorum
ejusmodi: sordes istae and labes hominum Tbomistae and Henrici, Sacrilegus
Henricorum, and asinorum cultus, furor insulsissimorum asinonum, and
Thomisticorum porcornm: os vestrae dominationis impurum and saecrilegum. And a
hundred more like sentences.

IX. CHAPTER. Of Luthers Incontinency.
Lvther after his conference with the Devil (having resolved to build upon
this foundation the structure of his reformation) endeavored by all means to
gain to his side many Poets, Painters, Players, and Printers, to discredit
with schoffing Ballets, Pamflets, Poems, and Pictures the Roman Religion (which
until then had been called and esteemed the only Catholic and Apostolic) and
to divulge his new Doctrine, amongst ignorant and vicious People. For the
encouragement of dissolute Clergymen to join with him he taught (against the
Doctrine and Practice of the whole Church, ever since the Apostles times) that
Priests, and professed Monks and Nuns might lawfully marry, and were bound to
do so.

This liberty of marrying, and joining together Monks, and Nuns, with his
principle of Justification by only faith, drew to him from sundrey parts of
Europe incontinent Clargy-men, (all Monks and Nuns, that were weary of solitude
and penance rann out of their Cloisters) some of the chiefest of those
Apostatas wear Carolostadius, Arch-Diacon of Witimberg, Justus Jonas head of a
College of Canon Regulars, Oecolampadius a Monk of Saint Brigitts Order,
Zwinglius a Canon of Constance, Martin Bucer a Dominican Friar, Peter Martyr a
Canon Regular, and some Augustine Friars of Luthers own Order, each of these
having taken a wench were engaged in Lurhers quarrel against the whole Church.
And they so domineered with their dancing women and Nuns, and with the favor
of the People given to all kind of liberty and dissolution, that they dared
say: Omnia judicemus and reganemus.

A word or two in particular of Luthers flaming incontinency. Few have ever
matched him that way; (though we should compare Mahomet the Author of the
Alcaron with him Luther would not yield to him in lust or dissolution.) Before
his Apostasy from our Catholic Church during the time he was a young man and
Monk, he lived Voyon upon the Cataloge of the doctors printed 1598. pa. 180.
in his Monastery, punishing his body with Mortification fasting and prayers,
honored the Pope out of mere Conscience, kept chastity, poverty, and
obedience. So says Simon de Voyon. And what soever (says Luther) I did, I
did it with a single heart, with good zeal, and for Luth. words upon the
Galatians Englished in Cap. 1. fol 35.
the glory of God, fearing grievously the last day, and desirous to be saved
from the bottom of my heart. But after his revolt from the Church harken to
what he says, and his most barbarous speeches. Nothing (says he) is more
sweet or loving upon Earth then is the love of a woeman if a man can obtain
it. And again: He that In Prove. 31. v. 1. Lrth. Tom. 7. VV ittemb. in Epi. ad
VV olsangum fol. 505
resolves to be without a woeman, let him lay aside from him the name of a
man, making himself a plain Angel or Spirit: yet more. As it is not in my
power, that I should be noe man, so it is not in my power that I should be
without a woeman etc. In so much as he acknowledges himself to have been
almost madd through the rage of lust, and desire of women: exclaiming out yet
further and saying I am, burned with the great flame of my untamed flesh, etc.
But says he. It suffiseth that we have known the Riches of the Glory of
God, the Lamb which takes away the sins of the world, from him sin cannot
draw us although we should commit fornication, or kill a thousand times in one
day. In fine having left of prayer, and all Mortification for eight days
together, at the last having cast of his Religious habitt anno 1524. He did in
a speedy acomplishment of his longing desire, marry even upon the sudden
Catharin Bore (one of the nine Nuns that Leonard Keppen on the 7. day of Aprell
1523. brought to Wittenberg from the Monastery of Nimpisen) having in the
evening invited to supper, Pomeran, Luke the Painter, and Apelles the Lawyer,
he then so finished the abominable marriage for which by the most ancient and
imperial Laws, soon after the time of Constantine the great, he should have
lost his head. Jovinian the third Christian Emperor after Constantin Zozom.
Histor. Lib 6. Cap. 3. fine.
published this Edict. Vt qui Sacratam Virginem vel ad nuptias contrahendas
pellicere conaretur etc. Capitis supplicio mulctaretur. And the foresaid Law is
yet extant. God. lib. de Episcopis and Clericis. Where it is said. Si quis non
dicam rapere, sed tentare tantum, jungendi causa Matrimonii Sacratissimas
Virgins ausus fuerit, capitale paena feriatur.

Oziander and Melancton do attest Ozean. Centure 16. c. 36 page 29. Melan. in
Epist. ad Ioac. Camer. de D. Lutheri conjugio
this marriage of Luther.

All wanton Monks and Priests rann after Luther. each one with a Nun or a
wench; Martin Bucer a Dominican friar, and Bernardus Ochynus a Capuchin a
complished the like Sacrilegious Marriage with two Nuns; Peter Martyr being a
Canon Regular of the order of Saint Augustine married at Straesburgh Dame
Catharin the loose Nun, that rann out of her Cloister of Metz in Loraine: yea
the Archbishop of Cullen began his Reformation with marrying a Nun. So writes
Osiander: Interea (says he) Osian. Centur. 16. L. 4 cap 18, pa. 984
Archiepiscopus Coloniensis Elector Gobardus Baro Truchesius Reformationem
Religionis meditabatur; and Matrimonium Agneti, quae monialis fuerat, promisit,
eamque tandem in uxorem duxit That is. The Archbishop Elector of Cullen, Baron
Truches began the Reformation of Religion, and promised to Marry Agnes that was
a Nun, and at length Married her. See further there page 953. How revolted
votarys the Protestant Bishops of England took wives, namely the ensuing.
Hooper of Worcester: Barlowe of Chichester: Downham of Westchester: Story of
Hereford: Barkaley of Bathe, and Wels, Coverdale of Exeter: who all of them
were professed Monks; to whom might be added Sands of York, and Cranmer of
Canterbury, (who still carried a woeman about with him) with diverse others all
of them formerly Catholic Priests.

One of the first that begun to live in England scandalously was John Bale of
Norwicth a Carmalit Friar, taking to him his Dorathy a lusty wench, whom he
called fidelissimam conjugem, this Friar was after made Bishop of Ossery in
Ireland.

Mark it well Sall how all these illuminated Doctors of your Protestant
Religion, were declared Enemies to chastity, and profane breakers of their
Vows, and began all of them the great work of Sanctifying the world, and
reforming the Church, by marrying to Nuns and other dissolute women, without
such Companions they could do nothing at all. Did the holy Missioners sent
from the Sea of Rome Saint Patrick to convert the Idolaters of Ireland, Saint
Austin the Benedictin the Pagans of England in the time of the Saxons, and
other Saints to other Kingdoms to enlighten them, and chase away Idolatry: did
(I say) these holy Missioners that brought in holy Religion by Miracles and
Sanctity bring a long with them sacrilegious and naughty women to acomplish,
the Conversion of Nations?

Now good Sall sit down a little I pray you and ponder with your self, if
God, (a God of Piety and Sanctity) would send so wicked a man as Luther to
denounce his word and Gospel to the world; a man, who by a conference with
the Devil abollished the Mass, threw of his habit of Religion, and all modesty
and virtue, married a professed Nun, and lived more like a beast then a man,
who contemned in the highest degree, the veneration, sanctity, and learning of
all the Fathers, who was possessed with a spirit of an intolerable pride,
would God employ such a man, a slave of lust, pride, and the Devil, to give
the true light of the Gospel?

Think seriously Sall what small reason Mr. White had to say of Luther, Mr.
Whit, in his way to the Church. printed 168. pa. 428
This was the end of that good man, whose memory shall be precious in the
Church for ever, and flourishing as the Rodd of Aaron laid up in the Tabernacle.

After a due ponderation of the premises touching Luthers impious Doctrine, and
incontinent and wicked conversation taken out of the writings of Protestants
themselves, I do referr to the Readers own Judgment, whether we are to
join in esteeming and terming him a holy man, as certain Protestants do to
the great blemish of their credit. Some of these are English: Gabr. Powell in
his consideraiion of the
Mr. Gabriell Powell calls him holy Saint Luther; Mr. Jewel calls him as
(above was said) a most excellent man, sent of God to enlighten the world in
the midst of darkness; Papists Supplication printed 164: page 70.
Mr. Fox says it pleased the Lord to send and set up Luther by his own mighty
Spirit, he also Rubricates him in the highest rank of his Confessors; Mr.
Whitaker, does reverence him as the Father of Protestants; other Protestant
writers of Germany and other Provinces call him Elias: Conductor, and Chariot
of Israel, and to be reverenced after Christ and Saint Paul. But all these
high, strange, Phanaticall, and hyperbolicall praises given to this wicked man
are proved lies by the plain uncontrollable alegations and Testimonies of
other learned Protestant Authors, who are to be creditted in this, Quia res
ipsa loquitur.

X. CHAPTER. What fruits followed Luthers Doctrine and Reformation.
IT has been a constant observation in all ages and times, that men sent from
God by extraordinary missions as the Apostles and other Saints after them; and
also those sent from the Sea of Rome with ordinary mission were Saints and
holy men, and wrought wonders and Miracles; and great devotion, sanctity,
penance, prayer, and change of men's lives to the better followed these
missions, whole Provinces amended their ill manners, and lives: Saints do
holy things, Bona arbor, bonos fructus facit.

Now if we shall examine the nature and effects of Luthers Reformation, we
shall find neither Miracles nor Sanctity in him, or the rest of his Brethren:
and what fruits did this new Doctrine produce in the people? did those that
received it become more holy then before, more modest, just, sober, or more
penitent for their sins? Was pride, vice, and dissolution abated or
diminished after the pretended zeal of these reformers? did any man mortify
his body, or crucify his flesh with the concupisence and vices thereof? Noe such
matter: a change indeed followed their new Ghospeling and Reformation, it
changed all to the worst; Rapine, Vsery, Adultery, and all kind of uncleaness
and dissolution became greater then before, these were the first fruits of
Luthers extraordinary mission. Mala arbor, malos fructus facit.

Will you have all this evidently proved by the Testimony of prime Protestant
Authors, whereof Luthers is one? He speaks thus: The World Luth. in Postilla
super Evang.
grows daily worse, men are now more revengefull, covetous, licentious, then
they were ever before in the Papacy: when we were seduced Dom. 1 Adventus
Dominica 26. post Trinit.
by the Pope, every man did willingly follow good works, and now every man
neither says; nor knows any thing but how to get all to himself by
exactions, pillage, theft, lying, usery, etc.

The second Author is Erasmus (one of Mr. Fox his Saints and Confessors in his
acts and monuments) he says: Circumspice populum istum Evangelicum, etc. Eras.
in Epist. ad vulturiam neocomum written anno 1529.
profer mihi quem istud Evangelium, ex commessatore sobrium ex impudico
reddiderit verecundum, ego tibi multos ostendam qui facti funt scipsis
deteriores. That is: Look upon those Evangelicall people, bring me one glutton
that this Gospel made sober, an incontinent man made chaste, I will show you
many that have exceeded even themselves in wickedness, and he further says:
Quos antea noveram puros, etc. That is: Who I have known before pure, clean,
sincere, and void of craft and knavery, I have seen these men after professing
this new Evangelicall Sect, begin to speak of mayds etc. to Eras. in Epist.
ad Fratres idferiores Germani^.
leave of their prayers, to become very impatient, and vain, and mere vipers
in their manners, and have as it were cast of human nature, I speak what I
know: And he says yet further there. Nov^ monachum, qui pro una duxerit tres
etc. I knew a Monk who instead of one wife married three, and I knew a Priest,
that after he had married a wife, found out that she was married to another
before. I will not name to you a certain Priest, whipped here at Basille about
the streets for his wickedness being of the same profession with these
Ghospelers, etc. He testified publicly that after he had once addicted
himself to that Sect, he rann into all kinf of wickedness: I will not say
what he told of the whole Sect, etc. hither to Erasmus.

Musculus a famous Lutheran says: Muscul. Dom. 1 Adv. and in Lib.
Thus stands the case at present with us Lutherans, that if any be desirous to
see a great rabble of knaves, of de Prophesia Christi.
turbulent persons, deceitful Coseners, Userers, let him go to any City
where the Gospel is purely preached, and he shall find them there by
multitudes; for it is more manifest then the daylight, that there were never
among the Ethnicks, Turks, and other Infidells, more unbridled, and unruly
persons, among whom all virtue, and honesty is quite extinct, then are among
the Professors of the Gospel. And Sall is not this a fair Testimony Musculus
gives of the first fruits of your Reformations?

Perhaps good works and Sanctity some years after followed your new Doctrine and
Ghospelling: I cannot find it so, but quite contrary: for Mr. Stubbs in his
Motives to good works, printed anno 1596. In his Epistle to the Lord Major of
London, says: That after his travel in compassing all England round about; I
found the people in most parts dissolute, proud, envious, malicious, covetous,
ambitious, carless of good works, etc.

And after him Mr. Richard Giffery a Protestant Devine in his Sermon at Paul's
Gross 7. October. Printed 1604. page 31, says: I may freely speak what I have
plainly seen in the course of some travells, and observation of some courses;
that in Flanders was never more Drunckenness, in Italy more wantonness, in Jury
more Hypocrisy, in Turkey more Impiety, in Tartary more Iniquity, then is
practiced generally in England, particularly in London. And if we may give
credit to the relation of some Catholics, and Protestants that come a broad,
it is noe whit better there at present.

The Centuristes Cent. 7. c. 7. Col. 181. Complaining of the want of good works
among those of their own Profession, and speaking of the Catholic common
people in the blindness (of Papistry as they term it) say thus. They were ( the
Catholics) so attentive to their prayers, as they bestowed almost the whole
day therein etc. They did exhibit to the Magistrate due obedience; they were most
studious of amity, concord, and Society, so as they would easily remitt
inivryes, all of them were careful to spend their time in an honest vocation
and labor, to the poor and strangers they were most courteous, and liberal,
and in their Judgments and Contracts most true.

Sall is not this a fair Testimony we Catholics have from our adversaryes of
virtue, piety and good works; strong it must be coming from adversaryes.

Now I would feign know how can Luther and his new Reformation, save those that
received his Doctrine, he cannot do it by good works, whereas himself,
Erasmus, Musculus, and the Centuristes Confess they had noe merita bona, but
multa merita mala. Noe good works, noe justice, noe piety: he answers let them
live as they please, and do noe good works; let them have faith, and live
never so wickedly, they are saved: for this is a principal Article of
Lutheran Faith and Doctrine that, Who does once truly believe, though he
committed thousands of Murders Adulteryes, and most wicked sins cannot be
separated from God, nor fall from his Grace, and, which is more, cannot loose
his Faith by any sin? Let any man judge, if there can be any principle and
Article of Faith more desperate and impious then this.

XI. CHAPTER. Of Calvin's Doctrine, his Calumnies against Catholics, and of his
Life and Conversation.
John Calvin borne at Noyon in France, an eloquent man and famous with
Protestants for his writings, especially his Books of Institutions, which are
more esteemed in England and whersoever his Sect bears sway then the Cannons
of holy Church, and the Doctrine and Authority of the ancient Fathers. He is
very well described by a French Author, as thus: Calvin, comme une meschante
Georg. l'Apostre contre les 150. Heresies du Ministre la Bansserie etc.
Arraignee, a couru par dessus toutes les Heresies passees, e de chacun en
succee le venin le plus pernicieux, and en compaesant, une venenade en a
enbevionne la Christiente. That is: Calvin like a venomous spiderr has run
over all Heresies of former times, and has sucked out of each of them the most
pernicious venim, and made thereof a poysened Potion, and gave thereof to drinck
to the Christian World. He raked up many old Heresies from hell, but nothing
can be more blasphemous then two Articles of his Doctrine: The one, that he
makes God Author of sin, affirming that he damnes souls to Hell by an
eternal inevitable, and unalterable decree and Judgment, without any regard
had of their doing good or evil; is not this to make God, a God of iniquity?
as you would call a temporal Judge, a cruel Judge when he puts to death a
prisoner without hearing any trespass, or crime aleadg'd against him, and
whether, he did or did not meritt death: the Scripture all over tells us God
is a holy God, and therefore in heaven the Angels, and the blessed souls sing:
Sauctus, Sanctus, Dominus Deus omnipotens, qui erat and qui est, etc. King
David says: Quoniam non Psalm. 5.
Deus volens iniquitatem tu es. Because thou art not a God that wilt iniquity.
And elsewhere it is said: Non est iniquitas apud Deum. And Royal David further
tells us, speaking to God: Odisti omnes qui Psalm. 5.
operantur iniquitatem. Thou hate all that work iniquity. Does not Saint Paul
say: Nonquid iniquus est Deus! Is Ad Romans Cap. 3.
God unjust? And Calvin contrary to holy David and Saint Paul makes God unjust
and doing iniquity in condemning souls to eternal flames without careing what
they have done good, or evil: were ever spoken by the mouth of man, so
horrible and impious words as these ensuing of Calvin. Dicitur Satan excaecare
infidelium mentes, sed unde hoc nisi quod a Deo ipso manat efficacia erroris?
lib. 1. Instit. cap. 18. Sect. 2. And again he says lib. 3. cap. 24. Sect.
13. Vocem ad eos (homines) dirigit, (Deus) sed ut magis obsurdescant; Lumen
accendit, sed ut reddantur Caetiores; Doctrinam profert, sed qua magis
obstupescant. What Doctrine so diabolical as this of Calvin saying
professedly, that when the Devil blinds sinners that the very efficacy of the
error proceeds from God; and that God speaks to sinners but will not that
they should hear him, that he shows them light, to the end they may be come
blinder then before, finally he says God makes an offer of Salvation (to the
reprobate) but with noe intention of their having it. This Doctrine of Calvin
affirming God to be Author of our sin, as it is impious in it self, so it
displeased many Protestants, in so much as the Magistrates of Berne (though
otherwise Calvinists) made it penal by their Laws, for any of their
Teritoryes, to preach Calvin's Doctrine thereof, or for their people to read any
of his Books containing the same. Vide litter as Senatus Bernensis, ann^ 1555.

Himself acknowledges such a decree, and judgment of God to be horrible:
Decretum quidem (says Calvin) horribile fateor, and yet he will have it stand
so: This Doctrine he Lib. 3. Instit. cap. 23.. 2. 3. 4. And in his harmony
upon Math. cap. 13. Petr. 2. Epist. cap. 3.
has in his Institutions and upon Matthew.

Calvin and other Heretics interpret holy Scriptures, which in some places are
dark, and the sense hard to be understood, with great presumption, and without
invoking the aid of the holy Ghost, which makes them fall into errors and
heresies. Saint Peter himself does attest this darkness in these words: My
dearest etc. do you account Salvation, as also, our most dear brother Paul
according to the wisdom given him has written to you: as also in all
Epistles, speaking in them of these things, in the which are certain things
hard to be understood, which the unlearned and unstable deprave, as also the
rest of the Scriptures, to their own perdition. It is certain that by reason
of the difficulties in Scriptures, whether in the style, or in the depth of the
matter, the ignorant and unstable (such as heretics be,) do pervert Saint
Paul's writings as also other Scriptures to their own damnation. Wherefore it
is a every dangerous thing for such as be ignorant, or for wyld witted fellows
to read the Scriptures, for such conditioned men be they, that become
Heretics, and through ignorance, pride, and private fancy, meeting with hard
places of Saint Paul's Epistles, or other Scr^tures, breed Heresies. The great
Saints, and Doctors Aug. lib. 2. de doct. Christ. c. 6. and Epist. 119.
Augustine, Ambrose, and Hierom, tell us that not only the things treated of in
the holy Scriptures, but also the manner of writing, and inditing thereof, is
high and hard, and purposly Ambr. Epists 44. Iherom to Paulinus Epist. 103.
cap. 5. 6. 7. Psalm 128. Acts of Apost. Cap. 8.
by Gods providence, appointed to be written in such sort. For this reason the
a bove named Saints and other Doctors in all ages by continual study,
watching, fasting, and praying, had much a do to understand the Scriptures;
did not David pray to God thus, give me understanding, and I will search thy
Law. Did not the eunuch in the Acts, reading the Prophet Esaias, say to Philip:
How can I understand without an interpreter?

Truly if those holy Fathers and Doctors found the Scriptures hard after much
study, and praying to God for obtaining light and the true understanding of
Scriptures, I wonder how they were not hard to Luther, Calvin, Zwinglius and
other impious men.

Saint Hierom says expressly that the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans is
wraped in so great obscurities, that to understand it we need the help of the
holy Ghost, especially some passages in the ninth Chapter, and among others
this: Jacob I loved, and Esau I hated, (and God says so): When they were not
yet borne, nor had done any good or evil. The Apostle considered, that men
reading this passage would take accasion to murmour against God as partial,
and acceptor of persons, for loving Jacob, and hating Esau, that were both
equal by nature and condition, both infected with original sin, and
consequently both guilty of eternal damnation: Saint Paul says, what shall we
say then? Is there iniquity with God? But you will say, what did God see in
Jacob, wherefore he loved him, and in Esau, wherefore he hated him, before they
were borne, or had done any good or evil? The Fathers and learned Interpreters
of Scriptures, answer thus: In Jacob nihil invenit amandum, nisi Misericordiae
suae donum. In Esau nihil odit nisi peccatum origenale. That is: That God found
nothing in Jacob to be beloved, but the gift of his own mercy. Nor in Esau to
be hated, but original sin. Now Calvin or another like him coms in, and says:
Quid ergo? what is hier to be said? Nunquid dicetur Deus iniquus, qui sine
merito elegit Jacob and Esau reprobavit? That is: Will not God be esteemed
unjust, that has chosen Jacob without merit? Saint Paul says absit, God
forbid, and the Fathers that rightly understands Saint Paul, do justify what
he said, and gives this unanswerable reason: Quia Jacob pro misericordia
elegit, and Esau pro justitia reprobavit; cum facit Deus (says Saint Augustine
upon this hard matter) per misericordium facit, cum autem non facit, per
judicium non facit. He that will busy himself to know wherefore God gives
mercy to one, and not to another, let him well consider what the same Father
says: Serutetur, qui potest, tam profundum Iudicium: verumtamen caveat
precipitium. That is: Let him that Seeks to penetrat so deep a Judgment be
aware he fall not into a precipice.

And that you may clearly see that God is just in his proceeding with Jacob,
and Esau. The Fathers, and Divines give this evident reason. In eo (says they)
quod alicui datur ex mera gratia, injustitia non habet locum, si non datur
alteri, quia gratia potest uni fieri, and non alteri sine injustitia. That is:
In that which is given to any one of mere grace, injustice has noe place if
the same is not given to another, because grace or mercy can be done to one,
and not to another without any injustice. Our Savior makes this plain in
distributing the penny or reward on the workmen, that came into the vyniard in
the morning, and at eleven Math. cap. 20.
of the Clock, for he gave the same to both: Those that came in the morning
thought they should receive more then the others, and not receiving more then
the others: They murmured against the Master of the vyneard, sayng: These last
have continued one hour, and thou have made them equal to us that have borne
the day and the heats. But he answering, said to one of them. frind, I do the
noe wrong: did thou not covenant with me for a penny? Take what is thine
and go: I will also give to this last even as to the also.

If there were two men both being Christened, both believing well, and living
well, if God should give heaven to one, and should damn the other, then would
God be termed unjust, partial, and forgettfull of his promise: but respecting,
or taking two, who both be worthy of damnation, (as all are before they be
first called to mercy) then the matter stands on mere mercy, and of the
givers will and liberality; in which case partiality or justice has noe place.
Saint Augustine gives an Aug. lib. de predest. and gratia c. 4.
example of two debtors: the one forgiving all, and the other put to pay all,
by the same creditor. Another example.

1. Two malefactors being condemned both for one crime, the prince pardons
the one, and lets the law proceed on the other.

2. The thief that is pardoned, can not attribute his escape to his own
deserving but to the Princes mercy.

3. The thief that is executed can not challenge the prince that he was not
pardoned also: but must acknowledge he has his desert.

4. The standers by, must not say, that he was executed because the Prince
would not pardon him; for that was not the cause, but his offense.

5 If they ask further, why the Prince pardoned not both, or executed not
both: the answer is, that as mercy is a Godly virtue, so Justice is necessary
and commendable.

6. But if it be further demanded why John, rather then Thomas was executed:
or Thomas, rather then John pardoned: answer, that (the partys being otherwise
equal) it hangs merely and wholly upon the Princes pleasure.

In all this mercy of God toward some, and Justice toward others, both the
pardoned work by their own free will, and thereby deserve their Salvation:
and the other noe less by their own free will, without all necessity, work,
wickedness, and themselves, and only of themselves procure their own
damnation. Therefore noe man may without blasphemy say, or can truly that he
has nothing to do toward his own Salvation, but will live, and think he
may live without care or cogitation of his end. Every good Christian must
suppose, that in Gods Judgments there be many things secret, but nothing
unjust: and therefore the good man without Search of Gods secret Judgments must
work his own Salvation, as Saint Peter does advise, saying: Wherefore Brethren,
2 Epist. Petri cap. 1.
labor the more, that by good works you may make sure your vocation, and
election. For doing these things, you shall not sin at any time. By this Saint
Peter teaches clearly, that Gods eternal Prodestination, and Ellection
consists with good works: yea that the certainty, and the effect thereof is
procured by man's free will and good works. For this reason all the ancient
Patriarcks, Prophets, Apostles, and all the Doctors, and Saints of God exhorted
the world, to fast, watch, pray, mortify their bodies, and to sanctify
themselves by good works, and themselves lived so: hear Saint Paul the great
Doctor of Nations, telling what way he took to the Kingdom of heaven and
making sure his Election and Vocation. Thus he spok to the Acto, cap. 20.
ancients of the Church coming to him from Ephesus. You know from the first day
that I entered into Asia, in what manner I have bine with you all the time,
serving our Lord with all humility tears, and temptations that did chance to
me by the conspiracyes of the Jews.

Who after these words of Saint Paul the Oracle of the World, will tell us,
that humility, tears, and temtations, are not necessary for gayning the Kingdom
of heaven?

The other Blasphemy is, that our Savior going down into Hell, suffered the
flames and torments of the damned there, for satisfying the Divine Justice,
Calvin super Math. the 27. cap.. 49.
and that without suffering in that kind; his death and passion had been noe
way profitable to mankind. He says the aprehention of the torments and pains
our Savior was to suffer in Hell, was the cause of sweating blood in the
Gardin, and that he feared his own Salvation: did ever man speak Calvin lib.
2. Iustit. cap. 26.. 36.
so horrible a Blasphemy? And says further that Christ nayld upon the Cross,
spoke words of despair. I will not spend time here, in telling you his
Heretical Opinion of the Trinity opening a way and door to the Arrians,
wherefore Franciscus Stankerus reprehending Calvin, said: Quis Diabolus O
Calvine te seduxit contra Filium Dei cum Ario obloqui. That is: O Calvin! what
Devil has seduced thee to speak evil of the Son of God with Arius.

Certain Calumnies of Calvin, against the Fathers and other Catholics.
CAlvin accuses against all sincere Conscience four Popes in this Language.
Julius forsoeth, and Leo, Calvin lib. 4. Instit. cap. 7. lect. 27
and Clement, and Paul, shall be Pillars of the Christian Faith, etc. Which
never knew any other thing of Christ then that which they had learned out of
Lucians School. Is not this Lucian was an Athist.
a strange impotency in accusing these Popes?

But what ( says he) if three or four ( Popes) go a stray, since the whole
College of Cardinals seem to have gone a stray? For first these are the
principal Articles of that secret Calvin lib. 4. Instit. cap, 7. lect. 27
Devinity that reigns amongst them: First, that there is noe God; secondly,
that all things that are written, and taught concerning Christ, are lies and
deceits; thirdly, that the Doctrine of the life to come, and of the last
Resurrection are mere fables, etc. Thus far he.

And all this he sets down resolutly as you see, without citing any one
Author, or Authority in the Text or Margent, but only noting these words: The
Athisme of Popes. All which is an impudent lying Accusation and Callumny.

Calvin in his first Book of Institutions writes resolutly, that in the first
Calvin lib. 1. Iustit. cap. 11.
five hundred years after Christ, there were never any Images in Christian
Churches. This is a false Callumnie. And Mr. Walsengham in his Search into
Matters of Religion found it to be so in Coccius a Catholic Author who cited
the words of 21. witnesses and some of those Fathers that lived in some of
those five ages, and Mr. Walsengham found all those Citations to be true.

Lastly, Calvin in his fourth book of Institutions, and 19. Chapter, has these
words against the Catholics, for esteeming as he says, more Chrisme, or holy
Oil in Baptism, then water. Praeterita aqua (says he) and nullo numero
habita, unum Oleum in Babtismo magni faciunt. That is: They letting pass, and
esteeming nothing at all, the water in Baptism, do only magnify their Oil
or Chrisme. Is not this a strange and bold accusation about Baptism whereas
the Protestants themselves do know we hold water essential and necessary to
Baptism, not so Oil; and that we hold the Baptism of Protestants for good
and essential though they use noe Oil: yea the Council of Council. Tred.
Sess. 7. caw 2. and 4.
Trent has so expressly determined the Matter, that none shall be rebaptized,
that are baptized by Protestants.

How then coms this impudent man to tell the world, that we esteem more the
Oil then Water in Baptism? Even this manifest Callumnie with others of the
same kind takes away all creditt and esteem from Calvin, and even for this
reason Sall, you should not rely upon such an open liar in the bussiness of
your Salvation.

Of Calvin's Life and Conversation.
AS concerning Calvin's incontinent and ill life. Hierom Bolseck a Doctor of
Physic, who lived at the same time with Calvin in Geneva, and was then of the
same Religion, published the same, and confuted Beza that canonized Calvin's
Sanctity and Virtues; but who would believe a Sodomite Beza, praising Calvin
another Sodomit? Bolsick beginns the life of Calvin with this Protestation. I
am here for the love of truth to refute Theodore Beza his false, and shameless
lies in the praise of Calvin, protesting before God and all the holy Court of
heaven, before all the world, and the holy Ghost it self, that neither anger,
nor envy, nor evil will, has made me speak or write any one thing against
truth, and my Conscience. (You are to observe that Bolseck being scandalized
with Calvin's life, became Catholic.)

Then he relates how Calvin was borne at Noyon in Picardy anno 1509. and was a
Priest and branded for Sodomy with a burning Iron upon the shoulder, and
therefore retired from his Country, and how this punishment was testiyed by the
City of Noyon under the hand of a public sworn Notary to Monsieur Berteliet
Secretary to the Council of Geneva, which testimony (faith Bolseck) is yet
extant, and I, and others have seen it: he then tells us of Calvin's
incontinency with a gentle woeman of Mongis who, stealing from her husband at
Lausanna, made abode at Geneva with Calvin, he also speaks of his adulterous
attempting at Geneva of the Lady Ioland of Bredrode, wife to a sickly noble man
called James Burgoigne Lord of Fallaise, in so much as she persuaded her
husband to leave Geneva, and go to Lausanna where she revealed the whole
matter. Then he discribes his delicate Diet, how his wine was choice, and
carried with him in a silver pott, when he dyn'd a broad; that also special
bread was made for Calvin only and the same made of fine flower, wett in
Rose Water mingled in Sugar, Sinamon, Annaiseeds, besides a singular kind of
bisquit; and this he affirms as a matter known to all Geneva: This delicasy
of Diet was not prescribed to preserve his health, but prepared to foment his
lust, and lewd Conversation with a Gentleman's wife of Lausanna and others. This
Calvin, (impious Calvin) after he had broaken and defaced the Images of
Christ, and Saints in Geneva, caused his own picture to be set up in several
places, and used also to give little pictures and Images of himself to
Gentle-woemen, and Gentlemen to carry about their necks. And when one told
him, that some thought much of this, he answered* Qui non potest hoc far,
rumpatur invidia. That is: He that cannot abide it, let him burst with envy. O
profane Hipocrit that preferred his own picture to the Image of Christ.

He attempted the working of a miracle to prove his extraordinary Vocation,
and Mission, to augment his own creditt, and to cheat the world with a fained
Miracle, you shall see how he came of. It happened thus. He agreed, with a
poor man called Bruleus a Tailor to faigne himself, dead, promising him great
rewards, if he acted his part handsomely in this Tragecomedy and would be
secret; none knew of the plot but Bruleus, and his wife, who upon the day and
hour appointed, satt in her house lamenting her husbands death; Calvin passing
by with agreat number of his frinds, (as it were by chance) and hearing the
Lamentation of the poor woeman, seemed to pity her sad Condition, and moved,
forsooth, with Charity and Compassion, fell down upon his knees with the rest
of his Company; praying in a loud voice, and begged of God that for the
manifestation of his Glory, and for the Confirmation of his servant Calvin's
Doctrine and Mission, he would vouchsafe to revive the dead Carcass, which he
took by the hand, and bid him rise in the name of the Lord. The wife seeing her
husband did not move or rise, as he had promised, drew near, and preceiving
he who had been well but half an hour before, was now dead, lamented in
good earnest the loss of her husband, reviled Calvin as a murderer, cheat,
Hypocrit, heretic etc. And related to the whole Company what had past between
them; Calvin seeing Bruleus had acted his part more naturally then he wished,
retired with have and confusion to his Lodging.

This is one of the miracles of Heretic Prophets such as an Arian Heretic did
work, when he made a man blind that saw well before, this made Tertulian
say. Isti (Apostoli) de mortuis Tertul. de prescrip.
suscitabant, ipsi (Heretici) de vivis Mortuos faciunt. That is. The Apostles
raise the dead to life, and the Heretics make those dye that were living.

Conradus Schlusselburge (a man of Principal estimation in the Protestant
Church, and noe less learned, and as great an Enemy to the Pope as Calvin
himself) gives this public Testimony of Calvin's fearful end. Deus manu
Schlusselburge in Theolog. Calvin printed 1594. lib. 2. fol. 72.
sua potenti adeo hunt Haereticum percussit, ut desperata salute, demonibus
invocatis, jurans, execrans, and blasphemans miserrime animam malignam
exhalarit; obiit autem Calvinus morbo pediculari vermibus circa pudenda in
apostemate seu ulcere faetentissimo crescentibus, ita ut nullus assistentium
faetorem amplius far posset: That is. God in the rod of his fury visiting
Calvin did horribly punish him before the hour of his death; for he so stroke
this Heretic (so he term^d him in regard of his Doctrine concerning the
Sacrament and of God being the Author of sin) with his mighty Hand, that being
in despair, and calling upon the Devil, he gave up his wicked soul
swearing, cursing, and blaspheming; he dyed of the disease of lyce and worms
(a kind of death where with God often stryketh the wicked, as Antiochus, Herod
etc.) increasing in a most loathsome ulcer a bout his privy parts, so as none
present could endure the stench.

the same Author says. Scio and lego Bezam aliter de vita moribus and obitu
Calvini scribere, cum vero Beza eadem Haeresi, and eodem ferme peccato
nobilitatus sit, ut historia de Candida ejus meretricula testatur, nemo ipsi in
hac part fidem habere potest. I know and read Beza to write otherwise of
Calvin's life, manners, and death, but Beza being infected with the same Heresy
( he means the denial of the real presence in the Sacrament) and being
accused of the same sin, as the History of Candida his little whore makes good,
noe man can give credit to Beza writing Calvin's life. A sodomite (as we have
said a bove,) will not condemn a another sodomite.

Finally I give you here Johannes Haerennius words a protestant writer, who
being himself an ernest Caelvanist, and at Geneva when Calvin dyed testifyeth
Calvin's filthy dispairing death, himself having bin present, and an eye
wittness thereof. Whose words are as follows. Calvinus in disperatione finiens
Ioannes Herenius in libello de vita Calvini.
vitam, obyt turpissimo and fetidissimo morbo, quem Deus rebellibus and
maledictis comminatus est, prius excruciatus and consumptus, quod ego verissime
attestari audeo, qui funestum and tragicum illius exitum, his meis oculis
presens aspexi. That is: Calvin ending his life in disperation dyed of a most
filthy and loathsum disease, which God does use to inflict on Rebels and
acurssed sinners being before tormented, and consumed away, which I can truly
attest, having been present and seen with mine eyes, his tragical and curssed
end.

Tell me Sall after this horrible end of Calvin a pillar of the English
Church, and your highest esteemed Doctor, whose institutions are your golden
Rules, what Angels have hurried him out of this world, to the tribunal of the
Son of God, and to what Eternity have they carried him, of Glory or
Confusion? Certainly such a despairing end of his life can be noe other then
the beginning of an Eternity of Flames and Torments.

XII. CHAPTER. Of Beza's Doctrine and Conversation.
THe aforesaid Hierom Bolseck; writ also the life of this filthy Beza, and
what ennormious villainies he committed.

First he rann away with a Tailors wife in Callendors-street in Paris, and
she then stole away her husbands goods: he sold a way a Priory he had, to
one for ready monyes, and he had farmed it to another for 5. years for money
before hand, after his running away, these two fell to a public suit, which
lies upon record in the Court of Paris. He was accused for getting his maid
Claudia with Child in Geneva, and then faining himself and his maid to be
sick, of the plague, he procured they should be lodged in two Chambers of
Petrus Virettus in another Garden: to conceal the sin, he had Claudia bled and
strongly purged, so as she was delivered of a dead Child, which they buried
in the Garden; the Barber that blooded Claudia confessed all this to Doctor
Bolseck upon oath. What does Beza? to cover the foul matter he composes a
Hymn of certain spiritual songs of the great pains he suffered by
vehemence of the plague, and printed them at Geneva.

Sall is not this a holy man fit to reform the Church of God, and to Sanctify
the World? O abominable Imposter, that covered black sins, with spiritual
Hymns!

Bolseck in publishing Beza's life anno 1582. does object against him many,
great, and heinous Imputations setting down in particular, with special
naming of times, places, and persons, and clear circumstances. Beza printed
seditious Books for stirring up, and fomenting civil wars in France, whereof
one was entitled the French Fury, another the truth, another the watch, another
the waking Bell: he writ a most pestellent Book, entitled De Iure Magistra
tuum in subditos. A thing so perfidious as Mr. Suttlife says: The Doctrine
Suttl. in his ans. to a Libel. suplicatory pa. 75. and pa. 92. Banc. in his
Serray of holy pretended discipline, printed 1593. Cap. 3. page 45. and in his
book of dangerous positions. pa. 21.
thereof does wholly tend unto trouble and rebellion, does arm the subjects
against the Prince, and overthrows in effect all the Authority of Christian
Kings and Magistrates. Likewise, Bancroft Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury,
delivers the same opinion of that dangerous Heretical Book.

Who will be pleased to consider the principels and Aphorisms of Zwing^ius,
Calvin, and Beza, the tribunes of the furious People, Boute-feux and
Ringleaders of Rebellion, it shall appear clearly ex effectis, that Geneva is
the School of Rebellion, and the Semenary of all the civil wars in France,
and if you will call to mind, both their beginnings; their proceedings; and
their continuance till this time in the Kingdom of France: In all these three
things, are specially to be observed. 1. Their many Conspiracyes, 2. Their
many and great Batles against the King and his Officers. 3. And the horrible
outrages and attempts, both incomparable for cruelty, and incredible for
disloyalty.

To say noe more of these things, let it serve turn to inform you of the open
and actual Rebellion of these new Saints, who sought by the sword in their
hands to compel the King, to pacification. Remember first that furious and
memorable Battle, upon the plain of Dreux; the Batle of Saint Dennis; the
Battle of Ianac; the Battle of Coutras: the Battle of Moncontour: and the
besieging of Roan, (where the King of Navare lost his life.) At Saint Dennis
the Constable was slain: and at tarnat the Prince of Conde: and at Coutras the
noble Duke Ioyeuse ended his days. The fields of France were stained with noble
French blood; and a curssed Beza was the greatest instigator of all men living*
in those Battles and seditions against his King, Charles the ninth, who was
bound to defend the Catholic Religion prescribed in France, and professed for
above 1300. years against all Heresiarks and impious men that would chase out
that Religion, and bring in Heresy. And by very reasons of state, and the Law
of Nations he was bound to do so, and to this purpose conduced the wise
Council Mecaenas gave to Augvstus, as an axiom contra Novatores as Dyon
records. Libro 52. Eos, qui indivinis aliquid innovant, odio habe and coerce:
non deorum solum causa (quos tamen qui contemnit, nec sant aliud quidquam magni
fecerit) sed quia nova quaedam numina ij tales introducentes multos impellunt
ad mutationem rerum. Vnde conjurationes, seditiones, conciliabula (res profecto
minime conducibiles Principatui.) That is: Hate those (said Mecaenas to
Augustus, that make any change in Religion, and chastise them: not only for
respect of the Gods (though he that contemns them shall never do any great
thing) but because those that introduce new Gods do stir up the people to
mutation and discord: from this springs up conspiracies, seditions and
dangerous meetings, and consultations (things noe way agreeable, or profitable
to the Kingdom.) And surely by such innovation did Beza insinuate himself
into the favor of the discontented Princes, as Conde, Collignie, and others,
and there by cast the strong and flourishing Kingdom of France into such
convulsions, as it hardly ever recovered its former strength and vigor.

Noe man did ever more vilefy and contemn the holy Fathers then this wanton
Poet, his insolency here in is intolerable. Will you hear him utter the
greatest petulancy that could be spooken? Itaque dicere nec immerito quidem
Beza ia Epist. Theol^ printed Geneve 1572. Epist. 1 page 5.
ut opinor consuevi, dum illa tempora Apostolicis etiam proxima cum nostris
comparo, plus illos Conscientiae, scientiae minus habuisse; nos contra
scientiae plus, Conscientiae minus habere, haec mea sententia est.

Therefore (says Beza) I was acustomed to say, and not without reason when I
compare those times even next to the Apostles with our times, that they ( the
Fathers) had more of Conscience, and less of Science; and we on the other
side, have more learning, and less Conscience then they, etc. As for Conscience
he said most true, but to prefer himself, and his Brethern Sectaries in
learning to the ancient Fathers he would not have don it, unless the Spirit of
lying and pride had thoroughly possessed him.

That we may loose noe more time with this man of abomination that preferrs
Calvin to all the Fathers in this language. Magnus ille Ioannes Calvinus beatae
memoriae veteres and recentiores omnes long superauit. That is: The great John
Calvin of blessed memory did far excel all the ancient Fathers, and later
Authors also. (He means in expounding, and interpreting Scriptures.)

Let me tell you what Heshusius a Hesh. in libro Verae and Sanae Confessionis
etc.
learned Protestant says of him (worsse cannot be said) Spurcissimus suis
moribus dedecori fuit ipsis diciplinis honestis, quique nefandos amoris
illiciti concubitus, scortationes faeda Adulteria Sacrilego Carmine decantavit
orbi, non contentus eo quod ipse more porci in fimo volutaret, nisi etiam aures
studiosae juventutis sua illuvie contaminaret. That is: Beza by his most
dishonest and villainous manners was a stain to honnest studyes, and learning
who published to the world in wanton sacrilegious verse unlawful and horrible
coppulations of his beastly love, horedomes, and filthy Adulteryes. Let us make
an end with that known and scandalous Epigram by him made of his inordinat
liking to his Ganimed, termed Andebertus, and to his young woeman called
Candida, in which (as thereby appears) he much debateth, whether sin he may
prefer, and in the end concludes with preferring the boy before his Candida.
The Epigram has this title. Theodorus Beza de sua in candidam and Andibertum
benevolentia. It beginns thus. Ab est, Candida Beza quid motaris? Andebertus ab
est quid hic moraris? Tenent Parisii tuos amores, habent aurely tuos Lepores,
and tu Vezelys mauere pergis, procul candidula amoribusque. Imo Vezely procul
valete, and vale pater, and valete fratres, nam Vezelys carere possum, and
carere and his and illis. At non Candidula Andibertoque: (g) sed utrum ergo
praeferam duorum* utrum invisere me decet Priorem? An quenquam tibi Candida
anteponam? An quenquam anteferam tibi Andeberte? Quid si me in geminas secem
ipse parts? harum ut altera Candidam revisat, currat altera versus Andebertum?
At est Candida sic auara novi, ut totum cupiat tenere Bezam, sic Bezae est
cupidus suus Andebertus, Beza ut gestiat integro potiri. Amplector quoque sic
hunc and illam, ut totus cupiam videre utrumque, integris frui integer duobus.
(h) Praeferre attamen alterum uecesse est, o duram nimium necessitatem! sed
postquam tamen alterum necesse est, Priores tibi defero Andiberte, qnod si
Candida forte conqueratur, quid tum? Basiolo tacebit uno:

Who understands this Epigram may tell you how fit a man Beza was to reform
the Church or if God would Choose such an unclean Monster to do it.

XIII. CHAPTER. A Brief Relation of the manners and Conversation of others of
the Protestant Religion, and pretended Reformers of the Church.
THose were Zwinglius, Philip Melankion, and others.

Of Zwinglius.
He was a Priest and Chanon of Constantia, Prince of the Sacramentarians, a
seditious and turbulent man. He had a conferrence with an evil Spirit, (
utrum albus an ater, whither he was white, or black he did not know,) and
upon the same he abolished the Mass as Luther did before him. He at once with
other votary Priests, as continent men as himself, offered a petition to the
Helvetian common wealth, which Englished goes thus.

We ernestly request, that the use of Marriage be not denied to us, who feeling
the infirmity of our Flesh, perceive that the love of Chastity is not given us
by God, for if we consider the words of Paul, we shall find with him, noe
other cause of Marriage, then for to satisfy the lustful desires of the Flesh,
( a Carnal saying and false) which to burn in us, we may not deny, seeing
that by means hierof we are made infamous before the congregation. Was not
this a fine Confession of Zwinglius and Companions? he had still in his mouth
this bloody saying. Evangelium fitit sangunem. That is: The Gospel thursteth
after blood. Indevouring by fighting, and by bloodshed to enforce his new
Gospel upon some Cantons, and Countries of the Switzers, he was slain armed
in a Battle: And Luther gave this noble Character of him. Obiit latro and
armat^^ obiit. That is: The thief died, and he died armed. Now Sall think on
it if this man came from God or the Devil.

Phillip Melankton.
A Devine of eminent rank among Protestants prefered by Luther to Saint Austin
himself maintained three distinct Divinities, as there are three distinctt
persons. He taught Poligamy to be lawful, and published so much by writing
to Henry the eight, houlding his divorse from Queen Catharin unlawful, but
withal proposed to the King that he might lawfully at Melan. concilia
Theologica printed 1600. p. 134.
once with her take another wife. Respondeo (says Melankton) si vult Rex
successioni prospicere, quanto satius est id facere sine infamia Prioris
conjugii, ac potest id fieri sine ullo periculo Conscientiae c^usqu^m aut famae
per poligamiam, etc. That is: I answer if the King intends a divorse with his
Queen Catharin for getting issue he may do that far better and without
infamy of the first Marriage, and lawfully without danger of Conscience by
Poligamy, that is to say by taking another wife at once with her.

Jacobus Andreas, otherwise named Smedelinus.
WAs Chancellor in the University of Tubing, Luthers prime Scholar, noe less
esteemed in Germany, then Calvin, or Beza in Geneva, in the Colloquie at
Mompelgar he encountered an overmatcht Beza; yet the Lutherans themselves, who
magnify his learning say he had noe God, but Bacchus and Mamon: Selnecerus his
great frind and daily Companion gave this Testimony of his Piety, that he
never prayed goeing to to bed, nor rising in the morning. Sturmius, a learned
Calvanist, charge him with the crimes of Adultery, covetousness, and robbing
of the poor, Zanchius says he was taken in a public Zanch. in Epist* printed
1609. lib. 2. pa. 240
Adultery. Sall what a holy Doctor have you of this man.

Carolostadius.
Archdeacon of the Cathedral of Wittembergh, aman of a furious nature, was
the first Sacramentarian. It was singular in him, that being a Priest he
married in the year 1524. and a peculiare Mass was made and printed for the
same: which began thus. Dixit Dominus Deus non est bonum hominem ess^ solum
etc. That is: God said, it is not good for a man to live alone. The prayer
Englished was. O Lord which after so long blindness of unmaried Priests has
bestowed so great grace upon blessed Carolostadius, as contemning the Popes
Law, he has presumed to take a wife, bring to pass we beseech thee, that all
other Priests may follow his example. The rest of the Mass you may see in
Cochlaeus in the year 1525. This unhappy Carolostadius was so persecuted by
Luther, as he lived miserably in the Country and labored like a poor Bore.

John Knox.
A Scotchman, and Apostata Married Priest, a Rebel and Boute-feux incendiary of
the whole Nation, and a Murderer, raised a Rebellion, stirring up the nobles,
and common people against Queen Mary of Scotts his Sovereign, and against her
virtuous Mother the Queen Regent, of the Catholic, and most famous house of
Guise, who dyed of Grief for the coming of Heresy into that Catholic
Kingdom. This man with a Rabble of Rebels deposed the Queen, and laid the
Crown upon her Sons head King James the sixth, (afterward King of England,
Grandfather to King Charles the second) an Infant: Infine the noble Queen
sorely afflicted, flying into England, hopeing to be protected by her
Kinswoeman Queen Elizabeth after a long Imprisonment was put to death by that
cruel woeman.

This holy man Knox began his Reformation with the murder of Cardinal Betune
Archbishop of Saint Andrews in his own Bedchamber, and did afterward many
bloody Tragical things: Notwithstanding all his villanys, Calvin termed him an
excellent and reverend man^, valiant Labourer in Christ his Church, restorer of
the Gospel in Scotland, and in the end of a letter to him writes. Vale eximie
vir and ex animo colende Calvin in Epist. and responsss. printed 1567.
Frater. And Beza writes thus. Ioanni Knox Evangelii Dei apud Scotos
instauratori, fratri and symmistae observando. And in another place. Magnus
ille Ioannes Knox Scotorum in vero Dei cultu instaurand^ velut Beza in Epist.
Theologicis printed anno 1573. Epist. 74 page 333.
alter Apostolus. Here mulus malum scabit. Impious impure men, praise an impure
impious man. The Protestant Bishop of Rochester in his Sermon at Paul's Cross,
gave a truer Description of Knox calling him, and Bucanan two fiery Spiritts of
the Scotch Nation. It is written that this wicked Knox was killd upon his bed
by a Devil. Sall Judge you if this end, showed him to com from God.

Oecolumpadius.
A Brigittin Monk married a Nun, was a fierce Sacramentarian the next after
Carolostadius, and after them Zwinglius, who they dying bore the Bell, and name
of that Sect. This Oecolumpadius was a man of an unclean wicked life, was found
dead upon his bed killed by a Devil as Protestant writers attest, and Luther
among others.

Christopher Goodman.
AN Englishman, a seditious rank Goodman in his book how to Obey. page 96.
Rebel great Companion to John Knox, writing of Queen Mary of England, speaks
thus. That wicked woeman Mary, whom you would truly make your Queen etc. And
again. God has not given an Hypocrit only to reign over you, but an
Idolatress also, not a man, but a woeman, which his Law forbids, and nature
abhors, whose reign was never counted lawful by the Law of God etc. He
says again. This ungodly Serpent* Mary has joined her self with Adulterous
Phillip.

Sall is not this a Godly homily of obedience Goodman teaches toward
Soueraigness? And is not Calvin your great Doctor of the English Church a great
frind to Sovereignty, whilst he highly praises this scurrill Rebel. You may
observe one thing how Goodman after Queen Mary dyed writ against his former
opinion, and acknowledged Queen Elizabeth to be lawful Sovereign of England,
and that the Law of God was not against her Government, nor that the Law of
Nature abhorred it, he called her not Idolatress or Serpent, by which it is
clear and plain that this Rebellious knave writ only against Queen Mary
being a Catholic, whose title to the Crown was clearer, and better, then that
of Queen Elizabeth, as all men know.

Having said thus much of the forementioned Heretics, and Reformers, let us
now examine what kind of men those were; that contrived the XXXIX, Articles of
the confession of England so highly valued by Sall and preferred to true
theorems of faith, (though many of them are condemned Heresies) after vewing
what they have done touching said XXXIX Articles you shall be able to Judge of
their vices, and virtues.

XIV. CHAPTER. A Narration of the English Religion and Reformers in King Edward
the 6. Reign.
THe Earl of Hartford the Kings Uncle newly created Duke of Summerset, and
Lord Protector of England, a man neither fit to govern, nor to be governed,
his Judgment being weak, and himself very wilful and blindly resolute. To
his infamy and destruction, he made choice of Dudlay Earl of Warwyck (a man
of great Judgment, and a deep dissembler) to be his chief assistant and
director, both in Church, and in state affairs, who was his greatest Enemy,
which Summersett had not wit to see or discern, though all the world knew him
to be Summersets competitor. This crafty man though he had bin allways a Roman
Catholic in his Judgment, (yet as many politicians use to do) he dissembled
his belief, and soothed the Protectors inclination to the Protestant
Reformation; and made account those new men for Propagation, and Preservation
of their new Gospel and Do^trin would fix upon himself for their chief
Patron and Director, and take with him, whom he would appoint for Sovereign
of the Land, and to this purpose he much humored their madness and zeal, while
they were intoxicating the people with the liberty and pleasure of the new
Religion. Dudlay being all, in all with the Protector, and having gotten the
power of the Militia into his own hand, he began to settle a new Religion in
England upon the score of a refined Reformation, and to unsettle the government
and ancient faith; and in doing all this he gave the world to understand the
Protector did all, and thereby made him so odious that none could endure to
hear his name or to live under his government.

This wicked Earl compassed what he went about to his own desire: his
impious drift was to make his Son King, (who was married to my Lady Jane Gray
of the Blood-Royall and a Protestant.) Infine he contrived the Protectors
destruction, and had him put to death, the young King to be poisoned, the
Princes Mary (afterward Queen) to be excluded, and the Lady Jane Gray to be
Crowned Queen of England.

For preparing the way to all those sadd things this cruel impious man by
force of the Army, (which was in his hands,) against his own Conscience in the
first Parliament, and year of King Edwards Reign obtained in favor of
Protestancy, and these new men, an act of indemnity for the new Preachers and
Heretics from pennaltyes inacted by the ancient Laws of the Land against
married Priests and Heretics; and a repeal of the English Statutes, that had
time out of memory confirmed the imperial Edicts and Laws against Heresies.
But in the second year and Parliament of Edward VI. it was carried (though by
few votes, and after along debate of above four months) that the Zwinglian or
Sacramentarian Reformation should be the Religion of England. O tempora! o
mores! o exicrabilem Parlamenti Anglicani impietatem! o scelus Cleri
Apostatantis!

Who the Contrivers of the XXXIX. Articles and first Reformers of Protestant
Religion.
TRue Faith and all Sanctity being chased out of England by the sins of the
Clergy, and the wicked laymen in the Parliament, the Charge of framing Articles
of this new Religion, as also of composing the Liturgy, and a Book of Rites,
Ceremonies, and Administration of Sacraments was committed to Thomas Cranmer,
Archbishop of Canterbury, and to some other Protestant Devines, who were all
married Friars and Priests, lately come out of Germany with their sweet hearts;
videlicet. Hooper and Roger Monks, Coverdale an Augustine Friar, Bale a
Carmelit, all these Englishmen: Peter Martyr a Chanon Regulare, Martin Bucer a
Dominican, and Bernardus Ochinus a Capucin, (these three strangers came over
with three galloping Nuns) invited by the Protector and Cranmer out of Germany,
and appointed to preach, and teach in both Universityes, and at London, who were
to agree with the rest in the new modern form of Religion, which was a matter
of great difficulty, because the tenets (which they until then had professed)
were irreconsilable: For that Hooper, and Rogers, were fierce Swinglians, that
is Puritans, or Presbiterians, and joined in faction against Cranmer, Ridly,
and other Prelaticks, Hugh Latimer of great regard with the common people; he
opposed himself to Cranmer and others for their opposing his pretention to the
Bishopric of Worsester; Coverdale and Bale were both Lutherans, and yet
differed, because the one was a riged, the other a mild or half Lutheran:
Bucer had also professed a kind of Lutheranisme in Germany, but in England was
what the Protector would have him to be, and therefore would not for the space
of a whole year declare his opinion in Cambrid (though pressed to it by his
scholars) concerning the Real Presence, until he had heard how the Parliament
had decided the Controversy at London; and then he changed his opinion, and
became wholly a pure Zwinglian.

The same tergiversation was used by Peter Martyr at Oxford, and so
ridiculously, that coming sooner in the first Epistle of Corinthians (which he
undertook to expound) to the Words: HOC EST CORPUS MEVM, then it had bin
determined in Parliament what they should signify; the poor Monk with admiration
and laughter of the University was forced to divert his Auditors with
impertinent comments upon the precedent Words. Accipite, manducate, fregit and
dixit etc. Which needed noe explanation.

At length when the news was com, that both houses had ordered these Words: HOC
EST CORPUS MEVM, should be understood figuratively, and not literally; Peter
Martyr said, he wonderd that any man could be of another opinion, though he
knew not the day before what would be his own opinion.

As for Bucer he was a concealed Jew, (joined in Contriving the XXXIX.
Articles only to make good days with his Nun) and dyed a Jew, being asked
confidently his opinion of the Sacrament by Dudley Duke of Northumberland, in
the presence of the Lord Paget then a Protestant (who testified the same
publicly afterward) he answered that the Real Presence could not be denied,
if men believed that Christ was God, and spoke the Words, THIS IS MY BODY. But
whether all was to be believed which the Evangelistes writ of Christ, was a
matter of more Disputation

Peter Martyr who came to England to Cherish in pleasures his wanton Nun, whose
death he lamented efeminatly, was noe Protestant in Judgment as is clear by
what is said, and yet he joynd in the XXXIX. Articles.

Bernardus Ochinus, (who loved Women so well as by an express written Book
he affirms Polligamy or the lawfullness of having two Wives together) dying
professed himself to be a Jew, and so whilst he lived in England was but a
counterfeit Protestant to make bon-chear with his Nun, and for this cause
agreed to the XXXIX. Articles.

Cranmer was a mere contemporiser, and of noe Religion at all. Henry the eight
raised him from Chapline to Sr. Thomas Bullen, Ann Bullens Father to be
Archbishop of Canterbury, to the end he might divorse him from Queen
Catharin, and marry him to said Ann Bullin, which he did: Afterward by the
Kings Order he declared to the Parliament, that to his knowledge Ann Bullen was
never lawful wife to his Majesty (by which he let the World know Elizabeth
her daughter had noe right title to the Crown of England.) After this he
married the King to Ann of Cleves, and when the King was weary of her, Cranmer
declared this marriage also null, and married, and unmarried him so often,
that he seemed rather to exercise the office of a pymp, then the function of a
Priest; which (to requite one curtesy for another) made the King connive at his
keeping a Woeman, and at some of his Opinions, though some what contrary to the
statute of the six Articles.

In King Henry the eight's days, Cranmer professed to be Catholic, and writ a
book for the Real Presence; In King Edward the sixth days he professed
Protestancy, and writ another book against the Real Presence; Bishop Bonner
produced both those books against him in Judgment.

He conspired with the Protector Summerset to overthrow K. H. will and
testament; and afterward conspired with Dudlay of Northumberland to ruin the
Protector: he joined with Dudlay and the Duke of Suffolk against Queen Mary
for the Lady Jane Gray; and immediately after with Arondell, Shrewsbury,
Pembrook, Paget, ane others against the same Duke: finally when he was
condemned in Queen Mary's time for treason and Heresy, and his Treason being
pardoned, hopeing the same favor might be extended to his Heresy, he
recanted and abjured the same; but seeing the temporal Laws reserved noe
mercy, for relapsed Heretics (who are presumed not to be truly penitent or
converted) he was so exasperated thereby, that at his death (moved more by
Passion then Conscience) he renounced the Roman Catholic Religion, to which
he had so lately conformed.

These were the Godly men, who framed the XXXIX. Articles of the Religion of
the English Church, the Liturgy and the book of Sacraments, Rites, and
Ceremonies of the Protestant Church: and though it may seem incredible, that an
Athist, a Jew, a Contemporiser, or mere Pollitian, a Presbiterian, a riged
Lutheran, a half Lutheran, and an Anty Lutheran, or Sacramentarian should all
make one Religion, yet when men do but dissemble, and deliver opinions to
please others, and profitt themselves, and have noe Religion at all, they may
without difficulty concur in some general points of Christianity framing
negative Articles (such as many of the XXXIX. Articles are) Impugning the
particular truths of Orthodox faith. This was the case of the Church of
England, and men disagreeing in opinions made up one religion such as it was.

The Fabric of those Articles being raised as was said, let any Christian be
Judge whether it be more safe, and more rational to rely in matter of faith
upon the Tradition of the whole Catholic Church, and ancient Liturgy's, and
Rites, and upon the Testimony of all the holy Fathers, and Counsels since the
Apostles times, then to take the bare Word of Cranmer, a man of slippery life
and Religion; Let any Christian man (I say) be Judge whether this man together
with Ochinus a Jew, Buzer an Athist, (or at the best a Jew) Peter Martyr of the
Religion the Parliament would have him to be of; Hooper and Latimer and Rogers
stubborn discontented Presbiterians; Bale. and Coverdale, Lutherans, two lewd
and runagate Friars, whether he that cares for his own soul, should rather
believe these wicked impious men, in points of Faith, and marters of Salvation,
then all the ancient Fathers and the holy Counsels.

Let us now see, after Dudlay and his faction of Protestant Religion and the
City of London had crowned Jane Gray, what became of them, and how long they
were in the roof and prosperity.

Queen Marys courage and resolution, and her own good right (Protestancy being
not as yet so deeply rooted) at once with those loyal Catholics, that waited
on hervertue and fortune, quashed Dudlays Rebellion and design (those lewd
Apostate Monks and Priests, that coined the XXXIX. Articles then vanished away
like smoke) and brought Dudlay to his destruction; he was put to death for
treason and Rebellion.

Upon the scaffold he declared that he had never been a Protestant in his
Judgment, and only made use of its principels and Profession for temporal
ends, as to raise his family, and make his Son (married to Lady Gray) King,
etc.

He advertised the people of the new Religions in consistency with peace and
quiet, that its Clergy were but ungodly men, and trumpets of sedition. The
substance of his speech is set down by Doctor Heylin a Protestant in Doct.
Heil. Eccls. Restau. Queen Mary page 19
these-words. He admonished the Spectators to stand to the Religion of their
Ancesters rejecting that of latter date, which had occationed all the misery of
the foregoing 30 years, and that for prevention for the future, if they desired
to present their souls unspotted in the sight of God, and were truly affected
to their country, they should expel those tempests of sedition, the preachers
of the reformed Religion; that for himself what soever had otherwise been
pretended, he professed noe other Religion then that of his fathers, for
testimony whereof, he apealed to his good frind and Ghostly Father the Lord
Bishop of Worcester; and finally that being blinded with ambition he had been
contented, to make wrake of his conscience by temporising, for which he
professed himself seriously repentant, and so aeknowledged the Justice of his
death.

A Declaration (says Doctor Heyling) very unseasonable whether true or false,
as that which rendered him less pitied by the one side, and more scorned by
the other. This is a more politic then pious observation of Doctor Heylin,
would he not have men confess their faults and profess their faith when they
are dying? and would he have them prefer the vanity of the pity, or scorn
of the World, when they are to bid the whole World adieu, before the
Satisfaction, and Salvation of the Soul?

Sall has there been so much as one man of your first Doctors and Reformers,
and of all those that contrived the XXXIX. Articles, has there been (I say)
so much as one just man before God walking in all the Commandments and
Iustifications of our Lord without blame? one virtuous soul that mortified his
body and loved Chastity? one Priest or Monk amongst them all that was bonus
odor Christi? Noe; but all of them lewd, dissolute, infamous Priests and
Religious men, that broak their holy vows, Rebels against God, and against
his anointed on earth, Kings and. Magistrates, rayfing tumults and seditions in
all the countries they lived in; such kind of men they have been, though John
Fox a ridiculous man canonized many of them for great Saints, of which we
shall treat more at large in the ensuing Chapter. They have been Cores that
have rent the Coat, and garment of Christ, and made a great Scisme in Gods
Church: like Ballaaems they have cheated Gods People, for gaining Wordly
Comodityes and Pleasures: like Gains they have murdered millions of innocent
Abells with Heretical Doctrine, and pestiferous manners and Conversation:

You are not ignorant Sall of what Saint Paul writes to Timothy. And 2. ad Tim.
cap. 3.
thus know thou, that in the last days shall aproatch perilous times. And men
shall be lovers of themselves, covetuous, hauty, proud, blasphemous, wicked,
without affection: Incontinent, unmercifull, traitors, stubern, puffed up, and
lovers of voluptuousness more then of God. Lay your hand upon your heart Sall
and tell me were not all your Saints such? did not they lead about captive
silly women laden with sins? are not Nuns breaking out of Cloisters, such
women? was there any of your capital reformers that has not led with him a
Nun, or some other woeman covered with sins, and from those they never
separated, but for enjoying them, and their love, perrished eternally?

Ah Sall, ah blinded Sall, have you for joining with those flagitious men, and
imbraceing their new and Heretical Doctrine, deserted the famous Doctors and
Saints, Gregory, Ambross, Augustine, and Hierom, and all the ancient Fathers of
the Church now glorious Saints in heaven? Heu and Vae will fall upon you for a
lost man that began to stray in your old age. Sall for shame: Fuge ad foli^ in
horto Paradisi, and absconde te a facie Domini cum peccantibus parentibus tuis,
and Deo clamanti Sall ubi es, responde cum pudore, v^cem tuam audivi Domine and
tim^i, eo qu^d nudus essem, and abscondi me.

XV. CHAPTER. Sall (if he minds his Salvation) should not stay in a Church,
wherein Murderers, Traitors, Heretics, Thieves, Negromansers, and other
Mallefactors are Can^nized for Saints.
IT is (says Sall) a grievous reproach objected to the Protestant Congregation
of the English Church, to say they esteem for Saints, Murderers, Heretics,
and other Mallefactors, it is so Sall, and even such a reproach, as the
Prophet objected to some men that were Socii furum, Companions of Thieves. But
if the Congregation of Protestants in England do this day own and acknowledge
for Saints, Murderers, and other Mallefactors; ( Ipsi viderint, volenti and
scienti non fit injuria.) While they do not disclaim in John Foxes Calendar,
wherein he sets down for glorious Martyrs, and Saints, Murderers, Traitors,
Thieves, etc. But rather highly value the same, so as it has bin publicly
read in the Churches to the Congregation, do not they make themselves guilty
of this reproach? Fox then is the man has don this great Injury to the
Protestants of England, if they will be sencible of it. This man of his own
head, forged a Calendar, or Ecclesiastical Table of new Saints for the new
English Church, out of pride and vanity, Emulation, and apish Imitation of our
Calendar, for he would forsooth have a Calendar for his own Saints, (that
indeed were noe Saints) and in this Calendar he put down agreat rabble of
Heretics, Thieves, seditious persons, etc. And canonized of his own new
Reformers who he pleased, and left out whom he pleased.

By framing this impious ridiculous Calendar, he has done a grievous Injury
to the Catholics of England, to all the Saints of great Britany, and to the
very Protestant Congregation. To the Catholics those constant Professors of
their faith in the days of Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth (days of
sharp persecution) that would not bend their knee to Baal (there were blessed
be God many thousands of them) Lotts that remained pure in Sodom; in raising a
Dagon, (a Calendar of false Saints,) against their Arca, (a Calendar of true
Saints) but in the end our Arca has fallen Foxes Dagon.

To the Protestants he has done a very great afront, and dishonored their
Religion by setting down in his Calendar for Saints of their Communion known
Heretics, Traitors, Murderers, Witches, and all kind of Mallefactors, by
which he has made his own Protestants Socios furum Companions of Thieves:
what more infamous to the Protestants of England, then the Company of wicked
men, some condemned for lewd life, some for theft and Sacriledg, others for
Murders and Conspiracies, others for witchcraft and sorcery, and coming even
to the distroying of their Princes person; And is not this a holy Communion and
Association of them to bragg of? This is the great honor that John Fox has
done to the Protestants of England, that Luther, Bucer, Ochinus, and those
other Apostata's Priests, Monks, and Friars, that for love of the flesh broak
their Vows made to Allmighty God, are set down for chief Saints in his
Calendar.

He has likewise highly injured the Saints in heaven, in turning them out of
the Callendar to make room for his new Saints, to that effect he put out of
his Callendar all the English, British, and Scotch Saints, that have been
known for glorious Saints by all the Ecclesiastical Historys of the World:
What atempt more violent, what Injury greater, then to stricke out of the
Senate of Saints, all the Bishops, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, Eremites,
Priests, and Monks of great Britain, enjoying the blessed Society of Angels,
and the happy presence and vision of their Master Jesus, the Lamb of God, and
who is the light and Lantern, and Sun it self of the Celestial City of
Jerusalem? and this he has done, and all those he has put out of their
seats, and places, to make room for his new Martyrs and Saints, such as you
will blush to see named for Saints.

Nor did Fox stay here; but with great petulancy like a scelerat and profane
man he dared compare his new Saints, with our ancient Martyrs, as John Hooper
a married Priest with Saint Policarp. He resembles Tindall in like manner to
Saint Paul, and his Shollar Frith, to Saint Timothy.

Let any man read his arrogant and blasphemous dedicatory Epistle, in beginning
of his volume, to Christ himself, and he shall see the pride the man had
conceived of those his new Martyrs. For first he asked of Christ this
question. Quae gens, quae Fox in Epist. dedic, ad Iesum Christum^
lingua, quae natio, qua temporum vetustas, quae hominum prosteritas earum non
cantabit lauds? etc. That is* What people, what tongue, what nation, what
continuance of time, what posterity of men shall ever be, that will not sing
these new Martyrs praises? etc. This was his question, Fox his writing to Jesus
Christ.
and you will easily imagine how quickly Christ could have answered the goose
(if he had been worthy of answer) to wit, that he should soon after see, and
behold a posterity of the English Nation it self, that instead of praising
them, would defy and detest both them and their Doctrine, as also display
their wickedness to the whole World. And whether this time and posterity be
already com or not, let the Reader judge by that, which in this book he shall
see set forth.

But now after Fox his Conference had with Christ in Latin, he comes down to
reason with the Q. Majesty in English, about the worthiness of the same Matyrs,
and then turns again to the learned Reader (for so he says he must be)
in another Lattin letter, where after many other insolent vaunts of his new
Martyrs, he says thus: Si non poena sed causa Martyrem facit; Fox Epist. ad
doctum lectorem.
non video cur non unum Cranmerum sexcentis Beckettis Cantuariensibus non
conferam modo, sed pretulerim. That is: If the cause and not the punishment
make a Martyr, I see *not why I should not only compare, but prefer also one
Cranmer before six hundred Becketts of Canterbury. This is one Impudency, let
us hear another: Quid in Nicolao Ridlaeo videtur cum quovis Divo Nicolao non
conferendum? That is: What is there in Nicholas Ridley, that Impudent and
rediculous demands of John Fox.
may not be compard with any Saint Nicholas whatsoever? To this every man that
has redd the life of Saint Nicholas surnamed the great, (that was Bishop of
Myra, and so famous in the first council of Nice) and has either known the
other Nicholas Ridley intruded into two Bishoprics of England at once,
together with his Burgundian wife, or shall read those things which afterward
I am to set down of him and October. 19*
his actions out of Fox himself, when I come to his festival day will easily
be able to make full answer.

There follows Fox his third demand of the learned reader more impudent and
impious then the rest. Qua in re (says he) Latimerus, Hooperus, Marshius,
Simsonus, caeterique Christiani Martyrii candidati inferiores summis,
maximisque ill is Papistici Calendarii divis, imo multis etiam nominibus non
pr^ponendi videantur? That is: In what one thing may Latimer, Hooper, Marsh,
Simson, and other renowned Christian Martyrs, (in this book contained) seem to
be inferior to the highest and greatest Saints of the Papisticall Calendar, or
rather not to be preferred before them all for many respects? Here now you see
his full sense, and these his Martyrs are to be preferred before the highest
and chiefest Martyrs of the Popes Calendar.

But some one of the Protestant Congregation will tell me it is a flatt lie,
that Fox has canonized Malefactors for Saints, to wype of this stain I remitt
this man to examine his Calendar by years, months, and days; and to point out
with a fingar some of them (for it were toe tedious to pass ^an. 7. 8. 9. 10.
Febr. 6. Enormityes of diverse Foxian Saints.
over them all:) In the first place I give you Sr. John Old-Castle, and Sr.
Roger Acton, who with above forty more were hanged in Saint Gylses field, for
treason and for actual Rebellion, and for conspiring the death of King Henry
the fifth, and of his Brethern: who yet are made solemn Martyrs by John Fox in
his Calendar and distributed into diverse festival days for celebrating their
memories: behold two capital rubricated Martyrs of John Fox who dyed for
Rebellion and treason. So write Catholic and Protestant Authors, as
Walsingham, who lived at the same time with Old-Castle: Likewise Stow expressly
speaks thus. Toward the end of the year 1417. Stow anno 5. Henr. 5. page 572.
Sr. John Old-Castle taken by chance in the Territory of the Lord Powesse was
brought up to London in a Litter wounded, during the Parliament, and there
examined. Which Stow sets down thus: As Soon as Sr. John Old-Castle, was
brought into the Parliament before the Kings Brother Duke of Bedford Regent and
governor of the Realm, his indightment was read before him of his forcible
insurrection against the King in Saint Gylses field, and other treasons by him
committed. The question was asked. why he should not be deemed to Dye? etc. But
the said Old-Castle giving many frivelous answers, and speaking nothing to the
point, the chief Justice admonished the Regent not to suffer him to spend the
time so vainly, and being commanded to answer finally, why he should not
suffer death. To which he stoutly answered, that This Rich. then in Scoctland,
was a Mock King a suborned impostore.
he had noe Judge among them, so long as his Leage Lord King Richard was a
live and in the Realm of Scotland. Which answer when he had made, because
there needed noe other wittness, he was condemned to be drawn and hang*d upon
a Gallows, and to be burned hanging upon the same. Which Judgment was executed
on him the 14. of December in Saint Gylses field. Where many honorable persons
being present; the last words that he spoke were to Sr. Irpingham, adjuring
him, that if he saw him rise from death to life again the third day, he
would procure that his sect might be in peace and quiett.

Thus far are the words of Stow, Old-Castle was of the Sect of Wicklif. And
who will not say now but that this traitor publicly executed for treason, is a
worthy Martyr for Fox his Calendar and Martyraloge? If Hackett the puritan put
to death in Queen Elizabeth's days for saying he would rise again the third
day, as Old-Castle did say: and went devoutly to the Gallows as the other did,
crying IEHOVA, IEHOVA, (as Stow sets it down) and at the Stow anno 33. Eli.
Christi Vero 1591. page 2289.
Gallows noe less bitterly railed against Q. Elizabeth, then Old-Castle did
against that worthy King: Into his Calendar had he gone without further
Consultation; and in some respect was fitter for it, being a Cal^anist in the
purest degree, which Old-Castle was not, as after shall be made appear.

It is also clear and manifest Of Sir Roger Acton and his cause why he was
hanged.
that Sir Roger Acton Knight with Sir John Old-Castle and others conspired King
Henry the fith his death with his Brethren, and was taken in open Rebellion
against him in the field of Saint Gyles in London, upon the year 1414. And was
condemned of treason, at Westminster, and on the tenth of February, was drawn,
hanged, and buried under the Gallows so ^elateth Stow. Stow. in Chro. ^n Dom
1414. pa. 551 Holen. anno 1414.
And Holenshed in effect writes the same, citing for his Authors Titus Livius.
And Hall in the Margent. Stow, and Holenshed as above was said were both
Protestants.

John Zisca also the famous Bohemian Murderer, who besides the Rebellion
against his Prince and Lieg Lord, was a common manqueller, began his Rebellion
by murdering openly the Major of Prage, and other Senators; and then breaking
violently into the court, so afflicted the sick King Vincislaus, as he fell
presently into a dead Palsy, and thereof soon after departed this life. He
continued that most cruel and outrageous Rebellion, against the afflicted
Widow Queen Sophia his souveraigne Lady, and against the Emperor Sigismund
Brother to Vincislaus, lawful Successor to that Crown, for diverse years. And
this with such slaughter, and opprobrious handling, especially of Priests, and
Religious men, as scarce is read in any other Barbarous History: calling
himself in his Title Monachomastix, the Murderer of Monks. His cruel bloody
Soldiers were a company of People called Thaborits from a Castle being on a
hill (which Zisca called Monthabor, which he had taken by treason and violence
from a Catholic noble man, killing both him, and all his that were with in
it,) who followed him for spoil and licentious life. There were committed more
outrageous insolencyes Murders, and grievous villanyes in a few years, by the
Directions of this cruel Zisca; then any other History does relate in many
ages. The horrible Testament of 1. Ziscae a Bohemian Saint.


And at length being stricken by Gods Hand with the plague being demanded of
his frinds (as Fox himself confesses) how he would be buried, he bid them
to flea him, and make a Drum of his skinn, therewith to terrify the Papists in
their fights and Battles (as it was done) casting his carcass to be devou'rd
in the field. This Relation of Zisca's life and death is writ by John
Dubravius, Bishop of John Dubra. lib. 24. Histo. Bohem.
Olemuz, and by Aeneus Sylvius that writ this story more at large, and out of
whom Fox professes to gather his Relation, who concludes thus: Divinitus
Aeneus Sylv. in Histor. Bohem. cap. 16.
tandem, ut par est credere, peste tactus expiravit, monstrum detestabile,
crudele, horrendum, importunum, etc.

And is it not cause of wonder that Fox in his Calendar allows to this bloody
Zisca the place of a holy Confessor on the fifth day of February, though his
Sect in Religion (being a Hussit) were far different from that of the English
Protestants at this day.

John Claydon a Curriour, has the place of a high Martyr on the third day of
February in the year 1413. ( Fox in another place gives him the year 1415.)
This Claydon, who was an old Lollard, who upon confidence of his Sect, was
grown into such a maddness, that being a layman, ( and Curriour by A Curriour
made himself a Bishop and his Son a Priest.
his trade,) he presumed to give holy Orders to his Son, and to make him
Priest, and to celebrate Mass in his House upon the day of his Mothers rising
from Childbed, for which he being apprehended, examined, and lawfully
convicted of Heresy, he was burned in London, etc. so writes Walls. anno 2.
Reg. Henr. 5. page 436.
learned and famous Walsingham. And behold the Curriour made a glorious Martyr.

William Flower in like manner, the famous Apostata Monk, took a wife and came
by Apostasy to be a Surgion, and wounded with his wood knife the Priest John
Cheltam administering the Blessed Sacrament to the people with great Devotion in
Saint Margaretts Church, (he wounded him in his head, Arm, and Hand wherein
he held the Chalice) and said it was by the special direction and Inspiration
of God, he is set down in Foxes Calendar the ninth of April, for a holy
Martyr, and he says of him in the end of his Martyrdom. Thus endured this
constant wittness, and faithful servant of God William Flower, the extremity
Fox page 1432.
of the fyte.

Eleanor Cobbam Duchess of Gloucester, and Roger Only, condemned plublickly, the
one for witchcraft and sorcery to Murder King Henry the sixth, the other for
conjuring, to the same effect and purpose, are both of them canonized upon the
12. and 13. of February for great Saints, the Duchess for a Confessor, and the
Conjurer for a Rubricated Martyr. The Author of this Relation is Stow who says
the Duchess was condemned to certain penance which she performed, and was
for all her life confined to the I Will of man. Of Only the Priest these ware his
words: That Stow anno Dom. 1441.
Roger Only (otherwise Bullenbrooke) was condemned to be hanged, drawn and
quartered at Tyburne, upon the 18. of November, (as he was) and she left to
her penance. It is here to be observed that said Duchess and Only were not
charged upon their araignment and Condemnation for being of any other Religion
then of the Catholic, yet Fox must by force have them of his Religion.

Collens a maddman, and Coubridg^ who flatly denied Christ himself, and used
most uggly and blasphemous speeches against him, yea did put out his name, of
all books, wherein soever he found the same, these are not left out, but rather
put in for great Saints, and holy witnesses of Christ, their days are the
tenth, and eleventh of October, and yet does Fox himself confess, that the one
denied Christ, and that the other was madd when he held up a dog instead of
the Blessed Sacrament to be adored in the Church. And was not Fox a maddman
when he canonized this Bedlam a Saint?

William King, Robert Debnam, and Nicholas Marsh, all three hanged in Chains by
King Henry the eight in the 24. year of his Reign for theft and sacrilegious
robbing of a Church in Kent are proposed in this Calendar for Godly Martyrs and
holy People; Fox to honor these holy men sets down a very goodly printed
pageant with this title over it. William King, Robert Debnam, and Nicholas
Marsh hanged, for taking down the rood of Dovercourt. Mark how Fox confesses,
they took down the Rood, and says further they did this to remedy the
superstition of worshipping the Rood then used by Catholics, and adds those
tender words of these his four theeving Saints.

Wherefore (says he) they were moved by the Spirit of God, to travel out of
Dedham in a wondrous goodly night, both hard frost, and saire Moonshine, etc.
By this he ascribes stealing and robbing of Churches to the Spirit of God,
and says God gave those Saints a very fair Moonshine night to go robb this
Church. But what did King Henry and his Counsel Fox pa. 940.
judge thereof? Fox himself tells you in this Language.

Notwithstanding (says he) these three, whom God had blessed with his
Spirit, were afterward indighted of Felony, and hanged in Chains, within
half a year after, or therabout. Thus writes Fox of these three holy
Thieves, which were hanged so solemnly in Chains for Robbery, and Sacriledg,
which things yet (as you see) Fox is not ashamed to ascribe to the particular
instinct of Gods Spirit. Saint Augustine said of the Donatistes, (those
especially called Circumcelliones) who committed Robberies and killed one a
another, and after, were reputed Martyrs by their own faction: Vivebant (says
S. Aug Epist. 68.
Augustine) ut Latrones, honorabantur ut Martires. That is: They lived as
Thieves, and were honored by those of their own Sect as Martyrs. The same
we say of King, Debnam, and Marsh, Foxes holy Thieves.

So liberal is Fox in canonizing Saints, as he gathers into his Calendar
many different sectaries of oppositt opinions, that cannot possibly agree or
stand together, (you shall herafter see them quarrelling and putting one
another out of the Calendar) as Waldensians, Albigentians, Wicklifists,
Lollards, Hussits, Tha^^rits, Anabaptists, and Lutherans, who abhor, and
condemn expressly our English Protestant Religion at this day, and each one
defending, yea dying for his sect and in maintenance of his peculiar opinions,
are here all cuppled, and joined together in this Calendar as fellow Martyrs.

He Canonizeth John Wicklif from whom came the Sect of Wicklifians. And
calls him a chosen man raised up by God for lightning the World and Impugning
the Church of Rome; and yet Wicklif taught and belieu'd Articles, that the
Protestants of England at this day do not, as that of the Real-Presen^,
VVicklifs Errors about that Sacrament Accidentia non manent sine subjecto in
^odem Sacramento. substantia panis naturalis, and vini naturalis manent in
Sacramento Altaris. Errores damnati in Concilio constanti^nsi.
the Doctrine of Purgatory, and other Articles: will you hear Sir John
Oldcastle a prime Wicklifian his Protestation at his death of believing the
Real-Presence, after confessing Articles about the Blessed Trinity and Christ's
Diety. Sir John OldCastle comes to treat of the Sacrament of the Altar he
protests thus, (as Fox himself writes: And for as much as Sir Ioh. Old-C.
his Protestation at his death.
I am falsely accused of a misbeliefe in the Sacrament of the Altar: I signify
here to all men, that this is my faith concerning that: I believe in that
Sacrament to be contained very Christ's Body and Blood, under the Similitudes of
Wine and Bread, yea the same Body, that was conceived of the* holy Ghost, borne
of the Virgin Mary, done on the Cross, dyed and was ^uryed^, and a rose the
third day from death, and now is glorified in heaven. The said Old-Castle
showed his belief about three sorts of men thus: The holy Church I believe to
be divided into three sorts or Companyes, whereof the first are now in heaven
etc. The second sort are in Purgatory Fox page 314.
abiding the mercy of God and a full deliverance of pain. The third upon Earth
etc. You see that OldCastle a W^ckclifian does clearly believed the Doctrine of
Purgatory, which Fox did not, nor do the Protestants of England now, wherefore
to this speech of Purgatory, Fox thought best, (least it might disgrace his new
Martyr) to add this parentesis of his own (if any such place be in the
Scriptures etc.) which was perfidiously done of Fox. It is to be supposed that
Wicklif held some things with us, and some things with the Protestants, and
somthings different from both, and yet Fox must have him and his Sect to be of
his own Communion, and make him a Martyr, though he confesses and so does
John Ball also, that he was never as much as imprisoned for his faith, but
his bones were taken up forty years after his burial, and burned by the
Commandment of the Council of Constance for his Heresies discovered after
^his death, and for this Fox made him a Martyr, and consequently he became
Martyr without feeling any pain, or without the Consent or Concurrence of his
own will. Take here some Articles of Wicklifs Doctrine to which I presume the
Protestant will not agree. One is.

That it is against Scripture for any Ecclesiastical Minister to have any
temporal possessions at all. What think you? will the Ministers of England
agree to this?

Another. That as long as a man is in deadly sin: he is neither Bishop nor
Prelate.

Another. That Temporal Lords may according to their own will and discretion,
take a way the temporal goods from any Churchmen when soever they offend.

Think you, that the Protestant Churchmen of England agree to this Article?

Another. Tithes are mere Alms, and may be detained by the Parishoners, and
bestowed where they will at their pleasure. This Article also cannot relish
Protestant Churchmen.

These and many more Articles of Wicklif have been condemned by the Catholic
Church as Hereticall^, and himself as an Heretic, though he held diverse
points of the Catholic Religion, as holy Orders, Consecration, Excomunication,
Purgatory, and other like. But Fox makes him a Martyr for holding some points
with the Protestants, though differing in other Material points.

But this is the Beggary of his new Church, that it cannot be made up but by
such dunghill cloutes as Wicklefians, Lollards, Albigensians, and the like,
which are cast of by the Catholics and rejected, for that they have not agreed
in every point of the Catholic belief according to the creed of Athanasius:
such is the integrity, severity, and Majesty of our Church, that we reject as
spotted, and blemished rags all such as believe not all Articles of Faith
proposed by the holy Catholic Church: this is according to Saint Augustins
Doctrine. Ecclesia Vniversaliter perfecta est and in nnllo claudicat. That is:
The true Church is Universally perfect, and does hault in noe one point of
belief.

Now you shall see how Wickless fellow- Saints condemned him for an Heretic,
and consequently one that should not be placed in the Calendar of Saints:
Luther the great Elias and Prophet of Germany, (as Ioannes Cockleus Ioann.
Cochl. in vita Luteri. Surius in hist. Anno Dom. 1517. and 1518. Melan. Epist.
ad Fredericum Miconium.
and Surius do recount:) held Wicklif for an Heretic: such also was the
Judgment of Phillip Melankton, which against John Fox must needs be much
avaylable, who placed him for a fellow Saint, together with Wicklef in his
Calendar. What then says Melankton of Wicklef? he speaks thus: Inspexi
Wicklefum, qui valde tumultuatur in hac Controversia, etc. That is: I have
looked over Wicklef, who behau'd himself tumultuously in this Controversy (of
the Lords supper) and more then this, I have found many Errors in him, by which
a man may make Judgment of his Spirit. It is certain, he neither understood
nor held the Justice of Faith. He said in another place. Plane furebat
Wicklefus Melan. in Apol^ tit. de human, tradit.
qui negabat, licere Sacerdotibus tenere proprium. That is: Wicklef was plainly
out of his wits, when he did deny, that it was lawful for Priests to hold and
in locis com. tit de potestat. Ecclesi.
any thing proper.

Well then, Wicklef a furious man that stirred up sedition, and was ignorant of
the very foundation of the Protestant Gospel, to wit, of their Doctrine of
Salvation by only faith, (as both Melankton and Luther affirmed Wicklif to be)
with what spirit, think you does your Apostata Friar Bale call him an Elias, a
morning star, an Organ of Christ, an habitacle of the holy Ghost.

But if you will listen to Catholic writers who lived about the same time with
Wicklif, as Thomas Walsingam, and Thomas Waldensis in their learned writings,
you shall find him to have been one of the most pernicious, wicked,
dissembling, Hypocritical, impugners of Christ and his Doctrine that ever was
in the Church of God. Walsingam Walls. in hist. Ricard. Rigis 2 anno Dom. 1382:
does beginn a Narration of Wicklif thus. Eodem tempore ipse verus Hypocrita,
Angelus Sathanae, Antichristi prae ambulus non nominandus, Ioannes Wicklef, vel
potius (wicked-beleefe) Hereticus, sua deliramenta concinnavit, reassumens
damnatas opiniones etc. That is: At the same time the very true Hypocrit, the
Angel of Satan, the forerunner of Antichrist, the heretic John Wicklif, or
rather ( wicked-beleefe) not being worthy the naming, continved his mad and
new devises, renewing again old damned opinions and heresies, etc.

You see how holy a man Wichlef was by the Testimony of Catholic writers, who
knew him better then Fox did; however we must leave him a Saint to fill up
that new Calendar.

Fox is not ashamed to place in his Calendar Lollards a Sect of Heretics
ancienter then Wicklifians by 50 years, who in some things held with the
Protestants and Wicklisians against the Roman Church, as against the Invocation
of Saints, Fastings, Prayers, and the Sacraments of Penance, Matrimony,
Extrem-unction, and the like: they had also particular Opinions of there own
against Baptism, Eucharist, and the like. They had also their peculiar
fanatic Opinions, (as Tritemius says.)

1. That Lucifer with the rest of The peculiar oponions of the Lollards
according to Tritemius.
his Angels were injuriously thrust out of heaven by Michael and his Angels,
and consequently to be restored at the day of judgment. And that Michael and
his Angels, are to be damned for the forsaid Injury, and to be delivered over
to everlasting punishment, from the day of Judgment forward.

2. That our Lady could not bear Christ and remain a Virgin, for that so he
should have been an Angel and not a man.

3. They held that God did only punnish such wickedness as is done upon Earth.
But if any thing be done underground, it is not punishable. And therefore in
caves and sellers underground, they were accustomed to exercise all
abomination. And of this he relates a certain Story happened in Germany,
which was that one Gisla (a young Woeman of their Sect) coming to be burned
for Heresy, she was asked whether she were a Virgin or not: whereunto she
answered, that aboveground she was, but under ground not.

This Heresy the Lollards grounded upon that saying of the Psalm. Terram
Psalm. 113.
autem dedit Filiis hominum. That is: God has given the Earth to the Children
of men.

I will conclude in this place with Fox, a Father os lies, the greatest
Hypocrit and Falcificator of that age, or this; for proof heerof I remitt you
to Father Persons (a famous man of blessed memory, a great Ornament to his
Order and all the Church of God) in the third part of his treatis in the
Addition he made or the Relation of the trial made before the King of France
in the year 1600. between the Bishop of Eu^eux, and the Lord Plessis Mornay.
Page 59. 60. 61.

I have had Occasion these monthe^ The words of Fr. Persons
past to peruse a great part of his last Edition of Acts and Monuments, printed
the fifth time in the year 1596. and do find it so stuffed with all kind of
falsehood, and deceitful mannerof telling tales, as I could never (truly) have
believed it, if I had not found it by my own experience. And I do persuade my
self fully (notwithstanding all his Hypocritical words and protestations,
which are more, and oftener repeated by him, then in all the writers together,
that I have read in my life) that there is scarce one whole Story in that huge
volume, told by himself, except when he relates other men's words out of
records, and thereby is bound to the formality thereof, but that it is falsified,
and perverted one way or other, either in the beginning, middle, or end, by
adding, cutting of, consealing, false translating, wrong cyting, or cunning
juggling, and falsification.

He says further. A certain learned Student of Divinity, brought to me of
late 30. places taken out of two only leaves of Fox his book to wit, from the
12. to the 14. which I looking upon found them all most evident by conference
of the Catholic Authors aleaged by the said Student: and moreover, besides
these thirty, I did discover so many other plain Falsehoods, and manifest
wilful lies, in those only two leaves, as might well double the former
number; and I do offer to prove them, one, by one, if any Frind of John Fox
will join issue with me upon this point.

Infine Father Person concludes with Fox that if all the Falsifications and
lies in his great volume of Acts and Monuments were well siffted, the number
and account would swell so high as it would much surpass John Sleydans Story
in this kind (though he be the Protestants Protochronicler) out of whom,
noe less then an eleven thousands lies were gathered by the Catholic writers
of Germany. Let Fox go along for his Companion, if not master in the art of
lyeing.

XVI. CHAPTER. The fifth Quaere, what Company has Sall forsaken, and who are
they he now sticks unto.
TO this Quaere an answer is Soon given: that Sall having shamfully deserted
the Catholic Faith, has also abandoned their side, and has passed to those
that profess the Religion, or rather Heresy he has embraced. This is made
manifest out of his own words in his Recantation. All considered well ( says
he) I did conclude the way of the Church of England to be safer for my
Salvation: wherefore resolved to declare as I Out of Salls Recantion.
do hereby seriously, and in my heart without any Equivocation, and mental
Reservation, in the presence of God and this Congregation: I declare, that I
do give my full and free assent to the XXXIX. Articles of the Church of
England, for holy and wise, and grounded upon the infallible word of God;
acknowledging the Romish Tenets against them to be false and superstitious,
especially that of Transubstantiation, as forcing upon Christians a belief of
monstrous Miracles, repugnant to human reason, and not grounded upon devine
Testimony.

Sall there is an end of you goeing out of the Arck, not like the Dove, that
returned carrying in its mouth a branch of an Olive tree; but like the crow
that never came back again, it may be much feared, this may be your dismal
end.

But having now bid adieu to us whither do you go? you pass indeed from us to
a great Congregation of men, who all of them put in a just claim to have you
of their Company and Communion.

All out of the Arck are your Companions; of these you have in the Law of
Nature, in the written Law, and the Evangelicall. All these (we call them
Heretics) were Armies fighting against the eternal Verity, and the goodness
of God, all are your Companions.

I remember to have said above out of Tertulian, that Protestants and other
Heretics being not able to show the succession of their Church, were forced
to grant, it was for a time invisible (which is against the nature of a true
Church) yet for all this I cannot deny but that Heresy is ancient, and had its
being before man was created.

The first Heretics therefore (and before man's creation) was Lucifer with some
rebellious Legions that with him stirred up sedition in heaven, when Lucifer
out of Pride would be esteemed an Anti God, with him joined in the quarrel
several Bands of Angels, and fell all with him. And there was Apocal. cap. 12.
seen (says the Book of Revelations) another sign in heaven, agreat red
Dragon, and his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast
them to the Earth.

The sedition and Rebellion is there discribed. After follows the fight
between Lucifer and those of his side, and Michael the Arck-Angell, Captain of
the innumerable Legions, that remaind obedient to God, and these had the
victory. And there was made Apocal. ibid.
agreat Battle in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought with the Dragon, and
the Dragon fought and his Angels: and they prevailed not, neither was there
place found any more in heaven. And that great Dragon was cast forth, the old
Serpent, which is called the Devil and Satan, which seduceth the whole World:
and he was cast into the Earth, and his Angels were thrown down with him.

From Heresy and Heretics in heaven let us pass to those on Earth.

Heretics in the Law of Nature.
AS soon as God began to be Cain the first Heretic.
worshipped on Earth, the Heresy of Cain sprang up, who denied Gods
Providence, and murdered his brother Abel for maintaining Gods Providence;
Cains Envy could not brook Abels Innocence.

The second Heresy was that of Lamech, Lamech the second Heretic.
who married two wives at once, and so denied the Unity of the Church: God
drew but one Ribb out of Adam, and of that made but one woeman, and said to
them. Erunt du^ Genesis cap. 2.
in carne una, Lamech violated this Law by taking two Wives, which was an
Heresy.

3. The Giants were the third sort of Heretics.

4. All those that did not enter the Arck, and perished in the Deluge, were
Heretics.

5. Cham after the Deluge mocked his Fathers nakedness, and was Eo Nomine
Pratriarck and Father of all those scoffing Heretics that contemn the holy
Fathers, saying they were ignorant, unlearned, and blind. You see by this,
there was one Heretic ( Cham) in the Arc, wherein were in all but eight Souls.

6. Those that were building Babell; were Heretics, and the figure of
Heretics that followed them; God confounded their tongues, so that they
could not understand one another, it is so this day with Protestants stricken
by God with a giddiness, and so disagreeing in Religion and Opinion, as upon
this one Text of Scripture, HOC Math. cap. 26. r. 27.
EST CORPUS MEVM. There are 400. Opinions, and Interpretations. God has
confounded them in their understanding, tongues, and writings.

7. Esau for persecuting his Brother Jacob, thereby opposing himself to God and
Israel.

These are Sall your Companions in the Law of Nature.

Heretics in the written Law.
1. FRom the time the Church of God was planted in Egypt, we find by tradition
that Iamnes, and Mambre, Tim. 2. cap. 3.
who resisted Moses, were the first Heretics; of those speaks Saint Paul. But
as Iamnes and Mambre's resisted Moses, so these also resist the truth, men
corrupted in mind reprobat concerning the faith.

2. All those that dyed in the desert murmouring against God, and Moses, and
his directions and commands.

3. Chore and Dathan with their seditious companions that opposed Moses and
his authority.

4. Nahab and Albiu, that put strange fire in the Insence of the Lord.

5. All those strange Kings, that made war against the Children of Israel.

6. All the false Prophets of Baal, and all of that kind.

All these, Sall are your companions in the written Law.

Heretics in the Evangelicall Law.
IN the times of the Law of nature, and of the written Law, there have not been
(if I am not mistaken) above 20. Kinds of Heretics, but in the Evangelicall,
or in the Law of grace they have been above 600. of them. A man would say it
were hard to believe this, seeing the standart of the Cross after Christ's
passion has been lifted up against hell and heresy, the kingdom and power of
the Devil diminished, Idols cast down, Atheism bannished, and the Empire of
Hell on Earth as it were destroyed by the Blood of Jesus, Virtue, Piety, and
the light of Grace; for all this woeful experience proves what I have said to
be true. And Saint Cyprian gives you the true reason S. Cyp. lib. de Vnitat.
wherefore in these words. Cum videret inimicus idola derelicta, templa sua
deserta, ex^ogitauit novas frauds, hereses inuenit, and scismata, ^ quibus
fidem subuerteret. When Satan saw (after our Saviors Passion) the Idols cast
away, and his tempels deserted he thought of new frauds, he invented
heresies, and scismes, by which he might subvert faith and sanctity.

Satan therefore the Father and Author of all lies and Heresies, seduced men
from the way of truth and stirred them up against the Church and Verity; these
kind of men sowed Heresies and Scismes, and some of them began like Hypocrites,
covering their damnable Doctrine with a cloack of Sanctity, such were Arius,
John Wicklef, and many more; and even the worst livers of them pretended a kind
of Piety in their Opinions, and as it were a special regard of the glory of
God; grounding all Sanctity and Salvation upon Sanctifying faith alone, and
upon this account some of them took away free will, others good works, fasting,
penance, and allkind of Mortification, they did but mock all these things,
others took away the Invocation of Saints and Angels, and Doctrine of
Purgatory, Indulgence, and Prayers for the dead; others reduced seven
Sacraments unto two or rather to one, to wit, Baptism, and others have even
destroyed this Sacrament, teaching infants to be saved in the faith of their
Parents, and that Baptism is but a mere cerimony that might be used, or
omitted without sin, others said the Commandments were impossible to be
kept, and others held they did noe way oblige Christians, and that they were
only made for the Jews; but oboue all Calyin was so zealous in attributing
man's Salvation only to the Passion and Blood of Jesus, that he held all the
good works man could do of noe value or effect: yea he termed Bona opera
hominis piacula, sordes inquiuamenta. By this you see the Doctrins taught by
Heretics were but mera somnia and deliria, and a good part of the thirty nine
Articles of the Church of England are such.

I shall herafter in a convenient place, give you a long Letany of Heretics,
but it will be noe way holy. In this place I will only set down the Sect of
Quakers that sprung up in England some years ago, their principal theorems
and tenets are.

1. That they are imediatly called by Jesus, and sent to convert the world as the
Apostles were by an extraordinary mission.

2. That God being a pure Spirit, is to be honored only by the Spirit,
wherefore they condemn all bending of knees, and all exterior signs of
Religion, and worship due to God.

3. That it is superstition to light Candles by daytyme, to wear Capps, Copes,
Albs, or any sacred vestments.

4. That it is Idolatry to build Churches, put up Crosses, or the Images of
Christ or his Saints, or render them any Worshipp.

5. They deny and reject the name of Sacrament, and affirm that Baptizing in
water is not of devine Institution.

6. They place the greatest part of their Religion in Contemplation and
Meditation, and they so strive to stir up strong and sencible fervor and
heat of Spirit, that somtymes excites in them motion and trembling of all the
body, from this they have the name of Quakers, and they take this trembling for
a great mark of perfection, and interior Devotion.

I have given you the Theorems of this rediculous, Quaking Sect, because they
are new, and not so well known to all. Oh With what illusions does Satan
deceive these poor Souls.

Their Author was one James Naylor, to whom all of the Sect gave the greatest
titles of honnour, and respected him as Jesus Christ himself. He was
notwithstanding condemned in Cromwells time in the month of December anno
Domini 1654. to a perpetual prison, after being whipped publicly, and his
tongue bored with a burning Iron.

Sall you see the number of your miserable Companions is almost infinite, but
this great multitude of them will bring you noe joy or comfort: Multiplicata
est gens eorum, quibus te junxisti, sed non est multiplicata laetitia. When the
Son of God shall come down and condemn them all to burn in eternal
flames, Sall what will you do? to prevent such a never ending misery, lament
in time and repent, and cry to God to have mercy on you.

XVII. CHAPTER. A Discussion of some parts of Salls Recantation.
A Little after the beginning he speaks thus. And by frequent reading of holy
Scripturs, Fathers, Counsels, and Histories of the Church, my knowledge. was
furthered, and my Judgment ripened, I began to doubt of several Articles,
introduced by the use and Authority of the Roman Church, repugnant to human
reason, and not warranted by devine writ; as Transubstantiation, Indulgences,
Porgatory, Worship of Images etc. Yet smothering scrupels, partly fearing the
severity of the Country, against opposers of their Tenets, partly amused with
a supposition that the Church and Pope of Rome were infallible in their
decrees touching Faith, and so might stand with security to their
Declaration.

Sall the reading of Scriptures well understood, and of Fathers, Counsels, and
Church-Histories, could not give occasion or ground to you or any man to doubt
of Articles of Faith professed in the Catholic Church, but true it is, that
Scriptures understood and explained amiss by men presuming much of their own
wit and learning (likely you are one of those) leads to Heresy and Errors.
S. Augustine teaches so. Neque enim (says he) natae S. Aug. Tom. 9. expos.
Evang. Joan. Tract. 18.
sunt Hereses, nisi dum Scripturae bonae non intelliguntur been, and quod in
eis non ^bene intelligitur, etiam temere and audacter asseritur. That is: Nor
do Heresies spring up, but when good Scriptures are not well understood, and
that which in them is not well understood is rashly and boldly asserted. Sall I
fear much this presumption carried you out of the Church.

But one thing I must tell you, when you began to doubt of Transubstantiation
and other Articles of Faith, you began to want Faith: Quia dubious in fide
infidelis est, That you began to stagger in Faith is manifest, because you
began to doubt of the Verity of Articles proposed by the Church, to be of
Faith, as are those of Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and the like: Nam certum
est, qui supponit Authoritatem Ecclesiae veritatem vel dogma docentis ac
profitentis, non esse certam and infallibilem, in fidelis est, Hereticus est.
That is: It is clear and certain, who supposes the Authority of the Church,
teaching, or professing Transubstantiation. or any other Article, not to be
certain and infallible is an Heretic and an infidel: Your own words above
cited convince you of being in such fear and doubt, whereas, (had you supposed
the Churches Authority infallible and certain, (as indeed it is) you would not
have any way doubted of the mentioned Articles to appertain to Faith; this is
evident: Quia certitudinem habens alicujus propositionis non potest habere
ejusdem dubitationem.

Saint Bernard pondering the difinition Saint Paul gives of Faith: Fides est
Epis. ad Hebr. cap. 11.
sperandarum substantia rerum argumentum non aparentium. Says: Audis
substantiam, non licet tibi in fide putare vel disputare pro libito, non hac
illacque vagari per incerta opinionum; per devia errorum; substantia nomine
altquid tibi certum sixumquae prefigitur, certis claudens finibus, certis
limitibus arctans. That is: When you hear the word Substance, it is not
lawful for you to doubt or dispute in points of Faith according to your own
head and fancy with incertainty of Errors and Opinions: by the word Substance
something is appointed to be believed, that is certain and fixed. The Saint
said excellently well, because it is the genious of Heretics to choose what
they will believe according to their own Judgment, and not as the Church does
appoint.

Saint Thomas says in Substance the same in these Words: Hereticus intendit S.
The. quest. 11. art. 1.
quidem Christo assentire (in quo dissert ab Ethnico and Iudaeo) sed deficit in
^ligendo ea, quibus Christo assentiat, quia non eligit ea, quae vere a Christo
sunt tradita, sed ea quae sibi propria men's suggerit. That is. An Heretic
intends to assent to Christ his Authority (in which he differs from an Ethnic
and Jew) but he is deficient in ellecting those things, by which he should
assent to Christ, because he does not choose those things, which are delivered
by Christ, but those, which his own mind does suggest.

Sall this is what you have done, which is a great Error: where, had you stood
to that Supposition (a very true one) that the Church and Pope are infallible
in their decree's touching Faith, all had gone well with you, relying on such a
Supposition you had not doubted, nor feared, nor wavered, nor erred, because
the Church is the Pillar of Verity, and (because you did not stick to this
Pillar (the Churches Authority) you have doubted in matters of Faith, and so I
will and must leave you, after teaching Divinity so many years in Spain.
Hominem dubium, and fluctuantem Circa Articulos fidei.

Sall do not tell those that read your Recantation, that Transubstantiation,
Purgatory, Indulgences, and the like Theorems, are intruded upon men for
Articles of Faith by the Authority and use of the Catholic Church, (by
introduceing them for such as you speak) as if they had not been Articles of
Faith before they had been declared, and defined to be such, which is a great
Error, they having been such (I mean Articles of Faith before such Declaration,
Quia propositiones fidei sunt aeternae veritatis,) what is this day of Faith,
was ever so, and in like manner whatsoever is now an Heresy was allways so
in its own Nature: so as the Authority of the Church does not make any
Proposition a Theorem of Faith, that was not so before, nor likewise make any
Proposition Heretical that was not so before, but only defines that
Proposition to be of Faith, that is and was ever so, and condemns that for an
Heresy that is and was so.

Nor are Articles of Faith (as Sall affirms) repugnant to human reason, but
transcending human reason; as Saint Thomas teaches: Fidem non esse contra
sensum sed esse de eo, ad quod sensus non attingit: much less is Faith
repugnant to reason, a nobler faculty, then that of sense; yet for all this,
we may not say that reason can comprehend an Article of Faith. Will you
believe nothing Sall, but what you can comprehend, and as it were demonstrat by
human reason and discourse? This is not Faith, but Science. The silliest
Catholic old woeman in your Country will tell you, that in believing you must
take Faith and leave reason; And Saint Aug^stin says the same as thus. S. Aug.
lib. de utilitat^ credend^
Quod inteligimus, debemus rationi, quod credimus Authoritati. Had you ankored
your self Sall upon the Authority of the Church (as most eminent Schoolmen of
our side do,) you had not fallne into Heresy, but you presumed to much on
your own wit, and wanted humility and necessary virtue: Saint Augnstin
reprehends such kind of men, as would circumscribe matters of Faith within the
sphere of reason and discourse, in these words. Ecce qualibus Argumentis
omnipotentiae Dei humana contradicit infirmitas, quam possidet vanitas. That
is: Behold with what kind of Arguments does human weakness, mastered by
vanity, contradict the omnipotent power of God.

The Paulin difinition of Faith (the most perfect of all diffinitions) does
clearly demonstrate that the force of reason cannot comprehend Articles of
Faith: Illa particula Argumentum non aparentium clare significat objectum fidei
esse rem non visam, cui firmiter adhaeret intellectus non ex rei evidentia, sed
ex auctoritate divina, and per illam particulam non apparentium distinguitur
fides a Scientia and intellestu, per quem aliquid fit apparens. That is. The
Argument of things not appearing does clearly signify the object of Faith to be
a thing not seen; to which the understanding does adhere not for the Evidence
of the thing, but for the devine Authority revealing it; and by that particle
of things not appearing Faith is distinguished from Science and understanding
of objects, by which a thing is made apearing. This is the Opinion of Nicholas
de Lira, and others. It is also the Opinion of Devines commonly, Visum non
esse objectum fidei. S. Tho. 1. 2. qs 67. S. Tho. 2. 2. q. 1. a. 4
And Saint Thomas says elswher: Quod nihil est objectum fidei nisi sub ratione
non apparentis,

XVIII. CHAPTER. The Doctrine of Transubstantiation defended against Sall a new
Protestant.
THere is noe Protestant so maddly obstinate, as to give God the lie to his
face and in plain terms to say, though he did know God did reveal the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation as the Church of Rome does propose and maintain
it, I would not believe it: noe; all Protestants acknowledge (and generally all
Heretics) God to be truth it self, and not able to deceive, or be deceived.

The obstinacy therefore of Protestants against Gods verityes is not as they are
uttered immediately by himself, but as they are proposed by his Church, as in
the point of Transubstantiation Sall become lately a Protestant does not
believe the Catholic Church proposing that Doctrine as revealed by God, but
says it is not warranted by devine writ, (the same he says of Indulgences,
Purgatory, worship of Images etc.) but introduced and made an Article of faith
by the use and Authority of the Roman Church.

Against clear evidence there can be noe obstinacy, the object of it must be
involved in some obscurity, otherwise the will (which is the source of
obstinacy) would not be able to master the understanding. There is nothing
more clear and evident to the understanding then this proposition. If God said
or revealed any thing its very true. The obstinacy therefore of Heretics does
not contest with this clear and confessed truth. It only doubts, or denies,
that God said or revealed any such thing as the Church pretends.

By this it appears, in what Sall and I do differ about Transubstantiation;
for he does not believe the Church proposing and defyning the Doctrine thereof,
as revealed by God. The Heretic believes, what the Church proposes, as
revealed, only conditionally; if God revealed it, reserving to his own private
Judgment, or to that of his private Patriarks Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin, etc.
this determination; but the Catholic Absolutely, and doubts not, but God
revealed, what the Church proposes as revealed, submitting his Judgment (in
matters of Faith) to what soever the Church does define, or declare.

This is the case of Heretics. They protest, if they had thought or believed,
that the Doctrine of the Roman Church in controverted points, were revealed by
God, they would heartily embrace it; but they do not consider this very if, or
doubt is Heresy: for they have noe reason to doubt, but that the Roman
Catholic Church has Commission and power of defining and declaring what is
revealed by God, seeing it has the evident signs of a true Church, as
Miracles, Sanctity of Doctrine and Life, continual Succession (from the
Apostles to the present age) both of Pastors and Doctrine. These signs may be
easily perceived and known by all people, as Clownes, Soldiers, and other
illiterate persons: let them examine the Histories of their own Countries, and
the Religion of their Ancesters, which soever amongst all the Christians
Churches, had, and has the aforesaid signs; that Church must be heard,
obeyed, and believed, as having Gods Authority and Commission, to deside all
doubts, and Controversies of Faith; whosoever believes not her diffinitions,
and obeys not her decrees and Canons in points of Faith is an obstinat
Heretic; and such is Sall having deserted and condemned this Church.

But Sall tells us the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is a novelty, not found in
Scripture, but brought into the Church by the Council of Lateran anno 1215.
This is a great mistake in Sall: The very condemning of Berengarius as an
Heretic for impugning Transubstantiation anno 1050, (which was before the
Council of Lateran 165. years) proves it was noe novelty, but an Article of
Faith before that Council There were present at this Counsel the Emperors
Roman and Greek: and of the Kings of France, Spain, England, Jerusalem. and
Cyperus. their Ambassadors.
even from the Apostles times. For otherwise I pray you how were it possible
that the Patriarks of Jerusalem and Constantinople; 70. Metropolitans; 400.
Bishops; and 800. Conventuall Pryours, who were all present at that great
Counsel, should all agree in declaring Transubstantiation to have been
revealed by God to the primitive Church, how can this agree with what Sall
affirms, that this Doctrine was first invented in the time of that Council. The
Canon, or Diffinition of that great Council was: In haec Verba. Verum Christi
Corpus, and sanguis in hoc Sacramento Altaris sub speciebus Panis and Vini ver
aceter continentur Transubstantiatis Pane in Corpus and Vino in Sanguinem
potestate divina

For the better declaring of this truth, Sall you know the Church does not make
new Articles of Faith, when it defines any controverted Doctrine; It only
declares that such Doctrine was delivered to the primative Church, and so down
along to us, and groundeth its difinition upon Scripture or authentic
Tradition. As the Protestants object against Transubstantiation, that it is a
nouelty; So did the Arrians against Consubstantiality that it was a novelty
brought in by the Council of Nice, whereas said Council did only define
Consubstantiality to have been from the Apostles time, an Article of Faith, and
decreed the same should be declared and signified by the word Omousion, in like
manner the Council of Lateran did define for a mystery of faith
Transubstantiation, which was so before their Difinition, and then they
agreed upon the word Transubstantiation, but the thing by that word signified
was before believed as an Article of Faith by the whole Church, though
expressed in other terms, as those of Mutation, Transmutation,
Transelementation, Conversion of the Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of
Christ.

In the mean time I can not understand how Sall a new Sacramentarian should
dispute with us about the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, seeing he slattly
denies the Body and Blood of Christ to be realy, and substantially present in
the Sacrament. What is more impertinent then to dispute of the manner of a
thing, or being, that you hold has noe being? The Lutherans, who believe the
Body and Blood of Christ to be realy and substantially in the Sacrament,
(though erroniously they likewise hold Bread to be there) have some reason to
dispute with us about the manner of Christ's being there, by Transubstantiation
or otherwise.

The first Heretics that impugned Transubstantiation, were the Capharnites,
who said: Quomodo potest hic nobis carnem Ioanes Cap. 6.
suam dare ad manducandum. And again. Durus est hic sermo.

When our Savior said, I am the living Bread, that came down from heaven. If
any man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever: and the Bread which I will
give, is my flesh for the life of the World. The Jews therefore strove among
themselves, saying. How can this man give us his Flesh to eat? This saying is
hard, and who can hear it? Sall you see by this is become a Capharnite, and in
this point so are all that embrace the XXXIX. Articles of the Church of
England.

About the year 780. certain Greek Heretics called Iconomachi, held this
Sacrament to be only an Image of Christ, and that his Body was not realy in the
Sacrament. In the year 800. one Ioannes Scotus of the Latin Church, fell into
the same Heresy, and after him two ages and more, in the year 1050,
Berengarius denied Transubstantiation, and the Real-Presence.

Before these men, none did impugn this high mystery of Faith, but all the
Church did quietly and unanimously believe the Real-Presence of the Body and
Blood of Christ in the Sacrament: and the aforesaid Iconomachi and all other in
this point, were confuted by the Fathers, and condemned by the Church in
several general Counsels. The latter Heretics as Zwinglians Calvinists, and
and the like Sacramentarians, have also been condemned by the Church.

In this high point of Doctrine we are to believe and maintain what the Canons,
and Counsels of the holy Church have defined, as that of Lateran above cited,
and others, and of the Council of Trent expressly and distinctly Council.
Triden. Sess. 13. Cap. 1. 2. 3. 6.
difining this mystery in the 13. Session in the sixth Chapter it defines more
especially the Doctrine of Transubstantiation which is the Conversion of the
whole substance of Bread, into the substance of the Body of Christ, our Lord,
and of the whole Substance of Wine, into the Substance of his Blood: Quae
Conversio (so ends the Chapter) convenienter and proprie a Sancta Catholica
Ecclesia Transubstantiatio est appellata.

The first Canon is in haec verba. *Si Cone. Triden. Sess. 13. Canon. 1. 2. 6.
quis negaverit in Sanctissimae Eucharistiae Sacramento contineri vere,
realiter, and substantialiter Corpus and Sanguinem una cum anima and divinitate
Domini nostri Jesus Christi, ac proinde totum Christum; sed dixerit tantummodo
esse in eo, ut in signo, Vel figura, aut virtute Anathema sit. This Canon is
point-blanck against Calvinians and Sacramentarians. The second Canon is
against Wicklefians and Lutherans; the sixth does define the Worship of
Adoration due to our Savior in the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist.

We cannot follow better guides and masters herein then the ancient Fathers,
men inspired by God in their writings, who all of them concerning the
Sacrament of the Altar have believed as we do, and asserted the true and
Catholic Doctrine touching the same in their writings: if Sall has any esteem
for those holy men, let him take pains to read their writings, and he shall
find I promise him, that they all held this Article to be of Faith, to wit,
that Christ is realy and substantialy present in this Sacrament by
Transubstantiation, or Conversion of the whole Substance of Bread and Wine into
his Body and Blood. I will not go, lower then the fifth age, (because
Ptotestants regard not the Authority of Fathers later then that age,) in which
lived Chrisostom, Hierom, Cyryllus of Alexandria, Augustine, Proclus
Constantinopolitanus, Theolet, Gelasius, Leo, Hilarious, Eusebius Emissenus,
etc. In the fourth Century (wherein the first Council of Nice was celebrated)
Athanasius, Hilarious Cyrillus of Jerusalem, Ambrose, Basil Optatus,
Gregorius Nyzenus, Gregorius Nazianzenus, Epiphanius. In the third age lived
Origin Tertulian, Cyprian. In the second Justinius Martyr, Pius Pope, Irinaeus.
In the first, the time of the Apostles, Ignatius, Dionisius Ariopagita,
Pollicarpe, and others.

Out of all these Fathers and many more can be produced an infinity of
passages, clearly declaring that they believed the Real-Presence, and
maintained Transubstantiation or the thing thereby signified, and believed, and
that it was delivered from age to age, from the Apostles time, and that this
was the Faith of the whole Church. I will content my self which I hope will
content my Reader,) in aleaging the Authorityes of some of them.

Tertulian, who lived in the third age, says. Caro abluitur, ut anima
emaculetur; Tertul lib. do Resurrectione carnis.
caro ungitur, ut anima consecretur: Caro Corpore and Sanguine Christi
vescitur, ut anima de Deo saginetur. That is: The Flesh of man is washed with
true substantial Water, that the Soul may be cleansed; the Flesh is anointed
with true Oil, that the Soul may be consecrated; The Flesh feeds of the
true and substantial Body and Blood of Christ, that the Soul may be nurrished
of God. It is an evident, and undeniable inference, that as by Water, is
understood in this passage of Tertulian true Water, and by Oil true and
substantial Oil, so also by the Body and Blood of Christ, are understood
the true, real, and substantial Body and Blood of Christ: For there can be noe
reason imagined, why true Water and Oil should be understood in this passage,
and not the true and substantial Body and Blood of Christ.

The Fathers treating of the Body of Christ in this Sacrament do use these
words: Fieri, confici, creari. Saint Cyprian says: Qui usque hodte hoc
veracissimum and sanctissimum Corpus suum creat. That is: Christ to this day
does creat ( in the Sacrament of the Alter) his own most true and holy Body.
Saint S. Amb. lib. 4. de Sacra. Cap. 4.
Ambrose says. Panis iste, Panis ante verbae Sacramentorum; ubi accesserit
consecratio, de pane fit Corpus Christi. That is: That Bread, is Bread before
the Words of Consecration, when the Consecration comes, of Bread is made the
Body of Christ.

Then when the Saint had declared this to have happened by the force of the
Words of Christ, because the speech of Christ is so effectual, that it can
create things out of nothing, he added: Sed post Consecrationem dico tibi quod
jam ost Corpus Christi: ipse dixit, and factum ost, ipse mandavit, and creatum
est. But after the Consecration ( says the Saint) I tell thee, that now it is
the Body of Christ: he said, and it was made; he commanded, and it was
created; That is to say, the Body of Christ was created, which he says
absolutely in that place to have bine made and created. In like manner Bessarion
says: Tota Bessar. lib. de Virbis consecr.
Trinitas hoc Corpus Altaris Creat. That is The whole Trinity does create the
Body in the Altar. And many more of the Fathers have used the like manner of
speaking, which propositions can not be verifyed unless the Body of Christ is
present in the Sacrament of the Alter, by a true and substantial change, or
Conversion of Bread into the Body of Christ, by which action or reproduction
the Fathers affirm Corpus Christi fieri, confici and creari: which can not be
understood, de creatione stricte sumpta, because that any thing may be said
created strictly, if must be created of nothing, so as it must absolutely
begin then to have its being, and that it had noe existence or being before,
Sic connotat vox creari: Now the Body of Christ in the Sacrament, had existence
and being in heaven before the Consecration, and has after it; Neque fit ex
nihilo in Sacramento sed ex pane.

There are of the Fathers many and clear Testimonies proving the RealPresence
of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, which Cardinal Bellarmin
Bellartoto lih. 2. de hoc Sacra. S. Amb. lib. 6. de Sacra. Cap. 1.
sets down largly, and brings to that purpose the Testimony of all ages. Saint
Ambrose speaks thus. Sicut verus est Dei Filius Dominus noster Jesus
Christus, non quemadmodum homines, per Gratiam, sed quasi Filius ex Substantia
Patris: ita vera caro est, sicut ipse dixit, quam accipimus; and verus ejus
Sanguis est, quem potamus. That is: As our Lord Jesus Christ is the true Sonns
of God, not as men by Grace, but as a Son of the Substance of his Father:
even so it is his true Flesh, as himself said, which we receive, and his
true Blood we drink.

Saint Damasen likewise says thus, Non est Figura Panis and Vinum Corporis
Saint Dama. lib. 4. de Fide cap. 14.
and Sangunis Christi (absit enim hoc) sed est ipsum Corpus Domini deificatum;
ipso Domino dicente boc est meum, (non figura Corporis) sed Corpus, and (non
figura Sanguinis.) sed Sanguis. That is. That as the Bread and Wine is not the
figure of the Body and Blood of Christ, (God forbid,) but it is ( after
Consecration) the very Body of our Lord deifyed? Our Lord himself saying this
is my Body, (not the figure of my Body) this is my Blood, (not the figure of my
Blood. What can be clearlyer said against Calvin's Hersie then this?

The Fathers prove evidently the Bread to be substantially converted into the
Body of Christ, and in this they praise the infinite power of God. Likewise tha^
after the words of Consecration, the bread is noe more there, but the true
flesh of Christ, and that in this mystery we are to believe the words of
Christ rather then our own senses. To this purpose Saint Ambrose (whose faith
was the general faith of Christendom in his days.) Quantis utimur exemplis,
ut S. Amb. de It Is qui Misteriis initiantur.
probemus hoc non esse quod natura formavit. That is: By how many examples do
we use to prove that which is in the Sacrament, is not that, which nature
framed, ( to wit Bread and wine) but that which the blessing did consecrat. The
Saint here insinuates that the force of blessing is greater then the force of
nature, seeing by blessing, nature it self is changed, as bread into the Body
of Christ. He says elsewhere. Sitantum valebat sermo Eliae, ut ignem de caelo
deponeret, non valebit sermo Christi, ut species mutet elementorum? That is: If
the word of Elias brought fire from heaven, shall not the word of Christ be
able to change the species of the elements? And this the Saint proves by the
force of reason in these words. De totius mundi operibus legisti, quia ipse
dixit, and facta sunt: ipse mandavit and creata sunt. Sermo ergo Christi, qui
potuit ex nihilo facere quod non erat; non potest ea quae sunt mutare in id
quod non erant? That is: You have read (says the Saint) of the works of the
world, because he said, they were made; he commanded, and they were created.
Then he makes this Argument. Shall not then the speech of Christ which was
able of nothing to create that which was not, be able to change the things that
are, into other things that they were not before? For it is more to give new
Nature to things, then to change Natures. The Saint concludes thus. Liquet
igitur, quod praeter Naturae ordinem virgo generavit: and hoc quod facimus,
Corpus ex Virgin est. That is to say. As the Virgin did conceive beyond the
Order of Nature even so that which we consecrat is the Body which came from
the Virgin.

Viewing all the great Miracles that happen in this Sacrament; Bread and Wine
changed into the Body and Blood of Christ; the species and accidents of Bread
and Wine remaining without inherence in a subject, which inherence is natural
and propper to accidents, and the Body and Blood of Christ having in the
Sacrament a spiritual presence; seeing all these wonders and magnalia, may say
with great Saint John Chrysostom. O Miraculum! o Dei benignitatem qui cum
Patre sursum sedet, in illo temporis Articulo omnium manibus pertractatur. That
is: O Miracle! o goodness of God, that he, who sits above with the Father,
is here beneath handled by men!

If Sall inquire, how a Body can have a spiritual Presence; I answer him with
demanding how a spirit can have a corporal Presence? How can an Angel have
appearence and presence of a young man? whereof there are many examples in
Scripture. Did not Angels seem to the eyes of Abraham, Tobias, and others to
be young men, and yet they were not men, but spiritts? And why cannot the Body
of Christ have a spiritual Presence in the Sacrament if God will have it so?
Let Sall show us the cause and reason why it may not be done?

It is indeed a hard question to declare: Qua Action Corpus Christi ponitur in
Sacramento. Some hold it is done Action Adductiva, that is to say, that Christ
(retaining the ubi his Body has in heaven) gives by this kind of Action a new
ubi to his Body and Blood under the species and Accidents of Bread and Wine;
but this opinion has great difficultyes and is hard to be defended: wherefore
the clearer and more plausible Sentence is; Quod Corpus Christi ponatur sub
speciebus Panis, and Sanguis sub speciebus Vini. By a true and real
Reproduction, Hoc est per Actionem productivam, sic sentire videtur S. Thomas
dicens: quia in hoc Sacramento tota S. Tom. 3. part. q. 75. Art. 8.
Substantia Panis convertitur in totam Substantiam Corporis Christi propter,
hoc haec Conversio Transubstantiatio vocatur. Id est perit seu destruitur
Substantia Panis, quando reproducitur Substantia Corporis Christi sub speciebus
Panis. That is to say. The Substance of Bread does perish or is distroy'd, when
the Substance of the Body of Christ is reproduced under the accidents of Bread.

I have said above, that the ancient Fathers and Saints asserted Corpus Christi
in Sacrament^ Altaris fieri, confici, creari: which Propositions cannot be
verifyed but by a real Action, which is this Actio productiva, Reproduction or
Replication of the Body of Christ in the Sacrament, that the same esse or
being, that Christ has in heaven is reproduced under the accidents of Bread
and Wine in this Sacrament. Will any man say that this is not possible to God?
If God can restore that which perrished, by reproduceing the very same thing in
Individuo G. V. if he can raise to life one that was dead, as he restored
Lazarus to life, the very same Lazarus in Individuo the Brother of Martha; and
Mary Magdalen that dyed few days before; why cannot God as well reproduce a man
that is living, and that was not dead before? It is clear the existence of the
man living does not hinder, but that God may reproduce or replicate the same
man again, and not once, but ten times, and a hundred times, and even make an
Army of one man by so often reproducing him. Likewise reproducing, or
replicating the same man in several places, that man may do different
Actions, the reason is: Quia licet secundum se sit idem numero homo, est
virtute multiplex, and multis aequipollet locorum spatiis and Operationtbus.
That is: Because though that man reduplicated be one and the same man in
number, yet he has the virtue of many men and can be in many, and different
places, and do many and different Actions. By this means the man replicated
may be hott in one place, and cold in another; walk in one place, and stand in
another; may be sick in one place, and well in another; and which is more
strange; may live in one place, and dye in another.

Let Sall tell us why all this may not be done, and what Contradiction does
this Replication involue that it may not be done by the power of God? Will he
dare say the power of God, which is infinite, can be so ended and exhausted, as
it may not extend it self to such a Reproduction, or Replication?

Having said so much by way of discussion upon some parts of Salls
Recantation, that impugnes the Doctrine of Transubstantiation: let me now show,
that the Greeck and Ruthenian Church, and the Armenians do agree with the
Roman Catholic Church, in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Real-presence,
and in Cultu latriae, or Worship of Adoration due to the Body of Christ in the
Sacrament of the Altar.

XIX. CHAPTER. The Ruthenian and Greeck Church, and the Armenians hold the same
in the Article of Transubstantiation, as the Roman Catholics do.
FOr informing Sall lately become Calvinist and a great zealot that way, that
the Ruthenians, and those of the Greeck Church and Armenians agree with us in
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Real-presence, etc. I here set down certain
passages worthy to be notifyed to him and all those of his Religion, which I
lately read with great Attention and Satisfaction. I will instance a late
undeniable proof of this out of a Conferrence that passed between L. H.
Gondrin Archbishop of Sans a very learned Prelate, and a venerable Priest of
Muscovia, a Chanon of the Cathedral of Muskow, then in the retenue of the
Muscovit Ambassador in Paris, and with the Secretary of said Ambassador. This
conference was made at Paris anno 1668. These being invited by the Archbishop
to dyne with him after great civility done them, his grace put the Priest many
questions, touching Transubstantiation, and the Real-Presence after the words
of Consecration, and what Worship is due to Christ in the Sacrament, and
desired upon all this to receive the Judgment and use of the Ruthenian Church:
they answered to all distinctly, as men well versed in the Religion of their
Country, and assured his Grace, they agreed in all these points, to wit,
Transubstantiation, Real-Presence, and Incultu latriae, that is Adoration due
to Christ in this Sacrament; the Archbishop much joy'd at these Answers,
further desired to know their Judgment of some Christians in France, that
denied the Body and Blood of Christ to be realy and substantially in the
Eucharist, and likewise denied Adoration to be due there unto; they replied
with a pious anger and indignation, if such men lived in our country, we
should put them to death and burn them like Heretics and Devils: But there
are said they ( God be praised) noe such men in Muscovia, nor dare they live
there.

Take another strong Confirmation of the same, the answer Paisius Legaridius
Chius, Metropolitan of Gaza given to Ioannes Lylienthal, Ambassador of the King
of Sueden, in the Court of Muscovia, in the Month of September anno 1666. The
Ambassador set forth to said Metropolitan the tenets of the Lutherans,
Calvenistes, and Romans, about the blessed Eucharist, the question stated, he
said: Est itaque questionis scopus, quam nempe in hac opinionum varietate
Ecclesia Ruthenia seu Graeca teneat Sententiam? partesne Ecclesiae Romanae, an
Lutheranae, vel Calvinianae tueatur? That is: It is therefore the but of the
question, what Sentence in this variety of Opinions holds the Ruthenian Church?
and whose part do they hold and maintain, that of the Roman Church, or the
Lutheran, or the Calvinian?

The Metropolitan answered possitively, in a long and learned discourse, that
the Ruthenian and all the Greeck Church agreed with the Romans in
Transubstantiation, Real-presence, and worship of Adoration due to Christ in
the Holy Eucharist: The Romans (said he) only differ from our Church in the
matter of this Sacrament, that the Greeck Church does consecrate in
Levin-Bread, and the Latin in Azime, wherefore we Grecians call the Latins
Azimits; but he further said, this differrence between us is not essential,
for that Levined, and unlevined Bread are ejusdem speciei.

In like manner the Surian or Syrian Church agree's with the Roman in all
touching the Eucharist, and likewise in some other points of Faith denied by
the Protestants of England: as does evidently wittness the ensuing Testimony of
several Bishops and Priests of that Country and Church.

Testimonium; seu Professio quorundam Articulorum apud Nationem Surianam In
Orient.
In Nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti.
1. CHristi Corpus and Sanguinem vere and realiter in Eucharistiae continer^
firmiter credimus, non figuram tantum ejus atque virtutem, ut Heretici commenti
sunt.

2. Item Panem and Vinum in verum Christi Corpus and Sanguinem realiter and
substantialiter vi Divinae Consecrationis mutari, atque converti seu
substantiari, quod idem est.

3. Christum in Eucharistia residentem Latriae cultu adorari debere, and ita ab
omnibus Ecclesiae nostri fidelibus adorari.

4. In Sacra Lyturgia vere ac proprie dictum Sacrificium pro vivis and mortuis
propitiatorium Deo offerri.

5. Sanctos recte a fidelibus coli and invocari.

6. Presbiterum non esse, qui ab Episcopo Impositionem manuum non acceperit.

7. Licere Ecclesiae carnium Escas certis diebus prohibere, and fidelibus
statuta per annum jejunia indicere.

8. Contra Sentientes pro Hereticis and prophanis haberi and excomunicari.

Haec est ac semper fuit Ecclesiarum nostrarum fides: hanc acceptam a majoribus
servamus, and seruabimus; nec ulla apud nos mentio ullorum a memoria fuit
aliquando, qui aliter docue runt.

Ita nos Testamur die 29. Februarii. Anno 1668. 1. PAtriarcha Surianae
Nationis. 2. Andreas Curatus Abdella and Choulac Nationis Surianae. 3. Curatus
Matove N. S. 4. Curatus Abdella and Moyl Religiosus and Sacerdos N. S. 5.
Sacerdos Nam. N. S. 6. Sacerdos Benjamin N. S. 7. Curatus Chaida N. S. 8.
Sacerdos Abdella and Chay N. S. 9. Sacerdos Abraham N. S. 10. Sacerdos Abraham
and Egeir N. S. 11. Dominus Abraham Sacerdos N. S. 12. Dominus Ioannes
Episcopus N. S. 13. Dominus a Deodatus Sacerdos N. S. 14. Dominus Theodorus
Sacerdos N. S. 15. Dominus Chacardour Sacerdos N. S. 16. Dominus Gregorius
Episcopus N. S. 17. Dominus Baptista Decanus Ecclesiae Beatae Virginis N. S.
18. Dominus Sergius Sacerdos N. S.


There are the like Testimonies of the Patriarck and many Bishops and Priests
Armenians dwelling in Aleppo, signed the first of March 1668.

In like manner all the Armenian Churches agree with the Romans touching the
Eucharist in all: which are very many under two Patriarcks; the one dwelling in
Arard a City of Armenia, whose abode is in the Monastery of Ermiasin or
Heruisin, and has under him 200. Bishops. The other Patriarck keeps in Cis a
town of Carmania having under him 50. Bishops. By what is said Sall may see,
and must confess that the Ruthenian and Greeck Church, the Syrians and
Armenians agree with the Romans in the Faith and Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
Real-presence, and Worship due to Christ in the Eucharist.

Who desires to inform himself more at large, of what I have here aleaged, I
remitt him to that excellent learned Treatis thus entitled:

La perpetuite de la foy de l'Eglise Catholic touchant l'Eucharistie defendue
contre le Liver du Seiur Claude Ministre d^ Charanton, printed at Paris, 1669.
What I here set down and much more he will find in the 12. Book of the third
Treatice (they are in all 4. Vollums in 8.) The reading of this excellent work
(as I have bine informed) converted that famous general Mareshall de Turene,
and after him was converted Prince de Tremoile one of the noblest Princes of
France, and after them many more Persons of quality.

The Greek and Ruthenian Church, Armenians, and others agree in more points of
Religion with the Romans, then with the Protestants of the English Church.
IT was my happ many years ago to have perused an answer of Father Paul Harris
a learned Priest that lived in Dublin (I knew the man well) to a Sermon of
Doctor Usher Protestant Primate of Ardmach or (as they used to speak) of al
Ireland a man of great fame, made at Wainstad before King James anno 1624. In
this Sermon the Primat haled into his Church and Communion, all those of the
Greek and Ruthenian Church, Armenians likewise, and other Sectarys in the
Eastern Church affirming Salvation was found in all those Congregations. Father
Harris confuted the man, showing evidently, that all those differed from
Protestants in many substantial Articles of faith, and consequently could not
be of their Communion; and was not this I pray you a pleasant Imagination of
Doctor Usher? But let Usher build his great new Church, of Greeks, Ruthenians,
Arminians, and English Protestants in the Clouds, we know the Catholic Church
is built upon a Rock and will never be destroyed.

Father Paul Harris in his answer to Usher speaks thus:

The Grecians, Ruthenians, and Armneians defend and maintain that Baptism is
necessary to salvation, and that original sin is remitted thereby; the riged
Calvinistes teach the contrary. The Greeks, Ruthenians, etc. hold
Transubstantiation, the Reael-presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the
Sacrament and the worship of Latria due there unto; the Protestant generally
not. The Greeks Ruthenians etc. hold that good works with faith do justify; the
Protestants, that faith alone does justify. The Greeks etc. free will in the
best actions, the Protestants not; the Greeks etc. hold seven Sacraments, the
Protestants not; the Greeks etc. believe Christ dyed for all Godly and wicked,
the Protestants not, but only for the elect; they pray and offer Sacrifice for
the dead, the Protestants not; they Invocate Saints and Angels, the
Protestants not; They worship Crosses and Images, the Protestant not; They hold
merit of good works, the Protestants not.

You may see what good Agreement in Articles of faith Doctor Usher found
between the Greeks, Ruthenians, Armenians etc. For bringing them into his own
Church and Communion, but if they agree in any Articles with the Protestant,
(though they differed in many more) 'twas enough for Usher to make them all
Protestants, as Fox made Saints of all Sectarys, as in what we have said
before is proved: But we Catholics do not, nor may not receive into our
Communion and Church the said Greeks, Ruthenians, etc. Though agreeing with us
in many Articles, because they differ in others according to that of Saint
James: Qui offendit in uno factus est omnium reus.

We are now to speak or to deal with Sall for his contumelious Language to
wit for saying, that the tenets of the Roman Church against the XXXIX.
Articles are false, and Superstitious, especially that of Transubstantiation,
as forcing upon Christians a belief of monstrous Miracles, etc. of which I
shall treat in the ensuing Chapter.

XX. CHAPTER. Miracles are ttue and clear marks of a true Religion, and the
power of working them has been given to the true Church and remains therein.
The Anger Sall has conceived against Gods wonders, caling Miracles Monstrous,
gave me occation of enlargeing this Chapter. A furious zeal in his new
Religion has made the man ungodly.

It was not enough for him in his Recantation to declare his mind in the
ensuing words.

Wherefore I resolved to declare, as I do hereby seriously and in my heart,
without Equivocation, or mental Reservation in the Presence of God and this
Congregation, declare, that I do give my full, and free assent to the XXXIX.
Articles of the Church of England, for holy and wise, and grounded upon the
insalliable word of God;

But he must also add.

Acknowledging the Romish tenets against them to be false and Superstitious,
especially that of Transubstantiation, as forcing upon Christians a belief of
Monstrous Miracles repugnant to humane reason, and not grounded upon divine
Testimony, nor necessary either for verifying Christ his words in the
Institution of this Blessed Sacrament; or for the effects of it.

Sall vere durus est hie sermo, and quis potest eum, audire! Let any Catholic
Reader tell me: Nonquid haec est atrox homuncionis insultantis Christo and
Ecclesiae rabies? I did not think poor Sall was come to such a hight of Impiety
as to belch up so virulent a contumely against Gods Wonders: But let him be
as much discontented as he will, Miracles are owned by the pious and learned,
by the Bishop and the Peasant, and by all true and Godly believers, because
they are wrought In Nomine and virtute Dei omnipotentis: wherefore the Doctrine
of Miracles is well grounded, and delivered from hand to hand a long from the
Apostles Times, and the Church is called Ecclesia Sancta Sanctitate
Miraculorum. It is true Sall, you have passed to a Congregation of men that
deny and contemn manifest Wonders, because noe Miracles were ever done in
their Church; I defy you to show me one Miracle wrought by any of Foxes
Saints, or any Protestant since your holy Father Luther first brought in
Protestanisme, tell me when and where, and the man that did the Wonder.

Sall I see you deal with Miracles, as the Fox did with a fair ripe bunsh of
grapes. he jumpt and leapt to bring down the grapes, but when he could not
reach them, said they were green and worth nothing. But whether I pray you
shall I believe, you in a kind of rage against Gods wonders caling them
Monstrous; or Saint Thomas the Prince of devines teaching What a Miracle is?
dicit enim Quod S. Tom. part. 1. quest. 105. a 7.
nomen Mirac^li ab Admiratione sumitur: Admiratio autem consurgit, cum effectus
sunt manifesti, and causa occulta. That is: The Word Miracle coms from
Admiration, and this Admiration does arise, when the effects appear, and the
cause is hidden. Likewise Saint Augustine tells us what a Miracle is. cum Deus
(says the Saint) Aliquid facit S. Aug. lib. de quest.
contra cognitum nobis cursum, solitumque naturae, magnalia vel mirabilia
dicuntur.

When God does any thing against the known course of nature; and custom
thereof they are caled Magnalia or wonderful things.

I pray you good Sall, give God leave to do wonderful things by his Saints
and servants, to his own Glory, when it shall so please him, and be not angry
therewith caling impudently these wonders, Monstrous Miracles: take rather.
Saint Augustins good Counsel, speaking thus to you and me, and all men.
Dicamus Aliquid Deum posse, quod nos fatemur, investigare non posse; in rebus
enim mirabilibus tota ratio saciendi est potentia sacientis. That is Let us
say, God is able to do something, that we must confess, we are not able to
search into or comprehend; in wonderful things the whole ground of doing
them: is the power of him that can do them.

That God has Empowered those he sent by an extraordinary way for converting
Nations, with the grace of working Miracles is a truth you will not deny,
having been evidently made appear in the written Law, and Law of Grace: when
the people see Miracles, they believe the man that does them is sent from God.

This made Moses, when he was commanded by God to lead the Israelits out of
Egypt, to answer God in these Exodus cap. 5.
terms. The people will not believe me nor hear my voice; but they will say,
our Lord has not appeared to thee. He proposed the difficulty of the Embassy
wisely, and God iudgd what he said, to carry great reason, and therefore gave
him the power of doing wonders, and this suffised to make the people believe,
he was sent from God with an extraordinary Authority. Sall we are still
demanding from your Prophets and Doctors, Luther, Calvin, and the rest of
them, who say they were sent from God by an extraordinary mission to sanctify
the world, and to pull down the whore of Babylon (so they name the Roman
Church) and also you of England, and all Protestants affirm the same, to wit,
that Luther, Calvin, and the rest were empowered with extraordinary authority,
even as the true Prophets of God, and other holy men, (that wrought Miracles
for proving their mission,) were sent from God in former ages: but till this
day you could never name any Miracles wrought by your Doctors.

Now if the Israelits would not take Moses his word (though he was a holy
man) that he was sent from God without doing wonders, shall we take Luther or
Calvin's word, who showed noe Sanctity in their manners, but much impurity;
that they are sent from God without working Mitacles to prove it; this would be
in us a great folly?

There are three kind of Miracles, those of Christ, those of the Apostles, and
Church Miracles, if Sall and those of the English Church will not believe the
two first kind of Miracles, they do not credit the Scriptures, wherein those
Miracles are found; as for Church Miracles they seem to make noe more account
of them then of fables, or of ridiculous things, but holy men, and those that
fear God do much esteem them: by Church Miracles I first understand such as
the most ancient fathers have left upon record, never questioned, never called
into doubt by any. 2. I understand by Church Miracles such as in latter ages
have been aproved by the Sea Apostolic, chiefly at the Canonization of
Saints, whereof witnesses have been produced upon oath, and all Imaginable
sinserity, (or severity rather) used to avoid heresies, and to make truth
openly known.

We Catholics distinguish between the received Miracles of the Church, and
those which particular men relate, whereof some are only probable, others
Dubious, others false; the Protestants does not distinguish them, but make all
fish that coms to Nett.

The Catholics also distinguish the Miracles of Christ and other Miracles;
those of Christ are immediately wrought by God, and the other by Gods servants,
but In Nomine and virtute Dei, so that Christ is the Magnus Thaumaturgus, quia
sine illo nihil possumus facere; when one baptizeth, Saint Augustine does
affirm that Christ does Baptize with him, even so we say, when any of Gods
servants works a wonder, Christ works that Miracle with him, and consequently
all the Miracles of the Saints are Christ's Miracles. If Sall and other
Protestants shall deny Gods servants to have received from Christ the power of
working Miracles, I say Sall and his Companions in this, do not believe the
Prophecy of Christ saying expressly. Amen, Amen. I say unto you, he Joan. cap.
14.
that believes in me, the works that I do, he also shall do, and greater
works then these shall he do. These are Christ's own words who cannot
deceive, or be deceived. For a more exact notice of the nature of Miracles and
how they are differenced, I remitt my reader to an excellent Treatise printed
at Antwerp anno 1674. Thus entitled: The Infallibility of the Catholic Church
and her miracles.

Now that Miracles are not Monstrous as Sall profanely speaks, but Glorious,
and the true seals, and Characters of the true Religion and Church the ensuing
Chapter will declare.

XXI. CHAPTER. Of undeniable Miracles proving the Faith and Sanctity of the
true Church.
Israel were most divided in matter of Religion, and very many of them bended
their knees to Baal, the Prophet Elias said to them in zeal and Anger, How
long halt you of two sides? if Lib. 3. cap. 18.
our Lord be God, follow him; if Baal, follow him. And the people did not
answer him aword. (Such a zealous postulation is necessary to those that are
neither hott, nor cold in Religion, but lukewarm such as the Angels
themselves detest, Apocall. Cap. 3.) then the Prophet made a motion to them of
clearing the truth in point of Religion between him and the Priests of Baal, by
that famous undoubted Miracle of burning an Ox upon the Alter without kindling
fire under: this way was well approved of by the people, and they all answering
said, a very good proposition. Gods Prophet was but one, and alone in this
conflict, and the Prophets of Baal then present 450. The reason wherefore the
people willingly condescended to the Prophets proposition, was, that in common
sense they judged, that God would not permit a falsehood to be confirmed by
Miracle in so public a trial, where the veracity of God was so
particularly concerned: on the other side the Prophets of Baal durst not refuse
so fair an ofter as Elias made in the presence of all the people, fearing
they would fall from them, and the Worship of Baal their God. What end say you
had this fair Trial? who had the Victory? who but Elias the true servant, and
Prophet of God? The Priests of Baal began to pray and cry upon Baal their God
with great fervor and many Ceremonies, they cried till noonday the time the
Sacrifice should be burnt, but their God Baal sent them noe fire.

Then Elias after gering the foolish prayres, and exclamations of those 450.
Profane Priests of the Idol Baal, began to pray to the living God in this
kind. Lord, God of Abraham and Isaac, and Israel, show this day that thou art
the God of Israel, and I thy servant, and that according to thy Commandment I
have done all these things. Hear me Lord, hear me: that these people may
learn, that thou art our Lord God, and that thou have converted their heart
again, And the fire of our Lord fell, and devoured the Holacaust, and the
wood, and the stones, licking also the dust, and the Water, that was in the
Water gutter. Which when all the People had seen, they fell on their face, and
said: Our Lord he is God, our Lord he is God.

Sall two things you may here observe, the first: that the people of Israel
seeing the Miracle of the fire coming from heaven, detested Baal, and adored
God crying out. Our Lord he is God, our Lord he is God* Secondly. That the
Devils power was here restrained, and so chained, that he was not able to
help those Priests of Baal, demanding fire from him to burn the Holocaust;
and so it is still, when Miracles are attempted for the Trial of truth, then
only truth will be testified, and Satan confounded having noe power to the
contrary; which is according to that of Saint Mark: Our Lord working with Mark.
cap. 16.
all, and confirming the Doctrine with signs following.

And why should not I in this place, in the name of the Catholic Church, make
such an offer to Sall, and all his Protestants in England, Ireland, and
Scotland, as Elias made to the Priests of Baal: I hope they will be ashamed to
refuse it, for that were to confess, that the Roman Doctrine is true, and theirs
false; The Roman Church the true Church, and the Protestants the false.

Sall let us not delude the people with School subtilitys, or obscure Texts of
Scripture, If the Church of England or Scotland, or any other reformed one be
the true Church, and its Doctrine the true Doctrine, let that be tried by
Miracles. I shall try ours of Rome by that Test. I challenge then all the
Bishops and Ministers of the Church of England, and all those of the
Reformation, or all the Protestants of the World, to work, or mention, any one
Miracle ever yet wrought by any Protestant, to confirm any one point of
Doctrine or Religion, wherein they differ from the Roman Catholic.

Gentlemen, summon your Synods, search into all Historyes, Profane, and
Sacred, set your heads to gether, and produce at least some probable testimony
of as much as one Miracle to grace your Reformations.

Elias, raised from death to life the child of the Widow of Sareptha of the
Sidonians, and delivered him to his Mother, and Lib. 3. Regum cap. 1^8
said to her: behold thy son lives. And the woeman said to Elias: now, in
this I have known that thou art a man of God, and the word of our Lord in thy
mouth is true. Sall will thou believe, that the Miracle made this woeman
believe?

Prophet Elizeus raised to life the dead child of the Sunamite, saying to her:
Take thy son. Lib. 4. Regum Cap. 4.
She came, and fell at his feet, and adored upon the ground: and took her
Son, and went out etc. Behold Sall the force of the Miracle.

Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago three of the Children of Israel in the midst of
the flames of burning fire, where they walked in the midst of Dan. Cap. 3.
the flame praising God, and blessing our Lord. And did not Nabuchodnozor moved
with this Miracle breaking forth say. Blessed be the God of Sidrach, Misach and
Abdenago, who had sent his Angel, and had delivered his Servants that believed
in him? And after said. By me therefore this decree is made., that every
people, tribe, and tongue, whatsoever shall speak Blasphemy against the God of
Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, he perrish, and his house be wasted: for there
is none other God, that can so save. This Miracle made Nabuchodonozor
confess. There was noe God could save but the God of Israel.

In the Law of Grace you will find that God gave the power of working Miracles
to wit, of casting out Devils, Math. cap. 10.
of curing all manner of Infirmityes. Where our savior says to his Diciples.
And going preach, saying. That the Kingdom of heaven is at hand. Cure the sick.
raise the dead, cleans the lepers, cast out Devils: gratis you have received,
gratis give ye. Mark Mark. cap. 16. 2. Cor. cap. 12.
the Evangelist does attest the same. Saint Paul also avouched Miracles for
the signs of his Apostle-ship.

The Miracles of Saint Peter and the rest of the Apostles, are many and
evident, as is manifest by undeniable tradition. All this being so, go now
Sall and tell thy Protestants, Miracles wrought in the Catholic Church are
Monstrous. But if you will know the Miracles wrought by Heretics, Tertullian
in a few words will give you an account thereof; he speaking of the Apostles
said: Apostoli de mortuis vivos saciebant: Tert. de prescr,
That is; The Apostles gives dead men life. And then speaking of Marcion
Valentinus, Nigidius, Hermogenes, and other Heretics said. Isti de vivis
mortuos faciunt. These make living men dye, so is it speaking of men's Souls,
and somtymes of their Bodies, as the Miracle of Calvin upon the Taylior
Bruleus, and of a certain Arian, that made aman seeing well, quite blind.

Another grave Father, tells us of another kind of wonders Heretics do.
Invenerunt says he. Matres; quas de captivis monialibus fecerunt mulieres.
That is: Of Nuns, who were in their power, as it were captives, they made
woeman and Mothers. Luther, Beza, Bucer, Ochinus, Peter Martyr, and hundreds
more wanton Monks, Priests and Apostata's were excellent at working such
Miracles.

Here Sall will tell me, he makes noe question or doubt of Miracles attested
in holy Scripture, if so he must confess they are undeniable signs and
proofs of a true Church and Religion, and though they were says he, you cannot
conclude other Miracles to be so, he means Church Miracles, and all such as
are not found in Scripture, these are they he accounts for Monstrous. Yet
Luther himself confesses these Words of Christ. He that believes in me,
John. cap. 14.
the works that I do, he shall do, and greater. Are understood of the power
Christ left, ( of working Miracles) to the whole Body of the Church, in whom
this Virtue does shine for ever, and your English Bibles (Edit. 1576.) in the
marginall notes, referrs this power to the whole Body of the Church: A Deo
discimus (says Luther) and accepimus, aeternum verbum and veritatem Luther
Tom. 7. Lib. de Iudois etc. fol. 220
Dei hactenus mill quingentis annis Miraculis and signis consessam and
confirmatam. That is: We have learned and received from God, the eternal Word
and Verity of God hither to a thousand and five hundred years to have been
confessed and confirmed by Miracles and Wonders.

But Protestants now a days contradict their holy Father Luther in this
particular (as all men must who maintain errors,) and say, when we press them
to relate some of their Miracles, that Miracles are now superfluous, and
therefore none wrought in the Church. And some hold them ridiculous, but Sall
goes further saying they are Monstrous. But I shall aleage some Miracles in
Confirmation of the Roman Catholic Doctrine, (and more especially of
Transubstantiation) that some Protestants themselves will acknowledge to be
Miracles of undoubted creditt.

XXII. CHAPTER. Six Miracles confirming the Doctrine of the Catholic Church,
touching Transubstantiation and the Adoration of Christ in the Sacrament.
SAint Nilus relates how Saint Ghrysostome S. Nilus in Ep. ad Anastasium
almost every day had visions of Angels assisting and adoring the blessed
Sacrament until the Sacrifice was finished.

In the Ecclesiastical History is recorded this example, which Euagrius Euagr.
Orthodoxus. lib. 4. cap. 35. anno. D. 552.
writ as a thing notorius, and done in his own Time. In the Time of Patriarck
Menas (says he) there happened a Miracle worthy to be remembered. It was an
ancient Custom in Constantinople A Miracle for the Communion under one Kind.
when many Parcels of the pure and unspotted Body of Christ our God were
remaining after Communion, little Children were caled out of the Schools, and
were permitted to eat them. It happened, that a little boy (whose Father was a
Jew by Profession, and a maker of glass by his Trade) being among the rest, did
eat also his share of the aforesaid Reversion of the blessed Sacrament, but
coming some what late home, and his parents demanding the cause, the child
told innocently what he had done; which the Jew his Father understanding, was
so enraged, that unawares to his wife, he cast his little son into the
burning oven wherein he used to melt and frame his glass. The Mother missing
the child, sought for him three days together. but hearing noe news of him
abroad, she returned home with an heavy heart, and sitting down at the
workhouse house door, she began to bewail the loss of her Son caling him by
his name, the boy hearing and knowing his Mothers call, did answer within the
oven; where at the woeman starting, burst the workhouse door, and rushing in,
espied her child standing amidst the coals without receiving any harm. After
coming out, being demanded how he escaped burning so long, a woe man, (said
he) came often Times unto me, and brought me water to quench the force of
the fire, wherewith I was environed. and withal gave me meat as often as I was
hungry. This accident being told unto the emperoor Justinian, he caused the
Mother and boy to be Baptized, which because the obstinate Father refused to
yield unto, by the Emperors commandment he was hanged upon a Gibet.

I Will now relate a story (says Waldensis) whereof I my self was an eye
Wittness in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul in London, where the venerable
Thom. VV aldensis Tom. 2. de Sacra. Eucha. cap. 62.
Archbishop Thomas Arundell of happy memory (the Son and Brother to an EarI)
sat in Judgment in his Bishops Chair, assisted by Alexander the Prelate of the
Church of Norwitch, and others. At which time he proposed certain
Interrogatories, concerning the Faith of the Eucharist unto a Tailor of the
parts of Worcester shire, taken in the crime of Heresy; but when that the
obstinat fellow could not be persuaded by any reason to embrace the right
Faith, nor would believe, nor call the consecrated Host any other thing but
only Holy Bread, he was at last commanded to Worship the said Host, but the
blasphemous Heretic answering said, Verily a spider is more Worthy to be
worshipped then it is. When behold a monstrous horrible Spider came suddenly
sliding down by her thread from the top of the Church directly unto the
Blasphemers mouth, and endeavored very busily to get entrance even as he was
speaking the Words; neither without much ado could the many hands of the
standers by keep her from entering into the wretch whether he would or not.
Thomas, Duke of Oxford, and Chancellor of the Realm was there present, and saw
this Wonder. Then the Archbishop stood up, and declared to all that were
present that the revenging hand of God had denounced the man to be a Blasphemer.

Saint Bernards Miracles.
THe Learning, Devotion, Sanctity, and Miracles of this Saint are so generally
confessed by Protestant writers, as Whitaker says. I realy believe Whit. de
Ecclesia pa. 369 Osian. Cent. 12.
Bernard was a true Saint. Osiander likewise says. Saint Bernard Abbot of
Clarivall was a very pious man etc. Yea Doctor Stillingfleet himself in his
late Comedy of the Idolatry, and Fanatiscisme of the Church of Rome, durst not
bring Bernard upon the stage. All the World looked upon this Saint as the
Apostle of that age, wherein Diverse Heresies were broacht by the Waldenses,
Apostolici, Henricians and others. These two last Sects had infected a great
part of France, especially about Toulouse; their chief Errors were against the
Sacrifice of the Mass, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Prayer for the Dead,
Prayer to Saints, their Worship; that of Images, the Popes Supremacy, etc.
Even the same Protestants hold in our days. The Pope sent a Legate, and Saint
Bernard to confute them: It is to be noted that Protestants Challenge, these as
Members, and Martyrs, of the Protestant Church, as every one may see in their
Catalogue of the wittness of truth, printed 1597. Among other Miracles one is
recounted by Godefridus in vita Bernardi Lib. 3. Cap. 5. And by others of the
same Time as follows.

There is a place in the Country of Tolouse, caled Sarlatum, where after Sermon
was done, they offered to the Servant of God (as every where the use was) many
loaves to bless, which he, lifting up his hand, and making the sign of the
Cross, in Gods Name blessing, said thus. In this you shall know that these
things are true which we, and that those other are false which the Heretics
labor to persuade you; that whosoever they be (of your diseased Persons) that
taste the loaves, shall be healed, to the end you may know us to be the true
Ministers of God The Bishop of Chartres (a great Frind to the Saint) thinking
this Proposition to general, told the People, they were to understand it
conditionally, if they did eat of the loaves with Faith. Saint Bernard
suddenly replied, My Lord, I do not mean so, my meaning and saying is, that
all sick Folks who shall eat of these loaves, shall recover their health, to
the end it may be known we are Gods true Ministers. And accordingly it fell
out, not one diseased Person that did eat of the Bread^, mist of being cured;
and the Miracle being thus d^uulged, by its effects, so huge a multitude of
People came to thank and admire the Saint, that he declined the common roads,
and went by byways to Tolouse.

Two other excellent Miracles of Saint Bernard, the one in Millane, the other
in Aquitaine.
THat in Millane was of an old woeman possessed for many years: the Devil had
taken from her speech, Veran. Dom. Gulielmus Abbas in vita Saint Bern. lib. 2.
cap. ^^
sight, and hearing; her Breath was stinking, her face gashly, her presence
uggly, infine she was the most miserable spectacle in the World. The Saint in
time of Mass began to vex this evil Spirit that for many years had vexed the
poor old woeman: And immediately after saying the Pater Noster in the Mass the
holy man holding over the Patena the Body of our Lord, and turning his face
toward the People, and to the lamentable and tormented possessed said these
strong and vehement words. Adest inique Spiritus etc. Thou impious Spirit he
is here present, who before his Passion said: Now Satan the Prince of the
World shall be cast out; this is the same Body, that took flesh from the Body
of the blessed Virgin, that was stretched upon the beam of the Cross, that was
laid in the Sepulcher, that did rise up from death, that ascended in to heaven,
his disciples viewing that strange Mystery. Therefore in the terrible power of
this great Majesty, I command thee malignant Spirit to go out of the Body of
this handmaid of God, and that thou shall noe more touch or molest her, The
Saint then turned to the Alter and persued the rest of the Mass.

Now what happened? The Devil cast out, fled away quite mute, the woeman came
to her self, and recovering her reason and senses; drew in her tongue that
hung down at a great length, and thank't God for his mercy toward her; and
beholding holy Bernard that cured her, cast her self at his feet owneing the
great benefitt she had received from him; Then (says the Author) Ingens per
Ecclesia^ attolitur clamor, omnis aetas Iubilat Deo, personant aeramenta, and
benedicitur ab omnibus Deus. That is: A great Cry of Joy was raised over all
the Church, young and old praised God, the Organs sounded melodiously, and God
was honored of all. This renowned wonder being done in the sight of thousands
of Souls, was recorded in the Archives of Millan, and now I would feign know,
what may be Salls Judgment of this Miracle wrought for Confirmation of
Transubstantiation, the real and true Presence of Christ his Body in the
Sacrament, the Worship of Adoration due thereunto, and of the power and Majesty
of Christ in the Sacrament; Will he dare call this Miracle Monstrous? let him
be aware of speaking so, ( Non enim irridetur Deus) or will he perhaps tell
us, that all we have said of this Miracle is but a Papisticall dream or
fable, if he say so, the Testimony of the Miracle before so many thousands,
and the Examination thereof upon the Saints Canonization will prove him
impudent, and if he shall say that Consecrated Host which Saint Bernard held
between his hands over the Patena, (which the Saint said was the same Body,
that took Flesh from the Body of the blessed Virgin) was not the true Body of
Christ, he affirms the Saint to be a cheat, and if this he says, we shall
make bold without being unmannerly to aver that he belyes the Saint, and
that what he says is a callumny; In a word there is noe way left for Sall to
discreditt this Miracle.

The other Miracle, where with Saint Bernard daunted and terrified William Earl
or Duke of Aquitaine, and changed as we may say a Lion into a Lamb, happened
thus.

This Duke took part with Antipape Petrus Leo against Innocentius the true
Pope, and in this Opposition showed great obstinacy, and used great Tyranny
against all those that obeyed Innocentius, and stuck to him in his Canonical
Election, he deprived several Churchmen of their Benefices, thrust out
violently Bishops out of their Chaires, and Churches, and did very great
Outrages against many of his subjects. It was found meet and fitting to reason
with this furious man, and try if he could be reduced to a due obedience and
agreement with the Popes party: to this purpose Saint Bernard, the Bishop of
Chartres with many other persons of quallity came to conferr with the Duke. The
holy man seeing him stubborn and refusing to reconsile himself to the Bishops
and Churchmen he had oppressed, betook himself to stronger weapons. that is
to say, began Mass with great fervor and devotion, and coming to Agnus Dei qui
tollis peccata mundi etc. Came abroad (the Duke being forbidden to assist, at
Mass did not enter the Church) with the Sacrament over the Patena and began to
handle this proud Prince in this kind. The above mentioned Author of Saint
Bernards life relates the History in this manner. Homo Dei etc. That is: The
Guliel. Abbas in vita S. Bern. lib. 2. cap. 6.
man of God, not now carrying himself like an ordinary man, puts the Body of
our Lord upon the Patena, and takes it with him, and with an angry,
countenance, and flaming eyes, not praying but threatening came a broad, and
setts upon Duke William with the ensuing vehement words,

We have hithertoe prayed you, and you have despised us, in our last meeting
of some servants of God, the whole multitude humbly besought you, and you
contemned us all: behold now coms to you the son of the virgin, who is head,
and Lord of the Church, whom you persecute, thy Judge, here is present, in
whose name all knees bend in heaven, on Earth, and in Hell, thy Judge is
present, in whose hands thy Soul shall com. Will you despise him, as you have
contemned us his poor Servants? All then upon the place powered forth tears,
and all attentive to their Prayres, waited for the end of the bussiness, and
cogitations of all suspended did expect some devine and great Matter to be
done. The Duke seeing the Abbott coming upon him in a vehement Spirit, and
carrying in his hands the most Blessed Body of Christ feared mainly, and
trembling in all the members of his Body was like a man stiff of cold, in this
trembling, and fear fell upon the ground, and lifted up by the Soldiers, fell
again upon his face, nor had he power to speak a word, nor look upon any
Body, his great beard all defiled with spittle breathing out deep sights looked
like a man in the Fallen-sickness. Then the man of God came near unto him, and
touching him with his foot commanded him to rise and stand upon his feet and
hear the Sentence, and Judgment of God upon him.

Here is present says the Saint the Bishop of Potiers whom you violently
thrust out of his Church, go and make peace with him, and bring him back to
his Church, and for Satisfying God give him Glory for the contumely you have
showed, and in all your Dominions command your People to obey Innocentius the
true Pope and have noe more to do, you nor they with Anti-Popes. What will you
do? William of Aquitaine embraced the Bishop of Potiers and the rest, and
obeyed in all, glorified God, and became afterward a great Saint.

Sall do you take the tameing of this fierce Lion of Aquitaine by the Lamb of
God Christ Jesus in the Sacrament in the hands of his servant Saint Bernard
wrought by him; take you this I say for a Miracle? Noe man will be so
impudent as to deny the creditt of the History published and believed over all
the World, and believing the History you must confess this Wonder was done in
Confirmation of Transubstantiation. Did ever your Piece of Bread in your
figurative Sacrament cast to the ground a furious, impious, Tyrant as Duke
William was, or cast out a Devil as the Sacrament in Saint Bernards hands did
in Millan? Go now Sall a furious zealott in your new Religion, and Preach to
your Brethren that Miracles are Monstrous.

XXIII. CHAPTER. Certain Advertisments to said Sall.
First.
Heretics are known by certain Marks.
1. Heretics deny and hate Tradiditions, so says the Counsel of Nice.

2. Heretics accuse the ancient Fathers of Ignorance, and blindness, so says
Saint Bernard.

3. Heretics despise the head of the Church, and speak contumeliously of him,
so affirms Saint Cyprian, and Augustine.

4. Heretics say and uphold there is noe need nor use of Miracles.

5. Heretics say they are sent extraordinarily from God to reform the Church,
and sanctify the World, and yet they work noe Miracles, the true signs of such
a Mission.

6. Heretics mock the simplicity of Priests, Innocent the third a learned Pop^
affirms this, saying: Simplicitatem Sacerdotem illudunt Heretici.

7. Heretics cannot give reason of their Chair, nor prove their Succession
from the Apostles.

8. Heretics are still disputing, but will in the end believe nothing, but
what themselves hold.

9. An Heretic defends his own opinion with pride, and obstinacy so says
Saint Augustine, Cap. 10. Lib. 9. De Civitati Dei.

10. Heretics love not the vettue of chastity; they hate (says Saint Hierom)
the Virgin and Virginity, Difficile est (says Tertulian) Hereticum invenire,
qui diligat castitatem. It is hard to find an Heretic that is a lover of
Chastity.

These are the marks of an Heretic as ancient Fathers observed; I leave Sall
to consider to whom these marks can be fittly atributed, to Roman Catholics
or Protestants.

We come now to a Litany of Heretics. George l'Apostre a French Author, has
this Litany in a work entitled:

Le Tombeau des Heretics. He calls the Litany. La Litanie Hugenote.

He begins thus:

1. CAin denied the Providence of God, and the meritt of good Works, (and then
says to the Hugenotes) Vous aussi. That is: And you do the same.

2. The Saduceans denied a part of Canonical Scriptures. You do the same.

3. The Scribes and Pharasies depraved the Bible. You do so too.

4. The Capharnaits would not believe the Body, and Blood of Christ in the
Eucharist. Nor do you.

5. Simon Magus said, God was Author of Sin, denied Marriage was a Sacrament,
denied Free Will, made a war against Saint Peter. You do so too.

6. The Menandrens ( says Saint Ignatius) denied the Eucharist, the Sacrifice
of the Mass, and averred the Body of Christ was not there. You do the same.

7. The Gnostics held them. selves only wise and learned, accused the Fathers
of Ignorance. So do you.

8. The Montanistes vaunted the Holy Ghost was only in their Church, they
denied Confession, and the Sacrament of Penance. So do you.

9. The Novatians held that the Church had noe power to remitt Sin; denied
Confession, rejected the Sacrament of Confirmation, ( so attesteth Saint
Ambrose of them) denied any Superiority in the Church, affirmed all The Apostles
were equal, and that Saint Peter was not chief, (so attesteth Theodoret.)
You do the same.

10. The Catharians rejected the Sacrament of Penance, denied Purgatory,
affirmed Priests ought to Marry. You do the same.

11. The Manichees mocked Virginity, denied Marriage to be a Sacrament,
reproched Catholics for Worshipping Saints broack down the Images, denied
Free Will, mocked Catholics for having memoryes of the feasts of Martyrs,
called Catholics Idolaters for saying Mass for the dead, said the Saints did
not pray for us. Threw away the Relics of Saints as acurssed and abominable
things, held the Eucharist ( as the Council of Nice reports) was but a Figure,
that the Body of Jesus Christ was not there. You do the same.

12. The Arrians denied prayers for the dead, would not receive Traditions,
said Bishops and Priests were equal, cast down Alters, and Crosses, hated
Monks like aplague, admitted nothing but the old and new Testament* You do the
same.

13. Jovinian mocked Celibatt or the state of Continency, preferred Marriage to
Virginity. gested at the Vow of Religion, derided Monks, detested fasting on
Friday, and Saturday, and in Lent, made noe Distinction between eating, and
fasting, Married their Priests, held that Fasting, and Chastity did noe way
profitt the Soul, that Jesus did pray and fast for us all, denied the meritt
of good Works, affirming Jesus Christ had satisfied for all, that all were
Priests, that aman may live in what Religion he will. You do the same.

14. The Waldenses, that began the year 1160. Mocked the use of Chrisme, in
Baptism, and Benedictions, Mattins, and Canonical Hours, prayers to Saints,
and Lent, denied Purgatory, said Extremunction was noe Sacrament, scoffed at
prayers for the Dead, denied the power of the Pope, derided Pardons, and
Indulgences, said the Devil had invented Monks, and Religious Orders, held the
Priest was as high as the Bishop. You do the same.

There are about forty Heresies more in said Litanie which for saving time I
omit: the same Author says, that Luther with his German Apostata's raked up
from Hell 404* Heresies. Of Calvin I have given you an account in his own
Words Page 124. beginning thus: Calvin, comme une meschante Arragnee, etc.

What ought to be considered in this place, is, that the before mentioned
Heretics, and their Heresies, have been condemned by the Church, and general
Counsels: this being so, I shall pray Sall, as he tenders the Salvation of
his own Soul, to examine with how many of these Heresies are the Protestants
infected, and how many of them are delivered as Doctrine of the Confession of
England in the XXXIX. Articles of the Church of England, let him look well to
what he has done, it is certain noe man sound in his wits will drink of a
Fountain wherein snakes, and todes, spitt their Poison, no man will stay in a
House infected with the plague, if he can get out.

The second Advertisment.
Clear places of Scripture in many points controverted make for the Catholics.
THere is nothing more frequent then Protestants to bragg, that Scriptures are
for them, in all Articles, controverted between them and Catholics. This great
Evidence they have, (as they say) on their own side, and therefore they lay a
side Traditions, ancient Fathers, Counsels, Canons, and School Arguments:
they will stand to noe other Trial but Scriptures, and when they come to this
test, they are aground, and fail quite in produceing formal Scriptures for
themselves: of the other side we Catholics admit of Counsels, Fathers,
Traditions, etc. for good Evidences in desiding differrence of Religion between
us and them; which they denying, we bring express places of Scripture, which
they cannot do, as does clearly appear in the ensuing Articles, and matters
controuerted between us and them.

For example-sake we Catholics Real-presence
for proving the Real-Presence have expressly, Math. cap. 26. Joan. cap. 6.
Iac. 2. Justification.
This is my Body, You have nowhere, this is the sign of my Body. We have
expressly, The Bread that I will give you is my Flesh. You have no where. It is
but the sign of my Flesh. We have expressly. A man is justified by Works, and
not by Faith only: You have nowhere, A man is justified by Faith alone, noe,
nor that he is justified by Faith without works, talking of works that follow
Faith, whereof only our Controvercy is; We have expressly, Whose sins you
forgive, Absolution. Joan. cap. 20.
are forgiven, whose sins you retain, are retained. You have nowhere, That
Priests cannot forgive, or retain sins on Earth. We have expressly, The
doers of the Law shall be justified. Romans cap. 2.
You have nowhere, That the Law required at Christians Hands, is impossible,
or that the doing thereof justifyes not Christians. We have expressly, Vow ye,
and render your Vows. Psalm. cap. 75.
Vows. You have no where, Vow ye not, or if you have vowed, break your Vows.
We have expressly, Keep the Traditions, which you have learned, Traditions.
Epist. 1 Thessalonians. cap. 2.
either by Word or Epistle. You have nowhere, The Apostles left noe
Traditions to the Church unwritten. We have expressly, Commandments Math.
cap. 19.
If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. And (when he said he
did that already) If thou will be perfect, go, and sell all thou have, and
give to the poor, and follow me. You have no where, That either the
Commandments can not be kept, or that we are not bound unto them, or that
there is noe degree of life, one perfecter then another. We have expressly,
Work your own Salvation works. Phillip. cap. 2.
with fear and trembling. You have nowhere, Either that a man can work
nothing toward his own Salvation, being helped with the grace of God: or that
a man should make it of his belief, that he* shall be saved without all doubt
or fear. We have expressly. Do ye worthy fruits Penance. Luc. cap. 3.
of Penance. You have nowhere, That Faith only is sufficient without all
Satisfaction, and all other works of Penance. We have expressly. That every
man shall be saved according Apoc. cap. 20.
to his works. You have nowhere, That men shall be judged only according to
their Faith. We have expressly, That it is a holy Cogitation to Prayer for
the Dead. 2 Match. cap. 12. Sacrifice for the D^ad. 2 Match. cap. 12. Voluntary.
Corporal affliction. Daniell cap. 10. Alms. Tobias cap. 12. Prayer of Saints,
for those on Earth. 2 Match. cap. 14.
pray for the Dead. You have nowhere, It is Superstition or unlawful to do
the same. We have an express example, Of an holy man, that offered Sacrifice
for the Dead. You have noe example of any good man, that ever reprehended it.
We have expressly. That the Affliction which Daniell used upon his Body, was
acceptable in the sight of God. You have nowhere, That such voluntary
Corporal afflictions are in vain. We have expressly. That an Angel did
present Tobias his good works, and Almsdeeds before God. You have nowhere
that Angels cannot, or do not the same, We read expressly, That Ieremias the
Prophet after he was dead prayed for the People of Israel. You have nowhere
the contrary to this in express Scripture.

I leave many places more that I might relate, but these are enough to prove
that express Scriptures are for us, and not for you: nor can you show that we
are driven to deny any one book of the bible, or to gloss upon plain places of
Scriptures, as you are forced to do.

I pray you Sall consider well these things, for they touch narrowly your new
Religion.

Further-more I dare give you this Challenge, that whereas there have been, so
many hundred Heresies for the space of one thousand sixhundred and seventy odd
years in the Christian Church, condemned and Anathematized by her and her
Bishops, if it can be showed, that the Roman Catholics do agree or
participate in any one point, truly, and sincerly, that was Judged for an
Heresy in old time, and that the Roman Catholics do hold it, in that sense
and meaning wherein it was condemned, that then we will yield, that our
Religion is false, and our Church noe true Church.

But on the other side, we Catholics offer to show clearly, that you
Protestants do hold diverse old and evident Heresies that were condemned
openly, for Heresies by the ancient Catholic Church, and in the self-same
sense and meaning wherein they were condemned, as is evident in the Heresies of
Aerius against Fasting days commanded by the Church and Prayer for the dead:
as also of the Heretic Vigilantius that denied Saints to Old heresys held by
Protestants.
be prayed unto, and their Relics to be honored: of the Heretic Iovinian,
that compared Matrimony with Virginity, and other like, for which we aleage
Epiph. Haeres. 75. Hier. cont. Vigilantium and cont. Iovin, Aug. lib. de
Haeresibus Here Is. 50. defense page 15. Doct. Fulke against Bristowes Motius
page 54.
the clear testimonys of Saint Epiphanius Saint Hierome, and Saint Augustine:
and the matter is so clear, that Doctor Fulk his words are brought in against
Doctor Bristo's motives saying: that Epiphanius and Augustine were deceived in
recording those for Heresies which are not; And that Jerome rather rayleth,
then reasons, and that Vigilantius was a good man, and his opinion sound.

Sall you see Mr. Fulk a grave Doctor in your Church drawn to that extremity
in this point, that he is forced to Judge Epiphanius and Augustine two grave
and ancient Doctors and Saints also, to have been deceived, and Saint Ierom
to have rather railed, then reasoned, and infine to say, that Vigilantius a
pestiferious condemned Heretic was a good man, and his opinion sound. Good
Doctor Fulk you sore to high, when you dare judge Doctors, and pillars of Gods
Church to have been deceived; can not we say to you Fulk, Quis te constituit
iudicem Upon those eminent Doctors? Sall this ought to trouble you in your new
Religion, that one of the grave Rabbis of your Church has showd himselfs so
foolish and impious, as to prefer Vigillantius a Notorious Heretick's Opinion
to the Judgment of three so renowned Fathers in a matter concerning faith:
Speak my Frind^^^ speak truth, and shame the Devil, is not this an
intolerable presumption in your Fulk an obscure man, not known out of the
Island of Britain*

Sall I pray put these things together, 1. That he, that houldeth any one
Heresy can not be saved, so teaches Scripture. A man that is an Heretic
after Ad Titum Cap. 3.
the first and second Admonition avoid: knowing that he, that is such an one,
is subverted and sins, being condemned by his own Judgment. 2. It is
confessed by both parts, that only a true Roman Catholic can be saved, as was
declared above in page 40. 41. 42. and 43. as Doctor King Bishop of London,
proves out of your own learned men and writers: and clear it is, that he
that holds any Heresy, cannot be a true Roman Catholic, for that the Names,
and Natures of the things are repugnant, and consequently, if any Protestant of
the English Church does hold any one confessed Heresy, he cannot be saved:
Now the cited Doctors have evidently shown and proved; The now Church of
England holds many Heresies, wherefore it cannot be the true Church, and
consequently, those dying in that Church and Religion, can not be saved. Doctor
Fulk saying those learned Fathers, Epiphanius, Augustine, and Hierome, were
deceived, and that Vigilantius the Heretics Opinion was sound, is a weak
ground to rely upon in the present Doctrine, and points of Faith, and none but a
madd man or in a fury of blind zeal will give him creditt against those most
holy, and learned Fathers. This is a high and dangerous point, Sall you had
need look well unto it.

The third Advertisment.
A dissension in Fundamental points, and Articles being between Protestants,
they must hold on another for Heretics, Ergo Sall if he minds his Salvation,
will part from that Church.
IN the true Church the believers in all Countries, and places, agree in all
Articles of Faith, as it is in the Roman Catholic Church, and as it was in the
Time of the Apostles as this Text signify's, And the multitud of the believers
Actor. Cap. 4. Irinaeus c. 1. l. 1.
had one heart and one Soul; Saint Irinaeus excellently teaches this. Quam
accepit Praedication^m and fidem (Ecclesia) diligenter custodit, quasi unam
domum inhabitans, similiter credit, quasi unam animam habens, and unum co^, and
consonanter haec praedicat, and docet, and tradit quasi unum possidens cor.
That is: The Church keeps diligently the Faith and preaching she received, as
if the whole Church were dwelling in one House; she likewise believes, as if
all the believers had but one Soul, and one heart, and she preaches, and
teaches, and delivers all points of Faith, as if all the believers had but
one mouth. Can this be said of the English Church? Noe, but all is truly
verifyed of the Roman Catholic Church. Saint Cyprian does likewise confirm
this Unity of belief in the Church. Exordium (Ecclesiae) S. Cypr. de Vnitate
Ecclesiae.
ab unitate profisiscitur, primatus Petro datur, ut una Christi Ecclaesia and
Cathedra una, Monstretur. That is: The beginning of the Church proceeds from
Unity and concord, primacy is given Peter, that the Church of Christ may be
proved to be one, and the Chair one. Let Saint Paul's Words give undeniable
weight and creditt to what is said. One To the Ephesians cap. 4.
Body, (says the Apostle) and one Spirit: as you are called in hope of your
Vocation. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. One God, and Father of all, which
is over all, and by all, and in all us.

The Devines of England would feign persuade us there is noe contention, or
difference in Fundamental Points, or Articles of Faith between Protestants, as
for example between Lutherans and Calvinists, so teaches Docter Charke,
saying in his reply to the defense of the Censure, that in Principal points of
Faith, the Lutherans, and Calvinists agree, and are brethren. And Doctor
Whitaker signify's the same, saying: we reverence Luther as a Father, and the
Lutherans, and Zwinglians our very dear Brethren in Christ. See above page
83. This he would not say, if he held they disagree'd in Principal points of
belief. But the matter is otherwise, as will appear to those will examine the
great contentions between Lutherans and Zwinglians.

Luther holds, the Zwinglians for Heretics being Sacramentarians (the same
Judgment he gives of Calvinists) saying of them: Hereticos serio Censemus,
and alienos ab Ecclesia Dei etc. That is: We do seriously censure them for
Luther contra Artic. Lovan. These. 27.
Heretics, and aliens from the Church of God. As also he affirms that
their first Author Zwinglius, Latro mortuus est. That he dyed a thief, and
in his Judgment was damned. Which Judgment he says, ( Christ does command us
to pronounce upon such as deny him in this life as Zwinglians did (in denying
the Real-Presence) of whom he says further, that he held him not in the
number of Christians, Quia totum Christum amiserat, for that (thereby) he had
lost Christ all together. (And furthermore he said that he held said
Zwinglius his books, and Doctrine for nothing else but for venenum tartarei
daemonis. That is: The poison of the Devil of hell: and that he would never
have more conversation, either with him, or with those of his sect* how does
Chark tell us that Lutherans and Zwinglians are brethren in Christ agreeing in
fundamental points of Doctrine, seeing Luther holds all Zwinglians, and
Calvinists Heretics, for denying the Real-Presens, and damned Souls, and
their Doctrine for poison of the Devil?

Surely the Protestants of England, if they hold Luther for a holy man, and
true Doctor, and reverence him for a Father, have great cause to tremble and
fear seeing he holds them all for Heretics in a fundamental Article of
Faith, (that of the Real-presence) whose Faith in this point is that of
Zwinglius, censured as was now said for an Heresy.

There are other p^incipall points of Religion in which Lutherans differ from
Calvinists. Franciscus Stancarus a Stanca. Lib. contra Calvin. N. 4.
famous Protestant Preacher in Polonia, has particularly written against
Calvin. Cave Christian Lector, etc. That is: Beware Christian Reader of the
Books of Calvin, especially in the Articles about the Blessed Trinity,
Incarnation of Christ, and his Mediation, about the Sacrament of Baptism, and
Predestination: Continent enim Doctrinam impiam, and blasphemias Arianas. That
is: For that they contain impious Doctrine, and Arian Blasphemies.

Another famous Protestant writer of the Lutheran party, called Conradus
Conradus de Theol. Calrin. Lib. 1. Art. 18
Schlusselburgius writes thus: Albeit (says he) in the beginning, the
Controversy of the Sacramentaryes was only about one Article, yet by their
naughty Disputations, the Calvinistes are passed now so far, as they have
brought into doubt, noe small number of chief Articles of Christian Faith: for
now is the Contention between us and them, of the Omnipotency of God, of the
Union personal of two Natures in Christ, de Comunicatione Idiomatum, of the
Comunication of Names in the Blessed Trinity, of the glorious Body of Christ,
of his Assention into heaven, of the differrence of Sacraments, of the old and
new Testament, of the force and efficacy of Baptism, of the prerogative of
Infants borne of Infidels, of the supper of our Lord, of Predestination, etc.
Noe man will deny these to be great Controversyes, and Articles of Religion, in
all which the Lutherans, and Calvinists disagree, and how then will Charke
prove them to agree in fundamental points of Religion as Brethren in Christ?

The said Conradus has written three whole Books principally to prove this
point, that Lutherans and Sacramentaryes, but especially Calvinistes are
Irreconsilable in the very chief Controversyes of Religion. And in his second
Book, and thirteenth Article he has these Words: Nos negamus, inter nos and
Calvinistas in Doctrinae fundamento esse consensum: That is: We deny that
there is betwixt us and Calvinistes any consent, or agreement in fundamental
points of Doctrine. And he further in the very Title of his Book, affirms
his chief purpose to be, to demonstrate to the eye as in a Table, that the
Calvinistes (De nullo fere Christianae sidei Articulo Recte sentiunt) have noe
right Faith, almost in any one Article of Christian Religion.

Likewise one Samuel Huberinus writ Samuel Hube rinus in Antith.
a Book, whose Title was, Antithesis Lutheranae and Calvinisticae Doctrinae in
praecipuis fidei Articulis. That is: The Contradiction or contrariety between
Lutheran and Calvinian Doctrine in the principal Articles of Faith. Yet was
this Huberinus a zealous Protestant.

I will conclud with the Judgment of Doctor Aegidius Hunnius public Reader of
Divinity in the Lutheran University of Wittembergh, of Calvin's writing upon the
Scriptures, his Book was printed in the same place Anno Domini 1594. In the
beginning of his Book he has this Assertion, that he will show most clearly,
and evidently:

Quod, Ioannes Calvinus Illustrissima Scripturae sacrae loca and Testimonia de
gloriosa Trinitate, Deitate Christi, and Spiritus Sancti, in primis autem
vaticinia Prophetarum, de adventu Messiae, nativitate ejus, Passione,
Resurrectione, Ascensione in caelos, sessione ad dexteram Dei detestandum in
modum corrumpere non exhorruit. That is: That John Calvin in his commentarys
upon the bible, was not afraid to corrupt most detestably, the most clearest
places, and testimonys of holy Scripture concerning the Glorious Trinity, the
Godhead of Christ, and of the Holy Ghost, and Principally, the forretellings
of Prophets, of the coming of the Messiah, his nativity, passion, Resurection,
Ascension into heaven, and his sitting at the right hand of God. All which
Articles (says this Doctor) does Calvin wilfully corrupt in his expositions,
in the favor of Jews, Arians, and other such enemies of Christ: which he
proves by alleging above forty, or fifty places, citing Calvin's own words,
and commentaryes thereupon, so clearly, and perspicuously, against sense, and
expositions of all holy Fathers, that if his commentaryes therein were to be
admitted, those four named points, or Articles of Christian Religion can not
be defended, against the force and adversaryes of Christ's name.

And is not this a brotherly agreement between Lutherans and Calvinistes in
Principal points and misteryes of Religion? but the Lutherans have the best of
it, for whereas Luther and his followers to this day condemn the Calvinists as
Heretics, (especially for not believing the Body of Christ to be realy and
substantially present in the Sacrament of the Altar) the Protestants of England
(who are Calvinists and deny the Real-presence) hold Luther for a holy man, and
their Father, and hold all the Lutherans their very dear brethren in
Christ, as Doctor Whitaker above cited does aver.

To leave Germany, and to speak of the Professors of Protestanisme in England,
and Scotland, do not many of them entertain quarrels, and falings-out among
themselves, about Principal Articles of Religion? do not the greatest part by
much of the Protestants in England, hold the King is supreme head of the
Church? all of one opinion with the Bishops maintain this as an Article of
Religion in that Protestant Church, (but the Protestants of Geneva and all
depending upon their Doctrine, in France and elsewhere, do not hold this Kingly
supremacy for an Article of Faith) and are not Catholics punished by Law, and
somtymes put to death for denying this supremasy* which would be a mere
murdering of them, and the greatest cruelty in the World, if those that put
them to death did not hold that supremecy to be an Article of Faith.

Now if you will be pleased to demand what those Protestants in England, and
Scotland (caled Presbiterians, or Puritans) say to this Article, they flattly
deny this supremacy to be an Article of Faith, though none of them did ever
suffer death for denying the same, nay, they are esteemed (not with standing
their opinion in this) to be of the Protestants communion.

A gain all Protestants that follow the Bishops hold the dignity, and
superiority of Archbishops, and Bishops to be agrecable to Gods word, and as
the Devines speak de Iure Devino, and what say the Presbiterians to this? By
their Champion Martin Mar-Prelate, and his mutenous moke-bates that band under
his colors cry all of them in the Name of the Lord, (as Thomas Rogers does
attest) That the calling of Bishops is In his Sermon printed by John windet
1590. pa. 13.
unlawful, that they be Ministers of Antichrist, worss then Friars, and Monks
Devils Bishops, and Devils In-carnate.

Sall you must grant me these dissentions between Protestants, and Protestants
in England and Scotland about the Kings supremacy, and the Order, and Dignity
of Bishops are not Triueall, but Fundamental, and they have been now many
years contending in their Writings and Conferrences, and still are about these
points, and others that are the very sinews, and Soul of their Religion, in
endless quarrels, and Contensions. If that were my Business, I could set
down many and great differrences, quarells, and contensions between these two
kind of Protestants.

In this place I think it pertinent to say something particularly of the
Protestants called Presbiterians, who were never by any act of Parliament (that
we could hear of) proscribed from the Communion of the Protestants, that
stick to the Religion of the King and the Bishops.

Impiety, Fury, and Rebellion gave beginning to this Sect and Religion in
Scotland (as has been above said in Page 164. and 165.) They had two
Reformations, the first was begun by John Knox an Apostata Priest, and though
his Reformation was ungodly and unreasonable, the second was far more
unreasonable and ungodly. A Presbiterian that was converted to the Catholic
Faith, describes the Presbiterian Piety in this kind.

There was among us a pretext of Piety, but we had not the substance of it:
we had indeed much preaching, praying, fasting and such like exercises; but
our long preachings, were nothing but continual praises of the Covenant, the
solemn League, which they cried up to the heavens; butt we omitted (as our
Savior observed of the Pharisees) the weighty Matters of the Law, as Judgment,
Mercy, and Faith: Our Ministers told us we were the happiest People of the
World, for they said, we only of all Nations had the honor to be Covenanters
with God, and that we had the truth of the Gospel in greater purity then
Geneva it self, that we had so clear a light, that the like had not shined
to any Nation since the times of the Apostles, yea one, who was esteemed a
principal Apostle among us, did not stick to say in the pulpitt (amidst the
many Miserys, Confusions, and Troubles, which then lay upon this Church, and
Nation) That the Angels and Saints of heaven, if they could leave the sight of
God, would be glad, to come down and see, the admirable beauty of the
Presbiterian Church of Scottland.

So far this new Catholic. And was not this ridiculous preacher, with the
beauty of his Scottish Kirck, a great Hipocrite and Pharisie?

It was much observed, that shortly after solemn fastes of Presbiterians, the
country and state was allways sure of some unhappy claps, the puritan fast was
still fatal, and ordinarily a preparation to some violence, or evil work that
was intended; this made many understand, what Queen Mary Stuart meant by that
famous saying. That she was as much afraid of a fast of the Ministers, as of
an Army of Soldiers; for experience taught her, that those fasts were
prognostic signs of ensuing tempests: their long prayers also did not prove
them to be Saints, more then the like did sanctify the Pharasyes: they bragged
much of the spirit, but showed noe fruits thereof, these be the fruits of
the spirit which Saint Paul recounts to the Galatians. The fruit of Ad Galat.
cap. 5.
the spirit (says he) is love, joy, peace, long suffering, Gentelnesse,
goodness, Faith, meekness etc.

This second Presbiterian ^eformation began with a prodigious abolishment of
all holy things: Mala arbor, Malos fructus faci^.

1. They condemned and cast down Episcopacy, (this they do whersoever they
have power) quite contrary to the Law of God, for Episcopacy is de Iure Divino.
This order and degree they abhorred as Tyrannical and Antichristian, yet Saint
Paul writing to Timothey, says: If a man desires a Bishops Office, he
desires 1. Tim. cap. 3.
a good thing. The Apostle likewise affirms that Bishops are to Order Priests
and Judge them, wherefore he says in his Epistle to Titus: That he left Ad
Titum Cap. 1.
him in Cret to Order Priests by Cittys. By this it is plain, and evident
that the Presbiterians gainsay Saint Paul. He says the office of a Bishop is
a good work, and they say it is Tyrannical and Antichristian, wherein they
show themselves profane presumptious fellows, in seeking to distroy the
Doctrine of the Holy Ghost pronounced by the Mouth of the great Apostle; two
evils they do in this: They contradict the Oracle of God, secondly they
incur the curses threatened by the Prophet. Woe unto them, who call evil
good, and Isay. Cap. 1.
good evil.

Let us for confounding those Presbiterians cite in this Matter some of the
ancient Fathers. Saint Augustine upon that place of Saint Paul (who seeks a
Bishops Office desires a good thing) says the Apostle would show what the
Office of a Bishop is, to wit: A Name of Aug. lib. 19. deCivi. Dei. cap. 19.
Labor, and not of honor, that he may know himself not to be a Bishop, who
desires to preside, and not to profitt. Saint Hierom says: That in the
primative Church, the calling of a Bishop was the next degree to Martyrdom:
wherefore (says he) the Office of a Bishop being so Hier. Ap. Cornel. in hunc
Loc.
high, and excellent, so hard and dangerous, it was noe wonder the Apostle
required many excellent quallitys, and virtues in a Bishop to exercise
profitably his Office, which Saint Paul calls a good work. Saint Ignat. Epist.
ad Tarscens.
Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch, Disciple of the Apostles and a holy Martyr,
describes an excellent subordination of Pastors in the Church. Priests (says
he) be subject unto your Bishops, Deacons unto Priests: and you People unto
Priests and Deacons: who shall observe this comlyness of Order, I would
willingly change my Soul with theirs: and our Lord be with them for ever.

2. The second comely work of the Presbiterians Reformation, was to lay a side
the Lords prayer, and to put it out of use and creditt, and all set Prayers:
was not this a horrible Tentation of the Devil? What more sublime, holy, and
devine, then our Lords Prayer? Christ made this Prayer, the Scripture contains
it, our Savior taught his Disciples to say it: when you pray (said Christ) say
Father hallowed Luke cap. 11.
be thy Name. Children learn this Prayer sucking their Mothers Breast. The
Church of God has ever esteemed and practiced it, wherefore th'Abollishment of
the Lords Prayer must come Tert. lib. de oration.
from the Devil, there is noe way of excusing it. This Prayer is short,
devine, and substantial, according to that of Tertulian. Our Lords Prayer is
short in words, but large in sense.

The Waldenses defended an error just Gualter Chron. Saecul. cap. 11. de Wal.
Errore.
conttary to this of the Presbiterians, for they maintained noe other Prayer
should be said, noe other form to be admitted but this of the Lords Prayer,
this had some color of Piety, and special respect done to that devine Prayer,
but to abollish it, as the Presbi ex^ans have done, is a most execrable
Impiety) Could a Christian man believe there would be Christians found on
Earth, that would contemn this devine Prayer (instituted by Christ Jesus, and
commanded to be said, commended by the holy Fathers, and practiced by the
whole Church time out of memory) and speak contumeliovsly against the use of
it? A great Rabbin and Preacher of the Covenant called publicly the use of
saying often the Lords Prayer a Papisticall Charm, and another Minister in
Galloway did Glory that he had bannished The* impious words of a Minister.
out of his Parish two Idols, to wit: Our Father which etc. And God of Glory,
and peace etc. A short Grace, that was said ordinarily after meat, but a
Layman answered the impudent Minister in these Words: If you have bannished
these two, which you call Idols, I fear you will bring in worss Idols in
their place.

O God! thy Patience is great with these profane wicked men, the seed of
Canaan, Qui claudunt ora Laudantium te. And that forbid men to speak to your
devine Majesty in a Prayer made by your Son Jesus, and commanded by him to
be said by all.

3. From Laying aside the Lords Prayer, the Presbiterians go a stepp farther
in their holy Reformation, what, think you, do they? a wicked business. They
abollish that hymn of praising God usually said in the end of each Psalm:
(Glory to the Father, the son, and Holy Ghost. etc.) even by the Protestants
themselves singing the Psalms, which hymn doubtless had its beginning out of
holy Scripture as this passage of Saint John may testifye, And (says the
Saint) A voice came out from Apocal. cap. 19. v. 19.
the throne, saying: say prays to our God all ye his servants: and you that
fear him, little and great. The Presbiterians in their hott zeal contradict
Saint John and hinder little, and great to sing this mellodious hymn of praise
to the Holy Trinity: can any thing be more impious, then men acknowledging the
Mystery of the Blessed Trinity (If Presbiterians do acknowledge it) to abollish
this divine Hymn, whereby the Trinity is glorified. It happened after they had
agreed upon this ungodly Reformation, that the People in the Church singing the
Psalms, (and knowing nothing of the determination they had made) coming to the
end of a Psalm, said, as they were wont to do, Glory to the Father, to the
Son, and to the Holy Ghost, etc. The Presbitertan Minister hearing them,
cried out in a fury, noe less ridiculously, then scandelously, Noe more Glory
to the Father, noe more Glory to the Father, etc. Was ever the like heard among
Christians?

The Arians, who denied the Divinity of Christ, and that he was equal to his
Father, did mainly strive to change and pervert this Hymn, for as they had
changed the form of Baptism by saying: I Baptize thee in the Name of the
Father, by the Son, in the Holy Ghost; Baron. Tom. 3. Anno 323. N. 174.
So also they corrupted this Hymn of Glorification by singing: Glory to the
Father, by the Son, in the Holy Ghost. But the great Saint Basile shows how
Basil. ad Amphilich. dispute. 5.
the Hymn of Glorification was used from the time of the Apostles; for when
the Sacrament of Baptism was administered by the Priest when he said: I
baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost; The faithful present, answered; Glory be to the Father, to the Son,
and to the Holy Ghost: The Holy Counsel of Ni^e was pleased to add to the said
Hymn, this Appendix: As it was in the beginning, and now, and ever shall be,
World without end, Amen. Which clause appears in my Iudgment^ like a Prophesy,
serving not only for the Confusion of the Arians, but also of the
Presbiterians.

4. What more holy things did remain in the Church to be reformed by the
Presbiterian congregation? The Creed stood in their way, they would have it
discredited, and not to be esteemed or caled Apostolicale: will you hear
these holy men speak in their own Cathechisme. Albe it (say they) the
substance of the Doctrine comprised Catebhisme. West. infine.
in the abridgment. commonly called the Apostles Creed be fully set forth in
each of the Cathechismes, so as there is noe necessity of incerting the Creed
it self. Yet it is here anexed, not as though it were composed by the Apostles.

What new masters or rather Monsters are these? What ungodly pestiferrous
Doctrine is this? to say, and teach the Creed is a human Collection, and not
made by the Apostles: this they declared, as was said, and after such
Declaration they did not say it, neither did they require it to be said any
more of others (as the custom was formerly) at Babtising infants: all this
they did to put the Creed out of Estimation, and use; now this Innovation
calling the Creed in question, the believers thereafter could be sure of
nothing: Thus the Presbyterians indeavered to dash the Authority of the Cymbol
the principal foundation of Religion. O abomination of furious zealots that
would change the Apostolical Creed, which was taught for such, and so
believed, and esteemed in all ages, by the consent of all Christian Nations,
and said daily by all the Servants of God young and old.

But against the Impiety of those men, we have the Authority and Testimony of
all the ancient Fathers, for the Credit and Estimation of the Creed.

Cardinal Barronius in the first tome of Baron. Tom. 1. Annal. an. 44. N. 15.
seq.
his Annals does show, by the Testimony of the holy and ancient Fathers, that
the Creed was composed by the holy Apostles, a little before they were to part,
and go into several Countries to preach the Gospel unto the Gentiles: to the
end there might be, a certain, short, clear rule of Faith, in which they all
agreed, wherein they were to instruct all persons, and by which, as by a
certain badge, all Christians might be known.

Be pleased now to hear the Fathers speak of the Symbol. Saint Ambrose says:
Let us believe the Symbol S. Amb. Sermon. 18. and Epist. 81.
of the Apostles, which the Roman Church does ever preserve, and keep
inviolate. Saint Hierom says: The Symbol of our Faith, and hope, which was
delivered by the Apostles, is not written in Paper or Ink, but in the fleshly
Tables of the heart. Saint Augustine speaks thus: The comprehension Aug. Sermon.
42. de trad.
and perfection of our Faith is the Creed. It is simple (says he) short and
full. That its simplicity might serve the rudeness; its shortness the Memory;
And its fullness the Instruction of the hearers. Else where he says, this is
a Symboll brief in words, but large in Misteryes, for whatsoever is declared in
the Scriptures, or foretold by the Prophets, etc. is contained, and briefly
confessed in it. To show the excellency of the Creed, which is therefore to be
often said, Saint Augustine, speaks thus: Render Aug. homil. fortitu.
your Symboll, render it unto the Lord; be not weary to rehearse it: the
repitition of it is good, least forgetfullness creep one thee, do not say: I
said it yesternight, I said it to day, I say it every day, I have it well.
Remember thy Faith: Behold thy self: let thy Creed be a mirror unto the,
there see thy self if thou believe all, that thou confessest thy self to
believe, and rejoice daily in thy Faith. Let it be thy Riches, the daily
apparel of thy Soul. Do you not cloth your self when you rise? So by
remembering thy Creed, cloth thy Soul, least per-adventure forgetfullness make
it naked. Saint Ambrose cales this the Seal of our Ambr. lib. 3. de Virgin.
Tom. 4.
heart, which we ought daily to review; and the Watchword of a Christian which
should be in a readiness, in all dangers. We have the Creed by an assured
Tradition and Testimony of the Church, which Saint Augustine holds of noe less
certainty then the Scriptures, as is signified by these words. I would not have
believed (says the Saint) Aug. Cont. Epist. fund. Cap. 5.
the Gospel, unless the Authority of the Catholic Church had moved me, etc.
And that Authority being once weakened, neither can I believe the Gospel.

Seeing these Presbiterians have abollished the Authority of the Cr^ed, saying
it is not Apostolical, what in Gods-name have these Doctors given to the
People in place of the Symboll? The holy Covenant, and as the Creed is denied
by these men to be Apostolical, so is the Covenant cried up to be Divine, for
they call it Gods Covenant and the Confession of the Scottish Kirck.

This was truly a rare exchange; to deny the Creed to be Apostolic, and to
cry up the Covenant to be devine. To Rob us of a most ancient, clear, brief,
positive, sacred Confession of Faith made by the holy Apostles, famous in all
ages, and Universally received throughout the whole world, full of great
Misteryes, and divine Expressions: and to give us, in place, of it, a new,
long, obscure negative Confession, or rather noe Confession of Faith, full of
terrible oaths, Execrations, and Combinations, devised by some few
discontented heads, and by cunning and force, obtruded upon the Nation; much
suspected at the beginning, to be nothing but a mere pretense of Religion; as
it was notoriously known to be a humane Invention; and as it is now at length,
after all its disguises, manifested for such unto the World. It Is good fame
has not lasted long, neither at home nor a broad. It got some footing in
England, by cunning and worldly interest; but these soon failing, it was
quickly detected, and rejected. The Christian Mediator says to this purpose.
That the last Reformation Christ. Mod. page 2.
settled with so solemn a Covenant, and carried on with so furious a zeal,
is already, by better lights discovered, to be merely humane, and therefore
deservedly laid aside. These are the words of the converted Presbyterian.

Sall I would now feign know, what is your Judgment of these kind of
Protestants? perhaps you will say they are noe Protestants, but Geneva, the
acknowledged school of English and Scottish Protestants will tell you, that
Presbiterians are the purest Protestants of all; and for ought I could ever
learn, the Church of England held, and holds them so (according to Doctor
Whitakers manner of speaking.) Tell me Sall have you ever seen any act of
Parliament in England declaring that Presbiterians are not Protestants, or any
penal laws enacted against them? noe such thing: though they differ (as was
said) from the Episcopal, or Royal Protestants in fundamental points of
Religion, that of the order and dignity of Episcopacy, which they hold to be
Antichristian and Tyranicall, and noe way de Iure Divino. The other of the
kings supremacy in Spiritualibus, which they flatly deny; they also differ
from the Kings Protestants in abollishing the Lords prayer, and the Hymn of
Glorification to the B. Trinity, and in denying the Greed to be Apostolical,
which are flatt Heresies: and for all these Impietyes, and abominations, there
are not (that I hear of) any Laws made in Parliament for punishing these
Presbiterians. Noe: but all the lightning, thunder, and tempest of the Bishops
and that kind of Protestants and of the Presbiterians likewise does fall upon
the poor Catholics: our Religion is made treason, to own the Pope head of the
Church in Spiritualibus, (as realy he is) is punished with death, to worship
Images superstition, to invocate the Angels and Saints Idolatry, we suffer
disgrace in Court and Country, we suffer the loss of livings, we suffer
Imprisonments, and death it self: the Extirpation of our Faith is desired,
sought, and put in Execution, and men receive pleasure (which is inhumane and
cruel) in our Miserye and Destruction, and all these Afflictions fale upon us
soly for the hatred men have to Religion, What comfort can we find in these
Extremityes? That only (and that is enough) which our Savior has promised to
his Servants, Beati qui persecutionem patiuntur Math. Cap. 4.
propter Iustitiam: quoniam ipsorum est Regnum Caelorum. That is: Blessed are
they that suffer Persecution for Justice: for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.
Sall we hear, you have preached in July (1674.) before the Lord Lieutenant
and State in ChristChurch in Dublin a long premeditated Sermon, for Justifying
your departure from the Romish Communion, and you then told your Auditors, that
you had found in the Romish Church three Abominations, to wit, Idolatry,
Impiety, and Tyranny, and those you called Abominationem desolationes stantem
in loco Sancto. And that therefore according to our Saviors Admonition, you
departed from that Congregation. But I tell you, you have forged a pernicious
Calumny and Imposture, in charging the Church of Rome, the Mother of all
Churches with Idolatry, Impiety, and Tyranny. And I further say my Opinion,
that an Idol (which is found in all your Congregations) the pride of the private
Spirit, (that Spirit Doctor Whitaker, see Pagina 17. discribed) made you
charge the Church of Rome with Idolatry.

Sir your zeal in your new Religion is so furious that you have rendered your
self at present incapable of Council and all advice, but in time you may
become colder: ( Non est abrevitae manus Domini.) And think better of what you
have done, however for the true love I have for you, and especially for your
Soul, which is the maine and principal part ought to be taken care for, I
heartily pray you, what kind of thing is Parliament Religion? a ssippery, and
changable Religion, which is thus declared.

For Satisfying King Henry the eight, The Parliament changed some Articles of
Faith; as soon as he died they changed that Faith into Zwinglianisme, to
comply with the Protector Summerset young King Edward the sixth his Uncle;
within two or three years after, they changed Zwinglianisme; into Calvinisme,
and at the suit of Calvin, reformed the Liturgy accordingly: After the young
Kings death, they returned with good Queen Mary to the old Faith, and by new
acts abolished those acts they had lately made before against Catholic
Religion; with Queen Elizabeth, they restored again the new Religion with some
Alterations; when King James succeeded they changed the translations of
Scripture and other things; In King Charles the firsts time, Prelatick
Protestancy, was pulled down by Presbitery, and this by IndePendency, and the
last pulled down quite Kingly Authority; and took of the good Kings head from
his Body: Prelatick Protestancy being restored by King Charles the second, the
forms of Ordination (where upon depends the validity of the Protestant
Ministry, Church, and Sacraments,) being not thought sufficient, were amended,
and are now changed into more Catholic Forms adding to the Forms the words,
Priest, and Bishop, which has quite discredited their Character of
Priesthood, and Episcopacy, for those two Words being held by them as
Essential in these two Forms, the former orders given without these Words,
must have been invalid, and in like manner all things in their Ministry, that
depends upon Ordination, are uncertain, and doubtful, for if the Church of
England has acknowledged to have erred in a thing of so great importance, as
the Forms of Ordination, what reason can it have in not erring in all the rest?
In a word Protestants, in the Kingdom of England in one age, have made more
changes of Religions, then Mahometans in the ten ages they have continued.

What I have said being duly examined, tell me Sall, is not Protestant
Religion slippery and changable, and consider well what shall become of you in
the sad exchange you have made.

The fourth Advertisment.
Learned Protestants of the Church of England do confess, that English, and
Irish Pagans (venerable Beda called them Slaves of Idols) were converted to
Christian Faith, by men sent from the Popes of Rome, holy men that wrought
Miracles in those Conversions.
IF any shall demand to what end do I make Mention of these Protestant
Authors, what do I infer from their Testimoneys? I make this Illation, that
said Authors did attest the Conversion of those Pagans, to have been made, by
those sent from Rome to a true and saving Faith, and for this Verity, there are
two convincing reasons; The first, that the Veracity of God was herein
concerned, which never confirmed by Miracles a false Faith: The second, that
the Goodness of God would not have Pagans brought from Idolatry, to Heresy, or
to such a Religion, wherein they would be as certainly damned as in Idolatry
to Judge this of the goodness of God were a horrible Blasphemy, for it were noe
less then to cale him a cheat.

Sall examine now seriously what Faith that was, the Saints Fugatius, and
Damianus sent from Pope Eleutherious taught to the Pagans of England, when King
Lucius (the first Christian King (his Queen, and thousands more were converted?
what the Faith, which Saint Augustine the Benedictin Monk, sent from S. Gregory
Pope denounced to the Saxon Pagans? In what Faith did S. Parrick, sent from
Pope Celestinus instruct the Idolaters of Ireland? doubtless you will confess
it was the same Faith, then professed in Rome, and by all the People that
obeyed the Pope: now all these professed as Articles of Faith, the
Real-Presence in the Eucharist, the Invocation of Angels and Saints, the seven
Sacraments, the Sacrifice of the Mass, worship of Images and the like; And
aforesaid Saints Fugatious, Damianus, etc. delivered them for such, to the
Pagans of both the Nations, they likewise wrought Miracles, for proving the
truth of the Religion they taught, and the Pagans seeing those Miracles,
believed they were sent from God. They were indeed sent to those Idalaters, as
Moses, Elias, and others Prophets to the People of Israel, and as the Apostles
to the Gentiles doing wonders In Nomine and Virtute Dei.

I observe in this place that the Religion the S S. Fugatious, Damianus,
Patrick, and Augustine, preached to the Pagans of these countries, was not the
Faith now Professed by Sall and the Congregation of the now English Church,
ergo the Protestant Authors attesting the verity of the Religion taught by
Fugatious and the rest, and confirmed by Miracles, give Testimony against
their own Religion, (I mean the Protestant,) My last illation from those
Protestant Authors and against their own Religion, and for mine, is that Sall
has cause to fear his own Damnation for having deserted the true Faith,
those holy men sent from Rome denounced to the Infidels, Imbraceing a new
Religion opposite to the ancient and orthodox.

The names of the Protestant Authors, Devines, and Historians, testifying the
Conversion of England and Ireland, from Idolatry by the aforesaid Saints sent
from Rome.

1. Abbots pretended Archbishop of Canterbury, that writ against Bellarmin.

2. Bale, pretended Bishop of Ossory in Ireland, reckened among their learned
men, he writ Centurys of the writers of Britain, and said of himself he had
read the Historys, and Chronicles almost of all Antiquitye.

3. Bilson, pretended Bishop of Winchester, esteemed a learned writer.

4. Caius, Doctor of Physic so well seen in Antiquity, as an Oxonian Orator
termed him the Antiquary.

5. Camden, well known for his Description of Britany an excellent Antiquary.

6. Couper, pretended Bishop of Lincoln, and after of Winchester, well known
for his Dixionary, and his Chronicle.

7. Dangerous positioner, some say it was D. Banckrofte, pretended ArchBishop
of Canterbury, others say it was Doctor Sutclife.

8. Fox, most famous amongst Protestants for his acts and monuments of their
Martyrs.

9. Fulk, Doctor of Divinity, and a great writer against Catholics.

10. Godwin, a devine Son to Godwin, pretended Bishop of Bath.

11. Holinshed, notorious for his great Chronicle, and mosT earnest against
Catholics.

12. Humphery, Doctor of Divinity, and the Queens Reader thereof in Oxford.

13. Jewel, so famous and known to Protestants, as I need say nothing of him.

14. Reynolds, Doctor of Divinity famous with Protestants.

15. Stow, well known for his Chronicle, and other his writings of Antiquity.

16. Sutelife, Doctor of Divinity, and Dean of Exetor, and a great writer
against Catholics.

17. Surueyer, so I call the unnamed Author of the Survey of the pretended
holy Discipline.

18. Whitaker, Doctor and Professor of Divinity, and a great writer against
Catholics, very famous in the English Church, termed by some, a worthy
learned man, by others a Godly learned man. These, and thus esteemed are the
Protestant writers that give Testimony of the Conversions of England by Saint
Augustine, and other Saints.

It is therefore agreed upon by Catholic and Protestant writers, that King
Luctus sent to Pope Eleutherius two holy men, Elvanus of Avalonia, and
Medwinus, together with these came commissionated from said Pope, two other
holy men, Fugatius and Damianus, who baptized the King, and Queen, and those of
their Family and many more that embraced the Christian Faith.

Authors, Catholic, and Protestant style these Legates of Pope Eleutherius
Prelatos, and Episcopos, for without such Authority, and Character they could
not erect. Bishoprics, consecrate Churches dispense Orders and the like; this
conversion was made, and the King, and Queen baptized anno Domini 183. to which
Conversion agrees. Fox, Jewel, Godwin, Abbots, Fulk, Whitaker, Sutelife,
Reynolds, Couper, Stow, Holinshed, Camden, Bale, and others.

Bale, (one that would write nothing to the Credit of Rome if not convinced
Bale Cent. 1. cap. 19.
by evident Verity) does attribute this Conversion to Pope Eleutherius, and
with him joined in this the Magdeburgenses. Of the Conversion of the Irish
Idolaters by Saint Patrick, Saint Prosper that lived at the same time gives a
clear Testimony, and after him, venerable Bede, Marianus Scotus, and others,
who affirm also that Saint Patrick dyed in the year of Christ 491. being
122. years. Paladius was indeed sent to that work before Saint Patrick, but
though he Religiously behaved himself, in that divine Function the Glory of
Converting the whole Nation from Paganism, was reserved for Saint Patrick, who
is therefore Iure merito styled Apostle of Ireland.

Let us now hear Bale (I pretermit other Protestant Authors that testify the
conversion of the Irish Idolaters) confirming the coming of Saint Patrick from
the Sea of Rome, and how he gave the light of Faith to the Irish Pagans (the
testimony taken from an Enemy, such as Bale against Catholics, is of the
greater weight and force against himself) Bale then, who usually called the Pope
Antichrist and the beast, and named the Primitive Church of England in the
time of its greatest purity, a Carnal Synagogue (as great an enemy to the Pope
as he was) speaks of Saint Patrick coming from the Pope thus.

Patrick (says he) surnamed Bale descrip. Britan. Cent. 1. fo. 250.
Magonius, who studied Divinity at Rome, sent by Pope Celestinus did preach the
Gospel to the Irish-men with incredible fervor of Spirit for forty years
together, and did convert them to the sincere Faith of Christ; he was most
excellent in Learning and Holiness, and among other Miracles, he did continue
in Prayers and Fasting, for forty days, and forty nights; founded many
Churches, healed many Sick, delivered many possessed of Devils, and raised to
life sixty that were Dead; Thus far Bale.

Behold here how John Bale confesses Saint Patrick was sent by Pope
Celistinus, and so sent, he converted the Irishmen to the sincere Faith of
Christ; what more can any man say, or more honorably of the Pope, clearly
allowing of Authority and power in him to send Doctors and missioners for
converting nations to the true Faith? In speaking of Saint Patrick he mentions
truly the virtues and duty of Apostles and preachers sent from Rome to
enlighten nations, as to fast, and pray, to found Churches, heal the sick and
work Miracles: Let Bale himself tell us if the blouddy Reformers of the Kirk
of Scotland, or himself, Peter Martyr, Buaer, and the rest, at the time of the
Innovation they made in England, did any of those holy works, done by Saint
Patrick, and such Missioners as were lawfully sent from the holy Sea into the
vineyard of our Lord? I dare challenge in this place all the multitudes of
those new men repayring (as themselves say) the house of God, to give one Saint
Patrick or Saint Augustine that fasted and prayed, healed the sick, and wrought
Miracles; I defye Bale to do this with all his studied tomes of centuries, or
Fox (esteemed by the Protestants, a most holy, grave, and pious man, and
plainly a devine man) with his great and numerous volume of Acts and Monuments
of their Ridiculous Martyrs, so Credited in England, as they have been set
in diverse of their Churches to be read by all; or delicat Calvin the great
Patriarck of Geneva with his so adored books of Institutions, or wanton Beza
Reforming forsooth the Church of France with legions and troops in set
Battles, and beseeging the Kings goodly Cytties, Guarded by two fierce Giants
in steel, the Prince of Conue and the Admiral Coligny.

As Bale has testified Saint Patricks Miracles, so do other Protestants the
Miracles of Saint Augustine; Holmshed one of these, says, King Ethelbert was
Holin in dese. Britan.
persuaded by the good example of Saint Augustine and his company, and for many
Miracles showed, to be baptized. And again he says page 602. Augustine to
prove his opinion good, wrought a Miracle by restoting to sight one of the
Saxon nation, that was blind. And Stow acknowledges the same in his Chronick.
Page 66.

Protestant Authors do likewise confess Saint Augustine was sent from the Sea
of Rome to convert the Saxons, then Pagans. Fox does affirm this in his Acts
and monuments lib. 4. Page 172. Holinshed says, Augustine was sent Helin. in
dese. Britan. Lib. 11. Cap. 7.
by Gregory to preach to English men the word of God, who were yet blind in
Pagans Superstition. And Camd. in dese. Britan. pa. 104.
Camden writes that Saint Augustine having rooted out the monsters of
heathenish superstition ingrafting Christ in English-mens minds, with most
happy success, converted them to the Faith.

Protestant writers do likewise acknowledge that 69. Catholic ArchBishops
sat upon the Chair of Canterbury. The first Saint Augustine above mentioned
(and after him ten Saints more, to wit, S. Laurence, S. Melite, S Iustus, S.
Honorius, S. Theodor, S. Dunstan, S. Anselme, S. Thomas, S. Edmund, S. Elpheg:
All these were Canonized Saints and their Memoryes are in the Roman
Martyrologe.

All these Archbishops were of the Roman Catholic Religion and Communion, all
received their Pall and Confirmation from Rome, all were Legates of the holy
Sea: One of them only, and the last of all but one Thomas Cranmer turned
Heretic, of whom we have said much before in pagina 176. 177. 178. the 169.
and last of all was the noble, Godly, learned Cardinal The great nobility rare
Learning of* Card. Poole.
Regmall Poole, Consecrated anno 1555. great and departed this Life 1558. the
same year and day that Queen Mary dyed. He was Son to Sir Richard Poor,
Cossin-german to King Henry the 8. and of Margaret Countess of Salsburie,
Daughter of George Duke of Clarence, and Brother of King Edward the 4. He was
(says Godwin a Protestant) of manifold and excellent parts, not only very
learned, which is better known then it needs many words, but also of such
modesty in behavior, and integrity of Life and Conversation, as he was of all
men both loved, and reverenced. He was by the Confession of Ridley in Fox
Edit, 1596 page 1595. A man worthy of all Humility, Reverence, and Honor, and
endued with manifold Graces of Learning and Virtue. But Bale according his
wicked bitter Spirit speaks ill of this noble Cardinal, and says: He was a
Cardinal Soldier of Antichrist, not to be Bale Cent. 8. cap. 100
commended for any Virtue by the Servants of God. And says further of this
excellent Ornament of the English Nation: That he was a horrible Beast, a
rooter out of the truth of the Gospel, a most wicked Traitor to his Country,
and prays God to confound him.

The Protestant writers do also agree with the Catholic Authors, about the
number of Kings Roman Catholics: there were of Monarchs of all England 53.
Egbert was the first Monarch of all England; William the Conqueror was the
33'th, the last, Queen Mary, and with her Welaway, an Eclips came upon the holy
Catholic Church in England.

Besides those absolute Monarchs, there were 70. and odd of the smaler Kings
Catholics, when England was divided into seven Kingdoms.

Behold Sall the happy Continuation of the Catholic Faith in England in the
Succession of 53. absolute Monarchs of that Land: many of them have been of
the most valiant, victorious, glorious, and holy Kings of Christendom. Of the
smaler Kings have been ten Saints, and 14. that forsaking their Kindoms became
Monks to live in Mortification and solitude for gaining the Kingdom of heaven,
or that went in Pilgrimage to Rome, there were also 13. Queens Nuns. You must
then Sall confess there was a holy Church and Kingdom in England in those
Catholic Times, wherein the Church of England was called Ecclesia Primogenita*
Because Lucius, King of that Land, was the first Christian King. Will you dare
then tell us (as you have preached in Dublin) that Idolatry, Impiety, and
Tyranny, dominered in the Church of Rome, (to whom the English then obeyed
with all Veneration) in those days of Joy and Sanctity? What kind of Church is
now in England (whereof you are a new member and burning zealot) I am not
willing to write, let others tell you, who can easily inform you, that the
number of your Protestant ArchBishops were few, and noe way famous, you had noe
Arondells among them, nor Pools, noe men either of Sanctity, or any great
Tallents or Learning.

The Protestant Monarchs are also easily numbered, they were but five in all:
Edward the sixth a child, a weak head to govern a Church; Queen Elizabeth a
monstrous head upon your new English Church, noe Historyes or annals will ever
tell you of a woeman; that in any land or Nation headed a Church in
Spiritualibus before this Iesabell: the third was King James a learned and wise
Prince; After him Charles the first a just and chaste King murdered by
perfidious Rebels, his head being taken away from ^his Body upon a Scaffold in
the View of the World, Coram Sole, and before his own Palace door by the hand
of an infamous Hangman: The fifth is King Charles the second now Reigning whom
God long preserve (I am certain Catholics will never do him harm, undertake
you Sall if you can, for the Protestants who distroyd his Father, God of his
goodness grant him the greatest blessing, that can befall him to, Embrace the
Roman Catholic Faith, the Religion of so many virtuous, noble, and invincible
Kings his Ancesters.

The fifth Advertisment.
I offer here certain learned Catholic Authors to be perused by Sall; likely
they came not all of them in his way.
SAll, let me for our ancient Amity entreat you to read Attento Animo the
ensuing Books, ( Comede precor Volumina ista) you will find in them, I promise
you, great Learning, strong Arguments, sound Verity, sublime Conceits, and
great Variety of Matters; but prepare your mind well for reading them
profitably, and beg humbly of God to send you from heaven Light and Fire;
Light to disperse the Clouds of Darkness your Soul's wrapped in, and Fire to
inflame your frozen Affection. Cry unto God with holy David; Cor mundum crea in
me Deus, and Spiritum rectum innova inviceribus meis.

The first Author.
THe prudentiall Balance of Religion, an excellent work, printed anno Dom.
1609.

Second Author.
THe Christian Manna, or a Treatice of the most Blessed Sacrament of the
Eucharist, written by a Catholic Devine through Occasion of Monsieur Causabons
Epistle to Cardinal Peron, printed Anno Dom. 1613.

Third Author.
CAlvinoturcismus, composed by that famous man Mr. Reynolds, once agreat
Preacher of the Protestant Church, and sharp Disputant, a fellow in one of the
Oxford Colleges, it is one of the rarest and most learned Books ever saw light
of that kind: the argument of the work is by way of Parallel, to compare the
Religion of a Calvinist and that of a Turk. This man Reading the sleights,
Shufflings, Lies, Falsifications and corruptions, of Mr. Jewel pretended
Bishop of Salsbury (one of the falsest men, that ever set pen to Paper.)
forsook the Protestant Religion, saying it could not be a saving and true
Religion, that used Falsifications, and sleights for a support of keeping it
up; he went in the year of Iubily to Rome and submitted himself with his
writings and works, to the Judges of th'Inquisition, who received with all joy
so precious a man; Father Persons the Jesuit accompanied him, came afterward
to France, there lived a holy life, and there dyed a happy Death.

4' th Author.
THe Legacy of Doctor King, Bishop of London, or his Motives for his change of
Religion, written by himself, and delivered over to a Frind in his lifetyme. A
most rational moving piece, printed Anno 1622.

5' th Author.
THree Conversions of England penned by the very virtuous Father Persons, one
of the best works ever was set out in English. All in this Book is strong: here
you will find Jewel and Fox two pillars of the English Church tottering and
cast down, and bruesed like a Dagon. Both are evidently convinced to have
been the most infamous Lyers', Shuflers, and Falsificators that ever lived of
the English Nation, or (I think) of any other.

6' th Author.
A Search made into Matters of Religion by Francis Walsingam, Deakon of the
Protestant Church, before his change to Catholic Religion; a Book full of
prudent Observations, printed ( Permissu Superiorum) Anno 1609.

7' th Author.
REdargutio Scismatis Anglicani', Authore Alexandro White, a Confutation of the
XXXIX. Articles of the Confession of England. See above page 13. 14. 15.
Printed at Lovain, Anno 1661.

8' th Author.
PRotestancy without principles, or Sectaryes unhappy fall from infallibility
to Fancy, laid forth in four Discourses by E. W. printed at Antwerp, by
Michael Cnobbaert, 1668.

This Author shows plainly to the Eye, Protestant Religion sinking down for
want of Principles, as a House laid upon a very weak Foundation; it is one of the
most learned pieces of this kind, and convincing that I ever handled.

There is another Book of the same Author, intiteled: The Infalibility of the
Roman Catholic Church and her Miracles defended against Doctor Stillingfleets
Cavills, etc. printed at Antwerp, 1674. An excellent work, the Preface thereof
is a Pearl.

Sall I pray you read with Attention these two Books, if you are able, you have
some kind of Obligation to answer the last, having denied Infallibility to the
Roman Catholic Church. I think you will find this E. W. has read as much as
you have done, if not som-what more, and that he is a subtle School-man, I
have reason to know what* mettle is in the man, and partly what in you.

9' th Author.
A Book that lately came out, styled a Treatice of Religion and Government: the
Argument (which is learnedly handled) whether Protestancy be less dangerous to
the soul, or more advantageous to the state, then the Roman Catholic
Religion. The conclusion, that Piety, and Policy are mistaken, in Promoting
Protestancy, and Persecuting Popery by penal, and Sanguinary statutes.

This man gives a perfect Anatomy of the English Church, shows clearly to the
eye the Falsifications, Iuglings, Corruptions, Shuflings, absurd lies, and
artifices of Protestant writers, and Doctors. He expounds briefly, and
soundly, the XXXIX. Articles of your English Creed, and Confession, and
declares them to be Pernicious. Finally he does as it were demonstrat the
Church of England to be without Sacraments, Priest and Sacrifice, and
consequently noe Church, and where there is noe Church, there is noe true
Religion. This Book is not Easily had, but I am ready to furnish you with one,
you will find I assure you the discourse learned and worth your reading.

Sixth Advertisment.
3. Weighty Points offered to be considered by Sall.
MOre then twenty years ago, I lighted upon a Book written by a learned
Protestant in the days of the Usurper, caled the Christian Moderator, wherein
he showed a great kindness and tenderness of heart toward us Catholics then
much afflicted, he spoke much good of us, and said we were a People of a
tender Conscience, shy in taking oaths, but Religious Observers of them once
taken, he maintained our Religion was not inconsistent with Obedience to the
Prince and Magistrate, and that the far greater part of us, were commendable
in our manners, and Conversation, and honest in our dealings, he wyp't away an
envious Callumny objected to us, to wit, that we held as a constant Doctrine in
our Schools, and Practices in our Proceedings, Fidem non esse servandam
Hereticis; which he showed to be most false out of Catholic Authors,
especially out of Paulus Layman a Jesuit. He likewise endeavored to persuade
by good Arguments, that Persecution of Religion was not lawful, nor could be
warranted by the Law of God, Law of Nature, nor the ancient Laws of the Land.
Among many good things this Author said, I took special Notice of three
remarkable Points, which I will express the best I can in my own words, having
not his Book at hand.

Primum Punctum.
He said it was observed, that Roman Catholics, who turned Protestants,
commonly became worse livers then before, great libertins, dissolute in their
manners, and careless of Salvation, especially Priests and Religious men, who
breaking their Vows, took Wives and wenshes, and ever after lived in
Sensuality and Sin, without all shame, and fear of God, giving Scandal to
all kind of men, and that many of them came to an Obduration of heart, and died
in Despair.

I will give you here a true and lamentable Narration of two fearful Examples
in this kind of two Apostata's Priests, that married and had Children, whom I
knew very well. One of them having studied in the University of Salama^^a, was
made Priest in Spain, had a rich Benefice in those parts I lived in, but was
borne in the Province of Sall, he was sufficiently learned, and audatious in
the highest degree, and had sometimes preached before the State in Dubblin as
latly Sall has done. In his Conversation he was a mere Publican, and most
vain, lying, vapering, insolent debaust, and Drunkenest Companion that was
known in those parts. As soon as the Rebellion began in England he bid a Deiu
to his Loyalty, went to England, and stuck to those then in Rebellion, thinking
thereby to make a great Fortune, came over with Crumwell, and was a mere
scourge, and plague to the Catholic Clergy, bringing Soldiers and wicked men
to the Houses of all the Priests, he knew: Infine he dyed of the plague in a
Ditch deserted of all of both Religions crying (as they say) for a Priest, but
found none.

The other was a homebred man native of our own parts, unlearned but witty,
he had been in the Order of Priesthood when he died 70. years, (they said
he was a Queen Mary Priest.) I came to him upon his dying-bed in November
1639. and did my best to bring him to a true belief, and used to that effect,
obliging terms as I conceived, I earnestly desired him to make a sound Act of
Contrition and confess his sins penitently for reconciling himself to God, I
told him he was not taken for an Heretic, but for one that wilfully went out
of the Church, and forsook his Master, (not for fear as Peeter did) but to
live with a woeman in Lust and Sacrilege, and to enjoy the pleasures, and
commodityes of the World; notwithstanding all this, I told him I would engage
my Soul under God for his Salvation, if he would then turn to God and true
Faith with a true Repentance for his sins, and have hearty Contrition: I
prayed him to think on the good thief, that lived wickedly until his last
Hour, and yet when he said, even then, with repentance and love: Domine
memento mei dum veneris in Regnum tuum, he heard that comfortable voice of
merciful Jesus, Hodie mecum eris in Paradiso. I did all I was able to do, and
wept bitter tears to see if I could gain this Soul, and peerce his stony
heart, but all in Vain, for he gave me noe good answer, but very hard words,
and called me Hypocrit and what not; his words did not trouble me, but the
dispairing state of the man's Soul gave me great Affliction of mind. At
length I told him in severe words, that I would arise against him in the day of
Judgment to give Testimony of his rejecting Gods Grace offered him at that time
for saving his Soul; what was the end of my sincere Exhortation, Prayers, and
Tears? the man roaring out and speaking impious words, turned his face to the
Wale, and even in that Instant lost his wits. God knows with how sad a heart I
parted from him; one of his Daughters, a Catholic that lived with him, came to
me weeping, and crying: O Reverend Father, what of my Father, will he come
of? I have seen him (said she) often saying his Canonical Hours, and did use
to hide his Breviary in a secret place, I replied, your Father has wilfully
violated his holy Vows, he has lived in Sin and Sacrilege above 64.
years, he has deserted God and all Godliness, and God has (I may well fear
it) abandoned him in this time of his departure out of the world. The miserable
man dyed within some Hours after sencless, and this was his end.

Think well Sall if it is not your near concern to consider seriously and
deeply of the evil end of these two wicked Apostata's.

Secundum Punctum.
THis Author further said it was observed that Protestants who embraced the
Catholic Faith, made change of lives and manners for the better, that they
mortified their Bodies, Fasted and Prayed, were meek, humble, continent, and
charitable, especially those, that took Priesthood became rare examples of
Piety, and all kind of Virtue, and so lived in the fear of God, and in so
great Charity toward all men, that Catholics took great Joy and delight in
their Conversation, and glorified God in their Conversion, and Protestants in
their change, confessed they had cause of Admiration.

Tertium Punctum.
THe Author said also he had heard of some Protestants, that dying, demanded
a* Catholic Priest to help them to dye in the Roman Catholic Faith. But he
never understood of any that lived Catholics, who dying, caled for a
Protestant Minister to help them dye and make a happy end in the Protestant
Religion.

Sall, though you are a Learned man (for such I take you to be) and have read
much and taught Divinity for so many years, I do not think you shall make any
loss of time in pondering duly these three grave points, and observations of
this Protestant learned Author.

The seventh and last Advertisment.
OLIM POSSIDEO, PRIOR POSSIDEO. The Roman Catholics strong defense against the
Claim of all kind of Heretics and their Attempts.
I Shall borrow much of what will be said in this Advertisment out of the
Author of PROTESTANCY WITHOUT PRINCIPELS, etc. The strong Arguments of that
learned man shall serve for a Wale and Ramper to this my little Treatise: from
men of my decaying age, high and great things can not be expected, we must
then have them from our Neightours; to him it will be some honor, that I make
use of his Learning and discourse, and to me noe kind of disgrace, both of us
aiming at the same mark or Butt, ( the pure Glory of God) Quia ambo predicamus
Christum Crucifixum. Prime Cor. cap. 1.
Nor have we been at any time esteemed by those, that know us, men gaping
after wind and Vanity.

Now to my purpose. 1 Before all I would have my Reader suppose (as realy he
should) that Luther, and his Associats, once Roman Catholics, separated
themselves from the Communion of the ancient Church, which gave them Baptism
about the year 1517. 2. It is as evident that the Protestants of England,
following Luther and his Sectaryes, uphold still, and stiffly defend, that
actual Separation as a Necessary Lawful fact and well done. 3. It is noe less
clear that as Luther, when he first began his Revolt from the Church, stood
all alone without joining himself with any visible Society of Christians, so
it is now as manifest, that our Protestants to this day, stand also as a
Solitary Society alone, owning noe Fellowship, Union, or Communication, of
Liturgies, Rites, or Sacraments with any Church through the Universal World;
they forsake Catholics, they forsake Grecians, Arme^ians, Abyssins, Arians,
Nestori^ns, Ruthemans, Socinians, and all the rest of Christians; wherefore, if
ever Scisme was in the World, or can be possibly conceived, Protestants are
most evidently guilty of a formal Separation from all other Christian
Churches, and consequently are formal Separators, or in plain terms
Scismaticks.

I pray did not Cromwell and his bands runn into a Rebellion? why so? because
with those, that followed him, he shaked of all Obedience to the King, and to
the Laws of the Land, he contemned the Government, and made himself and his
party, a Body by themselves, a Body apart, and though he gained all the
Cittys, and Towns, inslaved Freemen, and acted the worst Treason Imaginable,
by putting to death his Leage-Lord and Sovereign, noe man for all this can
affirm that this great power he had, and so many years enjoyed, exempted him
from of the Title of a Traitor; actually in Rebellion: Unlawful power, and
violence; cannot justify Rebellion and Treason.

This is our very case. England, all the World knows, once owned the Pope of
Rome, not only for the first Patriarch, but also supreme head of the
Universal* Church; It admitted of this Church's Discipline and Law, and
yielded Obedience to it: It communicated with the Roman Church, as well in
points of Faith, as in the use of Rites, Liturgy's, and Sacraments, yet for all
this, they have shaken of all Obedience to the Church of Rome: and if this be
not a wilful formal Separation of their part let any man judge. And after
all this, they are so bold and impudent, as to say the Scisme Lies of our part
for having given them the Occasion of Separation; but they do not point out
the time and errors they say crept into our Church: Is not this a pleasant
Jest, first openly to Rebel, and then without any other proof, but their
own prooflesse word, tacitly to suppose, they had great Reason for their
Rebellion; and to accuse so vast a Society of ancient Christians as we are,
and know not why; to condemn us of Errors, and know not wherefore, and this
before noe other Tribunal, but themselves, who were the Rebels. This indeed
savors so strongly of sauciness and self-conceited pride that the very method
held in the Condemnation, makes all to look upon it as naught, illegal, and
contemptible.

This kind of Proceeding of Protestants makes it most evident, that this
actual breach with Rome, this Rupture, this Rent, this Rebellion, this
divorse, from the ancient Church, this formal Scisme, (let Protestants cover
it with the smothest words they please) is as clear on their side, as the
Sun shining at noonday: like dirt it lies at their doors, and they will
never be able to wype it away. They say often, and over, and over that we
erred, and gave them the Occasion of Separation, but proving nothing, nor
showing the cause we have given of such Separation, they say nothing; do they
thinck their Asser^^on or saying that we have erred, can be proof^ strong
enough against us, or any thing like a Satisfactory reason in this matter
between us, their saying being noe received Principle?

Certainly the humor of Protestant W^iters and Disputers is strange: they
chiefly abuse themselves in finding fault, and carping at Catholic Religion,
whilst they speak least of that which most concerns them, that is possitively
to prove, that Protestancy ought to be owned, as Christ's true and Orthodox
Religion; this they wholly Wave, and Protestants prove no^ their own Religion.
the reason is, because an ^mprobability cannot be proved.

For confirming what I say, hear what the Author of PROTESTANCT WITHOUT
PRINCIPLES, etc. speaks.

Pray you (says he) tell me, did you ever yet hear from a Protestant That
Author pa. 430 and 431
any thing like a convincing Principle, when he goes about to prove two
Sacraments, and noe more, or that Faith only Iustifyes without Charity, or (to
be brief) that Protestancy ought to be valued of, as the only Pure and
Orthodox Religion of Christianity? Noe: these points they either pass over in
silence, or so slightly handle them, that they seem afraid to meddle with
such difficultyes, what do they therefore? Their whole strain is to find
fault. This in the Papist Religion is not right; that is not well proved, a
third thing pleases not, here we have a nouelty introduced, there is a
ceremony blamable etc. then a Iere follows in handsome language, and their
work is done. In the mean time, the maine point in controversy (which is to
prove that Protestancy ought to be owned as a true and Orthodox Religion,) is
noe more touched on, then if it were not in being.

This same Author says else where. I realy perceive, a strange humor The Author
pa. 320 and 321
in our Protestant writers. You have their Books (it is true difficultys now and
then hinted at, words ^ultiply'd, much talk in general, intricate discourses
carried in darkness, (and this to amuse a vulgar reader) weak conjectures
enough, now drawn from this, now from that Evidenced Authority: Margents
charged with Greek and Latin, and they must be thought learned Margents.

But after all you see the maine difficulty's waved, you find nothing proved,
nothing clearly reduced to any other owned Principle but their own proofless
word, and bare assertion, in so much, as I am apt to believe (if I think amiss
God forgive me) all that Protestants aim at in their Polemicall writings, is
only to keep up talk in the world, and Glory when they have the last word in a
Controversy, whether a proved word or not, it Imports not, so it may be proved
they answer it.

Is it not a remarkable thing? that Protestants, notwithstanding they do not,
nor cannot defend their own Religion, and notwithstanding they are wilful,
and wrongful in their Separation from the Roman Church, (an open: Scisme) and
notwithstanding a lawful Succession in our Church from the Apostles times, and
a quiet Possession of truth with it, by Virtue of an immemoriall Tradition, yet
our Adversaryes the Protestants tell us the Obligation of proving lies upon us;
of proving what for God-sake? That our Possession is lawful: Quo Iure came
they to question this? they being Actors how come they to put the proof upon
us, contrary to the Custom of all Benches of Justice, contrary to that known
Rule of the Law: Actore nihil probante reus absoluitur, If they would ever
acknowledge any indifferent Judge or umpier between us, (which they are never
like to admit of, assuming to themselves the Office of Accuser, wittness, and
Judge) he would compel them to the proof* we are noe way bound thereunto,
we only stand upon our own defense and guard, we only say: OLIM POSSIDEO,
PRIOR POSSIDEO; that irrefragable Rule of the Law is for us: Qui prior est
tempore, Regula Iuris 24. in sexto.
prior est I^re: Ratio huius regulae est, quod jus acquisitum alteri, inuito
auferri non potest: That is The reason of that rule is, that reason acquired to
any one, cannot be taken from him against his will. We have been above a
thousand and more years in possession, before the world heard any thing of
Luther and his knott of scismaticall companions, are not we then Priores
tempore? but they will perhaps tell us, they have prescribed against us by
holding our Churches, Benefices, and all power and Iuridiction in England for a
hundred years and more; to this we reply, that violence gives noe ground to
Prescription: we allege that undeniable rule of the law: Possessor male fidei
Regula Iuris. 2 in sext^
ullo tempore non Prescribit: that is a possessor of evil Faith or conscience
can never prescribe ( mala fides here is mala Conscientia) and does cut of
quite all title they can make to Prescription. It is manifest to the world, all
they have of ours, they have against Conscience, and so their crime in
holding that by force, which by Justice is ours, is the more grivous, and the
longer they detayn them, the greater is their sin; Cum tanto sint graviora
peccata, (as the Text of the Law says) quanto diutius infaelicem animam
detinent alligatam.

We Catholics (I repeat it again) can say to Protestants, that we are noe
way obliged to prove our Church is the true Church, and our Keligion the true
Religion (though we can evidently prove both) It is enough to tell the
Protestants, the Roman Catholic Church whilst evidences coms not against it,
stands firm upon its ancient right of Possession, OLIM POSSIDEO, PRIOR
POSSIDEO. This long and lawful Possession proves the Church Orthodox, and
frees us from all Obligation of disputing, the reason above hinted is, that the
Protestants Protestants because Agressors are obliged to prove their charge
and claim.
are the Actors, and Agressors, and therefore its their task to prove, ours
only to defend which is easy; If you mark how strangely in vain they make
their attempts against us, observe it. After our Church, had stood a thousand
years and more in the quiet Possession of truth, they accuse it of Error:
After, so many thousands of learned and virtuous men, that lived holily, and
dyed happily in it; ye, and had eyes as quick, Judgments as profounde, and
wills as good to find out these Errors (had any been) as the best of
Sectaries, yet found none; they, forsooth, espy them: After this Church had its
Purity The Churchss Purity and Innocence
and Innocence signed and sealed by the blood of innumerable Martyrs evidenced
by undoubted Miracles, manifested by so many glorious Conversions wrought on
Aliens, drawn to Christ, and finally demonstratively proved by all these
illustrious marks of truth; whereof we treated above, our Protestants rise up,
and Calumniate this great Society of Christians, lay the foul Aspersion of
Heresy on it. Are not they, think you, as Actors, obliged in Justice to make
their charge good against us by evident proofs? And are not we exempted from
all farther Obligation Proved by a long Possession.
of pleading, then only to stand upon our ancient, blameless, and quiet
Possession? Believe it. This OLIM POSSIDEO, PRIOR POSSIDEO, is warant
sufficient, and our Wall of defense against such weak Aggressors: And yet we
strengthen our hold with Canon proof (it is evident reason also) And eviden^
reason also.
Nemo praesumitur malus nisi probetur: No Man, upon vain presumption, ought to
be accounted naught, unless reason prove him a delmquent.

For Example. Give me a loyal Subject that has done wonders and great
service for his Prince; that has An Instance.
enlarged his Kingdom, gained him Frinds, defeated his Enemies, and yet is
struggling, to do him more Service; Whose repute was never stained, nor fame
blemished, etc. Suppose now: That a small knot of unknown men should offer at
some small or inconsiderable proofs. And with these endeavor to impeach him of
treason, would not the Prince, think you, either require evidences to be
brought in against so worthy a subject, or reject these Accusers as unworthy
of credit? yes most assuredly. This is our case (though noe Instance, taken
from private men, can parrallel the fidelity of the Church toward Christ) the
Roman Catholic Church The Church evidently has proved her fidelity to Christ.
(I speak of noe other, for there is none) has faithfully done great Service
for the King of Kings Christ Jesus, it has dilated his empire far and near, it
has defeated his Enemies (perfidious heathens) gained him Frinds, and
innumerable Servants. It yet struggles (Maugre all attempts against it) to
promote his honor, and gain him more. It has been of an unspotted same,
Hither toe of unspotted
and accounted pure without blemish, till now at last a small inconsid^rable
knot of Protestants Impeach it of Treason, and make it a Rebel against the
King, whom fame before Sectaries Impeachment.
it has served so long and faithfully, What then, does our Lord Jesus and all
Justice too, require of these Accusers but Evidence? Yes, and (if possible)
more then Evidente is Necessary, to make their charge good against this
Church. It has evident proof enough of its fidelitity, Justice in this charge
requires evidence not unproved Cavills.
by its faithful long Service, by its hitherto irreprehensible Purity, allowed
for a thousand years and upwards, and therefore cannot be supposed a delinquent
upon mere Cavils, or for things which look like proofs, but when examined, are
noe sooner weighed, then cast away as weightless.

For all this we Catholics find it noe hard matter to prove the Roman
Catholic Church, the only true Orthodox Church, out of which there is noe
Salvation, and to prove this by an undubitable Principle, which cannot be
shaken, even this short Argument will do it. Christ Jesus founded a Catholic
Church which (as he promises) should never fail, Et por^ae inseri non
praenalebunt adversus eam. And therefore Math. cap. 16.
could never be forsaken by him: Take the reason, for no Monarch, that lays
the foundation of a kingdom, and obliges himself to take care of it, can
without injustice abandon it, unless a contrary power, or great negligence
deprive him of his right: none can be more powerful then Christ, and I hope
those Protestants of the English Church will not make him guilty of negligence
or Injustice: ergo he still defends the militant Church (a most dear
Kingdom) which he established with his own blood.

Take this other Argument. A Church which has converted whole Author of
Protestancy without Principles etc pa. 409
Kingdoms, and Nations from infidelity to Christ, by working Miracles, casting
out of Devils, great austerity of life, and efficacy of Doctrine evident and
convincing Arguments of truth, and drawn innumerable Souls from a tepid life
to penance and mortification, from the contents of the world to a contempt of
it, from self-love to a perfect self-abnegation, must either be deservedly
named the true Church of Christ, or, else the Apostolical Church, was not: the
Church of Rome only, has, by the assistance of God done those wonders;
therefore it is the true Church, or there was never any true upon earth. Deny
these Conversations made by our Catholic Society, and you deny what is most
evident; grant them, and you subscribe to Popery: Ergo

This Learned Author after several Arguments and considerations makes the
ensuing inferences.

The Roman Catholic Church was once the true Church, ( Sectarys confess it)
once it was built on Christ, once it taught Christian verityes without error,
once it was owned by Christians for Christ's School, once it evangelized the
word of God purly, Therefore if God be yet as favorable unto Souls, as he
was anciently, if he substract not means from us Necessary to salvation, if
his gifts be unchangable, if his intention of settling truth for ever amongst
Christians alter not, if he blessed his own Society as well with truth, as with
the consolation of Grace; this Catholic Roman Church, and noe other, once
true, was, is, and shall ever be so, for the future, Ecclesia invicta res est,
(they are known words of agreat Doctor) etsi Infernus ips^ Commoveatar. The
Church is Invincible and continues the same, although hell it self be moved,
and struggle against it.

Those Inferrences of this able Devine, are strong and unanswerable.

The same Author, hints at some Faults of Sec^aries.
Faults, and failings of Sectaryes in writing controversyes: These are his
words page 434. first besides their corruptions, and self conceited glosses
whereof there is noe end, you have in the first place gross mistakes. 2. Pretty
leers (harmless) things) for they hurt no body, and give the Printer work. 3.
No little Ignorance. 4. Mere Suppositions for proofs. 5. Much unsincere
dealing, when they slightly handle Controversyes, and sly ly disemble such
proofs, as make for our Catholic Verityes. The last defect (but this is both
remediless, and transcendent) they never bring Assertions to Principles, nor
give us weight for weight, I mean Authority answerable to our Authorityes in
any one debated question.

With what is said this Advertisment is ended, my end therein being the
Conversion of Sall a poor sinner and straying sheep, which must be effected,
and done by the great Pastor Jesus, and therefore I humbly beg of him, Vt vadat
ad illam (Ovem) quae perirat donec inveniat ^am. That his own holy name may be
glorified on Earth and in heaven by bringing backagaine to his Flock poor
strayed Sall.

XXIV. and last CHAPTER. Containing a fervent Exhortation to straying Sall for
a tymely returning to his holy Mother the Roman Catholic Church, that there
may be joy in heaven upon a sinner doing Pennace.
To Bishops and all Pastors of Gods Flock, whose charge is to take little
Foxes, (Heretics perverting Souls.) The Holy Ghost speaks in this Language.
Catch us the little Foxes that destroy the Cant. cap. 2.
vineyards. By this care of good Pastors the tneevery of those little Foxes
will be prevented, and the wasting of the vineyard avoided.

Sall, owneing a Pastoral Office and care I have taken some pains in hunting
after you a little Fox, (an old man, and a young Heretic) and as I conceive:
Open Divina te parvam vulpem in opere nefario, nempe vineam Christ Electam,
speciosam, florentem, vineam Saboath Sanctis divi Patricii moribus,
stupendisque caels prodigtis in terra Hybermae feliciter plantatam, sceleste
demolientem caepi.

Sall it may be said to your eternal infamy, that after your fall you have
Imployd a violent burning zeal to infect your kindred and frinds, with the
plague of Heresy, that infected your self: Non vis Miser perire soul, sed ut
al^ tecum pereant vehementer niteris, but I hope God in his mercy will preserve
those Souls from the cupp of Poison you would make them drink of, for this
your endeavor and attempt your name is become odious to all that hear of you.
O deplorable change from the man I have known you piously given, (as all
Judged of you) an obedient child of the Sea of Rome, and a good member of your
order; likely you will gess, who I am that write these senlible complaining
lines, a person that loved you for your amiable nature, unoffensive
conversation and commendable tallents, and you also seemed to love and est^em
me in a high measure. Did you not to preserve our ancient amity, write unto
me a letter full of aftection and kindness, wherein you let me know of the
great esteem you were with the Protestant Archbishop? (O I then little dreamed
he could have had the power of perverting you, or you so wicked a mind as to
be perverted by him) to that letter I returned a loving and hearty answer, and
at the same time feriously recommended a virtuous and afflicted lady of my
acquaintance matched in your county of Tipperary, and by a special letter
commanded her to be guided by you in all, assuring her she would find you a
virtuous learned, and frindly person: But Sall dear Sall, you have betrav'd my
trust, and alas betrayed your own Soul for eternity, unless you recant in
time.

In parting from the Roman Communion you have not regarded Saint Ambroses
Devine and weighty council. To wit: Magni periculires est, si post Prophetarum
oracula, post Apostalorum testimonia, post martyrum vulnera, veterem sidem
quasi novellam discutere presumas. It is a business of great danger, if after
the oracles of Prophets, the Testimony of Apostles, and the wounds of Martyrs
you presume to examine and discuss the ancient settled Faith as if it were a
new Religion; these Arguments the Saint speaks of, testify a true Orthodox
Religion; these Arguments do satisfye all good Catholics, learned, and
unlearned, young and old, that they are in the right way and beleese, to these
Arguments all good Christians adhere, no way presuming to dispute or to doubt
in the least of the force and verity of them, with these Testimonies, oracles,
and Arguments, all of the Communion of Rome stand firm and constant in the
ancient Faith: Sall you have taken a different way, a way apart, your
presumption misled you, the crafty Serpent that tempted Eve and much commended
the forbidden fruit, saying: What day soever you shall eat (of the Genes. Cap.
3.
forbidden fruit) your eyes shall be opened: and you shall be as Goas knowing
good and evil: The same Serpent entised you to a curiosity of disputing of the
truth and Sanctity of the ancient Faith and tempted you so far that he made
you seek for truth where it was not to be found, and to desert the Church
wherein it was, is, and ever shall be to the worlds end: your curious Ambition
displeased God, and he has confounded your presumption and pride. Have you
forgotten to have read in S Paul, (God speaking to proud 1 Cor. Cap. 1.
high wits:) Perdam Saptentiam Sapientum, and prudentiam prudentum reprobabo.
That is: I will destroy the Wisdom of the Wise, and the Prudence of the
Prudent I will reject. Did not S. Paul himself writing to the Corinthians say:
I judged not my self 1 Cor. Cap. 2.
to know any thing among you, but Jesus Christ and him crucisy'd: and I was
with you in infirmity, and in fear, and much trembling. Sall had you remained
in your Order mortified (that is to know Jesus Christ crucified) had you stayed
in fear and trembling with your Brethren, (as great wits and Devines as you
have done,) all had been safe with you, all had gone well, but presumption
carried you further, forsooth you must examine the ancient Faith with
Speculations and Subtilityes, and so have miserably fallen, God of his mercy
give you Grace to rise again.

But Sall are not you greatly troubled Just praise of the Society of Jesus.
and disturbed in your Soul for deserting the order of the Society of Jesus, a
precious and sacred School of learning and virtue in Gods Church, an order
renowned over all the world, for the great things they have done to Gods Glory,
not only in countries insected with Heresy in Europ, but also for giving the
light of Faith to millions of Idolaters in Iaponia, and other Kingdoms of the
Indies, their memorable labors (noe man can deny this truth) have carried the
name of Christ to the new world, and dilated holy Religion and the bounds of
the Church to the furthest ends of the earth; they have pulled down Idols, and
lifted up the Standart of the Cross in place of them: Sall the Church you have
betaken your self to, has done none of these Godly things, and they, and all
sort of Heretics hate the Society above all Orders, and do enviously sting
them in all their Books, and writings; come, say all Heretics, let us stricke
the Society of Jesus with our Hiero. cap. 11.
tongue, let us obscure the Glory of that people: Let me speak without
offense, or derogating to any other order, (I love from my heart, and honor all
Religious orders in the house of God) that the Society may be termed for
virtue, the salt of the earth, and for Learning, the light of the world: A
person of eminent dignity in the Church (he lives as yet) defending the
innocensy and good fame of the Society in a certain point against a virulent
Calumny, cast upon them concluded his discourse thus. Desine tandem maledice
persequi ordinem Societatis Jesus, putidisque Calumniis impetere, ordinem Deo
Sacrum; regibus fidum; ^o^bus integrum; Litteris Florentem; Doctis Charum;
Ecclesiae utilem; orbi Christiano Necessarium: contra hoc genus hominum
Innocentiae Clypeo tectum in vanum murmur^t tua invidia; contra hos pugnans
Langues tanquam apis sine aculeo. That is: Detractour leave of persecuting the
Society of Jesus. and raising fi^thy Calumnyes against an Order dedicated to
God; Loyal to Kings, entire in their ways, flourishing in Learning, dear to
the Learned, useful to the Church, Necessary to the World: in vain does your
envy murmr against this kind of people that are protected with the Buckler of
Innocence you labor in vain against them like an idle drone. Another writer
says much more ( Sylvester Maurelius in Lib. 5. Oceani Religionum) in this
Language. Quid de iis dicam, qui pro fide^ Christianae defensione, sanaque
Doctrina Sanguinem large profuderunt, tinxerunt Oceanum, littora camposque
rigarunt, patibula and tribunalia made fecerunt contemptis tortoribus,
lanienis, atque ipso Tartaro; and jam fulgent in Caelo prae rutilis
adamantibus, and velut stellae resplendent. That is: What shall I say of those,
who for defense of Christian Faith and true Doctrine have copiously shed their
Blood, have dyed both the Sea, and shore, and embrued fields, sprinkled
gibbetts and tribunalls, contemning Torments, and Tormenters, and even hell it
self, and now glister in heaven more then the choicest Diamants and shine like
stars.

Sall you have left this learned and glorious Order, and they Christianly
lament the same, more for your misfortune, then for the loss they have had* by
your departure; they may say plainly you were not of them, though you lived
among them; and they will say well, for had you been of them, you had stayed
with them in Obedience, working your Salvation in trembling and fear: they are
noe way troubled for the speeches of some, imputing your departure as a stain
to the Order, which is an objection without all ground, and they answer to all
this vain kind of talk, (and justly) saying that Judas went out of a holier
Order, and from a higher dignity then theirs, and yet his going out was noe
stain to the Apostles: Judas his Impiety followed, him but left the College of
the Apostles pure and holy: even so Sall your ^mpiety goes along with you, and
the Society remains unspotted in its Virtue and Reputation.

Pro dolor Sall you are gone away from us, and notus est jam non tantum Patriae
tuae sed etiam exteris regionibus, Diabolt de te Triumphus; quid tandem in his
angust^ is consilii quid remedn? That is: And now the Devils Triumph over you
is not only known at home, but abroad also in foraine Countries, but what
counselle or remedy can be given in such a miserable Condition? Your returning
from Babylon (where you live) to Jerusalem will be your only remedy; come then
home Sall, come home Prodigal Child, thy Father is waiting for thee, and will
receive thee with mercy: do but say penitently Surgam and tho ad Patrem, and
the way is clear for you. Hear Sall a voice from heaven saying: Com out of
her Apoc. cap. 14
(Babylon) that you be not pertaker of her sins, and that you receive not of
her plagues.

We Catholics pray for Gods people that are in Babylon suffering (even now)
heavy persecution, and we also pray for the people of Babylon, that persecute
them, that they may become Gods people, and that by their conversion Babylon
may fale, and Christ have his Kingdom where Satan now reigns; which will be,
when true, pure, Orthodox Religion shall prevail in those three Kingdoms, that
were one day Catholic, full of Saints and holy men.

Sall your stay in Babylon is dangerous, and you know there is noe dallying
with Serpents; if you fale deeply in love with honors, preferments, and other
glorious Miseryes of the Babylon you now dwell in, if a woeman lay hold of you
(and why may not this happen, seeing you walk with those Rabbis that teach
Priests may marry, and are bound to marry, and did the like themselves) there
will be after no hope of recovery. Think therefore of coming of in time: Ne
peccatum tuum sensim sine sensu transeat in consuetudinem and obdurationem.
That is: Least your sin insensibly become an obdurate Custom. For it was
wisely said: Desinet esse locus remedio, ubi quae fuerunt vitia mores fiunt.
That noe remedy will take place when vices become Customs. You ought therefore
to fear extremely that delay of your Conversion, for Custom of sinning will
give Satan an absolute victory over you. Give therefore ear dear Soul to
Saint Augustine, who was a great sinner, but a greater penitent) noe man can
better preach in this kind, his weighty words are these: Omne peccatum
consuetudine vilescit, and fit homini quasi nullum sit, obduruit, jam dolorem
perdidit, and valde putre est, nec dolet, quod non dolet, non pro sano
habendum, sed pro mortuo computandum est; quando aliquid pungitur, and dolet,
aut sanumest, aut in illo spes aliquae Sanitatis est; quando autem tangitur,
pungitur, calcatur, nec dolet pro mortuo habendum est, and praescindendum. That
is: All sin by Custom is less regarded and at last seems none when a thing
groes hard, looses all feeling, becomes putrifyed, and has no sense of its
insensibility it is not to be reputed sound but dead; when a thing is pricked
and feels pain, it is either whole, or at least there is hopes of health, but
when it is touched, pricked, bruised, and feels not, it is dead and must be cut
of. Many touch and handle you sharply for your fale from holy Faith and the
Scandal you have given, be not like a dead man, but show you have life, and
feeling, and grief for what you have done, be not I say hard hearted, but give
way to the grace of God to make a breach on the wales of your obstinate will:
help thy self man and God will help thee, and never despair of Gods mercy.
The condition of a dispairing man is the worst that can be, for he Judges (
test Augustino) that God wants either power or love to save him, to say either
of God were a blasphemy. Look upon History's Ecclesiastical and profane, look
upon Scripture the book of life, all are full of fair Examples of Gods mercy;
has not Christ healed Magdalen possessed of 7. Devils, 7. Deadly sins? has
he not pardoned Peeter that denied him? has he not made Paul, that did
persecute him, a vessel of election, and Doctor of Nations? has he not given
heaven to the good thief, for one ^ct of contrition and love? (This theef's
owning of Christ to be the son of God when all the world seemed to abandon
him was a most Heroic Confession.) Harken Sall to the Comfortable words of
great Saint John Chrisostem to an afflicted sinner inclining to dispa^re. Si
Publicanus es, potes fieri Evangelista; si Blasphemus, potes fieri Apostolus;
si latro, Caeli civis: ne dic peccavi, qui habes medicum Potentiorem agritudine
tua. That is: If you are a publican, you may become an Evangelist; if you are a
Blasphemer, you may become an Apostle; if a thief, a citizen of heaven: say
not I have sinned seeing you have a Physician able to master your disease.
Hear the words of God himself to a Soul that had committed many
Fornications: which are full of Consolation. Tu fornicata es cum multis
amatoribus, Icrem. Cap. 3.
tamen revertere ad me, and reciptam te, Who would not fly out of Babylon to
adore so loving a God? come then out of that accurssed mantion, and place the
Ship of your Soul in the Haven of safty by returning to the Catholic Faith
and State of Religion you were formerly of, and walking with your devout and
Religious Brethren, between the mountain of Mythe, and Hill of Frankincense.
There can be nothing more safe and happy then the life of a good Religious
person, whose occupation during life, is an incessant voyaging between the
odoriferous Mountain of Myrh, and Hill of Frankincense: What is Myrh?
Mortification of the Body, hair Cloth, Fasting, and Penance; And what is
Frankincense? but fervent and humble Prayer? In this Myrh, and Frankincense
consists the Soul of Religion, and Godly Souls mortifying their Bodies, and
elevating their hearts and minds to heaven in the Contemplation of holy
things, and sincerely contemning for the love of God, all Pomp, Riches,
Pleasures, Vanities, and glory of the World, enjoy perfect and never decaying
delights, whereas the greatest Pleasures of the Potentates and Minions of this
World vanish away like smoke and only leave the sting of a tormenting mind
behind them. But the greatest Joy of a perfect Religious Soul is crowned, when
her loving spouse Jesus finding her perfumed and sanctified with Myrh and
Frankincense calls upon her in this amorous Language. Tota pulchra es amica
mea, and macula non est Cant. Cap. 4.
in te. Veni de Libano sponsa mea, veni de Libano, vent: coronaberis. That is:
Thou art fair my love, there is not a spott in thee, come from Libanus my
spouse, come from Libanus, come: thou shall be crowned.

I wonder Sall your heart is not brooken to see you have lost those heavenly
delights, and are not like to taste of them any more, I pray return, return
with Penance and tears that you may enjoy them again; be not ashamed to
confess the error that robbed you of those innocent pleasurs, Saint Augustine a
great Saint and wit did not stick to confess his errors in the Sect of the
Manichtes, and with much humility retracted his Opinions, do what he did, and
think seriously on these words of Saint Bernard, to one that had gone a stray:
Turpe est tibi falsitate seduci, and veritate non reduci. That is: It is a
shameful thing to be seduced with falsity, and not reduced with verity.

Sall I am forced here to put a period to this my unpolished (though well meant)
discourse drawn to a far greater length then I expected; and truly decaying
age with sharp panges of several Infirmityes God is pleased to vissit me
with all scarce gave me leave to finish what is done. The shining Sun of my
happier years (if any of them have been so) is now setting: And though I count
two years a bove 70. I must say what the Patriarch Jacob said to King Pharao.
The King demanded his age, saying, Quot sunt dies annorum Genes. cap. 47.
vitae tuae? That is: How many be the days of the years of thy life. Jacob
answered: Dies peregrinationis meae Centum triginta Annorum sunt parvi and
mali. That is: The days of the Pilgrimage of my life are an hundred thirty
years, few, and evil:

A great part of my life has bee^e spent in Pilgrimage and motion from
Kingdom to Kingdom and that by necessity, and not by election; they forced
me to wander that persecuted Christ, and true Religion, but their power is
now at an end (though not their evil will) because my time of living is near
ended: and alas though near my end and the upshot of my life I am forced to
use Jacobs language: Dies Annorum meorum parvi and mali. The days of my years
are few and evil. Mali, having in my life time done little good, and much
evil by offending the infinite goodness of my God; Parvi, The days before me
being to few to lament my sins, and apease the anger of God. Oh that I were in
such a state and tranquillity of conscience, that I could with confidence and
flaming desires, cry out with S. Paul, Cupio dissolut and esse cum Christo!
But I am far from that Sanctity, and my sins ( Delicta inventutis mea) make
me tremble and fear. What then remains to be done by an inconsolable sinner
such as I am? This only, that my care and fear in the little time I have to
live be wholly employed for a good goeing out of this Babylon of pride,
Iniquity, and vanity, O dear Jesus grant for thy mercy to Sall and me, a holy
and happy Hou^e of our departure out of this World.

In delating the Argument of this little Book, I have said much against the way
Sall has taken, and his flight out of the House of God, but all with true
Charity, and a pure Intention.

And now Sall let me speak to you in Saint Bernards Language, to one that was
dangerously erring. Iactavi semen Dominicum deprecant Deum u^ non revertatu^
vacuum. That is: I have soed the heavenly seed begging God it may not return
void. Let not dear Sall all my pains and the expressions of my good affection
be lost by an obduration in you; look to it my frind while there is time of
Consideration, having noe less at stake, then an Eternity of Salvation and
Glory, or of Flames and Damnation: if after all my ernest requests, and hearty
Prayers you will not think of Returning to Jerusalem, but wilfully stay in
Babylon, I can but say with a lamenting Soul. Perditio tua ex^te Isra^l;
denying to join your will with Gods Grace, Peribis in Aeternum: For Saint
Augustine tells you: Qui creavit te sine te, non salvabit t^ sine te; crea^it
nescientem, salvabit volentem. He that has created thee with out thee, will
not save thee with out thee; he created thee with out thy knowledge, but will
save thee, with thy will.

One word more and then adue until we shall appear before the great Judge of
all at the last day (in old English, doomsday) what word say you? This only;
that I conjure you, by all that is holy and precious on earth and in heaven, I
conjure you I say) in the name, and in the behalf of the Almighty, that your
great and only care in this life be, when the Angel of God shall come to kill
the Egyptians by Exodus cap. 112.
night (dark night of their Iniquityes) that lie find in thy house the mark
of Pardon, the Blood of the lamb, (Jesus) sprinkled on the Posts, of the Door
of thy Soul, (which cannot be unless you are then found a true professor of
the Holy Roman Cathoclick Apostolic Faith;) without this mark the Angel will
destroy you with the Egyptians. muse deeply on this Important point, and ever
think with fear, and tears to what eternity the last moment of life shall
deliver thy soul. O praetiosum Momentum, o Aeternitas! o Momentum, a quo
pendet Aeternitas! o Dear Jesus redeemer of the world have mercy on Sall that
has a bandoned verity, and Santity, and bring him home again, and have mercy
on me poor sinner now praying for him.

Amen.
Fugam scelestam and pudendam Andreae Sall ex castris Israel ad papiliones
Phylisthijm palam and just redargutam Deo Auspice finivimus 12. die Martii
Anno 1675. divo Gregorio P. M, Sanctae Ecclesiae Doctori Sacro, omnia quae
Scripsimus indubitato Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae Oraculo submittentes.

Ut Scripta omnibus prosint, summopere cupimus, Catholicis ad fidem constanter
servandam, Heterodoxis ad eam faeliciter Amplectendam.

Ad Majorem D. O. M. Gloriam.
THE TABLE Of the Chapters and Advertisments contained in this Book are as
follows.
SAll's Recantation. The Author to the Reader. I. Chap. A Distribution of the
contents of this work in 8. principal points. page 1 1. What drew Sall out
of Gods House. 2. What guide led him the way. 3. Having forsaken the Catholic
Religion, what Religion is he become of. 4. Who are the Doctors he has
parted with; and who they, he has now embraced. 5. What Company has he
forsaken, and who are they he sticks unto. 6. A discussion upon some
principal parts of the Recantation. 7. Certain Advertisments to said Sall. 8.
The Authors hearty Exhortation unto him for his speedy returning to his Mother
the Roman Catholic Church. II. Chap. What drew Sall out of Gods House. page 8
The Title of Mr. VVhites Book. Schismatis Anglicani Redurgutio, etc. page 13
III. Chap. What guide led Sall out of the House of God. page 16 IV. Chap. Of
what Religion is Sall become having forsaken the Catholic Religion. page 25 V.
Chap. Answer to the fourth Quaere. page 46 VI. Chap. Of the Doctrine and manners
of Luther, and some other principal Heretics. page 79 VII. Chap. Of Luthers
Doctrine. page 84 VIII. Chap. Of Luthers Pride, and contempt of the Fathers: and
belying them. page 98 IX. Chap. Of Luthers Incontinency. page 106 X. What
fruits followed Luthers Doctrine and Reformation. page 116 XI. Chap. Of Calvin's
Doctrine, his Calumnyes against Catholics, and of his life and Conversation.
page 123 Certain Calumnyes of Calvin, against the Fathers and other
Catholics. page 138 Of Calvin's Life and Conversation. page 141 XII. Of Beza's
Doctrine and Conversation. page 141 XIII. Chap. A Brief Relation of the manners
and Conversation of others of the Protestant Religion, and pretended Reformers
of the Church, whose names are as follows. page 159 Of Zwinglius. page 159
Phillip Melankton. page 161 Jacobus Andreas, otherwise named Smedelinus. page
162 Carolostadius. page 163 John Knox. page 164 Oecolumpadius. page 166
Christopher Goodman. pa. 167 XIV. Chap. A Narration of the English Religion,
and Reformers in King Edward the 6'th Reign. page 169 Who the Contrivers of
the XXXIX. Articles, and first reformers of Protestant Religion. page 172 XV.
Chap. Sall ( if he minds his Salvation) should not stay in a Church, wherein
Murderers, Traitors, Heretics, Thieves, Negromansers, and other Mallefactors
are canonized for Saints. page 186 XVI. Chap. The fifth Quaere, what Company
has Sall forsaken, and who are they he now sticks unto. page 218 Heretics in
the Law of Nature. page 222 Heretics in the written Law. page 224 Heretics in
the Evangelicall Law. page 225 XVII. Chap. A Discussion of some parts of Sall's
Recantation. page 231 XVIII. Chap. The Doctrine of Transubstantiation defended
against Sall a new Protestant. p. 240 XIX. Chap. The Ruthenian, and Greek
Church, and the Armenians hold the same in the Article of Transubstantiation,
as the Roman Catholics do. page 263 Testimonium; seu professio quorundam
Articulorum apud Nationem Surianam. page 267 Ita nos Testamur die 29.
Februarii, Anno 1668. page 269 The Greek and Ruthenians Church, Armenians, and
others agree in more points of Religion, with the Romans, then with the
Protestants of the English Church. page 271 XX. Chap. Miracles are true and
clear marks of a true Religion, and the power of working them has been given
to the true Church, and remains therein. page 275 XXI. Chap. Of undeniable
Miracles proving the Faith and Sanctity of the true Church. page 284 XXII.
Chap. Six Miracles confirming the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, touching
Transubstantiation and the Adoration in the Sacrament. page 294 Saint Bernards
Miracles. pa. 298 Two other excellent Miracles of S. Bernard, the one in
Millane, the other in Aquitaine. page 301 XXIII. Chap. Certain Advertisments
to said Sall, first, Heretics are known by certain Marks. page 310 Le
Tombeau des Heretics. page 312 The second Advertisment. Clear places of
Scripture in many points controverted make for the Catholics. page 320 The
third Advertisments. A dissension in fundamental points, and Articles being
betvveen Protestants, they must hold one another for Heretics, Ergo Sall if
he minds his Salvation, will part from that Church. page 329 The 4'th
Advertisment. Learned Protestants of the Church of England do confess, that
English and Irish Pagans (venerable Beda called them Slaves of Idols) were
converted to Christian Faith, by men sent from the Popes of Rome, holy men,
that wrought Miracles in those Conversions. page 364 The fifth Advertisment. ^
offer here certain learned Catholic Anthors to be perused by Sall; likely
they came not all of them in his way. page 381 The 6'th Advertisment. Three
weighty points offered to be considered by Sall. page 388 The 7'th and last
Advertisment. Olim Possideo, Prior Possideo. The Roman Catholics strong
defense against the claim of all kind of Heretics and their Attempts. page
397 XXIV. Chap. Containing a firvent Exhortation to straying Sall, for a tymly
returning to his Holy Mother the Roman Catholic Church, that there may be joy
in heaven upon a sinner doing Penance. page 416
FINIS,
ERRATA.
Page Lin. Faults. Corrected. 3 15 the thee 11 18 are are 25 14 pestiperous
pestiferous 35 10 nequo neque 35 14 quam cum 35 18 Jesus Jesus 38 23 motius
motives 39 8 Latanys Letanyes 40 21 motius motives 48 10 vertute virtute 48 12
vetteris veteris 66 commoderit commederit 78 19 si se 105 21 dispilefull
dispitefull 105 24 care are 109 1 usith with 124 11 compaesant composant 125
21 nonquid nunquid 130 22 origenal^ original^ 131 1 hier here 132 25 the thee
160 18 hierof hereof 160 22 Sangunem Sanguinem 166 2 malum mulum 178 14 ane and
180 22 wicked wicked 180 23 marters matters 191 14 prosteritas posteritas 197
24 since fifth 196 11 leage liege 202 20 vvare were 204 17 saire fair 228 6
inquivamenta inquinamentae 232 1 might might 234 10 altquid aliquid 237 25
inteligimus intelligemus 239 2 intellestu intellectu 252 14 hodte hodie 268 5
nostri nostrae 273 2 Armneians Armenians 275 4 ttue true 296 18 Emperoor
Emperor 316 8 beld held 347 20 contrary contrary 361 19 declated declared 371
4 Magdeburgenfes Magdeburgenses 371 15 felfe self 380 16 wife wise 394 3
patted parted 407 21 Keligion Religion


