The Free-Mens Petition: To the Right Honorable, The Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Commonalty of the City of LONDON, in Common Council Assembled, The Humble
Representation of many Thousands of the Freeborn People of England, inhabiting
in London, and Freemen of the same City.
Most humbly shows,
THat we cannot without Horror and Amazement reflect and look back upon those
Halcion days of Peace and Prosperity many of us have enjoyed in these our
Three Nations, and this once Famous City (the Renown and Glory of them) in
Civills and Spirituals, under their Lawful Governors and Free Parliaments.
And that now it has pleased the only good and wise God, for Our and the
Nations crying Sins, to manifest his Displeasure against us, in giving the Rod
of his Anger into the hands of such Persons, whose Principles and Actings tend
to the over-turning of those Two great Pillars of the Land (Gods Ordinances)
Magistracy and Ministry, and of Parliaments Themselves; Wherefore we can no
longer hold our peace, but represent to your Honor and Worships (as the now
visible Authority over us in this Nation) the Deplorable Condition of this Once
Renowned Nation and City, whose Conservation you ought to tender as our selves,
seeing God has placed you in those Emenencies you now are in, and put a
present Opportunity into your hands; That you would

1. Consider the total decay of Trade, chiefly by the frequent Revolutions of
Government and intolerable Taxes and Excizes incessantly continued upon us,
through the Ambition and Avarice of self-seeking men, which in all probability
must bring sudden and unavoidable misery and confusion to this once far-famed
Nation and City, if not timely remedied.

2. That you would therefore endeavor by all means possible, for the healing of
these distracted and divided Nations and City (the probable means under God as
we humbly conceive) that a free English Parliament be speedily summoned,
according to the Laws of this Nation, and 16o. Carol. Cap. 1.

3. That your Honor would be pleased to put the Militia of London into the
Hands of such persons as are known Assertors of Magistracy and Ministry, and
Liberties of Parliament, And the City Guarded by its own Militia, That so we
and our Servants maybe free from such Insolences and Disturbances of the
Soldiery as have been lately committed.

4. That such Officers and Soldiers of the Army as shall comply with your
Honor and Worships, for settling the peace of the Nation, and asserting the
Liberties and Privileges of Parliament, maybe assured theirs Arrears of Pay.

And for the accomplishment of these our Just Desires, we will with the hazard
of our Lives and Fortunes stand by and assist your Honor and Worships, And
ever pray for you.

This Representation was Delivered to the Lord Mayor, in Common Council
Assembled, on Wednesday last, Dec. 14. with many thousand Hands, and twenty
times as many Hearts.


