

THE HISTORY OF Brutes; OR, A DESCRIPTION OF Living Creatures. Wherein the
Nature and Properties of fourfooted Beasts are at large Described;

BY Wolfgangus Franzius, D. D.

And now rendered into English, by N. W.

Lectio Certa prodest, Varia delectat.
Sen. ad Lucit. Epist. 119. London, Printed by E. Oaks, for Francis Haley, at
the Corner of Chancery Lane in Holborn, 1670.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Do here present thee with a History of Brutes, a Piece that has been long
expected: Collected out of the most Approved Authors which have written of this
Subject: Written Originally in Latin, by Wolfgangus Franzius Professor of
Divinity in the University of Witteberg, a man famous, in his time, for his
great Learning: The Book is, by the Author, divided into five Parts. In the
first Part, he at large treats of the Nature of all four-footed Beasts; first,
setting down the Properties, and then deducing several Corollaries, which is
the method he uses throughout the Book; always mentioning some apt place of
Scripture where it is spoken of, from whence he infers them.

In the second Part, he discourses only of the Nature of Volatil's; in the
third, of Fishes; the fourth Part is a full description of Serpents; and the
fifth, of Insects. I have here translated only the first Part, which treats
only of the Nature of four-footed Beasts, having the other by me; which, if it
find acceptance, may speedily be put in the Press. I have one Request to thee,
which is, not to charge the Author with those faults which possibly thou may
find in the perusal, having not leisure to correct it my self. If thou shall
find as much pleasure in reading, as I have had in the writing of it; We shall
neither of us lose our pains.

N. W.

THE TABLE.
CHap. 1. The Argument of the Treatise. Page 1. C. 2. The definition of an
irrational Creature. p. 5. C. 3. Of the division of irrational Creatures. p.
13. C. 4. Of the Elephant. p. 17. C. 5. Of the Camel. p. 30. C. 6. Of the Lion.
p. 39. C. 7. Of the Bear. p. 54. C. 8. Of the Leopard. p. 62. C. 9. Of the
Tiger. p. 71. C. 10. Of the Elke. p. 56. C. 11. Of the Unicorn and Rhinosceros.
p. 78. C. 12. Of the Horse. p. 86. C. 13. Of the Ox. p. 101. C. 14. Of the
Ass. p. 108. C. 15. Of the Heart. p. 116. C. 16. Of the Hog. p. 127. C. 17. Of
the Fox. p. 137. C. 18. Of the Cat. p. 149. C. 19. Of the Hare and Coney. p.
153. C. 20. Of the Wolf p. 159. C. 21. Of the Dog. p. 174. C. 22. Of the Sheep.
p. 181. C. 23. Of the Goat. p. 195. C. 24. Of the Ape. p. 205. C. 25. Of the
Squirrel, Weasel, and Gulo. p. 211. C. 26. Of the Hedgehog. p. 220. C. 27. Of
the Beaver. p. 222. C. 28. Of the Otter. p. 223. C. 29. Of the Crocodile,
Lizard, etc. p. 226. C. 30. Of the Salamander, Lizard, etc. p. 230. C. 31. Of
the Chamelion. p. 233. C. 32. Of the Frog and the Toad. p. 236. C. 33. Of the
Mouse, and the Dormouse, etc. p. 245. C. 34. Of mixed four-footed Creatures. p.
249.
Books Printed, and are to be sold by Francis Haley, at the Corner of
Chancery Lane in Holborn.
Euclid's Elements of Geometry, in 15. Books, in Eolio.

An Exposition, with Practical Observations on the three first Chapters of Job;
by Joseph Caryl, in Quarto.

The Royal Grammar, commonly called Lilley's Grammar, explained, by way of
Question, and Answer; opening the meaning of the Rules, with great plainness,
to the understanding of children of the meanest capacity: with choice, critical
observations on the same, by William Walker, B. D. Author of the English
Particles, in Octavo.

The New Help to Discourse, or Wit, Mirth, and Jollity; intermixed with more
serious matters, in Twelves.

The opinion of Witchcraft vindicated; in an Answer to a Book entitled, The
Question of Witchcraft debated; being a Letter to a Friend, by R. T.

CHAP. I.
The Argument of the Treatise.
THe History of Brutes, which by some is not unfitly called, (...), or a
Description of living creatures, is that part of Physics which treats of
Brute beasts. We may properly call this one part of Physics, because it
treats of the nature of things; for Physics is either Physics properly so
called, or you may divide it into Metaphysics, and Mathematics. Physics
properly so called comprehends under it the nature of Meteors, Metals,
Plants, Stars, the four Elements, men, and Brutes. Some would have the
consideration of Brutes be brought under Medicine, which I think belongs more
properly to Philosophy* for here in this treatise of Animals you have the
nature, property, motions, generation, strength, shape and use of Brutes. But I
shall a little show the use and benefit that this treatise will be of, not only
to physicians, but also to all scholars, and more especially to Divines; for
consider;

1. The dignity of it, which Authors tell us, in any art or science, arises
from the efficient cause, or the object: The inventors of this science have
been learned and pious men in all ages* Genesis 2. ^0. Adam gave names suitable to
all creatures. ch* 6. v. 20. 21. Noah in the Ark did not only behold the
creatures, but was commanded to provide food for them. Genesis 36. 34. We find
several holy men in scripture who were shepherds. Genesis 13. 57. -- 37. ^. Exodus
10. 9. 1. Sam. 16. 11. -- 17. 34. We read that Solomon wrote of Fishes, Birds,
and Beasts. 1. K^^gs. 4. 33. We read of Alexander, that he gav^ 80. talents to
Aristotle to instruct him in the knowledge of Creatures, and had a 1000. men in
Asia and Greece, who were employed in fishing and hunting, thereby to be
informed of the nature of Creatures. which was the reason of Aristotle's writing
his History of Animals. The advantages we have from this kind of knowledge is
not only for dispute, but also for the explication of Authors as well Sacred as
Profane. It brings also much glory to God.

1. We shall find it very useful in sermons. For from hence we may deduce many
profitable inferences. It is fit to know lest we commit an error; Democritus
was laughed at by Aristotle, who asking him what was the reason that a dog
always lay upon the same stone, answered, because he had some thing in him
like a stone. We find Virgil bringing a Heart of Africa to prove what he said,
when there are none there; thus he brings in the wild asses of Italy when
there are none there. It is no less useful also in the explication of Profane
Authors as well as Sacred. The Priest in the Law was very well skilled in the
nature of all food, he being to instruct the people, of the lawfulness, and
unlaw^^lnes of meats. Dan. 7. we read that Monarchies are compared to beasts,
as the Chaldean to a Lion, the Persian to a bear, the Grecian to a fox, the
Roman to a beast with many heads and horns. Dan. 8. 3. we find [in Tobit] the
Persian Empire compared to a Ram, and the Grecian to a goat; we read many
things in Scripture of the Lions whelp. Genesis 49. 9. 10. 11. 12. 14. 17. 21. 27.
So Genesis 3. 15. many places of Scripture cannot be interpreted without the
knowledge of Animals. Thus for the History of Jonah, it is necessary we should
be acquainted with the nature of the whale, in whose belly the Prophet was
swallowed up. Thus John. 1. 29. we find Christ compared to a Lamb. Mat. 3. 16.
The Holy Ghost appeared in the shape of a dove, and we are commanded to be wise
as serpents, and innocent as Doves. Mat. 7. 15. Satan and false teachers are
compared to Wolves. Mat. 24. 28. where the carcass is, there will the Eagles be
gathered. Chap 23. 1. how would I have gathered you as a hen gathers her
chickens! Thus David, Psalm. 55. 7. O that I had the wings of a Dove, then would
I fly away. Thus we find him wishing himself a Coney and a Sparrow in several
places. Psalm. 84. 4. we find the Church compared to a nest in which the Swallow
and Sparrow lays her young. So Psalm. 103. 5. David wishes he might renew his
strength as the Eagle. Examples of which are frequent in profane Authors. But
finally, the knowledge of the creature does tend very much to the glory of God.
Thus we find that the frost is called upon to praise God. Bless the Lord ye
whales, and all things that move in the water praise the Lord, bless the Lord;
ye fowls of the air, bless ye the Lord; man by the beholding of creatures is
thereby induced to praise God, if he consider,

1. The different nature of Creatures, their beauty, magnitude, and agreement
one with another.

2. The benefit of them, the least Creature being not useles to man.

3. The wonderful providence of God that is in the generation of creatures, in
the places where they live: of which Job tells us, Chap. 39. 40. 41.

4. The constant use that several creatures are of to mankind, which they might
easily avoid if they knew their own strength: God has also commanded them to
serve man. Genesis 1. repeated also after the flood. Chap 9. 2. to have Dominion
over the Beasts of the Earth.

5. The wonderful obedience of the creature to God. Thus Herod. Lib. 2. in
Sennacheribs army, the Enemy being great, they despaired of victory, in one
night the mice destroyed their shields and arrows, so that the next day they
were forced to fly. Thus we see most of Phara^hs plagues were inflicted by
Brutes: and no less wonderful is the History of Bal^am's Ass, Numb. 22. and of
the Crow which fed the Prophet, and of the bears which destroyed those that
mocked the Prophet. 2. King. 2. 24. thus we see the be^efit and usefulnes of
this knowledge*

CHAP. II.
The Definition of an irrational Creature.
AN irrational or brute creature is a body perfectly mixed, endued with life
and sense; for the Genus, here is body; for the Form of it, that is twofold.

1. It is said to be perfectly mixed, to difference it from Meteors that are
not.

2. It is endued with Life and sense, to difference it from Vegetatives which
have not; so that an irrational creature consists of a body and soul.

Of the body of a Brute.
THe body of a Brute is the collection of its several members and intrails,
^of fluids as blood, of solids as flesh and bone, similar and dissimilar parts;
in this order all the other parts are to be explained; but we shall pass by
these members which it has in common with man, which are all explained in
Melancthon, of the soul. There are many creatures which want blood, as Spiders,
and Pismires, but instead of that they have fat and a sanguineous moisture,
analogous to blood, which nourishes the body, and is a vehicle to the
sensitive soul. Thus Fishes have no bones properly so called, but rather
thorns. Thus crabs have grisles, in Insects there seem eh to be something
between flesh and nerves, instead of bones. So Birds have small Meatus's which
are for ears, instead of teeth they have a bony bill. And for their nose small
passages into the head. Thus the Sea*Calf has his fore-feet for hands, the
Elephant his snowt, Fishes and Serpents have no members of generation, but small
passages, through which the seed runs; and the Pourcountrel, a fish so
called, has no head, but a great paunch, other creatures have no tongue that
appears outwardly; as, the Pismire; some creatures by a hollow spongie sting
do taste and take in the meat they eat: Fishes have no lungs living always in
the water, do not breathe, and so want not a neck, by which respiration is
made; but they have a larger gall than other creatures to keep them warm; see
Gods wisdom in creating those creatures that serve man with a small gall, lest
by heat of choler they should be enraged against those that use them; lesser
creatures have a larger gall, because we need not fear their hurting of us;
nature has also armed every creature, some have horns, some teeth, others
have spurrs, others are swift, as the Horse, others have large bodies as
Camels. The Hedge*hog has prickles; there is a creature called Benasus, which
pursued, voydeth so much excrements, that it cannot be taken. Thus a fish
called the Cuttle, does mud the water so that one cannot see her. Thus the
Pourcountrel by the pellucidnes of his body changes himself into diverse
colors, insects have but few members, but many feet. Their ears are moveable,
that by their constant motion they might hear the better. Some creatures have
teeth in one place, and some in another. Some in the roof of the mouth, some in
the tongue, as Fishes.

Crabs have two rows of teeth, the one in their mouth, the other in their
ventricle, and because they have but few bowels, from their belly to their vent
they have a small pipe which some improperly call their tail, for that is
necessary for those fish that swim, which a Crab does not; those creatures that
have no teeth live in a moister Element; some creatures have two ventricles as
birds, they that chew the Cud have four, they feeding upon crude food which
requires great digestion, especially milch kine. God has made lesser
creatures wiser than greater, as appears by birds-nests and Spiders-webs. The
flesh of wild creatures is more wholesome than the flesh of tame, the
superfluous humors of the one being by motion dispersed, the flesh of the other
being softer, but not so pure. The females of all creatures being the fiercest
God has made them weakest; some birds have a broader tongue than others, as
Parots, though every creature cannot speak, yet have distinct voices to know
one another by, as Aristotle says, Lib. 7. c. 7. of the parts of Animals.
Fishes have not so broad a tongue, and so swallow their meat quick^r, lest
humors meeting should stop it, and hinder the taste; it is strange that males
and females are alike for number, not more of the one than the other in men.
Those creatures that bring forth living creatures have firmer bones and flesh,
as Lions, Horses, which birds have not, the dung of the one is stronger than
the other. Hairy creatures have but short tayls. Birds that feed on flesh have
crooked bills. The Sow has a snowt which serves instead of a bill, to root up
small plants; many Fishes have no bladders, their excrementitious humors being
received into their tails and finns. Bruit beasts want those members that are
in a man, and what they have are not so placed as in a man.

Of the soul of a Brute.
NAtural Philosophers make 3. kinds of souls, from the three kinds of Animals.
Vegetative in Plants, Sensitive in Brutes, Rational in Man; as for the soul of
Brutes, it is not like ours, but, as the name for it signifies, a wind or
breath. There is a kind of a warm, spirituous breath in the blood of Beasts
which is their soul, by which is performed all its actions and operations;
hence, Levit. 17. 11, 14. it is thrice said, that the soul is in the blood;
some members are more excellent than others, yet the soul is not in them, but
in the blood which is a convenient vehicle for the vital heat. Deuteronomy. 12. 23.
They were forbidden to eat the flesh with the blood thereof, because it was the
life thereof. Hence we may learn to take heed of murder, the prohibition of
which follows immediately after the other command; that this is so, appears,

1. Because the parts of some creatures will live after that they are cut off,
and being put into the earth will draw moisture from it.

2. Because we see how the body is variously affected with the motion of the
blood. Thus we see when we are moved to anger, how the blood does boil in the
vein^. So in fear the blood does recede from the outward parts to the inward,
which causes a paleness in the face; thus joy sends out the blood, and
causes a redness in the face; thus when we are ashamed we blush, so that we
betray our selves in a fault, according to the old saying, Heu quam difficile
est crimen non prodere v^ltu.


The affections that happen in the blood are the same that happen in man. An
Ass is foolish, a Horse hot in love, and in war, and a Wolf unruly, a Lion
bold, a Fox crafty, the Dog docile, and so other creatures I could instance in.
The Tartars drink horses blood to be valiant. Those beasts that are fat are
soonest old, the vehicle of their sense being taken away, viz, their blood, but
a beast has no rational Soul, though it does exert such actions. Genesis 9. 5.
God will have the blood of man revenged on brutes, the Ox that goreth aman
shall be put to death. Levit. 20. 15, 16. The creature was to be burned that
was found naturally joined with a man; the reason of all which was, that men
might be deterred from killing his fellow creature. It being an argument a
Minore ad Majus. If God be so angry for beast killing a man, much more for one
man killing another. Now concerning the faculties of the Soul of a brute.

1. The vegetative Faculty contains under it,

1. Nutrition. Some Creatures feed only upon flesh, as Lions, Wolves, others
promiscuously, as Dogs. Some by prey, as Lions and Wolves, some upon what they
can get, as Pismires, and Earwigs, some get prey in the night as Wolves, others
day and night, as Cats. Many brutes are not made immediately for the use of man,
but for the use of other creatures, and so mediately for the use of man. The
Pismire eats the flesh and blood of a Toad, but leaves the bones.
Four-footed beasts eat more of these, whereby their flesh and milk is
increased. Serpents endure hunger a great while, otherwise they would be
injurious to man. Swallows devour Wasps, and Titte-mice Gnats. We have many
Crows, partly to destroy all Carrion, and also to destroy those worms which
are bred in the earth, which do follow in multitudes. Pies by slitting the
Barks of trees, the Worms fall out; thus Spiders, Gnats* Serpents, do clear
the air. Creatures that feed upon Mountains are the wholsomest, because the
herbs are driest on Mountains: God has ordered it so, that beasts do not sleep
much, because they should feed in the nightime. Some chew the cud, as oxen.
Some creatures are generated by copulation, others are generated out of
excrements, others both ways, as Mice.

1. By natural conjunction are produced creatures of the same kind, as Dogs,
Hearts, etc. The Serpent lays Eggs, others again generate neither by Seed nor
Eggs.

2. Some creatures are generated out of rotten wood, as Worms, lice; etc. many
creatures are generated of the excrements of other crea ures, others breed in
the bowels of living creatures; Bees are generated out of Calves that are
starved, as is noted in that History of Sampson; there is a Worm bred in the
boughs of Oak, of which we make a Scarlet color. So Gnats are generated out of
Horse-dung.

3. Some Creatures are generated partly by copulation, and partly by accident,
as Mice: Mice are generated in Ships, out of the putrid matter which lies at
the bottom of the Pump. I question whether all Creatures do not lay Eggs, and
whether a Hens Egg may not be hatched in a man's bosom. We see small Creatures
are generated in man's Body by the heat of some parts. We find Birds to have
been bred in Ships: but we leave these things to be judged of by the more
learned. Those creatures that are of most use to man do generate often, and
many at a time, as Doves and Hares: but others generate but seldom, and not
many, as Vipers, etc. as Herodotus observes. There are in Creatures distinct
Sexes, and they remain so. A Hare is not now a Male, anon a Female; hence we
imagine so many Hermaphrodites amongst Creatures. Useful creatures are
generated in a short time, as Sheep in 5 months time, Hearts in 8 Months time,
Oxen 9 Months, Sowes in 2, Dogs and Cat^s in 60 days; but Elephants 2 years;
Lions, Wolves, and Bears 3 years; some Creatures live longer than others, an
Elephant 300, a Camel 100, a Horse 50, a Dove 40, a Peacock, 25, Oxen, Dogs,
and Hogs 10, Partridges 17, Sheep 12, Goats 10, Hares and Mice, 6 years.

Concerning the Sensitive Power of Brutes. Brutes do excel man in several
outward Senses. The Boar for hearing, the Ape for taste, the Rave^ for
smelling, the Spider for Touch. God has also given beasts inward senses, they
can see objects, and distinguish between them by their Fancy, and they can
remember them, but yet they have not right reason, what they do is in
imitation, and have only shadows of Virtue; their building Nests, seeking food,
prognosticating of weather, are effects of their inward senses, which the
minutest animals have, as appears in the artificial contexture of the
Spiders-Web, and in the Pismires storing against Winter; but in some Creatures
these senses are more acute, in Fishes the Nerves are not so quick of Sense,
they perceive little pain from any wound that is given them. No Creature can be
without touch. The Mole has no Sight, but it has feeling. The Snail
discovers his way by his fleshy Horns, and upon a dangerous obstacle draws
in her Horns. As to the sensitive and loco-motive faculties that are in beasts,
they have them analogously as they are in man; the external Senses receive
external objects, and so are carried to the brain, there causing joy or
grief. Some creatures fly, Some swim, Some have a progressive motion, as
Serpents and Worms, first by a contraction, and then by an extention of the
body.

CHAP. III.
The Division of irrational Creatures.
SOme Creatures are sanguineous, others are not. The former Kind are greater;
some creatures have two, some four feet, which makes them more able to work.
Other Creatures are aquatile, and bigger than Sanguine Creatures. In all kind
of living creatures there is one, which is as it were King over the rest. Those
that have no blood are called Exsanguineous, such are insects, which though
they have not so perfect a heart, yet have something analogous to a heart.

3. Some Creatures are viviparous, and some oviparous.

4. Some Creatures are more in Number, as Hearts and Camels; some go singly, as
Birds, that have crooked talons, beasts that live upon prey, and Spiders, which
feed upon Flies. Some creatures are domestique, as the Cow and Dog, and other
creatures. It is the wonderful wisdom of God, that some shun the company of
man, others love it; concerning which Job speaks, Cap. 39. Who has set the
wild Ass at liberty, or who has loosed the bonds of the wild Ass; he
derideth the multitude of the City, he hears not the cry of the driver, he
seeks out the Mountains for his pasture, and searches after every green
thing. Will the Unicorn serve thee? etc.

5. Some creatures have more parts, some havefewer. But all creatures have
various parts, because the Soul resideth not but in an organic^ body. All
creatures consist of those parts that are necessary for their nutrition, or
augmentation, thus they have that which is analogous to bones and nerves; the
head is the seat of the Senses, wings for motion.

6. Some Creatures have feet, and they either have 2. 4. 8. or 10 feet, as
Spiders. Those Creatures that have wings, have either two wings, or four wings,
as certain insects: Eishes have neither feet nor wings, because that they live
in a thicker Medium than other Creatures do.

7. Other Creatures are made to labor, as Horses, and Camels; other creatures
God has made only for food, as Hogs. Other creatures God has made for both,
as Oxen. Some for safety, as Dogs.

7. Some creatures are dumb, as most Fishes. Other creatures have a voice, or
rather make a Noise, and especially at the time of their copulation, as
appears by Frogs, which in the time of their coitus do croak and keep a great
Noise in the waters; this may be seen plainly in Hearts and Cats, if you observe
them in the Winter time, but especially in Autumn. But this following table
will comprehend in it all the Animals that have been mentioned before, or all
that will be mentioned hereafter.

All Animals whatsoever, are either perfect or imperfect. Perfect creatures are
either rational or irrational; irrational are either those that live in the
Air, or those that live in the Water, or those that live on the earth; or else
there are some creatures which we call Amphibious, which are those creatures
that live upon the earth partly, and partly in the waters. Imperfect creatures
we call those which are partly Plants, and partly Animals, as Sponge. So is
Sea-beares-breech, which is bred out of the earth* and are like to Herbs, yet
if any one comes but nigh it they have a kind of fear, and are presently
contracted.

An Insect is such a creature whose head is contiguous, but not continuous to
his body, as we may see in a Fly. So those that live both in the air, and in
the Water, as are Frogs and Beavers; the rest are plain enough, from the very
names of them.

Now although the preceding table does sufficiently enough show the order of
our discourse, yet notwithstanding we will begin this History of Animals, and
speak of the biggest Animals first. The consideration of which will make the
other smaller kinds of Creatures more plain and easy. And thus I have showed
the use of this knowledge, and that not only in Philosophy, which is very
great, but also in Divinity. For from the nature of several beasts and birds,
we may draw several profitable inferences and instructions, which may be useful
to Divines, in the opening of several places of Scriptures, wherein several
sorts of creatures, not only Birds, but beasts and Fishes, which cannot be
explained, unless we know the nature of those creatures that are there
mentioned.

Now having finished the general table of all Animals, and showed the design
and Scope of this Treatise, together with the usefulness and benefit of it, we
shall now proceed to speak of Creatures more particularly. And, as I said
before, I shall begin the Book with the biggest Creatures first, so that the
first Animal we shall speak to, shall be the Elephant, which is the business of
the following Chapter; wherein we shall set down, not only the nature, bigness,
food, etc. of the Elephant, but also the several places of Scripture wherein it
is mentioned; and last of all, deduce those several Corrolaries, and
instructions, that may be deduced from the nature of it.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Elephant.
THe Elephant is a vast creature, but very deformed; she is also very prudent,
strong, gentle and docile; we shall treat of this Creature first of all,
because Job in his 40 th Chap: makes this creature to be the beginning of the
ways of God, or the very first work of God: we may Judge of the greatness of
this creature,

1. From his name; for Behema signifies a Beast: the Elephant in the
forecited place is called Behemoth in the plural number, which is as much as
to say beasts, because he is in stead of many beasts.

2. From his tail, of which the Scripture says, in the forecited place, that
it is like a Cedar, and yet it is of no use to him, but only to keep him from
the Flies.

3. From the quantity of his drink, for the Scripture says that he drinks up
Rivers, i. e. he drinks very much; for Arist. lib. 8. c. 9. of his History of
Animals, says that an Elephant at one feeding will drink up 9 Macedonian
measures; and in a days space he will drink thirty eight.

4. From his teeth, for he has two teeth which weigh 325. pound; and Julius
Scaliger in his 204. Exercit: does relate that he saw an Elephant's tooth
longer then a man; his teeth are called ivory; of which in Africa and Aethiopia
are made posts, pales, hedges, and styes for Hoggs; as Virgill has it in the
3. Book of his Georg. In foribus pugnam Ex auro solidoque Elephante.


5. From his footsteps, the diameter of which was seen to be 3. hands and a
thumb.

6. From his nose, for he has a snowt which he makes use of to take up his
fodder, which he can extend 10. cubits in length: he loves to be in waterish
and fenny places; until he is hindered from taking breath by some weeds, etc.
that hang over his snowt; for by reason of the vastness of his body he cannot
easily come out of the water; his height is judged to be 16. foot; that it does
delight in fenny places, Job seems to intimate in his 40. Chap. and 21. v.
where he says, he lies under the shady trees, in the Covert of the reeds and
fenns: although some would understand this of the vastness of his body, which
is so great that it cannot be covered by many trees; yet withal it shows that
it does delight to be in fenny places.

We may consider the strength of this Creature from these 6. particulars.

1. That Aristotle lib. 9th of the Hist. of Animals, affirms that it can
overthrow a house.

2. That Xtesius himself saw an Elephant pluck up a palm tree by the roots,
and when he had done he spurned it away with his feet.

3. Aelian, lib. 18. says that Elephants have tumbled down great walls; so
that toward the East when the inhabitants go to war they most commonly get the
victory by Elephants.

4. Job, Chap. 40. v. 18. says that his bones are like bars of iron.

5. Maccab. 6. and 37. it is said that upon every Elephant were strong towers
of wood wherein were 32. men besides the governor.

6. That he never sleeps lying; for if he should once lie down he could never
get up again; but though this be so large and strong a creature, yet it is so
ordered by the wonderful goodness of God, that it is a most mild and gentle
Creature, for otherwise neither man nor beast could live for him; he is not
only mild and gentle, but of all Creatures he is the mildest; and this will
appear,

1. From the Holy Scripture, Job 40. 10th, behold now Behemoth which eats
grass like an Ox, i. e. although it be so vaft a Creature, yet it is so gentle
that a man may rule it.

2. You may easily tame an. Elephant after it is taken; as to the taking of
Elephants there be diverse ways, whether they take them alive or dead. The
Aethiopians when they have killed an Elephant they build a small tent, and there
they stay until they have eaten it up. Those who would take them alive mark
the paths that they are seen most commonly to go in, and there they dig a pit
so cunningly that the Elephant coming along her old path as she used to do,
being not aware of it falls into it. As soon as she is in, she is by 3. or 4.
men beaten upon her tenderest parts very smartly until she is almost mad; when
they have so done, comes another Huntsman who deploreth her condition, and
threatens the former Hunts-men, and gives her some of the juice of barley, as
also some meat, and this he often does, coming to the pit and asking him
whether he will come out or no, until by degrees the Elephant begins to know
him, and to yield to him in any thing; another way they have to take them
alive, and that is thus; they make a very large pit of about a mile in compass,
in the place where they most use to haunt; the passage into it is very narrow
and straight, which is presently stopped up as soon as the Elephant is got in.
In Aethiopia they diligently observe what trees they lean against when they
sleep (for they sleep always leaning) then they go and cut that tree on the
other side almost in two, and having so done they go away, but never leave any
footsteps behind them to be seen; at Evening the Elephant coming to lean
against it with all his weight it breaks in two and so she falls down;
sometimes whole troops of men go to hunt her, as Strab^ says; sometimes the
tame Elephants carry armed men on their baeks; and so they take the wild ones.

3. In a little time these creatures are made so gentle that they will take out
of ones hand like a little Dog, and will as it were embrace one with his snout;
so then he will suffer one to put ones head between his jaws, and will not
shut his mouth until you pull it out again.

4. He never lays snares for any of his fellow creatures, but suffers them
to live quietly by him.

5. When whole flocks of little creatures meet the Elephant he will gently move
out of the way, lest they should bruise themselves against him.

6. Philostratus says that he saw a boy of about 13. years of age who sat
upon a great Elephant, and with a little stick guided it whither he wolud, to
the admiration of the beholders.

7. He is not fed of flesh, neither does he live by prey, but is content with
green herbs, as the Scripture says, he eats grass like the Ox.

8. He is very much delighted with music and singing.

9. He very much dreadeth any snare that a man lays for him, but most of all
when she has young ones; many times if he see a man he will go aside as if he
fled from him, lest seeing such a huge creature he should be frighted; but if
he does but give him a nod he will salute him; sometimes he will go before,
sometimes behind him, and will if need be set him in the right way: But if once
he knows that he intends to lay snares for him he destroys him; and when he
has so done he gives the carcass to the next Elephant he meets that he may
see his Enemy. Therefore they often meet together, and make a company, as Pliny
says, lib. 8. Chap. 4. of his Natural History; the gentleness, memory, and
subtilty of this Creature is so great, that Aristotle says, when he is first
tamed he will learn to make all letters with his trunk, to dance, and to bend
his knees; he will learn to do his reverence to the King, to cast a stone at a
mark, to handle arms; and so King Porus (whom Alexander overcame) had an
Elephant whom if his guide did command to kneel down would presently fall on
his knees.

He very well knows his name, and by daily use he will understand the
language of his country; and what soever he is commanded to do he faithfully
does it, never deceiving his guide: if an Elephant be to go to Sea, he will not
enter into the ship, unless the master of the ship will swear he shall return
again.

Plinus Mutianus, who was three times Consul at Rome, saw at Puteolis, that
when an Elephant at sea was forced to be thrown over board, lest he should be
frighted with the vastness of the Ocean, and the distance that he was from
land, they used to make him go backwards, and so tumble him into the sea.

Plutarch also makes mention of another Elephant, whose governor allowed him
a whole meafure of corn every day; but he who gave it him always took away
half of his allowance; the governor coming one day himself gave him a whole
measure of corn; the Elephant with his trunk parted it in half, and so
discovered the fraud of his feeder.

He tells us also of another, who was in love with ^ very beautiful woman of
Alexandria, who going by her brought her some apples, and with his trunk fawned
upon her.

Athaneus tells us of an Elephant who did no hurt at all to a little child
that lay between his legs.

Many like Examples we have in several Histories; in a certain Island in India
called Zilana are found very large ones, and those who will learn the languages
of strange countries.

When Pompey was the 2d time Consul at Rome he brought several Elephants into
the public Theater to fight with several Archers; but when the Elephants saw
that they were hated by the people, they showed themselves to be very much
troubled, which they signified to the people by several gestures and lamentable
cries; at which the common people were so moved that they wept, and cursed
Pompey for his cruelty. From what has been said it plainly appears that there
are shadows of virtue in Elephants; but this will yet further appear by what
follows.

1. Elephants are very mild and gentle not only toward other Creatures that
are but small, but also toward men which are wandering in holes, in caves, and
also toward criminal persons, who use to be cast before them to be torn in
pieces by them; which they will scarcely do unless they be drunk with wine; so
King Bocchus being enraged against 30. men, commanded them to be bound to 30.
Elephants; but the Elephants would not be bound to them, not being willing to
be Executo^s of the Kings cruelty.

2. They never gorge themselves by eating too much; and if at any time they do
eat more then they should do, they punish themselves afterward by abstaining
from meat for some days, that they may be ready to fight, or for any flight if
occasion should be; which is a great Example of Temperance and providence.

3. They never couple with any strange Elephants, nor with their own very
often, but only for generation-sake, and that not in the sight of other
Elephants, but in private by themselves.

Neither does he return to his fellows before he be very well washed; and
while the female is big the male does not leave her, but is always with her
ready to defend her; she is said to carry her young two years, and to bring
forth in the water, because she is very much afraid of the dragon. Others
report of the Elephant, that she brings forth but once in her life, and then
but one neither; which Scaliger, Exercitat. 204. Sect. 1 seems to deny, because
(says he) there are seen many young ones to go by the side of one Elephant.

4. They never leave their young ones but are always with them, to defend
them, and will lofe their life as soon as their young: when they go in
companyes, the oldest goes fore-most; when they are to go over the water, they
carry their young ones in their snow^, some carry them in their teeth ^ those
that are bigger follow them: for the great ones can go over where the young
ones cannot; all which are as it were shadows of ove and gentleness.

5. They never pass by a dead Elephant unless they can find a bough or a clod
of Earth to cover them with, by which they show a great deal of piety in
burying them.

6. They carefully cure those who are sick or wounded, they provide them meat
and cherish and help them in all their dangers, and if they see the Huntsman
they run upon him, and fright him away. When Hannibal could not make the
Elephants go over the River, he used this stratagem. He commanded that one of
them should be wounded in his ear and to be thrown into the River, and as soon
as the wounded Elephant was in, all the rest followed her.

The wounded Elephant when he is hunted seeks for Aloes, but before he uses
it, he will lift up his head, and use certain other gestures, which is (as
their Governors say) an imploring Heaven, and as it were an imitation of
Religion.

Others will salute the New Mood, and at that time many of them will get
together, and with delight and reverence, as they can, do behold it.

7. They have a desire after praise, for it was observed that one of them, who
was of a more dull capacity, was often corrected, and had but a bad esteem
amongst them. When they are commanded to do homage, as it were to the Moon, and
are not able to do it, they will strive with themselves until they can do it.
Hence we may learn good instructions, as to obedience, and to diligence in our
studies.

When they are overcome by any of their fellows, they are very much ashamed of
it, and cannot endure their presence, nay, not so much as to hear them; hence
we may learn honest aemulation: for it is commonly said, that he who yields to
any one, will be no body.

8. They cannot swim, yet they delight to be in Ships, whence Erasmus borrows
this similitude; as the Elephants who by reason of the greatness of their
bodies cannot swim, yet they love to be in Ships, so many who are unlearned,
yet love to be in the company of those that are learned. Whence we may learn
not to cast away or despise the Arts, because we are ignorant of them our
selves; but we should love and admire them in others, lest the old saying be
verified in us, viz. That learning has no enemy but the ignorant man.

9. They are said to want Gall, or at least they have very little, as appears
from Maccab. 6. 34. to provoke them to fight they showed them the juice of
grapes, and Mulberryes, which in the beginning of a fight does very much enrage
and provoke them, in so much that (as Osonius relates) they did not only carry
wooden Towers on their backs, full of men, but they also took swords in their
Teeth, with which they did good execution. But this rage (as the same Osonius
relates) does not last long, for they being impatient of any pain, if the Enemy
do but wound her on the side, she will be so enraged, that she will rush
through the Army, and by that means will so disorder it, that it cannot be put
in order again; Neither can any man make her tame again.

The long lives of the Elephants is very wonderful; some say it lives 200
years, others 300. when Alexander the Great had conquered on Phorus, King of
India, he took a great Elephant, which had fought very valiantly for his King,
and named him Ajax, and dedicated him to the Sun, and let him go with this
inscription, Alexander the Son of Jupiter has dedicated Ajax to the Sun. This
Elephant was found with the same inscription 350 years after, but many of them
do not live to that age, for they are often sick of very dangerous diseases.

11. We shall next speak of the Antipathy that is in this Creature; and though
they are many, yet we shall speak of some of the most observable.

1 They cannot endure the grunting of Hoggs, an example of which we have in the
Wars of the Magarens; for when Antipater brought a great many Elephants loaded
with armed men, against whom the Enemy brought a great Company of Hoggs in the
middle of them, after the Hoggs had been pretty well beaten, they began to fall
a grunting; the Elephants, as soon as they heard them, ran all away. We may
hence see the reason, why wise men are moved with calumny and reproaches.

2 There is a great Antipathy between Elephants and Dragons, although Elephants
do exceed them not only in the greatness of their body, but also in strength,
yet oftentimes the Dragon does overcome and ensnare him, sometimes by lurking
in paths in which he uses to go, sometimes by getting on the top of that
against which he leans at night* and because Elephants always go through
woods in Companies, the Dragon sets on the last; the first thing a Dragon does,
when he takes an Elephant, is to entangle his feet in a knot; after that the
first part he wounds is his Ear, which he wounds until the blood spout out,
for the Dragon being a very hot Creature drinks the blood of Elephants, which
he knows is cold, and that is the reason the Dragon drinks so much of it in the
Summer time. After they have killed the Elephant by sucking his blood, they
never touch the body; the Dragon will drink himself drunk with his blood, and
they will drink until they burst themselves, so that the Conqueror and
Conquered dye both together; hence Erasmus does infer the uncertain chances of
War, for oftentimes both parties perish; and we may also compare it (says he)
to Christ and Satan combating together, and also to the Tyranny of wicked men
to Christians; for as Dragons do thrist for the blood of Elephants most in the
Summertime, which they get by fraud and craft, so Tyrants do chiefly desire
the blood of good men, when Acted ^y their passion; and as Dragons oftentimes
do perish together with the Elephants, so Tyrants themselves oft-times ^^^ergo
grievous punishments; there are many famous examples to this purpose to be
brought out of Eusebius, concerning Domitian, Maximianus, Maxentius, and
Maximinus, whose cruelty was so great, that in one Month were slain 7000 by
their command, but they all underwent great and Tragical punishments; Domitian
killed himself, Maximianus was murdered, Maxentius was overcome in war, and
he together with his souldie^^ were driven into a River, and were drowned; and
Maximinus was eaten up of Worms.

The Story of Julian is known to all almost, who walking alone by himself in a
solitary place, was on a sudden wounded with a Weapon which he had about him;
he taking some of the blood in his hand, and holding it up toward Heaven, said,
Thou have overcome me, O thou Galilean; so that it was truly said of the Poet.
Ad generum Caesaris sine cade and sanguine Paali
Descendunt Reges and sicca morte Tyranni.


3. There is a wonderful Antipathy betwixt an Elephant and a Ram, which when he
sees he is much terrified, and he is even mad, yet at the sight of a Goat he
grows tame. So the Romans used to make the Elephants of the King of Epirus to
run away by bringing Rams to them; this may teach us allegorically, that
learning like the Goat does tame the fierceness of barbarous people; whence it
was well said, that he who has well learned the Arts, it does better his
manners. Thus the wind did obey Christ's command, as we may read in the
Evangelical story; so the Jews, when our Savior said these words, I am he,
fell back; so the Heathens left all their Oracles, Idols, and Divinations, when
once the Gospel of Christ was made known to them. Thus sinners when once they
received the impressions of the Holy Spirit they grew more mild and civil.

4. The Elephant is said extremely to hate a Mouse, insomuch that if the Mouse
touch any thing that is in his Manger, he will not eat any of it, so that a
small Enemy may torment an Heroic mind.

5. So if a Swallow be thrown into the water where an Elephant drinks, he will
turn from it.

6. Oftentimes the Elephant and Chamelion are fed together on a green bough;
the Elephant often eats wild-Olives, for he cannot live without them.

7. The Elephant does not love the sight of fire, neither can it endure the
sight of Grapes or Mulberries, and the reason of it is, because a red color
moves the spirits, which are conveyed through the blood; for if the blood be
once moved, the whole body is disturbed, hence those that have red garments can
never catch them. The Indian Elephant is nine Cubits high, and five broad;
sometimes she will tear an Arm of a Tree off, which twenty five men pulling
with a rope cannot bend it to the ground; when other food fails, he lives on
roots which he diggeth out of the grass.

CHAP. V.
Of the Camel.
A Camel is a very large Creature, of a tall stature, and has a hard skin, a
small head, of a brown color, very chaste, and an Enemy to Horses.

1. The Scripture too seems to intimate to us, how great it is, Matthew. 23. 24.
speaking of those who more regarded the commandments of men than of God, says
they strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel, signifying those who strain their
drink, lest they should drink a Fly, and in the mean while swallow a Camel.

2. It has a very thick skin, i. e. as Aristotle says in his second book of
the History of Animals, Chap. 2. of all four-footed beasts he has only that
which we call a Bunch; in Esai. 30. 6. He is said to sit upon the bunch of
Camels. There are found several of them in Arabia and Asia; those in Arabia
have two bunches, those are called Dromedaries.

3. These Creatures are made fit to carry burdens in War; and that they may go
the faster, they sometimes are gelded, for one Camel that is strong will carry
a thousand pound weight; they commonly will carry seven hundred.

4. In old age, or in any disease his strength does very much decay, but then
he will carry a hundred pound. Hence the proverb, that an old Camel will carry
the burdens of many Asses, i. e. That a Vert^ous man in old age or sickness
does excel many a young man who is in health. When he is to be loaded he will
kneel down if you do but touch him on his knees with your hand; when they kneel
they bend their foremost hams; they will not take more than their ordinary
burden, or more than their strength will bear.

5* Camels are a most swift Creature, by reason of the largeness of their
steps; those Camels which are small, and cannot carry any burden, yet they
will go twenty five German miles in a day.

6. They will not go beyond their usual Stages, and if once tired in a Journey,
he will not stir (though you lay on never so many stripes) unless he hear some
music.

7. They are of a very hot temper, and therefore of a very lean and spare body.
And by reason they are hot they have a very good concoction, which is the
reason why their Milk is so wholesome for man.

8. They cannot endure Cold.

9. They never over-burthen themselves with meat, but are content with a little.

10. They never drink in clear water, but first they make it muddy with their
feet, as do also the Elephants, etc.

11. They can endure thirst for four days together, but if forced to it, for
fifteen days. There are Camels found in Lybia which feed upon grass, and if it
be wet with dew, they never drink.

12. Camels have many ventricles, and not without cause, for they loving thorny
meat, and that which is very hard of digestion, it would never be so well
unless they had more ventricles than one, yet they have teeth but on one side,
because they have so many ventricles, which will digest their meat without so
much chewing,

13. They do not couple openly, but in some private place, and in that place
where they couple, there the Male and Female always meet afterward. In the
time of their Coupling they are very fierce, insomuch that they will endure no
one to come nigh them, unless it be the Keeper himself and that very scarcely
neither.

14. They are altogether free from incestuous Copulation; the young one never
goes along with his Dam, altnough you would force him to it. Aristotle gives
us an example of this, of a certain Camel that was by his Keeper brought to his
Dam (...) cover ber, who lay hid being covered with straw, the Camel leaps on
her; some of her cover^n^ falling off, he knew her, at which he being (...) he
leapt upon his Keeper, and tore him in p^^ces.

15. They have no Horns, nor teeth in both j^ws.

16. Their feet are fleshy like Geese, therefore it is that oftentimes they
make small puddles to w^sh* the^r feet in.

17. They are sometimes troubled with a kind of Ma^^iness, and sometimes they
have the Gowt, which oftentimes kills them.

18. They are said to have no gall, which must be thu^ understood; not as if
they had no choler at all, but they have a choleric humor which runs through
their veins, which is the reason that they are so patient, which would not be
were their choler in one place.

19. It is very rare to see a Camel leap, and as difficult to bring them to it;
whence the Proverb, A man is as fit for such a business, as a Camel is to leap.
Julius Caesar Scaliger tells us how to make a Camel leap; thus, let a young one
be shut up in a hot house, which is more than ordinarily heated, and at the
doors let some little bells be rung, the Camel being very much enraged with the
heat, will begin a little to lift up his feet, and afterward more and more, so
that when she comes out again, whenever she hears bells she will leap.

20. They say that there is a mutual love between Camels, for when they are in
Company, or in a Stable together, if one of them chance to be sick, the rest of
the Camels will leave their meat, and by several gestures will declare a
sympathy with him.

21. Camels are exceedingly hat^d by Horses, a notable instance of which
Herodotus has in his first Book of the War between Cyrus and Croesus. Craesus
bringing an excellent Troop of Horse into the field, Cyrus used this stratagem,
he brings a company of Camels, and sets them in sight of the Horses, who being
not able to endure their sight or smell, immediately fled away.

22. In the East they are fed among other Cattle, and Historians tell us that
several Camels have been roasted whole, being stuffed within with other small
Creatures, as in our days Oxen are roasted whole on some grand festivals.

Thus having explained the several properties of Camels, it now remains that we
show the several Allegories. 2. Why a Camel is said to be unclean, the Jews
being forbid to eat it, Levit. 11. 3. How it is that John Baptist was said to
have his garments of Camels hair.

1. For the several Allegooies.

1. A Camel is a deformed Creature, and Nature has so formed her, as if she
were Created o n purpose to carry burdens. So the Ministers of the Gospel are
despised and slighted; for Christ has not chosen the wise and strong, but the
weak, who are compelled oftentimes to carry great burdens of affliction.

2. As there is a natural enmity between a Horse and a Camel (yet so that the
Horses shun the Camels) so it is very rare to see the great men of this World
to agree one with another, who carry themselves so high in their deportment,
the Ministers carrying themselves humbly to them, yet at last those great ones
are forced to yield to them.

3. As Camels Milk is the best and sweetest, so the Doctrine of the Gospel
concerning peace with God, and remission of sins, is most sweet and pleasant,
bringing comfort to the disconsolate, and relief in the greatest misery.

4. As there is a mutual love between Camels, especially toward the sick, so
there ought to be a great care taken by Ministers to keep and preserve peace
and unity amongst men.

5. As Camels are chaste and continent, so ought all men, but more especially
the Ministers of the Gospel.

6. A^ Camels are content with a little meat, and can long en^ure thirst, so
Ministers ought to be very moderate in the use of these outward things, not
guilty of Covetousness, not Usurers, not guilty of filthy lucre, for they
should know that in this life they must have the water of tears, and the bread
of affliction.

7. As Camels fall on their knees when they take their burdens, so the
Ministers ought patiently to take their burdens, and undergo the difficulties
that may attend their Office.

8. As Camels will not go beyond their Stage, nor will they take more than they
can, so Ministers should do the like, not to cove^ another place and neglect
their own. Whence, in the Fable, the Camel desiring Horns from Jupiter, he took
from him his Ears. i. e. She desired more, when she did not make use of what
she had.

9. As Camels have many ventricles for the better concoction of what they eat,
so Ministers ought to meditate again and again, and diligently to correct those
things which they intend to preach, and not to speak what comes next.

10. As Camels have not all their gall in one place, but it runs through their
veins, so Ministers ought not easily to be provoked to anger.

2. We come now to speak of that place, Levit. 11. 4. in which the Jews were
forbid to eat the Camel, because it cheweth the Cud, but did not divide the
hoof, therefore it was unclean. The reason of which is this, the flesh of a
Camel is not unclean or noxious of it self, nor is it said it shall be un clean
to all, but only to the Jews. So again, if they touched any thing that was
unclean, they were to remain unclean until the Evening, but not for ever,
therefore we see that all things are good with respect to the time and place;
so that by these prohibited meats God would signify unto us, that chewing the
Cud is an Emblem of purity, and dividing the Hoof an Emblem of modesty, for
those Creatures which chew the Cud are fed with purer meat than those which do
not; and those Creatures which part the Hoof are not so fierce as those which
do not. That which the Jews were to learn from those Creatures which chewed the
Cud, and divided the Hoof, was this, that they ought diligently to meditate and
consider of those divine truths which at any time they heard, and from the
gentleness of those Creatures to learn mildness and courteousness toward all:
Luther in the beginning of his book of directions for reading of the Fathers,
uses this metaphor; that those Fathers only are to be chose which favor of
the spirit. So Lactantius follows the metaphor well, in his fourth Book,
Chap. 18. Concerning the prohibition of eating Hogs flesh.

So God had respect to this in all their sacrifices, as Galatinus in his
history of the Jews, lib. 11. Chap. 9. says, that those Creatures which were
sacrificed did figuratively signify unto them several Vices, and the
mortification of those Vices, and partly Virtues; so the firstlings of the
Sheep which Abel offered up to God, and the Paschal Lamb signified the
suffering of the Messiah. So Kids and Goats signified unto them the
mortification of the sins of the flesh by repentance, as also the impurity and
the filthiness of every sinner. By the Bull was signified pride, by the Calf
wantonness, by the Goat and Sparrow unconstancy. Contrarily, by the Sheep was
signified gentleness, by the Lamb innocence, by the Ox fury, by the Turtle-Dove
Chastity, by Pigeons which fly in Companies, and have no Gall, is signified
Charity; thus Galatinus.

3. Concerning the Garment of John the Baptist, which St. Matthew. says was made
of Camels hair, whence arises two enquiries. 1. as to the Matter, and 2. as to
the Form of it.

1. As to the Matter of it, we must know that the word which we translate a
Camel, signifies in Greek, a Cable-Rope, therefore

1. Some think that his Garment was made of Camels hair, as our hair Cloth is
made of Goats hair; which Garment was formerly a sign of Repentance, and did
suit with him who was a preacher of Repentance. Philip was of the opinion that
John Baptists Garments were made partly of Camels hair, and partly of Flax; as
amongst us, we have some stuffs which are half silk, which the Jews were not to
wear, as appears, Deuteronomy. 22. 11. So that in this respect also that kind of
Garment (...) very well suit with him who was to preach the abolishing of the
Law, and the Conversion of Jews and Gentiles to one Lord, and also to signify
that the Priest hood of the New Testament did not consist in Garments.

Some think that it was woven with thick flax, like to our Cotton, therefore
the Monks of the Order of St. John imitate him to this day, by such a Garment;
but I am apt to believe that it was made only of Camels hair.

2. Concerning the fashion of it, some do enquire what the reason is that Elias
(whom John mentions) is said to be a hairy man, and girt with a girdle of
leather about his loins, 2 King. 1. 8. which was the better to defend him from
the extremity of the weather, he being a man that was often in the open Air,
and in the Wilderness; and therefore John the Baptist would have his Garment
like the Garment of Elias; and therefore Limners now adays do not well in
representing John wrapped in a Camels skin, which makes him look more like a
Satyr than a Man. So Heb. 11. 37. we read that the Christians wandered up and
down in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, the benefit of which was only to keep them
from cold, as we see in the example of Elias.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Lion.
THe Lion is a fierce and intractable Cre^ture, but yet famous, because it has
the shadows of many Virtues, which we may learn partly from the properryes of
his body, and of his soul. Those which belong to his body are these.

1. His bones are so firm and solid that they are scarcely perceived to have
any cavity in them, and yet they are but very small; and therefore it is that
his Neck is so stiff and hard, that many have thought that it had no joints,
but was one continued bone.

2. The strength of a Lion is so great, that he can at once break all the bones
of a man's body; therefore it is that we find in holy writ, What is stronger
than a Lion? Judge. 14. 18. And so Solomon says, that a Lion is the strongest
of Creatures, Pro. 30. 30. Hence comes the proverb, as good vex a Lion. Thus
Genesis 49. v. 9. it is said, Judah is a Lions Whelp, he stooped down he couched as
a Lion, and as an old Lion; by which is signified to us the great strength of
the Jews, who although they have oftentimes been worsted, yet there have been
some branches left of them even until Christ's time. So Numb. 24. 9. he
concludes; he lay dew^ as a Lion, and as a great Lion, who shall stir him up?

3. As the Lion is the King, so it is the hotte^st of all Creatures, and
therefore he soon digesteh his prey; he is also a greedy and devouring
Creature, and oftentimes eats his prey without chewing, which he vomiting up
eats it again.

4. By reason of his great heat he breeds much choler, and therefore in the
Summer time he is continually troubled with a quartane fever.

5. Sometimes having eaten too much, he is forced to abstain from meat for two
or three days, and afterward for some time to eat but once every other day;
which afterward makes him follow the prey with more greediness.

6. His dung is very dry and hard, so that he eases nature with a great deal
of difficulty. He makes his water as a Dog does, with one leg lift up, which
comes from him with a great deal of difficulty.

7. He has short eyelids, but yet very great eyes; and that is the reason
that he is so troubled with the Gnats which fly in his eyes, that he is forced
sometimes to plunge himself in the water when he sleeps.

8. When he sleeps, he sleeps with his eyes open, which is but very little; he
is often seen to move his tail when he is asleep, that men may see that they
are not fast asleep.

9. Some Lions have Manes, and those are the fiercest; and therefore those in
America are very fearful and timorous, so that they cannot endure the sight of
man.

2. We come now to speak of the properties which are in the soul of a Lion.

1. A Lion is a generous, proud, cruel, hasty Creature; and as Horses show
their anger by hair, so do Lions by their tail, which they strike against the
ground when at any time they are angered; but when their passion is a little
over, they strike their own backs with it.

2. They hurt no man, and are seldom angry, except they are forced to it by
great hunger, on have been hurt first; they seldom pursue or hurt man or child,
unless it be in their old age, when they are not able to encounter with wild
beasts for a prey; and therefore it is that when they are old, they are seen to
wander up and down in Cities for a prey; Julius Camillus, a French man, tells
us this story of himself; a certain Lion did pursue him, but coming to him did
him no mischief at all; the reason whereof he makes to be this; because the
Lion is one of the twelve signs of the Zodiac; which I do not at all approve
of.

3. The Lion never makes a prey of those who lie flat on their faces, and seem
as if they were dead. I have read of one who putting his hand in a Lions mouth,
got hold of his tongue and killed him; it is strange, that although he can
break Iron, yet he never meddles with wood, it being the weaker of the two; and
therefore it is, that they are always kept up in wooden Dens.

4. They are oftentimes seen to hide themselves in the fields, lest Passengers
should be frighted at them.

5. When they are hunted, they do not make much haste from the Hunsmen; and
although they pursue him over hedge and ditch* yet he will not fly, but goes
on slowly before, and oftentimes stands still in the sight of the Hunters, as
it were preparing himself to encountet with them; and when he comes to a great
hedge, he then runs swiftly away, that he may get sight of the Hunters again,
that so they might not think he hid himself for fear; so that the Lion is
without any malicious craft or guile. Neither are they ever seen to look
asquint on any one; and as they will not fly from the hunter, so they will not
willingly run themselves into a snare; and therefore it is, that when they go,
they cover their footsteps with their tail, lest huntsmen should follow them
by their footsteps. 7. When at any time they are put to flight, they do strive
all they can to vomit; and do provoke themselves to vomit by putting their claw
into their throat, that thereby emptying themselves they may be the lighter to
run. This they do also, if they find at any time, that they have overcharged
their stomachs. 8. The Lyoness, when she has young ones, will fight so
fiercely to defend them, that she will lose her life before they shall be taken
from her. Aelian relates a story of a Bear in a Mountain of Thracia, who going
into a Lions Den, the Dam being gone out to look for a prey, found several
young ones in the Den, no one being there, he destroys them all; the Lion and
Lyoness returned and took him in the very act; he for fear climbeth up into a
high Tree, thinking there he was safe; the Lion he runs out into the wood
(the Lyoness in the mean time standing at the Tree where the Bear was) and
wandering up and down, found a man with a Hatchet in his arms, whom he forced
to go along with him, taking hold of his clothes, and led him to the Tree where
the Bear was, and there he made some signs to him, that he should cut it down;
which when he had done, the Lion soon destroyed the Bear; which being done, he
carried the man into his way again. 9. In a great multitude the Lion diligently
observes who it is that wounds him, and takes him alone from all the rest
of the company, and teareth him in pieces: hose who have weapons and do not
hurt him, he will do them no hurt, but only affright and terrify them.

1. Although, by what has been said, we may gather the gratitude of the Lion;
yet it will further appear by the example of a Lion at Rome, who would not
touch Androdus's servant, because that not long before he had pulled a thorn
out of his foot; neither do they always exercise their power on every object.

2. There are ^ix ways whereby to make these Creatures mild and gentle.

1. The first way is to hood-wink them; Pliny recites many examples to this
purpose, which happened at Rome.

2. To give them meat, so as to fill their bellies; for Arist. (lib. 9. of the
History of Animals, cha. 44) says that when they are full and satisfied, they
are very tame, tractable, and gentle.

3. When they are kept in a House; whence Antonius did make them so tame and
gentle by this meaus, that his Chariot sometimes was drawn by Lions; and Hanno
also, the Cart^aginian, did by this means so tame them, that they did car^^
^^rthens like Asses; and which is more, Antonius Caracalla had some Lions which
he brought up in the house, which were so gentle that they would lick his
mouth, and at dinner time used to sit on a bench by him, and to lie in the bed
with him like little dogs.

4. When they are kindly used, or have received any benefit, as appears* from
the forecited story of Androdus; also their Keeper may lead, nay, strike them,
and they will do them no harm.

5. If any one lies flat on his face, and does feign as if he were dead.

6. If their mouths are miraculously shut, as in the case of Daniel, Chap. 9.

11. They will never injure a Camel, if they can have any other prey; hence
Herodotus recites that Xerxes did look on it as a prodigy, and as a token of
bad success in his war, when a Lion in his Army tore a Camel in pieces.

12. They always hide themselves in some Cave, or high Mountain, in which they
most delight to be, and there they will sit in such a posture as may the better
fit them with greater violence to set on the next prey. Hence David, Psalm. 10.
v. 8, 9. does recite all the several postures of Lions, and does apply them to
his Enemies. But if the prey be so far from him, that he thinks he will escape,
he will roar and make such a noise, that he will even amaze the wild beasts, so
that they are not able to stir any further, and so become a prey; hence it is
that the Scripture, when at any time it speaks of an Enemy, to show the
terribleness of him, sets it out by the roaring of a Lion. 14. When he
comes to a wild beast, he encompasseth him with his tail, so that he cannot
get out: after once he has taken his prey, he teareth it to pieces with his
teeth and claws; and after that he has broken all the bones, and torn the
flesh in pieces, he then first licketh up the blood, before he eats any of
the flesh. 16. If he espyeth an enemy approaching, he immediately leaves his
prey, and pursues his Enemy; and if he sees that he flies from him, he
pursues no further; but if he will not run away from him, and if he stands
to him, he presently destroys him, and then returns to his prey again. 17.
He always leaves some of his prey for other beasts. 18. Whatever Creature the
Lion wounds, the blood of it turns black, yet the fat of a Lion is good
against a bite of any other Creature. There is a kind of secret Antipathy in
other Creatures against the fat of a Lion. 19. He can contract his nails and
hide them as it were in his flesh, which he does many times, lest they should
grow dull in cold weather. 20, The Lion never fe^deth with the Lyoness, nor
with any other Creature, but always feeds in solitary places, and deserts.
21. As the Lyoness is very fierce, so she is also very leacherous; she will
mingle her self with other Lions, also with the Libard and Civet. 22. In those
places where there are many Lions, if any of them are taken, the rest presently
run away. 23. They cannot be taken but in pit-falls, wherein a Lamb or two must
be put, and then they easily run in for them. There are several things which
the Lion hates, and cannot endure: 1. A Lion cannot endure the noife of
wheels. 2. He cannot endure a Cocks-comb, he is very much affrighted at the
sight of it. 3. A Lion is very much afraid of fire. 4. He is as great an enemy
to the crowing of a Cock. 5. They are easily afrighted with the sight of any
that looks like a Ghost, or any ways terrible to look upon; but above all
creatures they hate an Ape most, which is a crafty cunning Creature, which a
Lion has very little of; yet when a Lion is sick, nothing will cure him so
soon as the blood of an Ape. 7. A Lion cannot endure to see a Wolf. Philip
Camerarius tells us that a Lion has no such hatred against a Cock, for they
have been oftentimes seen to have taken both Cocks and Hens, and tear them in
pieces; we have several names in Scripture, by which Lions are called, which
are especially four. 1. They are called Whelps, that is, those young Lions that
are not yet able to seek their prey: but although a Lion is so fierce,
notwithstanding the divine providence has put such an affection into these
Creatures toward their young, that they will bring them food into the Den,
until they are able to go out to take their prey. 2. They are called Kephir in
the Hebrew, which signifies those Lions that are not yet come to full age, but
are of middle age, at which time they are most ravenous and greedy of their
prey. The Psalmist compares the covetous to Lions whelps, being violent and
greedy Creatures. 3. They are called Ari, which is when they are at the
strongest that they will be; it comes from an Hebrew word, Arah, which
signifies to snatch, and devour, because at that age they are aptest to tear
and devour: we find that Tyrannical Rulers are set out in Scripture by Lions.
These Lions when they grow old are called Levi, because then they are not able
to go out to seek their prey, but hide themselves in Dens, and behind bushes,
and lie as if they were asleep, and move no part of their body; so when any
beast passes by, he sets upon him on a sudden, and teareth him in pieces;
just as Cats cateh Birds and Mice; but if they are so old, that they cannot get
their prey, they sometimes do fall upon men and destroy them. But it is
ordained so by divine providence, that their young ones bring them meat when
they are not able to go for it themselves. A Lion lives to a great age, for
several of their teeth have been very much eaten in, which shows that they
were very old.

3. Although the Lion is of a noble and generous spirit, yet sometimes also he
is very fierce and cruel; from whence we may learn several good instructions;
and first we will consider what the Scripture speaks, as when the Jews, Christ,
the Apostles, and all wise men are called Lions: hence Genesis 49. 9. Kings are
called Lions, whom no one dare raise; and as the bones of a Lion are firm and
strong, so the Jewish state was so firmly established that although it had many
enemies, yet they could never overthrow it. Moreover though the Lion is a
strong Creature, yet is he not proud of his strength, neither has he any craft
or guile, but does all his actions openly; so in the Jewish state right and
Justice ought to prevail before fraud and injustice; and as the Lion is a great
Enemy to the Wolf; so all Commonwealths ought to be armed with strength and
power against all sedition and heresy; so David, Psalm. 101. 7. He that works
deceit shall not dwell within my house, and he that tells lies shall not
tarry in my sight. And though a Lion be sometimes very fierce, yet he is then
so noble and generous, that he will spare those who crouch to him; so it is
policy in Princes to be ready to forgive, according to that of Virgil, Parcere
subjectis, and debellare superbos,
to spare the humble, and to bring down the proud; and as Lions sleep but very
little, so all Rulers ought to be vigilant and watchful, as Homer seems to
intimate to us.

(...), i. e.

It is not fit for a Governor to sleep much; and therefore it is that the
Ancients have given a Lion in the Arms of Princes, to show that they ought to
be pitiful and merciful toward their subjects; yet also just and impartial to
all malefactors and offenders; therefore Solomon compares the wrath of a King
to the roaring of a Lion, Pro. 20. 2. The wrath of a King is as the roaring of
a Lion, whose provokes him to anger sins against his own soul; and we find
it prophesied by Joel, chap. 2. 10. concerning God, That he shall utter his
voice as a Lion; thus Christ is called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Rev. 5.
5. so the Tribe of Judah is called a Lion, and a Lions whelp, Genesis 49. 9. So
called because it was such a settled and strong Government, which continued even
until Christ's time, and was then the most famous Government in the whole
World; and although they had several Kings and Judges, famous for power and
wisdom, yet Christ by way of eminency is called the Lion of them all; which is
plain, as we might show in several particulars; as his satisfaction for our
sins, his conquering the Devil, and his several miracles. And as the Lion, when
he roars, does make the other beasts to quake and tremble; so Christ by his
word has converted several Nations to himself, Mic. 5. 8. we read that the
remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles, in the midst of many people, as a
Lion amongst the beasts of the Forest, as a young Lion among the flocks of
Sheep, who if he goes through, both treads down and teareth in pieces, and
none can deliver. Thus Christ brought the Jews from the Babylonish Captivity:
so holy men are compared to Lions, for as Lions do prepare themselves to take
their prey by setting them in a convenient place, by watching, etc. so the
Apostles were made all things to all men, that they might gain some.

2. As Lions by their roaring do affright their prey, that they may make it
stand still astonished; so the Ministers not by force of Arms, but by the word
of God, ought to bring men to Repentance.

3. As Lions will not suffer their prey to be taken from them, so the Apostles
gave all diligence by visiting the Churches which they had planted, lest they
should be drawn aside by Satan, the common Enemy.

4. Again, we find just men compared to Lions, Pro. 28. 1. The Righteous are as
bold as a Lion. For first, as a Lion is a strong and bold Creature, scorning
none of his fellow Creatures, so the true Church, i. e. all holy and pious men
are armed with the spiritual strength of the Lion of the tribe of Judah, by
which they can overcome and conquer all those dangers and difficulties which do
attend them in this World.

5. As the Lion, if he finds himself sleepy, does lie down and sleep, let it be
where it will; Thus the righteous are prepared to undergo all dangers, let them
happen in what place soever, according to the old verse, Omne solum forti
patria est, seu piscibus aequor;
A valiant man is never out of his Country.


Moreover, as Lions have nothing of craft or deceit, nor will they look asquint
on any one, neither will they hide themselves when hunted; so holy and pious
men are plain and open in all their dealings.

And as Lions do hate Apes and Wolves, so true Christians are Enemies to all
Tyrants and dissemblers; Pindar compares a wise man to a Lion, being ready to
bear all burdens and hard-ships that shall be laid upon him; but he is also
like a Fox, taking counsel in all his actions; thus we have shown what good we
may learn from this Creature; and we will consider what we may learn from those
evil qualities which are in him.

We find in holy Scriptures, that all Tyrants, Hypocrites, and the Devil
himself is compared to a Lion; and we find also, Dan. 7. 4. that the Assyrian,
Chaldean, and Babylonish Monarchies are compared to a Lion, and an Eagle, which
might be for these reasons.

1. Because as a Lion is a strong and fierce Creature, so most of the Kings of
the abovenamed Monarchies, were both potent and cruel, as Nimroth,
Salmanasser, Sennacherib, Nebuchodonosor, Xerxes, etc.

2. As the Lion is the chiefest of Creatures, so the Assyrian King had vast
Dominions and territories, of which we may read at large in holy writ.

3. As the Lyoness is a most leacherous Creature, so the Chaldeans and most of
their Kings were subject to lust and gluttony; so we find Sardanapalus, who by
his lust did lose his Kingdom; we read, Psalm. 22. 14. that Christ complains,
that his Enemies are like Lions; and in another place, he calls them Lions, the
Priests Bulls, and the Scribes Dogs; as also Pro. 26. 15. As a roaring Lion,
and a hungry Bear, so is a wicked Prince over the people. For as a hungry Lion
spares none, so wicked Princes are cruel toward the innocent, devouring the
Sheep. Aristotle calls Tyrants Lions, but more cowardly Princes he compares to
Hares; so the fable of the Hares speaking to the Lions, who could scarcely
speak for fear of being devoured by them: it may fitly be applied to those
timorous men who dare not reprove great Potentates.

Moreover we read, Eccles. 4. 35. where it is said, be not thou as a Lion in
the house, by which all Governors of Families are taught to be mild and gentle
toward their Families, and never to disturb that conjugal love and society
which ought to be between Man and Wife, which we are taught by the Lion, who is
never angry with the Lyoness; and as the Devil, so all wicked men who are his
instruments, are compared to Lions; for although the Jews in the Gospel called
Satan Beelzebub, which signifies the Prince of lies, which they spoke out of
disgrace, yet the Apostle Peter compares him more fitly to a roaring Lion,
going about seeking whom he may devour: for though the Lion can go three days
together without any sustenance, yet afterward it makes him follow his prey
with more eagerness and fierceness.

And as the Lion is fierce and cruel when he has got a prey, and in the
pursuit of it covers his footsteps with his tail, lest the Huntsmen should
follow him by his steps; so the Devil is cunning and diligent to take all
occasions to get men into his snare, which he does sometimes by drunkenness, or
some other sin.

Further, as the Lion does not eat one part of his prey only, but devours it
all; so the Devil does destroy both body and soul; and as Lions are fiercest
when old, wandering near Cities making a prey of Men, so the Devil in these last
times is most diligent and watchful to seduce the souls of men: and as a Lion
does not break wood (though it be weakest) but Iron; so the Devil sets on those
that are most secure; therefore let him that stands take heed lest he fall. And
as a Lion cannot endure the crowing of a Cock, so the Devil is only by the
sound of the Gospel overcome, not by external means.

Finally, as the Cock is a weak Creature, yet is proud of his crowing; so the
Saints, though weak and feeble in themselves, yet do make their boasts, and do
confide in the promises of Christ; we have to this purpose the Examples of the
Martyrs, who were cast to Lions, yet were not at all amazed; and those several
fables of the Lions are not to be made light of, for from them we may learn
good Morals.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Bear.
THe word Bear, is derived from the latin word Urgeo, which signifies to urge
or provoke. It is a very large Creature, and very strong; mischievous,
perfidious, and deformed, and a great lover of Honey: we shall speak to the
properties of this Creature more particularly.

1. Although, as we said, it is so fierce, yet it is not so strong as a Lion,
nevertheless it can break a man's backbone asunder at once.

2. Though it has such a strong body, yet it has a very weak head, and
therefore it is when he comes down from a Tree, he comes down backwards, but if
he be forced to leap down, he takes great care to defend his head with his
fore-feet. Pliny tells us that there have been several Bears found dead in the
Sand at Rome, which were supposed to have had some blow on the head, which
killed them.

3. When the Male and Female meet together for Copulation, afterward they go
backwards, and never see one another again, but hide themselves in some Cave or
Den, and therefore it is very rare to find a Bear who is big with young; there
is a time in the Winter quarter when they sleep for several days together, and
that so soundly, that it is a difficult thing to awake them; and this is the
time in which they grow fat; when they are awakened, they suck their fore-feet
(which are sweeter than their hind-feet, because they are more in use) and do
exceedingly like the juice which they suck from thence.

4. The female is said to be very leacherous, and does bring forth very
deformed young ones, which are so deformed, that as soon as they are brought
forth, it seems to be but a mere lump of flesh, without eyes or hair, and
little bigger than a Mouse, but not so big as a Cat, which she afterward
brings into shape and form by licking of it; therefore Virgil said, that he
composed his Verses as Bears do form their young ones, viz. by licking, i. e.
with a great deal of difficulty. Scaliger proves the contrary, Exercitat. 6.
Sect. 15. where he alleadges that there have been several Bears found in the
Alps big with young, which were cut open, and the young ones were found to be
perfectly shaped in all its parts; and others have observed that the young ones
of Bears as soon as they are brought forth, are enclosed in a certain skin,
which cannot be got off but by licking, and it is a long while ere they can get
it off so too.

5. The Female has a great love and affection to her young ones, and sits over
them as a Hen does over her Chickens, by which she cherishes them exceedingly.

6. She is very fierce and cruel when she has young; therefore Solomon says,
that is it better to meet a Bear robbed of her Whelps than a fool in his folly,
Pro. 17. 12. thus we find God speaking, Hos. 13. 8. I will meet them as a Bear
that is bereaved of her Welps, and will rend the caul of their hearts; so 2 Samuel 17. 8. we find that David's counselors were compared to Bears.

7. They love to be in Caves and secret places; and if they can find none, they
will make themselves a hiding place with boughs of Trees, which they will place
so closely together, that it will shelter them from rain.

8. They exceedingly love honey, and oftentimes do smell out Bees in a hollow
Tree by the scent of the Honey-combs, which they desire, possibly, not so much
out of love to the Honey, as to be stung with Bees, which cures them of the
Headache, a disease with which they are often troubled.

9. It is very strange and wonderful to see how they will climb a Tree, and
with their paw will tear off the bark from the Tree where the Bees are.

10. They will eat any thing; as Pears, Nuts, Plumbs, flesh; yea, some will eat
Carrion: and if at any time they perceive that they have overcharged their
stomachs, they eat Pismires, which causes them to vomit, which eases them;
they are also very full of revenge, and if any one does injure them, they will
be sure to be revenged of him; and though they are useful in carrying of
burdens, and drawing of water, yet their Masters often find, to their cost,
that they are revengeful and perfidious. Further, it is to be observed, that a
Bear is extraordinarily delighted with music. Paulus Diaconus, and Olaus
Magnus tells us a story, that there are multitudes of Bears in the South, who
oftentimes will come to Shepherds, and will make them play to them, till hunger
forces them to go away; and as soon as they are gone, the Shepherd will sound
his horn, by which they are so affrighted, that they will never come more.

Moreover (as we said before) it is a very mischievous Creature; they are often
seen upright standing on their hind-feet, and many of them will leap very well,
and are very nimble and agile in several other Actions; as running, dancing,
etc. Sindrigal, Prince of Littaevia, had a certain Bear which he had brought up
by hand, and used so to the house, that he would every day come out of the wood
to his house and knock at the door, and wait like a beggar, until some one had
brought him some meat, which when he had got, he returned into the wood again;
other Bears have been seen to hunt Cows and Horses; and if they see a Cow with
Calf, they will with more eagerness pursue her; some tell us that when the
female has young ones, she will work her self on her back to the Cave where
her young ones are, lest any one by her footsteps should follow her to her
Den; but if she perceive that the Hunters have followed her, and have espied
their Den, she then immediately takes some of her young ones in her mouth, and
some on her back, and carries them into some high Tree.

Again, he is often troubled with sore eyes; there are abundance of them almost
in all parts, except in Africa, and Numidia; and therefore Virgil was much
mistaken, when he speaks of the Bears of Africa; he never drinks as the Dog,
nor sups up the water as other Creatures do, but as it were bites it up.

Hunts-men have no device to entrap them so well as by laying honey over the
pit-fall, which they smelling, come immediately to the place where it is, and
so are got; but they have several other ways to entrap them; one cannot more
enrage a Bear, then to strike or cut him on the Nose, which is the tenderest
part about him; hence the Proverb, As good take a Bear by the Nose.

Further, it has an inveterate hatred against Horses; and as in other
Creatures, so in this, their hatred remains after their death; hence it is
reported, that a Bear will fly at the sight of a Horses skin.

Thus much for the properties of this beast, we will next consider what we may
learn from it. The Holy Scripture compares the Persian Monarchy to a Bear,
because as the Bear after he has seized on any man as a prey, the first thing
he does is to flea off his skin, which is a sign of his cruelty; so the Persian
Kings were very cruel and inhumane in punishing Offenders and Malefactors, as
Cambyses, who inflicted this punishment on an unjust man, viz. He commanded his
skin to be flead off. There are three things, especially, to name no more, in
which the Persian Monarchy and a Bear are alike.

1. As a Bear does exceedingly love and delight in Honey, which by the scent
they find out; so the Persians are mere gluttons and Epicures, wholly given to
delight and pleasure; being prodigal in Clothes, and no less in the furniture
of their Houses, it being common among them to have golden Tables, and Beds of
the same; neither do they come behind hand in lust and uncleanness, for
Cambyses defloured his own Sisters; and Herodotus reports of them, in his fifth
Book, that it was a Custom among them, at any feast or banquet, for every one
to bring in his Concubine.

2. As Bears are often troubled with sore Eyes; so the Persians had very little
skill or insight in Military affairs; so Herodotus, lib. 7. affirms that Xerxes
brought an Army into the field, consisting of almost an incredible number, yet
he could not subdue the Grecian Monarchy: so likewise the Persians, when they
fought against Hellespont, where a vast Army of the Persians were easily
overcome by Alexander the Great, as the Reader may see more at large in Q.
Curtius.

3. As Bears are observed to have very weak heads, several of them at Rome
having been killed with a small blow on the ear; so the Persians giveing
themselves wholly up to lust and pleasure, did destroy the natural strength and
vigor of their bodies, which was the reason of that ill success which we read
they had in all their wars. Herodotus, lib. 3. tells us, that after a war,
seeing the heads of many Egyptians and Persians, he observed the heads of the
Persians to be softer, whenas the heads of the Egyptians were much harder and
firmer, they wasting their strength in lust and lasciviousness: there are
several things I have observed in the nature of a Bear, which may not unfitly
be compared to a Scholastical and Philosophical life; for instance, the Bears,
at first when young, are very deformed Creatures, until she by licking them
has brought them into shape; thus it is most commonly amongst Scholars, the
first thing they put out is not so polite and well digested as the next is: and
then secondly, as the Bear has a great love and affection to her young ones,
thus we see that Scholars do set a high price and value upon the first fruits
of their study. Thirdly, as the Bear is so good at climbing of Trees, thus
learned men should make it their chiefest business to seek those things that
are above. Again, as a Bear loves Caves and Dens, thus Scholaos love
retiredness and secrecy; moreover, as the Bear when he is tied to a stake, will
still be walking round it; thus the Scholar delights to be in his study, and
among his Books, spending all his time there. Again, as Bears love honey, thus
learned men cannot endure to spend their time in reading of dull Books, but in
those Books wherein they find something of sweetness, the reading of which is
their chief business; for eating and drinking that is a thing they do by the
by, as the Bear that does not drink as the Dog, nor sup up his water as other
Creatures do, but does as it were bite up the water when he drinks. And as
the Bear loves Music, so do Philosophers, who are like to this Creature for
passion and revenge; and as these Creatures are deformed, oftentimes troubled
with bad eyes, having but weak heads; thus it is most commonly with Scholars,
who are oftentimes troubled with the same distempers; who oftentimes are
seduced with the pomps of this World, and blinded with the vanities thereof, as
they say that Bears if you hold but a bright silver Basin before their eyes,
they cannot see. Albertus tells us of certain white Bears, which are
Amphibious* and live both in the Air and Water; I have read that Heliogabalus
sent several Bears into the Room where were several of his guests, whom he had
made drunk. I need not speak of those men that have been turned into Bears,
which as it seldom happens in Physics, yet it is often seen, as to their
Morals; some being more like Bears than men, as others are like Swine.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Panther, or Leopard.
THe Panther, or Libbard, is called in Low Dutch Lin Panterthier, which is also
called in Dutch Panther, the Female is called a Libbard or Panther; it is a
Creature which is found in Asia, the Males are as big as a Calf, the Females as
big as a Beagle; it is a fierce and crafty Creature, his skin being full of
little spots.

1. He is very fierce, and especially aims at a man's eyes, as Basil says in
these words, I have seen and partly heard, as a thing most certain, that the
Panther, of all Creatures, is the greatest enemy to man; some have showed him
the picture of a man, which with a great deal of rage he has tore to pieces,
which is an evident argument of his hatred to man; thus we may plainly see what
an Enemy Satan is to God, by that enmity which he shows to man, which is his
Image; thus far St. Basil.

2. As he is fierce, so he is very swift and nimble; thus Osonins, in his
History of Portugal, lib. 9. reports that the King of Portugal sent forth a
Panther which was somewhat tamed, who notwithstanding when he was let loose
into the fields or woods, did with a wonderful eagerness destroy several beasts
which were in the field; as Hearts, etc. A further instance of their swiftness
we have, Hab. 1. 8. God says he would bring the Chaldeans upon them, whose
Horses should be swifter than Leopards.

3. It has a very beautiful skin, spotted with diverse Colors, the spots are
like an eye, so that his skin looks as if it were full of eyes, the spots are
blacker in the Male than in the Female, to which the Prophet alludes, Jer. 13.
23. saying, Can the Leopard change his spots?

4. It is very crafty and subtle, and has a very deformed head, insomuch that
it frightens all other Creatures (as all other Creatures hate a Cat, or any
thing like it) but the rest of her body is very beautiful and comely, which is
the reason why she hides her head between her legs: it is observed that she is
most cruel to any beautiful Creature; thus Jer. 5. 6. The Wolf of the Evenings
shall spoil them, and the Leopards shall watch over their Cities, every one
that goes out thence shall be torn in pieces: For he oftentimes feigneth
himself dead, or fast asleep; or elfe she hides her self that so she may
better take other Creatures for her prey.

5. Of all Creatures the Panther has a most fragrant and pleasant smell, by
which means he draws other Creatures to him, and so makes a prey of them;
thus Aristotle, in his Problems, Sect. 23. Quest. 4. enquireth into the reason
why a Panther of all other Creatures should smell the sweetest? Some learned
men tell us that it is from the place they are in, Asia being a hot Region, all
sweet scents being hot and dry; yet we may very well doubt of this reason,
until we have plainer evidence of the truth of it.

6. If he has at any time eaten any poison, he presently seeks for some of
man's dung, which he with a great deal of eagerness devoureth, and it is a
certain remedy for him, speedily curing him.

7. It is observed that they will sleep three whole days together, and after
he is awake he roareth out, and then it is that his body smells the sweetest,
at which time abundance of Creatures are drawn to him by the scent of his body.

8. Although he be so fierce and cruel a Creature, yet it is reported of him,
that he is not unmindful, or ungrateful to any one that does him any courtesy:
for the truth of which we have the testimony of several Historians, which do
affirm that if he meets a Passenger that is wandering up and down in a Wood
and cannot get out again; if he has formerly showed any kindness to his young
ones, he will take him and set him in his way. Aelian tells us that the
Leopard, while young, accompanies with the Kid; it is reported that a certain
Kid being cut to pieces, and given to the Leopard to eat, he would not touch
it, being his old companion. Although men oftentimes do indeed devour as it
were their near relations.

9. If at any time he has touched any poisonous flesh, he immediately dies.
The Panther has an inveterate hatred against three kinds of Creatures more
especially.

The first is the Dragon, whose voice he cannot endure, neither the scent of
him.

2. He has an inveterate hatred against the Hyaena, and that not only while he
is alive, but after he is dead; so he hates the Leopard, that if he sees a
man that has only his skin, he will fall upon him and destroy him; it is
affirmed by some, that if the skin of a Hyaena and a Leopard be hung up both
together, the hairs of the Leopards skin will all fall off. 3. He is a great
Enemy to the Cock, he cannot endure his flesh, insomuch that he will not meddle
with a man that he smells has eaten of a Cock.

11. The Female is not so cruel as the Male, for she has a very large heart;
the reason why she is so timorous and fearful, if at any time she does any
mischief, it is merely out of fear.

12. The Female is very leacherous, she not only coupling with the Panther, but
with the Lion also.

13. The Females skin has a more fragrant and odoriferous smell with it then
the skin of a Male.

14. Although this Creature be so valiant and s^btle, yet it is easily
intoxicated with wine, which he is very greedy of; therefore it is that the
Huntsman pours wine into the water that he drinks first in a morning, and
when he is very thirsty, he is drawn with the scent of the wine to the place;
after he has drunk, it flies into his head, which makes him wanton, sporting
himself in the fields with other Creatures, until at last they are tired, and
fall asleep; so that then they are easily taken: and thus we have shown the
several properties of this Creature, let us now see what is to be learned from
them; and although we may compare them to all cruel men, to Devils, etc. yet we
will first take notice what the Scripture says; thus we find it comparing the
Grecian Monarchy (as also Alexander the Great, who was a chief member of it) to
the Panther or Leopard; the reasons of which according to Pererius, and others,
are these that follow.

1. As the Panther is no bigger than a Beagle, yet is very strong, thus we see
that Alexander the Great had but a small Empire, yet with an Army consisting
but of 40000 men, conquered the Eastern Countries.

2. As the Leopard is a very swift Creature, thus we read how that Alexander
the Great, in the space of twelve years had got the whole Empire to himself,
for at twenty years of age he enjoyed his Fathers Kingdom, he dyed when he was
but thirty three years of age, at which age men use to have but little of any
experience and prudence; but how much he gained in those twelve years, we shall
know hereafter more at large: he being once asked how he brought about such
great things in so small a time, he answered, (...), never delaying nor
procrastinating any business; but it is much to consider what a fiery bloody
Empire he had; therefore Apelles pictured him carrying Lightening in his hand,
his Mother Olympias when she was with Child dreamed that it lightened into her
womb, and that it caused a great flame. Iu seventeen days time he built that
noble City of Alexandria, seated upon the River Tanais. In three fights he
conquered all Asia, and built seventy Cities, and as Hieronymus says well,
that he was rather famous for his victories than his war, thus we read in the
Prophet Daniel, who speaking of the Leopard, chap. 7. v. 6. says, th^^
dominion was given to it; for when he came to Jerusalem and met the High Priest
there, he fell on his knees and worshipped him, being asked the reason why he
would so debase himself, he answered, that he did not Worship the man, but God;
for the night before God did appear to him in the shape of a High Priest, and
promised him several Victories.

3. As the Leopard hunteth all living Creatures, and makes a prey of them, so
the Dominion of Alexander was very large, as the Prophet Daniel says, that he
had dominion over the whole Earth; thus 1 Machabees, it is said that he went
even to the ends of the Earth, for he had overcome the greatest part of Europe.
All Asia, Macedonia, Armenia, Ilerica, Albania, Cappadocia, Syria, Egypt, Mount
Taurus, Caucasus, Media, Persia, India, and indeed, all the Eastern Countries
in general; several Kings being subject to him; and he had gone further, had
not his Army mutynyed; as the learned have observed out of Q. Curtius; coming
from the East to Babylon, he found there the Ambassadors from several Nations,
not only from those which he had conquered, but from those which he had not
conquered; as out of Africa, Spain, France, Italy, and also from the Romans
themselves, and he had conquered the whole Mediterranian, and the rest, had he
lived a little longer.

4. As the Leopard has a most sweet and fragrant smell, thus Alexander was not
only civil and courteous to all, and happy and successful in all he undertook,
but as Plutarch affirms, he had a sweet smell came from his Body, he being of
a hot and moist temper; we will not now speak any thing of his converting the
Barbarous Nations, how he instructed them how they ought to cherish and nourish
their Parents, and not to destroy them, as some of them did, he also taught
them to abstain from incest, it being common among them to lie with their own
Mothers. From his loins came four Kings, viz. Antipater in Macedonia, Antigonus
in Asia, Seleucus in Syria, and Ptolome^ in Egypt.

5. As the Leopard is a fierce and cruel Creature, thus Alexander, he overcame
and destroyed all his Enemies, he never sat down before a City, but he took it;
although he has fought with the Enemy when they have been Armed, and his
Soldiers unarmed, yet he got the Victory; many times he has fought alone
himself, and scaled the walls himself.

6. As this is a most crafty subtle Creature, so Alexander by his policy
overcame many wise and grave Seniors, he had a quick and ready wit, he having
an extreme love to all learned men.

7. As the Leopard is full of spots, but beautiful ones, so there were in
Alexander many virtues together, for he was like Achilles, and like Agamemnon
for chastity, for piety like Diomede, and like Cyrus for Magnanimity, and for a
quick wit like Themistocles, and for learning like his Father; but whatsoever
we have said of him, or can say of him, is less than he deserves.

8. As the Leopard is a furious Creature, and cannot be taken but by wine; thus
Alexander is said to have loved wine extraordinarily, and when he was drunk he
was guilty of many enormous crimes; he often drunk so much that he slept three
days together; he would often appoint drinking matches, giving large rewards
to them that overcame; when he was drunk he set that famous City Persepolis on
fire, and killed his dear friend Clitus when he was in drink, at which he
grieved so much, that it had almost killed him; he once made a feast, to which
he invited 9000. guests, and to every one he gave a golden plate; so that he
who once overcame the whole world, and was most chaste and continent, at last
could not overcome his voluptuousness and gluttony. Q. Curtius, in his tenth
Book, goes about to excuse him for this; we may also learn from what we have
read of this beast, to apply them to several other noble men, who being
destitute of divine grace, although at first were famous for many noble and
Heroic actions, and would stick at no dangers, yet at last lost all this, and
came to sad and tragical ends. Hercules was in some things very like to a
Leopard, destroying all Thieves and Robbers, at last being overcome with his
own lust and passions, he gave himself wholly up to Women, one of which knocked
him on the head with a Slipper; thus Themistocles, who overcame all the
Persians, and kept all Greece under him, yet in his old age he was so
leacherous, that he was drawn into the Marketplace by four Women instead of
Mules; moreover now I will compare this Leopard to the Devil, as St. Basil did,
for

1. As the Leopard is so crafty and subtle, so we cannot express the malice and
subtilty of this common enemy.

2. Thus the Devil (as the Leopard has a most fragrant scent) sometimes
transformeth himself into an Angel of light; and as the Leopard hides himself,
feigning himself to be dead, or asleep, the easier to ensnare his prey; so the
Devil oftentimes covers his temptations with fallacies and deceits, the
better to take the simple: and as the Leopard with a great deal of eagerness
leapeth upon his prey, so the Devil is never sluggish nor slothful in tempting
of us, but he does (as he is a roaring Lion) snatch away the wicked; finally,
as the Leopard never changes his spots, so he will not leave off deceiving
mankind; nay, by so many years experience as he has had, he is much craftier,
and now in these later ages he is more fierce and cruel, by how much the nearer
he sees his Judgment coming; and therefore we ought always to implore the Son
of God that he would restrain and confound this cruel Creature; but so much for
the Leopard.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Tiger.
ARistotle in his ninth Book of his History of Animals, Chap. 29. says, that
in Asia are found more cruel beasts, in Europe stronger, and valianter; but
that in Africa there are beasts of stranger shapes; and therefore this Creatute
being found only in Asia, is more fierce and cruel; as for the Etymology of the
word, Tiger is an Armenian word, and signifies in that tongue, an Arrow; hence
it was that in ancient times there was a River called by the same name, because
it ran so swiftly.

1. This Creature is found most commonly in Hircania, being generated only
there; hence Virgil, in the second Book of his Aeniods, calls them Hircanian
Tigers.

1. It is like a great Horse for the bigness of it.

3. It is a very swift beast, and almost incredible; whence in former times it
was called an Arrow.

4. It is as strong as swift, therefore it is said to be stronger than an
Elephant.

5. His skin is all over spotted, and therefore this heast is what the Peacock
is among Birds, most comely and beautiful.

6. It has such a fragrant scent, that it comes not behind any other Creature.

7. By reason of its swiftness and fierceness, it is very difficult to be
taken; but especially when it is grown to any bigness, therefore Huntsmen use
this stratagem for the taking of them. They take notice what time she brings
forth in, and where, as also when she goes to take her prey, as soon ^s she is
gone, one rides on Horseback, and ta^eth away all her young ones, and
brings them away with all speed; as soon as ever she is returned from her
prey, she knows by the scent which way the Hunter is gone, and does pursue
him with all speed, but when the Huntsman sees him not far from him, he
lets one of them fall, this she takes and carries to her Den, and comes
again; and he droppeth another, she carries that to her Den; she overtaketh
him again and again, so often that he has scarce one left. Or else he does
thus, if he intends to take them all, then goes another way to work, that is
thus; he goes to the Den, and takes all her young ones away with him, but
when he perceives that the Tiger does pursue him, he sets down a great
Lookingglass in the way, and one of her young ones by it, as soon as the Tiger
comes to the glass, she wondreth to see her self in the glass; she seeing the
resemblance of the young one that lies by it in the glass, thinking that to be
another, striveth with a great deal of eagerness to get that out of the glass,
in the mean while the Huntsman rides a^ay with all the rest, and carries them
aboard; the Dam standing upon the shore, roareth out, and rages for madness.

8. The Males have no love at all for their young ones; but when the Huntsman
comes, will fly away; but the Females are so careful of them, that they will
lose their lives for them.

9. There are a certain people of India, which are said, at this day, to find
Tigers that are as big as two Lions, and have stings in their tayls, which they
put out if they meet any one.

10. It cannot endure the sound of Drums, which makes him run mad, and tear
himself to pieces.

11. Although it be so fierce a Creature, yet Augustus Caesar had one which he
had tamed, which he brought to Rome; and Anrelianus Caesar, besides several
Tigers, he brought Elkes, Camels, and Panthers; and thus we have shown the
several properties of this beast, which we can resemble to no thing so like as
to she Turkish Empire; for,

1. As the Tiger is a strong, fieree Creature; thus is the Turkish Empire,
Potent and Rich.

2. As it is the swiftest Creature, so neither are the Turks long in taking
counsel, and whatsoever they propose to themselves in war, they do it without
any long deliberation about it; and as this Creature does cast forth a most
fragrant scent, thus the Military discipline that the Turks have does far
exceed other Nations; moreover, as the Tigers skin is full of spots, thus the
Turks have some small virtues, but joined with enormous vices; as their daily
prayers which they say seemingly with a great deal of attention, as also their
several kinds of washings; washing their whole bodies, their eyes, mouth,
privities; they are very cleanly in their diet; they will not suffer any
unclean Creature to be where they are, they have certain conveyances in the
Tents for all manner of filth, which runs into several ditches, which are daily
covered with Sand, lest the stench that comes from it should infect the Air;
further, in their Marketplaces they have several deep holes, wherein they cast
all the filth of the beasts that they kill, as their excrements, guts, etc.
they are very severe in punishing any one that plays at any game for money;
as also those that neglect their kind of worship are exceedingly derided and
scorned by all people; if any one is not seen at their worship for three
Fridayes together, he is immediately excommunicated; they make mention of their
Gods with a great deal of reverence, if they find any pieces of paper, they
either burn them or hide them, if they think that the name of Mahomet is
written in ^it: when they pray, they turn their faces toward the South, but
when they ease nature any ways, they take a great deal of care that they turn
not their faces to any of their Moschs, or Temples; when they go into their
Temples, they pull off their Shoes, which they do when they sit down to meat;
so that in these, and several other things, they far exceed several others; for
although they have no great love for the Arts and Sciences, being ignorant of
their very names, yet they are very great Linguists, and honor every man
according to his skill in the Tongues, they finding a great deal of profit and
advantage in the knowledge of the Tongues; but on the contra^y they are guilty
of many heinous vices; for,

1. They are very cruel and unnatural, so that the very Emperors themselves as
soon as they have the power in their hands, they put all their Brethren to
death, nor have they any regard or respect for any of their Concubines,
oftentimes taking them Captive; they use their Enemies like Beasts, which they
sell, or else put them to cruel torments, nay oftentimes they will put out
their eyes, others they will pull their skin off, and several other ways of
cruelty they have among them, that they exercise upon their Enemies: and
although they give a great deal of honor and reverence to their Kings while
they are alive, yet after they are once dead, they then care not what they do;
they will mutiny, rob his Treasury; but this will be too tedious a business to
follow any further, it being but a digression, I shall say but a little more of
it.

5, As Tigers cannot endure the sound of Drums, thus the Turks banish from them
all good Arts and Sciences, as Rhetoric, Physic, Limning, but especially
Music; because they know that they are apt to use it immoderately. Finally,
although Tigers are so fierce and cruel, vet have been, and may be tamed; thus
the Turks, were they governed as they should be, would soon be a more civilized
people; as to the difficulty that there is in the taking of their young ones,
Erasmus applies it to niggardly covetous men; for as Huntsmen think they do
very well in robbing the Tiger of her young ones, so those that possess other
men's Estates, think they have them lawfully, and at first satisfy themselves
with thoughts of returning it back again; thus we see how the several
properties of a Tiger may be applied to several other things. Thus we see a
Tiger pictured lying by Bacchus, which signifies to us, that men when
intoxicated, are more fierce than they are at other times.

CHAP. X.
Of the Elke.
THe Elke is only to be found in the Northern parts of the World; they are
chiefly to be found in the Woods of Muscovy, as also in Illyria. Aristotle
says nothing of this Creature, neither does Pliny, speaking nothing of his
shape, or nature, but only names it; this Creature is bigger than a Heart, and
more hairy, his hairs are almost the same with the Heart, but something more
like to an Asses hair, as Scaliger has well observed; and therefore it is that
the Helvetians call it a wild Ass, others call it a Horse-Stag. There is
another beast in Muscovy, which is a very swift Creature, which is very like to
this Elke. Julius Caesar in his Comment of the French war, lib. 6. describing
the Wood Hyrcinia, says that it did extend much toward the North, and further
adds that he found in it the Elke, and the Machlin.

3. It is like a Goat, whose forehead is two handfuls broad, his upper lips
are very large.

4. His legs have no joints.

5. He has horns, but they grow only backwards, the Hoofs of this Creature do
cure and heal all Epileptical diseases in young Children, it being covered with
gold, and so hung about his neck; there are some who instead of this, sell an
Oxes Hoof, but it is very easy to discern the difference, for if you shave an
Oxes Hoof, it will have a very bad smell with it, which this has not.

6. It has a doleful, mournful cry, as I my self have heard, so that if you
did not see it, you would think it were a young Child, and therefore it is that
the Germans call it Glen. They have been tamed and ridden upon; others have
used them for drawing, it being a very swift Creature, and will go further in
one day than a Horse does in three, especially upon Ice, where he will go much
faster than upon the Earth: Thus we have shown the nature of this beast, which
somewhat resembles a Christian; as, 1. His leg is without any joints, so that
if it lie down, it cannot get up again; thus Christians are seldom guilty of
any craft or subtilty, and not armed with any external power, for if they once
fall into any danger, they are not able to deliver themselves; and as she never
goes backwards, lest she should be got in a snare; thus Christians have a
great care lest they should be ensnared with the snares of this World. Further,
as she goes swifter upon the Ice than upon the Land, thus the Church has
always gained more by afflictions then by prosperity. Finally, as the Hoof of
this Creature cures the Epilepsy; so to be conversant among Christians is the
only way to be kept from Vices, that are the diseases of the mind; there might
be more corrolaries drawn, as we might apply the nature of this beast to
Counselors, Merchants, and almost to all sorts of men, they are very watchful
while they are feeding, and very swift in flight; it is a rare thing to meet
with those that will give us good counsel, and when once we have deliberated
upen it, then to follow it without delay: we should carefully lay up good
counsel, and if we have a secret told us, not to reveal it.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Unicorn and Rhinoscerote.
WE have two questions to answer, before we begin to speak of these two
Creatures; as a. Whether there be any such thing in nature as a Unicorn.

2. Whether an Unicorn and a Rhinoscerote, be one and the same beast.

As concerning the first doubt, whether there be such a Creature as the Unicorn
or no; some learned men have denied that there is any such Creature as an
Unicorn, but only an Indian Ass, for many approved Authors do say, that Indian
Asses have but one horn, but the Scripture draws many inferences from the
nature of this beast, and does apply them to good men and bad men, nay, even to
Christ himself, therefore it must nessarily follow that there are such
Creatures as Unicorns, and according to that judicious writer, Julius Caesar
Scaliger, in his exercitations against Cardanus, quoteth one of his friends
that saw one.

As for the second question, whether a Unicorn and a Rhinoscerote be not the
same. The word in Hebrew for a Rhinoscerote, which is (...), Rheem, signifies
an Uniiorn, and a Rhinoscerote also, the other Hebrew word which the Jews use
for it is (...), Rhum, which signifies both the Unicorn and the Rhinoscerot,
thus we find several have used Rhinoscerote and Monocerot for one and the same
Animal; but Julius Caesar Scaliger in his Exercitations affirms the contrary,
that the Unicorn and the Rhinoscerot are two several Creatures; for the Unicorn
has but one horn in his forehead, but the Rhinoscerot has two, one little
one in his forehead, and a great one in his snowt, from whence he takes his
name; but because in the holy tongue we have but one name for them both, we
will handle the properties of them both in this Chapter.

The Unicorn is a Creature about the bigness of a Horse, he has the beard of a
Goat, the head of a Heart, he has a neck with a large main, he has the feet of
an Elephant, the tail of a Hog, he has one black horn in the middle of his
forehead about two cubits long. The Rhinoscerot is a very large Creature, and
is almost as hig^ as he is long, but has very short legs, and two horns, as I
said before; but because they are both such large Creatures, and therefore the
Jews have but one name for them both, that comes from an Hebrew root Ram,
which signifies high exalted; moreover the Rhinoscerots horn is evceeding
hard, which he often sharpneth and whetteth upon a stone, when at any time he
is to encounter with any other beast; for the Rhinoscerot has an natural
enmity against several Creatures, but especially against the Elephant, which
two are always at variance one with another* in the Combat the Rhinoscerot
aims at the Elephants belly, which is his tenderest part, and does often
overcome him; against whom the Elephant fights very fiercely with his horn
that he has in his s^owt. His back is of a dapple gray, and defended as it
were with diverse shields, from whence we may gather the great strength of this
beast (Philippus Camerarius speaking of the Rhinoscerot, says that i^ is
something lower than the Elephant, but is as long as a wild Ox, he is cloven
footed, but his skin is of a box color, but so hard and impenetrable, that it
is like Armor to him; he has no weapon to defend himself with but his horn,
with which he often runs through the belly of the Elephant, which is his
chief Enemy; but in the Combat the Elephant has a great care lest the
Rhinoscerot should thrust against his throat, which if he did, it would soon
strangle him; the hatred and enmity that there is between these two Creatures
is very great, and almost incredible. Imma^uel King of Portugal carried a
Rhinoscerot to Rome, but in the way they were Ship wrackt; the Rhinoscerot
although he were shackled, yet it was wonderful to see what shift he made to
swim, bu^ at the last he perished in a Rock, Philippus Camerarius ^ells us
another story of the Rinoscerot, who when he was set on shore, was perceived to
trem^le and shake extremely; the reason of which a^terwards was perceived to be
an Elephant which he there saw afar off; the Rhinoscerot betakes himself to
fight, and with a great deal of eagerness pursues the Elephant, making a
lamentable noise as ne went, and destroying all before him.

We come now to speak of the Unicorn, and the first thing observable is his
horn, which is two Cubits lon^, white and shining within, but is black without;
it is not light nor hollow as other horns are, neither is it so plain and
smooth, but is sharp and rough like a file, and at the end of it as sharp and
piked as a sword, so that he ea^ily runs his horn into any thing.

2. Although he be very fierce, yet he is mild and gentle to the Females, and
is often found asleep by them in the fields, by which means they are taken;
they have another way to take them, viz. To cloth a strong young man in woman's
apparel, perfuming his garments with rich scents, and so to stand in the
fields; the Unicorn smelling him presently comes to him, the huntsmen hide
themselves, but yet keeps within sight of him; the young man lays his hands
upon his eyes, and so blind-folds him, whereupon the Huntsmen come softly
behind him, and take him.

3. The Unicorn is so exceeding strong that it is invincible, a wild Creature,
inhabiting only Mountains and Deserts, to which Job alludes; who speaking of
the Unicorn, says, Chap. 39. 12. Can the Unicorn be tamed, or can thou bind
him? Whence it appears to be very fierce and wild, because it cannot be tamed;
for we have tamed Lions, Panthers, and Tigers, but this we could never tame. 4.
It Is horn is an excellent Antidote and preservative against poison, insomuch
that if water has been poisoned, if it be but touched with his horn, it takes
away the poisonous quality; it was a Custom in old time among rich men to have
drinking Cups made of the Unicorns horn, and when at any time they drank, they
used to have a piece of the horn in the Cup, for it is very much commended by
Physicians; now having explained the properties of the Unicorn, we will next
consider what we may learn from it.

1. Nazianzen, in his 13 Orations, compares the Philosopher and the Unicorn
together; for,

1. As the Unicorn loves solitude, so he who addicts himself wholly to good
learning, desires nothing so much as privacy and retiredness.

2. As the Unicorn loves to be on the high Mountains* so wise men ought to
despise and slight these worldly things, as below them.

3. As the Unicorn hates any slavery or servitude, so the true Philosopher
should be servant to none* nor should he dwell (as it were) in another man's
brains, taking up and changing his opinions, on another judgment.

2. I suppose that that in the Psalms is unknown to few, Psalm. 22. 22. where
Christ being compassed about with most cruel Enemies, makes sad complaints as
of their cruel usage, and compares them to Lions and Unicorns, saying, in the
forecited place, Save me from the Lions mouth, from the horns of the Unicorn;
by which we are to understand, more especially, the cruelty of those who
Crucified our Savior, although it may not unfitly be applied to all the
Enemies of the Gospel; for,

1. As the Unicorn is a very cruel Creat^re; so the Enemies of Christ were
strong and cruel.

2. As it is strong and vigorous, so are the Enemies of the Church.

3. As it is very difficult to be taken, and when taken, as difficult to tame
it, which Job, Chap. 39. 9. seems to hint to us, saying, Will the Unicorn be
willing to serve thee, or abide by thy Crib? Can thou bind the Unicorn with
his band in the f^rrow, etc. so the Enemies of Christ are implacable.

4. As the Unicorn loves to dwell in solitary places, never keeping company
with any other Creature; thus the Enemies of Christ will by no means be reduced
to the society of the Church, but do still go on in enmity and hatred against
it.

3. In other places of Scripture, the Church and Jewish state is compared to a
Unicorn; so Number. 23. 22. it is said, that God brought them o^t of Egypt, he
has the strength of a Unicorn, and the very same words are there used, N^mb.
24. 8. like to which we have Deuteronomy. 33. 17. His horns are like the horns of a
Unicorn, with them he will push the people together to the ends of the Earth;
so the Family of Joseph is compared to the horns of a Unicorn; so David, Psalm.
75. praye^ that his K ^gdom might be exalted as the horns of a Unicorn; and in
general we may re^em^le this to the Church, and so to all holy and pious men
that ever have, or shall be in the World; and without doubt the horn is an
Emblem of power and strength, as also of defense, which we may liken to the
true knowledge of God, and to his presence, aid, and assistance, and then we
may learn,

1. As the Unicorns horn is so high, by which he defends himself against all
inj^ries, so the Churches welfare and safety consists in the knowledge and
love of God.

2. And as his horn is an excellent Antidote against all poison, so the
knowle^ge and love of God is an excellent remedy against all vice.

3. As the chief thing that Huntsmen regard in a Unicorn, is his hor^; so it is
most certain that the main reason of the Churches sufferings is (as I may so
speak) her horn, i. e. her great confidence and affiance in God.

4. As it is very difficult to take the Unicorn alive, and when she is hunted
takes great care of ^e^ horn; thus the Church ought in the midst of all her
afflictions to take great heed, lest she love her horn, i. e. her knowledge and
love of God; these heads of inferences might be further enlarged I shall add a
story which I have read in the third Book of Philip's Declamationes, where he
says, that he saw the Church pictured like to a Unicorn standing, one half of
which only appeared, but immediately it appeared in his full proportion; about
whom stood diverse beasts, as the Elephant, Panther, etc. making a great noise
about him; the Unicorn in the mean while standing undauntedly. He adds there,
that the Church has in this World sometimes prosperity, and sometimes
adversity, but always has great Enemies, which she at last overcomes; by the
way here we may take notice that oftentimes states and Kingdoms are called by
the name of horns; for as horns are of no use at all, but only to defend the
body, so Kings and Princes, unless they defend the Church, are useless.

4. Also Christ himself and his Kingdom are not unfitly compared to an Unicorns
horn; for although we have it not expressly mentioned in the Bible, yet we read
in the Book of Numbers, that when Balaam was to bless Israel he takes many
similitudes from the Unicorn, from whence we may learn,

1. That as the Unicorn is an invincible Creature; thus the Church shall
prevail against the gates of Hell; moreover, as the Unicorn with his horn does
overcome all other Creatures; thus we by this horn of Christ do overcome all
the temptations of Satan, and of wicked men; and as his horn is a Sovereign
remedy against poison, so the Kingdom of Christ is the horn of Salvation, in
which sin is destroyed, death is abolished and overcome, and everlasting life
promised to all Believers; and as the Unicorn spares the Female, as being the
weaker; thus Christ loves and cherishes those that are of a contrite heart;
to conclude, as the Unicorn pursues any one that goes about to ensnare him;
thus Christ does by his horn (as it were) oppose all that set themselves
against his Gospel, insomuch that to all Eternity they shall find nothing but
severe punishments and torments, inexpressible and intolerable.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Horse.
THe Americans never saw this Creature, till about a hundred years since, and
therefore when they saw a man on Horseback they thought the man and the Horse
to be one individual Creature, which made them much afraid of it; this being
the Creature that Conquered the Indians; so that the Spaniards, if they could
not bring Horses, the Indians overcame them; this is a very useful and
necessary Creature to man, and that not only for war, but also for Journeying;
concerning his usefulness in war, we have it set down at large in Job, chap.
39. 22, 23. etc. Have thou given the Horse strength, have thou clothed his
neck with Thunder? Can thou make him afraid as a Grasshopper? The glory of
his Nostrils is terrible, he paweth in the Valley, and rejoices in his
strength, he goes out to meet the armed men, he mocketh at fear, and is not
affrighted, neither turns he back from the sword. v. 25. He says among the
Trumpets, ha, ha, he smells the battle afar off, the thunder of the Captains,
and the shoutings. These words God himself speaks of the Horse, as of a noble
spirited Creature; in all ages of the World, as well without as within the
Church, men have had a great love and care of their Horses, above other
Creatures; so that we find them sometimes to be careful of them, we find
Solomon (1 Kings 4. 26. had some thousands of Horses, too much confiding in
them, against the express command of God. Deuteronomy. 17. where we read that the King
is not to multiply the number of his Horses; there were in Egypt many rare
Horses, and therefore lest the Jews, by having any converse with the Egyptians,
should learn their Customs and manners, God did forbid all Princes to multiply
their Horses, which command Solomon violated; for he had several Troops of
Horses brought him from Egypt, 1. King. 10. 29. It was a custom among the
Persians, to bury the dead Carcasses of their Horses, and therefore we read
that Simon at Athens buried his Horses by his own Tomb; and Julius Caesar did
erect a marble Monument for his Horse in his own Temple; and Antonius verus did
set up a golden Image, in honor of his Horse; Poppe^ Sabina, Nero's Wife, had
her Horses shod with golden shoes; Glaucus (in the third Book of Georgicks)
Potneius fed his Horses with man's flesh; Nero did adorn his Horse with a gown
that the Senators only wore, and every week allowed them so much; thus Caligula
went beyond them all, he inviting his Horses to dinner, and did make them drink
in golden bowls, and would have made one of his Horses Consul; as he once (a
most horrid fact) made himself Priest, and his Horse his associate.
Theophylact, Patriarch of Constantinople, always kept above two thousand
Horses; which he fed not with Hay and barley, but with Spices, Figs, Raisins,
Wine, etc. nay, when at any time he was at the Communion, doing his office, if
one had come to him and told him that one of his Mares had foaled, he would for
joy immediately have left off, and seen his Mare, and then come again to make
an end; thus Alexander, in the honor of his Bucephalus, did erect a great
City; so in all Ages of the World great has been the folly and madness of
Princes, in taking over-care for their Horses; and so we read in Homer, Il. 8.
that the wife of Hector fed her Horse as constantly, and with the same diet as
she did her Husband. Conradus Gesner speaking of the Horse, has digested, in
one Alphabetical order, all those proper names that have been formerly given to
Horses; but I shall come now more particularly to speak of the nature of Horses.

1. The Horse is an understanding, docile Creature, but especially are those
that are bred in the Islands of the Baltic Sea; and those that are bred in
Selandia, though small, yet are very strong; those are o^^erve^ to be very
do^ile above other Horses; for they will understand their Masters by a ^od or a
sign; they have been ^aught to walk upon their two hi^^er feet, ^o sit dow^, to
take their meat with their two ^ore-^ee^ out o^ a dish, and to hold up a (...)
with their ^ore-^eet, to wink, to lay their heads upon their backs, to run
round in a Circle, to kneel down that t^eir Masters ^ight get up; they h^ve
^een al^o ^a^ght to reverence the King, by certain ge^t^res that they are
taught, all which C^sp^an affirms that he has seen; and Pausanias rela^eth
of a^ot^er Horse, who in the Olympic Games, as often as ^e go^ the Victory,
would run to the chief Officer imme^iately, to let him understand that he had
overcome; they may be taught to leap over Ditches, to go up hills, and also to
go down again; nay, they understand their own names, and oftentimes are seen to
be drunk, which they will soon be with W^^e, or any strong liquor.

2. It is a warlike fierce Creature, endued with great strength and co^rage*
me^alsome Horses often moving their j^ws up and down, foaming at the mouth: for
Aristotle el^eth us that it is a sign of a strong Horse, if he be in continual
motion of one part or other; motion and hea^ together or causing foam,
according to t^a^ of Virgil, Stat sonipes, and frae^a f^^ex sp^mantia mandet.


Thus we find G^^^c^ dim, in his second Book of the War ^e^wee^ (...) ^^ench
and the Italiaus, says tha^ the Horses did as ^uch service in the War as men;
^iting, ki^k ^g, and leaping upon men; which also appears from that place
which we quoted in Job; in War they*will neigh, rage, scrape the ground with
their feet, their Manes will stand upright, and can very hardly ^e held in; he
knows the Enemy; nay, he knows the very noise of the Enemies Horses; he is
not at all terrified with the Sword, nor is he afraid with the noise of
Trumpets, Quivers, Spears, nor Shields, but loves to be among them, being as
valiant as the Soldiers themselves, being daunted with nothing, but pricketh
up his ears, and stands as it were with a great deal of courage; sometimes
Horses will not be so stout and valiant, as at other times; thus we read in
Virgil, lib. 10. of Merentius Horse, Flet Pallantis equus.


3. There are several Creatures which are proud, but the Horse more especially,
and that chiefly when he sees himself to have rich Trappings on, according to
that of Virgil, in the third Book of his Georgicks; Frena Pelethronii, lapithae
gyrosqae debere,
Impositi dors, oatque equitem docure sub armis.


Which take thus in English. Lapithes first the Art of Riding found,
And Horsemen taught to fight over trampled ground.


When Bucephalus is naked and has no Trappings, he will suffer any
Horse-courser to ride him, but when once he has his Trappings, then no one
shall back him but his Master Alexander* the like also was observed of Julius
Caesar's Horse, whose fore-feet were very handsome, and almost like unto men's
feet; Erasmus applies it to poor men, who will admit any one into their
Society; but if once they grow to be rich, they scorn and despise all poor
people.

4. They are very much delighted with any Musical Instrument; for they are
observed sometimes even to weep for joy at it, but most of all he is pleased at
the sound of a Trumpet; he terrifieth the Enemy, but himself is not at all
afraid; he runs into the battle, rages and foameth, but the more when he
sees his Trappings. Pliny speaking of Horses, mentions a sort of people in
Italy, that taught their Horses to dance at the sound of a Trumpet, which they
used to do at great feasts; and therefore when the Enemy waged war with them,
they had the best Trumpets they could get, by which the Enemies Horses were so
transported, that they would leap and dance, and run with their Masters on
their backs into their Enemies Camp.

5. They are the most leacherous Creatures in the World, man only excepted;
they are mad when in the Act, and will bite any Horse that comes nigh them,
but the Mares are more leacherous than the Horses; it is fabulous that is
reported of the Mares in Portugal, who are reported, by drawing in the wind, to
have a kind of false conception, (as Hens oftentimes lay windy Eggs) but what
they bring forth never lives long; those that would satisfy themselves
further in this point, may read more in the third Book of Georgicks, like to
that fabulous report I have read of the Tigers conceiving with the wind; but so
great is the leachery of the Horse, that he will copulate wit^ the Mare that
foaled him; Aristotle in his History of Animals, lib. 9. Chap. 47. says, that
the King of Scythia's Horse was compelled to copula^e with the Mare that cast
him, she being covered over with clothes, that he could not see her; but yet
notwithstanding after he perceived it, he ran away and threw himself down
headlong from a high place; Herodotus, in his third Book, relates this story,
that after the Death of Cambyses it was so agreed upon among the Nobles, that
the next day seven Noblemen should be drawn into the City with Horses, and that
his Horse that neighed first should be made King; that night one of Darius his
Servants took a Mare and tied her to a post, and there let her stand, and after
a while brought Darius his Horse to her, which he was to ride upon the next
day; Darius his Horse coming by that place, remembering the Mare that stood
there the day before, neighed, upon which Darius was made King.

Mares cast their Foals standing, which no other Beasts do; the Mare has a
great love for her Foal, for she will dye if they be taken away from her; and
if it chance that the Dam dies, some other Mare takes care of the Foal.

7. After they have cast their Foal, it is a long time before she is proud
again.

8. The Horse is a fickle and unconstant Creature, not caring much for company,
unless in the time of Copulation, and then no Creatures love it more; there is
no leader or Captain (as it were) among H^r^e^, as there is among Oxen and
other Creaur^s.

9. As Oxen delight to feed upon the Hills, Hor^es, on the contrary, delight to
feed upon a plain, where they are most serviceable in time of War; e ca^^o^
endure to go in boggy ground, and therefore Campanus, we read in Livye's
History, advised ^^e ^nemy to go into some Moorish place; the Horse takes
great delight in washing himself, and t^eref^re will oftentimes lie down in the
water; when ^e drinks he muddeth the water with his ^eet* but the Ox loves
to drink in clear water; the reason of which may be, because he sees his
shadow the better in it; when Bucephalus was brought to Philip of Macedon, he
began to rage as if he were mad; Alexander, though he was but a young man, came
to him, and turned him to the Sun, (for if he perceived the shadow* of any one,
it made him startle) and immediately the Horse was very gentle, to the great
admiration of his Father: great care is to be had that tame Fowl be not fed
^igh Horses, for oftentimes they scatter t^eir feathers among their meat, which
breeds diseases in them.

10. Horses and Sheep are liable to as many diseases as man is, wild Horses
being often troubled with the Gout, and those that ^re kept up in the Stable
with the Iliack passion, the Cramp; they sometimes are stopped in their
Ureters, so that they make water with a great deal of difficulty (which the^
will do with a great deal of ease if they are brought to a place where there is
Sheeps dung) they have ^een oftentimes observed at the snuff a candle to cast
their foal, as it sometimes happe^eth to women in the like case. Some constand
purge their Horses once every year; it is bad f^ Horses to stand nigh Hogs, and
as bad to have the^ Stalls nigh any stinking Ditch; a Horse as he grows old,
so he grows hoary, as Aristotle says.

11. A Horse is a very laborious Creature, especially if he be well fed;
Jovius, in his fourth Book* says, that the Italians laughed at the Germans for
cutting off their Horse tayls, but ^et he commends them, because it makes
Horses fatter; for that nourishment which goes into the tail, after it is cut
off, serves to nourish the body; th^^ Philip Camerarius, lib. 1. Chap. 36.
says, that in a certain war between Maximilian and the Venetians, the Germans
had the Manes and Tayls of their Horses cut off, which as some are of opinion,
makes them stronger and better for service; I have read in Pa^lus Vinetus, how
that the Tartars used to dock their Horses Tayls, that so they might not hit
their Rider with them; but some do not so well allow of it. We then may see
the falsehood of that report, that a Horse is fiercer when he has no Trappings
on, when we see that Horses are delighted in colors, and are pro^d when they
have Trappings on; and since the Horse is so useful, as we have seen already,
to all Countries; it is a punishment to those people that e^t Horse flesh; as
the Tartars, who account the guts of Horses the greatest ornament.

12. They exceedingly hate Bears, Camels, and Elephants; as Herodotus, in his
first Book, and 7. Chap. gives instances of more at large.

13. Horses and Dogs are true and constant to their Masters, unless they grow
mad; which love is greatly increased by making much of them; no better way to
make a Horse mild and gentle, than to forbear striking of him as much as you
can; for he will do that by fair means, which he will not do with the Spur and
Whip; these are the several properties of the Horse; we come now, according to
our method, to draw some corrolaries from him; we might compare him to
Soldiers, but I shall speak to that place, Zach. 1. 8. I saw by night, and
behold a man riding upon a red Horse; and he stood among the Myrtle trees that
were in the bottom, and behind him were red Horses speckled and white; then
said I, O my Lord, what are these? and the Angel that talked with me said, I
will show thee what these be; and the man that stood among the Myrtle Trees
answered and said, these are they whom the Lord has sent to walk to and fro
through the Earth; To this agrees that of the Prophet Habakk^k, Chap. 3. 8.
That thou did ride upon thy Horses, and thy Chariots of Salvation; in which
places the Apostles and all Ministers are compared to Horses, on whom Christ
rides through the Earth to the eternal salvation of the World; many goo^
inferences might be drawn from the Nature of this Animal; I shall mention but
few of them.

1. As Horses carry burdens and packs into several Countries; thus the
Ministers prea ch the Gospel throughout the Earth.

2. As the (...) no^ where he list, but is guided by the R^de^, so the
Ministers are by Christ himself placed in several parts of the World.

3. As Horses take the pains, but their Masters receive the profit; thus in all
ages good Ministers are exposed to more dangers and difficulties then any other
men; thus when Christ preached to ^he multitude, he was upon the water in a
small fisherboat; (so the Minis ers are exposed to all dange^s) when in the
mean time his hearers stood on the sh^^e safe and secure.

4 As Horses, when they go through any Town or Village, shall soon have the
little Dogs barking at his heels; so Minis^ers are still persecuted and
perplexed by wicked men.

5. And as we see that the Horse is not at all moved or troubled at the barking
of these Dogs, neither do they so much as mind them, but go on their way; so
the Ministers of the Gospel do despise and make light of the scorns and jeers
that the World puts upon them.

6. As Horses do take a great delight and pleasure in washing themselves; so it
should be the chief care of Ministers to see their lives and conversations,
that they be pure and holy.

7. As we see how docile and tractable Horses are, yet fierce against their
Enemies; hence Ministers are taught to be meek and humble to all men, but to be
armed against the Enemies of the Gospel.

8. As Horses are troubled with many diseases; thus we commonly see that
Ministers are liable to as many distempers, if not more, than other me^n and I
may add also, that they are no less subject to Vices,

Further, as in the forecited place of Zach. Chap. 1. v. 8. the Son of God was
seen to be among those Horses that were in the Prophets Vision; thus have all
good Ministers this to comfort them in their greatest miseries and afflictions,
that God is with them.

To conclude, as Bucephalus would suffer no one to back him but Alexander; thus
should the Ministers take especial care not any ways to be ensnared to Satan,
and so made (as it were) the Devils Horses.

We might have spoken to each of these heads much more than we have done. I
could have shown how fitly this Creature might be likened to the Apostles, but
especially to St. Paul, who traveled many thousand miles, and carried the
Gospel into Spain, Ant^^ch, and Cappadocia; neither was he satisfied with
preaching once to a people* but often visited them, to confirm them in the
truths that he ^ad preached, etc.

We often find in Scripture, that Horses have been tired and wearied, as we
find the Horses of the Canaanites were, Joshua 11. 9. Without question this was
to teach the Jews, that they were to put their whole confidence and trust in
God; for as a Horse, as we said before* is very fierce, leacherous, and proud;
so we are commanded in the place quoted before, to weaken these Horses; (...)
we ought to root out and avoid those vices, of pride, leachery, etc. Origin,
upon the 15. of Exodus, compares all wicked, carnal men to Horses, who have
the Devil for their Rider, and are delighted in the plains of Egypt; by which
we are to understand the allurements of this World; he further goes on and
calls Judas Christ's Horse, because he carried the Gospel to several places
of Judea; but as soon as he took the Sop, he had another Rider on his back, who
led him to eternal ruin. Origin proceeds to give many other examples,
exhorting us to bridle our immoderate affections, which oftentimes like wild
Horses do often hurry us to the doing of what is contrary to reason, like to
that known verse, Fertur equis a^riga, nec audit currus habenas.


Erasmus has several inferences and corrolaries, which he draws from the
Horse; as 1. The Horse, if not tamed, will be ruled by none; thus Man by Nature
is a wild and unruly Creature, until by good education he be better mannered;
and as a Horse is not at all the better for his rich Trappings; thus these
Worldly enjoyments do not at all better him that possesses them; and as we do
not use to put an Asses Saddle on a Horses back; so we ought not to back-bite
or cast any reproach on the good name of our Neighbor.

Moreover, as we find that Horses are not tamed by stripes and blows, but by
gentle means; so we see that Children at School are not so easily wrought on by
the Rod and Ferula, as by mild and gentle words; nay, we often see that good
wi^^ have been spoiled by the over harsh and austre carriage of their Masters.

Further, if at any time we see an unruly Horse, we presently conclude, that it
is either for want of care, or skill in the Rider; so also we conclude, if we
see a people given to all vice and wickedness, it is the fault of the Clergy.

And as a free Horse needs no sput, so he who loves learning, needs no
arguments to make him diligent; and as we do not ride a Horse without a Bridle,
and if we see that he begins to be headstrong, then to put on one; so all men
who are choleric, ought to restrain and bridle their passions at the first
risings of them.

And as when a Horse is made tame and tractable, one may ride him without a
bridle, and easily guide him; so when once a man has conquered and subdued his
passions, they will not so easily afterward exceed their due bounds and limits.

As a Horse also, when single, can go in as narrow a path as a man; but when he
draws a Chariot, he then is forced to go through thick and thin; so we find it
amongst men, who are not content with their condition, but still aiming at
preferment, do but thereby run into greater troubles and dangers.

To conclude, as Horses, when they once grow old, are good for nothing but the
Cart or the Plough; so while a man is in prosperity, he is beloved of all; but
when in adversity, then he is despised of all; Sophocles, in his Electra,
speaking of ^restes, his aged Schoolmaster, by whose mean^ he killed
Clytemnestra, and Aegis^us, said he was like a Horse, who though he be old, and
have lost his strength, yet did not lose his courage. Wasps and Hornets breed
in the carcass of a dead Horse, as Bees do in the carcass of an Ox, which we
are to understand thus; that such kinds of small insects do use to lay their
spawn or Eggs in such Carrion; and those things which we read in Exodus, and in
the History of Sampson, that were done many of them contrary to the ordinary
course of Nature, have made some people think them incredible, and almost
impossible, because they have been ignorant of the way, how these insects and
all such kinds of little Creatures are generated. Pliny tells us, that although
there be some herbs that will destroy the Palmer-worm, yet if the head of a
Mar^ which has been with Foal be laid by it, it will preserve it; some people
do judge of the goodness of a Horse by his colors; some do tell us that a good
Horse must be thus qualified; he must have the eyes, stomach, and neck of a
Wolf, the short eats, long tail, and softly tread of a Fox; the breast, the
pride, and the hair of a Woman; others say, he must be like the Hare for
swi^tness and agility; the good eyes, and hairs, tail of a Fox, the thigh and
the hair of an Ass, the pride and suggestion of a Woman; others say a Horse
must be ^s swift, and leap as a Pike, the sharp sight of a Serpent, the broad
breast and thick mane of a Lion, the cleanliness and soft tread of a Cat:
Horses require great skill to keep them well; Horses do not love to stand in a
Stable alone, but are abundance better when they have company with them; it is
a known story of the Trojan Horse, that it was destroyed by those that got into
it; Joachimus Camerarius, has written a whole Book concerning Horses, which is
worth peru^^ng, where the Reader may satisfy himself further in the nature of
this Creature.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Ox.
THe Ancient Greeks comprehend the wild Bull and Cow under this Creature; there
is a beast called Hyreinia, much like to an Ox, which they called by the same
Name, a very swift Creature; this word Ox was formerly taken to signify a
Calf, which of all the rest agrees best with the body of a Man; it is a very
useful Creature, it was used to be offered in sacrifices, it is good for food,
the Husbandman makes great use of him in tilling his ground; formerly it did
thresh the Corn, which was done by leading him over the Corn, and treading it;
the Earth is much fatned by his drug* shoes are made of his skin, of horns are
made Combs, winding horns, and several other things, which we could not well
want.

He is a strong Creature, endued with a great deal of valor, yet very gentle.

2. His flesh is very hard of digestion, especially when old, which Baptista
Porta thinks would be tenderer, were he baited with Dogs before he was
killed, for experience tells us that the flesh of those Oxen that run among
Bears, is so tender that it will almost melt in the mouth, but his blood is
thicker; thus it is in other Oxen, that which makes him appear to be the
stronger, is this; that he never Coughs, nor scarce ever brings any thing up
out of his stomach; (it is observed by some, that a Minister is never heard to
sneeze while he is preaching, the reason of which I leave for the more curious
to enquire into) this Creature has many ventricles, by which his food is
better digested; he is very hot naturally, whose Milk serves for the
nourishment of his Body; and therefore it is that he gives not so much Milk,
either as the Sheep or Goat.

3. In the time of his Copulation he is like all other Creatures, very mad and
furious, but otherw^se tame and gentle.

4. He is observed to be given as little to leache^y as any other Creature; and
as before his Coitus he usually feeds among Cows, but afterward he
^ccompanieth himself with Bulls, which Aristotle has observed to be the nature
of several other Creatures; lib. 6. chap. 18. in his History of Animals.

5. He is much delighted in company, and cannot endure solitude; there is a
kind of mutual love (as it were) between Oxen that work in the plough together,
insomuch that if his fellow be not with him, he looks about him to see if he
can find him, and will low until he comes to him. I shall not say any thing
of his grateful resentment of courtesies* which is spoken of by the Prophet
Isaiah, chap. 1. v. 3. where the Ox is said to know his owner.

6. This Creature is exceeding delighted in Music, and he never drinks but
in clear cold water.

7. He loves to be in the woods among the boughs; it is by some observed, that
sometimes he feeds backwards; there is a certain herb in the field that the
Ox loves to feed on rather than grass, in the leaves of which lies hid a
little Creature, much like a Bettle, which will bite him and torment him so,
that oftentimes he kills him; an Ox is soonest fat when by himself, and kept
from Copulation; but I have been informed, that the quickest way to fatten him,
is often to wash him with warm water, and feed him with beans and elm boughs;
Baptista was wont to give his Oxen those scraps of meat that came from his
Table, which in a short time made them so fat, that they could scarcely go; the
Ox will work at the plough much better, if he has a live coal held to him.

8. The Horns of a young Ox laid in hot wax will be soft and bend any ways;
the Hoofs of an Ox, if anointed with wax, oil, or pitch, they are not sensible
of any pain.

9. He sheddeth his hair every year; it is very strange that Nanzienzen tells
us, that if the corn that is sown have an Ox horn lie amongst it, that grain
shall never grow, be it what it will; the Phy^ical cause of which is not yet
found out, although several writers, as well sacred as Profane, have deduced
several inferences from the nature of this beast, yet for brevity sake I shall
name but few of them.

1. I shall speak to some places in the Old Testament, in which there is
mention made of this Creature; as that it was offered for sacrifice, which was
a kind of a Type of Christ, being offered sor ^s, for before the Sacrificing of
the beast, they used to lay their hands upon the Heifer, by which Rite was
signified unto us, that that particular beast was set apart for Sacrifice; thus
the voice that came to Christ from heaven, did foretell that Christ should be
the general Victime of the World.

2. As the Heifer was slain before the ^ abernacle, in the sight of all the
people; thus was Christ crucified before Hier^salem, in the sight of the whole
multitude.

3. As his skin wa flead off, and the beast also dismembered, thus Christ lay
naked upon the Cross, there enduring many stripes and wounds; and as the blood
of the Heifer was sprinkled upon the horns of the Altar; thus by the preaching
of the G^spel, is the blood of Christ sprinkled throughout the whole World; and
as in old time an Ox or a Cow was given as a marriage pledge, as one, in Homer,
gave a hundred Oxen to his Father-in-Law as a pledge; thus Christ is given to
the World as a pledge of that Covenant which is made between God and man, sinee
the fall.

Further, as the Ox is the Husband-mans servant, thus Christ was made servant
to us all, for he did (as the Apostles) wash the feet of several poor people,
yet he himself went on foot into Palestine, and so finished the work of our
Redemption; moreover, as the Ox is a strong Creature, thus there was an
infinite power given to Christ; and as the Ox was not an unclean Creature in
the Law, ^ut gentle and tame; thus there was never found any craft or guile in
Christ's mouth, for he was of al^ men the most meek and humble, and so inviting
all men to him.

Moreover, as the Ox is a gentle tame Creature, being seldom seen to fight with
his fellows, neither has he any pride in him, thus was Christ the meekest,
humblest person that ever lived on the face of the Earth, and all his Sermons
which he preached while he was here on the Earth, tended all to exhort them to
meekness and humility; it is reported that there are some Oxen in Tar^ary,
which will kneel down like a Camel when they take up any burden; thus Christ
patiently and willingly took up the Cross; and as we see that Bees are bred out
of the carcass of the Ox; thus by the Death of Christ many have been turned to
God, and by this spiritual Death they are restored to life; and as Corn that
was but touched with the horn of an Ox will never come up in the ear; thus
wicked men, through the just judgments of God perish to all eternity, because
of their unbelief. I might have enlarged on each of these particulars, and also
upon the several circumstances of the Sacrifice, and also of the red Heifer,
which in the Law was offered for a Sacrifice, which signified the blood of
Christ, one drop of which (as St. Bernard says) is sufficient for the
Redemption of the whole World, were there a thousand more than there are;
moreover, we find, that the Ministers of the Gospel, (who represent the person
of Christ) are compared in the Holy Scripture to Oxen; the first place where we
find them thus compared, is, 1 Cor. 9. 10. where we find the Apostles thus
speaking; If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing, that
we should receive your carnal things? i. e. That as the Ox was not to be muzled
that trod out the Corn, which Law seems to have respect only to Oxen, as
appears from that place, Deuteronomy. 25. 4. yet the Apostle shows that when this
Law was given it had respect to Ministers; but this will appear, if we
consider, we may compare Ministers and Oxen together.

1. As the Ox is a stout Creature, endued with a great deal of courage; thus
ought Ministers to be valiant for the Gospel, and fight manfully under Christ's
banner.

2. Oxen by nature are gentle, tame, chaste, loving to drink always in clear
water, and has a great love to his fellow; thus ought Ministers to be like
them in all respects; and as an Ox is useful, whether he be dead or alive; thus
ought Ministers, by their preaching and writing, seek to edify the Church; and
as the horns of young Oxen do soften by lying in wax; thus are younger
affections easier wrought upon; and as Oxen will labor more, and work harder
in the VVinter than in the Summer; thus Ministers get more when under
sufferings, then when in a prosperous Condition.

3. We read in the 68. Psalm, that false teachers are compared to Oxen, and
their hearers to Bulls and Calves; so that as Oxen are better than Calves, so
are wicked Teachers than their people; and as Oxen sometimes (although but very
seldom) are seen to quarrel one with another; thus are Ministers too often
striving for the supremacy. In Phrygia it is reported that the Oxen will move
their Horns; thus we find too often that Ministers are wavering and unconstant.
It were very easy to draw more corrolaries from the forecited place, but
these that we have named shall be sufficient.

4. We read that the Enemies of Christ are compared to Oxen, Psalm. 22. 13. and
that for these reasons especially.

1. Because as Oxen are the chiefest of Cattle; thus the Scribes and Pharisees
were the chiefest among the Jews, and most honored; and as Oxen sometimes will
be exceedingly enraged one against another; thus these Enemies of Christ like
mad Bulls thirst after the Death and blood of Christ; sometimes wicked men are
compared to Oxen, unaccustomed to the yoke, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. for as the Ox will
run away if he sees any one come to yoke him; so the wicked shun all good
exhortations to virtue; to conclude, Nazianzen, in his fourteenth Oration,
speaking of those several excuses made by those that were invited to the
marriage-Supper, he expounds it allegorically thus; he that had bought the
land, and was gone to see it; they are those, says he, that are given wholly
to the love of riches; but those that had bought the Oxen, are those that are
ambitious of honors and dignities; but he that had married a wife, are meant
those that are addicted to the unlawful pleasures of this world, which three
sins were the cause of their ruin, and indeed they are the seed that all
manner of sins do come from, and of the ruin of most men in all ages of the
world; for Adam was drawn to his sin by pleasure, the Devil by honor and
ambition, and Judas by covetousness; we have many examples of this in History,
but I shall in^arge no further.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Ass.
WE read Deuteronomy. 22. 10. Thou shall not pl^w with an Ox and an Ass together,
which words are spoken allegorically, to show that we should not compare fools
with wise men, nor timorous with valiant men; now as to the several properties
of this beast.

1. It is a very timorous fearful Creature, he has a very large heart, but no
gall at all, and therefore it is that he will endure more hardship than any
other Creature; he is content with his Provender, let it be what it will; and
if you lay upon him more than he can bear, he will no ways complain, or
resist, but fall down under his burden.

2. His chief provender is hay, the fodder, the whip, and the burden belong to
the Ass, meat, correction, and work to thy Servant, Ecclesiasticus 3^. 23. The
Ass will eat brambles and Thistles better than any thing else; his skin is very
hard and brawny, for he cannot feel a blow with a stick, when he goes into any
field where there is any grass, he is kept from eating it, or any other green
herb; and when he is loaded with wheat, he keeps himself upon hay; the little
birds are oftentimes very troublesome to him, for by rubbing himself against
those hedges where the birds build, and by his doleful cry does so affright the
young ones, that were not his eyes very low in his head, the birds would peck
them out; he uses to drink in muddy water, he can endure the smell of no
ointment, and if by hard labor he is killed, he is good for nothing but the
Dogs, after his skin is pulled off.

3. When once he falls, he is always afraid of that plaee; he will scarcely
go over that bridge where he can see the water through the crevises of the
boards; and if you force him to go through the water, he Urines; he has but a
weak head, and oftentimes is troubled with the dizziness in his head.

4. She so exceedingly loves her young ones, that she will run into any danger
to secure them, he carries the form of a Cross (as it were) in his body, he is
strongest in his hinder parts, he never does any one any hurt, but is an
innocent harmless Creature, but withal very dull and blocki^h, yet sometimes he
will move his ears, which with him is a sign that he knows what you say;
Bodinus relates a story of an Ass that was so tame and gentle, that being
commanded to go into the Theater, he would find out the handsomest woman there,
and when the Actors were commanded to fetch him some barley, he would by his
gestures express something of joy at the hearing of it; if any one had spoken
to him, he would make some sign that he understood what he said; from whence he
infers that no Creature is so dull and senseless, but may be brought to
understand something, thus far Bodinus. Some have not scrupled to say that what
the Ass is made to understand, is done rather by Magic, than by Art, which I
think the likelier of the two.

4. There is no Creature so fruitful as this is, for she is with young, when
she is but young her self, and so continues still to have Colts, until she is
thirty years old.

5. When she is bringing forth, it is always; in some dark place, where no one
can see her; before he copulateth, he does with a loud voice call the Female,
continually braying until she comes; and as Nazianzen very well observes, an
Ass will bray although laden with gold, the flesh of Asses is allegorically
compared in Scripture to the grosfest kind of Idolatry, which the Jews were
always very much inclined unto, Ezekiel. 16. 26.

6. The Ass will always drink in the same place, if he can go dry to it, for
he will not go through any water; he will drink no water at all unless it be
like to what he uses to drink.

7. The Ass is a very dull, blockish Creature, having long ears, very impatient
of cold; if at any time he chance to eat any Hemlock, it makes him sleep so
soundly, that you may flea him, and he not feel it; in the Deserts of Arabia
are found a kind of wild Asses, that are so swift they cannot any ways be
taken, and if any one by chance is taken, he can never be tamed, nor made to
carry b^rthens. God seems to speak of this Creature, Job 39. where he says,
that he has given a dwelling to the wild Ass. And thus we have sufficiently
showed the nature and properties of the Ass; there are many things which the
Holy Scripture draws by way of inference from the Nature of this beast, I
shall speak to some few of them.

1. We read, Genesis 48. 14. that Jacob in his prophesying concerning the Tribe
of Issachar, says, that he shall be as a strong Ass. For, 1. As an Ass is of
no use in war, so the posterity of Issachar shall be wholly ignorant of war.

2. As the Ass is gentle, will bear great burdens, and will endure hard
labor, so his posterity shall choose rather to suffer, and pay Tribute, so he
can but have peace, then to get wealth by war, for peace, though but upon base
and dishonorable terms, is better than a war, though never so just* 2. In the
same place we find Jacob speaking concerning the Nativity of the Messi^s, where
he says, that he shall bind his f^al to the Vine, and his Asses Colt to the
choice Vine; I am not ignorant of the several expositions that are given of
these words* some expounding it of the universal peace that should be at the
coming of Christ, and so Judah found it when he bound his Asses foal to the
Vines, which in time of war was not lawful to do; others again do expound them
thus; this Ass signifies several Nations, and the Vine the Church, to signify
thus much to us, vizs That Christ should ride upon an Ass, i. e. that he should
gather all Nations into his Church, which before for their ignorance and
stupidity, might be compared to wild Asses, feeding upon thorns and thistles,
having but an impure Religion.

3. God commanded (Exodus 13. 13.) that the firstborn of an Ass should not be
offered to him, but that he should be redeemed with a Kid, or his neck be
broken, which the learned have expounded thus; that although God would have the
first of all Creatures offered to him, as being the (...) yet he would not have
the Ass offered, because he is a dull, sluggish Creature; thus we should have
none in the Church that are dull and sottish, and especially among Ministers.

4. Sampson, (Judge. 15. 15.) with the jaw bone of an Ass killed many of his
Enemies, and with (...) broke open a Fountain; Sampson being a type of Christ,
the jaw bone might signify Christ, by whom we have living water, who also like
Sampson subdued all his Enemies.

5. In Samaria, we read that there was such ^ scarcity of food ((...) Kings 6.
35.) that an Asses head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver, and the fourth
part of a cab of Doves dung was sold for five pieces of silver; which may not
unfitly be applied to the spiritual famine under the Pope, when there was such
great rates given for Asses heads; the maintaining of the Monks being mighty
chargable, and with no less charge did they buy Doves dung; purchasing the
false and pretended Relics of the Saints at so dear a rate; and I think it
may not unfitly be applied to the Religion of the Turks and Tartars, it being
almost incredible, what esteem they have for their Idol-Priest, and at what
cost and charges they are to maintain them; and among the Tartars, their chief
Priest at certain times rides upon a Horse decked with the richest Trappings,
whose hands it is an honor for the King to kiss, the Nobles may only kiss his
knees, and the common people only scarcely admitted to kiss his heel; we may
not unfitly compare this Creature and the Heathen Oracles together, which with
infinite charge they obtained of the Devil: those that will see more of it, may
read Herodotus, in his second Book concerning those gifts that Cyrus sent to
Apollinis.

6. The Ass that Christ rode upon; some expound concerning those Heathen
Nations that inhabit among the Jews, which will not bear the yoke of Christ;
and in general it may very well be applied to all Christians, but especially to
the Elect; for, 1. As the Ass was created for the use of man; thus true
Christians should strive to be useful to all men. 2. The Ass feeds on thorns
and briars; thus true Christians are acquainted with the dainties of this
World. 3. As the Ass will very hardly be made to go through the water, and is
always afraid of that place where once he fell; so ought Christians to have
great care of old sins, and not rashly to run themselves upon a temptation; as
the Ass has the figure of a Cross upon his back; thus ought Christians always
to bear in mind Christ Crucified, and to study him only, willingly bearing
whatever he shall lay upon them; and as the Ass has Foals when she is old;
thus ought Christians to be fruitful in good works, even to their lives end.
Moreover, as the Ass, when she casts her Foal, gets into some Cave, where no
one can see her; thus Christians should do nothing to be seen of men, and when
they give alms, it must be done so privately, that their left hand must not
know what their right hand does. And further, as the Ass will not willingly
drink in any Pond, but where he is used to drink; thus Christians ought to take
heed what Doctrines they are that they give credit unto. I have read of a
certain Priest in Germany, who in his Sermon said that the Citizens were like
Asses, who were sorely oppressed with the burdens that were laid on them; but
that the Senators were great Asses, they having a greater charge lying upon
them, and that the Priests were the greatest Asses of all, the burden that lay
upon them being of the greatest concernment; and at last, lifting up his eyes
and his hands, but the King (said he) comes not behind any of the rest, the
burden of the whole Nation lying upon him.

The wild Ass may represent wicked men, of which there are abundance in the
Deserts of Arabia; thus even the whole World is filled with wicked men. And as
there is no possibility of taming the wild Ass; so it is as difficult a matter
to reclaim a wicked person, one that is given over to a reprobate sense;
moreover, as this Creature will never cry if it have but good pasture; so
neither do wicked men take any care for the next World, if they can but have
enough of this. Covetous men may also be compared to Asses, who as they are
chiefly employed in carrying of burdens; so are covetous men still heaping the
world together, and burthening themselves with the cares thereof; but as the
Ass oftentimes is laden with Corn, but feeds upon the chaff himself; thus
covetous men do not enjoy what they have got, not knowing who shall enjoy those
riches which they with a great deal of pains and care have scraped together. To
conclude, Erasmus has drawn many inferences from the Ass, comparing illiterate
men to them; who as she has a great love to her young ones, so have they a
high esteem of their own works; and although it has a very large heart, yet is
very timorous; thus unlearned men will imitate, and sometimes exceed the
learned in their serious deportment and grave gestures: many teachers there are
that are more dull then the Ass, who saw divine vengeance, and the naked sword
sooner than Balaam did; for it is often seen that the people are truer
Worshippers of God than those that teach them. The Ass may be compared to that
knowledge which men have of God, and of his ways; and Balaam may be compared
to the will which oftentimes goes contrary to conscience, until they see
divine vengeance coming upon them. The Ass may also be compared to the sinner,
who runs on in a full Carreir of sin, until Christ meets with him, and
stops him; but so much for the Ass.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Heart.
THe Heart is a Creature commonly known to be very swift, strong, but timorous;
his heart is yellowish; but in Critannia there are some found that have
blackish hearts; these are the only Creatures that have yearly new horns. 1.
Those Creatures that have great hearts are most timorous, because the heat is
more dispersed; but on the contrary those Creatures that have lesser hearts are
stronger, according to that saying, vis uuit a fortior; so we read in the first
Iliad of Homer, that when Achilles told Agamemnon of his timerousness, he
answered him that he had cor cervi, the heart of a Stag. 2. This is a very
swift Creature; David gives God praise that he had given him the feet of a
Heart, Psalm. 18. 34. because God had always given him speedy and prosperous
success in his enterprises; he is naturally very leacherous, b^t especially at
the rising of Arcturus, at which time he is observed to be fiercer then at
other times; it is common among them to fight one with another for a Female,
and oftentimes are mortally wounded; at this time their flesh is something
rank, like the flesh of Goats; after the Female has been copulating with a
Male, they then do separate themselves one from another; the Female eats
Cummin, which makes her bring forth her young ones with a great deal of ease.

3. Although the Heart in some sense may be termed a stupid Creature, insomuch
that when she is hunted, if a Horse comes by her, she perceives him not, (for
she has her eyes fixed so on the Huntsmen,) yet this may be a great instance
of her sagacity and prudence, that she always feeds and brings forth her
young ones by the path way, by which she need not fear being made a prey by
wild beasts, by reason of passengers coming so often by; she has a very tender
care of her young ones, teaching them to avoid the snares of the Huntsman, and
inureth them to running while young; she shows them those places which are
the securest for them to lie in; as Rocks upon high Mountains, where there is
but one way to it, and that but very narrow, and in an eminent danger to run
thither; he is often seen to stand sentinel, as it were, upon a Mountain, to
see which ways the Huntsman goes, and if he comes nigh her hole where she
is, she will not run away, but resists them; we find David, in the 18. Psalm,
33. giving God thanks that he had made his feet like Hindes feet, and had set
them upon high places, i. e. That God had made him as safe as Hindes are in
high places; if he perceives himself grown fat, he goes into some place where
there is no path, nor any one passes by and if he sees any man, he hides
himself, because his fatness makes him that he cannot run so swiftly; thus in
the Winter time, for then he is weaker than at other times; and so when he
sheddeth his horns, divine providence has so ordered it, that they fall off
very easily, for they grow not out of the skull, but out of the skin; the
reason of his shedding his horns may be, because if they should grow still
bigger and bigger, it would be a burden to him; or else it may be, because it
makes a greater plenty of his horn (which is of such great use in Physic:) at
the time of her bringing forth (which is in the Spring) she goes aside into
some private place, where no one may see her, and when she lies down, she
either thrusts her horn into the ground, or else hides it where no one can
see it; she goes out to feed but in the night time; when she has new horns
growing, she tries the firmness of them by thrusting them against a Tree, and
will never be seen abroad again until her horn is firm and fit for service; and
when they are full grown out, she lies in the Sun that it may harden them;
from all which it appears that the Stag is a wise Creature; she soon
apprehends any danger approaching, if she pricketh up her ears; but otherwise
she is easily taken; in Scythia it is reported that Stags are so tame, that
they may be rid on like Horses; Aelian reports of King Mithridates, that he
would lie among Bulls and Horses, that he had used familiarly, and also that he
often slept with the Stags that he had tamed; if any one had come to him, one
would have mowed, the Horse would have neighed, and the Stag would make a great
noise until he had awakened him. 5. They exceedingly love music* and are much
delighted in hearing any one sing; and therefore one goes before a Stag and
sings to him, another comes behind him and takes him. 6. When he is so
closely pursued by the Dogs, that he sees there is no hope at all, he will run
to the Huntsman, expecting more favor from him, than from the dogs; but some
there are, who are of opinion, that this proceeds from the fierceness of
their Nature.

7. He has no gall, yet his inwards are so bitter that a Dog will not touch
them, unless they be very fat indeed; some have reported (but how true I shall
not here dispute) that in Achaia there are Hearts who have their gall in their
tail. 8. When he is wounded with a Dart, the only cure he has is to eat some
of the herb called Betony, which helps both to draw out the Dart, and heal
the wound. 9. The Stag is a very sociable Creature, for they always go
together in companies; some have been seen to swim over Rivers in great
companies; the Captain of them going first, and the hindermost laying their
heads on the backs of the foremost; and if the foremost be tired with swiming,
another is put in his place, and he swimmeth behind all the rest, and laying
his head upon the back of him that is before him, recovereth himself again;
sometimes when he is hunted, he will g^t himself into a low Tree, and hide
himself among the boughs: Many wild beasts do hunt the Heart for a prey, as the
weakest Creature; this they do always in the morning, because then hunger
pincheth them most; it is a wonderful thing to consider the great Antipathy
that there is between a Heart and a Serpent, for he knows by natural instinct
where the Serpents holes are; he goes to the hole where he sees and thinks
a Serpent is, and breaths upon him until he is forced to come out of his
hole, and then he sets upon him, and teareth him to pieces, or else eats
him up; the Serpent (after he has eaten it) makes him very thirsty, yet he
knows by instinct of Nature, that if he drinks any water before it is well
digested, it will kill him; and upon this account he will endure thirst a long
while, but at length he runs to the water so swiftly that he is tired before
he comes to the water, and when he is come to the fountain, he cries for
weariness, making a lamentable noise, and pants until he has recovered his
breath before he will drink; thus we find David speaking, as the Heart pants
after the waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O God, Psalm. 42. 1. when
he comes to the water, he does not immediately drink, but first plungeth
himself in the water, and after he has eatet^ so me Crabs (if he can get any)
he drinks. In Lybia there are abundance of Serpents, and if they see a Heart
lying along upon the ground, a great company of them leap upon him together,
and one windeth himself about his neck, another about his back, some about his
belly; he being thus tormented with them, when he feels them bi^ing so hard,
he starteth up and runs up and down the fields as if he were mad; at last he
throws himself upon the ground, and rubbing his back against the ground,
destroys the Snakes; but when he sees himself all over bloody, he runs
immediately to the water to wash himself: the hatred that is between a Serpent
and the Heart, is not only while alive, but after he is dead; for a Serpent if
he smell a Hartshorn burning, will get away from it; this is also to be
observed concerning the Heart, that when the wind blows he always runs
against it, because if he run with the wind it would carry the scent of him to
the dogs. Thus we have finished what is very necessary to be spoken of the
nature and properties of the Stag; I shall now speak to the several corollaries
or inferences that may be drawn from the nature of it; there are many
similitudes which the Holy Scripture fetches from the Stag, which I find
mentioned very often in profane Authors; I shall content my self out of many to
collect some few, and among those many places in Scripture where we find
mention made of this Creature, I think this which I shall here begin with, may
be accounted the chiefest place, viz. Psalm. 22. 2. where we find the Son of God
compared to the Hind of the Morning; where observe, 1. He is not compared to
the Heart, but to the Hind, because the Hind is the weaker Creature; thus we
find, Cant. 5. 2. It is not, Gemellus meus, of male twinns, but Gemella, female
twinns, because the love that Females have for Females, is greater then that
which they bear to Males; as Galatinus tells, lib. 3. chap. 30. Christ when
he suffered made his power of no effect, as Irenaeus tells us; that is, says
he, he suffered, and spoke not a word. 2. It is not unworthy our observation,
to consider that which is added; the Morning Hind, cerva matutina, for the
beasts do make a prey of the Hind in the Morning, as being then the weakest and
most obnoxious to danger. 3. Hinds flesh is softer then that of the Stag, if it
be hunted; thus the flesh of Christ which was softened by those cruelties he
endured, is thereby made food for us: Ein guter murber Braten, as the Germans
say. 4. As the Heart has such a hatred against Serpents, thus Christ came into
this World, that he might destroy the Old Serpent, the Devil, that he might
bruise his head, destroy his Kingdom and power; we read it promised, Genesis 3.
15. that the seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head. 4. And as the
hatred that is between the Heart and ^he Serpent, is the same after death; thus
Christ, now he is dead, and risen again, and sits at the right hand of God,
is still de^troying the Devils Kingdom, and does by his breath, the preaching
of the Gospel, ruin and destroy him. 5. As the Stag, after he has devoured
the Serpent, burns within with a vehement drouth, which they do signify to
others by that lamentable cry which they make, panting and howling as it were,
until they come to the Fountain; thus it was with Christ; we read that the
Serpent should bite his heel, Genesis 3. 15. Christ when he came into the World to
save sinners, to destroy the works of the Devil, he perceived the great weight
of the wrath of God which then lay upon him, insomuch that in the Garden he
sweat drops of blood, and when he was upon the Cross, he cried out that he was
a thirst, and with a bitter cry called upon God; saying, My God, my God, why
have thou for saken me? And when he had offered up supplications and prayers
with strong crying and tears, gave up the Ghost; all which is fully and
emphatically set down by the Prophet David; all my bones are out of joint, my
heart is like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels, my strength is dried
like a pot sherd, and my tongue cleaves to my jaws; I am poured out like
water, Psalm. 22. 6. As there are great store of Serpents found in Lybia, which
cannot endure the Seag; thus the Enemies are numerous that are against Christ
and his Gospel; and as the Heart when he is beset with these Serpents, some of
them winding about his neck, others about his feet, which he throwing himself
upon the ground destroys, others he bruises, and after he has cleared
himself of them, immediately runs to a River, partly to wash himself from
the blood, and partly to wash away any venom that may be in the wounds; thus
Christ endured the contradiction of sinners, and by death overcame death, and
conquered the Devil, and now enjoys Life Eternal; and has left us
efficacious remedies in his passion, which as often as we shall seriously
consider of, and meditate upon, will be an infallible cure for any deadly
wound, that the Devil by any heinous sin shall give unto us; the Church in the
Canticles, Chap. 2. v. 9. speaking of Christ, says, that he is like the Roe,
or the young Heart; or as some will have the words to signify, a wild Goat; and
they give us these reasons for it; as, 1. Because of his great swiftness and
strength, in leaping over the Mountains, so that he seems rather to fly than
leap; so Christ is said to come leaping over the Mountains, and skipping over
the Hills; the word may also signify Hearts, for as Hearts do fight one with
another for the Hind; so does Christ wage war with the Devil for the defense of
the Church. 3. Many in Christ might be applied to the Church, and to all good
men as members of the same; thus all good men are compared to Hearts, Psalm. 42.
1. The Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O
God: We might draw several inferences from the nature of this beast, and
further show wherein the good man and the Heart do agree; as, 1. The Heart is
meek, and a very sociable Creature, loving the company of his fellows; thus the
Church has received from Christ the spirit of meekness. 2. As the Heart, when
surrounded and beset with the Hounds, seeing no way to escape them, he will run
to the Huntsman, rather then be made a prey to the Hounds; thus the Church in
her greatest danger runs for help to God, and like an humble supplicant
acknowledges her transgressions, and confesses that she has deserved greater
punishments. 3. As Hearts and Goats when hunted run for refuge to high Mountains
and Rocks; so Christians when any ways distressed, look up to Heaven, from
whence comes their Salvation; and as the Stag, when he perceives himself
wounded with a dart, their only cure is Betony; thus Christians perceiving
doubts to arise, can find comfort no where but in the Holy Scriptures; and as I
said before, some Hearts have their Gall in their Tayls; so ought all good men
patiently and quietly to endure injuries done unto them; not prone to revenge,
but laboring daily to bridle and restrain their uuruly passions. 4. As there
is a natural Antipathy and enmity between the Heart and the Serpent; thus the
Church in all Ages has always had implacable Enemies, Tyrants, Heretics,
etc. And as when he is hunted, it grows exceeding hot, and extremely
thirsts for water; so when good men are vexed and persecuted by wicked men,
they immediately betake themselves to the service of God, expecting there alone
to find help and succor in all their extremities; and as when they swim over
any River, they so order themselves, that the head of one lies on the back of
another; so we ought all to bear one another burdens; and as, although they
have large Horns, yet they hurt no one, but are very timorous; so Christians
ought not to trust in an Arm of flesh: St. Basil says, that as Hearts by their
breath do expel, and (as it were) draw out the poison from the Serpents hole;
so good men, by their good coversation do often convert and reclaim men from
their sins.

And as in the Cant. Christ and the Church are compared to two friends, in like
manner the Heart is an eminent instance and Symbol of love and frieudship,
concerning which we will not now speak any thing, having at large spoken to it
in the former part of this Chapter.

And as oftentimes the Horns are of no use to the Heart; so neither do riches
profit the owner, because as we often see the owner never lives to enjoy what
he has gotten; thus it often comes to pass, that outward strength has done a
great deal of mischief, therefore it is always good to trust in God for relief
in all our miseries; we read, Psalm. 29. That the voyee of the Lord makes the
Hinds to Calve; which is as if he should say, that God was even the midwife and
Physician at the time of their bringing forth; some say that the Heart is very
fearful of Thunder, for when it Thundreth she never brings forth her young
alive, which God, in the forecited place, is said to prevent; he also breaks
the Cedars of Lebanon; i. e. by his word he humbles the high and lofty spirits
of men, he is said there to make the Hinds to Calve, i. e. he by his Gospel
comfort and supporteth all weak and despairing Christians; but having so
largely spoken of this beast, we shall say no more of it.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Hog.
BEfore we shall speak of the Nature of this Creature, we shall consider the
difference between the Hog, the wild Boar, the tame Boar, the Pig, Sow, and the
Porcupine, which some do think is rather a kind of Hedgehog; as the Ape is
likest to a man in his outward parts; so the Author of that little Anatomical
exercise, (which Galen is supposed to have writ) says that a Hog of all other
Creatures is likest to a Man in his inward parts, whose flesh is so like to
man's flesh, both in smell and taste, that (as Conradus Gesner says) several
have eaten the one for the other, not discovering of it by taste or smell;
these things premised, I come now more particularly to speak of it.

1. It has exceeding hard hairs, of a devouring gluttonous Nature, and
therefore his head continually looks toward the ground, and never can look
upwards, and by his scent and continual smelling of the Earth, he finds
Roots, Bones, Carrion, Dung, and never refuses any thing that he finds.

2. It is hot and moist; and therefore it is that sometimes we see hard
swellings grow about them; so that Butchers looking under their tongues, will
tell whether a Hog be good or no. Those Hogs which are fed of rotten Apples,
bean cods, and such moist meat, their flesh is moister and pleasanter than
other meat, but not so healthful for the body; they have another way to know a
Hog by looking on their backs, for they see whether the blood be good or no
that comes out upon the plucking some hairs off by the roots; the way to have
them clear from these swellings, is to let them run abroad, and keep them in
clean sties; Butchers commonly say, that it is very seldom but that a Hog is
troubled with some distemper or other, either in his Lungs, Lights, Liver, etc.
but most especially they are troubled with Lice, which breed most upon their
backs; but the headache is an epidemical disease among all Hogs, of which many
dye. 3. It is so greedy a Creature, that he has no measure in eating, and
grows so fat, that sometimes he is not able to go; they have lain so long in
one place, that Mice have bred under them; Otto Melander says, that in Arcadia
he saw a Hog so fat that he could not stir, and that a Rat had eat a hole in
his flesh, and there bred young ones; as Marcus Varro says, quoting Johannes
Rivius, in his Book concerning the institution of Children: this Creature
lives as if he were born for nothing but to eat; and, as there he observes,
the grosfest bodies breed the worst blood; he has nothing of subtilty or craft
in him, but is a dull, stupid, senseless Creature, and can never be brought to
any service, as are other Creatures, though wild; viz. Lions, Bears, etc. and
therefore Cicero says, that the life of a Sow is for nothing but to keep it
from putrefying, and as the Proverb, habet animam pro sale, their souls are of
no other use than to keep the body from stinking; pigs will suck any sow, and
therefore they use to distinguish one from another by sticking pitch upon them.
4. They very much delight to be in the mud, which they do not perceive the
stench of, because they often breathe in the mud, and do not take the scent up
into their nose; he cannot endure the smell of a Rose or sweet Marjoram; and, as
Varro says, that tumbling and wallowing in the mud is as pleasant to the Swine
as washing to a man; he loves roots better then any thing, will eat something
of whatever he finds, he very greedily devoureth serpents, and the dead
carcass of any creature, nay he will eat the carcass of his fellow creature,
which no other creature will do. She is so impatient of hunger, that
oftentimes she devoureth her young, and therefore it is no strange thing, as
some have thought, for a Sow to devour her pigs. 5. It is no less fruitful then
leacherous, for it is so exceeding enflamed with lust that they will fight one
with another for the female* it has almost the strength of a Lion, for a Boar
when hunted will not only throw the Huntsman down, but if he has no help will
kill him. 6. The Sownever sheddeth her hair in the winter time, as all other
four-footed creatures do. It is the particular property of the Boar, who when
he sees unavoidable death, he singleth out one of the Huntsmen and will run
upon him, with the greatest rage imaginable, not to be affrighted with swords
or sticks; it is worth observation, to consider that if one Hog be hurt, and he
begins to grumble, all the rest of the Hogs of the same company come in to
him; it is needless to recite any thing more of this creature, it being so
commonly known: now let us see what we may learn from the nature of it. I might
give Examples of this creature, out of several profane Authors; but I shall
only set down one or two out of the Holy Scripture: the first place I shall
speak to, shall be taken out of the Old Testament, in the 14. of Deuteronomy. v. 8.
where we find the Jews were forbidden the eating of Swines flesh; some may
enquire the reason of this prohibition, since, according to the judgment of
all Physicians, it may be reckoned one of the best sorts of meats, provided
that it have no distemper upon it; nay they were not only forbidden the eating
of it, but they were not so much as to touch the carcass of it after it was
dead; the reasons of which among others may be these.

1. Lest the Vines and Olive trees in the fragrant Gardens should be rooted up
by this venomous creature; for he will not eat the tops of herbs, but pull them
up by the roots.

2. To prevent the increase and spreading of diseases among them, who were
always very subject to the Leprosy; Swine being often troubled with hard
swellings, which soon putrify, being not well fed. Conradus Gesner has
observed that white Hens are troubled with the same disease. But,

3. The next reason of their being forbidden Swines flesh may be, that by their
abstinence they might give a testimony of their obedience to God, which would
not have appeared in abstaining from those things which in their own nature
were hurtful; but in abstaining from those things that were useful and
pleasant; for Swines flesh (as we said before) is the likest to man's flesh. 4.
Lactantius tells us a fourth cause, in his Book de vera sapientia. cap. 17.
God forbid the Jews the eating of Swines flesh, (says he) that thereby they
might learn to keep themselves from all sins of uncleanness, for Swines are
filthy and unclean creatures; never so much as once looking up unto heaven, but
always rooting in the earth continually seeking for food; and no creature is
of so little use as they are, for every creature is either good for drawing,
for tilling the ground, for easing of burdens, or else they serve to clothe
us, or give us milk, or last of all, are for a safegu^rd unto us; so that no
creature but is of some use or other to man. God therefore forbids them to eat
Swines flesh which was fed only to live. He would have them take heed, from
this coeature, of being gluttons, which would very much hinder the free
exercise of justice amongst them, as also that they should not plunge
themselves in filthy lusts as the Sow does in the mire, and that they should
not be subject to, nor clog themselves with earthly pleasures; for they are
besmeared with mud or clay, that make riches their God; thus far Lctantius. The
Sow never looks up to heaven but when he grunteth, and then it is only with his
eyes lift up; he will be much under trees, loving exceedingly to feed upon
Acorns, but never looks up to the Oak from whence they fall; thus wicked
covetous men, though they enjoy all this worlds good, never look up to God who
is the tree of life, who is the Author and Giver of them. Physicians say, that
those who have small foreheads have no more learning in them than a Hog; and
that they who have a thick nose and flat at the end, are foolish; and if they
have a thick neck, then they are choleric: all Authors compare those men that
are given to lust to Swine; thus Christ, Mat. 7. 6. Forbids us to cast
Pearls before Dogs and Swine, not to dogs, i. e. to furious persecutors; not to
Swine, i. e. to unclean persons, who contrary to their consciences wallow in
their sins, and that men should not be deterred from preaching the Gospel by
the ingratitude of their hearers, Christ commands them to preach to those who
are more willing and obedient; thus we find Epicures and Drunkards are compared
to Swine. 2 Pet. 2. 22. for first, as the Hog is a most dull stupid creature,
having not so much reason as to distinguish good from bad; nor can he be made
fit for any service; thus wicked men will not understand the things of God, not
being at all moved at any Sermon, but do despise even wisdom it self. The same
Christ tells us, in another place, that the cares of this world is one great
hinderance of our profiting by the word. 2. Swine are led only by their
appetite, always living an intemperate gluttonous life, Jeremiah, cap. 12. 3.
says, that wicked men who flourish in this life, and enjoy all the world can
afford them, are fatted for the slaughter* and as Swine do devour any thing
that comes next to their mouth, (for dish-water is a very pleasant drink to
them) thus wicked covetous men use all means, both right and wrong, to obtain
their covetous desires; sometimes we pull out some of their teeth to prevent
mischief; thus wicked men are kept from doing that mischief which otherwise
they would do, for fear of the Laws. 3. As Swine cannot distinguish between
Pearls and Carrion, but trample upon them both, so sinners do not see any
difference between earthly and heavenly things; Nay, they contemn the latter,
and only seek for earthly things; and as they cannot endure the scent of roses
and sweet Marjoram; so cannot wicked men endure that breath of life which is
breathed out of the Holy Scripture. Swine do not only delight in dung, but
they count the smell of carrion a sweet scent. Thus wicked men count all their
sins virtues; so it is common among us now, not to count drunkenness any sin,
but a virtue; so of other vices; and as the Sow after her washing will turn to
the mire again, so wicked men, after a feigned repen tance, will turn again to
their former wicked life; and also, as this creature defiles any thing which
he touches with his snout, thus do wicked men by their evil lives; and as we
commonly see the Sow teaches the young Pigs betimes to wallow in the mire, so
wicked men begin betimes to teach their children to do wickedly; if one Hog be
hurt, all the rest of the company will run to help him; so if the Minister
accuses one wicked man of his sins, all his company will run to help him. But
we may learn some good instructions from the nature of the So^ in this
particular, in which she shows a tender nature and a great love to her
fellows; thus ought Christians to be pitiful and tenderhearted to their fellow
creatures when under any misery or affliction; but more particularly we may
compare the Hog and the covetous man together; for as the Hog does nothing all
his life long but eat and seek for food; thus is it the whole business of the
covetous man's life to heap up riches, and to increase his wealth.

2. As the Hog is never satisfied with what he eats, so are the desires of the
covetous never to be satisfied with riches.

3. As the Hog is of no use nor service to any one while alive; so it is with
the covetous man, who never does any good with what he has while alive.

4. As Swines when very hungry and cannot get any thing to eat, do not spare
their young piggs, but greedily devour them; thus covetous men will have their
greedy desires satisfied, and spare neither friends nor relations, but are for
what they can get of either.

5. As the Hog if he hears any noise about his stye presently begins to
gruntle, fearing that some body is coming to take his life away; thu are
covetous* men afraid of every one, lest they should rob him of his pelf.

6. As the Hog is continually grunting all the while he is at the trough,
eating in fear lest any should take it away from him; thus covetous men do not
enjoy what they have, but are in fear lest by any accident they should lose
what they have.

7. As the Hog will soon forget the misery of his fellow, though at the hearing
of him cry many of them will run to help him; thus it is with the covetous men,
who have no true affection to their friends and relations, but when
self-interest is at the bottom of it.

8. As the Hog makes a great noise and loud cries when he is going to be
killed; thus are covetous men as fearful of death.

9. As when Swine are killed, there are puddings and sausages sent about to
friends and neighbors, which are eaten with a great deal of joy; thus do
wicked heirs daily expect and desire the death of the covetous miser, and then
with joy they divide what with care and pains he had gathered together.

As Swine never shed their hairs in the winter time, thus it is with the
wicked, who never leave off their wicked ways; and as the Sow after her
washing, returns again to her wallowing in the mire; thus do wicked men after
a feigned repentance return again to their former wicked courses; and as Swine
do not make any noise toward heaven; thus wicked men while in peace and
prosperity never seek God; but when under afflictions and troubles, Psalm. 80.
14.

10. To conclude, the enemies of the Church are compared to wild Boares
destroying the Vineyards, who will often whet and sharpen their teeth, rushing
upon the Huntsman with so great violence that it is very hard for him to escape
with his life; thus with no less rage and violence do the enemies of the
Church act against her. Xenophon, Opianus, Pollux, and several other writers do
tell us, that it is of so fiery a nature, that when for weariness he is forced
to lie down upon the ground, his teeth are so inflamed and his whole mouth,
that if you take a hair from his neck, and put it into his mouth, it will set
it on fire; the enemies of Christ are as fierce against his Church, as the Boar
is against the Huntsman; an example of this we have, in our modern story; who
have sworn for themselves and their posterity the ruin who have and
destruction of all Lutherans; and as the Boar (which may not unproperly be
called a kind of Swine) until she has voided her ruin, cannot fly the enemy,
but will stand still and be taken; thus the enemies of the Church, unless they
do leave and forsake their sins, cannot avoid the wrath of God; and as the
Boar, when ill, cures himself tby the Ivy-tree; thus there is no remedy for
the cure of sinners but the word of God; and as the Boar if enraged will for
madness run into his stye; thus many men, in a passion* will say and do that
which at last proves their own ruin: we read in St. Matthews Gospel, of the
Devils that besought Christ, if he cast them out that they might enter into
the herd of Swine, Christ gave them leave to go, the Devil was very willing to
enter into the herd; from whence we may learn thus much, that the Devil
dwells in those persons, who like Hogs and Swine delight to continue in their
sins and iniquities; and as the Gadarens desired Christ to depart out of their
Coasts, lest they should lose any more Hogs; thus it is with wicked men, who
rather then they will lose the enjoyment of a base filthy lust, will let
Christ, God and Heaven, and all go. Thus much of the Hog.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Fox.
THE Fox is a creature commonly known to all, and therefore I shall not be very
large in speaking of it; only I shall say something to those several places of
Scripture, where we find this creature made mention of: there are three things
which I observe in the Fox; it is a very crafty and subtle, and it is a cruel
and gluttonous Creature. Ambrosius (in his Hexameron) says, that the Fox is to
be hated for his greediness, and that he is despised for his weakness, and that
while he is laying wait for another, he does not take care enough of himself.
I find that Foxes and Weasels may be said to be equally cunning, especially
Ferrets and white Weasels; there is also a seafish called a Fox, which I think
does not come far short of this Creature we are now speaking to, for subtilty
and craftiness; that the Fox is so, appears from those Fables which are extant
concerning him, by which his craftiness, etc. is signified to us; but we shall
shall have occasion to speak of this at large hereafter; that he is malicious
and revengeful appears, in that all his craftiness, etc. is only employed to
the destruction of other Creatures; and his gluttony appears in that he is
continually seeking for his prey, never being satisfied; which three odious
properties are applied to Hypocrites, Luke 9. 58. and that chiefly to Herod,
Luk* 13. 32. Go and tell that Fox, etc.

The Fox therefore, as we said before, is very crafty; which will appear,

1. In that he claps his tail between his legs when he is pursued,

2. He has a very large hairy tail, insomuch that the dogs pursuing of him
catch hold of his tail; and thinking to catch hold of him, instead of flesh get
nothing but their mouths full of hair, by which means they lose their hold of
him.

3. When he perceives he cannot escape he urin's on his tail and whisks it on
the dogs, which has an exceeding strong scent, insomuch that the dogs not
enduring the scent are for a while forced to desist.

4. He often when he is in danger, and no avoiding of it, he will bite the dogs
on their hinder legs, for that is the tenderest part about them.

5. Because the Urchine is too strong for him, he takes him by craft; for when
he casts himself down upon the ground, he leapeth upon his belly and
destroys him.

6. The Fox has a way to take fish; wandering by the shore, he dippeth his tail
in the water; the little fish immediately entangle themselves in his tail, and
so are taken.

7. He his often troubled with wasps in the summer time, but uses this wile to
destroy them; he hides himself, but lays his tail out; the Wasps fly to his
tail, and when there are abundance in it, he runs to the wall or to some
tree, and there strikes his tail against the tree, and ^ubbeth it against the
ground, and so he destroys all of them.

8. If he wants any food and cannot tell where to get it, he lies upon the
ground upon his back with his legs stretched abroad, and so feigneth himself
dead; the Birds seeing him lie so light on him, thinking he is dead; and when
they are upon him he takes them, and devoureth them.

9. He hides himself privately when he knows there are Hens, Geese or Ducks,
and so destroys them in the night time; he will be often sucking the milk
Pailes where he can find them; sometimes he takes a Hare by his trapps which
he lays for him. The Fox will eat Mice, and hens, after he has killed them,
but before he will not meddle with it. He is a destroyer of Peacocks, Doves,
and almost all Birds, as also of Hares; and therefore there are but few Hares
where there are many Foxes; it is a known Fable of the Fox, the Geese, and Hens.

10. He will never eat if any one sees him, but always feeds by himself in
his hole.

11. When he goes abroad he never goes straight forwards, but in several
paths and turnings, and therefore he is called Vulpes quasi Volvipes.

12. He goes as if he were lame, for his right legs are shorter than his left.

13. He is a greater devourer of tame, than of wild Creatures.

14. His breath is very strong, and his urine is no less unpleasant than his
breath; and if he bites any one it is venomous; it is observed, that those
places where they are are very barren; the reason of which some think may be,
that rank and unpleasant smell which comes from his body; so that, according
to the Proverb, he stinks ano and ore.

15. When he wants food he will be very tame, and keep about houses, and in the
night time, if he can get any thing he takes it, and runs with it into the
woods, and his hole or den has six or seven ways to it, lest any one should
trayle him.

16. There is a kind of mutual love between the Fox and the Serpent; for both
of them love to be in holes and Caves; but though Foxes have holes, yet they be
not of their own making; for those holes which the Badgers make for themselves,
they by craft cosen them of by this stratagem; when he sees any of their
holes empty, he immediately dungs just at the mouth of the hole; when the
Badger returns he not enduring such a rank smell is forced to leave his hole;
the several ways which lead to his hole are a great distance one from another;
for were they near one another, if the Huntsman laid a gin at one place, let
him come out where he would the dogs would see him. We find that Christ spoke
of the holes of Foxes, Mat. 8. 18. Luke 9. 58. The Foxes have holes, and the
Birds of the air have nests, etc. Serpents, Apes, and Foxes, and all such like
mischievous creatures, are observed to have very small eyes; but the more
innocent creatures, such as Sheep, Oxen, etc. have very large eyes; the Crow
and the Fox are often seen to be together. There is a Bird called the O^sal^s,
which is a great destroyer of Foxes, for he will light upon the Fox and pull
the hairs off his back, and if he knows where his young ones are, will kill
them all; and therefore the Fox is seldom found big; and when she has brought
forth her young, she hides them where no one can find them; when she is old it
is a hard matter to take her in a net, neither will she be deceived by taking
any thing that you shall throw unto her.

17, The Fox feeds upon dead carcasses; we find David cursing his enemies who
had sought for his soul, those that seek my soul to destroy it, shall go into
the lower parts of the earth, they shall fall by the sword, they shall be a
portion for Foxes. Ps. 63. 9, 10. Origin understands by the Fox the Devil,
parts of whom are all wicked men; yet we may very well by it understand
temporal punishment for wicked men; offenders and malefactors are here
destroyed by the sword, and their carcasses cast to the beasts of the field;
that story will very well come in here, that Pausanias relates in his History
of Messene, a little City in Peloponese in Greece; which is of one Aristomenes
Messenius, who was taken by the Lacedaemonians, and condemned to dye; and after
the Custom of those people he was thrown into very deep Cave and there to
starve, where man^ malefactors before him had been thrown, and die^ with
hunger; he lying there very sad, and expecting a lingering death, he saw a Fox
coming privily and very slowly to devour a Carcass which lay by him; he seeing
that covers his face with the garment that he had about him; and so lay for
dead; the Fox at last perceiving him lie so, thinking that he had been dead,
sets upon him, and immediately catches at his garment to tear it off from
him, the better to come to his carkas^; the man* with one hand catches hold of
the Fox, and with the other hand keeps on his clothes that the Fox should not
bite him; the Fox striving to get away, the man keeping his hold, follows him
from one hole to another, until he came to a little hole where he saw light; he
let the Fox go, broke his way through and escaped; but when this was told to
the Lacedaemonians, that Aristomenes was escaped and alive among his friends,
they thought it as great a miracle, as if he had arose from the dead. Pliny
tells us, that if they chance to eat bitter Almonds it is death to them
except they can get water; in Thracia if he goes over any ice; he will first
lay his ear to it, if he hear the current of the water underneath he will not
venture over, fearing lest it be too weak to bear him; if a Fox runs mad he
has the same qualities as a mad dog: but we have spoken enough of the nature
and properties of the creature. Authors have deduced many and useful inferences
from it; I shall for brevity sake only tell the reader thus much, that the
craftiness and subtilty of the Fox, is an evidevt symbol and example of that
craft and deceit which is in the Devil and all his agents; which how great it
is in transforming himself into an Angel of light, will be better altogether
omitted, then briefly to speak of, as the Orator once said of Carthage: with
what fraudulent expressions did he deceive our first Parents? with what
subtilty did he tempt Christ himself? and how many cheats does he put upon men
daily, but chiefly those that think themselves most secure? how easily does he
deceive Witches and Inchanters? he tells them how to bring a flood, how to
make thunder, and he destroys these; nay he is not contented with this
neither, but at their death he being not able to give that help which he
promised, destroys both body and soul; Sampson is said, Judge. 15. 4. to get
300. Foxes, and to tie them together with firebrands at their tails, and so
sent them into his enemies corn; some doubt how it could be done; for first,
Sampson could not get so many; and secondly, although he might get them, yet he
could not tie firebrands to their tails; to both which I answer, that about the
Caspian Sea there are so many Foxes, as Aelian reports, that they will come
into Towns and Cities in great companies, but do no one any hurt, fawning upon
every body; and as amongst us we have so many Goats, that they will often get
into the Vineyards and pull down the Vines; So in Judaea, in old times, they
were as much troubled with Foxes, as appears, Cant. 2. 15. Take us the Foxes,
the little Foxesthat spoil the Vines, for our Vines have tender grapes.

To the second objection, I answer, that we have many like examples in profane
Authors; thus we read in Ovid. lib. 4. Fastorum, of several Foxes that have
been fent amongst corn with firebrands at their tails. Cur igitur missa junctis
ardentia taedis
terga ferant vulpes, causa docenda mihi est.


And a little further, you may read, Is capit extremi vulpem in convalle
salicti,
abstulerat multas illa co^ortis aves.
Captivam st ipula foenoque involvit and ignes,
admovet urentes effugit ill^ manus.
Qua fugit incendit vestitos messibus agros.
damnosis vites ignibus aura dabat.
Factu^ abiit, monumenta manent, nam dicere certam
nunc quoque lex vulpem carse^lana vetat
Utque luat poenas genus hoc Cerealibus ardet
quoque modo segetes perdidit, ille perit.


But enough of this; we will now return to the story of Sampson, who may
signify to us a true teacher or Doctor who is set, whose work and business is
to see it that it flourishes; but we may compare the Foxes unto Heretics who
are tied together by their tails, i. e. they consent and agree to destroy and
ruin the Church; but their heads are distant one from another, i. e. they
differ in judgment and opinion; notwithstanding all makes for the ruin of the
Church, Sampson therefore gathers the Foxes together, i. e. to show that they
are all agreed to trouble the Church, Neh. 4. 8. We read, that when the Jews
returned from Captivity, and began again to build the Temple, and the Heathens
their Enemies hearing of it, said, Even that which they build, if a Fox go up,
he shall even break down their stone wall; Thus, as the Enemies of the Jews
thought, that the wall which they built was so weak, that they might easily be
laid waste, even by Foxes, etc. Thus the Enemies of the Church, if they see
that our Sanctum Sanctorum is likely to be built, i. e. that by the preaching
of the Gospel many shall be converted; they think it an easy matter by subtle
disputations to overthrow and ruin; this we see happened in the primitive
Church, which appears by those many and long disputations which we see the
Fathers had with the Philosophers of those times.

Take us the little Foxes which spoil the Vines, Cant. 2. 15. false Prophets
and Heretics are compared to Foxes, Ezekiel. 13. 4. O Israel, thy Prophets are
like the Foxes in the Deserts; that is a remarkable place in the Canticles, of
the little Foxes that spoiled the Vines; Origin by the Foxes understands
Devils; for as Foxes are fed with clusters of Grapes, that is, they spoil the
Vines while young, and their tender branches but just grown out: thus the Devil
hides himself in Dens, but on purpose to entrap young Christians, and with
evil thoughts to extinguish the flower of virtues as soon as budded, and but
beginning to appear, but especially in young men, when they have but just begun
to lead an honest life: I could by many examples show how young men are in love
with vice, as Drunkenness, filthy and obscene songs, immodest pictures, etc. so
that it was too truly said by some of the Fathers, that the youthful age of
most is sacrificed to the Devil, the best part of most men are spent in the
worst things; no one can take this little young Fox but Christ, therefore we
ought earnestly to implore him, that he would govern and enlighten our youth by
his Holy Spirit; the best time to take this Fox is while young, we ought
betimes to stop the first beginnings of vice, before they become a habit; as we
use to say, principiis obsta.

Fot in the forecited place of the Canticles it is faid, that these Foxes live
to be taken when the Winter is past, and the showers are over, when the voice
of the Turtle is heard, etc. Hence some of the Holy Fathers understand by these
little Foxes, Heretics that lay waste and destroy the Vineyard, that is the
Church; and as in that place there is no mention made of Lions, Tigers,
Leopards, Bears, etc. because the Church never receives such hurt from open
Enemies, though they shed much blood, but rather by such perfecutions it is the
more increased, and grows the better, according to those Verses, Sanguine
succrevit Ecclesia, sanguine coepit,
Sanguine fundata est, sanguinis finis erit.


As those little Foxes which lie hid under ground do most mischief to the
Vines, thus the greatest Enemies of the Church lie in her very bosom, for the
Church in all ages has been like Joseph, sold by her own Brethren, and like
Sampson betrayed by his own Wife; thus Christ was betrayed into the hands of
his Enemies by his own Disciples; thus the Church chiefly suffers by those
me^ that are maintained by her, as Joseph preserved the life of his Brethren
that destroyed him; and no less does it suffer from those men whom it
defends, and who know all her secrets; so Judas knew the Garden where Christ
was wont to pray. And as Foxes by their craftiness do great mischief to Vines
and Gardens, so the Church never suffers more than from subtilty of
arguments, by which young men are easily deceived, not being able to perceive
the fallacy of them; We might illustrate this by the example of several
Heretics in all ages, who have used all wiles and stratagems to deceive; and
as Foxes have several ways to their holes, so do wicked men turn and wind
themselves always to deceive; and as the Fox, if he be necessitated to it by
hunger, will seem to be tame, so do these deceivers seem to imitate the true
Church; an eminent instance of this we have in Ecclesiastical History, of
Arrius, who seemed to be one of the true Church, and agreed with all Orthodox
men, and said that he would subscribe to the Nicene Creed, and the rest of the
Decrees of that Council, using these words, What I have subscribed, ^ give my
consent to, but under his doublet he had a paper wherein was written another
thing; but these Foxes are to be taken, they are to be confuted with strong
arguments, and that while they are young, before their opinions get too big a
head, before they have cast their urine and dung about, before their breath
becomes rank, and their teeth venomous; that is, before they have by their
false doctrine poisoned and infected men's judgments; they make those places
barren where they are, i. e. they lay waste the Church; and as the Foxes have a
kind of friendship with the Crow and Serpent, thus have Heretics a
correspondency and a great love for the Devil and his Agents; it is worthy our
observation to consider how Ministers are compared to the Hunters of Foxes, who
must be crafty and industrious to find them out; the little Foxes are only to
be taken, for none can take the great one but the Son of God, who is described
in the forecited place of the Canticles: the Germans have this Proverb, Eines
Haas une inchs sein, he that is once overcome by an Enemy* shall never be at
quiet: they have another Proverb to the same purpose almost, which is this, Ber
einen inchs fangen will, der mus einen schops hinder das Garn stellen, it is a
difficult thing to find out an Army that lies in ambush; with which Proverb we
shall conclude our Discourse of the Fox.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Cat.
IN former times Cats were not so tame as to live in Houses, and be familiar
with us as they are now; for they used formerly to live only in Woods, and were
exceeding cruel and venomous, making a prey of Foxes and Rabbets, etc. but yet
doubtless their nature was the same then as it is now; for God at the first
creation gave every creature those properties which afterward it retained; but
yet I do not deny, but that about Helvetia there are wild Cats now, and, as
Conradus Gesner says, are very good food; the Cat in former times was one of
the Egyptian Gods, as Diodorus Siculus tells us, and Strabo in his 27 th.
Book says, that in the Reign of Tiberius there were above 7000 Romans slain in
Egypt for the killing of one Cat; but we will let this pass: a Cat is not much
unlike a Lion in his face, teeth, and claws, but his ears are somewhat rounder;
the wild Cats most commonly are gray, and are almost of the color of ice; the
tame Cat is of diverse colors, but most commonly are gray; Cats eyes shine in a
dark night, they can see to get mice in the darkest night; thus the Hyena and
the Batt have their sight the strongest when it is dark, their eyes are
observed to be bigger and lesser according to the change of the Moon; if he
sees a mouse run by him, he will run after him whatever he is doing of, and
thence came the Proverb, the Bride Cat, which Gregory Nazianzen expounds
thus, that if a Cat be adorned like a Bridegroom with rich attire, if he sees
a mouse stir, though a Bride for attire, yet she runs after it, never
minding her attire; thus are all spurious and false Ministers; and he compares
them to some Gentlemen that have been given to lewd courses, but afterward
have undertaken the office of the Ministry, and yet continue the same as they
were before. 2. Aelian, Lib. 7. Cap. 40. says, that the Male Cat is the
leacherousest creature that is, but the female not so bad, and very tender of
her young ones; when the Male is thus inflamed with lust, she leaves the
House, and wandereth up and down; the Male being so leacherous, kills all the
young ones, that he may enjoy the female the sooner; the male at that time is
exceeding fierce, and oftentimes do wound one another in the night time, where
we commonly hear them make such noises; but some do say that the male is not
more lustful than the female, but that they are both alike, nay sometimes the
female will fight for the male. 3. A young Cat is very nimble, climbing over
Houses, and up into Trees, and if he sees any thing to move upon the ground,
he will leap upon it, he will play with any that he meets with; but when old,
then he is as dull and lazy: Julius Caesar Scaeliger says, that in Malabar
there are some Cats so nimble, that they will run as nimbly as a Squirrel. 4.
He is exceedingly cleanly, he will often be licking of himself, not enduring
any bad scent, and therefore makes a hole with her feet, and hides her own
excrements in the earth. Pliny tells us the reason of it is, that she might
not discover to the nice where she is. 5. At night she will run into the
darkest corners of the House, having a very sharp and acute sight, and can
better see in the night time than in the day; very intemperate in her diet, and
often is distempered by overmuch eating, and therefore seldom lives long;
she loves to lie near ovens, and in the chimney-corner, and often burns
herself, she will always lie clean and soft, and will not leave the house that
she has long lived though the house be left alone; not like the Dog, that
loves the people, and not the house; the breath of a Cat is very unwholesome,
and the smell of his urine is very strong, and therefore we use to say, that a
Cat always leaves a stink behind him; he is naturally very hot, his skin is
very warm, he being always so hot, has a bad scent about him; some cannot
endure the breath of a Cat, and will smell it though they do not see him, and
will sweat until he be removed out of the room, because the Mother, when big
of that child, could not endure a Cat her self; the Cat will light on his feet
though he falls a great height, and seldom is hurt by any fall; if his skin
be burned any where, he will not stir out of doors, but at other times will go
about to show himself: his breath is exceeding strong and unwholesome (as we
said before) and therefore those that let them lve with them in bed are seldom
free from diseases; he is a great enemy to serpents and toads; in time of
sickness he will carry the contagion about him; he hates no creature more than
mice, and will easily find them out by their smell, and will see them when they
do not see him; and oftentimes when he has got one, first he will play with
it, and afterward devour it: thus do they serve birds; he loves fish, but
cannot endure the water, and these are the most noted things that we shall
observe of the Cat; and I know none that more resemble the Cat than Flatterers:
For, 1. As it is a common creature, so there is no place free now from
Slanderers and Back-biters. 2. As they creep into all corners and holes, thus
do Tale-bearers prye and search into all men's actions; and as they themselves
do not perceive the strong smell that comes from them, thus Back-biters
aggravate other men's faults, but hide their own, and as the Cat loves to be
handled and stroked on the head, thus Flatterers love those that will give ear
to their reports: as in the old time it was one of the Egyptian gods, so
Back-biters and Flatterers are by too many people honored and loved; they,
like the Cat, wherever they come, leave a strong scent behind them, and by the
just judgment of God are often discovered.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Hare and Coney.
THe Hare is generally known, and is very swift, and therefore some give the
Etymology of the word Lepus from levi-pes; he has a very light round head,
his ears are long, and but of a small body, he never grows fat, and never
goes, but always leapeth; his hair is as soft as feathers; but the Fox has a
way to take him although he be so swift; when the Fox pursues him, when he
has run after him a great way, he seems to give over pursuing him; the Hare
perceiving of it, goes on but very leasurely, the Fox perceiving that,
follows him to his Borough; the Hare can go up a Hill easier than he can go
down, he is easier taken in a Valley than on a Hill; when he goes down a Hill,
he never goes straight forward, but windeth about; for his hinder feet being
longer than his fore-feet, it is troublesome for him to go down hill: his feet
are very hairy, and cannot easily be hurt with running. 1. He is very timorous,
as are all other creatures that have such great hearts; (he is frighted at the
shaking of a leaf) those creatures that are strong, as the Bull and Dog, have
a loud cry, but the Heart and Hare have a very small cry: the Hare exceedingly
fears the Eagle, and is no less fearful of the snares of the Fox; there is no
virtue in the Hare worth commendation; but instead of this, Nature to
recompense them (as the Heathen Philosophers say) has given them very long
ears, that they might the better perceive dangers approaching; and as soon as
he fears any danger, he flies so swiftly, that sometimes in the midst of his
flight he dies; he is so fearful, that oftentimes to avoid one danger, he
runs into another; when he is pursued he runs into his hole: It is
reported of a Hare, that being hunted very hard, he ran into the Sea, and there
was killed by the Sea-dog; no one would hunt a Hare with a Snail, according to
the Dutch Proverb. It is a further argument of the timerousness of the Hare,
that she shunneth those places that passengers come through, but loves woods
and hedges; Lysander did well when he commanded his men to be of good courage
when they lay before Corinth, because he saw a Hare running upon the walls;
for, says he, it cannot be that the Hare would be there, if they had ever used
any military exercise upon them; and possibly from hence came that saying, that
it is a bad sign for a Hare to cross us in the way; for it signifies that
those places are very lonesome, and that few people frequent them, and so the
more dangerous. 3. It has a very weak and infirm sight, he sleeps not as
other creatures do with his eyes shut, and therefore of old, to live the life
of a Hare, was as much as to say, you are in perpetual fear. 4. It is exceeding
fruitful, and of all other creatures, this only after she has brought forth
her young, conceives another; she brings forth young, and yet continually is
with young; whence Herodotus well observes, that God has so ordered it, that
those creatures which are useful and beneficial unto mankind, should
exceedingly increase; but on the other side, those things that are ravenous and
mischievous, such as are Lions, Bears, and Wolves, should not increase so much;
in old time it was thought, that those that eat much Hares flesh, it made them
very fair, as Martial says, and that it did in seven days time, because it is
a kind of a melancholy flesh, and good blood; Martial therefore makes the Hare
to be the best of all fourfooted creatures; Inter aves Turdus, si quis me
judice certet;
Inter quadrupedes gloria prima Lepus.


Take it in English thus, The Thrush above all Birds that are;
And of four-footed Beasts, the Hare.


That a Hare should make one beautiful, I know no reason can be given. 5. It is
exceeding leacherous, but mostly in January, when if she be hindered from the
male, she will devour those young ones which she had brought forth not long
before. 6. She may in some respects be said to be crafty; for in the Winter
time she is always in plowed fields, but in Harvest time she hides her self
in Vineyards, and after Harvest, when the Grapes begin to grow ripe, she
leaves the Vineyards; when she goes to seek her food, she always goes and
comes the same way, but not in a straight line, but in several turnings and
windings; she seldom goes amongst the thorns, lest it should tear her hair;
for the dogs by the scent of her hair would soon discover her: when she
brings forth her young, she hides them up and down in several places, and of
all enemies she fears the Hawk most, and continually when hunted windeth up
and down, and so deceives the dogs; we do not hunt the Hare for any hurt it
does us, but as we use to say, the Hare is hunted for her flesh, from whence
came the Proverb, As safe as a Hare, spoken of one who had riches, etc. for
which only he was vexed and troubled by others: Neither is the Hare of an
uncertain Sex, sometimes male and sometimes female, as some have falsely
imagined, but it is always the same.

The Coney is not much unlike the Hare, something less, but much stronger,
always being under the earth, and makes her buroughs sometimes under
mountains, as Martial says; Gaudet in eff ossis habitare Cuniculus Antris,
Monstravit faciles hostibus ille Vias.


The Psalmist seems to speak almost the same, Psalm. 10. 18. The Coney where
ever she makes her borough, she levels the ground again, lest it should be
discovered; at mornings and evenings she constantly comes out of her borough,
and there she sits at the entrance of it, to see if there be any approaching
danger; and if at any time she be closely pursued, and has no way to escape,
she immediately runs into her borough, out of which there is no way to get
her, but by sending a Ferret after her; for there is nothing which the Rabbet
hates more than the Ferret; there is such plenty of them in some parts of
Spain, that oftentimes they have destroyed the Harvest: Nay, we read of the
Island called Carpathia, that the Inhabitants were once destroyed by them; and
Marcus Varro (quoted by Pliny) says, that there was a City in Spain undermined
by Coneys: but what we said before concerning the Hare, that it might be
compared to timorous and cowardly men, we may say the like concerning the
Coney; the Fable of the Hares and the Lion is known, how that the Hares would
have given Laws to the Lion, who afterward were destroyed by him; which may
signify thus much to us, that oftentimes mild and timorous Princes do rule and
govern a fierce and warlike people, by whom their Kingdom is sometimes
overthrown; or else it may signify those men who are afraid to tell men of
their faults: the Germans have a Proverb, Ber hasen Spurng, i. e. The anckle of
an Hare, meaning any thing that men trust to, or rely upon; for the
Anckle-bone in the Hare is that without which she could not leap: but by the
way we shall speak to Prove. 30. Verse. 21. 25, 26. there are four things which
are upon the earth, but are exceeding wise; the Ants are a people not strong,
yet they prepare their meat in the Summer; the Coneys are but a feeble folk,
yet make they their houses in the Rocks; the Locusts have no King, yet go they
forth all of them by Bands; the Spider takes hold with her hands, and is in
Kings Palaces; by all which this wise King signifies to us, the great
inadvertency and perverseness of mankind, who of all creatures is only able to
consider his ways, and knows his own greatness and strength, and yet daily
runs into dangers: these four sorts of little creatures that Solomon spoke
of in the forecited place, though small, yet know their own weakness, and
therefore choose always those places where they may be most secure; and will
not go into any place where there may be a possibility of danger: the Ants
begin betimes to lay up food for Winter: the Hare being timorous, does not love
to be in those places where any one comes: the Locust being weak, lives
quietly, and does not go where any one is in the place, knowing that it cannot
so well avoid dangers: the Spider is always exercising her curious art;
therefore this is to be wiser than the wisest. 1. To know our own strength, and
our own weakness. 2. To undertake nothing above our strength, but on the
contrary, not to indulge our selves in sloth and idleness; and because there is
some small difficulty in it wholly to let it alone; we know there are many
mischiefs and distempers accompany drunkenness, and that idleness and wars, is
not without its inconveniences, yet few do endeavor to shun the one or the
other: the Hare being weak, goes not much abroad; the Ant because poor,
labors the more (...) ^^utarch says, that there is no small creature so l^,
an^ great one, as is the Hare and the Ass, in his e^ the color, ears, and
flesh; and he says further, (...) Lib. 4. Sy^p. the la^^ question, the Jews
were therefore forbidden to eat the Hare, because so like an Ass; Leviticus 11.
^. It is said, the Coney, because he cheweth the cud* and divides not the
hoof, he is unclean unto you; so De^t. 14. 7. by which prohibition they were
most especially to learn, chiefly to avoid the qualities of the Hare; when
Xerxes brought his numerous Army against the Grecians, (as Herodotus relates)
a Mare brought forth a Hare, that signified to Xerxes that he should not
prosper in his undertakings, which also happened.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Wolf.
THis creature is known to most, he is much like unto a Dog, but for fierceness
like a Lion, only this difference, that he has them not in the same degree,
but as Albertus says, more mischievous and crafty; his chief properties
particular t^ him, are strength, swiftness, fierceness, and a natural hatred to
sheep; he has no qualities that do deserve any commendation. 1. Whatsoever he
teareth with his claw, dies. 2. His greediness and cruelty appears in this,
when he goes to se^k his prey, he whetteth and sharpneth his teet^e L^^h the
Herb Origanum; he can endure hung^^ ^r a long time together, but afterward he
will eat ^ery greedily, and sometimes too much, but he speedily digesteth what
he so greedily devoureth; the reason of which quick digestion may be the great
heat of his body, he being naturally of a very hot temper; the female
constantly supplyeth her young ones with food, the male knows this, and
therefore the female is fain to hide her prey from him; and as soon as she has
taken her prey washes her mouth, lest by her bloody mouth she should be
discovered; but yet when the he- Wolf has been out, and can take no prey, he
forces her to give him the prey that she took for herself; his cruelty
appears further in this, that he loves nothing more than blood. 2. His
craftiness is more than his cruelty; for those beasts which have horns, she
comes upon them, and begins at their tail, lest by his horns he might be
too hard for him; he often fills his belly with earth, which makes him more
ponderous, and not so easily to be destroyed: he always observes this, never
to go for his prey but in the night, or early in the morning, a little before
day, that so he might not be seen by man or beast, by which means he also
avoideth all snares and ginns that are laid for him: his eyes shine in the
night, and do as it were sparkle in the dark; his sight is very strong, seeing
very exactly in the darkest night. 3. He has a great hatred to man, which
appears in this; if a Wolf sees a man first, he is not able to speak; and on
the other side, if a man first espyeth a Wolf, immediately he becomes tame,
and has nothing of fierceness or cruelty in him; the reason of which some have
enquired into, who tell us it proceeds from the hot, fiery spirit of the
Wolf; that, they tell us, enters into the man; how true it is I know not, but
Camerarius tells us it is altogether fabulous, in his Succis. Cap. 23. vid.
Scalig. de Subtilitate, ad Card. 344. Exercit. Sect. 1. Camerarius, in the
forecited place says, That a Wolf has not such a fear of wood and iron as of
stone, which appears in this, that if a stone touch him, where it is touched,
that part shall rot and putrefie; and therefore it is that he flies from the
noise of stones; as a dog is sooner frighted with a stone than a sword: if once
he gets amongst the sheep, he will not only kill as much as he can eat, but
it he be not hindered, will destroy the whole flock. 5. When he is extreme
hungry, he will eat earth; he never hunteth for his prey where his young ones
are, lest they should be discovered, for he has a very great care of, and love
for his young ones; and is very fierce when big with young: in all dangers she
betaketh her self to flight before it be too late, and takes her young ones
with her into the woods; if she goes to the sheepfold, she always goes
against the wind, because if she should go with the wind, it would carry her
scent to the dogs; if she lose her feet in a snare, or one of them, she teareth
her self for vexation, and is mad that she is taken. 6. He is very fearful of
stones, if he hears the noise of stones, immediately he runs away into the
woods; nay, he will swim over rivers, which they do in companies, the
hindermost taking hold of the tail of the foremost. 7. If he espyeth a Goat, he
hides himself among green boughs that he may not be seen; when he is
exceeding hungry, he will yawn and open his mouth; and if he can get nothing,
he walks with his mouth open: Wolves may be fitly compared to highway men,
who go in companies. At Atticu a Province in Greece there was a Law made, that
whosoever killed a young Wolf, should be rewarded with a talent of silver; but
he that killed an old one, should have two talents; for they are great enemies
to man; though the voung ones did never do any mischief, yet they did what they
could to kill them, to prevent the mischiefs that they might do for the future:
Adulterers and Whoremongers are often punished by God with want and poverty,
and thence it is that they are often forced to rob and steal to keep themselves
alive; and therefore we may not unfitly compare Adulterers and Wolves together;
and therefore it is that Harlots are called Wolves; so Romulus and Remus were
nourished by a Wolf, that is, a Harlot, they being bastards themselves: if the
Reader has a mind to see more of it, let him read Lactant. Lib. 1. Cap. 20. de
vera sapientia. 9. He always burieth some part of his prey, that so he may
have something to eat when he cannot get a prey. 10. There is a wonderful
secret antipathy between the Sheep and the Wolf, that is plainly seen while
alive, and when dead; for the sheep-skin that the Wolf biteth, is afterward
full of lice; and I have heard that the guts of sheep made into fiddle-strings,
will never tune with the strings made of Wolves guts; if Wolves skins lie among
sheepskins, they will be utterly spoiled; and if a Drum that is covered with a
Wolves skin come near a Drum that is covered with a sheep-skin, it will
presently fly in pieces; but for the reason and truth of it, I shall further
enquire when I come to speak of the sheep. 11. They are very much afraid of
fire, and cannot endure to see a sword, and therefore some always carry flints
about them, and when they see a Wolf they strike fire, which when he sees, he
flies away; the like he does at the sight of a naked sword. 12. If a horse
tread in the footsteps of a Wolf, it makes him dull and stupid for the
present; and if a mare tread in her steps, she cannot cast her foale:
Bolapolines, in his Hierogl^phicks, represents an abortive woman, by a mare
treading upon a Wolf* nay if she sees but the guts of a dead Wolf any where,
her strength decays, as Camerarius tells us, Lib. 1. Succise. 23. 13. though
she be so greedy and ravenous, yet is she very mindful of any one that does her
a courtesy. Bonfinius relates a story of a Wolf, who when he was taken, a
passenger that came that ways, set him lose again; when he was free, he
observed which ways the man went, and the house where he dwelt, and afterward
would often drive Horses and Cows out of the field to his house; so that the
fiercest creatures that are be mindful of kindnesses done to them; a Wolf when
his belly is full, if among a flock of sheep, seems rather to be a lamb than
a Wolf. Aristotle says, that in a certain place in Greece, the Wolf will
couple with the dog: when a company of Wolves have gotten a prey, they will
equally divide what they have got; sometimes the Wolf and the dog will plot as
it were together to go into a sheepfold; She hates the Bull, the Heart, the
Fox, and the Goat; it has all the properties and qualities of a Lion, he
exceeds the Lion in craft and deceitfulness; that creature which Albertus
says is begotten of a Stag and a Wolf, which some call a Los or a Lynx, is a
kind of Wolf; it bears an inveterate enmity to the Heart, and thence it is
that in Latin he is called Lupus Cervarius, and for his ravenous and greedy
nature comes not behind the Wolf; nay, he will kill a Wolf, and has been
seen to have destroyed a young Lion; when he is hungry, and is eating, if he
looks back, he forgets that he has any thing, and goes to look after
another prey: there is a beast like a Wolf who has a mane like a horse, whom
some call a Hyaena, he will go into graves, and devour dead bodies, a fit
representation and symbol of those slanderers which do not spare to destroy
the good name of their neighbor after he is dead. A Wolf will go among the
sheep in the night time, and will learn those tones that the shepherds use to
them; nay, they will learn the shepherds name, and will call them out by their
names; the shepherd thinking it to be the voice of a man, comes forth, and
when he is come out, the Wolf falls upon him, and destroys him; so she
often serves dogs: Thus the Papists used to let Booksellers sell heretical
Books, and then mark what Noble men did buy of them, and afterward accuse them
for it. The female Hyaena is much craftier than the male, for it was never yet
found where she lies at night; whatsoever she touches is made dull and stupid
ever after. Philippus Camerarius, Suc^is. 1 Cap. 28. says, That there are no
Wolves in England; for they being exceeding destroyers of sheep, and making of
Cloth being the chief of Englands Trade; Those Malefactors in former times
that were condemned, had their lives given them upon this condition, that each
man should kill a Wolf; this creature is not only a fit representation of
thieves and robbers, but may also fitly resemble the Devil, Heretics, and
Tyrants.

John. 10. 12. Christ makes mention of the Wolf, in the parable of the
shepherd and the sheep, by whicn the Devil is to be understood. For, 1. As the
Wolf continually goes about to destroy men and beasts, so is the Devil the
most implacable enemy to all mankind. 2. As the Wolf by nature is so greedy
and ravenous that he can never be satisfied, so neither is the Devil ever
satisfied with those millions of souls that he yearly destroys. 3. The Wolf
has a sharp and acute sight, seeing best in the night time; and they say of
her that she can smell her prey when she is half a Germane mile from him: Thus
the Devil by so many years experience grows more subtle, easily perceiving to
what sins every man's natural inclination leads him unto. 4. As they will
sometimes devour a whole sheep, sometimes only some part of it; so does the
Devil, by divine permission, sometimes take away our estates only, sometimes
our health; nay, sometimes destroys body and soul. 5. As the Wolf is a most
crafty, cunning creature; so is the Devil full of his crafty and subtle
devices; for as the Wolf chiefly seeks her prey in a clowdy night, being then
not so easily perceived: so the Devil makes his assaults, and tempts men
chiefly when under some heavy affliction; and as the Wolf goes slowly, and
often licketh her feet, which makes her steps not so easily heard; so the
Devil insinnuateth himself into men, darting his tentations as insensibly as
the Sunbeams. Goats cannot defend themselves by the weapons which nature has
given them; neither can Sowes keep their pigs from any one that will take them
away from her; therefore the Wolf when she goes to take any of these, takes
them by the ear, and if he comes not forward willingly, he strikes them with
his tail; sometimes he makes them run faster than himself, and so he leads
them by the ear to the rest of his company, who stand in a certain place
expecting the prey; and when he has brought it, the rest of them fall on, and
tear it in pieces. Albertus says that he saw a Wolf catry a green willow in
his mouth to deceive the Goats that love a sprig of a Willow-tree; than which
there cannot be a fitter representation of Satan's malice and subtilty, whereby
he entrappeth and ensnareth poor silly people, endeavoring to draw them from
the truth, by suggesting his tentations and flattering devices, thereby drawing
them into eternal destruction. The Wolf uses no less subtilty in taking of the
Bull; for she never sets upon him forwards, lest he should kill her by his
horns, but comes behind him, leaping upon him (as we said before) filling her
belly with earth, which makes her the heavier, and so makes up her weakness
by her weight; she takes a single calf thus, she draws him away from the
Cow, which she perceiving, it causes a small combat between the Cow and the
Wolf for a time, the calf in the mean time running up and down; when he has
tired the Cow, then he goes to the calf, and teareth him in pieces: thus in
like manner does the Devil set on young and old, suiting his temptations to
their constitutions and inclinations; and oftentimes by the force of his
temptations, and of those asflictions which oftentimes godly men lie under
(were they not endued with faith and strength from above) would vanquish and
overcome them; but when by strength he can do nothing, he does as it were come
behind them by his fraud and deceit, and then begins a little to fall back,
as if he were overcome, and so makes him the less wary of him, thinking he is
gone; but afterward comes on afresh with his new wiles with a greater
violence, and so destroys them; many instances and examples of this might be
given; but I shall proceed. 6. If a Wolf first espyeth a man, he does by a
secret virtue so astonish him, that he cannot cry out for help: thus the Devil,
when by his tentations he besetteth a careless sinner, he easily obtains the
victory, triumphing over him when conquered; but on the other side, if a man
first espyeth a Wolf, he is not so fierce nor ravenous as before: thus good men
who are afraid of Satan's devices, who by prayer and other holy duties arm
themselves against him, do as it were afright him, and make him fly; and as
Wolves hate nothing more than the sight of fire, and of a naked sword; so does
the Devil no less dread those sparks of divine light that come from the
Scripture, and the prayers of good men, which are the arms and weapons of the
Church; and therefore St. Chrysostom rightly said, that swords are not so
terrible to Wolves, as are the prayers of good men to Satan.

2. We find that Heretics are often compared unto Wolves; we read Acts 20. 28.
That Wolves should come who would not spare the flock* so Matt. 7. 15. We are
commanded to beware of false Prophets who come to us in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly are ravening Wolves; we may here take notice of the epithete given to
false Prophets of ravening Wolves: There are some Wolves in Africa and in
Egypt that will stand on the shore, and if they see any fishermen, will take
some of their fish from them, and run away with it* and on the other side,
Oppianus and several other good Authors tell us of another kind of Wolves that
are called (...), that are a kind of Goats, which are swifter than any of the
former; for they go to hunt early in the morning, and do as it were leap upon
their prey with an incredible violence; these are found in great companies upon
Mountains; in the Winter time they are so venturous, that they will come into
Cities, and there will go up and down very quietly until they can see a Goat,
etc. which they will greedily fall upon, and run away with; this may seem to
have respect to that Prophecy of the Patriarch, Genesis 49. 27. Benjamin shall
ravine like a Wolf, in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at evening he
shall divide the spoil; although some would have this to signify the
covetousness of the Benjamites, yet I can see no reason for it, because they
were not so cruel; and besides, what argument could that be of their
covetousness, who though they took their prey in the morning, yet he divided it
again at night: the Holy Fathers therefore do make this to be a prediction
concerning the Holy Apostle St. Paul, who was of the Tribe of Benjamine; for he
in the morning, that is in his youth, was like a cruel and devouring Wolf; but
at the evening, toward his old age, he gave food, the bread of life, which he
distributed to the Heathens; these things being premised, any one, from what
has been said, may deduce very useful corollaries, such as these. 1. The Wolf
is said to astonish a man so much, that he takes away his voice and speech;
thus wicked men do rob the Saints of their wonted purity, yet they will talk of
great things; for always amongst wicked men there is more seeming Religion
than true piety; and as the Wolf is of so ravenous and greedy nature that he
kills more than he can eat; and if not hindered, will destroy the whole flock:
so wicked men do not so much seek the hurts and ruin of one particular man, as
of the whole Church; and as the Wolf is very subtle and crafty, first going
very slowly round about the flock, to see whether the shepherd, or any dogs be
there; and when he sees his opportunity, will rush among them with a great
deal of fierceness: thus Heretics, before they disclose their errors, will
insinuate themselves into the minds of the people, and will use a great deal of
hypocritical piety, boasting of their angelical holiness and peculiar visions
which they have from God, and after they have thus prepared the minds of the
common people, vent their impious errors that tend to the ruin of the whole
Church, and as there is a natural enmity and antipathy between the sheep and
the Wolf even after death: thus wicked men by their doctrine do not hurt the
Church only while alive, but after death: there is a Law among the Atticks,
that whosoever kills a Wolf shall be highly rewarded; of no less praise are
they worthy that do discover the plots and devices of Heretics and Deceivers:
the Wolf if he cannot get the prey that he sought, he runs up and down with
his mouth open, making a great noise; thus are Heretics very much troubled if
their snare do not take as they would have them.

3. What Heretics are in the Church, that are Tyrants in the Commonwealth;
and therefore they are called by some Ethiopian Wolves; the Poets do feign
Tyrannical Princes for their cruelty to be changed into Wolves: we read, in
Ezekiel, of Princes that are like ravening Wolves devouring the prey, Cap. 22.
27. the same is said Wisd. 3. 3. It is easy to draw several other inferences
from the nature of the Wolf, and to follow the comparison between the Wolf and
the Tyrant further than I shall carry it now, which I leave to the studious; I
could speak also to the Fable of men that were changed into Wolves, and other
creatures; but I shall not enlarge much further on his creature; the History of
Nebuchadonosor is no proof at all of men being changed into other shapes; for
all that we find in Scripture concerning it is this, that he did eat grass as
Oxen, and that his body was wet with the dew of Heaven, until his hairs were
grown like Eagles feathers, and his nails like birds claws, Dau. 4. 30. I have
read of the Tyrant that promised the Athenians to make peace with them, if they
would send away their Orators; the Athenians answered him with this Apologue,
of the Wolves that offered to make peace with the sheep, if they would send
away their dogs, the ready way for them to be all destroyed; a fit answer for
him, they being then as naked lambs among Wolves; as Christ told his Disciples,
that he sent them out as lambs among Wolves, Luke 10. 3. Is. 11. 6. It is said,
that the Wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with
the kid, and the calf and the young Lion together; spoken allegorically of the
conversion of great ones; the same is spoken of them, Cap. 65. 25. Tyrants are
compared to Wolves ravening the prey; those cruel exactions that were used to
the people of Israel, God does not call them barely robberies and thefts, but
rapines, as may be seen more at large in these following places, Is. 1. 23. chapter
2. verse. 14. chapter 10. 2. Ezekiel. 22. 25. 27. 29. Mich. 3. 11. Wisd. 3. 3.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Dog.
THis is a creature more commonly known than any we have yet spoken of, and
has many good properties in him; fidelity, love to his Master, constancy,
vigilance, obedience, sagacity and memory.

1. He is more faithful than a servant, watching in the night, and like a
Porter keeping the doors, and gives notice by his barking of any thief or
stranger; and therefore the Proverb is true, That the Dog has nine lives, but,

2. Amongst all other creatures, there is no creature has so much love to his
Master as the Dog, always going along with him, knowing his voice, and will
find him out by his scent; if his Master be killed, he will not leave his
Garkass, but will betray the Murderer if he sees him, barking at him, and
fastening upon him, fighting for his Master against any one that shall assault
him: Plutarch relates a story of King Pyrrhus, who in a journey found a Dog
who for three whole days together lay by his Master that was murdered, never
eating any thing all that while; afterward he found out the murderer by
flying on him, who being examined confessed the fact.

3. He is very constant to any house where he is kept, and will not follow any
one that shall entice him away: Jovius relates of the Dogs in France that fled
into the enemies Camp, and licked their feet, which they took to signify their
Victory, which afterward came to pass; for thereupon Maximilianus Sphorsia
vanquished the French.

4. Their vigilance is known to all, although Geese are more watchful than
they; and thence the French entering into Rome, were not disturbed at the Dogs,
but were betrayed by the noise of a company of Geese; and therefore once every
year several Dogs were slain, because they gave no notice of the enemies
approaching.

5. No less is his prudence and sagacity, being no less fierce and rough to
strangers than he is courteous to his Master: but he is especially an enemy to
any one that he sees come in a poor habit; for he knows these do but rob him
of what he should have. Among all birds the Vulture; and of all four-footed
beasts the Dog has the best smell; and therefore Aelian says he has so quick
a scent, that if you cut a piece of a dead Dog amongst several sorts of meats,
he will scent it from all the rest, and will not touch it.

6. He is as obedient as he is constant or faithful; he will learn to do any
thing, he will go into the Shambles, and fetch meat, pluck hairs off from ones
head, etc. Plutarch says, that in a Comedy acted at Rome, he saw a Dog that
feigned his Master had poisoned him, and as soon as he had taken it, all his
body would shake and tremble, but that would abate by degrees, and at last
would stretch himself, and never move at all; his Master comes to him, and
bids him rise, he then hearing him stirs one part, and then another,
until at last he came to himself again; all which he did so cunningly, that
Caesar and all the rest of the Spectators were moved with no less laughter than
admiration; not long after that he would draw himself up altogether, as if he
were going to dye, and would lie without any motion at all, suffering himself
to be dragged out by the heels, as if he had been dead; but in a little while
after he recovered himself again, to the admiration of the Spectators; when he
is hunting, or at any other time he will come at his Masters call, although he
has a good prey before him; he has a greater respect for his Master than for
himself, his actions are all for the good of his Master; when he is hunting, he
will bring the prey to his Master, and he himself is content with the bones,
nay, is content without them, if his Master will not give them him.

7. He has a very strong memory, insomuch that he will remember the way to his
Masters house, though through Woods and Lands, and will remember those persons
a long time that have injured him: he will lay up those bones that he cannot
eat, and fetch them out again when he has occasion for them; when he is asleep
in the night he will remember what he has seen in the daytime; and therefore
it is we often hear them bark in their sleep when no body is nigh them.

8. He is very careful of his whelps, and will suffer no one to take them away
from him; he loves to be among company, but as timorous when among strangers,
as he is bold among his acquaintance.

9. He has a kind of ambitious desire; for Plutarch says, that Dogs, if they
get a hare alive, besmear their mouths with the blood of it; this they do not
do if they run her dead, then they will not touch her, but stand about it
wagging their tails, to signify that they rejoice not so much in the flesh of
it, as in the Victory; Pliny says, that it is a sign of an Heroic spirit in
Dogs, that if any one lies upon the ground, they will not meddle with them;
and the Scholiast upon Homer says, that it is the best way to secure our
selves against Dogs, to sit down and hide our sticks; and we may add further,
that as the deepest Rivers make the least noise, so, fearful Dogs will bark
more than they will bite.

10. A Dog cannot endure to see the Moon, and are very much afrighted at a
Spectrum or apparition; and therefore when the Moon shines, Dogs be continually
barking.

11. When they grow old they are very dull and heavy; they then will sleep in
the dirt, and the flies oftentimes will eat through their ears, which they
might easily prevent, yet are so lazy that they will not, unless they come
upon their face, and then they snap them in their mouths.

12. They cannot hunt if the South Wind blows, for that is the moistest of
all the four winds, and all moisture hinders the smelling: in Egypt the Dogs
are so subtle, that because they know the Crocodiles oftentimes devour them,
they will not stand still when they drink, but drink as they run; and therefore
the Proverb is, Canis ad Nilum, i. e. a sup and away; just as many men learn
Philosophy; but on the other side, they have their ill qualities as well as
their good.

1. He is a very filthy, unclean creature, coupling himself publicly in the
streets; and has a very greedy stomach after his meat, and exceedingly loves
carrion; he satisfies his lust with the Bitch that puppyed him. Deuteronomy. 23. God
forbids that any money should be brought for the price of a Dog into the house
of the Lord, verse. 18.

2. He is easily angered, and will be soon enraged at a stone or a stick that
is thrown at him. Plutarch, in his Sympos. says, that some Dogs have died
because they could not take their revenge.

3. They cannot endure one another; one Dog will not suffer another to come to
the house, yet they will eat one another vermin.

4. Some dogs sleep all the nightime, and go about in the day, these are very
mischievous.

5. The Dog will eat his own vomit, and is subject to many Diseases, but
especially they are aptest to grow mad; and when they are so, whatsoever they
bite they make like themselves: it is a sign when a Dog will grow mad, if he
will not eat what he used to eat, and will purge at the nose and mouth, and is
very dull and heavy, barking at every one they see; Hesychias says, that all
dogs have very hard deaths; and thus we have shown both the good and the bad
properties of the Dog; the Holy Scriptures, both in the Old and New Testament,
draw many inferences from the nature of this creature, which, although they be
very many, yet I shall satisfy my self, in speaking to two only, one out of
the Old Testament, and another out of the New; that out of the Old Testament,
is Judge. 7. 5. when Gideon had brought a vast Army against the Midianites, lest
if the Jews had overcome them they should have ascribed it to their own
strength and valor, the Lord said unto Gideon, Every one that lappeth the
water with his tongue as the Dog lappeth, him shall thou set by himself;
likewise, every one that boweth down upon his knees to drink: there were left
but 300 of 20000. and those few were crowned with victory; a fit Symbol of the
Elect, who get the victory over all their enemies; and those that drank water,
represent those that received the Sacrament of Baptism, and so are listed among
Gods Soldiers. 1. As there were a great multitude which drank, yet were
rejected by Gideon, being a great sign of laziness and sloth; so, many of
those who are baptized, are rejected; which being careless and sloathful, do
not fight the good fight, nor keep the faith, and therefore lose the Crown, 1
Pet. 1. 10. 2. As Gideon received those only into the number of his Soldiers,
that lapped of the water with his mouth as the Dog lappeth; a sign of fortitude
and valor: so, those who were baptized, carry away the heavenly crown, being
not addicted to this World, but diligent and sedulous in their calling; and,
like Dogs, are faithful and industrious in searching out divine mysteries,
being lovers of Christ, knowing his voice; neither will they be drawn from
Christ through the temptations of Satan, being very watchful, and like the
wise Virgins, always expecting the coming of Christ, very courteous to their
kinsfolks, but are fierce and unpleasant to those who are strangers and enemies
to Christ; they do also every thing to the honor of their Master Christ,
though no temporal advantage should from thence acrew, who lastly are easily
called back from a course of sin.

2. We read Matt. 15. there are several inferences drawn from the Dog, some of
which seem to be spoken in his commendation, and others not. Thus, when the
Syrophaenician woman, whose daughter was sore vexed with a Devil, came to
Christ and implored his help, received this answer, that it was not good to
take the childrens bread, and cast it unto Dog^, which she inverteth thus to
her present condition, and says, yet the Dogs do eat of the crumbs that fall
from their Masters table; in which words Christ compares the Heathen to Dogs:
For, 1. We see that Dogs will couple with any strange Bitch; thus, the Heathens
were not like all other men, born in sin only, but of those Parents who made
nothing of the ordinance of Marriage; this might be confirmed from many
examples; thus the Aposile, Romans 1. 26. complains, that the Women changed the
natural use into that which is against nature; as also the men leaving the
natural use of Women turned in their lust one toward another. 2. They commonly
bark at any passenger that comes by, and a mad Dog will fly upon his own
Master: thus, the Heathens, destitute of divine light, and without the true
Religion, do blaspheme God, and, as it were bark at their Neighbors, by
cursing of them. We do not use to feed Dogs with any thing but what is not fit
for others to eat; the Heathens being so wicked and blasphemous against God,
are not worthy of Christ. Further, Dogs do not use to run from their Masters,
if they can but get food; the Heathens, as long as they prosper in this World,
are very well contented, but when under trouble and afflictions, have nothing
to support them: Dogs are of such a beastly nature, that (as we said before)
they will devour their own vomit: thus it is with the Heathens, who, though
often instructed in virtue by diverse of their Poets, yet soon return unto their
former wicked life; thus, having spoken what is necessary for his
discommendation, now, I shall see what may be said to his praise and
commendation. 1. Dogs only wait at their Masters table, expecting what may
fall; thus, the ignorant Gentiles had no other comfort but this, that they
should expect what God had promised them, saying, in thy seed shall all the
Nations of the Earth be blessed; neither did they desire to be preferred above
the Jews, but were very well content with what the bounty and goodness of God
did give them: Children often sport themselves with little dogs, hence it is
that we read, in the Proverbs, of Wisdom (i. e. the son of God) sporting her
self among the sons of men; and we see that children take great care of Dogs,
and will feed them if they can get it; the Heathens did continue long in their
primitive ignorance and state of darkness until Christ came and delivered
them; Dogs will bemoan themselves when bereaved of their whelps; and it is the
greatest trouble to good men to see their children drawn aside from the truth;
although, I must confess, Dogs as well as most other beasts have a great love
for their young; yet, I doubt, we may find some persons who, like fishes, leave
their spawn in the water, never minding it afterward what becomes of it.

4 He will not leave off barking and howling until his Master give him
something: thus, the Canaanitish woman, and every true Christian, ought to be
constant, persevering in duty.

5. Also the Dog will be so fierce that he will fly upon any stranger, yet
when corrected by his Master, will hang down his tail: thus all true
Christians, when in peril and trouble, will cry out with Daniel, ^o thee
belongs righteousness, but to us confusion of face; and with the penitent
thief, We are justly punished for our deserts; and like the Emperor Mauritius,
who, when he saw his Sons and his Daughters slain before his face, did not
murmur or repine in the least; but his Wife turning to him, said, O Lord, Thou
art just and righteous in all thy Judgments. Luther, when he saw a Dog wagging
his tail at dinner, used to say, that he begged by the very wagging of his
tail; and, I wish, says he, that we men were endued with the like nature, not
to leave off our prayers because not presently received; this is a good
similitude, though but a homely one. See more of this in Philippus Camerarius,
Lib. 2. Succis.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Sheep.
I Take the word Sheep here for all kind of Sheep, whether it be the Ram, the
Wether, etc. The Ram is the male, the Wether is guelded; although this be a
domestic and common creature, yet it is worthy our observation, to consider,
that it has pleased the Holy Ghost very often to compare Christ to Sheep, as
also all Christians: the Jews in their sacrifices offered more Sheep than any
other creature, although they used to offer up Calves, Goats, Oxen, Heifers,
Kids, as also Turtles and Pigeons; but their daily sacrifices consisted
chiefly of Sheep; for every day, for above 1582 years, all the while that the
Mosaical Law was observed, there were offered two Lambs, one in the morning,
and the other at evening, with fine flour and wine, which did signify to us
holy Prayers and Ejaculations, with which we ought to begin and end every day.
That Ram which Abraham offered in the Mount, instead of Isaac, was a Type of
Christ; for, as the Ram was slain for Isaac, so Christ, the Lamb of God, was
offered up instead of us; every day (as I said before) were offered up two
Lambs, besides all other sacrifices which sometimes did require Lambs and
Sheep, as in the consecration of Priests, as also on their Sabbaths, and New
Moons, and at the Passover, at Pentecost, and several other Feastivals, as also
upon their Confessions, Purifications, etc. of which we may read at large in
Exodus, Leviticus, and several other places, all which were but types and
figures, as they are called, Heb. 9. Now we come to speak of the nature and
properties of the Sheep.

1. It is not a crafty, subtle creature, like to Foxes and Leopards, but dull
and stupid, often wandering and running into deserts and by-places, where he
meets but with worse pasture: in the Winter time they will run out of the
pens into the snow where they are smothered, neither do they ever come back
again unless the shepherd fetch them; it was wittily said by him of a wandering
sheep, Raro una errat ovis, raroque revertitur una.


2. The Sheep is neither so strong as a Horse, so courageous as the Lion, nor
so confident as a Dog; he regards not the traps and snares that are laid for
him, being gentle, and easily taken: the Sheep has no gall, and therefore is
more patient than other creatures that we have named before, never roaring nor
crying out, when sheared; nay, they are silent, though about to be slain:
whereas on the contrary, Swine, and several other creatures, are not only
unwilling to be caught, but when caught, do make such a hideous noise as is
scarcely to be endured.

3. Nature has denied this creature any thing whereby to defend her self; some
creatures have talons, others horns, but this nothing; and although Rams have
horns, as Sheep have in some Countries, yet have they no courage to defend
them; for Sheep are very timorous and fearful, and are very gentle when they
have young ones, contrary to the nature of all other beasts; and thus is easily
made a prey of, either to man or beast.

4. Of all creatures, none are subject to so many diseases as Man, the Horse,
and the Sheep; as distempers in the head, and is also very subject to the Scab:
and what we said before of their wandering abroad, so, the scabby Sheep is never
single, as the old Verse has it; Morbida facta pecus totum corrumpit ovile.


If they are driven far in a night, or heated, it makes them lean; when it
thundereth, they are so affrighted, that they cast their young for fear.

5. They seem to have a great love to their Shepherds; for nature has made
them so cowardly and weak, that they cannot live without some one to rule over
them. A Shepherd has especially these four things to do for the Sheep;

1. To lead them into good Pastures, and wholesome clear Waters; for a Sheep
loves green Meadows, and is very delicate; for if she cannot feed in such
green Meadows, she will eat nothing at all; and counts no labor lost if at
last she gets into a field that is green, and then she looks about for
cold, clear water, loving nothing more, not enduring to drink of muddy waters.

2. The Shepherd is to keep them together, lest by their simplicity and
foolishness they should stray from the flock, and run into ditches and fens
where they are destroyed without remedy.

3. He is to defend them by his Dogs against Wolves, or any one that shall
disturb them when feeding: when any of them is with young, he takes them up
upon his knees, and cherishes them.

4. He is to understand and know the signs and causes of their diseases; all
good Shepherds ought to be thus qualified. When the Sheep hear the Shepherds
voice, they all get together into one place, but especially when he sings,
for they love music exceedingly, and it makes them feed the better; they are
so delighted with it, that some think they would not live long if the Shepherd
did not sing: the young Lambs as soon as brought forth know their Damms, though
there be thousands of Sheep in the field together, yet they will know their
Damm from them all by their bleating; and though they be never so hungry and
thirsty, yet will they suck of no one but of their own Dam; and the Damm,
amongst hundred of Lambs, although of the same bigness, color, and make the
same noise, yet they will know their own Lambs; this they do while young, but
when once they come to be weaned, they know the Shepherds voice so well, that
they will follow him, and fly from any one else; the Scripture reckons this
amongst those creatures that cleave the Hoof, and chew the Cud, of which we
have spoken very largely before: He loves to eat of green willowleaves though
they be very bitter: salt gets them a great stomach, and therefore the
Shepherd will oftentimes sprinkle salt in the water where they use to drink.
The Sheep is observed to be very cleanly, and cannot endure, like the swine, to
be in dirty places; there is scarce any thing in the Sheep but is of use to us,
she gives milk, brings forth lambs, we make cloth of her wool, and formerly
her skin was worn for garments, of her guts are made fiddle-strings, and her
dung makes the ground fruitful; they bring forth young as long as they live,
and are never barren, though not so long lived as some other creatures: but to
conclude, she will never go into water unless compelled, loves company, and
will not be alone if she can get to her fellows; has always the same bleating
when hungry as when full; whereas men do not more rejoice in prosperity, than
they are cast down in adversity: And thus I have briefly run over the principal
properties of the Sheep, from whence the Holy Scripture draws many useful
inferences from the nature of this creature; we read, Dan. 8. 3. I lifted up
mine eyes, and saw, and behold there stood before the river a Ram which had two
horns, and the two horns were high, but one was higher than the other, and the
higher came up last: I saw the Ram pushing westward, and northward, and
southward; so in Chap. 7 th. there was the vision of a Bear, by which we are to
understand the fierceness, and ambitious desires that were in those Kings, like
Ahasuerus, who by the instigation of Haman did intend to destroy all the Jews
in one day; but afterward he became as mild as a Ram; which, as he is even
laden with his horns, his flesh, and wool, so, the Persian Monarch did abound
in all mauner of wealth, and it had two horns, viz. the Kingdoms of Media and
Persia, with which he did push, as it were troubling and tormenting the Eastern
Nations.

2. In Leviticus, and several other places, the Jews were commanded to offer up
a lamb as a sacrifice for their sins, which did signify to us Christ the true
lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the World: these lambs were to be
sacrif^^^d, i. e. all stupid and dull affections were to be cast away, and
striven against, which they observed to be in the Sheep, as Origin well
observes on that place: but we have spoken more at large of this in the Chap.
of the Camel, out of the learned Galatinus.

3. Matt. 25. 32. Christ places his people at his right hand, and compares
them to Sheep, because of that wonderful meekness which they have learned of
Christ; or else it may signify to us, that as the Sheep is wonderful patient
of injuries, so likewise all good men have been always very ready to suffer
all calumnies and reproaches for Christ, yea, even death it self: but enough of
these. I shall now speak a little to that notable place where we find mention
made of the Paschal Lamb, which is called, in the New Testament, the Lamb of
God which was slain from the beginning of the World.

1. The Paschal Lamb which used to be eaten at the Passover, is a fit Symbol
of the body and blood of Christ, with which we are fed at his holy table; and
doubtless, it did also signify unto us, that Innocence, Patience and Meekness
that was in Christ; for the whole life and death of Christ was one continued
example of humility and patience; and his death was of great advantage to us,
in whose mouth was found no guile; and he truly might be said to bear our
infirmities, who was thoroughly tried in all things; the death of Christ was not
only represented unto us by the Paschal Lamb, but those very Sheep that were
slain to cover Ada^ W^^^ in Paradise, the skins of them were a type of Christ.

2. The Paschal Lamb was slain toward evening; Christ the Lamb of God suffered
not for us in the first ages of the World, but some thousands of years after
the fall, to exercise the faith of good men, and then in the fullness of ^ime
God sent his Son, which was to be slain at even, not in his childhood, nor in
his youth, but in his estate of manhood.

3. The Paschal Lamb was used to be taken from among the flock; Christ took not
on him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham, and so became the
Captain, and Shepherd of his Sheep.

4. It was to be a male of a year old, without spot or blemish; Christ was
perfect man, but yet subject to diverse infirmities, though without sin.

5. The blood of the Paschal Lamb was to be sprinkled on the door-post; thus is
the blood of Christ by the preaching of the Gospel sprinkled on the hearts of
men.

6. It was to be eaten with unleavened bread; Christ never does that man good
that does not receive him into a pure heart.

7. It was to be eaten with bitter herbs, by which was signified to us those
many afflictions and calamities that the Christians were to undergo.

8. As there used to be but one Paschal Lamb in a house, so was there but one
Christ, who was King both of Jew and Gentile.

9. That which remained of the Paschal Lamb was not to be kept, but to be
burned, to signify to us, that Reason is to be brought into subjection unto
faith.

10. As garments were made of Sheepskins* thus ought we to put on Christ to
cover our naked souls; Jacob could not have received the blessing, unless he
had put some skins over his hands to make them hairy, like Esau's; so, neither
can we be made partakers of heavenly blessings, unless we have on us the
righteousness of Christ.

11. The blood of the Paschal Lamb which was sprinkled on the door-posts, was a
means to preserve the Jews from destruction, but was no benefit at all to the
Egyptians; the blood of Jesus Christ in like manner does not profit us, unless
we have true faith, and show it forth by our works: finally, the Paschal Lamb
was to be eaten in haste, with their loins girt; and poor people that could not
kill a Lamb of their own, were to go to their neighbors, and eat it with them:
those likewise that do eat of the body of Christ, ought not to be dull and
sluggish, nor of dissolute and wicked lives, but courteous and charitable to
their neighbors.

2. Exodus 29. 15. a Ram was to be offered at the consecration of Priests, from
whence we may learn, that as the blood of the Ram was to be poured on the right
ear; so ought we to hear the word of God, for faith comes by hearing.

2. It was to be poured upon the right ear, and not on the left, which
intimates unto us thus much, that our faith ought not to be feigned, but
sincere.

3. The blood was to be sprinkled upon the thumb of the right hand of the
Priest; it does not suffice to hear the word of God, but we must set our hand
to the Plough; for the Kingdom of God consists not in words, but in holy
living; we must put to our right hand, following the commands of God, not of
men.

Further, the blood of the Ram was to be sprinkled round about the Altar; the
blood of Christ, in like manner, is to be sprinkled through the World, one drop
of which (as St. Bernard faith) was sufficient for the redemption of the World,
were there 1000. Worlds more.

Moreover, the blood of the Ram was to be sprinkled on the garments of the
Priest, and yet many of them were mere hypocrites; there are many likewise
which partake of Christ's table which are unworthy to be his guests.

Lastly, some parts of the sacrifice were given to the Priest, as the breast,
and the shoulder, one of which is the sign of wit, and the other of fortitude;
two virtues which of all others are most necessary for Ministers; by which also
we see that Ministers ought to be allowed a competent subsistence, for which
God did bless the people the better.

5. It is very well worth our observation, that Christ compares all good men
to Sheep, as himself is compared to them; and without question it does figurate
unto us that sweet and near union that there is between Christ and his Church.

1. Christ being to prescribe laws to his Church, does not compare it to a den
of Lions, which all other creatures dread; nor to Wolves which are never
satisfied, having such a greedy desire; nor to Bears which are always doing
mischief; nor to the stately Horse; nor to the crafty Fox; nor to the sluggish
Ass; nor to the contentious Dog; nor to the luxurious Swine; nor to the
leacherous Goat; nor to the intemperate Glutton, but to the Sheep; by which we
are taught to shun and avoid all the former vices.

2. Sheep have nothing of fraud nor deceit in them; Christians likewise ought
not to be crafty and deceitful in their dealings one with another.

3. Sheep do no harm neither to man nor beast; neither ought Christians to do
any injury to their friends or enemies, to good or bad; moreover, the Sheep is
very patient and mild; Christians in like manner ought to be courteous and
civil to all persons; and they are of all creatures the cleanlyest; so ought
every member of the true Church to mortify their lusts by the Holy Spirit:
again, they love green Meadows, and clear water; neither does the Church make
the Jewish Fables nor the Turkish Alcoran any part of their Creed, but the word
of God: but yet a little further, Sheep love to be among their fellows; thus
ought it to be with good men, who should love the company one of another: if a
Sheep strayeth, he never returns again of himself, but lies liable to all
dangers, unless the Shepherd bring him home; so good men, when they fall into
errors, cannot be brought home but by the word of God: we do not use to bind
Sheep in chains, but they go freely of themselves, with no less willingness
ought all Christians to do their duty: when the Sheep is pursued by the Wolf,
she has nothing to defend her self withal; thus, neither have Christians any
strength of their own to resist the Devil, but what they have from their
spiritual Armory mentioned, Ephesians. 6. Sheep are often troubled with weak and
infirm heads, having nothing of craft or subtilty in them; neither can
Christians do any thing in spiritual things by their own wit; they, (as we said
before) are as obnoxious to diseases as any creatures, excepting man and
horses. God in all ages has been pleased to exercise his Church with many
afflictions and calamities, and therefore the Church is compared to a Sheep
that is fatted for the slaughter; for, as Butchers are glad when they find a
fat Sheep, so wicked men rejoice at the calamities and afflictions of the
Church: when once the Sheep has the scab, he is separated from the rest of the
flock; neither ought notorious, scandalous sinners to be suffered to have
communion with the rest in the public congregation; for, as one scabby Sheep
infecteth the whole flock, so the slips and failings of one Christian is often
the cause of the fall of many weak ones. Sheep, as I said before, know their
Dams as soon as they are brought forth; so ought we all to learn how to
distinguish the true Church, and once found, never to leave her. I spoke, in
the former part of this Chap. of four properties which did belong to the good
Shepherd, all which may be fitly applied to Christ, who is the good Shepherd:
For, 1. He feeds us, he gives us food and raiment, health and plenty,
mercies spiritual and temporal. 2. The Shepherd is to take care that the Sheep
do not wander; Christ, as the Shepherd of our souls, gives us his holy Spirit
to guide and direct us, that we sin not against him. 3. In like manner he
defends us from the Devil and all his instruments (this he does by his own
power, and the tutelage of Angels) who by all ways, by force and fraud,
endeavors to oppose and ruin the Church. 4. Neither does he neglect
wandering and weak Christians; he takes them up in his arms, and wipeth all
tears from their eyes.

But, to conclude, we said before, Chap. 20. speaking of the Wolf, that two
drums, one covered with the Wolve's skin, and another with a Sheeps skin, will
never agree in sound; and that an instrument tuned with the gut of a Wolf, and
the gut of a Sheep, will never make any harmony: and that a Sheeps skin and a
Goats skin laid together, the hair of the Sheeps skin will shead: the reasons
of which Conradus Gesner gives us in these words; It is no wonder that a
Wolves skin which by nature is more hard and solid, should give a clearer, and
louder sound than a Sheeps skin which is more soft and porous: and, it is no
wonder that a hard, solid body, should endure longer than a body that is more
soft and pliable; as we see the feathers of an Eagle will last longer (it being
by nature very dry) than the featners of a Goose, which is by natuee more moist
and humid; so that a Sheepskin consumes never the more for being laid by the
skin of a Wolf,; for it is by nature more solid and substantial, and therefore
may very well last longer than the other; as we see that the bodies of those
persons which are lean and spare, may be kept much longer from putrefaction
than those bodies which are more fat and gross.

We shall not speak to that place, Genesis 30. 37. where Jacob peeled rods and
laid them before the Sheep when they conceived; but shall only take notice of
this by the way, that the same Device would not have the same Effect in other
places; for, we must consider, that in those Countries where Jacob lived, the
Sheep were wont to wander up and down in dry, barren fields, where they could
not come by a drop of water until noon, at which times they used to be driven
to the wells, and there were watered; by which they being much refreshed,
became more apt for Copulation, and the sight of the rods did work on their
imagination; but I doubt whether it would have the like effect in other
Countries.

The Jews will not eat the sinnew that is in the leg of a Sheep, especially,
though they will not eat that part of any other creature, as being that part in
which Jacob was touched by God, Genesis 32. 10.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Goat.
WHen they are young they are called Kids, afterward, when guelded, are called
He-Goats, otherwise Buck-Goats; those that have brought forth are called
She-Goats; but if they have not brought forth, they are called Kids: some say
that the Fallow-Deer is a kind of Goat, as also the Oryx, a wild creature in
Africa: but, to let this pass. 1. It is commonly thought to be that which we
call a Satyr; he loves to be amongst the Briars, and thorny places, and is
very delicate, biting off only the tops of boughs; but most of all she loves
to feed on the bark of the Beech-tree, as also on the leaves of shrubs and
hedges: what tree soever he biteth, it proves very noxious; for his breath is
exceeding hot, which may be a fit emblem of slanderers, who turn what ever
they hear of others to the worst; and therefore, as in old times it was an
ancient custom, That when any one let out a piece of Land, this was made one
article of the Agreement, that the party which took it should not let a Goat
feed in it: so I would have all men well to consider these Verses, Quisquis
amat dictis aliorum laedere faman,
Hanc mensam vetitam noverit esse sibi.


If he eat honey it is present death to him, although it is thought, that honey
mixed with his own milk is very wholesome for him: the herb Eringo, or
Sea-holly, is almost as deadly to him; for if he eats of it, he is so
stunnyed with it, that he cannot stir from the place where he stands; neither
will the rest stir unless the Shepherd take that away: a fit resemblance of
those men that take bribes, who, although, before they receive them, they are
very active in their Clients Cause; yet afterward, when they have got what
they can get, they then begin to grow negligent in the cause; for gifts corrupt
Judgment, and will make a man perjured: he said well, I have received a bribe,
and am not free. Goats have a great deal of hair under their chin, which is
called their beard; if any one takes a Goat by the beard from amongst the
flock, the rest will stand still, as it were amazed. Further, he is very often
troubled with the Epilepsie, or Palling-sickness: some say, that whoever eats
of Goats flesh, especially if it be old, are very subject to that disease. The
Goat of all other creatures is thought to be the most leacherous; for if he see
other Goats in the act, he will run at them; his lust is so great, that
sometimes they do endeavor to couple with women. Plutarch, Coesius, and
others, do relate a story of one whose name was Crates, who was killed by a
Goat; for it was observed of him that he loved a she-Goat, and was often seen
to be familiar with it: at the time of copulation Goats do sweat very much, and
have a very strong scent comes from them, whence comes the Proverb of those
men that have a strong scent about them, that they stink like a Goat; Olet ut
Hircus, there is a kind of an antipathy between the blood of a Goat and the
Adamant stone; for, although it cannot be broken neither by the hammer, neither
can it be softened by the fire, yet the blood of a Goat will break it: a fit
representation of the blood of Christ, by which only Satan is overcome: some
have made Bows of Goats-horns, with which they used to kill wild Goats, like
those men that cherish those who afterward are their greatest crosses: thus
are arrows feathered with the wings of Birds, that afterward prove their own
destruction: thus we use to say, that when we are injured by any of our own
kindred, we see some of our feathers in the wound. The Goat is of no use to the
Husbandman for the tilling of his ground; neither is it of any use in war,
but, that sometimes coats are made of their skins; in some parts of Africa they
make cableropes of Goatshair; and Aelian says, that in some places of the
Caspian Sea there are Goats as big as Horses; their hair is so fine, that the
best sorts of Garments are made of it; as, in Arabia, good cloth is woven of
Asses-hair; and Zembelitas tells us, that in Lycia there are Goats have hair
as long as women's hair; we read, Exodus 25. that the Jews were commanded to
bring Silver, Gold, Purple, Scarlet, and fine Linen, and Goats-hair, of which
were made curtains, which hung over Silk-curtains; by which is signified unto
us, that every one ought to give something toward the building of the Temple;
but profane stories tell us, that they used to make their tabernacles of Goats
skins, (Coelius, Lib. 27. chap. 14.) as in Moses his time, tabernacles used to
be covered with Rams skins, and Badgers skins dyed, as we read, Exodus 26. 14.
thus, the Author to the Hebrews, speaking of those course Garments which the
Prophets of old were forced to wear, Chap. 11. 37. says, that they were
clothed with Sheepskins and Goat Skins; for there is nothing so useful to us
as their skins, though some do make cheese of their milk; but it is very rank:
many of them cannot feed together, as Gaberius, a Senator of Rome, found dearly
to be true; who feeding a 1000. Goats together, lost them all; so that it
appears from this, that that place which will feed a 1000 Sheep, will not be
ground enough for an 100 Goats. She, like the Cow, will kick down the milk as
soon as she has given it; like those men, who, though they have many good
qualities, yet have more bad ones; thence comes the Proverb, Like the Cow,
that gives a good mess of Milk, and afterward kicketh it down with her heel.
He seldom stays long in a place, always running up and down: the Goats in
Arabia do exceedingly love Cinnamon, and if you have but any Cinnamon about you,
he will follow you any whither; so that we may see a kind of sympathy that
there is between the Goat and Cinnamon; they have a very quick hearing; for
Horace says (but how true, I know not) that she hears not only ^^th her
(...) but with some part of her throat. Sheep and Goats, as Aristotle says, in
some places bring forth twice in a year; some do gather it from that place, in
Genesis 30. when as, in that place, Jacob's words do not mean as if the same Goats
brought forth twice in a year, but that some brought forth, some sooner, and
some later.

The subtilty and craftyness of this creature is very great, if we may believe
Munanus; who reports, out of Pliny, that a couple of Goats meeting one another
on a long Bridge, which was so narrow, that they could not pass by one another;
neither of them would go back to give the other way; so that one of them lies
down, and the other goes over his back; which should be an example to us of
love and unity; and when once our private interest does meet with the public,
so that one of them must go back (as it were,) let the one give place to the
other, to prevent all contention and divisions: an instance of which we have in
Jonathen, who, though possibly was as strong as David, yet he would not stand
to contend, or resist him, knowing that he was chosen of God, but gave place to
him: I might further enlarge this, but let this suffice.

Moreover, It is very patient, and content with a little; the Buck-goat most
commonly goes the foremost of the flock, like as the Bell-wether goes out,
and comes in, the first of the flock; and they (as some have observed) are
prouder than the rest, because of the small difference that there is between
him and the rest; according to the Proverb, Vacua vasa plus tinniunt, i. e.
Empty vessels sound loudest. Philip Melancthon was often heard to say, that
Every fool was proud; and, that Every proud man was a fool: and the word in the
Germane-tongue, which signifies a proud man, viz. Stolt's, is, by some, derived
from the Latin word, Stultus, which signifies a fool; according to those
Verses, which, some say, that John Gerson, Chancellor of Paris, made. Vidi ego
vesicam medico tur gescere flatu,
Quae pisis sonuit quatuor impositis;
Hanc puer unus acu pupugit, displosa repent
Vilis and absque sono flaccida detumuit.


That Verse is known, of proud men. Capra nondum peperit, and hoedus ludit in
tectis.


He was like that flatterer who applauded one for asking this Question; Which
was the greatest Fool? he that went to milk a he-Goat; or he that went to fill
a sieve; they being both alike foolish, and ridiculous.

The Wild Goat is called the Roe*Buck, or Fallow-Dear; it is called also the
Ibex, or Eveck, the Oryx, or the American Wild Goat: the she-Goat is very
quick-sighted, her cry is weak, but very shrill; which the hunts-men do
imitate, shaking the leaves of trees, the noise of which brings them out of
their denns; to which may be added that Verse of Martial. Pendentem summa
capram de rupe vid^res:
Casuram speres, decipit illa canes.


The Fallow-Deer differs from the wild Goat in this, that the horns of the
Fallow Deer have not so many branches in them as the wild Goat; the horns of
the one bending forward, but the other bending backwards. The Ibex or Eveck is
a kind of Goat found chiefly in the Alps, something bigger than the he-Goat,
having very large horns, by which, when she leapeth down from a rock, she
keeps her self from the stones; she is very swift, and when at any time
hunted, if she has no way to escape, she runs upon the hunts-man, and
tumbleth him down, so escaping; the Oryx, or wild Goat in Africa, differs
from all the rest, in that his hairs turn toward his head: they are exceeding
fierce, oftentimes killing Lions and Tigers, and is never satisfied but with
the death of whatsoever assaulteth it; and, although all the kinds of this
creature are very good at leaping, yet the Eveck has his name from an Hebrew
root, which signifies to leap: he always lives upon Rocks and Mountains,
which are so cold that the snow lies there all the year long; for, unless they
did dwell in those places which are very cold, they would grow blind: they are
very nimble, and climb any thing, if they can but set their claws in: and thus
we have spoken to the several properties of the Goat; from which creature, the
Holy Scripture borrows many similitudes; two of which I shall only speak to
here; the place in the Canticles, where Christ is compared to the Goat, or
Hind, I have spoken already to, in the Chap. of the Heart; it is very well
known, the comparing of wicked men to Goats, at the last day; by which are
meant all lustful and lascivious men, who shall then receive their reward.
Levit. 15. 16. the Escape Goat is there spoken of, which was to be offered for
the sins of the people, and that was to be done only by the High Priest once a
year: Christ, our High Priest, offered up himself once for us, and went into
the Sanctum Sanctorum, and by his miracles did testify, that he was the Son of
God; while one Goat was offering up, they laid the sins and transgressions of
the people upon the head of another Goat, which was done thus: Aaron laid his
hands upon the head of the wild Goat, which afterward was sent into the
wilderness; by which was signified unto us, that Christ was to suffer without
the City; thus we read, Heb. ult. that they lead Christ without the Gates of
the City; he was nailed to the Cr ss, so, that he could not see the City: and
thence was the custom of placing Pictures with their faces to the West, in
Churches.

2. The Kingdom of Alexander the Great is compared to a he-Goat, Dan. 8. 5.
and as he was considering, behold, a he-Goat came from the West, on the face of
the whole earth, and touched not the ground; and the Goat had a notable horn
between his eyes; and he came to the Ram that had two horns, and was moved with
choler against him, and smote the Ram, and broke his two horns: the Grecians,
here, are compared to Goats, and Alexander to the he-Goat, because he was to be
born of the Greeks; the Grecians, because of their nimbleness and sagacity, are
well compared to Goats; but it informs us thus much of them likewise, that
they were unstable, and fleeting; as they used to say, that the Romans spoke
from their hearts, but the Greeks from the teeth outward: as the he-Goat is
more swift and hasty, powerful and lustful than the Ram; so was Alexander the
Great, who overcame the Ram, the King of Persia, by his great horn, his great
prudence, and valor: he touched not the ground as he went; for he flew,
breaking the two horns of the Ram, viz. Media and Persia: but when this he-Goat
was grown too big, his great horn was broken; that is, he did not dye in his
old age, but in the flower of his age; which is signified in these words, his
horns were broken: that day in which Alexander was born he set the most famous
Temple of Asia on fire, viz. that of Ephesus; and therefore the Magicians
prophesied, that the Incendiary of Asia was born that day: of his broken horn
arose four other horns, i. e. the four Successors of Alexander, of which we
spoke at large, Chap. 8. Further, Alexander, when he was 23 years old, went to
Jerusalem, where he sacrificed, and heard this prophecy, concerning himself,
read, and explained, with a great deal of joy: the History is worth the reading
at large, in Josephus Book, 11. There is another pretty Story, which we may
read in Herodotus, Lib. 2. of a question that arose between the Egyptians and
the Phrygians concerning their priority; which King Psammetychus undertook to
decide, thus; He commanded two infants to be brought up by a Shepherd, amongst
the Sheep, and commanded him, that no one should speak a word to them, and that
they should suck a Goat, which accordingly was done; the Shepherd was to
observe the first word that they spoke; at a certain time the Shepherd opening
the door, both of them being hand in hand, cried out Beccus, which they often
repeated; this was told to the King; he enquired what that word signified in
any language, and they found, after long search, that it signified bread, among
the Phrygians; and so ever after the Egyptians acknowledged the Phrygians to be
the more ancient Nation; although Weken signifies Bread, and Becket signifies
a Baker; and the Phrygians did use the Germane Tongue, as Historians tell us;
yet, no doubt but they expressed that inarticulate sound which they heard from
the Sheep; for there is no tongue or language that is natural to any one, but
all are to be learned: the Hebrew tongue is not natural to the Jew; for if a
Jew be born in Germany, France, or Spain, he will speak the language of the
Country where he is born; and will as soon learn Hebrew there, by the help of
a Master (without which, he cannot attain it in his own Country) as his own
Country: but this by the way.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Ape.
THis is a very known creature, very much like the Monkey; the Ape has a large
Tail, but the Monkey has none at all; this being the only thing almost wherein
they differ: this creature very much resembles the Marmoset, which is like an
Ape, very apish, and never staying long in one place: Vesalius and Columbus,
two famous Anatomists, tell us, that Galen had more skill in the anatomy of an
Ape, than of a Man. But now I shall speak to the nature of an Ape, properly so
called.

1. He is very like a man in several parts of his body; he has a very
ill-favored face, his nose is almost flat to his face, which is full of many
wrinkles; his ears are movable; he lives on the tops of Mountains and Trees,
and in the holes of Rocks.

2. As he is very like to man in several parts of his body, so he does strive
to imitate men's actions, but very foolishly, and not at all like those actions
which he seems to imitate; he will learn any childish action quickly, as to
play upon the pipe; sometimes he will act the part of a Carter, at another time
he will look a child's head, crack nuts, etc. he will play wlth dogs and little
children, and if care be not taken, will kill them: so Aelian reports of an
Ape, who seeing a Nurse washing a little infant, he, in the Nurses absence,
strippeth the child, and washes it with hot water, and so scalded the child to
death.

4. The foolish imitation of the Ape often proves his own ruin; for he has a
very strong body, and cannot be taken by force, but by some wile or trap: the
hunts-man when he sees an Ape, goes before him, and pulls off his shoes, and
combs his head, and washes his face, and so goes his way, leaving a vessel full
of mud behind him; the Ape coming to wash himself, as the hunts-man did, and
daubing himself with the mud, the dirt gets into his eyes that he cannot
see; and he leaves also shoes of lead behind him, which, when he has tied on,
he cannot stir: the hunts-men when they go to take him, carry a looking-glass
tied to their head, with many ropes hanging upon it, which, when they go away,
they leave behind them, which the Ape tyeth on when they are gone; the
hunts-men seeing this, catch hold of the ropes, and so take him.

5. He loves himself very much, and is very sensible when any one praises
him; and loves to see himself in a glass. There is no creature loves her
young ones so well as the Ape, and with a great deal of joy he will show them
to all in the house; he is always hugging, and making much of them, although
they be the most deformed creatures of all others: GOD has given them dugs in
their breast, not as other creatures; whence it is, that they can feed them in
their bosom; they love their young so much, that oftentimes, by too much
embracing, they kill them: when he is put to flight at any time, he carries
one of his young ones at his back, and the other before him; he carries that
on his back that he loves best; in any great danger she is fain to let go that
which she holds in her claws, while the other that she has the least love
for, remains safe upon her back: which represents to us those Parents that
have too great a love for some children, while they neglect the others; but yet
we often see, that those that they love least prove the best, when the other
come to ruin: an example of which we have in our first Parents; which bare a
greater affection to Cain than they had to Abel; yet notwithstanding, Cain, and
his whole posterity, were rejected in the deluge, when as the other was
received into God's favor, and saved. Moreover, the male has so great a love
for his young ones, that if he sees one of them look as if it were not kindly
used by her damm, he will correct her for it.

6. The ridiculousness of his actions is no less than the deformity of his
body; for he will not only imitate the actions of men, but is very unlucky, and
mischievous; wheresoever he biteth any one, it is very dangerous, and hard to
be cured: he is so wild, that he can hardly be kept in with chains; and though
he be tamed, yet he is soon as wild again as ever.

7. He will eat any thing, be it never so filthy; he will eat lice with a great
deal of delight, and loves to crack nuts; but especially he loves apples, and
wine; and will drink so long of it until he is so drunk that he cannot stand.

8. There is a great antipathy between the Ape and the Lion; the Ape being a
crafty, subtle creature, but the Lion (as we said, Cap. 6.) hates all manner
of craftyness: the antipathy between the Lion and the Ape is further seen in
this; that if the Lion be sick of any disease, he can no ways be cured but by
eating of the flesh of an Ape. Aelian says, that among the Indians, no Apes
that are red are suffered to come into their Cities, because they are so
lustful and lascivious, insomuch, that they oftentimes assault the women. They
will know their Masters where they are long kept, and will remember any injury
that is done unto them, but will as long feign their anger, until they have a
fit opportunity to revenge it; an Ape is an Ape, though clothed in never so
rich garments; although by fools and children he may be taken and saluted for a
man, yet he cannot hide his natural deformity. Gregory Nicene tells us of an
Ape, who being clothed in very rich habit, did dance very exactly, according
to the Music, in the City of Alexandria, and that for a long while together,
until one of the company throwing some nuts to him, he left off his dancing,
and fell to gathering up of the nuts, to the great laughter of the beholders;
like, as many men, who are entrusted in great Offices, honored by all men; yet
if any private gain offers it self to them, they presently discover that
secret wickedness that lies hid. Athenaeus relates of Anacharsis the
Philosopher, who seeing many foolish things acted, did not laugh at all; but
seeing an Ape brought upon the Stage, broke out into a great laughter; and
being asked the reason of it, answered, that it was made for nothing else but
to laugh at: and these are most of the chief qualities and properties of the
Ape; to which we might compare all Flatterers and Dissemblers, and even the
Devil himself, who may not unfitly be called God's Ape.

1. Then, the Ape has not the reason of a man, but without respect to the
place, persons, or time, do imitate many of men's actions, without either wit or
discretion: thus do Dissemblers and Flatterers; when they cannot give counsel,
they applaud and commend that which they have done; by which means, as Polybius
says, they often betray not only their weakness, but their folly: thus it was
in the Reign of Philip, some then imitating Melancthon, in the gestures which
he used in his Sermons; thereby discovering their great folly; not considering
their time, nor the difference of persons; to which we might add the foolish
imitation of the Germans, wherein they show a great deal of weakness;
according to that known story of the Painter, who was commanded by the Duke of
Venice, to describe the several habits of the Countries; when he came to paint
the Germans, he painted the Ape, carrying a piece of cloth; and being asked
the reason of it, he answered, that the Germaues, like so many Apes, did
imitate the garments and habits of all Nations; and therefore he had left them
a whole piece of cloth, that they might please themselves in their habits.

2. Apes, (as we said before) are often caught by their foolish imitation: so,
oftentimes such Flatterers get nothing else, but to be made a laughing stock;
like Phaeton, who would needs drive his Fathers Chariot, but could not do it.
Apes are very proud, and love to behold themselves in looking-glasses:
Flatterers, of all men, love to be praised; Apes, although they move laughter
oftentimes, yet are very unlucky, and mischievous: thus are Flatterers, as we
find sometimes by sad experience, in the Courts of Princes. We seldom find an
Ape in poor peoples houses, but most of them are to be found in great men's
houses, and Princes Courts: Flatterers are seldom in the poor man's cottages.
Apes often sport themselves, and play with their Masters: thus do Flatterers
oftentimes deceive their Princes, and bring them into unavoidable dangers:
examples of which we read too often in History. Apes are so impudent, that they
will not fear to disturb a Lion; Flatterers are oftentimes the ruin of great
Favorites, by the calumnies and reproaches which they cast upon them, which
Euripides found to be true; being very familiar with Archelaus, one uight
coming out of the Court, the Courtiers set the dogs at him, which tore him to
pieces. And Aratus had the same fortune, who was poisoned; which he perceiving,
cried out, Haec sunt praemia Regiae Amicitiae, fuge Aulam; Moreover, they are
good for nothing but to provoke laughter; and Flatterers are good for little
else: as Aurelianus, who used constantly to keep a very big man, who had no
other office but to drink with strangers: the flesh of an Ape is good for a
Lion, if distempered with a Fever; the posterity of those who are thus soothed
up by Flatterers, pay dear for their Ancestors folly: all these might very well
be applied to the Devil, who is God's Ape; who, of old, did use to prophecy to
the Heathens, and foretell things to come; to feign miracles, as he did in
Egypt by the Magicians: and many things more might be added, but let these
suffice, as to the nature of the Ape.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Squirrel, Weasel, and Gulo.
THE Squirrel is very common amongst us; he has a very large tail, which
serves indifferently for a shadow and a covering: he lays up his food in the
Summer for the Winter; he eats often, but drinks very little; he lays up
what he cannot eat, and loves sleep, which makes him very fat: he lives in
hollow trees, where they build their neasts, and bring forth their young; his
tail serves him for wings, which he uses often wagging of it when he is to
leap on any thing; if he is to go through any water, he will get upon a piece
of wood; his tail serves him instead of a sail, so swimming over, carrying his
food in his mouth. She has diverse holes and caverns in the earth where she
lives, and each of these has several ways to it, which she stops up with
^er tail; when the wind blows, if the wind is in the North, she stops the
hole toward the North, and leaves that hole open which is Southward. Some
tell us (but how true I know not) that he ^a^ foresee a storm, or any
tempestuous water, a long while before it comes, and will provide aga^n^t it,
stopping up her little holes that lie to that point of the compass that the
tempest will come at. He sheddeth his hair once every year, sometimes in the
year he is almost quite bald; yet he is not long without his hair; for when it
grows again (which it does in a short time) he has more than he had before.
Squirrels are of two colors, some of them are red, and others are gray: we
might deduce many inferences from the nature of this creature; it might be a
fit resemblance of a frugal man, he securing himself against all mischances of
fortune, providing suitable remedies against them; and this is not at some
particular seasons only, but all his life long: thus should the man that is
frugal, observing a mediocrity in all things, never exceeding his due bounds,
not being given to drinking, gaming, nor any thing else to excess: there are
some things in the nature of an Ape which we should avoid, they only taking
care for themselves, always either sleeping or eating, doing no good to no one
but to themselves. The Squirrel, as soon as he has eaten inordinately, goes
to sleep; and after he is awake again, then he falls to eating afresh, as if
he had eaten nothing before. And thus we have spoken what is necessary, or
worth observation in this little creature. The next that comes in order to be
spoken to, is the Weasel; it may be called Mustela, quasi mus long^or, because
it is something longer than a m^^se; for, although it does not belong to any
kind of mice, yet it may be said to have a very great likeness and affinity
with it: it was the opinion of the Ancients, that the Weasel conceivd at he
ear, and brought forth at her mouth; and therefore it was forbidden to the
Jews: that they might know it was a most wicked custom to aggravate what they
heard. But this is frivolous, when as it conce^veth, and brings forth as
other like creatures: but should we grant it to be so as they say (as it is
not) it might learn us thus much, that we ought to consider well before we
speak; according to the counsel that the Son of S^rach gives us, learn before
thou speak, chap. 18. 20. The flesh of the Weasel was forbidden to the Jews, to
teach them that they should not fear what should hereafter befall them.

1. The Weasel is no less crafty than it is timorous; and although she brings
forth her young ones in the house, she often changes her neast, lest being
discovered, her young ones should be taken away: some tell us, that if her
young ones at any time were hurt, she seeks out for some herb proper for the
distemper, with which she cures them.

2. They have a natural enmity against Serpents, and Mice have as great an
enmity against them. The secret members of the Weasel are very deformed; as
therefore the Serpent, so is the Weasel commonly seen in houses: it is their
work to catch mice, which is most of their food; Weasels destroy more mice and
moles than Cats: it has been observed, that those creatures which eat both the
same food, can never agree one with another. The Weasel has a particular way
to find out serpents holes; for they defend themselves against the serpent, by
taking some rue in their mouths, and then go in boldly to the serpent, and will
kill it, let it be never so big; nay, they will kill a Basilisk: it may be a
representation to us of all Christians, against whom the Devil has always
had, and does still express the great enmity he has against them; but this may
be for our comfort, that he is easily overcome by the virtue of rue, that is,
by the blood of Christ. If the Weasel be angered he will send forth a stinking
smell from his body, and is as mischievous when vexed, as a mad dog: he
destroys many small birds; for what the Wolf is to the Sheep, that is the
Weasel to Fowls; and as he cannot endure the serpent while he is alive, so when
he is dead, his gall is a sovereign remedy against the poison of the serpent.

The Weasel is a very swift creature, his teeth are venomous, he sheddeth his
hair, and is very wild, and has a very nimble body. The field or wild Weasel
is somewhat larger than the domestic; he will catch abundance of small birds
in a day: but the Iltissa, a kind of Weasel which destroys cocks and hens, he
devoureth also fishes, fowls, and birds; and to prevent their crying out, he
first bites off their heads: the Martin may be also called a kind of Weasel, as
also the Civet-Cat, which is the better sort of Weasels, of which there are two
sorts; some live in Cities, others in Woods and Deserts, but especially in the
Fir Tree and Beech-tree; they are like to the Weasel in every thing, excepting
these two. 1. That his dung smells very sweet; therefore it is that they are
so much prized. 2. Although he will destroy the poultrey, yet he will bring
them home to the house where he is; which is a fit resemblance of gratitude: an
example of which we have even among thieves, who have always some respect to
their relations; and those men are worse than beasts who will lay violent hands
on those men by whom they subsist: by the way I shall note this, that the
Squirrel Weasel will become tame, if their teeth be rubbed with garlic. Deuteronomy.
11. 29. the Jews, among other things, were forbidden the field-mouse or shrew,
which is a kind of Weasel, though not so commonly known to us; but some do
think that the word does not properly signify the field-mouse called a shrew;
for there are many words in the Latin version of the Bible, which do not agree
with the Hebrew: this is a very small creature, almost as big as a Weasel; it
is wholly given to his prey, and is very crafty in taking of it, and given much
to excess and intemperance; if any one comes by him, he will lie still, and
seem tame until he come nigh, and then he will bite, which is venomous: if
therefore the word in the Hebrew signifies a shrew, we may learn thus much,
that God would have us to shun all the vices abovenamed. The Ferret may not
unfitly be called a kind of Weasel; he has a little head, a red back, and a
white belly; his hair sticks so close to him, that his skin will come off as
soon as his hair; this resembles covetous men, who, as the Comoedian well
said, will part with their teeth rather than with their money; it is called in
Latin Furo, or Furunculus, from furor, to steal; because it steals, and
carries away all he can get to his hole, laying up a great deal of corn
against winter, without any chaff amongst it; so that one may commonly see half
a bushel of corn laid up in one Weasels hole, so that it may be well called
Viverra, quasi vi omn^a ad se verrens: if the male fears that he shall at any
time want food, he will not suffer the female to eat any; but she is always
too cunning for him, finding out some other way to it; which may serve to
admonish those men who are too severe and rigid to their Wives, who sometimes
are too wise for them; and cannot always see nor prevent their plots: the
Ferret agrees with the Weasel in all things, but in this, that he hates the
Coney, which he hunteth out of their buroughs into the traps that are laid
for them: he is so cruel to them, that he will kill a rabbet that is as big
again as himself; when under ground he is very fierce, but otherwise is very
tame and gentle; contrary to the nature of dogs, who are fiercest when at home;
but when in strange places are very tame; like those men who are very cruel and
rigid at home, but when they go abroad, seem to be very mild and courteous.
Formerly they used to carry Ferrets along with them to hunting, and to send
them into the Coney-burroughs to drive them out. The Poltcat is a kind of
Weasel also, they are most commonly very fat and ravenous: he will foresee a
tempest coming, and will run into their holes to shelter themselves; I cannot
give much credit to those who say that they can know a tempest a great while
before it comes, which, I think, no man can do; not Astrologers, who pretend
so much skill in knowing the weather; for tempests and storms, and all changes
of weather depend only on the will of God; but I think they may sometimes hit
to foretell the weather by chance: but to say that it will certainly be such
and such weather, I think no one can tell; for we have oftentimes seen that God
has disappointed them in that which they have foretold would most certainly
come to pass; but this by the way. The Poltcat lies hid, and is seen but very
little all the winter; sleeps very much, which makes them grow exceeding
fat: when they are pursued by the dogs very close, and are in danger of their
lives, they will hold their breath, thereby puffing themselves up, being then
better able to bear blows. There is a natural antipathy between this creature
and the Fox; for the Fox will oftentimes be in his holes, which if he cannot
get by force, he will do it by fraud; he will dung and urine at the mouth of
the hole, which makes such a stink, that he cannot endure the smell of it, and
is forced to leave her hole. The Poltcat is almost as big as a Fox, and some
say that it is a kind of Fox: if so, it may represent to us Apostates, who of
all other men are the most bitter enemies against that Religion of which they
were once themselves; for in all ages of the World, heretics, like those
Apostates, have opposed and persecuted the true Church, striving only for
riches, and by calumnies and reproaches intend to ruin the rulers of the
Church; and if they cannot do it so, they will do it by curses and
maledictions; they never go far from their holes, nor do they stay out long
when they do go out, which is only in the nightime, because then they know
all things are safe and quiet; it is called in Latin Taxus, which is the word
for the Ewe-tree, yet from thence came the Dachsus: to conclude, Weasels may be
tamed several ways, and when they are tamed they are very useful; they will
fetch young birds from trees, they will drive out young Pigeons out of their
holes, and will hunt Coneys out of their buroughs: by which we see, that God
has made nothing in vain, though at present we cannot see the usefulness of
it: the next thing that comes in order to be spoken to, is the it was unknown
to the Ancients, found only in the Southern Countries; of a very greedy and
ravenous nature; about the bigness of a Dog, and has a Cats face, the body and
tail of a Fox, and the color of a Weasel; he has 2 particular properties; 1.
He is very cruel: and, 2. Very ravenous. He will climb up trees, and leap upon
any man that goes by, and is very cruel, feeding most upon dead carcasses; and
where he sees one, he will eat so long of it, that his belly will be almost
ready to burst; as soon as he has done, he will look for two trees that stand
close together, and will squeeze himself between these trees; and so what he
had forced in, he forces out; having done so, he makes haste again to the
dead carcass, then to the two trees again, and does as before: this he does
until he has devoured the carcass: by which filthy creature, God would have
us to hate that sin of Intemperance; for we see that most of our domestic
creatures observe a rule in eating and drinking, and will not exceed the rules
of temperance; nay, we cannot make them, neither by fair means nor foul, to
take more than will satisfy nature: but it is to be much lamented, that man,
who was born in the image of God, should so violate the laws of nature, as to
exceed the bounds of sobriety, that which the very beasts are free from: and by
this creature we should learn to detest the beastly sin of Intemperance. This
creature, though such a gorging creature, is satisfied when he has eaten one
carcass; but men, when in their cups, know not when they have enough, turning
day into night, and night into day; and when nature will bear no more, but
forces them to bring it up again; they will after their vomit, return again to
their cups: some have merrily put the question, whether there may not be
Antipodes in the same City, and have concluded on the Affirmative: these
Antipodes are the Gluttons and Drunkards abovementioned, who have t^^ir day
when we have our night; and when we have our day, and are about our business,
they are ^aking their rest.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Hedg-hog.
I Need not go about to make a large description of this creature, because it
is so very well known; it is all over full of prickles, so that no one can
touch him without pricking himself: it represents unto us the untractable
Rustic, or wrangling Disputants, with whom there is no talking without a
quarrel: her neast is by the Hedges and Vineyards in Autumn, but in the Winter
in hollowtrees; in the Summertime she lays up her food against Winter; she
will climb fruit trees, and shake down apples, and then she takes one in her
mouth; and so rouls her self up, and sticks the rest upon her prickles, and so
carries them to the hollow-tree where her neast is, and that is her food all
the Winter; she does the same in Vineyards, shaking the Vine as long as any
grapes will fall off: his hole has two holes, one toward the North, and
another toward the South, which he shuts North and South, according as the
wind is in either of those two corners: sometimes they have two vents, through
which nature eases her self: when he sees any one coming to take him, he
rouleth himself up, and so secures himself; but when he cannot run away, he
urines upon his back, which makes his skin to rot and putrify; this he does
for very fear; but some are of a contrary opinion, who think it is because no
one should have the benefit of his skin: there is no way to take him so easily,
as to pour cold water upon him, which will make him unfold himself: his skin is
very good to scour garments with, to brush them from the dust: if he loses one
apple by the way as he carries them, he will throw away all the rest, and run
to his hole. She knowing that her young ones are full of prickles, she rouleth
her self up, because she would have it as long as she could before she brought
forth; but afterward it is a means to make her bring forth with a great deal
more pain and anguish; as oftentimes it happens, according to that verse,
Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Charybdin.


Men oftentimes, while they are taking care to avoid a small danger, run into a
greater: a fit resemblance of all quarelsome, proud men, who will do nothing
peaceably; and it is our wisdom to let such men alone; in vain do we attempt
to persuade them to be more civ^l and courteous, when their very nature makes
them otherwise: so we have it in that Verse; (...)
Ex hirco lavem nunquam mutabis Echinum.


Such as was Cain to Abel, and Saul to David; and we may more easily beware of
open enemies than dissembling friends: and although the Fox is crafty enough,
yet the Hedg-hog does it by her prickles: the Porcupine some do make to be a
wild sort of Swine, which has larger prickles than the Hedg-hog, which he will
shoot out like an arrow, and will with it wound either man or beast: as most of
the creatures abovenamed, so does this hide himself all the Winter.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the Beaver.
THis is an amphibious creature, has four feet, two of a Dog, and two of a
Goose: his forepart is hairy; he has a long, broad, ruggid tail, like the tail
of a fish; his feet are skinny, which makes him swim with a great deal of
ease; he cannot dive long together, being of very short breath; and therefore
is fain often to put his head up above water for air: he biteth very hard, and
loves to be among fishes, or where they are: he may be like a thief in this
thing; for he loves to lie in the way that passengers come oftenest by: he is
as big as a large Cat, his testicles have neither a bad scent nor a good, but
is very good against the Diseases of the Matrix; and is often given to women
with child. Some are of opinion that the Castor knows it, and therefore when
he is pursued, biteth them off, because he will not have any one have the
benefit of them; which, I think, may be rejected as fabulous: this resembles
those men, who, when in an eminent danger, will part with those things that are
dearest to them, if they can but escape. He loves to be upon the banks of
Rivers, and in those places where trees grow close to the water; and there he
will sit, with his body in the tree, and his tail in the water: his subtilty is
seen in this, that he will make a tree hollow with his teeth, as if it were
made so by art: he will not loose his hold that he has taken of any man,
except he has broken the bone, or that part that he has hold of. The tree
that he thus holloweth he makes threce else in it, one above another; and if
it raineth so that the tree is full of water, then he goes up a story higher,
and according as the water decreaseth or increases, so he goes up higher or
lower in the tree; yet so, that still he may keep his body dry, and his tail in
the water: this may teach us to foresee dangers that are coming upon us, and to
arm our selves against them.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the Otter.
THis is also an Amphibious creature, very much resembling the Beaver; there is
no great difference as to their outward shape; Pliny says, that the Otter and
Beaver are both the same, but in this they differ; the Beaver has a tail, but
the Otter has no tail at all: he biteth as hard as the Beaver, and has many
other qualities which the Beaver has. There is a creature which is much like
the Otter, called Latax, which has all his food out of the water: all these
creatures, the Beaver, the Martin, the Ferret, etc. are mentioned among those
doleful creatures, Is. 13. 21. called there by the names of ohim and zihim, by
all which, is represented unto us the lives of those who live privately, and
solitarily in the World, only looking after what concerns themselves, meat
and drink, not skilled in any Art or Science that may fit them to do their
Country service: for, as the creatures abovenamed are very timorous and
fearful, shunning the sight of men; so are these Country people, who are
strong, but nothing of courage in them; neither are they able to do any
service; so that, as Terence said, Homine imperito nihil injustius, nothing is
more injurious to men, than when ignorant men are put in place. 1. They live
most under ground, and seldom come abroad but in the nightime, when they
know all things are quiet and still, and then only when they are forced to it
to seek for food: thus is it with common people, who will not take any journey
to increase their knowledge, or to serve their Country; but to serve their own
private ends holding this for a Maxim, Been qui latuit been vixit, He lives
the best that lives the privatest life. He nourishes his young ones always
in their houses, or in their holes; like those men that breed their children at
home, and never send them abroad, whereby they might see the World, because
most commonly it is liable to the greatest hazards: moreover, he cares for
nothing but food, some of them laying up whole heaps of corn against the
Winter: thus do they take thought for nothing, but how to increase their
wealth. The Lion is forced daily to seek his prey, when these creatures have
food enough in their holes; so that they do not only live in the Winter, which
some creatures cannot do for want of food; but they grow fat. Thus Learned men,
who have done their Country service either in War, or otherways, although
they are not so sollicitous to get wealth as others are, yet they do seldom
want; some of the forementioned creatures will not let the female eat as much
as she will, but yet she will find a private way to his heap, and eat as much
as she will: so, those Churles who are so harsh to their Wives, do but endamage
themselves by it. These creatures daily change their neasts; so those men are
continually laying up their riches, knowing no end of them. Some are of
opinion, that they can foresee a storm long before it comes, and defend
themselves against it. Ferrets will not devour the poultrey in the same house
where they live: thus, those people, who although they have no love for their
rulers, yet are forced to obey them out of fear. There is another sort of Otter
in Egypt, which is called Ichneumon, or the Indian-rat, about the bigness of a
Cat, his hairs are as hard as Sowes brissels, dwelling chiefly amongst hedges;
having a great enmity to the Crocodile, as Solinus and Strabo do affirm. The
Trochilus, or Wagtail, a creature that goes into the Crocodiles mouth, and
eats that which sticks between his teeth, so that he does, as it were,
scour and cleanse them.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the Crocodile, Lizard, Salamander, and Stellio.
ALthough all the forementioned creatures be but several sorts of Lizards, yet
they differ much as to their bigness, and several properties.

Of the Crocodile.
The Crocodile is a creature found only in Egypt; he is an amphibious creature,
as are many others besides; which are fit emblemes of the Popish Priests, which
are conversant as much in Civil as in Ecclesiastical affairs: it may resemble
those men who are of all Religions; when they are among Priests, they will seem
to be Priests; if in wicked and profane company, they will be so to; if in
religious company, they will be religious: it is a four-footed creature, and
brings forth eggs a little bigger than Goose-eggs, which she hides in the
earth where they are hatched: there is no creature that is, which from so small
a bigness, grows to be such a great creature; he grows as long as he
lives: he lives 60 years, and grows till he be 17, 18, or 20. cubits long:
his teeth are more like rakes than teeth, being ertraordinarily big: his skin
is so hard all over his body, (excepting his belly, which is exceeding tender)
that he cannot feel the hardest blow. 2. Although he is so exceeding timorous,
pursuing none but those which fly from him; and flying as fast from those that
do pursue him; yet he may be accounted bold and valiant. When he goes out for
his food, he will sometimes lie still, as if he were dead, or asleep; thus
inviting the birds to him, which thinking he is dead, come very near him,
flying about him, and when they are within his reach, he takes them. There is
a little Bird which is called in Latin Trochilus, that he suffers to feed
continually in his mouth, because it keeps his teeth clean, by picking out any
thing that is between them; like to those men who will do nothing but what may
serve their own interest* when the Crocodile wants food, and is exceeding
hungry, he will fill his mouth full of water, and pours it upon the beaten
path, and so making it very slippery, if any one falls down, he will catch
them before they can rise again: he first eats the carcass, and then, with
tears, he will eat the head* whence came the Proverb, The tears of the
Crocodile, which are feigned, and hypocritical. There is a great antipathy
between the Crocodile and Ichneumon, or Indian-Rat, which is a kind of Otter,
to be found only in Egypt: when the Crocodile lies asleep with his mouth open
on the shore, he will go into his mouth, and down his throat into his belly;
and that he may the more easily go down, he daubeth himself with mud: the
Crocodile awaking, and perceiving the rat in his belly, runs up and down,
sometimes lying down upon the ground, and stretching himself out, then he will
go and plunge himself in the water; all this while this little Indian-Rat never
minds what he does, but lies in his belly, gnawing of his bowels, (which is
very pleasant meat to him,) where he stays until he has gnawed his way
through the Crocodiles side, which kills him; but he comes out alive,
without any hurt at all: he is very diligent in seeking out the Crocodiles eggs
(from whence some are of opinion, that her name is derived from (...), veftigo,
to seek,) and when he has found them, he breaks them in pieces.

Moreover, it is exceeding ravenous and greedy, and wants the use of his
tongue; his sight is dull when in the water, but very quick on the land: it
exceedingly fears serpents, for they will lie hid under those herbs which they
know the Crocodile most loves; in all which he much resembles the Devil; for,
1. The Crocodile is a very great creature, amphibious, living either on the
land, or in the water, a very cunning, crafty creature. 2. The Crocodile flies
from those that pursue him, and pursues those that fly from him: the Devil
likewise dares not stand to encounter with those that resist him by the word
and prayer, but eagerly pursues those that are ignorant of their spiritual
weapons.

3. The Crocodile suffers the creature called the Trochilus, quietly to feed in
his mouth: the Devil likewise spares one the better, to draw and allure more to
himself.

Again, if he can get any thing, he presently devoureth it; so likewise does
the Devil deal by those who follow his temptations. Origin, Contra Celsum, Lib.
3. does enveigh very bitterly against the Egyptians, who worship the Crocodile
as one of their gods; and blames them that they suffer that to live which is
such an enemy to mankind.

The enmity that there is between the Indian-Rat and the Crocodile, much
resembles the war and enmity that there is between Christ and the Devil.

1. The Indian-Rat lays traps, and ensnares the Crocodile: Christ likewise
destroys the works of the Devil.

2. The Indian-Rat goes into the Crocodiles mouth when it is asleep, and
eats his way through his belly, and again comes forth alive: thus Christ
has conquered death, and rose again the third day.

The Crocodile, were it not destroyed by the Indian-Rat, would overrun those
Countries: the Devil likewise would destroy the World, were he not restrained,
and kept in by Christ.

CHAP. XXX.
Of the Salamander, Lizard, and Stellio, etc.
THE Lizard is a creature so well known, that there are few better known. There
is a certain kind of Lizard in Egypt, which is called Sciuncus, or Scineus; but
that which we have out of Egypt, called Scineus, is not a true Lizard, but a
kind of land-Crocodile, (which is used, by some, to provoke lust,) having his
scales growing toward his head; as also, a very white, thin skin.

Moreover, the Lizard has a very great love to man, insomuch, that whenever
he sees any man, he expresses it by several apish actions, fawning, and
wagging his tail like a dog; and when he sees a serpent to lie lurking under
any herb, (as they often do) he is more active and apish, which he does to give
notice to any one that is passing that ways, that they may defend themselves
against it: which is a very fit resemblance of those men who are crafty and
mischievous, and make it their business to do mischief; yet it is so ordered by
divine Providence, that they do even betray themselves; like Balaam, who was
forced to bless those whom he would have cursed: and so it was with Pharaoh,
who was forced, against his will, to let the people go; so that it is verified
which Solomon said, When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes his very
enemies to be at peace with him: and so it happens amongst us, our greatest
enemies sometimes being the occasions of our greatest good: and thus much for
this creature, which is hatched out of an egg.

The Salamander (Ein Melch) is a kind of a white Lizard, being hatched of an
Egg; it is very like the Lizard, having along, crooked tail, and crooked, sharp
feet; his skin is very rough, and rugged, and is said to be of so cold a
nature, that he can e^ven put out the fire; but experience teaches us the
contrary; for if he be kept some time in the fire, he is easily burnt, although
at the first sight one would think otherwise.

They say, that if he get into a tree, he does so impoyson the fruit, that it
proves mortal to those who shall eat of it afterward: and his spittle (as it
were) or that which comes out of his mouth, is of so venomous a quality, that
if it chance to light on any one, it makes the hair to come off; and yet,
notwithstanding, Swine will eat it without any hurt to them at all; which fitly
resembles wicked men: for, the Salamander (as we said before) is a kind of
Lizard: so wicked men likewise, are but the issue and offspring of the Devil.

And as its spittle makes the hair to fall off; so, the reproaches which wicked
men cast on the godly, robs them of that honor and esteem which is due to
them. The Salamander is never seen abroad in fair weather: wicked men, in like
manner, ought not to be seen in a well-ordered Commonwealth.

Again, he never comes out of his denn, but in great storms and showers: it is
likewise only in times of sedition and rebellion that wicked men dare show
themselves.

(...), i. e. In troublesome and seditious times, the worst of men are often
honored and promoted, when others are reproached and scorned.

The Salamander (they say) has little spots on his back, like stars: wicked
men, in like manner, make fair shows and pretenses of Religion, but yet they
are good for nothing: wicked men also are born for nothing else but to trouble
and perplex their neighbors.

Under this Chapter is to be referred the Stellio, a creature much resembling
the Lizard, having shining spots on his back, resembling stars: they are found
chiefly about old houses, and sometimes in new; he chiefly lives on the dew,
and spiders. She casts her skin every year, which she devoureth as soon as she
has done; which some think she does out of envy; for her skin is good against
the Falling sickness. It is a very venomous creature, and bears a great ha^ed
to the Scorpion, which she often shows; insomuch, that she cannot endure to see
one: which fitly resembles wicked men, who put on stars, i. e. a pretense of
Religion, when about the most wicked Action.

And, although the Stellio be a venowous creature, yet it cannot endure the
Scorpion: thus, we oftentimes see that wicked men cannot agree among themselve,
but fall out one with another.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the Chamelion.
THis is a creature very well known, four-footed, and engendered of an Egg; to
be found in Asia only; almost like a Lizard: he holds his mouth open to take
in the air. It is reported of Aristotle, that of all the creatures that he has
described, there is none that is more timorous and crafty than the Chamelion:
it is to be found in Africa also, but very rarely, as also in India. His snout
is like a Hogs, which routeth up the ground; and although the Chamelion is very
much like a Crocodile, yet in this he differs from him, his tail being much
longer, and thicker: he is very crafty and mischievous, although so fearful and
timorous. It is a quality of this creature, and of this creature only, that
when at any time he is frighted, he, for very fear, changes himself into the
color of that thing at which he is frighted: the reason of which Bodinus
thinks to be the pellucidness, and transparency of his body; and therefore
whatsoever color is next to him, that color seems to reflect from his body:
a fit resemblance of Stage Players, who can be any thing for their profit and
advantage: he can change himself into any color except red and white; which is
a fit resemblance of subtle Disputants, who run from one thing to another, to
evade the force of their adver^aries argument. When he is dying he turns very
white, and pale; he can no more be without the cool air, than he can without
food: he has very large lungs, yet when opened, there is nothing found within
them: which fitly resembles flatterers and dissemblers. The Chamelion being a
very timorous and fearful creature, changing himself into all colors but red
and white: thus, flatterers do live in fear continually, and lest they should
be discovered, are sometimes put to their shifts; but they can never endure to
behold the truth in its luster. Moreover, the Chamelion always goes with his
mouth open, and has large lungs, but nothing within them: thus, these
Sycophants and Dissemblers covet nothing so much as the breath of people; who,
although they have not the least spark of Religion, yet would seem to have the
most: good men had rather be real, than seem to be Religious; but wicked men
had rather seem to be Religious, than to be really so: such are those that do
all things for their own praise, and by their gestures and actions do plainly
show that they would be praised of all men. There is a natural antipathy
between the Chamelion and the Crow; which, as often as they meet, the Crow
remembers that poisonous quality that is in the Chamelion; and therefore,
before he encounters with him, he eats a leaf or two of laurel; and, although
he be often wounded in the combat, yet he always is conqueror. That, by the
laurel, is meant true piety and godliness, I suppose no one can be ignorant of
it: as the Crow therefore, we see, overcomes by this lawrel-branch; thus, we
can no ways better reject, and conquer slanderers and back-biters, than by an
innocent and virtuous life: it has been the constant care of godly men to live
a godly and religious life; the only way to confute the reproaches that are
cast upon them, and to stop the mouths of gainsayers. The Chamelion, when he is
dead, grows pale and white; which Arist. Lib. 1. Eth. cap. 10. does apply to
the life of a man; and says, that those who depend on fortune, do as often
change, and alter their conditions, as the Chamelion does his color; sometimes
rich, sometimes poor, now happy, anon miserable, etc.

2. It may be also not unfitly applied to Tyrants: the Chamelion goes very
slowly; the like is reported of Nero: Tyrants at first do feign and dissemble
piety, but when once they have got the power into their own hands, they then
show what before they did but dissemble, then committing all manner of
wickedness. The Chamelion can imitate all manner of colors, like Tyrants, who
imitate all men's manners. The Chamelion, when he is afraid, seems to be very
gentle, and mild; like as the Tyrant is sometimes fain to dissemble himself
mild, but cannot imitate white and red; i. e. true innocence and modesty; and
therefore Nazianzen tells us, in his 47 th. Oration, of the objection that he
made against Julian; Who, with the Chamelion and Proteus could do all things;
but yet he could not be mild toward the Christians: it may also resemble those
men who study several Arts and Callings, lest one of them should fail. To
conclude; as the Chamelion, so these men can imitate the black and evil
customs of men, but take no example by good men, not being able to imitate the
white and red, i. e. true Virtue and Piety.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the Frog, and the Toad.
FRogs are divided, by Physicians, into several kinds; some tell us that there
are none in the Sea, but only in gardens, and in the fields; sometimes in Ponds
and Lakes: those that are more venomous, are called Toads, and are to be found
only in holes; which, like the Bat, never come out of their holes but in the
nightime. 1. Our common Frogs, by their continual croaking, do very much
trouble and infest us; which Ovid tells us of, in his Metam. concerning the
Contrymen that were changed into Frogs. Quanquam sunt sub aqua, sub aqua
maledicere gaudent;
Litibus exercent linguas pulsoque pudore.
Their brawling tongues, but setting shame aside;
Though hid in water, under water chide.


To which we may fitly compare our clowns, who, when in their cups, talk of
that which does not concern them. Aristophanes being to describe the croaking
of the Frogs, sets it down thus, (...), in which is elegantly set down, the
noise that Frogs make when they croak, the Grecians call a Frog (...), like to
our Germane*word Brosch, which signifies a Frog; but let the studious see more
of this in Homer, in his (...), the Fable of the War between the Frogs and the
Mice. Frogs are commonly taken to be a sign of the approaching Spring; and are
thought to be engendered of mud, like Eeles: it is to be observed, that there
are most Frogs to be found in a moist year; and therefore, when we see a
multitude of Frogs, we may conclude no happy year to follow: but it is to be
rejected as fabulous, and ridiculous, which some say, that they are bred of mud
and slime, when we may see them copulate, and of their sperm or eggs are
generated young Frogs; they are not seen to copulate in the daytime, neither
can they do it in the water; but yet, by their continual croaking, the male
provokes the female, and both of them wait for the night, that they might the
freelier enjoy one another; this they do in the nightime, lest they should be
disturbed by men or beasts, and are very much delighted in the act: sometimes
men, through carelessness, drink the spawn of the Frogs; whence it is, that
sometimes we have seen Frogs to be generated in men, and whether also eggs by
the same means, the sperme, or the little worms being eaten with our meat
oftentimes, do not breed worms in children and in men oftentimes, I leave to
the more learned to judge. From the spawn of these Frogs are bred other little
Frogs, which have long tails at first, but afterward grow shorter and shorter:
in Wintertime they lie hid in holes of the earth; and some say, that in those
Ponds that do not freeze, are Frogs all the Winter; but, as concerning the
multitude of Frogs that we have sometimes, there can no other reason be given
of it, than what we have for the great company of Locusts that was sent upon
the Egyptians, to wit, the immediate hand of God, for our sins. Some are of
opinion that they are bred of showers; others, of winds; but, I think, no other
reason can be given of this than of the former; like as God once did create out
of the Rivers of Egypt great store of Frogs. 4. If we set a candle lighted on
the ground, the Frogs will immediately be silent; they make a great noise when
they are in warm water; but if they are cast into a Well that is colder, they
are immediately silent. 5. Some do pretend to foretell a shower, by the more
than ordinary croaking of Frogs: But, I think, we may more rationally conclude,
that Frogs do see the shower hanging in the air, and so prepare themselves for
it; they being very much delighted in rainwater, being much sweeter than any
other water. It is a common thing for children to get Frogs by a piece of red
cloth, and a hook; the Frogs do catch those bees that fly near the water,
and, although they are often stung by them, yet do not feel it. There are some
people will eat Frogs, first fleaing them, and then taking only the hinder
parts of them: this may be a fit representation of those who do delight in
scandalizing and reproaching their neighbor. Too great multitudes of Frogs are
thought, by some, to portend an unhappy year: thus it is with these men who
always breed commotions, and are the promoters of dissentions and divisions.
If Frogs do croak more than ordinarily, it shows the change of weather; thus,
when wicked men ^lourish, and prosper, it is but a bad omen of some alteration
for the worse. Frogs are not sensible of the stings of Bees; so great and high
are men in their wickedness, that reproofs and advices will do them no good.

Frogs croak only in warm water, but make no noise at all in cold water: thus
wicked men are well enough while in a prosperous condition; but, when once
affliction comes, then they cannot bear it.

Rev. 16. 13. And I saw three unclean spirits like Frogs come out of the mouth
of the Dragon; that is, Heretics proceeding out of the mouth of Satan, such
as were formerly the Monks, and at this day the Jesuits; who, by all their
reasonings and disputations, do only endeavor to maintain the Popes Supremacy,
and his power over all other men whatsoever. 1. If one were to judge of the
bigness of a Frog by the noise that it made, and did not see it, we should be
ready to conclude that it was some large beast: ignorant people, at first, that
do not examine their arguments, and bring them to the touchstone of the
Scripture, are ready presently to conclude their arguments unanswerable, when,
indeed, they are nothing less; and like the croaking of Frogs, intending only
to weary out their adversaries by the multitude of their arguments, but not to
convince them by the force of them; and all to no other end, but to establish
the Papal Chair. 2. If a Frog be set upon a Golden Stool, it will leap off from
it into the mud* thus, Jesuits, if brought to the Scripture, will betake
themselves to Philosophical arguments, and creep to the authority of the
Fathers, where they think themselves secure. 3. Frogs do not love Wine, but had
rather drink water: thus, the Jesuits do tell us, that the Scripture is
ambiguous, and choose rather to trust upon the authority of the Church, than the
Scripture it self.

Of the Toad.
A Toad is but a larger kind of land- Frog. 1. They love to dwell in moist
places, neither can he endure the light of the Sun; and therefore at daytime he
lies hid, seldom creeping out but toward night, at which time he is seen
always in path-waies. 2. He lives most under ground, and is nourished chiefly
by the vapors of the earth; but yet sometimes he eats herbs, and worms; some
say that he feeds upon the earth it self; he eats as much at one time as he
can hold in one of his feet: some Authors do conceive that the reason why he
eats no more at one time, is, because he fears that the earth will not be
enough for him; whence came the picture of a covetous old woman standing upon a
Toad. 3. The Toad is a venomous creature, and soon angered: if he gets hold
of any thing that you hold to him, he will not loose his hold: if he be struck
by any one, he spitteth poison at them. The spider and the Toad have a great
hatred one to the other, yet the spider always has the better of it; he
comes down by a small web, and lights upon his head, and pricketh him, or
rather biteth him. It is a known Story, that Conradus Gesner recites out of
Cardinal Foncetto, concerning the Toad, in these words; One taking up a reed in
the field, there was a Toad at one end of it; he perceiving that, threw it out
of his hand; and returning home, when he was at dinner, he vomited up all that
he eat, neither did any thing stay with him that he took, until another gave
it him; not perceiving the reason of it at first; afterward, he considered
that the Cane which he took in the field was poisoned, which he found to be so;
the Toad having left a kind of viscous, thick matter, which was not able to
pierce the skin, and so could not prove mortal: thus far Foncettus; and Gesner
goes on further, and recites a story out of Matthiolus, and discourses at
large concerning the Toads poisoning of herbs, which he does by sittilng upon
them, and sending forth a poisonous moisture upon the leaves, which spreads
all over the herb, and does poison the herbs that are next to it; thus far
Gesner. We may now consider, a little, the several commands that God gave to
his people Israel, about the difference between those creatures that were
clean, and those that were unclean; and that they were not to touch those
creatures which are unclean; neither were they to touch any dead carcasses: we
read also, how those men that were unclean by the touching of any unclean
creature, were to be separated for a time: there were also several laws given
to the people of Israel, concerning their several washings; for those persons
that were any ways unclean, and also all the ceremonial laws, had their
particular uses, and typical significations, yet they all contained something
that was moral: and among other things, this may be one, which is in the Story
related before: thus we fee in Gardens, the little worms that are upon the
herbs and fruit; yet we commonly touch the grass with our hands, and eat fruit,
never washing them again before we eat, when we know not what poisonous humors
are in the grass that we so freely handle: we see that Cats, Mice, Flies, and
Spiders, do bepiss* our clothes, books, meat; and therefore, I think it would
be very healthful for us if we used often to wa^h our hands; but especially,
when we have been handling of herbs; unda datur gratis, water is cheap enough;
but, verbum sat sapienti. ^he Toad might be very fitly compared to all envious,
cruel, malicious, and tyrannical men: but, I shall not stand here to enlarge
any further, or to draw any inferences from the nature of the Toad; we use to
say, that, A fool has as many senses as a Toad has hairs.

Of the Snail.
This creature is commonly known, and there are several kinds of them; some
living in the water others on the land, others in marshy grounds; it is very
much eaten among diverse people; if any one eats but a few of them together,
it will bind him; but if a great quantity of them are taken together, then the
property of them is quite altered. The nature of Lettuce is the very same; the
Learned Erasmus fetches a similitude from hence concerning our Study, that
there is no mediocrity neither in professing the truth.

2. This creature goes very slowly, and always carries his house along with
him wheresoever he goes; and therefore Apelles, or, as some would have it,
Phidias, painted Venus standing in a sheet, to signify to us that a woman
ought to be always (...), that is, that she should not be far from her own
house; as it is a great commendation of a man (when we can say of him, as
Horace says out of Homer, Mul^orum mores hominum qui videt and urbes;) To have
seen the customs of Countries, and to be acquainted with the manners of men:
So is it on the contrary, the greatest honor and glory of a woman to keep at
home; the Hebrews do very fitly call a woman (...), Alma quasi occultata,
signifying that a woman should not be much in the streets, but to mind her own
houshold-affairs; and as it is dangerous for the snail to go from his house, so
it is not good for women to go far from their own houses: we may remember sad
examples of it in Dinah: the Snail uses the herb called Origanum, or wild
Marjoram, against Serpents and Vipers; when he goes along, he puts out his
horns, to see it the way be safe. 3. If he sees no body near him, he will
creep out of his shell a little way; but if he sees any one coming, he
presently contracteth himself, and gets into his shell again: we may learn
thus much from it, for our instruction, that we should be silent, and say but
little; and thus much it may teach us, for our caution, to have a care of our
enemies, who do privily lay snares for us when we do not see them. It is worth
our observation, which Plutarch reports of the Sea-snail; when she lays her
eggs, she goes out upon the sand, and when she has covered them with the sand
so that they cannot be seen, goes again into the Sea, and makes some private
mark to find them again by: thus we have set down the principal qualities of
this oviparous creature, covered with a shell; from whence it may have his name
Testudo, a Testa; besides these land-snails, there are water-snails, or
Sea-snails, of the several kinds of which, the curious may satisfy themselves,
if they look into the treatise which several Physicians have written of the
nature of this creature. It is reported, that there are very large Snails in
the Indian Sea. It is a known story of Aeschilus the Poet of Athens, who having
a bald head, an Eagle seeing of it, and taking it for a stone, let a shellfish
fall upon it, to break it, which falling upon his head so high, killed him: And
the Apologue of the Beasts, and other Creatures that were invited by Jupiter to
a Feast, is very well known; all the creatures came together, but only the
Snail, who made his excuse to Jupiter in these words, (...); Propria domus,
carissima domus, according to our English Proverb, Home is home, though never
so homely. The Ape hates nothing more than the Snail; but I shall not dilate
any further upon this creature.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the Mouse, the Dormouse, and the Mole.
THese are all of them known creatures; the Comocdian calls the Mouse a wise
creature; for he trusts not himself in one hole always, but has several
holes to run into: he compares them to captives, who, like mice, are fed with
other men's food: he has a very good scent and taste, and is very gluttonous,
and will not be contented with a little; he will taste of all things, as
cheese, bread, meat, but will eat only of the best: and, as among Birds, the
Swallow; so, of all creatures which live upon the earth, the mouse is the
dullest: its urine is exceeding strong and offensive; nay, it will eat the
flesh to the bone, if it lie long; and therefore men ought to be careful that
nothing they eat be tainted with it. Lemnius, Lib. 2. Chap. 10. tells us of a
mouse that was bred in a man; the reason of which, no doubt, was this, that the
mice had cast their sperme upon some of the meat that he had formerly eaten;
although Lemnius does ascribe it to be some filthy humor that lay in his
stomach in the wintertime. Those mice that live in woods in Autumn, gather a
great deal of corn, insomuch, that sometimes they are so overladen with it,
that he is fain to be drawn along with it by the female; so the female is
sometimes so laden, that she is fain to be drawn by the Mule. Aelian says,
that mice are not so lively, but that if their guts fall out, they immediately
dye; they can live without any thing better than heat; for cold destroys
them: those mice that live in woods will roll themselves up, and so sleep all
Winter; they are often carried in cold weather on hay in baskets. The liver of
a mouse does decrease and increase with the Moon. This creature is chiefly to
be found in ruined and rotten houses.

There is a Story in Herodotus, Lib. 2. that is worth the perusing; Concerning
the King of Egypt, Sethon; This Sethon would not indulge the Egyptian Soldiers
so much as the former Kings had done; and therefore, when Senacharib had
invaded Egypt, none of the Soldiers would come in to his help; whereupon he
implored the Oracle, and in a dream it was revealed to him that it should go
well with him notwithstanding; he trusting to this, with a few Spartans
resolves to meet the Enemy, and coming near, in the nightime, they did
perceive that a company of field-mice had eaten off the feathers from their
arroms, by which they being disabled for fighting, were forced to fly the next
day, and were pursued by Sethon, who slew many of them. Afterward they did
erect a Monument in honor of him; with this Inscription: In me quis intuens
pius Esta.


We might deduce several things from the nature of the mouse, from whence we
have both caution, and instruction.

1. It may resemble all timorous and fearful creatures, but chiefly, all
Parasites and Flatterers, because they are chiefly delighted in stealing,
living on other men's charges.

Of the Dormouse.
The bigger sort of mice are called Dormice, called in the Latin, Glis, a
glicescere, i. e. crescere, to grow, and increase: they consume most part of
their time in sleep, which makes them grow exceeding fat. The Dormouse is
counted a dainty dish amongst Epicures, so that some do report that they have
pulled down houses to find some of them, for the satisfaction of their curious
palate. Authors tell us, that the Viper makes a prey of the Dormouse; and if
he finds a neast of them, although he cannot eat them all, he will put out
the eyes of the rest, and feeds them until he can eat them: if these
Epicures chance to find these Dormice, and eat them, they are certainly
poisoned. Epiphanius, Lib. 2. Tom. 1. contra haer. applies it to Origin, who
being blinded, by the Grecian doctrine, did vomit poison to those that
believed him: so that, what injured him, he did a greater injury with to
others: like those, who neglecting the wholesome food of the holy Scriptures,
seek to be satisfied rather with Metaphysical, and Scholastical Speculations.
The Dormice love company exceedingly, and are therefore always seen in great
companies together; whence came the Proverb, Currere sicut glires; spoken of
those who love to be with their companions at work, or wherever they be. The
Dormouse will fight with those that are not of their company; but they show a
great love to the old ones, and have a great care of them, and provide food for
them, and several other ways do show their love to them* from whence we may
learn that reverence and obedience that is due to our Parents; as also, to take
heed of overmuch sleep, to which these creatures are so very much addicted.

Of the Mole.
The Mole cannot properly be called a mouse; he has no eyes, but is very quick
of hearing; but yet if a young one is taken out of the Dams belly, it is
plainly perceived to have eyes: he hears far better under ground, than when
above ground; he can hear the worms more under ground at a great distance from
him, which does not proceed so much from the quickness of his hearing, as from
the continuity of the moved earth; if there be a hole made in the earth, and a
noise be made in it, the Mole will hear it a great way off; as we hear any one
speaking through a hollow-pipe better than in the open air; and therefore Moles
make themselves several holes in the earth, that they may hear any thing that
stirs the better. The worm, if pursued by the Mole, makes his way above the
ground; the Mole is continually under ground, and casts up the earth, making
himself holes to be in: therefore we find Virgil speaking to this purpose, Aut
oculis capti fodere cubilia talpae.


Some say that the Mole cannot properly be called an Animal, because he wan^eth
(...) eyes, ^he instruments of the chiefest sense, and a (...) creature is not
so without senses, and therefore the Mole is no creature; it is plain, that
they having been dissected, there have been holes found in their heads for
eyes, and so they do not want sight per se, but per accident, for they want not
the organe of sight; but because they are continually under ground, which
blinds them; nature has given them a very quick hearing, and so recompensed
them for the want of their sight. The Mole spoils a great deal of corn that is
laid up in Barns; they also will eat Roots, Toads, Serpents. Their nose
resembles a Sows snout: they cannot live above ground an hour together: their
feet are like a hand. This may fitly resemble all false-hearted persons, who
are afraid to come to the test; for, as darkness is dispersed by the light of
the Sun, so is falsehood discovered by truth.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of mixed four-footed Creatures.
HItherto we have explained the nature and properties of those creatures that
have been begotten by their own species. It remains now that we speak of
those that are begotten of creatures of diverse kinds, which are chiefly to be
found in Africa; that being a barren Country, and very dry, several kind of
beasts drinking at one River: wherefore it comes to pass, that creatures of
several kinds copulate one with another: Hence comes those diverse mixed
creatures, as the Leopard, the Mule: the Leopard is generated of the Libard and
the Lioness: The Lion being of a hot temper, does not so often copulate; but
the Lioness is a very leacherous creature, and therefore she suffers her self
to be covered with a Libard: when she grows big, she runs into the
Mountains, as if she went to take her prey, that there she might bring forth
without any danger. She brings forth a Leopard, a creature like a Lion, and a
Libard; which, if the Lion find, he teareth in pieces; but to prevent it, the
Lioness always brings forth in some solitary place. Thus, the
Camelopardalis, a creature like the Camel, and the Panther, is generated by
them two: so, the Mule of the Ass and the Mare; and sometimes of the Bull and
the Ass: so, sometimes Dogs are generated of the Fox and Dog, and sometimes of
the Wolf and the Dog: thus is the Lypopanther begot of the Wolf and Panther: so
also in Rhoetia there is oftentimes a creature generated of the Ram, and
she-Goat, his fore-parts resembling a Sheep, and his hinder-parts a Goat; and I
wish that these mixed coitus were to be found among beasts only; for we find
even men too often guilty of it. Plutarch relates of one Plinius, who says
that he himself saw a Crocodile lying with a woman: other examples might be
brought to illustrate this; as, of the Girl that was born of a Man and a
she-Ass; but such births are so ordered by Divine Providence, that they never
live long; neither do they always beget again, though sometimes they do so.
Herodotus, Lib. 4. says, that in the Babilonish Siege, as also in Xerxes Army,
a Mule brought forth most commonly. There may be a reason given of most
Monsters; so, as Plutarch says concerning Thales Milesius, who was invited to
a Feast, with other grave Seniors, to the house of one Periandrus; there was
for one dish a little Infant brought in, that was begotten of a Man and a Mare;
his head, neck, and hands, were like other childrens, and his cry was also the
same; but all his other parts were like a horse; several gave their opinions
concerning it: Diocles judged it to be a miracle, or prodigy, portending
dissentions, wars, and divisions: but Thales was of another opinion, and
advised them, that all who looked after horses should be married men; for they
committed this horrid, beastly act, for want of Wives. Sabellicus relates, in
his 7 th. Book, Ennead. 6. under Martin the 4 th. P. R. of one who was akin to
the Pope, that brought forth a hairy boy, who had claws like a Bear: he was
very much troubled at it, and commanded the pictures of Bears to be pulled down
in all places. Those men are much to be blamed, who at Feasts do disguise
themselves in frightful vizards, the sight of which may prove exceeding
dangerous: when as we ought earnestly to implore Heaven that we may not be
punished with such deformed children; for the sight of such things do very
strangely work upon the fancy of women with child: hence it is, that oftentimes
when women look upon hares, they bring forth their children with hare-lips; so,
some have brought forth their young ones with horns, seeing the picture of
Actaeon, who was turned into a Heart: and therefore we have horses of diverse
colors, when the Mare stands in a Stable where she sees hangings of several
colors. We read of a Bitch that lying continually in the soft wool of a Ram,
brought forth her puppies with a main. Thus Damascene relates of a woman, who,
continually almost, looking upon the picture of John the Baptist, brought forth
her child hairy all over its body. Quintilian cleared a woman who was accused
for lying with her servant, because the infant was black, when he found the
image of an Ethiopian in her chamber. There are five things go to the making
up of a mixed creature, (man, not being content with the ordinary course of
Nature, first invented those promiscuous couplings of one creature with
another.)

1. Those creatures that thus copulate must not be much bigger one than
another; therefore it is that the dog and the horse cannot copulate, but the
Wolf and the Dog; the Ass and the Horse, the Lion and the Panther: and hence
it is that man, by a horrible act against nature, has copulated with Mares,
Swine, etc.

2. Those creatures cannot capulate together, when one carries their young
longer than the other; therefore a Dog cannot be begotten of a Woman, nor a
horse by an Elephant; for a woman carries her infant nine months, but a Bitch
not above seven.

3. They must be prone to lust, such as are Dogs, Goats, Swine, Asses, etc.

4. It must be done at a convenient time, which, with most creatures, is the
Spring; for so it has been found by experience, that some creatures are more
leacherous at one time of the year than at another; for there are very few
creatures which at all times are equally prone to lust.

5. It is necessary that they be both young, that so the one may be the better
able to give seed, and the other to receive it: and, although it be thus
qualified, yet they do not do it voluntarily, but are compelled unto it by
those that look after them, that so they may have new sorts of creatures. But,
the reason why the Ancients used to compel creatures to these promiscuous
couplings was, that those creatures were much stronger than other creatures
which are not so generated. In India formerly those Dogs which were begotten of
a Tiger were incredibly strong, and very fierce. Thus Philes, that wise King,
as also Aelian makes mention of an Indian Dog of Aleuander's the Great, that
was presented to him by an Indian King, which Alexander commanded should be
brought upon the Stage, and that a great Bore should be let loose upon him; the
Dog would not stir, as scorning to meddle with it, thinking it was not worthy
of his anger: not long after, a Bear was brought upon the Stage; the Dog looked
upon him, but would not stir: last of all was brought a Lion; the Dog, as soon
as he saw him, flies at him, and bit him so hard, that he made his teeth meet,
and there held him: Alexander commanded that one of his legs should be cut off;
the Dog endured it with so much courage as if it had not been his own leg that
had been cut off; another of his legs was cut off, and so a third; and then
they cut off the other also, the Dog yet keeping his hold; but afterward they
cut off his head; yet his teeth were as hard set together as when he was alive:
we may judge of other creatures by what has been said of this. And as,
although all right lines are equal, yet crooked lines differ one from another,
and there are many sorts of them; so that it is impossible to set down the
several kinds of them; Thus, I think, it is a very difficult thing to set down
the several sorts of mixed Creatures; and therefore I have spoken only of the
Camelopardalis, the Leopard, and the Mule; of which last I am now to speak. It
is a noted Story which Plutarch and Aelian relate of a Mule that was laden
with salt, if he went through any water that was so deep that the salt was wet,
he found it grew lighter and lighter every day than other: the next time he
went through any water, he plunged himself in over head and ears: Thales the
next day commanded that he should be laden with spunges, which he perceiving
to grow heavier by being dipped in the water, would never lie down in the water
any more when he was laden with salt. Herodotus says, that Croesus was called
a Mule by the Oracle, because his Father was a Persian, and his Mother a
Lydian: but he not understanding it, could not believe that that Oracle should
so highly affront him, on whom he had bestowed so many gifts: but his
misunderstanding of the Oracle had like to have been his ruin: the more
curious may read the Story at large in the Book of Herodotus. I noted before,
out of Aelian, concerning the Indian Apes, which they could not bring into
their Cities, because of their leacherousness; nay, they could hardly be kept
off from assaulting the women themselves: and therefore, those Monsters that we
have now been speaking of are not always miraculous: and therefore I very much
commend the judgment of Thales, in Plutarch, of whom we spoke but a little
above. These creatures may resemble those men who either in the Church, or in a
War, own neither side, but stand as Neuters. The Jews were forbidden to let
their Cattle gender with diverse kinds, Lev. 19. They were also forbid to till
their fields with an Ox and an Ass together; and as they were not to sow the
ground with mixed grain; so, neither were they to wear a garment made of linen
and woollen: by all which we are to learn what we read, Mat. 6. 16. to avoid
the leaven of the Pharisees, which the Psalmist exponndeth thus, that we should
not stand in the counsel of the ungodly: In former times the Grecians condemned
those persons to dye, who in time of War, or any other disturbance, did not
take one side or another; but because the Mule is more known than any of the
former, I shall speak to it by way of corollary, and draw two or three
inferences from the nature of it. 1. The Mule is neither a Horse nor an Ass,
but between both: so, those which stand Neuters in a cause, are neither hot not
cold, as is said in the Apocalypse. Chap. 5. But yet it is added also there,
that she should be either hot or cold: Moreover, Mules are barren; so these
hypocrites are barren and empty of all that is good. Mules do carry very great
burdens: those men likewise that do stand neuter, are oftentimes troubled and
vexed by both sides, like to those men that Po^eanes speaks of, who have a
room one Story high; they are troubled with those above them, who sometime,
pour water upon their heads; and with the smoke of them below. And thus we have
finished the first part of our Discourse, wherein we have spoken to the nature
and properties of four-footed Creatures.

FINIS.

