A Full and Exact Relation of the Fight betwixt the Henry, an East India
Merchant-man, and the Marine, a French Man of War of 40 Guns, on the Coast of
Ireland, on the 12th of July, 1695.
Written from Ireland by an Officer of the said Ship.
Dingle Couch, July 21. 1695. Dear Brother,
IN my last I had not time to give you a short Narration of our Voyage and
Misfortune since we departed India, which is as follows:

We departed Surrat the 19th of January, 1694/5. and saw the Cape of Good* Hope
about the 7th of April; the 8th, ditto, our Gunner by accident blew up, as we
did suppose, in small Cases, Powder-Horns and Granado-shells, above 30 l. of
Powder in the Gun-room, which fired our Ship. It pleased God, by cutting up our
Decks, and throwing Water, we quenched it in about two hours. The Gunner died
next day by the Wounds he received; his Mate is still living, but has lost as
yet the Use of both his Hands. There were several others that had small hurts.
About the 3d or 4th of May we saw the Island Ascension; and the 10th of this
instant we made the Land of Ireland, in the Latitude of 54. Degr. or
thereabouts, it being very thick hazy Weather, and so much Wind and Rain, that
we could not deal with it. On Friday the 12th Instant, about 7 in the morning,
we made the Skellicks, steering directly in with them, still the Wind fresh,
thick Weather, and a great Sea. About 10 in the morning we saw a Sail without
us bearing down; we prepared our Ship for a Fight, and still kept on our Course
toward the Skellicks. Just as we got into the Sound, which was about 3 of the
Clock, the Ship came up with us under English Colors within a Ships length,
and bid us strike for King James. We told him, We would not. In Answer he said,
He would make us presently, and in a very short time fired his Broadside and
Small Shot. We answered him with the like Salute. Then he laid us on Board
athwart the Harse, and entered about 100 Men on our Forecastle. The Broadside
he gave us by Misfortune carried away the Bulk-head of our Cuddy, and laid
those Close Quarters quite open, and at the same time killed Mr. John
Pluncknett a Gentleman on Board us; which forced the Men that were quartered
there to retire into the Steeridge and great Cabin. At the first of the
entering, by what Accident I know not, they took our Forecastle, where we had 15
Men quartered, of which they carried away 13, and left one dead, and another
sadly mangled, his Right Hand being off, and his Mouth and Jaw shot to pieces.
All this time from the Steeridge Quarters we gauld them on our Forecastle, and
on their Quarter and Poop, they still halling away their Dead Men, and
re-entring fresh. We forced them to forsake the top of our Forecastle; then
they made themselves Masters of the Quarter Deck and Round-house, and down our
Staircase, which was open, they cast down G^anada-shells and Stink-pots, and
fired Pistols, with which they wounded 2 Men; one of them died afterward: We
had nothing to return that could offend them but Huzzaes, that they might know
we were in being; and so guarded the Passage, that they could not descend. In
the Interim, after the Ships staying 2 hours or more thwart our Harse, they
cast round our Starboard Bow along our side at about a Ships Breadth distance:
We gave him a Broadside, at the receiving of which he stood off, and brought
on the Careen, leaving about 40 or 50 Men on Board us. We forced them out of
the Round-house, and they lodged most on the Poop (except such as were in our
Tops cutting our Rigging, and in our Forecastle.) We designed to Sally, but our
Small-Arms were all disabled, having flown out of the Stocks, and cloyed with
often firing; and some of the Locks broke, which we fired with Matches, one
taking Aim, and the other giving Fire. Then we resolved to convey half a Barrel
of Powder into the Round-house, to blow up the Poop, which accordingly we
conveyed there, and fired, but did not the expected Execution. Finding no other
means, but to venture at all, resolving they should not have the Ship, we
carried a whole Barrel of Powder into the former place, and set Fire thereto,
but it did not the expected Execution in blowing up the Deck; the reason we
suppose to be, was by the Bulk head being down, and the Powder decayed. Then we
resolved to Sally with our Swords, half Pikes, and Javelings, which accordingly
we did; they having Firearms were too hard for us; we had one Man killed, but
took two of theirs Prisoners: We Sallied again, and mounted the Quarter Deck;
they being on the Poop, in the Mizen Sh^^rds and Tops, and some over the Ships
Quarter: We bid them cast overboard their Arms, and they should have good
Quarter, and they said if we did not lay down our Arms and Surrender, we should
have no Quarter: They fired several small Arms, which fired one of our Men's
Eyes almost out, either they had no shot in them, or were bad Marks-men,
otherwise they must needs have killed many of us. After a long Parley, they
begun to Surrender. The Ship was on fire on the Larboard Quarter, which I judge
was caused by the last Barrel of Powder we blew up. We secured their Officers,
and set their Men and some of ours to the Pump, and putting the Fire out,
others to Trimming the Sails; the Rigging was so much cut and shot, that we
could not brace the Yards, and she was a shore immediately, and the Fire as
high as the Mizen Top: In the interim we were doing this, the Ship struck
against the Rocks, about a Mile from a place called Vintrey, and three Miles
from hence. The Man of War lay all this while hovering about a Mile from us: In
the time of our Fight, we gave him our Larboard Guns, which was the last salute
he received from us: it is supposed he received more damage than we can
imagine; otherwise his Men say he would have boarded us again, for they called
to him on our Poop to come, signifying if they did, the Ship would be theirs.
After we had Conquered them that were on Board; we found they were 35, or 40
sound men, far exceeding our Number; but the Ship running a shore, we all were
left to the mercy of the Fire and Water, the first was soon got to our Main
Mast. We had 3 Men killed, and about 7 wounded in the Action, 1 Dyed on the
Rocks of his Wounds, and about 4 Drowned and Starved with Cold: It was about 7
at Night when we ran a shore, and nigh 12 before all were got off, there going
a great Sea. Here is constantly, as People tell us, Men of War and Privateers
of the Enemies Cruizing off of this Port: I have seen 2 (three or four times)
and now they lay nigh the B^asketts; though it pleased God four Days since, a
small Ship called the Susanna, belonging to Bristol, about 100 Tunns, John
Vic^are Master, from Mevis, got safe in. The Man of War that we fought, was of
36 Guns and 280 Men, called the Marine of Breast, Commanded by Captain Neagle.
They had a great many English and Irish men on Board: Some of our Prisoners are
English Men. The Country has secured 27, the most of note are Escaped. One
Fitz Gerrard who was the Commissary, had a Letter found in his Pocket, of some
Importance.

Men Dead in the Voyage.
Hugh Levelis Chief Mate. Richard Foster. Job Herbert. John Hawkins. John
Hobbs. Thomas Eales. Robert Lee, Gunner. George William a Dutchman. John
Jackson. William Thornehurst.
Killed in the Action.
Mr. John Plucknett. Mr. Walter Aston. Abraham Stark a Dutch man.
Drowned and Died upon the Rocks.
William Merton. John Waton. Harman Mire a Dutchman. Edward Rutteridge.
Carried Prisoners to France.
Robert Hudson. Ralph Porter. John Adean. John Daynes. Edward Brumidge. Edmond
Duke. Phillip Lee. Henry Lewis, and 5 more.
What I have here Writ, is a True Account of the Action, and more we could not
do to save the Ship. I thank God I escaped with Life, and received no other
Damage than a small Blast, which took the left side of my Face, and scorched me
a little; my Eye was hurt, but now I thank God I am well of it. There is not a
prospect of much to be saved, for there is a Storm now which has shattered her
bottom all to pieces, and the Canes are floating about the Sea.

I am, Your Affectionate Brother, etc.

LONDON, Printed by R. E. and are to be Sold by J. Whitlock near
Stationers' Hall, 1695.


