SERMONS Concerning GRACE AND Temptations. BY THAT Reverend and Eminent
Preacher, Mr. THOMAS FROYSEL, Late Minister of the Gospel at CLVNNE in the
County of SALOP.

JOHN 5. 35. He was a burning and a shining light -- LONDON: Printed for Tho.
Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers-Chappel, and
at the Bible on London-Bridg. 1678.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

TO THE READER.
Good Reader,
IT will suffice that I suggest unto thee these Two things on this occasion.

I. That the Author of these ensuing Sermons was a Great man for Worth in his
Generation. Great for true Holiness both in Heart and Life. Though a person of
a pleasant conversation, yet made great conscience of touching the least sin.
He had a truly tender Conscience, and withal led a most blameless life. 2. He
was great in Parts, both natural and acquired; a River of Eloquence did always
flow from him, and that without any affectation. He had concocted the substance
of School Divinity, and made it useful for his Ministry. He was a good
Textuary, and well acquainted with the Learned Languages. He had the command of
Philosophy, and other Juvenile Learning, even in his Old Age, and made a sober
and sweet use of them in his Ministration. 3. He was great in his
Accomplishments. Of a sweet and sociable temper; ever cheerful, unless clouded
with the fears of Gods Displeasure: Of a gentile and obliging humor, fit to
converse with the Greatest, and yet ready to resolve the Cases, and comfort the
hearts of the Meanest. No man at once more Heavenly and yet Humble: It was as
rare a thing to hear him speak ill of any man, as it was to hear any man speak
all of him. 4. He was great in his Labors, both in his Study, in his Family,
and in the Pulpit. He dwelt in his Study, it was his Palace; his book and he
seldom parted, except at meals, throughout the whole day, unless it were to lay
out in his Masters service, what he had been laying in; (and so intent in it,
that it was long before he did hear or heed such as were sent to call him down:
And the matter of his studies would so affect his heart, that he was frequently
overheard by his domestics to perfume his Garden with holy Ejaculations. And
then in his Family, he was diligent and serious, having the Scriptures read,
Psalms sung, and Prayers poured out every day, and preaching to his household
two or three times in the weel (except in Harvest) for a long time. He
frequented the public Ordinances when he was able, and exacted a constant
account of the proficience of his Children and Servants under the Means of
Grace; and in particular, he seldom omitted a solemn Exhortation to them on
Saturday Evening, the better to compose and prepare them for the Duties of the
Lord's Day. But he was Greatest in the Pulpit; there his Grace and Gifts did
shine, like a Star of the first Magnitude. He did really seem to his Hearers to
come there like an Angel dropped from Heaven. His Eye, his Countenance, his
Gesture proper to a Divine Orator. His Sermons composed of Learning and Piety,
and delivered with such natural fluency, and other gracious Accomplishments,
that his Elocution and Pronunciation did equally charm his Hearers; which he
would frequently intermix with lively Apostrophes, sometimes God, sometimes to
them that were before him, in a most effectual manner. His Genius did most
naturally incline him to deal with ungodly men by way of sweet reflection and
persuasion, yet upon occasion he excelled in the penetrating and terrifying
Hypocrites and obdurate sinners, and his sword was the keener by being dipped in
oil. 5. He was great in success: many in London, and more in the Country, some
alive, and some dead, that received their spiritual life, growth, and comfort
from God by his Ministry. 6. Lastly, He was great in his Afflictions and
Trials. He was reduced in his last years to a narrow livelihood; Being no
Plodder for Riches, nor Complainer of Poverty; he had scarce whereon to live,
much less wherewith to give to six Children which survived him. And to add to
this Trial, falling from his Horse not long before his Death, he brake his Leg,
which proved a long and sore affliction; which sad season Satan espying, fell
upon him with his black Tentations, with which he endured many bitter
Conflicts; and then he that had comforted many, had need of comfort himself;
but Thanks be to God, who gave him the Victory through Jesus Christ our Lord,
and released him from his Warfare on Earth in the Sixty-third year of his life.
The modesty of his surviving Relations hinders you from a more particular
Narrative of his Life, which was eminent and exemplary every way. When I have
said all, I speak not in Complement, I do but darken his luster; He was a Man
every way above my Commendation.

II. That these Sermons were exactly his own, being transcribed from his Notes
with all possible care. Being Preached in the Country, they were fitted for his
Auditory, though you will find they might have gratified more discerning
palates: You cannot expect them so exactly polisht or methodiz'd as those that
came out of the The Gale of Opportunity; and, The Beloved Disciple.
Authors own hand, but they may prove as profitable to the honest and good
heart, who will have occasion to give thanks to that Worthy Person by whose
direction these are published; and to beg of God to thrust more such Laborers
into his Harvest. In a word, though it be impossible to represent them to the
eye with that peculiar advantage, wherewith he did it to the ear, yet the
serious Reader will find herein that which will clear his Understanding, search
his Conscience, inflame his Zeal, and settle his Comfort: which is the unfeined
scope and desire of

Thy Servant for Jesus sake, Richard Steel.

THE MYSTERY OF SAVING-GRACE.
Mat. XIII. 11, 12. He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto
you to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given.

For whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance,
etc.


THIS Chapter is made up of Parables, with which Christ at this time Apparel'd
his Sermon to the people: He spoke many things unto them in Parables, Ver. 3,
at which his Disciples wondered, and asked him, Why speak thou unto them in
Parables, Ver. 10? i. e. Sir, the rude multitude do not understand thee, they
cannot see the soul of thy meaning through the body of thy Parables: And
therefore, Why speak thou unto them in Parables?

His Disciples wonder at it. Where observe an Example of Ignorance in the
Disciples, they knew not the cause why Christ spoke in Parables to the
multitude.

Obs. 1. Saints are ignorant of the Reason of Gods Actions, till he make it
known.

2. We admire why God does do many things, till he discovers the Reason.

3. Good hearers and Christians are not ashamed to profess and acknowledge their
Ignorance.

Non Pudor est, Nescire aliquid; sed Discere Nolle
Et Pudor and Scelus est. --
4. The Saints are very desirous to know the Reason of Christ's Actions: Why
speak thou unto them in Parables?

5. Beginnings of Grace and Knowledge are very earnest after more: Good hearts
are very Inquisitive and diligent to ask and understand the Mysteries of Heaven.

Dub. 1. And indeed it is a wonder that Christ who loved souls so dearly, and
thirsted after their Salvation, who was sent into the world by his Father to
Unmask the way to Heaven; and who had before Explained the Law, and taken the
Vizor off from the face of it, and convinced the Proud, and Preached so home to
the heart, that he Preached with Authority: He Preached plainly when he said,
Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand: He preached plainly when he said,
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. and
now to cloathe his Sermons with such dark Parables, it is a wonder.

Resp. To this the Lord Jesus Answers, That he therefore preached in Parables:
i. e. darkly and obscurely, Because he preached in Judgment unto some that were
present: He preached that they might not understand him.

Dub. 2. But why should his Disciples admire that he preached now in Parables,
seeing it was always his custom to do so? And Parables do illustrate and clear
things more to the understanding, than plain phrases?

Resp. Christ was wont to preach in Parables, and therefore that is not the
Disciples Query, at least not the meaning of it, why he did now use Parables
(for he did ordinarily use them); but when he did use them, he did Explain
them; Luke 15. 4-7. and 16. 1-8, 9.

But now Christ did preach in Parables, and not Explain them as he was wont to
do.

And before we leave this Query of the Disciples, [ Why speak thou unto them
in Parables]? Observe further,

First, Their Charity.

Secondly, Their Modesty.

1. Their Charity and love to the souls of others, Why speak thou [to them]
in Parables? They understand thee not: they first ask Christ why he spoke to
them in Parables, before they ask him to Explain the Parables to them.

Obs. Good hearts desire the Salvation of others, as well as their own: aeque,
though not aequaliter.

2. Their Modesty toward Christ: They do not question Christ's Doctrine, or
manner of Teaching in public, but ask him in private to Explain himself, When
he was alone, Mar. 4. 10. and Mat. 13. 36.

Obs. People ought not to question and move doubts against their Ministers
Doctrine in public, but in private; lest they should by their importunity
create stirs and tumult, and give to others occasion of doing any thing
unseasonably and out of due time: Therefore his Disciples move questions in
private.

We shall now descend to the words of our Text: To you it is given to know the
mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given: For whosoever
has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance.

To you] The word [ to you] has Emphasis in it: Vobis and vestri similibus, To
you, and such as you.

1. To you Elect, for Christ speaks of the Elect under the Apostles Persons: To
you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven.

2. [ Vobis (amantibus videlicet, Sicientibusque veritatem) To you, Guilliandi.
who love and thirst after Truth; to you, that are godly and gracious; the
Spirit gives to you, not only to hear and see these things; but to know them,
and believe, and feel them in your hearts: And therefore these are no mysteries
to you, but Salvation and truth Revealed.

It Is given] that is, it comes to pass,

1. Not [ Casu] by chance. 2. Nor [ Necessitate] by necessity. 3. Nor [ Natura]
by nature, or natural industry: That you know the mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven: But it is given.
He discovers the gift and Grace of God: For, O man, What have thou which thou
have not received?

Obs. The knowledge of the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, is a Supernatural
gift; a gift from above.

None can understand the mysteries of Heaven, but they to whom it is given:

The gifts of God are twofold,

1. The gifts of Nature. 2. The gifts of Grace.
It was given them by Nature that they could hear or see: But it was given them
by Grace that they should hear the Gospel, and see the Miracles and Face of
Jesus Christ; but more Grace yet, that they could Receive the Gospel, and
Believe in Christ, and know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven.

It was outward Grace to have the Gospel given them to hear it, and Christ
given them to see him.

It was inward Grace to have knowledge to see into the Mysteries of the Gospel,
and to have Faith to distinguish and apprehend Jesus Christ the Lord of Glory.

There Is the Gospel of Grace, and the Grace of the Gospel.

To have the Gospel of Grace preached to them, and to have Grace to receive the
Gospel, is a double Grace.

The mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven,] Is a Periphrasis, of the Gospel, and
of those things which lie hid in the Gospel.

Obs. The Gospel is a mystery. The Doctrines of the Gospel are mysteries.

[ Mysterium significat secretum aliquod, quod remotum est ab oculis, atque
absconditum, praecipue vero in verbis: ut cum aliquid dicitur quod obscurum
est, and intellectu difficile, Solemus dicere, hoc mysterium est: Subest his
verbis tectum aliquid and abstrusum. -- -- -- Mysterium -- sic enim consuevit
appellare Scriptura, quae praeter spem, and praeter humanam fiunt Opinionem,
Ecce mysterium vobis dico, Omnes quidem, etc. Guilliandus in Loc. -- 1 Cor. 15.


The mysteries of God therefore are Faith and the Gospel concerning Christ:
nay, Christ himself is called a mystery, because he is a Spiritual thing, and
remains hid and covered, till the Spirit unvail him: For whatever the Gospel
preaches, they Mat. 11. 25. 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7, 8.
are remote from sense and reason, that the whole world cannot apprehend them,
till they are Revealed by the Spirit.

You shall see many preach, and many hear, that Christ was delivered for us to
Redeem us; but these words are only [ in ore] in the mouth, not [ in corde] in
the heart: For

1. Neque ipsi suis verbis credunt] neither do they themselves believe their
own words.

2. Neque gratiam hanc aliquatenus sentiunt] neither do they feel the Grace of
the Gospel.

But to them it is not given,] Luke has (...), Mark has Luke 8. 10. Mark 4.
11.
(...), qui for is sunt, sive exteris.]

To them that are without] By which he understands not only them that are
strangers all their time from the Kingdom of God, as the Gentiles; but also all
those that have been for a time the children of the Kingdom, and by their
wickedness and unbelief deserved that a bill of Divorce should be given to
them, and cast Mat. 8. 12.
out of the Kingdom.

To them that are without] i. e. Who only hear with the outward Guilliandus.
Ear; who hear with the outward Ear as well as you, but want Faith, and care
not for the Truth, seeking rather their own than Gods glory, their earthly
rather than heavenly Treasures: For whosoever has, to him shall be given, and
he shall have more abundance, etc.

1. To him that has [Faith] shall be given the knowledge of Hilarious sic
Exponit, q^d. Habens fidem, mysteria fidei percipiet, at Judaei fidem non
habentes, Legem quoque quam habue rant, Perdiderunt.
the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, for these cannot be known without Faith:
As if he should say, To you [Apostles] who believe in me, as in the Messiah; to
you it is given, daily to hear and clearly to understand of me the mysteries of
Heaven: But from the Scribes and Pharisees that have not, i. e. Faith, will not
believe in me as the Messiah, God will take from them That which they have: i.
e. That slender knowledge of God and sense of Heaven which they have; their
Church, Kingdom, Priesthood, Temple, Sacrifices Country; he will take from
them, and make them no people, no Church, no not in outward Profession.

2. To him that hath] i. e. That has an hearing ear Mat. 13. 9, 12. and Mark
4. 24. That is, that bring with them an humble and sincere affection, namely, a
pure desire of Faith and Truth (which the Apostles by the gift of God have) to
them shall be given: i. e. I will Explain and clearly open to them The
mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven: I will increase their knowledge, and add
beams to their Light; but they that have not, i. e. this pure desire of truth,
but are indulgent to their lusts, and to the pride of their own understanding,
as the Scribes and Pharisees; from them the little knowledge which they have
shall be taken away, and they shall be made blind; and therefore it is that I
speak not clearly to them, but obscurely in Parables.

Dub. But does not this prove a power in man to do something naturally, that he
may gain something that is supernatural? To do something morally, to attain the
gift of Grace that is spiritual? And are not these words a promise, Faecienti
quod in se est, Deus non denegat gratiam?

Res. I answer, no, It argues no such thing, it does not speak a passage out of
Morality through the use of natural gifts, into the state of Grace: As it
appears,

1. From the 11th, Ver. To you it is given to know the mysteries Mat. 13. 11.
of the Kingdom of Heaven. [to you,] i. e. To you my Apostles and Disciples,
who have more than good nature in you; who have blossoms of heaven already in
you: to you it is given, To know, i. e. (to know further, to know more of) the
mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven: to you that have the buddings of knowledge
in you, to you shall be given the ripeness of knowledge in the mysteries of
Heaven: And then he adds in the 12th Ver. For whosoever has, to him shall be
given: i. e. Whosoever has the infant and young workings of grace and knowledge
(as you have) to him shall be given, that is, an higher stature of grace and
knowledge shall be given him.

2. From Ver. the 10th, The Disciples when they heard the Parable, said to
Christ, Why speak thou unto them in Parables? i. e. Why do thou preach so
Obscurely and Aenigmatically to them? Why do thou not open thy self more
plainly to them? They are never the better for what thou say; neither they
nor we understand thy meaning: And therefore they without doubt Mar. 4 10-13.
asked Christ in private to unlock the Cabinet of the Parable to them, and show
them the Jewel, or meaning of it: Now says Christ, [ to you, (i. e. Who desire
of me spiritual knowledge) it shall be given to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven.] For whosoever has (i. e. Such holy desires (as you have)
to inquire and move after the knowledge of Heavenly-mysteries) to him it shall
be given (as it is to you) and he shall have more abundance.

3. Jesus Christ in the 13th Ver. gives his Disciples an account why he spoke
to the Pharisees in Parables, Because they seeing, see not: i. e. They are
wilfully blind, they see the wood, and yet will not see the trees: they see my
Works, and yet will not see me to be Christ.

In seeing they see not] i. e. They have seen me and believe not. Joh. 6. 36.
They see me and my Miracles with the eye of sense, and yet will not see me
with the eye of faith.

And hearing they hear not] i. e. They hear with the sense of Audientes
corporis sensu, non audiunt cordis assensu. August.
the ear, but hear not with the assent of the heart: they hear and are
convinced, but will not be converted; as you have it in the 15th Ver. They
perceive, but will not receive the knowledge of the truth. For to hear, is to
receive and submit to what we hear: It implies the affection with the Organ.

Now in opposition to them, says the Lord Christ to his Disciples, Ver. 16,
Blessed are your eyes for they see, and your ears for they hear: Your eyes see
me, and are taken with the sight of me; your eyes see me, and your hearts are
in love with me: your sight of me has wounded you with the love of espousals
to me: And your ears hear and suck in the truths you hear from me. You hear and
submit to the Authority of the Word you hear from me: You see with an amorous
eye, and you hear with a believing ear: And therefore to you (says Christ) it
shall be given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it
is not given, i. e. It shall not be given: For whosoever has, (that is,
whosoever has a Believing eye, and an Obediential ear) to him shall be given
to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven: And he shall have more
abundance of knowledge and grace added to him.

4. So that the sense and mind of the Text is this: Whosoever has, by the gift
of God, any true beams of Light, to him shall be given further Revelations: God
will give him higher degrees. Whosoever has, to him shall be given: i. e. He
gives after he has given: as a Spring runs when it has run.

So that the words speak not a word of the Improvement of Nature, but of the
gifts of Grace, both in the beginning and in the increase: Whosoever has, it
is by gift; and whosoever has more, it is by further gift: So that this phrase
[ whosoever hath] speaks a gift, in that he has: For what has any man 1 Cor.
4. 7.
which he has not received?

The meaning is not then, whosoever has the improvement of Nature, to him
shall be given true Grace; but whosoever has true Grace given to him, to him
still it shall be given, and he shall have more abundance: God will heap
favors on them. i. e. The beginning of Grace is a pawn of more Grace, and
every former Grace shall be a pledge of future.

First, God gives Grace, therefore we have it: whosoever has, then he adds
more to it, to him it shall be given.

1. The words are a Reason why Christ said to the Apostles, Unto you it is
given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven: For (or because)
whosoever has, to him shall be given: I pray, mark it, I say, It is a Reason,
not why natural men should have Grace given them, but why the Disciples should
have Grace given them.

2. Having, or not having, is to be understood of Saving Grace.

Therefore speak I in Parable to them, because they seeing, see not: and
hearing, they hear not, neither do they understand, Ver. 13. Here Christ gives
the Reason clearly (which he touched in Ver. 11, But to them it is not given)
why he spoke to the Scribes and Pharisees in Parables, because hearing Christ
before preach plainly the Kingdom of Heaven, they would not understand, nor
believe, nor obey him: Hearing, they would not hear.

And seeing his Holiness and his Miracles, they would not believe nor receive
him for the Messia: Thus seeing they would not see: And therefore they deserved
that Christ should now preach in obscure and cloudy Parables to them.

We see then the cause of Christ's preaching in Parables, was the obstinacy of
some who were present; and they were not mere simple men, unlearnd men, but the
Scribes, and Pharisees, and Priests, who follow Christ only to carp at, and
catch him. (2) To deride him; and he was not to give holy things to Dogs: From
these the mysteries of Heaven were justly veiled, because in seeing and hearing
they did not, and would not see, nor hear, and understand: Observe hence,

Obs. Such minds as hearers bring to Christ, such Sermons does he preach to
them.

Because they would not understand, they shall not: When they will not
understand those things that are clear and manifest, Christ involves his
speeches in darkness; because the Disciples do plainly and honestly receive
what is given, they are worthy, i. e. counted worthy, to whom more secret
mysteries should be Communicated.

Obs. As it is the mercy and gift of God, that some hear and understand what
they hear; so it is the dreadful judgment of God, that some in hearing, hear
not, nor understand.

Having traveled thus far in the Explanation of our Text, we now arrive at the
several Theses, or Doctrines contained in it; upon which we will lay the
Structure of the following Discourse.

1. Doct. The matters of the Kingdom of Heaven are Mysteries.

2. It is a matchless aend blessed Privilege to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

3. The Divine knowledge of the Mysteries of Heaven is given to some, not to
others.

4. Where there are beginnings of true Graece, though never so weak, God makes
rich additions of more.

Of these we will treat in order as they lie before us.

1. Doct. The matters of the Kingdom of Heaven are Mysteries.

1. Jesus Christ is a great Mystery: The Creator became a Creature: He who made
Man, was made Man: He was born of the Virgin Mother, and yet made his Mother:
He that was the Father of Eternity, was born in time.

He never offended his Father, and yet was the greatest offender in the world:
A sinner, and no sinner: For he knew no sin, and yet was made sin for us.

He was David's Son, and yet David called him Lord. Mat. 22. 42, 43.


2. Justification by Jesus Christ, is a great Mystery.

There is a Curse denounced against them that break the Law: Gal. 3. 10.
and yet the Saints are not cursed, though they never kept the Law.

The Saints cannot be Justified by the Law, and yet the Law Gal. 5. 23.
cannot but Justify them.

There Is nothing hinders Acceptance but Sin; yet Sin does 1 Timothy 1. 13.
not hinder their Acceptance.

3. Faith is a Mystery. The Apostle says, Faith is the substance Heb. 11. 1.
[or subsistence] of things hoped for, and the Evidence of things not seen. See
and not see; things not seen, and yet Faith sees them; Things to come, and yet
makes them present, and gives them present Being; It is a Mystery: Christ was
born some thousand years after Abraham, and yet Abraham saw John 8. 56.
his Day.

By Faith Moses saw him that is Invisible, says the Text: [ Invisible] and yet
saw him, It is a Mystery; He saw him by Faith, who could not be seen by Sense.

It is said of Abraham, that against hope, he believed in Romans 4. 18.
hope.

4. Regeneration is a Mystery: That a man should be born again, and yet not
enter into his Mothers Womb, it is a Mystery: How can a man be born when he is
old? (says Nicodemus) John 3. 4.
Can he enter the second time into his mothers Womb, and be born?

So Conversion is a Mystery; That a man should be the same, and not the same;
the same man for soul and body, and yet not the same in regard of supernatural
Life and Being put into him; It is a Mystery:

To see a man's Judgment and Affections turned backward; He that was proud
before, now turned humble; and he that was ambitious before, now despise the
vain World, it is a strange Mystery: The men of the World stand wondering at it
(as 1 Pet. 4. 4.
the Israelites did at Saul: Is Saul also among the Prophets?) And the Church
admired at Paul. Act. 9. 21.


5. Humility is a Mystery: The Saints know themselves to be Kings, and yet
refuse not to be every man's Servant.

To lie lowest, is the only way to rise highest: Whosoever shall humble
himself, the same is the greatest in the Kingdom of Matthew. 18. 4. Matthew 23. 12.
August. de Temp.
heaven: But whosoever does exalt. himself, shall be abased. Videte magreum
miraculum, etc. says Austin; See here a great miracle; God is on high; and yet
the higher thou liftest up thy self, the further thou art from him; and the
lower thou humblest thy self, the nearer thou art to him.

The Angels, those great Courtiers and Princes of Heaven, such is their
humility, they become Ministering spirits to the Saints; surely the Angels
humility is a Mystery.

Again, That a man should use the World, as if he did not 1 Cor. 7. 29. 30, 31.
use it: weep, as if he did not weep [weep and not weep], rejoice, as though he
rejoiced not [rejoyce, and not rejoyce]: And they that buy, as though they
possessed not; [buy, and not buy] that they that have Wives, he as though they
had none, [married, and yet unmarried], it is a Mystery.

6. Self-denial is a Mystery: For take a Saint, there is no man denies himself
so much as he; and yet there is no man 1 Cor. 9. 27.
seeks himself so much as he.

7. Affliction is a Mystery: That God should kill his people, and yet love
them, and put them in his bosom; it is a Mystery.

Again, Persecution for Jesus Christ is a Mystery: That whosoever Matthew. 16. 25
will save his life, should lose it [save, and not save]: and whosoever will
lose his life for my sake, should find it; [lose, and not lose it], it is a
Mystery.

That a man should hate himself, and yet love himself; nay, love himself best,
when he hates himself most for God, it is a Mystery.

8. Patience in Affliction, is a strange Mystery; for a man to sit down
cheerfully, and be content with his Condition in all changes and varieties, is
a Mystery: That a man should be tossed, and moved up and down, and yet be
unmovable, it is a Mystery: To be at home, and yet to be a Stranger, and a
Pilgrim in his own House, and among his own Children, is a Mystery.

And therefore, says St. Paul, I know both how to be abased, Phil. 4. 12.
and I know how to abound; every where, and in all things I am instructed [The
word is, (...), Instituor in sacris, i. e. I am instructed in this Mystery;
(...), Diodor. Siculus. Instituo in sacris, Pasor], I am instructed in this
Holy Mystery, both to be full, and to be hungry; both to abound, and to suffer
need.

9. When God is destroying his Church, he is multiplying his Church; when he is
pulling her down, he is setting her up: As when you see a man pulling down an
old or deformed house; you say, surely he is building up a fairer: when a
Tailor is ripping the Cloth, and cutting it into shreds and pieces, he is
making a comely Garment.

Again, Sometimes when a Sinner is galloping in the high way of Sin and Hell,
he is in his way of pardon and salvation: God meets him in the way, and makes
his way from Heaven, his way to Heaven: As Paul, when he was going to Damascus,
Acts 9.
went (in his Intention) to undo the Saints, but went (in Gods Intention) to be
made a Saint.

Doct. 2. It is a matchless and blessed privilege to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

In my Discourse upon this subject I shall (through Divine assistance) show you,

1. What are the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven?

2. Why it is such a Privilege to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven?

1. What are the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven?

1. They are Latent and secret things; they are hidden treasures; and therefore
are they called Mysteries: (...):

Now (...) some derive from (...), which is [ Claudo] to shut up under secrecy.

For secret things are not spoken, but locked up in the heart. But I rather
think, that (...) comes from (...) -- whose root is (...) to hide, or keep
close: And from the same word (...) came Saturnus, who hid himself in Italy (as
the Poets Fable) which was therefore called Latium.

Upon this account are the matters of the Kingdom of Heaven called Mysteries,
because they are unknown to Nature, they are hidden, till they are revealed:
Man could never have known them, had God never revealed them: And though they
are revealed, yet they are still Mysteries to carnal men who hear the Gospel,
and yet do not understand it.

2. They are excellent and stately things, because they are the Mysteries of
the Kingdom of Heaven: They are high Mysteries, for they are Mysteries of a
Kingdom, and of the highest Kingdom too, for they are the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven. Never were there any such Mysteries of State as these: and
truly, they that are acquainted with them, are of Gods Privy Council.

Thus you see why they are called Mysteries:

But what are they?

They are the Plot or Design of Gods wisdom which he has contrived in order to
Man's salvation, the sacred Principles and Doctrines of Christian Religion: the
Platform and Draught of his Will, according to which he will save Man. For the
Church is styled a Kingdom, and Jesus Christ is the King; and the Laws of this
Kingdom are Mysteries, because it is a spiritual Kingdom, the Kingdom of
Heaven; they are Laws of an higher and more sublime nature, than the Laws that
any worldly Kingdom has.

If the Common Law of England be a Mystery to silly Contrymen; what are the
Imperial Laws of the Crown of Heaven?

More particularly,

1. The Incarnation of Christ is called a Mystery: Without controversy great
is the Mystery of godliness, God manifest in the flesh.

This is a Mystery, not only not known by Nature, to humane 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Reason, but being known and revealed, far transcends the conception thereof.
We do not so much believe it by our understanding, as understand it by our
belief.

This is the Mystery of all the Mysteries; the Masterpiece and flower of all
the rest.

2. The Union and conjunction of Christ and the Church, Paul says, This is a
great Mystery, and I speak (says he) concerning Christ and the Church; that
Christ and his Church should be Man and Wife! that there should be a conjugal
oneness between them! that a person of such Majesty and Distance should marry
so poor a Bride, and make her his Queen!

2. Why is it such a Privilege to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven?

Reas. 1. Because Knowledge is wondrous desirable, and satisfactory to the
Nature of man: for man is a rational creature, and therefore desires to know
all things that are knowable: There Is a rational desire in man breathing after
Knowledge: Knowledge is (as it were) man's Element, wherein he breathes and lives:
as sense is the Element of bruits and beasts, they wallow in sense, and walk
within the circumference of sense, higher they cannot go: so Knowledge is the
Element of man, his native air (as it were) wherein he is born and bred, and
which he sucks in delightfully: The air of Knowledge is wondrous pleasant to
man; and therefore he loves to take the air, read Books, and search after
Knowledge.

Reas. 2. The Knowledge of the Mysteries of Heaven, is a Knowledge that will save
thee. It is [ Scientia scientiarum] the science of sciences, the Knowledge of
all Knowledges: it is a Knowledge that will save thee, and do thee most good,
and stand thee in the greatest stead; it is a Knowledge that will do thy soul
good, a Knowledge that will put thee into Heaven: It is the Object that makes
the Knowledge: Knowledge derives its Excellency from its Object; Therefore says
Paul, I count all things but loss and dung for the excellency of the Knowledge
of Christ Jesus my Lord, that I may be found in him. The Knowledge of natural
things, leaves thee but a natural man, a wellpolished Phil. 3. 8, 9.
natural man; but the Knowledge of Christ makes thee a Saint; the Knowledge of
Jesus saves thee from thy sins; the most exquisite Knowledge of all natural
things leaves thee in thy sins, but the Knowledge of Jesus Christ saves thee
from thy sins: And therefore says Paul, I determined not to know any thing
among you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified: Because Paul knew, that no
Knowledge would save himself, and no Knowledge 1 Cor. 2. 2.
he made others know, would save them, but the Knowledge of Jesus Christ and him
crucified.

If all the men in the World were wounded, and lay at the point of Death, and
there were but one herb in all the World that would heal them; How would they
all send abroad to know that one Herb, and to know the virtue of it, and how to
use it, and apply it? How happy would they count themselves in the Knowledge of
it?

My Beloved, All the Men and Women in the World are wounded, they are wounded
to death, and lie gasping for life; and there is but one Herb in all the World
that can heal and save them, and that is Jesus Christ, whose Divine nature did
grow out of the bosom of God the Father from all Eternity, and whose humane
Nature did grow out of the sanctified Womb of the Virgin; Oh! how precious
should be the Knowledge of Jesus Christ then unto you? Surely it is the greatest
privilege to know him.

3. Grace begins in Knowledge, in the Knowledge of the Mysteries of the Kingdom
of Heaven, as the stream begins in the spring: for Knowledge is the spring of
Grace: the Knowledge of God is the spring of our Love to God: the Knowledge of
the Power and Truth of God, is the spring of our Trust in God. They that know
thy name, will trust in thee. Psalm. 9. 10.


Knowledge that saves us, is not a bare notion of God, it knows his power, and
therefore fears him; knows his justice, and therefore serves him; knows his
mercy, and therefore trusts him; knows his goodness, and therefore loves him.

Reas. 4. Because it is a Knowledge above the reach of Nature; to know the
Mysteries of Heaven is beyond the sphere of Nature and Reason. They are
foolishness to the natural man, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Natural men
cannot know supernatural Mysteries: Carnal reason cannot apprehend spiritual
Objects.

Surely they are some rare and stately things that stand thus aloft above the
reach of Reason: For man's Reason is an Eagle, and flies high, and therefore
these Mysteries of Heaven must needs be some high and glorious things, which
man's reason soaring upon its loftiest wings, cannot attain unto.

Reas. 5. Because few do know them: we count that a great Privilege, which is
committed but to a few: and that is the signification of the word [ Privilegium].

Reas. 6. Because they are Mysteries, i. e. hidden and secret things: Now, to
know not plain and common things, but to know Mysteries, we count it a great
Privilege: How did the Philosophers study to know the Mysteries and secrets of
Nature? and in what Honor were they had, because they knew them? What a
privilege is it then to know the Mysteries of Heaven?

And because they are such deep and rare Mysteries, the Angels themselves
desire [(...)] to peep into them.

Reas. 7. Because they are Mysteries of God; and is it not a 1 Pet. 1. 1^
superlative privilege to know the Mystiries of God? A man counts it an high
privilege to be of a Kings Privy Council, and to know his Royal secrets. What a
point of Honor is it then to know the Mind and Mysteries of the great God, and
have his Divine secrets communicated to them. God can do no more, unless he
should make us God: They that know the Kings secrets, are next unto the King
himself: So does God make them that know his secrets, next unto himself. First,
God makes all his secrets immediately known to Christ, and Christ is next to
God; and Christ made known his secrets to the Apostles, and they are next to
Christ.

Reas. 8. Because the Mysteries of Heaven are lovely things to see to; they are
bright beauties, and exquisite rarities to look upon.

God is a lovely and beauteous thing; therefore says David, Psalm. 27. 4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord.

His beauty is such, that if we could but see some little of it, it would
enamour and ravish our hearts; 'twould wrap us into such an Ecstasy and
Admiration of him, that all other (even the most excellent) things would appear
to be but base to him: For,

First, God is the only satisfactory Object of man's Knowledge: The Knowledge of
all other things (could you behold them all with one intuitive Act) is but an
hungry, beggarly Knowledge, a sick Knowledge, till thou know him: The soul of
Man, her Appetite is never filled, nor satisfied, till she know God.

When I read some Authors, and view their Ignorance of God, I cannot but sit
down and say, Oh! what a Privilege is it to know God! I will give you an
Instance:

Pliny, A man of vast parts, who writes the History of Nature; Lib. 2. Cap. 7.
Quisquis est Deus, si modo est Alius, etc. Irridendum vero agere curam rerum
humanarum illud quiequid est summum: Ibidem Anne tam tristi atque multiplici
Ministerio non pollui credamus, Dubitemusve. Ibidem. Verum in his Deos agere
curam rerum humanarum credi, ex usu vitae est. Ibidem. Verum in his Deos agere
curam rerum humanarum credi, ex usu vitae est. Paenasque Maleficiis aliquando
seras (occupato Deo in tanta mole) nunquam autem irritas esse: Ibid.
and you would think he had fathomed the very bottom of Nature; yet when he
comes to speak of God, says he, God, whosoever he be, if happily there be any
other but the World.

Again, says he, That the chiefest Power, whatsoever it is, (meaning God) has
care of mankind, or of men's affairs, is a thing to be derided or scorned at.

What dreadful darkness is this! How uncomfortable to us, that we have no God
to mind our Conditions, or manage our Events!

And his Reason is this (as poor as his Assertion), Can we believe, that he
should not be polluted with so sordid, or base, and so trouble some a service?
As if the Sun cannot shine upon a dunghill, but it must be defiled.

And yet afterward he says, Howbeit to believe, that the Gods have care of
men's Estates, is useful and expedient for this life.

Whether he speaks this, being forced by Conviction, or out of Policy (to keep
men within Bounds) rather than of Faith, I know not, though I conceive the
latter by his following words: To believe that the Gods have care of men's
Estates, is useful for this life; As also that the punishment of Malefactors is
sometimes late (because God is busily employed otherwise in so vast a frame as
this World is) but never misseth in the end.

Where you may see how poor an opinion he has of God, as if he were forced to
put off the punishment of Sinners out of necessity, because he could not have
while; could not do many things at once, his affairs being too great for his
head.

But he goes on, and says, That the chief comfort that man has for his
imperfection and weakness of nature is, That even Imperfectae veroin homine
naturae praecipua solatia, ne Deum quidem posse omnia: Ibidem. Nam nec sibi
potest mortem consciscere, si velit -- Nec mortales aeternitate donare, nec
revocare defunctos; nec facere, ut qui vixit, non vixerit, qui Honores gessit,
non gesserit, nullumque habere in praterita jus, praeterquam Oblivionis: Neque
(ut facetis quoque Argumentis Societas haec cum Deo copuletur) ut bis dena
Viginti non sint, Ac multa similiter efficere non posse; Per quae Declaratur
haud dubie Naturae Potentia, Idque esse quod Deum vocamus: Ibidem.
God himself cannot do all things.

And he does Instance in some things very sadly, That God cannot [Mortales
aeternitate donare, aut revocare defunctos] Crown mortal men with everlasting
life, nor recall or raise the dead; which speaks his own miserable Condition.
And ye Saints of God, if this were truth, then ye also of all men are the most
miserable.

But he does instance also in other things which God cannot do, and which we
grant. For we say, That God cannot do those things which imply Contradiction.
And these things God cannot do, not because he is not Omnipotent, but [ Quia
Praedicatum Repugnat subjecto] because the Praedicate is Repugnant to the
subject. Thus God (to use his own Instances) cannot bring to pass, that one who
lived, did not live; or he that bare Honorable Offices, was not in place of
Rule and Dignity. God cannot make things that are past, not to be past. And he
goes on to break a jest upon God in these things: For says he [ Vt facetis
quoque Argumentis societas haec cum Deo copuletur] That by Facetious and merry
Arguments we may prove our Fellowship therein with God, he cannot cause that
twice ten should not make twenty. Whereby without doubt (says he) is proved
the power of Nature, and that it is she, and nothing else, which we call God.

Thus does this great Man (for want of Divine Knowledge) advance Nature into the
Throne of God, and degrade God so low as to be nothing else but Nature: How was
he benighted in dark and dreadful Ignorance!

Do you not by this time see, That it is a most superlative Privilege to know
God? And indeed it is so, if we would believe but Scripture, This is
life-eternal (says Christ) to John 17. 3.
know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

God himself is the great Soul and Excellency of all the Mysteries of Heaven;
all the rest are but so many lines that lead us to him the Center: he is the
root of all the Mysteries of Heaven, and the Vltimate end of them all; were it
not for God, they would all be worth nothing.

2. Jesus Christ is a lovely thing: The brightness of his fathers Heb. 1. 3.
glory, and the express image of his person: All the beauty and glory of God is
engraven upon Christ: he is a lovely thing. He was a sweet flower, planted in
the Womb of a Virgin, and grew out there without the least spot of sin. Surely,
as man, he is a very lovely thing, how much more as he is God, shining with the
same Rays of Glory that God has!

But is not Christ a lovely thing as our Mediator? Do you not love to look
upon him sitting at Gods right hand, and pleading your Cause for you? How
lovely is he in this Office?

3. Justification by Christ is a lovely thing: It is a glorious Garment, and
beauteous Robe; more beauteous than the Righteousness of the most holy Angels:
Whoever puts it on, are as pure as if they had no spot or dirt of sin upon them.

4. Pardon of Sin is a lovely thing: every Saint longs to have a sight and taste
of it: it made the poor woman that came in weeping, to go out rejoicing from
Jesus Christ, [Her sins which are many are forgiven her], it was the most
golden day that ever came over her head.

5. Peace of Conscience is a lovely thing: The Saints are ravished with the
sweetness of it: it grows like a Rose in their bosoms (when it is once planted
there) and they can never cease smelling at it: it fills their senses with
delicate Odor, and makes them look fresh and green all their days.

Reas. 9. It is a transcendent Privilege to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom
of Heaven, if we consider how unworthy we are to know them; unworthy to have
such Jewels hang at our ears; unworthy to have such Wine put into our old
Bottles; and to have such golden Mines grow in the earthy Bowels of our Minds
and Understandings. As the Apostle says, We 2 Cor. 4. 7.
have this treasure in earthen vessels. The Mysteries of the Gospel are Gods
Treasures, and we are but poor earthen Vessels, unworthy to have such Divine
treasures put into such earthen Caskets, such Oyster-shells: The Angels, those
golden Vessels and Velvet-Caskets, think themselves unworthy to have his
Mysteries and Treasures put into them, unworthy to know him, and see him; and
therefore the Seraphims, each of which Isa. 6. 2.
had six Wings, with two they did fly, to signify [ Celerrimae Ministeria]
the swiftness of their Ministry; and with two did cover their faces, as men do
when they look upon the Sun, to signify, That they cannot endure the splendour
and brightness of Gods face; and withal, that they are unworthy to see his
face; and with two they did cover their feet, that is, their secret parts, for
so does the word [ feet] signify in Scripture, not only our feet wherewith we
go upon the ground, but the secret and unclean parts of Man. Isa. 7. 20.


The Angels therefore appearing in the shape of Man, did cover those parts, not
as if there were any stain of sin upon those blessed Creatures, but as ashamed
of their perfections, as imperfections in comparison of God's infinite and
incomperable perfections.

If the Angels, how much more are Men, who are Sinners, unworthy to know God in
Jesus Christ?

We shall now pass to the Application of this Doctrine:

And first,

Use 1. Prize then the preaching of the Gospel: that is the looking-glass in
which you behold the Mysteries of Heaven.

1. It lays open the Mysteries of Heaven to you: there may be a great deal of
Riches wrapped up in a Treasury, but this opens and unlocks the Treasury: The
Ministry of the Word is ordained to lay open the Treasure to Gods People, that
they may know what Riches they have by Jesus Christ.

There be rich Mines in the Scripture, but they must be dug up: The Ministry
serves to dig up those Mines, and lay them open above-ground, that the Saints
may see them, and be in love with them.

2. The Preaching of the Gospel casts the sweet savor of the Mysteries of
Heaven abroad the World, and renders them lovely.

As the Woman that brought her Box of Ointment to anoint the Lord Jesus with
it, when she opened the Box, the room was filled with the Odor of the
Ointment: were not the Box opened, the Ointment would not smell: so the
preaching of the Word, is the opening of the Box.

The Gospel (which is a rich compound made up of the Fragrant spices and
Mysteries of Heaven) I say the Gospel is a Box of sweet Ointment, and the
Preaching of it is the opening of the Box; if it be not opened, it casts not
its sweet savor abroad the World. The publishing of the Word, is the opening
of the Box, and the casting of the perfume of it abroad the World: Hence says
the Apostle, Now thanks be unto God, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
which always causes us to triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the SAVOVR
of his Knowledge by us in every place.

3. The preaching of the Gospel applies the Mysteries of Heaven to men's Souls
in particular: It distributes the portion to every Child of God: The Ministers
of God are the Stewards of God to distribute the Mystery of comfort, and the
Mystery of pardon, and peace, to whom they belong: Now where there is an equal
and convenient distribution of the portion to every one, this makes the
Ordinance of God so beautiful, and the Mysteries of Heaven so delicious; this
makes the people taste them, taste the Mystery of comfort, and the Mystery of
peace and pardon; when the Waters of Life are derived from the spring of the
Scriptures, to every man's particular use, they taste them, and relish them.

And it is this that makes the Word in the Application of it so sweet a thing: I
say the Word in the Application of it is a sweet thing; for good things, the
nearer they are brought home, the more delightful they are; as a Rose on the
Tree is a sweet thing; whether you smell it, or smell it not, it is sweet; but
if it be brought home to you, and put into your bosom, then you smell it sweet:
So the Mystery of peace and pardon, as it grows upon the Tree of the Promise,
is a sweet thing; but if the Hand of Application bring it home to you, and put
in thy bosom, there thou art sweetened with it.

Use 2. England! See thy privilege: God has revealed to thee the Mysteries of
the Kingdom of Heaven.

Ah London! See thy privilege: Thy Fleece is wet with the dew of the Mysteries
of Heaven: Thou art Goshen, when the greatest part of the Kingdom is Egypt,
dark Egypt.

And the rather (oh England!) see and prize thy privilege [ The Mysteries of
the Kingdom of Heaven] lest God remove them, lest God depart from us.

The Glory of God departed out of the Temple before the Destruction of
Jerusalem; so the Glory of God departs from a Church, the Beauties and
Excellencies of God remove, when we esteem them not.

And if any thing in the World make God to leave a Church, as he left the Jews,
and as he may leave any particular Church, it is because there is not a prizing
of the Heavenly Mysteries we have.

For however we esteem these things, God sets an high price upon them; and if
we do not, God will deprive us of them, and of the Power and Beauty of them.

Use 3. Oh the love of God that will communicate the Knowledge of himself unto
us; that is not content we should know any thing, unless we know him!

1. He knows himself to be our chiefest good, and therefore knows that the
Knowledge of all other things would do us no good, without the Knowledge of
himself.

All the Creatures are but his Servants; the Sun, Moon, and Stars, are but the
Creatures and Servants of the High God; and to know them; and all their
motions, would not advantage us, unless we know their Master. As a man that is
ambitious of Honor, and high places, he uses acquaintance with a Kings
Servants but as an Introduction to acquaintance with their Lord and Master: He
knows that the Donation of Honors, and Collation of places and offices, is in
the hand of the King, and therefore to know his Servants will do him no good,
only the Knowledge of the King himself: So God is the Fountain of Honor and
Glory, all the Creatures have but a Glory Derivative from God; they can confer
no Glory on their Fellow Creatures, and they will part with none of their own:
There Is no Creature will part with its Glory, or lose its Glory, to confer it
on thee: The Sun will not lose its Light and Place in the Heavens to translate
it to thee: if they would, it is not their own to dispose of.

Besides, the Sun may shine upon thee, but cannot shine Peace of Conscience
into thee. The earth may afford thee Wine and Oil, but cannot yield thee the
grapes of saving joy, and the Oil of gladness to anoint thy soul with.

To know any thing, the Knowledge of Jesus Christ would be of greatest worth
unto thee; and yet to know Christ, would not advantage thee, but as a means and
door to let thee in to acquaintance with God himself: The Knowledge of Christ
would not save thee, did not the Knowledge of him lead thee into the Knowledge
of, and acquaintance with God himself. And therefore says Christ, I am the
way, [not the end] no man John 14. 6.
comes unto the Father, but by me: Thou must not terminate the Knowledge of
Christ, in Christ himself; but use it as a Medium and Way to bring thee to the
Father. Therefore says the Text, Who by him do believe in God that raised him
up from 1 Pet. 1. 21.
the dead, and gave him Glory, THAT YOUR FAITH AND HOPE MIGHT BE IN GOD.

2. It is a wondrous privilege that any man affords us, to let us know him, and
to be intimate with him: What can he do more, than to unvail himself to us, and
let us see his inside, and let us peep into the Cabinet of his secrets, and
make us acquainted with all his Excellencies? It is the greatest love that can
be: A man may invite us often to his Table, and make us sit down with him, and
yet not let us know himself; nay you may live with him all your days, and
converse with him, and yet he not let you know his inward self, nor what is in
himself: He Will make himself known to none, but whom he makes his second self!

Ah then! how are we engaged to God? That thou will let us know thy face, and
know thy mind, and know thy heart; What is this, but to make us thy second self?

3. God does not only let us know him, but he knows us: As the Apostle says to
the Galatians, But now, after that ye Gal. 4. 9.
have known God, or rather are known of God: We know not God so much as He
knows us. We are rather known of him, than know him: it is more that he knows
us, than that we know him: As when a poor man lives by a great man, and knows
him, it does not do him so much good that he knows the great man, as that the
great man knows him, and communicates some of his greatness to him; The great
man's Knowledge of him makes him a great man: though he knows the great man, yet
if the great man know not him, and take not notice of him, he is never the
better: So we may by nature know God, and by the Scripture know the Attributes
of God, yet this does us no good, unless the Lord know us, and communicate his
riches and greatness to us. It is the happiness of the Subject, that his Prince
will know him: All the Honor of one that is in low degree, springs from the
Knowledge his Superior takes of him. Zacheus ran and went up in Luke 19. 3.
to the Sycamore-tree, that he might see Christ, and know him; but it was
Zacheus happiness (and the rise of his Honor) that Christ would know him, and
cast an eye upon him.

Use 4. The next Use is an Use of Trial.

Try your Knowledge of the Mysteries of Heaven: Every one is prone to approve
and think well of his own Knowledge: especially those that have higher parts of
Understanding than others, that can discourse of Divine things, that have a
speculative apprehension, and quick fancy.

And therefore try your Knowledge of the Mysteries of Heaven.

By way of Preface into this Use of Trial, let me show you three things:

There are three ways to know God:

1. By the Contemplation of the Creatures, which is proper to the Gentiles: I
say, proper to the Gentiles in this sense, That they had no other glass to see
God in, no other book in which they could read the Divine Excellencies: The
book of the Creature was the only Scripture they had, wherein God was
discovered to them, and in it they might have seen and read much of God, as the
Apostle argues: For the invisible Romans 1. 20.
things of him from the creation of the World are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead, so
that they are without excuse.

2. By the report of Scripture, and the reading of Scripture: and this was
proper to the Jews: This was their privilege or advantage (as the Apostle
says) For unto them were committed Romans 3. 2^.
the oracles of God; that is, they received all the Revelations of his Will,
the Law and the Prophecies, they were the only people with whom God thought fit
to deposite all these: they were the only Cabinet in which God laid up the
Jewel of the Scripture: To them and for them he wrote his Law: He shows his
word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments Psalm. 147. 19, 20.
unto Israel; he has not dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgments
they have not known them.

3. By Christ, which is proper to Christians.

The Knowledge of God, which they get, who know him by the Creatures, is like
that Knowledge which we have of a man only by seeing some of his Workmanship
which he has wrought.

The Knowledge of God, which they get who know him by the holy Scriptures (I
mean a literal Knowledge) is like to that Knowledge which another gets of a
Famous learned Man, by reading the things which he has written.

The Knowledge of God which they get who know Christ, is like to that Knowledge
which one has of the King by having seen his Image, or rather his Son, who is
the true and very Image of his Father: Hence says Christ to Philip, When he
said, Show us the Father, and it suffices us: says Christ, John 14. 9.
Have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou not known me, Philip? He
that has seen me, has seen the Father, and how say thou then, Show us the
Father?

Now through Gods infinite mercy we have the benefit of all these.

We have the book of the Creature, wherein we may read the Being and
Subsistence of God.

We have (besides that) the book of the Scripture, wherein we may read the Will
of God; which is a step or stair beyond the other: for in the book of the
Creature we can read no more than the Being, and some attributes of God, that
God is, and that he is wise and powerful, etc. but not one tittle of his Will
there: only the book of Scripture shows us the Will of God, the Will of his
Commands, what our duty is, and what we must do that we may be saved:

And the Will of his Decrees disposing of Men and Angels to their last end or
eternal state.

But besides these, we Christians have another book, written as it were) with
the Rays of the Sun, who is styled the brightness of his Fathers glory, even
Jesus Christ; I call him a Book, for he is styled [(...)] the Word of God. But
he is a book not made of Ink and Paper, but [(...)] a living Book, in whom we
read the Treasures of his Fathers Glory, Wisdom, Love and Mercy to us in our
Redemption: Of him the first Testament prophesied; Him the new Testament
declared.

He was from everlasting, yet may be said to be printed and set forth when he
was born of the Virgin.

This is the Christians Book, and God was never known visibly till Christ came,
for he is God manifest in the flesh.

And, it is the property of the Christian to take up the Knowledge of God in
Christ, and to believe in God through Christ, and to converse with God in
Christ: He is the Kernel of all the Mysteries of Heaven: the sap and
quintessence of Religion.

These being premised, we will now give you some Trials of a saving Knowledge of
the Mysteries of Heaven:

First, They that know the Mysteries of Heaven savingly, know them clearly. For
this is a spiritual Knowledge, not only in respect of the Object, but also of
the Principle.

Though it be not without the Scripture, yet it springs not alone from the
Scripture, but from the effectual Irradiations of the spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation.

That, look as the literal Knowledge makes an Addition of further discoveries to
the natural; so this spiritual Knowledge superadds even to the literal, namely
clearness of light. My Beloved, you must understand it thus: The things which
the Holy Ghost discovers, are no other for substance, but those very things
which are in Scripture, only he gives a clearer light to discern them by.

To Instance,

That God is: Every man says he knows this, and believes it, as well as the
godly does. But I must tell him, That the godly man sees a great deal further
into it: he sees that God is, as truly as he sees that the Sun is, when it
shines upon him: And therefore God is in all his thoughts.

The wicked man will tell you, he knows that God is present in all places, and
yet he will be drunk in God Presence, swear and lie in Gods Presence, cheat,
and deal unjustly in Gods Presence: How can this man say, he believes that God
is present where he is? But now the godly Man sees that God is present in all
places, as clearly as if God appeared visibly to him.

Secondly, They know feelingly: they feel what they know: what they know in the
head, they feel in the heart.

And they count themselves to know no more than they feel: as Melancthon makes
mention of a godly Woman, who having strong conflicts upon her Deathbed, and
was afterward much comforted, brake out into these words, Now, and not till
now, I understand the meaning of those words [Thy sins are forgiven thee].

The Knowledge of Divine Mysteries is rather a spiritual sensation, than
speculation: It lies more in sense and feeling, than in understanding of them:
(...), the soul it self has its sense, as well as the body; And therefore when
David would teach us how to know what the Divine goodness is, he calls not for
speculation, but sensation, Taste and see how good the Lord is.

Know God, as thou would have God know thee; know Christ, as thou would
have Christ know thee.

Thou would have God know thee, and take care of thee; so must thou know
him, and take care of his Glory: Thou would have God know thee, and succor
thee in dangers, as the Disciples (when the Waves covered the ship) said to
Christ, Master, carest thou not that we perish? So must thou Mark 4. 38.
know God and his Cause, so as to prop it up in difficult times, lest it perish.

Thou would have Christ know thee, so as to dye for thee; Lord if thou dye
not for me, I must be damned; so must thou know Christ, so as to dye for him
and his Truth; I am ready, Acts 21. 13.
not only to be bound, but to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.

Thou would have Christ know thee, so as to love thee, and put thee in his
bosom [ Who loved me, and gave himself for me] Gal. 2. 20.
So must thou know Christ, so as to love him, and put him into thy bosom, Lord,
thou know that I love thee. John 21. 16.


Charity, or love, is the most eminent of all the Graces, inasmuch as Faith
shall fail, when there shall be nothing to believe, nor to have confidence in;
and Hope shall fail, when Christ returning, and the resurrection of the just
being made, there shall be nothing more to hope for.

Only Love shall never fail: for there shall be always what to love, and what
to taste: For in eternal life we shall love God and Christ, and we shall find a
perpetual relish and savor in the contemplation of God, and of Jesus Christ.

Know the things that are prepared and given thee of God: Therefore is the
spirit given us, that me may know the things 1 Cor. 2. 12.
that God has given us: What is it to know Heaven, unless thou know that
Heaven is given thee of God? What is it to know Christ, unless thou know
that Christ is given thee of God? What is it to know God himself, unless thou
know him to be thy God? What is it to know the Scriptures, unless Valdesso.
Consid. 70.
thou believe and hold for certain all that is contained in the
Scriptures, and have confidence in the Divine promises, as if to thee properly
and principally they had bin made?

Forgiveness of sin is a blotting out of iniquity as a cloud. Isa. 44. 22.


A Cloud is by the Power of the Heavens nullified; neither form nor matter to
be found, not any circumstances like it, to note that ever such a thing was.

Forgiveness notes Remission, which is the Term in the Greek (...) Remission.
Remittere, quasi Remittere; to send a thing back again, the unravelling, and
undoing of a thing misdone, the nullifying of an unlawful Action. As sin makes
void the Law, and nullifies it, so does forgiveness nullify and make void sin.

When we are remitted, we are [ retromissi] sent back again to our first
Condition, as when we were in Paradise; no more mentioned, and no more thought
of, than of Adam before his fall.

Know thy self, what need thou have of them: a Damned man, and therefore need
of eternal life; a guilty man, and therefore need of Justification; a lost man,
and therefore need of a Savior; A man under Satan's power, and therefore need
of Redemption.

Thirdly, They know powerfully: Their Knowledge comes like an Armed man upon
them, and carries them Captive into the Tents of those things they know, 2
Cor. 10. 5. And therefore Christ is said, To ascend up on high, and to lead
Psalm. 68. 18.
captivity captive: It binds the soul up in chains: Lord, I am thy Prisoner, I
yield to thee, and will be no more a Rebel.

It lays a soul flat at the feet of Christ, as it did Paul, he fell to the
Earth, Lord, what will thou have me to do? I Will swear no more, only pardon me,
Lord: and I Will be drunk no more, I Will persecute the Saints no more; pardon me
only, and I Will deal unjestly no more.

I Will serve thee upon thine own terms, and do what ever thou bidst me.

Fourthly, They know delightfully: Their Knowledge stamps upon their hearts
Impressions of delight in the things they know: because true Knowledge presents
the Mysteries of Heaven lovely to them, and lays a Net to catch their souls
in love with them.

Spiritual Science is steeped in affection, taking delight in the things known:
not barely apprehending, but relishing and savouring what it apprehends with
abundance of love and complacency.

Fifthly, They know admiringly. Their Knowledge catches them up into the third
Heaven of admiration: They that know aright the Mystery of Redemption, know and
admire the Wisdom of God in contriving such a curious piece of reconciling
Justice and Mercy to save a poor sinner: As Paul calls it, The manifold wisdom
of God: For consider, Gospel-Mysteries Ephesians. 3. 10.
are the Mysteries of a Kingdom, and fit for admiration.

For, 1. Kingdoms have Majesty. Solomon had Lions about his Throne to set forth
the Majesty of it, to make Transaction between that and all other people with
Awe.

So Christ manageth his way in this World with Majesty: Heaven and Earth
tremble at his Presence: he utters his voice to the great World, and the Rocks
rend: Thunder is the voice of God to the great World: and in what Majesty does
he express himself to all Creatures below in that voice?

As there be Thundrings without, so there be Thundrings within: In great
Majesty does Christ speak to the soul sometimes; Ask your Consciences else; ask
Faelix, the Jaylour, and Cain else; yea, ask your Father Adam else; what a case
were all these in, when Christ did but reason with them! Yea, I ask you
Hypocrites (if any here) is not the way of Christ full of Majesty? What means
those loads that gather about your hearts, and that fearfulness which
surpriseth you? Thou do but touch the mountains, and they smoke (says the
Psalmist), so God does but touch your Consciences, and they smoke: he does but
whisper within, and your spirits fly about every where, into the fingers, into
the face, and up into the head, and the heart within beats for want of them,
ready to swoon away.

Ask wounded spirits whether Gods Word be not full of Majesty: Twenty years
time not enough to heal the wound of a word of Gods mouth: Oh the Majesty of
that word!

Look upon the whole Creation, upon the Earth, upon the Sea, upon the Heavens,
do they not all-speak the Majesty of Christ? God is mightier than the noise of
many waters, yea, than the Mighty waves of the Sea. The tossings, rollings, and
roarings of the Sea, Do they not speak loudly the Majesty of Christ? But, ah
sinner! The tossings, rollings, and roarings of a troubled soul, speak the
Majesty of Christ's word much more: Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord,
we persuade men.

2. Kingdoms have Supremacy: This is Basis Majestatis.

Christ is a great King over all, as the Psalmist titles him. Psalm. 29.


God has set Christ over all, so should we; as God has set him, so do you,
over all, in all things.

Now self-denial is an excellent means that Christ may Reign: Thou must deny
thy Kingdom, that Christ may have his; you must lay down your Crowns at his
feet, that he may wear his Crown upon his Head.

And this is a sweet Testimony of Grace in the heart, if the heart can endure
Tribulation, that Christ may Reign; If it can suffer all things, that Christ
may do all things; if it can lie low, that Christ may be exalted; when we are
most annihilated, our Lord and his Mysteries are most admired.

Sixthly, They know thankfully. The beams of Knowledge that shine into them,
melt them into pangs of Thankfulness, that they should have the Honor and
Happiness to know those things that they know.

They would not be without Christ whom they know, not for a thousand Worlds.

They would not be without the miracles of love, and peace, and pardon in
Christ which they have and know, for all the Worth of India.

They count themselves to have been no better than brutes and beasts all the
time they were without the Knowledge of those Divine Rarities which now they lay
up so close in their hearts.

They adore God, that they should know and see those saving secrets which are
hid from the eyes of so many round about them.

Seventhly, The true Knowledge of spiritual things does spiritualize. True
Knowledge of Religion makes a man Religious.

Religion in Scripture is called Godliness: Without controversy great is the
Mystcry of godliness; that is, The principles of 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Christian Religion. Godliness is great gain, i. e. Christianity. The Christian
Religion is great gain: Thus the Truths themselves are called Godliness; Why
so? Because the true Knowledge of them begets an inward godliness.

As Religion it self is called Faith, and the grace in the soul is also called
Faith: Why so? To show that Faith begets Faith; that is, the Truth revealed
begets Faith, and must be received by Faith.

Therefore one word includes both the Object, the thing believed, and likewise
the Disposition of the soul to that Object. So Religion is called Godliness,
because the true Knowledge of it begets Godliness.

Oh! See then what makes a true Christian: What, when a man nakedly believes
Divine Truths? When he knows the Principles of Faith, does that make him a true
Christian? No: But when Religion makes him Religious, when these Tit. 1. 1.
Truths work Godliness: for Religion is a truth according to godliness. Where
the Truths of Religion are embraced, there is Godliness with them: A man cannot
embrace Religion in Truth, but he must be godly; because Religion is Godliness,
so it is called, for that it tends to beget all Piety, and Virtue, and
Godliness in the heart.

And therefore if the Mysteries of Heaven work not Godliness, a man has but an
Humane Knowledge of Divine things.

When Lucius a bloody Persecutor offered to confess his Faith, hoping thereby
to gain an opinion that he was Orthodox, Russin. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 6.
Moses a Religious Monk refused to hear him, saying, The eye might sometimes
judge of one's Faith as well as the Ear; and that whosoever lived as Lucius did,
could not believe as a Christian ought.

A man knows no more of Christ, than he is sanctified; he knows no more of
Divine things than he esteems and affects: he knows no more of the Mysteries of
Heaven, than he brings the whole inward frame to be like the things; He that
says, 1 John 2. 4.
I know God, and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not
in him.

No doubt but Hophni and Phineas being Priests, had a literal Knowledge of God;
yet being profane, they are said expressly not to have known him, They were
sons of Belial, they knew 1 Samuel 2. 12.
not the Lord.

Eighthly, If we know God aright, we know God in us: for we come to know God
savingly by Regeneration, and so by little and little we come to know God in
us, knowing in our selves those Divine perfections which the Holy Ghost
attributes to God.

We know the Holiness of God by the Beam of Holiness which he has irradicated
into our hearts: We know the love of God by the working of love in us toward
him, and toward his Saints: We know hatred of sin in God, by knowing in our
selves an hatred of sin; we know the Mercy of God, by finding in our selves an
Image of his Mercy toward our Enemies; As Christ says, Be ye merciful, as
your heavenly Fathers is merciful. Luk 6. 36.


And it is a clear case, We could never know in God Truth, Justice, Goodness,
were we not in some measure true, just, and good; it being natural for Man to
judge of others, according to that which he knows in himself.

The spirit makes me to know Omnipotency in God, through the great Power which
he shows in me, mortifying me, and making me alive: The spirit makes me know
Wisdom in God, by the Wisdom which I get through his Holy Spirit; he makes me
know Justice in God, because he justifies me in Christ; he makes me know Truth
in God, because he keeps promise with me: he makes me know goodness and mercy
in God, because he bears with my slothfulness and sins.

Ninthly, This leads me to another, much like it; true Knowledge of the
Mysteries of Heaven is experimental.

A man never stands firm, and solid, and constant in the Faith, till he has in
himself some experience of that which he knows and believes.

And it is certain, That he holds so much firmness, as he holds of experience in
himself, and no more.

It befalls us in believing and knowing the Gospel, as it does in knowing at
first some wise and godly Man.

As long as we know the Wisdom and Godliness of such a man, only by the
relation of other men, we are so disposed, that other men coming, and making a
contrary relation, we change our opinion we had of him, at least doubt of it,
till at last having strict familiarity with him our selves, we know by
experience that the relation of him is true, which was made to us, and then no
man is able to persuade us to the contrary.

So long as we believe the Gospel, and the Mysteries of Heaven only by the
relation of Preachers, we believe it, till other Preachers come and tell us the
contrary, and then we believe the other way, or at least doubt of the Truth we
had from the first Preacher, till by having experience of that which is
preached in the Gospel, we stand firm and constant in that which we know and
believe; and then all the men in the World are unable to unsettle or change our
Faith and Knowledge, after it is confirmed by our own experience.

As for example, here is a Gospel-Mystery, That God has punished all our sins
upon Christ, and redeemed us from wrath, if we believe in him.

Now thy great work and design should be to get the experience of this Mystery
in thee, that God has punished thy sins in Christ, and redeemed thee from
wrath.

Quest. You will say, how is the experience of Faith gotten?

Answ. Then a man has experience of that which he believes, when he has peace
in his Conscience; when he has the fruit of that which he believes in himself;
being assured in himself, that he can appear in the Judgment of God, with that
self-same security wherewith he would have appeared, if he had lived with that
innocence wherewith Christ lived, and had (by Gods will) fuffered that which
Christ suffered.

Use. 5. If it be such a transcendent privilege to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven; Oh, then act your souls with disires and endeavors after
the Knowledge of these Divine things: For,

1. Our souls are made for these things: What are our souls made for, but for
excellent things? And what is excellent, but the Mysteries of Heaven? Is the
soul made to lay her mouth to the breasts of the World, and suck in wealth and
riches which she must spit out again? I tell you, these are but dunghils to a
soul.

2. They put Glory upon the soul: They are glorious, and make us glorious: The
Knowledge of God in Christ is a glorious Knowledge: and the Gospel is called a
glorious Gospel: these things put a Glory upon our souls.

What a glorious thing is it, when (by the Mysteries of Heaven) a weak man
shall have power againsta a strong Devil?

When a poor Creature (flesh and blood) shall (by some virtue distilled through
the Mysteries of Heaven into him) have such a strong Faith in the promise of
forgiveness of sins, and such a mighty Faith in the promise, that all shall
turn to his good; that all the gates of hell shall not prevail over that weak
soul? VVwhat a glorious thing is this?

And what a glorious thing is it, when an impotent and unable soul shall by an
Ordinance of God have strength over those corruptions and sins which others are
slaves to? That mean men of low and cheap education and parts, should not be
taken with those things that others are besotted with, that are of more
excellent natural parts than they? What a glory of grace is this!

3. Did ye know the Mysteries of the heavenly Kingdom, ye would wonder at
nothing in the world besides.

What is the reason that silly men are taken up with admiration of small and
poor things here below; but because their thoughts are not employed nor raised
up to these high and great Excellencies?

The Poet says,

Nil admirari, prope res est una numici, Hor. Epist. 1. Epistol. 6.


Solaque quae possit facere and servare beatum.

To wonder at nothing, is the only thing to make us happy.

Whilst men stand wondering at the glory and foolish luster of the World, Oh!
this honor, and that greatness is a goodly thing, they are undone; they are
taken with it, and so undone: This makes those whose names are not written in
the book Revel. 17. 8.
of life, to wonder at the beast, (as it is in the Text), saying, Oh! what a
godly order have they among them, one under another? And this makes them
worship him, as it is in another Text; All that dwell upon the earth shall
worship him, Revel. 13. 8.
whose names are not written in the book of life.

As the Philosophers speaking of the Knowledge of Causes, say, That the Knowledge
of the cause takes away admiration, O (...), He that wonders, seems to be
ignorant: Arist. 1. Metaph. cap. 2.
As Contrymen, that wonder at the Eclipse of the Sun, or at a Blazing-star,
or at an Earthquake, it is from their Ignorance of the Causes: a Philosopher
wonders not at these things: And therefore Pythagoras said, That the end of
Philosophy is, that we should wonder at nothing.

So, They that wonder at the Glory of the World, and of earthly Dignities (Oh!
It is a fine thing to be rich, and to shine in greatness), it springs from
their Ignorance: It is the nature of shallow men to wonder at the things of
this World.

A wise man wonders at nothing, because he knows greater things; he has seen
greater matters than those the world can show: Do you think a wise Christian
will stand wondering at great and rich men, at great places and honors, and
such things?

Alas, He has had greater matters in the eye of his soul; and what can be
great in this world to him, to whom the World it self is not great?

What is great in this world to him that has seen Christ, and conversed with
God?

Oh! come then, and know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven: These will so
dazzle your eyes with their glory, that you shall wonder at nothing in the world
besides.

To dwell in the favor of men, and to rise up into high places, and have the
world smile upon you, are these the things ye wonder at?

Truly Sirs, If we would wonder, let us come to Religion, there we have him
whose name is Wonderful, that is Jesus Isa. 6.
Christ.

There we have his Laws and Testimonies, which are wonderful; Thy testimonies
are wonderful, therefore does my soul Psalm. 119. 129.
keep them.

There is peace that passes all understanding: joy unspeakable and full of
glory.

There we have the ways of his Wisdom, and his dealings with the Saints, which
are wonderful, as Job says, Things too Job. 42. 3.
wonderful for me, which I knew not: To bring us to life by death, to glory by
shame, to perfect his work in abasement, to bring it low, that he may raise
after.

But how may we know these Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven?

1. You must use all means; you must read, and hear, and discourse; you must
study the things of God, and converse with the Saints to whom God has revealed
these Mysteries.

The Ministry of the Word is the golden pipe through which these Divine
Mysteries flow down into your Knowledge.

And then meditate of these things, till the heart be warmed: fasten your
thoughts on them every day: It is your Wisdom to spend consideration on them,
Oh that my people were wise, that they would consider their latter end; I say
it is your wisdom to consider the Excellency of these Mysteries of Religion,
the Beauty of them in themselves, the fruit and sweetness of them in this
world, and in the world to come.

An ingredient in the use of means after this Knowledge, is, that you must
search for it: The promise of finding Knowledge, is only to such as search for
Knowledge: It is such a precious treasure, that it lies deep in the bowels of
Scripture: Thou Prove. 2. 4.
shall find wisdom -- if thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her as
for hid treasures.

There are two places, two veins especially, where wisdom is to be found; there
is the Book of Gods Word, and the Book of Gods Works; the Book of Scripture,
and the Book of Providence.

In these two Books we are to search and study out the Knowledge of the
Mysteries of Heaven: The Word reveals them, the hand of Providence does
dispense them: The Word unfolds them, Providence makes all things to further
them in the soul.

And let me tell you, One great means to irradiate your Knowledge of the
Mysteries of Heaven, is to know that Mystery of sinfulness that is in you, and
that Mystery of misery that lies upon you: It is not to be conceived (as
Jeremy says), How deceitful the heart is, and how desperately wickea, what a
depth of corruption lies there?

The cursed and woeful state we are in by nature, is not to be conceived: Man's
apprehension is too little to take in all the Dimensions of it: to lie under
the eternal wrath of God, what head can comprehend it? What created soul can
fathom in her widest thoughts the wrath of an infinite God? Who can tell what
Hell is? And how hot the fire is which Gods Almighty wrath has kindled to all
eternity? As eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man the things which God has prepared for those that love him: so
neither has eye seen, nor ear heard, nor can the heart of man conceive those
depths and treasures of misery that men are in by nature: Here we may cry out,
Oh the depths! Therefore the more transparent Knowledge we have of the Mystery
of Corruption, and of the dreadful misery we are in by sin, the more we shall
wonder at the unparalleled goodness of God in the Mystery of our salvation; the
one will sharpen the appetite of the other.

Truly Sirs, if you are yet in the state of sin, consider how little there is
between you and eternal Death; you are ready to drop into Hell immediately and
irrecoverably: Did these things sit sadly and seriously upon your spirits, how
would it advance the Knowledge of the Mysteries of Heaven?

2. That you may know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, bring Humility,
and self-denial.

Humble reason, and make her give place to Faith: for the humility (we here
speak of) is a Denial of our own Parts and Wits, though they be never so
capacious.

In this case the Intellectus must be rasa tabula: I say, the understanding
must be as a Table scraped, all the Writings and Notions of humane Wit and
Reason must be scraped out: It must be like the Wax that has no Character,
that it may receive the Impression of the Seal.

That which reason should do in supernatural things, is to stoop to Faith, to
believe the things of God upon the sole Authority of God: Here it is the
greatest reason to yield to Faith; In Divine Mysteries Faith is the reason of
reason; and the highest reason is to yield to God that has revealed them: And
therefore Faith stands with the greatest reason that can be; for is it not the
greatest reason in the world to believe him, that is Truth it self? Reason it
self says, It is the greatest reason to believe God who is the first Truth.

3. Wait upon the spirit. Give the spirit that Honor to reveal these Mysteries
to you.

For your eyes are blind: you have an inward darkness upon you: the Gospel
takes away the Vail from the things, but the spirit takes away the Vail from
our souls.

The Jews had a Vail of types and shadows thrown over the things themselves;
now I say, Our Gospel takes away the Vail from the things, but the spirit must
take away the Vail from our hearts.

In Nature there is need of a double light, that we may behold Objects.

1. A light someness upon the Object it self through the Medium; and therefore
men cannot see in the night, because the air, which is the Medium, is dark.

2. A light besides in the Organ, that is the eye; and therefore blind men
cannot see in the day; because though the Sun shines, and things may be seen in
themselves, yet they want a light in the eye.

So, though the former darkness which lay upon the Mysseries of Heaven be taken
away, those legal shadows and curtains are removed, and the Sun of the Gospel
shines full upon our faces, yet we are blind within, there lies an inward
darkness upon our faculty: and the spirit must open our eyes, and give us a
vital light to join with the outward light.

4. Send up your prayers to Heaven: The holy Vapors of Prayer ascending, the
spirit comes down in showers upon the soul: The earth must send up Vapors,
before the Clouds can give down rain: And therefore Paul prays for the
Ephesians, That God would give them the spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, Ephesians.
1. 17, 18.
that the eyes of their understanding being enlightened, they might know what is
the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in
the saints.

5. He that would find the knowledge of Divine Mysteries, must seek it with a
sanctified mind.

That which enables us to know, and understand aright the things of God, must
be a living principle of Holiness in us.

As Plotinus says, The eye cannot behold the Sun (...) En. 1. l. 6.
unless it be Sun-like, and has the form and resemblance of the Sun drawn in
it: so neither can the soul of Man behold God, (...), unless it be God-like;
has God formed in it, and made partaker of the Divine Nature.

As in the natural body, it is the heart that sends up good blood, and warm
spirits into the head, whereby it is best enabled to its several Functions: So
in the spiritual fabric, it is the heart that sublimates the head, and stores
it with pure influences: the affections beget imaginations.

(...). Hom. Iliad. T. v. 44.
As the Treasurers of an Army give out Corn and Provision to the Soldiers.

Some men have too bad hearts to have good heads: they cannot be good at
Theory, who are so bad at the Practice.

Our Lord Christ hangs all true acquaintance with Divine Truths upon the doing
of Gods will: If any man will do his John 7. 17.
will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God.

Such as set themselves to do the will of God, shall know the Doctrines and
Mysteries of God.

Corrupt passions and earthly affections are apt of their own nature to disturb
all serene thoughts, to precipitate our Judgments, and warp our Understandings.

There is an inward sweetness and deliciousness in Divine Truth, which no
sensual mind can taste or relish.

And therefore the Platonists solicit so much [(...)] A separation from the
body in all those that would [(...)] purely understand truth.

The more our souls dive into our bodies, the more will reason and sensuality
run into one another, and make up a most unsavory and muddy kind of Knowledge.

And therefore wicked men, (let them imagine what they please) have no true
Knowledge of God: Such as men themselves are, such will God himself seem to be.

It is the Maxim of most wicked men, that the Deity is some way or other like
themselves; their souls do more than whisper it, though their lips speak it not.

That Idaea which men generally have of God, is nothing else but the picture of
their own complexion.

6. Know things as God does know them: God, to exercise the wisdom that he has
given to man, has planted a difference in the Creatures, and has given a
faculty to man to know, and make a right choice in those differences; and then
man does know things aright, when he knows them as God knows them; and then man
makes a right choice, when he chooses as God chooses.

Now God knows that riches are but little things; and that credit in the world
is but a shadow, and that honors in high places are but like leaves on the top
of a tree; And who would climb a tree to fetch a leaf?

But God knows that pardon of sin is a choice rarity.

7. Know things and judge of them as they are in another world: Whilst thou
live in the world, and have all things before thee, know and judge of them as
thou will; when thou art going out of the world, and have all things behind
thee; ah! my Beloved, when thy last sand is run out, thou will have a far
different opinion of the World, from what now thou have.

Use 7. As I desire you to know the Mysteries of Heaven, so I would have you to
know your selves, that you have an Interest in these blessed Mysteries; that
they are yours:

Salvation is a Mysteries; but if you know that salvation is yours; and the way
to salvation is a Mystery, but if you know that you are in the way; Ah! this is
the soul and sweetness of the Knowledge of the Mysteries of Heaveb: This is
(...), the Greece of Greece, the wheel in the wheel, the Heaven of that
heavenly Knowledge.

It is to no purpose to know that these things are Mysteries, unless we know
they be for us, and for our good, that Christ is ours, and that God is
reconciled to us.

Use 8. You Saints and Children of God, who enjoy this great privilege; Oh! go
you, and bless God, For unto you it is given to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Would it not have greatly ravished your hearts, had you been the persons
present to whom Christ spoke these words? Surely it would: But though Christ be
in Heaven, yet he has left this Text behind him, to speak to you, and to tell
you, It is given unto you to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but
to them it is not given.

Observe here two things:

1. It is a gift: To know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven (says Christ)
it is given to you: Dear souls! Flesh and Has. 16. 17.
blood has not revealed these things unto you, but your Father which is in
heaven.

Now gifts are received with thankfulness: even small gifts are taken
thankfully (...). Hom Odys. Plutarch. de Artaxcrxe Longimen.


It is said of Artaxerxes (...); There was no gift so small which he received
not kindly.

I say, we take small gifts thankfully, how much more spiritual gifts? Such
gifts as have Heaven and Salvation wrapped up in them? Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Ephesians. 1. 3.
Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in
Christ: These gifts are blessings; and for such blessings, Blessed be the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Thy Being is a gift, but grace added to it is a blessing: to be born is a
gift, but the new birth put to it is a blessing; otherwise, It had been good
for that man (says Christ) if he had never been born: To have Understanding
and Knowledge is a great gift, but to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven is a great blessing; Blessed are the eyes which see the things that Luke
10. 23.
ye see.

2. They are Mysteries: and will ye not bless God, that he should make
Mysteries known to you? They are Mysteries of his bosom; and is it nothing to
be Gods bosom-friends? They are the Mysteries of his secret, wise, and eternal
Counsels; And is it nothing to be Gods Privy-Counsellors? They are the
Mysteries of eternal life; And is it nothing to know the Rolls and Records of
eternity? (Saints, God has made ye his Cutodes Rotulorum) is not eternal life
a delicate flower to smell at? Is it nothing to see within the vail? Surely it
is a great privilege; therefore you may rejoice in it, and bless God for it.

And this leads us to the third Doctrine, which is this:

Doct. 3. The Divine Knowledge of the Mysteries of Heaven is given to some, not
to others.

In this Doctrine there are three things clear and obvious.

1. The Knowledge of Divine Mysteries is a gift. [To you it is given to know the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven].

What is given, is a gift: Divine Knowledge is a Divine gift: The Knowledge of
the Mysteries of Heaven is a gift from Heaven: To know God, it is from God:
Christ is the gift of God; and to know Christ is another gift: And therefore
the Apostle says, That faith is the gift of God. Ephesians. 2. 8. Psalm. 119. 125.


And therefore says David, Give me understanding, that I may know thy
testimonies: To understand the Divine Testimonies is a gift: God must not only
give us the Objects of Knowledge, but also the Knowledge of those Objects.

Man lost his Knowledge; and therefore must be created again, and renewed in
Knowledge after the image of him that Col. 3. 10.
created him.

God must set him up again with a new stock of Knowledge, else Man can know
nothing.

The Mysteries of Heaven in themselves are intelligible; they are glorious and
radiant Objects, they sparkle with splendor in our eyes; but blind men cannot
see light without a light: we are dark within, while the Mysteries of Heaven
shine (like the light) round about us: And therefore God must give the opening
of the eye to see the out-breaking of the light upon us.

2. The Knowledge of the Mysteries of Heaven is given to some: [To you it is
given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven]. I know (says Job) that
my Redeemer lives, Job. 19. 25. Verse. 26.
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: And though after my
skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.

Job knew the Mystery of Redemption, and in that glass he saw the Mystery of
the Resurrection. He knew one Mystery in another: In that he knew he was
redeemed, he knew he should rise again: Our redemption implies our
resurrection: Job, though he lived in dark times, yet he knew these Mysteires;
because to him it was given to know them: I know, Psalm. 119. 5.
O Lord (says David) that thy judgments are right, and that thou in
faithfulness have afflicted me. He knew

First, The judgments and dispensations of Divine Providence.

Secondly, And he knew that those Judgments were right.

Thirdly, And he knew the mystery and meaning of them, That God in faithfulness
had afflicted him.

Christ says, That his sheep know his voice: I am the good John 10 14.
shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine.

They are gifted with discerning, that they know the voice or Doctrine of
Christ: they are so well acquainted with the Mysteries of Heaven, that they
know what is the Doctrine, and what is not the Doctrine of Jesus Christ.

When it pleased God (says Paul) to reveal his Son in me: Gal. 1. 15, 16.
There was a time when the Mysteries of Heaven were veiled from Paul, and
afterward were revealed to Paul; God in his time gave him to know, what he did
not know before.

Thus you see the second point, That the Knowledge of the Mysteries of Heaven is
given to some.

3. The Knowledge of the Mysteries of Heaven is not given to others. Ye have
seen all that the Lord did before your eyes in Deuteronomy. 29. 2.
the land of Egypt unto Pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and to all his
land. The great temptations which thine eyes have Verse. 3. Verse. 4.
seen, the signs, and those great miracles: yet the Lord has not GIVEN you an
heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day

They saw much, and yet they saw little: They saw great things, and yet they
saw nothing; nothing to purpose: they had not a spiritual apprehension and use
of the great works they did see.

In Psalm. 82. 5, They know not, neither will they understand, Psalm. 82. 5.
they walk on in darkness, all the foundations of the earth are out of course.

The Psalmist speaks of such as were great men, the Judges of the earth, they
knew not how to administer Justice uprightly and impartially.

In Isa. 1. 3, The ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters Isa. 1. 3.
crib: but Israel does not know, my people does not consider. They are more
brutish than the brutes: Asses indeed, more sottish than the Ass: they eat and
drink, and seed upon Gods Provisions, and yet know not God who provides all for
them.

The Papists in their Legends abuse this place, and coin a Fable, that an Ox
and Ass being in the stable where Christ was born, took notice of him, and did
cherish him with their warm breath, as he lay in the manger.

The story is mere Fiction; but Sinners are so brutish, that they do not, what
the others fained the Ox and Ass to do.

The Lord Christ is come into the world, but they take no notice of him, he is
laid in the Manger of the Gospel, but they know him not; Did Christ lie in a
Manger for you, and shall he not lie in your bosoms? Ah Sinners! more brutish
than the Ox, and more silly than the Ass.

In Acts 14. 1, 2, There it is said that Paul and Barnabas Acts 14. 1, 2.
so spoke, that a great multitude of the Jews, and also of the Greeks,
believed: but the unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles].

Here to some was given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to
others 'twas not given.

In the 17th of the Acts, at the 32, 34 verses, When they Acts 17. 32.
heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked, but others 34. clave to
Paul, and believed]. Here to some was given to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven, but to others 'twas not given.

In Acts 28. 24, It Is said, That some believed the things Acts 28. 24.
which were spoken, and some believed not]. Here to some was given to know the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to others it was not given.

The Heathens could observe,

(...) Hom. Hliad.
That God does not give all things to all men.

(...),
(...).
(...)
To one man God gives Martial skill for War, to another the Art of dancing, to
another that of singing, and of music; but to another he gives a wise and
prudent mind.

In this dispensation of God (wherein to some he gives the Knowledge of Divine
Mysteries, to others he does not) I say in this dispensation there is both

Sovereignty and Justice:
First, In that he gives not to some the Knowledge of the Mysteries of Heaven,
there appears Sovereignty: For in another Text the Lord Christ says, Father,
thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them
unto babes -- Mat. 11, 25, 26.
Even so; Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.

Here Jesus Christ gives no other reason why the Mysteries of Heaven were hid
from the wise, and revealed to babes, but only his Fathers good will and
pleasure.

Secondly, In this dispensation of God, wherein the Knowledge of Divine
Mysteries is not given to some, the Justice of God appears: Which, that you may
understand, I lay down these two Propositions.

1. God has instituted means for the obtaining of supernatural grace.

2. Where God gives grace (in the use of means) he gives it freely; to whom God
gives not grace, he denies it justly.

1. God has instituted means for the obtaining of supernatural grace: For
faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God: The Lord has set the
stamp of Institution upon means wherein he will be found, as hearing the word,
And when they heard this, they were pricked at the heart.

Reading the Word, Prayer, and Meditation.

2. Where God gives grace in the use of means, he does it freely; and to whom
God gives not grace, he denies it justly.

1. Where God gives grace in the use of means, he gives it freely. Whether it
be in the outward means, or the inward preparatory work: for he is not tied by
the means to us.

Some say [ Facienti quod in se est, Deus dabit Gratiam ulteriorem], To him
that does what he can do, more shall be given him; but though God should
sometimes (or always) answer man in this kind, where do we find that he has
bound himself by Promise to do so?

Now I must show you, That where God gives not grace, he does it justly.

Under the Gospel, where God denies grace, he never does it but justly.

God observes a distributive Justice in it.

For the Saints (through grace) use the means to gain more grace; and Sinners,
they refuse all grace: For

1. In the Church, salvation according to Gods Promise is offered to all.

2. In the Church, the administration of grace is so high, as that it is
sufficient to convince all.

3. Sinners perish, and go without grace through their own fault. For,

1. They neglect the means of the Knowledge of the Mysteries of Heaven.

2. They despise the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven: And this reason Christ
renders of it at the 13th verse. Therefore spoke I to them in parables, because
they seeing, see not: and hearing, they hear not, neither do they understand:
As if he had said, such Minds as they bring to hear, such Sermons do I bring to
them, clothed with parables and obscurities: They that will not understand
things that are manifest, to them I wrap up my Sermons in clouds and darkness:
They have eyes to see my manifest signs and miracles, yet being blinded with
envy, they will not see what they see; They have ears, and hear the truth that
is irresutable, and yet in hearing they will not hear, i. e. they will not
receive it, neither do they understand, that is, it is so clear, that they may,
but they will not understand.

To speak more particularly,

1. Some will hear the Word, but not mind, it so as to understand it: their
punishment is, That as they will go no further with God, so God will go no
further with them, but denies unto them the spirit of Illumination, leaves
them blind as he found Math 13. 19.
them, and suffers Satan to take the word from them.

2. Some receive the word so far, as to understand it, but are not willing to
do it, they cannot digest the holiness of it; their lusts, and its purity
cannot stand together; their punishment is, That God will not make it further
effectual to promote their spiritual happiness; though they may receive the
spirit of Illumination, yet not of Conversion.

3. Some receive the word so far into their hearts, as to delight in it, and to
do something commanded, and obey it in some degree; They proceed to Profession,
and several measures thereof, but advance not to sincerity and perfection;
their punishment is, That the spirit of Sanctification and Adoption is denied
unto them, and for fear of Adversity, or love of the World, they deny the truth
in a day of trial.

Thus when we say, The Knowledge of the Mysteries of Heaven is given to some,
and not given to others; to those to whom it is given, it is given freely; to
those to whom it is not given, it is denied justly: For this denial is a
punishment, and therefore just: sinners deserve it, that it should be so.

The elect can speak of underserved-grace, and the reprobate of deserved
punishment.

God is so just, that he does not condemn any but for sin: so gracious, that he
does not condemn all that do sin.

Though God will save miserable men without their merits, because he is good;
yet he will not damn any without their demerits, because he is just.

But to give you a clearer Prospect of this Truth, that the Divine Knowledge of
the Mysteries of Heaven is given to some, not to others; Observe,

First, Sometimes God makes choice of an Alien, an Heathen, before his own
people in Covenant with him: As you may see in Jeremiah 38. 7, 8. verses, He
gives an Ethiopian Jerem. 38. 7, 8.
grace, which he gave not to many a Jew: Ebedmelech was an Ethiopian, yet a
Saint; a black Ethiopian, but a white Saint: V
None speaks for the Prophet but he: an Ethiopian saves the Prophet, whom the
Jews did persecute:

Where observe

1. How God picks one out of a whole Nation: God makes choice of Ebedmelech
above all the Nation of the Ethiopians:

The whole Nation of his Contrymen lay under the black Vail of darkness and
ignorance, while he knew the Mysteries of Heaven.

2. The wonder of Gods Providence, how it brings about the Salvation of a
person, whom he means to save.

God brings Ebedmelech out of his own Country, to make him a Saint: how he
came thither, to live in the King of Judah's Court, there is no mention of it;
but this we know, that he was brought thither upon the Wing of Providence, to
know God, and to be saved.

3. God gives grace to Ebedmelech, and makes choice of him before many of his
own people in Covenant with him.

Secondly, He prefers the Servant before the Master: All the Phil. 4. 22.
saints salute you, chiefly they that are of Caesar's household: This Caesar was
Nero, in whose palace Saint Paul's bonds were made Phil. 1. 13.
manifest: So that some of his Servants were made Christians, who afterward
proved Martyrs, namely Evellius and Torpetes, if we may believe the Roman
Martyrology; here the Vassal receives the Gospel, which the Emperor does not:
The servants are made lambs while their Lord and Master remains a Lion; for so
is he styled in 2 Timothy 4. 17.

Thirdly, God prefers the poor before the rich: a poor Lazarus before a rich
Dives: he drops his golden showers of grace upon a low shrub, and over-looks
the tall Cedar: The truth of it is, Dives was poor, Lazarus was rich; Lazarus
had more gold in his Soul, than Dives had in his Purse.

Has not God chosen the poor in this world, rich in faith Jam. 2. 5.
[i. e. to be rich in Faith] and heirs of the Kingdom? As we Jam. 2. 5.
read it, Has not God chosen the poor in this world, rich in faith: Some would
argue, that they were chosen, because rich in faith, as if their faith foreseen
were the cause of their choice: but the meaning is, Has not God chosen the
poor in this world [to be] rich in faith.

[ (...)] is understood, as in many other Texts].

Fourthly, Christ Jesus in the dispensations of grace, preferred strangers
above natural relations: He gives not grace according to natural relation: he
passed by many of his kindred: For neither did his brethren believe in him.
John 7. 5. Trap. in Loc.


And this the Jews at this day, read with such wonderment, that they take
occasion from this Text to slander our Saviors miracles, since his own kindred
believed not in him: but they are ignorant of the Mystery of Free Grace.

And indeed, a man would have thought, that Christ Jesus would have given grace
to his kindred before others; that he would have passed by none of his kindred;
but though they were kin to him in the flesh, yet he was God, and so above all
Kindred and Relation to them: In respect of his Humane Nature, he was of the
same blood with them; but as God, he had no relation to them; Kindred and
Consanguinity is below the Godhead: Consanguinity runs in a line of blood, but
God partakes not of flesh and blood.

Obj. But you will say, methinks the Humane Nature of Christ should have
desired the conversion of his kindred more than others, and prevailed with the
Godhead for grace for them.

Resp. 1. The nearer one is united to God, the less he partakes of himself, and
the more of God: Christ's Humane Nature united to the Deity, willed nothing with
a private will, but all with an elevated will, moving according to the will of
the God head.

2. A Saint, as far as he is sanctified, wills nothing, but what God wills; but
Christ's Humane Nature was united personally to the Godhead.

The Saints are mystically united to God by Faith, morally united to God in
love and affection; but Christ's Humane Nature was personally united to the
Godhead, and therefore was more nearly united to God, than to all natural
relation or kindred.

Fifthly, Sometimes he passes by the Children of Saints, and graffs in the
Children of a profane stock: he takes pearls out of Toads-heads, and digs
golden mines out of a barren and dry earth; for ordinarily golden and silver
Mines grow in the most barren Grounds and Mountains, not in your fruitful and
rich soyls.

Samuel was a noble plant, yet his Children degenerate 1 Samuel 8. 3.
branches; His sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre, and
perverted judgment.

Josiah was a curious and rare flower; yet his Sons that came 2 Kings 23. 30,
32, 34, 37 verses.
from him were the worst that might be.

Sixthly, Sometimes he puts a difference between Sons of the same Womb; takes
the one, and passes by the other; Seals the one, and leaves a blank on the
other: Jacob and Esau were twins of the same Womb; two Kernels in the same
Pomgranate, and the Lord put a difference between them betimes, [ The children
Romans 9. 11.
being not yet born, neither having done either good or evil] makes choice of
the one, repudiates the other, [ Jacob have Verse. 13.
I loved, but Esau have I hated].

Seventhly, Sometimes he prefers the younger before the elder; and so makes the
first, last, and the last, first: and thus the Lord crosses man; for man
writes Praerogaetive upon his first born, and makes him the first in his love;
but God comes and writes quite contrary, and faith, I choose this for mine, and
leave the elder.

As Zachary, when all his friends would have his Son called Luke 1. 57. 63.
Zachariah (his Fathers name) he, when the writing Tables are brought him,
writes his name, John; and they admired at it: So when men write their eldest
Sons, heirs of Heaven; God comes, and strikes out their names, and writes the
younger in his Book of Life: Thus did God by Jacob and Esau, the elder Romans 9.
12.
shall serve the younger; And when Isaac resolved to lay the blessing upon
Esau, God ordered it so, that Jacob the younger should have it.

As when Joseph brought his two Sons to Jacob to bless, he prefers the younger
before the elder.

David was Jesses youngest Son, despised among his Brethren, 1 Samuel 16. 6. 7,
14. verses.
he was Jesses youngest Son, but the Lord made him the eldest.

Among the three Sons of Noah, there is a controversy about their Primacy.

Cham, though the youngest, yet will be preferred above his Brethren, if we
stand to the judgment of the Poets, who derive Jove (or Jupiter) from Cham.

Again, We shall give the first place to Japhet, who was the eldest Son, if we
follow the order of Nature; but to Sem, if we follow the order of Grace, whom
God preferred before his Brethren, not of merit, but out of free grace, and mere
indulgence.

That Cham was the youngest of the Sons of Noah, you have an express in Genesis 9.
24, and that Sem was not the firstborn, Genesis 9. 24.
it is manifest out of Genesis 11. 10, Where it is said, That Sem Genesis 11. 10.
was one hundred years old, and begat Arphaxad two years after the flood: That
is in the year of Noah's age, six hundred and two; for the flood came in the
six hundredth year of Noah, Genesis 7. 11, It follows that Noah begat Sem in his
year five Genesis 7. 11.
hundred and two; seeing he had begotten his firstborn two years before, for
he began to beget Children in his year five hundred, Genesis 5. 32. Therefore Sem
was two years younger Genesis 5. 32.
than his brother that was firstborn, that is Japhet, who is therefore called
the elder, Genesis 10. 21. Genesis 10. 21.


Therefore Japhet being the firstborn of all the three, yet God preferred Sem
before him; to show that his Election was fire, and not tied to the prerogative
and worthiness of Age; and to show that there was not the same order of Grace,
which is of Nature.

For nature gave many privileges to the firstborn; and presently from the
beginning of the World, God subjected Abel to Cain his elder brother; unto thee
shall be his desire, Genesis 4. 7.
and thou shall rule over him; yet in grace he subjected Cain to Abel: The Lord
had respect to Abel, and to his offering: Verse. 4, 5.
but unto Cain and his offering, he had not respect.

Eighthly, He prefers the child before the father; he gives grace to the child,
which he denies the father; makes choice of the child, refuses the father.

The Prophet said of the wicked Jeroboams Son, All Israel shall mourn for him,
for he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave, 1 King. 14. 13.
because in him there is found some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel.

And sometimes he chooses the Father, and passes by the Child: he forgave Adam
his sin (though he damned the whole world) and cast off Cain for ever.

Ninthly, God makes some sharers in the same deliverance, who share not in the
same grace: as the ten Lepers, he gave them the same cure, not the same grace:
he gave them all a cure, only to one grace: Were there not ten cleansed? where
are Luke 17. 17.
the nine? There are not found that returned to give glory to God, save this
stranger.

So the Sons of Noah, were all saved in the same Ark, and yet not all made
partakers of the same Faith.

We shall now give you the Application of this Point; And first,

Use 1. See by what tenure the Saints hold and receive all their grace; By gift.

1. The first work of grace in the soul is a gift: No man can come to me (says
Christ) except it were given him from John 6. 65. Romans 5. 5.
above: and Romans 5. 5, All is given: It is grace that we have grace: the
grace of God, that we have grace from God.

2. The addition and increase of grace is a gift; every little degree of grace
is a gift; and when he gives more, still it is more gift.

3. Heaven it self is a gift: The gift of God is eternal life: Romans 6. 27.
mark the whole verse; The wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is
eternal life.

Eternal death is a wages, eternal life is a gift: men deserve it, when they
are damned: but they deserve it not, when they are saved: their sins are worthy
of Death, but their graces are not worthy of Life; And the reason is,

1. Because men's sins are their own, and therefore deserve death.

As Christ speaking of the Devil, says, When he speaks a John 8. 44.
lie, he speaks of his own: Our lies and our sins are our own works, but our
graces are not our own: we are beholden to God, in that we have grace: when we
serve him with our graces, we serve him but with his own.

2. Because our sins being perfectly sinful, are worthy of death; but our
graces being not perfectly gracious, are not worthy of life.

Use 2. Is grace a free gift? then serve God freely: We cannot be too free in
serving him, from whom every thing is a free-gift.

I may rightly apply that Text to the Saints; Freely ye Math. 10. 8.
have received, freely give: I am sure you have freely received grace; serve
him freely with your grace: And therefore a Servant is in Greek called (...),
which comes from (...), Luke 15. 17.
a reward; because servants serve not their Master freely (as his Sons do,
merely, because he is their Father) but for reward.

What is it to serve God freely?

1. To count it a greater good to serve God, than to be saved: not as if a man
should not serve God with an eye to his salvation; for 'twere a sin if he
should not, because the recompense of reward is the great Promise; and 'twere a
sin not to prize, and eye, and look up to any promise of God; I say we are
bound to serve God with an eye to the recompense of reward, because it is the
Promise of God; now we are to make the best of every promise; to improve the
promise, and to make the best advantage of it, for the quickening of our graces,
and the cheering up of our spirits: The promises are helps, and we are bound to
use all Gods Helps. And therefore Heb. 12. 2.
we may set our salvation before us, and aim at it.

But yet (still) this we should do, (and if we serve God freely, will do it)
count it a greater good to serve God, than to be saved; to glorify God, than
to be glorified.

Indeed the Lord says. Them that honor me, I will honor; This is his
goodness; yet Gods Honor is a greater good than our honor: It is a greater
good that God be glorified, than that we should be glorified: because the Glory
of God is the good of the Creator; but our glory is but the good of the
Creature.

2. To serve God freely, is to serve him willingly: As we say of a man that
does a thing willingly, he does it freely: for that is the very essence of the
Will: that which is not done freely, is not done with the Will.

Oh observe thy self! Thou [Professor] it may be prayest in thy closet, but if
thou durst omit it, thou would not pray; thou art not drunk; but if thou
durst for shame, thou would not be so temperate; now thou do not pray nor
abstain from sin willingly and freely.

3. To serve God freely, is to serve him abundantly: to be liberal in his
service: He that is no niggard, but is liberal in his gifts, we call him free:
So he that serves God freely, is no niggard of his service; he is very liberal
of his service to God: As we say of a man that is liberal of his Fare, and
liberal in his House; he is free, he cares not what he spends upon his friends;
he provides bountifully for them; he calls for his Wines and Sweetmeats about
him, and thinks nothing too much for them; we say this man has a free and
noble spirit: so the Saints that serve God freely, think they can never do
enough for him: he makes abundant Provision to entertain Christ, and sets a
long Table full of Services, like so many dishes before him.

When Christ said to Zachaeus, To day I must abide at thy Luke 19. 5.
house: How did Zachaeus entertain him? Wondrous liberally: says he, Behold
Lord, half of my goods I give to the poor: Verse 8.
and if I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him
fourfold: Zachaeus was wondrous free; Christ Jesus might have any thing of him
without speaking.

A Saint cares not what he spends upon Christ; will thou have me give away one
lust? yea, says Christ; there it is; another, says Christ; there it is Lord,
another yet, says Christ; there it is Lord; nay all, says Christ; take all
then.

Veniat, veniat, Verbum Domini (says one) Et submittemus ei sexcenta, si nobis
essent, Colla: Let the Word of the Lord come, let it come; and we will submit six
hundred necks to it, if we had them.

Nay, but not thy lusts only, but thy life too, says Christ; take it then:
says St. Paul, I am ready not to be bound only, Acts 21. 13.
but also to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.

Use 3. Is grace a gift? then count thy work a gift: not a burden, but a gift;
not a toil, but a gift: look upon every labor, and every service and
obedience for God, as a gift: As a Woman, though she travel in pain, yet counts
her Child a gift from God: As the Text says, Lo, Children are an heritage
Psalm. 127. 3.
of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his reward: The mother counts her
child a gift: for who can create a soul in the Womb but the Lord? Who can form
the shape and structure of a man in the Womb, but the Lord? So, though thou
labor and travel in birth of Service for the Lord, though thy Service for God
may cost thee many a pang; yet count it a gift: As Jesus Christ did, The works
which the Father has Joh. 5. 36. John 17. 4.
GIVEN me: And I have finished the work which thou gave me to do: Lo, Our
Savior counts his work a gift; so should we take it for a favor, that he
employs us, that we may do him any service, or have any office about him.

Nay to suffer for Christ, and lose all for Christ, count it a gift; As Paul
tells the Philippians, Unto you it is given in Phil. 1. 29.
the behalf of Christ, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for his
sake: To suffer for Christ, was given them, as a great favor: sufferings are a
gift, as well as Faith.

As Latimer said, The greatest promotion that God gives in this world, is to be
such Philippians, to whom it is given not only to believe, but also to suffer.

And Ignatius professed, he had rather be a Martyr, than a Monarch: And the
Apostles rejoiced, that they were graced, Acts 5. 41.
so as to be disgraced for Jesus Christ.

Use 4. Make sure of Heaven then, since the Knowledge of the Mysteries of Heaven
is a gift to some, not to all.

How should we make our calling and election sure, since many are called, and
but few chosen?

Give diligence to make thy calling sure, seeing he gives grace but to some,
not to all; since he sends pardons but to some, not to all.

We need not doubt the attaining of that which none at all miss, nor any are
ever put by it: But when a thing of price and worth is given only to some, not
to all, there we should make sure work.

You that hope for Heaven, make sure of Heaven; for hopes disappointed will
break the heart: If hope deferred makes the heart sick, surely hopes
disappointed will make the heart break.

Oh do not hang upon rotten hopes: as a man that hangs over a deep River by a
Rope or Cord, there he hangs and hopes, and hopes and hangs, but if his Cord
break and snap asunder, there he falls, and never rises more; so many hang
over Hell by the Cord of hope; and if thy Cord of hope breaks (as it will, if
it be but rotten) thou art gone; Man, thou art gone if thou had a thousand
souls: And therefore do not hang upon a weak Cord of uncertain hope; but upon
the golden Cord of Faith and Assurance.

If you say, How may we attain Assurance? I answer you,

First, God gives assurance in Gods way: if God gives assurance, certainly he
will give it in God's way: Therefore, Sirs, never expect it in a way of sin;
for sin is not God's way.

I am told by a most learned man, That Assurance by our Divines Mr. Woolbridge
of Hustification, Page 292.
is wont to be made a part of Sanctification, and may very well be included in
the sanctification of the spirit, (1 These. 5. 23.) as distinct-from Soul and
Body.

Secondly, Seek not assurance in the way of the World: the World is a stranger
to assurance; this is such a flower, as grows not in the Worlds garden; the
world and assurance are Antipodes: And therefore if ever you would meet with
assurance, do not as the world does: For do ye not know, That narrow is the way
that leads to life, and few there be that find it? And therefore you run from
assurance, if you follow the world: Oh tremble then to go in the way of the
world! If thou will follow the most, I tell thee, the most will be damned:
Assurance lies East, and the world goes West; if thou follow the world, the
Sun of assurance will set upon thee.

The Apostle says, That the Devil is the God of the world, who 2 Cor. 4. 4.
has blinded their minds.

And he tells you, That the Saints are chastened of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 32.
that they may not be CONDEMNED with the world.

Where then can the world or her Children meet with assurance? They may be
assured of Hell, but not of Heaven.

Our Lord Christ says, I pray not for the world, but for John 17. 9.
them which thou have given me, for they are thine: The Lord Jesus does not
spend one breath to pray for the world; and where then is the assurance of the
world?

Thirdly, It is but a few special ones that wear the golden chain of assurance
about their necks: and therefore you must be choice Christians if you would
have this white stone, and the new name written in it.

It is not every measure of true grace that affords assurance: ordinary Saints
have it not; and therefore advance; Sirs, you must advance higher, you must be
peculiar ones, if you would enjoy assurance: All the Children know not their
Fathers secrets, but the choicest of them.

Fourthly, Assurance is a work of the greatest diligence: And therefore says
Peter, Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure.

Lazy souls will never arrive at it: he that would have it, must be familiar
and intimate with God.

Enoch, who was translated, was one that walked with God; and you that would be
translated into the Heaven of assurance, must be persons walking with God: You
must take many a turn with him: you must dwell in his Presence; you must pray
hard, and lay fast hold upon him.

As it is said of Thetys, that when she came to ask a request of Jupiter,

-- -- -- -- (...), Hom. Iliad A. v. 512.

(...).
She laid fast hold upon his knees, and held him as if she had been ingrafted
into him, and would not leave him.

So vigorously must you pursue God in Prayer that would have assurance; you
must wrestle with him, and lay hold on him, as if you were incorporated into
him.

Use 5. Tremble at the severity of God in his spiritual administrations.

His judicial punishments upon the souls of men are very dreadful.

To you it is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven]: here is
exceeding mercy.

But to others it is not given], here is exceeding severity.

The Lord knows how to meet with sinners in their own way: to shape his
judgments to their deservings.

Ignorance is their sin, and Ignorance shall be their punishment.

He will speak in parables to them, and he will act in parables to them; his
Word shall be parables, and his Works shall be parables to them: They shall
understand nothing that he says, and nothing that he does: he will walk every
step in the dark toward them, all his paths shall be covered with Clouds: in
all his teachings, and in all his walkings, there shall be a mist before their
eyes: though he says, This is the way to heaven, walk in it; yet they shall
not see the way: they would not, and now they shall not.

Oh that thou had known in this thy day the things that belong to thy peace!
but now they are hid from thine eyes: They did hide their eyes from their
peace, and now their peace is hid from their eyes.

Consider, What are the things whose Knowledge is not given you: The Mysteries
of the Kingdom of Heaven: What, Sirs, Is it the matters of Heaven that are
kept from you? A curtain drawn between you and heaven? Now God's angry indeed:
A cloud set up to darken salvation and eternal life from you? Lord, here is thy
greatest severity.

Nay, he infatuates the wise, and takes the understanding from the prudent.

He is a severe God to those that act against the light.

-- (...) Homer Odys. PS.

(...).
God has made thee mad, who can make the wisest man a fool, and strip him of
his Intellectuals.

Do we not see men whom we call wise, damn themselves understandingly?

God draws an horrid Eclipse upon their minds, and their See Isa. 29. 10, 11,
12, 13, 14 verses,
Sun of Wisdom sets upon them; they run madly upon their ruin, and most
skilfully plot their own destruction.

God struck Nebuchadnezzar mad, and he was driven from Dan. 4. 33.
men, and did eat grass as Oxen; his hairs were grown like eagles feathers, and
his nails like birds claws: he was turned into a beast by the Judgment of God.

And therefore Sinners are called in Scripture, Lions, and Bears, and Wolves,
and Dogs.

God bereaves them of their understanding, they bark against Religion, like
Dogs, and bite the Saints like Dogs; they run about snarling and snapping at
Gods ways and his People, like mad Dogs.

Thus God is severe in his spiritual Judgments, he infatuates the wise, and
makes them fools: they carry on most artificially their own damnation.

Use 6. Sinners, see your spiritual misery: and my God open your eyes, that you
may see it.

1. You have seen many things, and if you see not your own misery, you see
nothing: It may be you have seen miserable Objects; but if you see not your
soul-misery, you have seen nothing.

You have seen War in the Land; you have seen garments rolled in blood; you
have seen your own or other men's estates plundered; you have heard the noise of
the Trumpet, and the beating of the Drum in your streets.

But now, if in a day of peace, you see not God at War with your selves; if you
see not the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven denied to you; if you see not
your selves plundered of Heaven, and stripped of light and life; if you see not
your spiritual estate wallowing in its blood; if you hear not the Trumpet of
the Gospel calling you to Repentance; if you hear not the Drum of Conscience
beating against sin in your own bosoms; whatever you have heard, or seen, you
have seen and heard nothing.

2. Much communicable, and nothing had, is not this miserable? Heaven drops,
and it drops fatness, and yet your souls so lean, is not this a Mystery? So
much to be had, and so little enjoyed, makes me wonder and grieve. Light
communicable, and yet men have no light; Grace communicable, and yet men
without grace; Heaven communicable, and yet men drop every day to Hell: This is
an aggravation of Misery: Ah sinners! in your Fathers house is bread enough,
feasting, banqueting, glorious dishes in Wisdoms house; how is it that you
have nothing?

3. Your sins are aggravated, and so will your condemnation be; you seeing, see
not; and hearing, you hear not; you hear and see, and yet understand not: Does
not this aggravate your sins, and make them exceeding sinful? You are called,
and yet you have refused: God has stretched out his hands, and yet you have
not regarded; you shut your eyes, and stop your ears, lest you should be
converted; and does not this greaten your sins, and make them odious? Glorious
power works in the world, and yet men lie in their sins: Power works
gloriously, but you feel none, you are under the power of sin, as if there were
no Power of God at all working in the World.

Sinners, this leaves you wholly without excuse; there is power enough working
to subdue the strongest lust; what can you plead? How great is that sin which
is committed under the neglect of glorious power! within the reach of a
glorious arm! As there is a glorious power, so there be glorious sins,
splendida peccata, scarlet, crimson sins; and these are such as are committed
against glorious means, glorious light, grace, and aid.

Men sin, and lay it upon their weakness, and so rest and rub on: Ah Lord! what
a life is this! God will judge you, and lay it upon your wickedness and
wilfulness: for is not glorious Power present to raise you up? Weakness becomes
wickedness, when it is rested in, and pleaded for: A soul given to shifting,
has no mind to leave his sin; there is no damning temper like this: you say,
you have no power to come out of sin; it is not fo, there is the Power of God in
the Gospel present and ready for you to lift you up: And therefore there must
be no pleading for sin, no not for any sin, though never so great and strong:
The remedy, the power is so gloriously All-sufficient.

Dub. But I pray you, Sir, tell us, How shall we know that the Knowledge of the
Mysteries of Heaven is not given unto us?

Answ. 1. You that sleep in your lost estate, to you the Knowledge of the
Mysteries of Heaven is not given: The Mysteries of Hell and Damnation are made
known to you, and yet you awake not: What soul is there that does awake?

2. When a man can love a sin in the very face of Divine Mysteries, in the very
face of Mercy, and the face of Glory.

3. When the more God forbids a sin, the more you bid for it: When the more the
Commandment comes, sin becomes the more sinful, and the heart the more
stubborn; when the more the spirit strives, the more sin thrives; the more the
spirit strives against thy lust, the more thou strivest to hold fast thy lust:
From this man is the Knowledge of the Mysteries of Heaven shut up: let him look
to himself be-times.

Use 7. Sinners, go not on to provoke God to deny you the Knowledge of the
Mysteries of Heaven.

I told you (in the Explication of this Point) that God in denying to some the
Knowledge of the Mysteries of Heaven, observes a Method of Justice; that is,
Sinners deserve it and procure it at the Hands of God: I say Sinners deserve
blindness and obduration.

First, [sensu Negativo] in a Negative sense, because they deserve not softness
of heart, that God should mollify them; they deserve not this special mercy.

Secondly, They deserve blindness and hardness of heart in an Affirmative
sense; because by their Additional sins, and daily resistings, they deserve a
further Hardness and Tradition [(...)] to a Reprobate mind.

Use 8. Try your graces: Gifts will not save you: see that you have not the
gift of Knowledge, but the grace of Knowledge: not the gift of Prayer, but the
grace of Prayer: See that you have not good parts, but parts in Christ, as our
Lord said, Mary has chosen that good part which shall not be taken Luke 10. 42.
from her.

No man has good parts, till he has part in Christ.

Would you try your graces? know then,

1. Grace acts inwardly. It works upon the heart, upon the vitals: it works
upon the subject it is in: as physic works upon Nature, so does grace; it
works upon the very nature and constitution.

2. It acts Divinely: it does all for God, and for Divine ends: He that has
the gift of Prayer, prays for himself, that he may show himself, as David said
to King Achish, Thou shall 1 Samuel 28. 2.
know what thy servant can do: But he that has the grace of Prayer, prays
for God; he does not only pray to God, but for God, that he may have more of
God, and less of himself: more communion with God, less communion with himself:
he that has the grace of Prayer, prays for grace.

He that has the grace of patience, suffers Divinely; because God will have
him suffer; as David said concerning Shimei, Let him alone, (says he) for God
has bid him curse David. 2 Samuel 16. 10.


He that has the Grace of Obedience, obeys Divinely, he acts with Divine
raptures of love to God, and zeal for his Glory.

3. It acts universally: As the Sun being in the Heavens, runs its course over
all the World; so the soul that is fixed in an Heaven of grace, runs its course
and motion through all the Commandments.

As the Apostles being universal pastors, were not fixed to any place, but went
Preaching the Gospel all the world over; so those that are universal Saints,
limit and fix themselves to no Commandment, but travel over all the world of
Gospelprecepts.

Use 9. This speaks admirable comfort to many sorts of men, who start up doubts
and scruples against themselves, and follow the scent of them too far, so as to
hinder them in the way of believing.

Dub. 1. Says a doubting soul, I am a poor man, and despised in the world, and
will the Lord reveal his Mysteries of Heaven to me? Will the Lord look upon me?

Sol. And why not upon thee? Though the Lord be high, yet he looks low: He
humbles himself to behold the children of men.

1. The Lord will not despise thee in that thou art poor, because it is the
condition himself has put thee in: Now the Lord does never despise his own
work: he despises Satan's work, and Man's work, which is sin; but he does never
despise his own work; he that made thee poor, will not despise thy poverty.

Thou can not be worse than a beggar, a blind beggar; we count a beggar to be
in a low condition, but a blind beggar that cannot see to work for his living,
we count him very low; and yet Christ gives grace to such, Mark 10. 47, He was
blind, and yet he saw Christ by Faith: for as soon as ever he heard it was
Jesus, He cried out, Jesus, thou Son of David, (i. e. the Messiah) have mercy
on me.

Christ Jesus before he came at him, sent his spirit to teach him to say [
Jesus thou Son of David] Christ Jesus came by that way on set-purpose to reveal
himself to the poor beggar.

2. Thy Savior was poor, and therefore no marvel if the poor be saved: He that
made Christ poor, will make the poor, Christians.

3. To choose, God will reveal his Mysteries to the poor rather than to the
rich: not that he does despise riches, but because the rich despise him; they
are proud of their riches, and think that God is engaged to save them above
others, because they are great above others: They that are rich in estate; are
rich in conceit.

Dub. 2. But I have but an ordinary Trade; and will the Lord give grace to me?

Sol. Why not to thee? The Lord had as leif Trade with thee, as with any other.

The Apostles (many of them) were but Fishermen, and yet the Lord Christ caught
them in his Net: his spirit moved upon their Waters, and took them out of the
depths of sin, and revealed the glories of Heaven to them, so as to none ever
before or after them.

A Fisherman is as ordinary a Trade as any in the World, and yet Christ
preferred them above all the World, and made them the greatest men in Heaven
and Earth; for himself sits next the Father, and the Apostles next him.

Dub. 3. But I am a Servant, an Apprentice, I am an Handmaid, whose work is the
meanest drudgery in the house, and will the Lord reveal to me the Mysteries of
Heaven?

Sol. And why not to thee? especially if thou art humble: If thy Master trust
thee with his Estate and Cash, will not God trust thee with his Jewels and
Graces?

God is an humble God, and will sit with the servant at the lower end of the
Table, as well as with the Master at the upper end of the Table.

Nay with God all are round Tables, there is no upper end; he respects not the
Master more than the Servant, in matters Ephesians. 6. 9.
of grace.

Thou say, I am but a servant, I sit not down with my Master at Table, I
wait:

So does Free Grace, it waits too:

Thy condition is not so low, but Free grace goes lower: God waits to be
gracious. Isa. 30. 18.


Dogs are lower than Servants: and yet Christ gives grace to Dogs; to the Woman
of Canaan, whom he called a Dog, Oh woman great is thy Faith!

The Children of Israel were but Servants and Bondmen in Egypt; and yet God
appeared to them, not to Pharaoh: Thou do the basest service in the house,
and they made Brick, and yet God appeared to them, not to Pharaoh.

Joseph was but a servant, and yet how familiar was God with him? It is worth
your noting: Joseph was a Servant all along. A servant to his Brethren, they
sold him (as his Masters) into Egypt.

He was a servant in Potiphar's house, and yet God reveals his Presence to him
there: When his Mistress tempted him, says he, How can I do this great
wickedness and sin against God?

A man may be a servant to men, and yet not a servant to his lusts, and then
God appears to thee:

Joseph, when he was cast in the Prison, was worse than a servant, and yet God
was with him there: God keeps company with Joseph from service to prison, and
gives him favor in the Jaylours eyes, and he trusts him with all his
Prisoners: When men have command over their lusts, God gives them command over
men.

Dub. 4. But (yet says a soul) I am a foolish man, an unlearned man, and will
the Lord reveal his Mysteries to me?

Sol. And why not to thee? The Lord loves to be making the foolish, wise: and
Jesus Christ saw a great deal of beauty in it, when he said I thank thee, oh
Father, that thou have hid Mar. 11. 25.
these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes.

What Beauty may we read in this work?

The wondrous skill and power of God, appears in it: you count him a rare
Schoolmaster that can make Idiots and Fools Scholars; How do you admire his
Art in Teaching? This sets out the Lords skill, and speaks him admirable: When
the scribes and pharisees saw the boldness of Peter and John, and Acts 4. 13.
perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled; and they
took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus.

Is it not a rare sight to see a child speak sentences, and pose an aged man
with Wisdom? Thus when Christ was but a child (twelve years old) and posed the
Doctors, in the Temple; The Text says, They were astonished at it.

Use 10. Oh! awake your selves then: feed not your selves with idle dreams of
an universal grace, as if ye could not miss of Heaven.

Is it not time to awake, when salvation (like a Rose) grows not in every ones
garden? When the Beams of grace shine not in at every ones Window? when there
are so many professors, and so few saints? When the Knowledge of the Mysteries
of Heaven treads not over every man's threshold, but only goes into that heart
where God sends them.

There were two Thieves crucified with Christ on the Cross, the one is taken,
the other left: Two Sons in Rebeccha's Womb, ( Jacob and Esau) the one is
taken, and the other left. There were ten Virgins, five of them taken, and five
left: Ah, Lord, how narrow is thy number!

Whilst the Minister is Preaching, the spirit, like an Archer, shoots the arrow
of Conversion into such an one's heart, and hits him, and passes by many an
one; he shoots his Arrow by so many, and hits one or two.

Oh, how should this awake you! Lord, hit my heart: Lord, make me thy mark; do
not miss my soul, but hit, Lord: I am an unclean wretch, make my black heart,
thy white to shoot at: Lord, I am a drunkard, level thine Arrow of grace at my
heart: shoot stedy, Lord, take thine aim, and shoot thy Darts through my deadly
lusts.

Lord, I am an unbeliever, I cannot believe the promise; take such a word of
pardon, and dart it into my soul, that I may believe.

Lord, I have heard many Sermons, and thou have not hit me yet; I have sat
under the showers of grace a long time, and every drop has yet fallen besides
me: thine Arrows have fled about mine ears, and not one yet stuck in my sides.

Content not your selves then, in that ye live under the means of grace.

Object. But is not this an hindrance to our conversion, a great block in our
way, in that God gives grace to some, not to all? In that many are called, but
few are chosen?

Answ. No, none at all; nay it is a huge furtherance to grace and conversion,
in that it is the gift of God.

I think grace may sooner be had, in that it is in Gods hand to give, than if
it were in our power to get: Who would doubt of having grace from such an hand?
I say, from such an hand, who has such a large and bounteous heart? And
therefore if you ask, should we not be more certain if our salvation did depend
on none but our selves.

I answer, no: For we ought to be much more distrustful of our selves than of
God, who loves us more than we love our selves: And in a doubtful and difficult
case, it is better to commit our selves to the mercy and goodness of God, than
to our own power.

And therefore I would demand of thee, Can thou ask for grace?

Who ever went without grace, but 'twas his own fault? he had it not, because
he would not seek it: he went without it, because he did not care for it.

Object. But in that grace is the gift of God, and not in the dispose of man;
Is it not enough to take men off from duty and endeavor, and make them secure,
and negligent of their salvation?

No such matter: For seeing on the one side, we cannot say, Grace shall be
denied us; and on the other side, we are bound to Cooperate with grace, and
work out our salvation; we ought therefore so to act [ Ac si Gratia semper
adesset] as if grace were always present; and yet so, as if the whole business
lay in us: We should walk between sloth and pride: God is to be sought and
prayed to, as if the whole did depend upon him; and we must so act, as if the
whole did depend upon us: We see this in Scripture, [ Work out your salvation
with fear and trembling] as if the whole lay upon us; [ For it is God that
works in you both to will and to do] as if the whole lay upon him.

God told Joshuah and the Israelites by express Revelation, that he would fight
for them against the Nations, and give them victory; and yet they did act
themselves, and pursue their business, as if the whole success were in their
power.

Election is not to be looked on but in Christ, nor Reprobation Mr. Bradford.
but in Sin; seek to be delivered from sin, and fear not Reprobation: But if
thou will not, thou shall find no excuse in the last day.

2. Thou makes a wrong use of this sort of Doctrine in Scripture, [ Many are
called, but few are chosen: to you it is given to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven, to them it is not given]: For this is set down in Scripture,
not to feed thee with infidelity, but to terrify thee from the fame, to stir
thee up to believe; not to hinder, but to put thee on to believe, to make thee
more careful to believe.

3. As the command of believing reaches to you, so does the promise: The
promise belongs to you all (though not the benefit of the promise; but only to
so many as do believe), I say the promise belongs to you all.

To clear this:

1. See Heb. 4. 1, Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being Heb. 4. 1.
left unto us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of
it (through unbelief).

Mark the words, [ there is a promise left unto us]; so doubt not but the
promise belongs to thee; only beware thou come not short of it through unbelief.

Thou fear that the promise belongs not to thee; but the Apostle bids thee
fear, lest a promise being left thee (or belonging to thee), thou come short of
it through unbelief.

It Is clear, That the promise is to those, who come short of it.

2. So Acts 2. 39, Repent, and believe, for the promise is to Acts 2. 39.
you, and to your seed, and to all that are afar of, even as many as the Lord
our God shall call.

Mark here [ the promise is to you] is laid down as an Argument to believe; as
a Motive to believe; and therefore did belong to them before they did believe:
for the Cause is before the Effect.

Yes (you will say) to them, to the Jews, but not to us: mark the next words, [
And to all that are afar of, even to as many as the Lord our God shall call]

Object. But God gives not Grace to all, and that is the thing that fears me.

Answ. What is that to thee? As Christ said unto Peter: Peter asked Christ such
a question, Lord what shall this man do? Joh. 21. 21, 22.
says Christ to him, What is that to thee? follow thou me.

So God gives not grace to all: What is that to thee? follow thou me, believe
thou in me, says Christ.

Object. Oh! but I am a great sinner, and will he pardon me, and give grace to
me?

Answ. 1. The Covenant of grace is a free Covenant; from the Lord's free
favor, without any respect to any thing in thee: it looks at nothing in thee:
no worth in thee can procure it.

The Covenant, is not only a Covenant to grace, but a Covenant of grace; not
only a Covenant to grace, to give more grace where it is; but a Covenant of
grace, to give grace where is none.

2. The greatness of thy sinfulness will manifest, and set out the greatness of
his mercy: For his names sake he pardons iniquity. Isa. 43.
Now the greater, and the more thy sins have been, the greater will be the name
of his mercy.

Quest. But how may we attain the Knowledge of the Mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven?

Answ. 1. Let not sin stand between you and the glorious light of the Mysteries
of Heaven: Cease love to sin, if you would have an Heaven upon Earth, a
glorious Presence of God in you.

Render your spirits free to God; let them not be ensnared with any lust: such
entanglement spoils your Glory: pure hearts shall see the face of God, Blessed
are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

You poor souls, who are purging your selves, will you believe your Savior?
then you shall see God.

Purity makes capacity of Heaven: The holiest men ever had the most glorious
visions; as Daniel and John.

A man may see Hell in his sin, but shall never see Heaven.

2. Would you have the Knowledge of these Mysteries? Then get upon some hill;
the air of the lower region is thick and misty: I mean, live above, abstract
your selves (as much as may be) from the world: God chooses his place to make
Heaven: he makes Heaven above; in Jerusalem, that is above: in souls that are
above; above the vanities of this World, he makes an Heaven, and there the
Mysteries of the Kingdom (like so many stars) shine.

Moses is led up to a mount to see Canaan: Christ upon a mount had his glorious
Transfiguration, he had his Heaven upon a mount.

Love must mount above all these low things, ere the soul can see Heaven, enjoy
glorious Presence.

It falls out unhappily still with man, when he goes about to make an Heaven
here; when he sets love at work, to take her fortune, to make her Glory and
Felicity here below as she can: This checks the working of a glorious light in
any heart: it sets a Divine Power a working another way, to whip the man with
vexation of spirit, for seeking Heaven in Earth, in glorious vanities.

No man shall have two Heavens, or but very few.

3. Let thy heart be Crystal: The Mysteries of Heaven shining upon such an
heart, reflect gloriously: I mean, an heart that is a pure glass, clear from
all hypocrisy: God descended like a Dove, upon a Dove; sweetly and gloriously
upon him, In whose mouth there was no guile.

It was upon Jesus Christ there came a voice from Heaven, This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well-pleased.

God never proclaims himself well-pleased in that heart, which makes not him
his pleasure: A heart, and a heart has none of Gods heart.

Divine Power works not gloriously, where the heart, works basely.

An hypocrite has least of Heaven of any man, and most of Hell.

4. As men draw near to God, so they see him: near to him in Quality, and near
to him in Duty. Sirs, We see Heaven best upon out knees: At the Throne of grace
we find grace: Heaven at Gods feet: When most in his Presence, most in Heaven:
A man must live in Heaven, to have Heaven live in him; much going to Heaven,
brings Heaven at last down along with one.

Use last, Then, Oh ye Saints, bless the Lord: Admire the Lord that has
revealed his Mysteries to you, not to others; that ye know those things which
others do not. Oh! fall admiring God and Free Grace.

The fourth and last Doctrine.

Doct. 4. That where there are beginnings of true grace, though never so weak;
God makes rich Additions of more grace [Whosoever has, to him shall be given,
and he shall have more abundance].

Now to evince this, I will give you the Testimony of Scripture: And

1. In Phil. 1. 6, Paul cheers up their hearts, by telling them, that he was
confident, [i. e. assured] That God who Phil. 1. 6.
had begun a good work in them, would perfect it, until the day of Jesus Christ.

The Apostle writing to the Thessalonians, praises God for them, Because
(says he) your faith grows exceedingly, and the charity of every one of you
all toward each other abounds. 2 These. 1. 3.


Where God plants, he makes to grow; and where he sows, he waters into an
increase.

2dly, John 10. 10, I came (says Christ) that they might have John 10. 10.
life, and that they might have it more abundantly: or that they might have
abundance: So Musculus reads it, Et abundantiam habeant.

For it is not (...), that is, [ Abundantius] but (...), which word signifies
Abundantiam, copiam, and affluentiam, i. e. Qui vivere dedit, dabit and reliqua
ad vitam hanc caelestem necessaria: Nec dabit parce, sed liberaliter and
opulente: Musculus in Johan. Quid dat formam, dat consequentia formam. He that
gives life, will give all things necessary to this Divine life, to maintain it
richly.
an abundance and affluence of spiritual and heavenly Additions to the least
grace.

3dly, Isa. 42. 3, A bruised reed shall he not break, and the Isa. 42. 3.
smoking flax shall he not quench, [The Negative here implies an
Affirmative], A bruised reed shall he not break, i. e. he shall strengthen it;
and the smoking flax shall he not quench, i. e. he shall be so far from
quenching, that he shall make it flame, and blow it up into a blaze: He shall
bring forth judgment unto truth; which Matthew (following the Septuagint)
Matthew. 12. 20.
says, He shall bring forth judgment unto victory.

And this is the meaning of that Text, Of his fullness have John 1. 16.
we all received [(...)] and grace for grace, (...).
(i. e.) one grace for another. The latter for the former: for having mentioned
the fullness of Christ, he says, That not one, but many graces are drawn and
derived from him: not one, but many graces; the first whereof is the cause of
the second, the second of the third, and the third of the fourth, and so along;
always the latter is given for the former, till all the gifts of grace being
completed, beatitude it self is at last perfected.

Not as if more grace were given for the right use of grace; for that were to
take us off from Christ to our selves: whereas it is the Apostles scope to fix
us wholly on Christ; but the Condition and Nature of Saving-grace, which is
such Vt prima Trahat alteram) that the first draws the second; they are as it
were so concatenated, as one Ring in a chain draws another; and for the former
that is given, the latter is given; that is, God, because he has given the
one, will give the other; such is the Order and Method he observes; he give
grace for grace; that is, where he finds one grace, he gives another; and where
he finds some, he gives more.

Or Grace for Grace; (i. e.) Gratiam super Gratiam, grace upon grace; ( i. e.)
abundance of grace: having scarce received one, but presently receive another;
and after that, another, which ( Musculus says) the Hebrews express (...) as
the Apostle shows it in Romans 8. 30. From the fullness of Christ, we have
received the grace of our Calling; and upon our calling, the grace of Pardon
and Justification; here is grace upon grace; and upon our Justification, the
grace of Adoption and Sanctification; here is grace upon grace; and upon our
Adoption, the grace of Glory and Salvation: still grace upon grace, as the
Apostle expresses it in Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, etc.

We shall now give you the Reasons of the Point, why it is that where there are
beginnings of true grace, though never so weak, God makes rich additions of
more grace: And,

Reas. 1. Because, grace in a Saint is God's own child: the infant grace is the
Spirits little babe, begot in the Womb of the soul, by the Spirit: the soul is
the Mother of it, and the Spirit is the Father of it: Now, you know, a Father
is very tender of his young babe; he takes it up in his Arms, and looks upon
it, he reads his own Image in it, and puts it in his bosom; he handles it as
gently as ever he can, and preserves it from the least harm: So when the
Infant-grace is born in the soul, the Spirit is very tender of his young babe;
he makes wondrous much of it, and is as Preservative of its life, as ever he
can: As you may see in Paul; he had been in sore pangs of Travel three days and
three nights together; and the child [ Grace] was newly born, and see what care
the Spirit had of it; said he to Annanias, Arise [do not stay, says he; but
Acts 9. 11.
arise] and go into the street which is called Straight, and enquire in the
house of Judas, for one called Saul of Tarsus: for behold, he prays: The
child [ Grace] as soon as it was born, began to cry, and the Spirit presently
takes care of it.

1. The Spirit (when the soul is brought to bed, and safely delivered of her
Man-child [ Grace] sets the little babe to nurse, and provides suck for it, and
gives it the Breasts of the Ordinances; as the Apostle says, And I brethren,
could not speak 1 Cor. 3. 1 1 Pet. 2. 2.
unto you, as unto spiritual, but -- as unto babes in Christ; I have fed you
with milk: And [in 1 Pet. 2 2.] As new born babes desire the sincere milk of
the word, that ye may grow thereby.

A babe, when it is newborn, must have milk, which is the most nutritive food
in the world: so must the little new creature, when it is born, it must have
milk; and therefore the Spirit provides it for him; The Ordinances are the
Breasts, and the Ministers are the Nurses which give it suck; As the Apostle
says, We were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherishes 1 These. 2. 7.
her children.

2. The Spirit dades his little child [ Grace] and teaches it to go; As God
says, When Israel was a child, I loved him, Hos. 11. 1. Verse 3.
and called my son out of Egypt -- I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by
their arms.

And therefore are we said to be led by the spirit, and to walk Romans 8. 14.
in the spirit.

3. The Spirit teaches his little child [ Grace] to speak: as a Father (you
know) takes up his little one upon his knee, and teaches him to Articulate
words, and to call [ Dad]: so does the Holy Spirit teach the child [ Grace] to
cry, Abba, Gal. 4. 6
Father. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into
your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.

Reas. 2. Where there are beginnings of true grace, God makes rich Additions of
more grace; because (such is the Lords noble Nature, that) he loves to be
giving: To give, is an Act Dare, honestum quid est, Recipere utile: Dans
exercet Actum Monestum, Accipere utilem: Agit ille, hic patitur potius.
for a Prince, rather for a God: poor men receive, rich men give; Subjects
receive, Princes give: Creatures receive, the Creator gives: The more noble and
eminent natures are, the more they give, and the less they receive: The
heavenly bodies glance their light, and dart their influences upon the Earth
below, but receive nothing from the Earth: To give is an Act of perfection; to
receive is a note of imperfection: were we not imperfect, we need not be
receiving.

He that gives, imitates God, who gives and receives not again, because he
wants not any thing: And therefore it was a saying of Christ, It is more
blessed to give, than to receive: Acts 20. 35.
It is a part of Gods Beatitude, that he is all things, and has all things to
give; that he can give and not be beholden to receive: that he is an
overflowing Sea, always pouring out his gifts and golden streams upon the
Creature: When he has given thee grace, he has more grace still to give: And
being a God (and not man) he gives continually; to give, he makes his continued
Act: He Will never cease giving to his Saints, not only in this life, but in the
life to come: he will be giving out unto his Saints eternally.

As the Sun is always giving out its heat and virtue to the World, so will God
be always giving out his sweetness to his Saints throughout Eternity.

So that, he that has grace, shall have more grace: he that has it in the
bud, and in the beginning, shall have it in the perfection: fear not (poor
creature) if thou art always wanting, God will be always giving; and being a
God, he is not weary or remiss in any of his Acts. He takes more pleasure in
giving, than thou can in receiving; such is his Noble and Princely spirit.

To give, is (as it were) an Act connatural to him, an eternal Act: he gave his
Essence to his Son from all eternity, and John 5. 26. John 3. 16. Romans 8. 32.
in time gave his Son to lost Sinners (see, he loves to give) and with his Son
will give us all things.

Reas. 3. To him that has grace, God gives more, because he knows there he
shall not bestow his grace in vain: he shall have fruit from his Plantation:
the grace he sows there, will return him a crop.

Oh, how happy a thing is it to have a soul seasoned with true grace! The
person gains, and God himself is a gainer by such an one: the poor soul gains
by it; for he that has true grace, shall have more; and God gains by it, for
the more grace God gives such an one, the more fruit shall God have from such
an one: and that is the Lords delight: it is the vine-dressers delight to see
his Vines (which he plants and prunes) decked with grapes: It is the Husbandmans
delight to walk and see his Field (which he tilled) clothed with stately Corn:
Now God is an Husbandman (as Christ says) I am John 15. 1. 1 Cor. 3. 9.
the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman: And ye are Gods husbandry,

Saints, it does delight God to see his Vines full of grapes; and to see his
Field clad with fruit: ye are his Field, ye are his Vines; ye must be always
bearing, because he is always watering: The gardener delights to Water those
herbs that will grow, and yield him profit: he bestows no drops upon the
Flowers that are dead and withered.

It Is so with God, Every branch that bears fruit (says John 15. 2.
Christ) he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit: here is the reason
of it; he that has grace, and bears some fruit, God will give him more grace,
that so God may have more fruit.

Reas. 4. Because it is his design to perfect his Saints, and the work of grace
in his Saints: he means to make every one of them as Holy as Adam was in
Paradise: God does not mean that we should come short in Christ, of what we
were in Adam.

Christ Jesus came in place to repair us up all that we lost in Adam, and more
than that all: only Adam was made perfect at once, and we are perfected by
degrees: but this is no disadvantage to us, for Adam was made perfect at once;
but he lost it as soon, he lost it at once; and we are not made perfect at
once, but by degrees, but we shall never lose it.

As a Limner, that intends a curious picture, at first makes but a rude
Draught, and lays his dark Colors; but then by degrees he comes over with his
beauteous and bright Colors, and draws out the perfect proportion of a curious
piece: So God (that glorious Artist) in repairing man, intends some stately
piece; he has in his thoughts the Idaea of some glorious piece: Indeed it is
Jesus Christ that stands by him, after whom he means to draw man's picture. As
a Limner that sees a beauteus person, draws his picture, whilst he is in the
room with him, and takes it wondrous lively, because he has him before him; So
God the Father has Jesus Christ, the beauty of Heaven and Earth, before him;
and looking upon Christ, draws every Saints picture, and will make his Saints
exactly like to Christ; every Saint shall be Christ's perfect picture: And
therefoe he that has grace, be it never so small, shall have more, nay shall
have all; because God intends to make his Saints perfect in Christ Jesus.

We shall now make some Improvement of this Point; And in the first place,

Use 1. This shines with excellent comfort upon the weak Saints; upon you that
complain, you are but weak Christians; and you cannot match others in
performances, you cannot do as others can; and if we do believe, we believe but
little; and if we do love Jesus Christ, we love him but little.

To you, to you, I say if you have the least drop of true grace,God will give
you more, and you shall have abundance: Do you believe but a little? Be of good
comfort, you shall believe a great deal: Do you repent but a little?you shall
have given you a greater store of repentance: Can thou pray but a little?
can thou but scarce pray? It shall be given thee to pray mightily, to pray
down mountains and strong sins.

I pray you consider these things:

1. Though thou have but little grace, yet thy little may be true grace: Thou
art suspicious of thy self, and art wont to say, Surely if my grace were true,
it would be more than it is; it is so little, that I cannot think it is true
grace.

But I say unto thee, though thou have but little, yet thy little may be true
grace: as a little piece of gold is true gold.

Object. 1. Oh! But I enjoy rich means of grace; I lie down in the fatting
pastures of the Gospel, which would in a short time plump up the weakest grace,
if it were true: I sit daily under the nourishing showers of the Word, and yet
my grace is but little, and therefore (I fear me) is not true.

Answ. The Disciples sat under the most powerful Ministry that ever was, under
the droppings and the honey-dews that fell from Christ's lips: Never man spoke
as the spoke: He was the Prince of Preachers, that had the tongue of the
learned.

To be with him, was to be in Heaven upon Earth: They saw his wondrous miracles
every day, and conversed with Christ himself; his lips did drop the choicest
fatness, and yet under all these golden shrowres they had but a little Faith:
For the Lord Christ upon an occasion says unto them, Why are Matthew. 8. 26.
ye fearful, oh ye of little faith?

Object. 2. But I cannot trust God for the smallest matters: Food and Raiment
are the smallest matters, and he that cannot trust God in the least matters (I
fear me) has a faith less than nothing.

Answ. The Disciples of Jesus Christ had many experiences of God Providence and
Provision for them, they went about with Christ from place to place; and though
they had no victuals, yet they found victuals every where; they saw so many
thousands sed with so few loaves; and yet they were Mat. 6. 30, 31.
troubled, What shall we eat? what shall we drink? and wherewith shall we be
clothed?

Thus, thou see, thy little grace may be true grace.

2. God will own thy little grace: thy grace, though it be never so little, yet
he will own it: As you may see in Rev. 3. 8, where writing to the Church of
Philadelphia, says Christ, Thou have a little strength, and have ept my word:
She had but a little strength, and Christ takes greatnotice of her little
strength; Christ makes much of a little grace: As the Father dandles his little
child, so Jesus Christ dandles a little grace upon the lap of his Commendation:
Though thy grace be but low, yet he has an high esteem of it.

3. God's giving some grace, engages him to give more: Has God given thee a
little grace? His giving thee that little, puts an engagement upon him to give
thee more: one of his gifts bind him to give another.

When God went about to destroy Sodom, says God, Shall I Genesis 18. 17, 18.
Hide from Abraham that thing which I do, seeing I mean to make him a great and
mighty nation? As though one kindness did bind him to give another: with God,
the bestowing of one favor binds him to add another.

If God begin to give thee grace, he is engaged to go on, and give thee more
grace, not for thy sake, but because it is his own work; and therefore if he
should not carry it on, he should lose what he had begun: If God has pardoned
thee some sins, and should not pardon thee all the rest, all his former Pardons
would be thrown away, like precious water spilt upon the ground: If God has
begun to give thee some grace, he is engaged to give thee more, for the sake of
the former; I say he is engaged to give thee more for the sake of the former,
and to give thee more yet; nay more yet, for the sake of that grace that went
before: As man that ploughs a piece of Land, counts himself engaged to sow it;
and if he sow it, he counts himself engaged to fence it, and make it thrive;
because one work is for another, the former for the latter; plowing is for
sowing, and sowing is for growing, and growing is for reaping, and therefore
one labor calls for the help of another: So when God puts a little grace into
thee, it is for another, to bring on another, and that the former grace may not
be in vain; one gift calls for the help of another.

4. A little grace is a pledge of more: I say, the little grace thou have, is a
sure pledge of more; as a little piece of money is an earnest of the whole sum:
God, speaking of the effusion of his gifts and graces, says, I will pour out
my spirit: God gives his spirit as freely as he gives rain: now (you know)
first it rains small drops, and after greater; and the small are the signs of
the great.

5. Jesus Christ makes intercession for a little grace: Peter, (says Christ) I
have prayed that thy faith fail not: thou have but a little faith, and I have
prayed for thy little faith, for thy weak faith, that it fail not: if any man
sin, we have an 1 John 2. 2.
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

Use 2. What says this Principle to Sinners, that are without grace? Surely,
Sirs, it should much deject you, and make you smite upon your hearts: When
Christ says, It is given to you to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven, but to others it is not given, should it not make those tremble that
have not the gift? that have not this special gift, To know the Mysteries of
the Kingdom of Heaven? When our Lord says, To him that has shall be given,
should it not shake the heart of the man that has not so much as the first
gift of grace yet bestowed upon him? Sinner, thou have not so much as the
Foundation, the first stone of the building yet laid in thee: Lord, what a sad
case am I in? whilst thou art promising the addition of grace to others, thou
have not planted so much as the beginnings of grace in me!

1. While the saving-work in others is going on, it is not yet begun in thee:
While others are upon their growth, thou art not yet born; I say, not born
again. Sinner, thou have not yet so much as the first preparation of Heaven in
thee, while others are upon their Progress; thou art not as yet in the Race,
while others are running to the Gole: thou lie dead, while others are raised
and enlivened; thou have not yet set out toward Heaven, while others are a
great way upon their Journey to Glory: thou art left sleeping in Sodom, till
the sparks of fire and brimstone fall down from Heaven, and fly about thine
ears, while the Lots are carried out by the Angel of the Lord: Oh Sirs! see
your misery.

2. Sinners, you are ugly and misshapen Creatures without grace: you want the
Image of God upon you: Holiness is our comeliness, and Grace is the only
handsome garment: What are thy sins but thy deformities? and thy lusts but thy
leprosies? Thou carest not what thou art in the eye of the godly; but carest
thou not what thou art in the eye of God? Thou feast no unhandsomness in sin,
thou see not thy self ugly, but art thou therefore the less ugly?

A Toad or a Snake has no odious apprehensions of it self; it is above their
reach to apprehend what they are; so Sinners cannot discern their own
deformities, their Judgments follow their Natures and Dispositions.

3. If Jesus Christ does not conquer you, he will slay you: In Rev. 6. 2, there
says John, I saw, and behold; a white horse, Rev. 6. 2.
and he that sat on him had a bow, and a crown was given to him and he went
forth conquering, and to conquer.

1. Here John saw an horse, which is mystically the Gospel; because of its
swiftness: The Apostles and Apostolical Preachers of the Primitive times, were
Horses, for their nimble and swift Preaching of the Gospel through the World.

2. This is a white horse, to signify,

1. The Purity of the Gospel, or Divinity of its Doctrine.

2. to signify the joy and peace it offers to the Sons of Men: it is called
glad tidings, and the Gospel of peace: A white Flag is an Ensign of Peace.

3. To signify the Glory of Christ: white robes are Emblems of Glory: Princes
and Nobles did go in white.

4. To signify the Triumph of Christ; white horse in sign of victory and
Triumph.

The Romans, when they rid in Triumph, had white Horses to ride on, or to draw
their Chariots.

The Lord Christ will get the day, he will triumph over souls, either in their
submission or destruction: And therefore it is said,

3. That he that sat on the white horse, had a bow given him.

This Horseman, or Prince, the Lord Christ, had a bow in his hand, and a Bow
presupposes arrows, that is, terrors, and threatenings against his Enemies,
that will not submit to his mercy; he has his Arrow prepared upon the string,
and will shoot at the rebellious Sinner.

It may be thou have some of Christ's Arrows sticking in the ribs of thy
Conscience, and art wounded for some sins; thy very heart is galled with the
threatenings that fly (like Arrows) out of the Bow of the Ministry; but thou
frettest: instead of being converted, and falling at his feet, thou ragest:
Well, Christ rides on still in the Chariot of his word, conquering, and to
conquer: one or other way conquer he will: if he cannot conquer thee with love,
he will kill thee in wrath: Those that do yield, he saves; those that will not, he
slays.

4. Christ will Preach over all these Truths again in Hellflames to thee.

Thou keep thy sins and lusts, and wilt by no means send them away; thou
make nothing of the Word of God, because dispensed by Man: I tell thee, all
the Sermons thou now hear against thy sins, all the Truths of God shall one
day be Preached over again in flames of Fire to thine eternal horror; and that
will be a long Sermon.

All the Sermons of Repentance and Grace thou heard'st here in thy lifetime,
shall in Hell be brought fresh to thy memory, thy Conscience shall then Preach
them all over to thee in Hell-flames, and then 'twil be a woeful Sermon: Now the
Sermon is but an hour long, look upon the glass, it is turned; and while the
glass is running, we are Preaching, Preaching thee (if it be possible) into a
state of grace; this Sermon is but a short Sermon, it will end anon; and while
this glass is running, thy glass is running, and thy life is hastening: but in
Hell, there is no glass turned up; This, and all the Sermons thou ever heard'st,
will there in flames be Preached over to thee again throughout eternity; Oh
tremble at it! It will be a woeful Sermon, and a long Sermon, 'twill never have
an end.

Use 3. Here Is rare comfort to weak grace. To them that are but new beginners:
you complain your grace is but little; My Beloved, you shall have more.

1. Grace at first is but little: An Infant, when it is newborn, is but little:
a Tree, when it is first planted, is but a little Graff: The Cloud that
over-spreads the Heavens, was at first no bigger than a man's hand.

Object. 1. But I am a Christian of long standing, and yet my grace is but
little: Were I but a new beginner, 'twere something: but I am a long stander,
yet a short Christian.

Answ. 1. Truly ( my Beloved) blame thy self then: chide thy self that thou art
a Christian of a long standing, and of a short stature: It is a disgrace to be
so; as it is a disgrace to be an old man, and yet a dwarf: Christ chides his
Disciples for it, though they were but of one or two years standing in his
School; yet he chides them, because they had so little Matthew. 8. 26.
Faith.

Besides, Those that have less Grace, shall have less Glory.

But yet I must say this much:

2. That every thing in this life is but little: David says, Psalm. 39. 5.
Thou have made my days as an hand-breadth: A small measure the Lord knows!
David lived in all probability threescore years and ten, he was King of Judah
and Israel forty years, and yet he called it but an hand-breadth.

3. Thou measurest thy grace, with what thou should be, and then it seems
but little: A great deal of grace measured with what thou should be, is but
little: As Augustine says [ Maxima eorum quae scimus, Minima eorum quae
Ignoramus;] The much, nay most we know, is the least of what we do not know: so
the most we are, is the least of what we should be; the most we do, is the
least of what we should do.

Great Saints are but little to what they should be.

4. Compare thy grace with times past, and then it may be it is not little; and
that thou must do.

Object. 2. But I have trifled away my time, the time I should have got grace
in; The Ant provides her meat in summer, and gathers her food in the harvest:
But I have spent my time of gathering, and is there any hope that I shall have
more?

1. Humble thy self: for it is a wondrous sin to lose time: because we have but
a time to glorify God here: and by our losing of time, God does lose his Glory.

2. Yet, though thou have loytered away thy time, do not limit Gods time:
because thou have past away thy time, do not say, that Gods time is past.

3. It may be thy time of growing is not come yet: As Children, some shoot up
presently, in their first years; others do not grow till they are sixteen or
twenty years, and these at last out-grow the others; some Saints grow more at
first, others grow more at last.

Trees bring forth their fruit in different seasons, some sooner, and some
later.

There is the first ripe fruit, and there is the latter fruit: some Trees have
their fruit ripe and ready with the spring, others not till August, others not
till Winter; there is the Summer-fruit, and there is the Winter-fruit: One tree
goes before, and has her fruit ripe one month, another has its fruit the
next month, another follows and has its fruit the next month after that.

And this is the Masters Wisdom, that he may have new fruit every month to
serve his Table, and please his palate; so does God.

Object. 3. But I am a withered tree, I did bear fruit, but now do not; I was
once fresh and green, but now am dry and blasted; I am in part an Apostate, I
am fallen from my first love: I was good, and now am worse: I do not bear the
fruit I did: Is there any hopes for me?

Answ. Yes: thou may recover, and therefore away to Prayer, and send quickly
for the spirit: Lose no time: I will give you an Instance in another case.

Nebuchadnezzar was a great tree, whose height did reach Dan. 4. 11. 12, 14, 15.
to heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of all the earth: The leaves
thereof were fair, and the fruit thereof much: the beasts of the field had
shadow under it, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and
all flesh was fed of it.

And this great Tree [ Nebuchadnezzar] was lopt down fearfully, and withered
dreadfully, he was driven from among men, and cast off from his Kingdom seven
years.

But yet the stump of his roots was left in the earth with a band of Iron and
Brass: To signify, that his Kingdom was reserved for him, and that he should
revive again: So thou have been (it may be) an high Tree, whose top of
profession did reach up to Heaven, and all the fowls of the air, the Saints
that live about thee, were wont to fly, and sit under the boughs and branches
of thy gifts, to receive Counsel and Direction from thee: And now thy leaves
are fallen, and thy branches cut, thy graces lopt, thy gifts withered, and thou
think therefore, thou art forsaken.

But, oh man! Is not there a stump of thy roots left in the earth, with a band
of Iron and Brass? A stump of Faith and Repentance, and panting after Christ?
As long as there is a stump left, thou will revive again.

Use 4. Shall more grace be given to them that have grace, be it never so
small? Then, Saints, see what your work is; What Is that? to receive.

How may we receive more grace?

First, Open thy soul to receive grace: For to receive a thing, is sometimes a
motion of the subject or faculty, opening it self to receive it: As the hand
does open it self to receive a gift; and a vessel must be opened to receive oil
or cordial poured into it. The earht opened her mouth, and swallowed up Corah:
And Numb. 16. 32. Genesis 4 11.
the earth (as God said to Cain) opened her mouth to receive thy brothers blood
from thy hand.

Now the opening of the soul to receive Grace, consists in these three Things:
1. In believing the Promise; when the soul believes, its door stands open to
receive the golden Treasures of Grace that are brought into it out of the
storehouse of the Promise; And therefore (says the Text), They rehearsed all
that God had done with them, and how he had opened the door of faith unto Acts
14. 27.
the gentiles.

2. In love to grace promised: for love is an opening grace: When a man loves a
friend dearly, he opens his Arms to embrace and receive him: so when a man
loves grace, he opens his heart to welcome grace into it: And therefore ye shall
find this passage between Christ and his Spouse; says Christ, Open to me my
love; And says the Spouse, I rose up to open to Cant. 5. 2. Verse. 5.
my beloved.

He that loves Christ, will open the two-leav'd gates of his soul, to let in
Christ with all his train.

3. In desire after grace promised: for the desire of grace is an opening of
the soul to receive grace: As the Lord says, Psalm. 81. 10.
Open thy mouth wide, [i. e. ask freely, open thy mouth in Prayer, as wide as
thou wilt], And I will fill it.

2dly, Lie low: The valleys that receive all the showers and floods into their
bosom, lie low under all the high hills, and proud mountains: so the humble
Saints (that lie in the bottom of self-abhorrence under all the rest) receive
the showers of grace; the floods stay upon them, and they drink them in; they
are overflown like your low grounds) with abundance of grace.

3dly, Accept of grace: to receive grace, is to accept of grace: As Jacob said
to his brother Esau, Nay, I pray thee, if now I Gen 33. 10.
have found grace in thy sight, then receive my present at my hand: i. e.
accept of my present at my hand.

Use 5. What shall I do that have no grace? To him that has shall be given:
But what shall I do that have not?

Consider grace is a gift; and therefore,

1. God can give grace, where it is not: he gives grace, where is none: he does
good to them that are not good: A gift is bestowed, where it is not: See Isa.
44. 3, I will pour water upon Isa. 44. 3.
him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit
upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring: i. e. as I pour Water and
Floods upon the dry and thirsty ground that has none; so will I pour my spirit
upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring. Where observe,

God gives showers of grace, where there is not a drop before.

2. He can give grace to whom he will: he can love whom he will; and he can
give grace to whom he will: this is the Prerogative of Gods Love, he can love
any one: Man (being a narrow creature) cannot love any one; one that is fowl,
and ugly, and crooked; but God can love any one, he can love unhandsom and
deformed Creatures, and marry them, and make them lovely: Naaman the Syrian was
a Leper, and therefore wondrous ugly, he was a Leper in Body and Mind too: The
beauty of the mind presents a crooked person comely to us: but Naaman had
beauty in neither part; he was a Leper in body, and an Idolater in mind; and
yet God loved him, and (by a poor maid in his house) sent him to the Prophet of
Israel, and healed his outside, and healed his inside, made his Body comely,
and made his Soul comely.

3. He makes notorious sinners, noteable Saints: he makes Persecutors,
Preachers; As he did Paul, and all the Church admired it; But they had heard
only, that he who persecuted us Gal. 1. 23.
in times past, now PREACHES the faith, which once he DESTROYED: See the Work
and Free Grace of God! Would God show mercy to him that destroyed the Faith?
Yes, he gave Faith to him that destroyed the Faith: Paul, if he could, would
have killed Christ, and yet God gives him Christ.

The Gentiles were the greatest Sinners in the World, and they were at the
height of sin, when the Gospel began to be Preached to them; they were counted
unclean, the unclean Act 10. 14, 15.
beasts (swine and other Beasts) which the Jews under the Law might not eat;
did signify the Gentiles; and the Jews not eating the unclean beasts, did
signify that they should have no communion with the unclean Gentiles; yet on
the GENTILES Verse. 45. Acts 11. 17.
also was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost: And, forasmuch as God gave
them [i. e. the Gentiles] the like gift as he did unto us.

4. Sometimes God makes his greatest Act of Love to pass upon the greatest
sinner: Paul (you know) was a Saul indeed, chief of sinners, he says it of
himself; and yet notwithstanding Acts 9. 3, 4.
Christ Preached from Heaven to him: he sent men to Preach to others, (as
Philip to the Eunuch), but Jesus Chrrist does himself Preach to Paul.

Jesus Christ, when he was on Earth in the form of a servant, called the other
Apostles; as Matthew at the receipt of custom; and Peter, when he was fishing;
follow me; but when he was on his Throne, in Majesty, he Preached from Heaven to
Paul: Wondrous love to a wondrous sinner!

5. He bids thee pray, and he will give: Ask and it shall be Matthew. 7. 7. Luke 11.
13.
given you.

But you will say, he says this to Saints?

Sol. See what our Lord Christ says to the Woman of Samaria, If thou knew'st
the gift of God, and who it is that says John 4. 10.
to thee, Give me to drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have
given thee living water.

Dub. But I ask, and yet it is not given.

Resp. Questionless, he that bids us ask, means to give: As we bid our Children
say, I pray you father give me such a thing; we do it not, but when we mean to
give it them.

Object. But I cannot pray, I cannot pray for grace.

Answ. 1. He that will give thee grace when thou prayest, will give thee grace
that thou may pray: As God first formed Adams body, and it lay dead before
him on the ground, without breath, or life, or soul in it; and God breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life [or spirit of lives (...)] Genesis 2. 7.
and man became a living soul: So when thou lie dead before the Lord without
any life, or breath of Prayer in thee; thou can not so much as breathe before
him; he will breathe a Soul of Prayer into thee, he will put breath into thee, as he
did into Acts 9. 11.
Saul, Behold he prays, says God.

2. Sometimes a man sends a gift to one, that never asked him for it; so does
God sometimes send his gifts of grace to them that never ask for it, he gives
them, before they ask it.

Opposers and Persecutors are said to be the greatest Sinners; yet says Christ
upon the Cross, Father, forgive them, they know not what they do: he spoke it
of those that put him to Death.

Some might have said, Lord, they are opposers of thee, even to the Death; be
it so, says Christ; I have mercy for opposers too, and for persecutors too;
Father, forgive them, they know not what they do: But Lord, they do not beg for
pardon, will thou give such a kindness to them that ask not for it? They do not
acknowledge their fault: if thou will show mercy to them, stay till they
acknowledge their fault, and be humbled, and ask pardon: nay (says Christ) I
will prevent poor sinners with my love; Though they do not ask forgiveness, yet
I beg forgiveness, Father, forgive them.

But Lord, these are great sinners, and less mercy would serve the turn;
forgiveness is a great mercy: no, (says Christ) no mercy less than forgiveness
will serve the turn, they will be never the better for any mercy without
forgiveness, therefore they shall have it; Father, forgive them: but
forgiveness is a great mercy: be it so, says Christ; I know what I do: I have
great mercy, the greatest mercy for the greatest sinners; and because they
cannot ask it, I will ask it for them, Father, forgive them.

Use 6. Woe to you Professors, that have not true grace; from Matthew 13. 12. Luke
8. 18.
them shall be taken away, even that which they have: Luke says, From them
shall be taken that which they seem to have.

For if we speak of true grace, they have not grace, only seem to have it: They
seem to be holy, and their seeming holiness shall be taken from them: They seem
to believe, and their seeming Faith shall be taken from them: They seem to
repent, and their seeming Repentance shall be taken from them: They Matthew. 13.
20.
seem to joy in Christ, and in Mercy, and the Promises; but their seeming joy
shall be taken from them.

The spirit does but assume them; he does not inform them, nor enliven them: As
the dead bodies which Angels assume for a time, they seem to live, and talk,
and eat and drink; but when the Angel leaves them, because they were not the
Angels proper bodies, they vanish away, and lose that life they did seem to
have: So the Spirit of God does assume and act the souls of many men in the
Church for a time, to do service for God by them; and all that while, they
pray, and preach, and hear, and walk up and down in Duty, out of one Duty into
another; and the Spirit leaves them, because he did but assume them, and then
they drop down dead, as indeed they are, and always were.

Thus the Spirit did assume Judas for a time; Judas was but a dead man in soul
all the time he was with Christ, only the Spirit of God assumed him, and acted
him, and he followed Christ, and went about Preaching the Gospel with the other
Disciples: but when the Spirit left him, he betrayed Christ for thirty pieces
of silver (that was his proper work) and despaired, and dyed.

Use 7. This should put the Saints upon a serious Trial of their graces.

The Point tells you, that where there are beginnings of true grace, God will
make rich Additions of more grace: Oh then, try what grace yours is: if it be
true grace, God will give more grace; As the Apostle says, He that has begun
a good work in you, will perfect it; If it be a good work, God will perfect it;
he will cherish his own work.

Sirs, God will not nurse up a spurious seed, Bastard grace, whereof he is not
the Father: Oh! then all you that would taste comfort from this Point, try your
graces.

The Evangelical Hypocrite is he I aim at: There is Gospel-Hypocrisie, so I
call it: for where the Gospel comes, there are two sorts of Persons that walk
beside it.

1. Some directly oppose the Doctrine of it, and those are Justitiaries, that
set up their own Righteousness, as the Jews Romans 9. 31, 32.
did.

And therefore it is said, That Christ came to his own, and his John 1. 11.
own received him not.

And such are the Papists at this day, who are justly by our Divines said to
answer to the Jewish Pharisees.

These are Christian Pharisees, they receive Christ in Name; but set up their
own Righteousness, and will be justified by their own Works, and saved by their
own Merits.

2. Others there are, that receive the Gospel, and so decry all their own
Righteousness, and cry up Christ; they see nothing in themselves, and look for
all from Christ, renouncing their own Righteousness, and resting upon Christ
alone for salvation.

These are of diverse sorts.

1. Some receive Christ with an Historical, lifeless Faith: they believe in
Christ, but will not part with their sins: they gladly embrace Christ as a
Savior, but oppose Holiness, and will not change their lives; and because
Christ came into the World to save sinners, they take liberty to sin, and hope
to be saved as well as any: These are those we call our large Protestants, who
are as great Enemies to Christ as Papists are.

The Papists persecute the true Christians in the Point of Doctrine, and these
Enemies within us persecute the true Christians in Point of Holiness.

The Papists they will be saved by works without Faith, these will be saved by
Faith without works. These are spots in our feasts; The Epistles of James and
John were written as Antidotes against this kind of poison.

And Jude writes against these men, ungodly men, turning the Verse. 4.
grace of God into lasciviousness: Arguing from mercy to liberty, which is the
Divils Logic, Continuing in sin, that grace may abound.

And (my Beloved) in this lies the very form of an Evangelical Hypocrite, in
denying his own Righteousness, to establish his sin; he will advance Christ, to
advance his lust.

Dub. But how can open sinners keep their lusts, live in visible profaneness,
and yet believe in Christ?

Sol. Because the Gospel brings the sweetest and highest Consolations along
with it.

And therefore every man under sense of sin, will fly thither for Sanctuary,
and hide himself under the Canopy of the Gospels mercy.

A man that travels under the fiery Beams of the Sun in an hot day, the cool
shadow of a Tree is very refreshing, and he will sit there and rest himself
under it.

Men that have their feet or their arms scalded, will put them into cold water
which gives them ease, though it gives them no cure; yet, because it gives them
ease, there they keep them: So men, whose Consciences are scalded with wrath;
Oh! now the Gospel, and Justification by Faith in Christ is very sweet: And so
they are eased by it, never cured by it; and therefore you shall find them
disclaim all works, and cry up grace only; when Christ is offered, and general
notice given them, that there is Mercy and Hope for great Sinners, this fills
them with joy and peace.

But wherein does these men's hypocrisy appear?

They receive Jesus Christ only for ease: I say, a false heart receives Christ
only to ease him, to ease him of the terror of Conscience, and to ease him of
the work of Obedience. And here profane Sinners find great ease: The weight of
their guilty Consciences would press and sink them down, but that they bear up
upon the Righteousness of Jesus Christ: Oh! he dyed for Sinners, and paid our
debt, and now they are cheerful and easy: they can sin, and be easy; follow
their drunkenness, and be easy; swim in their uncleanness, and be easy; for
they make the Righteousness of Christ their Bladder to swim upon; and say what
you will to them, they will not sink.

If you ask one of these drunkards, and haters of the Saints, and railers at
godliness; I say, if you ask them, Do you believe in Christ? yes, say they:
Believe, yea, we believe exceedingly: and so they do: the truth is, they
believe beyond measure: but they believe and rest upon Jesus Christ, to ease
themselves of sanctification: they cannot but see the want of it, and they
cannot ease themselves, but by pleading, that Christ is holy, and that though
they have it not, yet Christ has it: This is a great ease to their thoughts at
the present; and thus they receive Christ.

Oh Sirs! that you would consider the sad condition of this man, whose plagues
shall be made wonderful, whose Conscience suits him still for sin, and then
looks up to Christ, and rests there; and hears Sermons, but then salves up all
with the Righteousness of Christ, and considers often that his ways are evil,
but never suspects his faith to be evil: Then he is taken with Death, and then
looks up to Christ; at last the snuff dies, and his Sun sets, and darkness
approaches, and then instead of heaven embraces flames: and what is it that
has deceived these men? Oh! their Faith has deceived them: they believed they
might have had Christ and Sin too: and then in Hell they wish, Oh! that I had
considered, and feared this before: and will you not fear now?

I charge you then, think not your Estates good, because you rest on Christ,
and look for salvation by him only.

2. There are others who receive Jesus Christ not only into their belief, but
into their bosoms; not only into their heads, but also into their hearts: They
have a great work upon them, the Gospel does not only Irradiate their minds,
but also (in a great measure) Captivate their Wills: they have affections to
Christ, and sweet motions to holy things kindled in their hearts: They receive
the word with joy and delight; Matthew. 13.
they fall into raptures of love to, and admiration of Jesus Christ; they do
not only assent to the Doctrine of Justification by Christ, but are made
partakers of the Holy Ghost; There is a change wrought in them, they seem to be
washed 2 Pet. 2, 20.
and sanctified in the blood of Christ, having escaped the pollutions of the
world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: And so they
shine in the surface of their outward lives.

The hypocrisy of the heart springs from defect of light in the mind: The want
of saving Illumination in the understanding, is the reason of the hypocrisy of
the heart.

These two faculties [the Understanding and the Will] live very near one
another, if they be not really the same: some say, they are but one and the
same power or faculty of the soul, and so there is a real Identity of the Will
and Understanding; saying, that the Will is Intellectus extensus; others
affirm, that they are faculties really distinct.

However it is by all concluded, that there must (in order of nature) be light
before choice, knowledge before election; the Intellectual creature must see,
before it can determine or resolve upon.

Now I say, the imperfect and unsound resolution of the soul flows from defect
of light: The hypocrisy of the heart springs from the want of a saving
Illumination in the Understanding.

This appears in the Parable of the Virgins, of whom the Lord Christ says,
That five were wise, and five were foolish: The vanity of the one sprang from
their folly; the provision of Oil the others made, sprang from their Wisdom.

You know it is frequent in Solomon's Proverbs, to call the upright and godly
man, the wise man; the sinner and hypocrite, the fool; the power of sin lies
in the power of darkness: The strength of a State, in the Wisdom of its Council.

1. The Understanding is the first inlet of Sin and Grace: this is that which
opens and shuts to all life and sin.

When Satan laid his Train and Powder Plot to blow up all the World by the sin
of one man, he first enters into dispute with Eve, and (as the Apostle says)
deceived her; The woman was deceived, and so darkened her mind with a mist: 1 Timothy 2. 14.
the serpent crept into her heart through the door of her Understanding.

There could no sin get into the Will, were there not an error first in the
Understanding.

2. And as the mind is the first inlet into sin, so it is the first door that
lets in grace: Sanctify them through thy truth, thy John 17. 17. John 12. 35.
word is truth: Walk while you have the light, lest darkness come upon you.

Satan knew, if light came in, Christ would come in. Matthew. 13. 15.


3. Divine light is very powerful: it has a mighty influence to change and
renew the heart. We all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory as by the spirit of
the Lord: All Divine light of glory works strongly: if hypocrites had it, their
hearts would be sincere: Not that bare light can change the will, but the Lord
works by it: When the Lord comes with life, he comes with light. Awake thou
that sleep, Ephesians. 5. 14.
arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light.

When the spirit comes, all his work is expressed by conviction, of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment: convince one effectually, and you convert him:
You shall know the truth John 8. 32.
(says Christ), and it shall make you free; that is, from your bondage of
sins, you shall be set at liberty.

I say, all hypocrisy springs from some want of this Divine light: The young
man saw some worth in Christ, but not enough, and therefore forsook Christ.

A man may see the Lord Jesus in the letter of the Scripture, which though it
be necessary to the saving Knowledge of Christ; yet to see the Lord Jesus no
otherwise than in the letter, by the strength of Fancy and Understanding, this
is no saving Knowledge of Jesus Christ.

Between the palpable ignorance of Christ without the Gospel, and the saving
Knowledge of Christ in the Gospel, there is this middle Knowledge of Christ,
which is literal, whereby a man does see; yet in seeing, sees not.

Now saving Illumination,

1. It is a peculiar Illumination: The greatest Scholar that ever lived, never
had one such thought or apprehension of the Lord, and the things of the Lord,
as the Saints have: To them the Lord reveals some things that the wisest in the
world never knew.

2. It is a glorious and shining Illumination.

1. They behold a Glory in Christ's person: the Lord reveals his hidden glory
to them, such as never entered into their hearts before, or into the minds of
other men; which, though others may talk and discourse of, yet they cannot see
it in that manner as they do: It is therefore called a marvelous light.

In John 1. 14. They saw Christ veiled in our Humane Nature, and darkened under
the Cloud of a mean condition; And yet they beheld his glory, as of the only
begotten of the John 1. 14.
father.

The Jews saw the same Christ, yet could not see the same Glory in him.

2. They behold a glory in the holiness and graces of Jesus Christ: his graces
strike a Majesty of him in their hearts: Oh that I were like him!

3. They behold a glory in his Covenant and Promises: Oh, that all those
promises might be made good to me! this is all my desire.

4. They behold a glory in all the Ordinances of Christ: Oh Psalm. 63. 1. Verse.
2.
God! my soul thirsts for thee -- To see thy power and thy glory, so as I
have seen thee in the sanctuary. How amiable Psalm. 84. 1. Verse. 10.
are thy Tabernacles, Oh Lord of hosts! A day in thy court is better than a
thousand.

Oh the fellowship of Saints! Oh the luster and beauty of his Sabbaths!

5. They behold a glory in the Commands and Will of Christ: Oh, if once I could
in every thing give content to his heart! Such a soul had rather lose all, than
cross his Will in a small thing: he sees a glory in the least truth.

6. They see a glory in all his Dispensations: Have I but a little estate? This
is the allowance he provides for me: I am less than the least of all thy
mercies: His glory therefore appears, that I have a bit of bread to eat.

7. They behold a glory in the Cross of Christ; glory in all their sufferings:
I am not worthy to suffer shame for the name of Christ: Moses esteemed the
reproaches of Christ greater riches than the Treasures of Egypt.

We shall find a false heart ever fall short here.

3. It is a soul-humbling Illumination: One every way so fit and suitable to
them, according to all their wants and woes; so far in Splendor and Majesty
surpassing their unworthiness, and yet laying his greatness flat at the feet of
their necessities and miseries; that when the soul does see it, it usually
fills the head, and heart, and eyes with tears: Oh, that I have despised him so
glorious! Acts 2. 36, 37.


4. It is an endearing and attractive Illumination.

Sinners may (like Balaam) see the glory of the Tents of Israel, and the Star
of Jacob; but they esteem him not in all his glory.

Many reprobates under a lively Ministry, may see some glory in Christ, and in
his Saints; to think them the happy men, yet not esteem of him in all his glory.

The damned in Hell see a glory in Christ, else they would never grieve for the
loss of him; yet they cannot love him, nor rejoice in his glory.

But the light the Saints have of him, makes Christ transcendent in their eyes,
and precious in their hearts: they esteem him beyond ten thousand Worlds.

3. But yet further; The secret Gospel-hypocrites have not hearts effectually
to use and improve the means unto salvation: Salvation is the great end they
would have; but they come short in the use of means; they draw not the Arrow to
the head; they drive not home enough in the use of means.

The closest hypocrites discover themselves in an ineffectual use of the means
unto salvation.

Men out of the Church, they perish because they have no remedy, no saving
means to help: But why do those perish that are within the Church? Is it
because there is no remedy? No: but because they do not use the remedy: Is it
because they want means? No; but because they do not effectually improve the
means: Here they fall short, herein they discover themselves.

Sirs, There is a Spirit of sloth and slumber which the Lord ever leaves the
best hypocrite unto: The last Enemy God conquers in a man is his sloth: Now
this hangs upon the most refined hypocrite to the end: he will Act, but it is
remisly in order to salvation: he will not act at all, or will not act thoroughly.

In the Parable of the Talents, one of the servants was cast Matthew. 25. 24, 25.
away, Why so? because he had no Talent? No; but because he had no mind, nor
list to use his Talent: he was idle, and did not make his gain out of it, to
attain his end; And therefore the Lord says unto him, [ Thou wicked and
sloathful Verse. 26.
servant].

My Beloved, all the Ordinances of God, and all that time we have under them,
are Talents: Now wherein do hypocrites fail? There is a secret gain of
Ordinances which hypocrites regard not.

Why have many souls set a great price upon Christ, and yet have lost him, and
gone without him? Because like indifferent chapmen, they have had a desire to
the Commodity, but have been loath to be at the full cost for him.

The Lord sets before you the highest and most glorious end, but it is through
many difficulties that we must arrive at it; now there being a spirit of
Security and sloth within, and those dfficulties without; a hypocrite sits down
and rests under the shadow of his negligence; and says, It Is hard; and because
he cannot do so, he hopes it is but an infirmity, and God will accept of his
desires. And here he perishes.

The Israelites (you know) were bound for Canaan, they aimed at it; but when
their spies had told them of the difficulties, their spirits sunk within them,
only Caleb and Joshuah had upright hearts, and followed the Lord fully.

These spiritual merchants do prize and earnestly desire the Treasures of
Heaven, here is their end: But to be at the cost to prepare a Ship, to embark
upon the trouble of an Heavenvoyage to fetch this Treasure, to sail through a
dangerous Sea of Temptations, through evil and good report, through the powers
of darkness, through the oppositions of the World, and the contradictions of a
sinful and unbelieving heart; to lanch from one depth, and wave to another:
This the best hypocrite fails in, and loses all at last.

My Beloved, here you may see the root of all the complaints that are in the
mouths of many Professors, they are ever complaining and crying out of wants,
but never feel supplies; ever confessing their sins, but never triumphing over
their sin; ever hoping, never having; ever wishing that they had the Lord, but
never enjoying the Lord: Why? what is the cause of this? Is heaven so barren,
that there are no golden mines there? Are the fields of Gods Ordinances so
empty, that there is no treasure to be found there? Surely no: Gods
Storehouses and Granaries are full, but Christians are lazy; there is the
Treasure, but they cannot, or will not dig for it: If thou cryest Prove. 2. 3,
4, 5.
after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding: If thou seek
her as silver, and searchest for her, as for hid treasures: Then shall thou
understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.

Men pray against sin, and if a few sighs will fetch in strength, well and
good; if not, they cast that shovel by, Dig I cannot.

They spend some time in mourning, and laying sin to heart; but if they cannot
presently feel the bitterness of it, I cannot help it (say they) Dig I cannot.

You complain, you seek and find not; but do you seek diligently? He that
comes to God, must believe that he is, and that Heb. 11. 6.
he is a rewarder (...) to those that seek him diligently and earnestly.

You complain that your hearts are fugitive and wandering, undisposed to what is
good.

But I pray you, Do you keep them with all diligence? Are you at pains to keep
your hearts? There, there it lies, you are idle and slothful, you love not to
sit up and watch your hearts.

Keep thy heart (says Solomon) with all diligence: Prove. 4. 23.


Above all keeping: That is, more than any of those things or treasures, which
thou dest keep, though never so strictly.

You complain you meet not with assurance: but you can live well enough without
it, and make up the want of it with other comforts: Your contentments in the
world make up the absence of Christ from you, and is not this a neglect of him?
Yet you complain you want assurance, but do you use the utmost cost and care to
make it sure? As the Apostle says, Give all diligence to make your calling and
election sure. 2 Pet. 1. 10.


Oh! come then and examine your selves by this rule: Tell me, you poor
Creatures, Do you not often find checks for sin, desires against it; Christ and
Mercy weeping at your knees, and your hearts almost persuaded? Do you not find
some movings toward the Lord, but yet withal a dead, sloathful heart stays
you again, and will not let you offer violence to your selves?

4. An hypocrite, his turning from sin, is but an exchange of one sin for
another.

Many will say unto me, I am no hypocrite; for I have left these, and those
dear lusts which pleased me very well: My drunkenness pleased me, but I have
left it; my carnal mirth was my daily Cordial, but I have thrown away the Cup
and spilt it; I was an oppressor and dealt unjustly, but I have left it off:
Well, this is well done; but have thou entertained no other sin in the stead of
it?

I tell you, An hypocrite his turning from sin, is but an exchange of one sin
for another: When one sin is cast away, another steps in the room of it; and
when that is gone, another supplies the place of that too; and commonly the
strongest sin and temptation is the last.

The reason is, because his Nature is not changed.

The sin of Nature only is most properly the reigning sin.

It has been a Question, What is a man's reigning sin? his Master-sin? But no
sin is able to reign over any man, but by Commission and Power from his sin of
Nature: As the weeds can never grow tall, but by virtte of their soil where
they grow: All the Boughs flourish by virtue of the root on which they grow;
And therefore we shall see, let Satan sow his seeds of pride, or lust, or
passion in a man whose nature is changed, it is impossible they should come to
any perfection there; but they will dye away within a time, because the heart
of the soil is gone.

Hence also it comes to pass that a man's Master-sin may be changed: Those sins
that are his Master-sins in his youth, are not in his old age; those that are
at one time, in one place, are not in another.

Now there could never be such change of Governors and Viceroys, unless there
were some great King that sets up one, and pulls down another, Satis pro
imperio.

This therefore is the reigning sin, which pulls down one sin, and sets up
another under it, which gives strength to every sin.

Now a gracious change is a full change; not only a change, but a full change;
not only a Conversion (for an hypocrite may be converted) but a full
Conversion: It Is said of Amaziah, That he did that which was right in the sight
of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 25.
but not with a PERFECT HEART: Judah turned to 2. Jer. 3. 10.
the Lord, but not with her whole heart.

So then, you see hypocrites may be converted: There may be a turning to the
Lord, but not a whole turning: there are many that have a Conversion, but not a
full Conversion.

What is a full Conversion?

First, It is a deep Conversion. Secondly, It is a universal Conversion.
Thirdly, It is an high Conversion.
1. It is a deep Conversion; it strikes at the root, and subdues the very
natural corruption; I say, more or less it kills the natural corruption, and so
by degrees ruinates the very foundation of sin: so that in true Conversion,
nature it self is slain, I mean corrupt nature; it dies and rots like a root in
the earth; and in this, the superficial Conversion falls short.

That you may understand it, you must know, there are two corruptions of Nature:

1. The one natural. 2. The other acquired.
The natural depravation is expressed by David, I was conceived in iniquity;
and in that of Job, Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness?

The acquired Corruption of Nature is expressed in that Text, All flesh had
corrupted his ways. From the natural Corruption proceeds the acquired, and by
the acquired, the natural corruption is inflamed.

The natural corruption cannot be repaired but by grace and regeneration.

The acquired Corruption of Nature was got by custom and habit, and so it may
be lost by habit.

A man may free himself from his acquired Corruptions, he may by care and
industry of his own, mortify his acquired depravations of Nature.

As we read of many, Socrates and Plato, who by their Wisdom and Industry freed
themselves from the slavery of many sensual appetites and passions, which their
corrupt nature and evil company had led them into, and yet the natural
corruption remained still.

Thou think thou art converted, because thou have overcome thy drunkenness;
but drunkenness is but an acquired corruption, thou did get it by custom, and
may break it by custom, and yet nature remain still unchanged.

5. The change of the heart chiefly appears in the change of the ultimate or
utmost end.

As the Pollution of the whole man, and all his Actions, Moral, Civil, and
Religious, consists chiefly, and appears in seeking self, or making our selves
our utmost end; so our sanctification lies in this, and appears chiefly in
making God the ultimate end of all we do.

A man before he is sanctified, desires God and Christ, only to keep his sores
from aching: for so I look upon all men made up of wants; if the body ache with
diseases and pains, the stomach with hunger, conscience for sin; all their
happiness lies in the easing thereof, here lies their bliss: They seek after
God only as a Physician to heal or cure them, but not as the end of their cure:
The sick man sends for the Physician, but his health and recovery is his end;
so do men before their Conversion, in their pangs of Conscience, their
afflictions, their wants and necessities; they seek to God, and make use of God
as an instrument, but their ease and interests are their ends: Jehu sought the
Lord, but his last end was himself.

But when the heart is sanctified, then God is their end; instead of their
lusts and sins, God is the only end in their eye; instead of the riches or
comforts of the World, God is the Object in their eye: Whom have I in heaven
but thee? and Psalm. 73. 25.
there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee: God was instead of all
things to him.

1. The soul sees its own vileness, and the Lord in his Glory: This is the
first Principle of seeking the Lord: the soul sees all his good laid up in the
Lord, more than in himself; nay wholly in the Lord, not at all in himself: All
my springs (says the soul) are in thee: All my treasures of Righteousness and
Redemption, all my riches of Wisdom and Sanctification, they are all in thee;
and therefore the Saints, when they see their own vileness, and the Lord in his
Glory, are so far from seeking, that they loath themselves.

2. The soul slights the creatures, as vessels of mere vanity.

Oh try your selves then by this touchstone!

A carnal heart may cross his own Will, but not his own utmost end.

A man may seek the Lord with delight, and follow the Zech. 7. 5, 6. Isa. 58.
4, 5.
Ordinances, and fast, and pray, but himself is his end still.

How shall we know we make God our end?

1. When you make him your happiness: those that are thoroughly sanctified, make
the Lord their last end and happiness: Happy art thou, O Israel; who is like
unto thee, O Deuteronomy. 33. 29. Psalm 144. 15.
people! Happy are those people, whose God is the Lord.

The full rest and peace of the soul is to be found only in the Presence of
God, in this Being of Beings: his perfections are in himself, he keeps a
perpetual sabbath of rest in himself: And in this rest only the gracious soul
seeks his rest; God is the journeys-end of all his Labors, Life, and Travels.

When Solomon had tired out himself in his Travels through all the things of
this World, at last he returns empty and crying home; and now when he sums up
all his Glory, he says, The words of the preacher the Son of David, King in
Jerusalem. Eccl. 1. 1.


He styles himself,

1. A man gathered to the Church, to be as near God as he can.

2. The Son of David, to whom the promises were made.

And then thirdly, King of Jerusalem, the least and last of all.

Secondly, When you do the Lords work purely for the Lord: the Hypocrite will
do the Lords work, but it is, because his own Interests are bound up with it. As
a man that goes to the City, he will do your business, but he would not go,
unless he had affairs of his own to do there.

But the gracious heart will go for God, and ride for God, merely upon the
Lords occasions.

Thirdly, When you carry all things down the stream toward God: As a River
running toward the Sea, many springs fall and run into it, but it carries them
down all with it; so the upright soul, there are many occasions, hindrances,
businesses, but he carries them all down along with him; they must all go with
him, they shall not divert him, but he will over-master them, and lead them his
way; nay the more he is hindered, the more violent is his motion; It is time for
thee, O Lord, to work, for they have made void thy Psalm. 119. 126. 127.
law, therefore love I thy Commandments above gold, yea above fine gold.

Fourthly, Therefore they that are sanctified, love the Lord fully, that is
above all.

A man is highly endeared to that which he makes his end: his end commands his
affections: to love the Lord, and to be beloved of the Lord, and behold his
Glory, is the main end of the upright heart.

Fifthly, They that are sanctified, dedicate themselves to the Will of God; I
mean to the whole Will of God: Their will is emptied into his will: Teach me to
do thy will, Psalm. 143. 10. Psalm. 40. 8.
O God: I delight to do thy will, O my God, yea, thy law is within my heart.

The Hebrew word for an holy man, is a consecrated man, (...)
a man separated from common to a Divine use.

The sanctified man, is a man separated from his own will, and set apart to do
Gods Will; he is gone out of his own Will, and lives at a distance from it; he
is sorry that he has served his own will so long, and is weary of the service.

1. They that are sanctified, do Gods Will, purely because it is his will;
because it pleases him: there is a dear propensity in the Saints to do Gods
Will, because it pleases him. Thus says the Lord unto ths Eunuchs that keep
my sabbaths, Isa. 56. 4.
and choose the things that please me: This is their choice, it is in their
hearts to do it, because it pleases the Lord: I will Psalm. 69. 30.
praise the name of God with a song, and magnify it with thanksgiving: This
also shall please the Lord better than an Ox or Verse. 31.
Bullock that has Horns and Hoofs.

This is the Motive and loadstone of their Obedience, in that it pleases him:
This is the joy of their work, and that which makes music upon the strings of
their hearts, because it pleases him.

It is with every man, as it was with Sampson, he would needs have a wife of
the Philistines; Why so? because she pleases Judge. 14. 3.
me.

So why do men seek themselves, love themselves, and espouse these and those
lusts, but because it pleases them: Look then, as the soul, when he loved
himself, did seek to please only his own will in every thing and 'twas good,
because it pleased him; so the Saint, whose heart is now endeared to Christ,
though he cannot perfectly do it (that is in Heaven), yet he seeks to give the
whole will of Christ content, because it pleases Christ.

He that is unmarried (says the Apostle) cares for the 1 Cor. 7. 32.
things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord.

2. The upright heart, though he cannot joy in the Lords Love, yet he will joy
in the Lords Will: His delight is in the Psalm. 1. 2.
Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate day and night.

3. They close with the whole Will of God as their happiness.

It is not only good to do the Lords Will, (for thus men may seek the Lord, as
thinking it good so to do) but as their Blessedness; else it is not their last
end, and so not sought as their last end.

The sanctified soul obeys God as his Blessedness; Blessed are the undefiled in
the way, who walk in the Law of the Lord: Psalm. 119. 1. Verse. 2.
Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with the whole
heart: This makes them seek God with the whole heart, because they count this
their Blessedness; this makes a gracious heart prize service to God above the
whole Creation, and set an higher rate upon a good work, than upon a miracle;
he had rather be obeying, than working miracles; rather humbling his soul, than
removing mountains, because he is doing the Will of God.

Use 8. Saints reach after more grace: It should not content a Saint to have
grace, but to have more grace: As it does not content God to give grace, but to
give more grace; so it should not content a Saint to have grace, but to have
more grace: Because,

1. The more grace thou have, the more of God thou have in thee: And he that is
full of grace, is full of God: To know the love of Christ, which passes
knowledge, that ye might Ephesians. 3. 19.
be filled with all the fullness of God.

2. Abundance of grace is lovely; for grace is the beauty of the soul; the
quintessence and sweetness, that does dulcifie and perfume the soul.

A little sugar does not sweeten a cup; especially if it be a bitter cup, such
as man's nature is: we say of a little, that it is as good as none at all.

A little Frankincense does not perfume a room, especially if it be a stinking
room, such as man's impure nature is.

Where grace is predominant, there a Saint is lovely.

Ah my Beloved! God would have the Saints lovely in his eye, and lovely in the
Worlds eye: Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. There must be abundance of
light in thee to shine over all the Horizon of thy Conversation; as there is
abundance of light in the Sun that shines over all the Hemisphere we live in,
and therefore it is a great body; so must thou be a great Saint to shine before
all men; and therefore the little stars do not shine scarce to our eye.

Ah my Beloved! This is the reason why many, who call themselves Saints, are
not lovely in the eyes of the World; they have not abundance of grace; they
have abundance of profession, but not abundance of grace; abundance of
profession, but little grace; and this makes them so odious in the World;
abundance of profession (without grace) makes them but the more odious in the
world: The world sees so much pride, and so little humility in them; so much
worldliness, and so little of Heaven in them; so much unjust dealing, and so
little truth in them, that the world is apt enough to conclude, that either
this is not the Gospel which they profess, or that they are not true to their
profession.

John the Baptist had abundance of grace, and he was very lovely in the eye of
the World; he was lovely in Herod's eye. Mark 6. 20.


3. Abundance of grace is lively: for grace is the life of the soul; and where
life is but weak, there the actings are not lively: A weak man cannot run; But
says David, I will run the way of thy Commandments: He was lively, for he had
Psalm. 119. 32.
abundance of grace.

Moses was mighty in Prayer; says God, Let me alone, that Exodus 32. 10.
my wrath may wax hot against them, i. e. hinder me not by thy Prayer from
punishing them: Moses had abundance of Spirit, he was too hard for God himself
(as I may say with reverence): Saints, had ye abundance of Faith, ye would be
lively in believing: As it is said of Abraham, He was strong Romans 4. 20.
in Faith.

4. The more grace thou have, the more terrible to the Devils: The Devil
trembles at the mighty Prayers of a gracious man; the Devil trembles at the
strong Faith of a gracious man: Oh! Who would not have grace? And who would not
have much grace?

When the Apostles (acted by Faith) came (as Christ said) to cast out Devils;
Did not the Devils tremble at them? Saint, he fears thee, more than thou
need fear him: Jesus, I know, Act. 19. 15.
and Paul I know; said the Devil: That is, I know them to my fear; they have
put me to flight many a time: And if you were such as they, I should fear you
also: Believe it, Soul, he trembles at thy holiness, he trembles at thy Faith;
put it forth in Prayer, and thou shall see him run: Resist the Devil, Jam. 4. 8.
and he will fly from you.

5. The more grace thou have, the more thou shalt-serve the Lord, which is the
true and proper end of thy Creation: Lord (says one) is it much that I serve
thee, whom Thom. a Kempis, l. 3. c. 10.
all creatures are bound to serve? It ought not to seem much unto me, to serve
thee; but this rather seems much and marvelous to me, that thou vouchsafest to
receive into thy service one so poor and unworthy to serve thee: He goes on,
Behold, all is thine which I have, and whereby I serve thee: and yet in very
deed, thou rather servest me, than I thee.

6. Nothing but grace will bring thee to Heaven: Vanity of vanities, and all is
vanity, but only to love God, and wholly to serve him.

Knowledge is Vanity: yea Knowledge of God himself is Vanity, and of Christ
himself is Vanity, without grace to love him, and live to him: As one says,
What will it avail thee Tho. a Kempis.
to dispute profoundly of the Trinity, if thou be void of grace, and displease
the Trinity? High words surely make a man neither holy, nor just, but grace
makes him dear to God.

It is vanity to seek after fading riches, it is vanity to gape after withering
honors; vanity it is to wish to live long, and to be careless to live well.

But now many will say, grace does increase in us: we do reach after more
grace: and this many false hearts say they do. My Beloved, false grace may
grow, and does lengthen out in desires and dimensions: many that are Hypocrites
glory in this, that their graces grow.

I must therefore show you the difference between the increase of true grace,
and counterfeit grace.

1. The Hypocrite grows out of Emulation: The true Saint grows out of love to
goodness: The Hypocrite is grieved that others go beyond him, and over-match
him; not love to grace, but a spirit of envy makes him to advance: The true
Saint grows out of Duty to God, to bring in more glory to his Name: The growth
of others is matter of his joy, not of his repining: He is glad that God is
better served, though it be by another; his only grief is, that himself can
serve him no better.

2. The Hypocrite (another sort of them) grows in Parts, but not in the Power
of godliness; in gifts and curiosities, but not in vital and Divine quicknings:
In Knowledge and Speculations, but not in strength against sin and temptations.

Judas by conversing with Christ, could not but grow in Knowledge; but being not
incorporate into Christ, never grew in grace.

But the true Saint grows in his spiritual life, in Union to Christ, in
Communion with God.

The Hypocrite may grow in quantity, but not in quality; the real Saint grows
as much in quality, as in quantity.

3. The Hypocrite may grow more and more in hearing the word, but the Saint
grows in tasting the word; and in tasting that most deliciously, which is most
spiritual: The Hypocrite longs more after new truths, but the Saint tastes old
Promises with new affections, and old truths with a new appetite: The Knowledge
of an Hypocrite may grow bigger, but the Knowledge of a Saint grows more savoury
and judicious: The Hypocrite may know more Objects than he did before; but the
Saint relishes the things more sweetly which he knew before.

The Hypocrite may grow in enlargements, and pour out longer Prayers; but the
Saint prays more spiritually.

The Hypocrites zeal may be a great fire; but the Saints zeal is more heavenly
and discreet; there is more incense in his golden censer, his love more solid
and active, more to God, and less to himself and the world.

The hypocrite is like a tree, that bears great Apples, but they are sower; but
the Saint, the fruit he bears it may be are not such big Apples, but they are
sweet Apples, the juice is better, that gives them a more pleasant relish in
Gods palate.

There is a sweeter juice of love and kindness, and godly sorrow, and filial
delight in God, in a Saints duties; and here the Saints growth chiefly lies,
his fruit grows more ripe and mellow, and so more pleasant and sweet: His
Prayers are not bigger in quantity, but better in quality; he grows in
choiceness of spirit; he comes to the Throne of grace with a more precious
esteem of Christ upon his heart: He comes to the word with a dearer thirst upon
his palate; it is the same Christ that is set still before him, but he relisheth
Christ more sweetly, receives and tastes the same promises more ravishingly,
trembles at the same threatenings more tenderly and meltingly: Whereas the
hypocrite is cloyed with the word, if it be not dish'd up to his palate; but
the Saints palate is spiritualized to the word.

The hypocrites taste of Sermons, is flatted by reading of Books; but the Saints
taste is quickened by the sense of his wants.

For this is the true use of reading, and the end of Knowledge, To make US more
sensible of our wants, and make Christ more excellent in our eyes.

Therefore in taking notes, the hypocrite picks out matter here and there
according to his nice and licquorish palate; but the hungry Saint takes all,
and feeds upon all that comes before him, feeling his need to be stirred up to
consider what he knows.

Use 9. Here Is a sweet ground to assure the Saints perseverance: To him that
has grace, he shall not lose it, but more shall be given him; he shall not
lose what he has, but he shall have more than he has; he shall not fall away,
but stand faster.

They that fall away, are those that have not truth of grace at all; Whosoever
has not, from him shall be taken away, even that he has.

But the poor Saint, that has, To him shall be given, and he shall have more
abundance.

He shall be so far from losing grace, that he shall have more grace.

Dub. But my grace is but little, I cannot stand.

Sol. God shall make thee stand, Romans 14. 4. Where disputing of him that is
weak in the faith, (Verse. 1.) says he, (Verse. 4.) HE shall be holden up, for
God is able to make him stand.

The more weak thou art, the more tender God will be over thee; if thou can
not stand, he will make thee stand, thou shall stand in his arms.

In Christ, you have not only the graces of Christ, but the spirit of Christ.

I pray you mark it.

1. If Adam had stood (how long, we know not; it may be, had he stood the first
shock of Satan's temptation), all his Posterity should have had that assistance
of the Spirit, that they should have never fallen; as the Holy Angels, that
were contented with their first station, and abode in the truth (when the other
Angels fell), this was their Obedience, that they were loyal in the day of
their great Trial, when the others their Fellow angels rebelled, and their
reward was, That they are confirmed in their happy condition, and secured in
it; so if Adam hemself (in whom we were all one man) had stood, I say, if he
therefore had stood it out to the last, both he and all his Posterity should
have had the continual and constant assistance of the Spirit, and been
confirmed, so as never to have fallen.

And the ground is, the rule of Justice; for if he falling, all his Posterity
are forsaken of God, and put under the Reign of Sin, and Death, and Satan;
then, he standing, all his Posterity should have had the perpetual Presence of
Gods Spirit, and been under the everlasting Reign of the Spirit of grace and
life.

2. But now Jesus Christ the second Adam (who was the Head of the new seed and
family) he stood; and therefore propagates to all his Posterity the perennious
Presence, and constant assistance of the Spirit, whereby (being once begotten
of him), they live for ever, and abide in him.

As in Adams fall, we all fell, so in Christ's standing, we all stand; the Lord
Jesus having stood, they cannot fall; because by virtue of his standing, they
have the eternal Presence of the Holy Ghost: I say the ground is Christ's
standing; for though there are many reasons, why the Saints shall not fall from
Christ, as the immutable love of God, the Covenant of Grace, the spirit of
Grace, and the Intercession of Jesus Christ: yet all these are bottomed upon
Christ's standing and fulfiling the first Covenant: For therefore is the
Covenant of grace unchangeable, and the federal love of God to us in that
Covenant immutable, and the dwelling of the spirit eternal, and the sealing of
the spirit indelible, because built upon the unchangeable Priesthood of Jesus
Christ, such a Priest as stood and finished the work, so stood as to satisfy
Justice, and vanquish Satan: And the Intercession of Jesus Christ in Heaven for
us is built upon the standing and perseverance of Jesus Christ; had not Christ
stood, his Intercession had not now been standing; had he fell, that had fell
to the ground also: had he fell, the Holy Ghost had not been given.

Hence it is that the Covenant of grace reigns to life Romans 5. 21.
eternal.

Hence it is that they who receive Christ, shall be sure to Verse. 27.
reign with him.

Hence it is, that our Justification by Christ is not a tottering or fallible
Justification, that may be lost, but a Justification Verse. 18.
unto life.

In a word; hence it is, that the Spirit when he comes, he comes to dwell and
abide in Believers. Romans 8. 11.


He is called the spirit that abides for ever.

And now I am returned where I began; Saints, your perseverance is certain in
it self (though not perhaps to you), because in Jesus Christ you have not only
the graces of Christ, but the spirit of Christ: the spirit dwelling and abiding
in you.

1. The spirit knits the soul to the Lord, and never suffers that Love-knot to
be untied again: This knot the spirit makes, is stronger than the Gordian-knot,
which cannot only not be loosed, but cannot be cut asunder.

The Gordian-knot, Alexander the Great, when he could not loose it, cut it
asunder; but this knot whereby the Saints are tied to Christ, it is such a knot
as can neither be untied, nor cut asunder.

2. When the poor soul is careless of himself, the spirit keeps him; he sleeps,
and the spirit sits by him: The wise virgins took a nap as well as the foolish;
they fell into a sleep of carnal security, but the spirit watched by them, and
awaked them.

3. When the poor soul is weak, the spirit helps him.

4. When the froward soul offers to run from the Lord, the Spirit follows him:
Jonah run from God, but the Spirit follows him into the Sea, and into the
Whales belly, and there he prays, and looks again toward the holy Temple: Is
not this your wonder?

5. When the unkind soul grieves the spirit, yet the spirit still keeps the
house, and will not depart from him, and so not suffer the soul wholly to
depart from the Lord: When David sinned and defiled himself, he grieved the
spirit, he polluted the house, and yet the spirit would not leave the house;
the spirit stayed to keep grace alive in the embers, and to blow it again into
a new flame at Nathans Sermon.

Use 10. You, to whom God has given grace; the beginnings of grace; here is a
great deal of work for you to do.

1. Give the Lord the Honor of his grace: And now (the Lord knows) I know not
to whom I speak: The Lord knows who are his.

Some that make the least appearance, may have the greatest grace; and some
that cast the greatest luster, may have no grace; a slight Impression upon the
soul, among men, goes for grace: But you that have searched your hearts, and
found the pearl there, give the Lord the Honor of his grace, that ever he
should plant such a flower in your bosoms.

For the last end of all the Elect is to admire and honor the riches of Gods
grace. Ephesians. 1. 5, 6.


Beloved, This is Heavens work, Oh! learn this song before you go thither,
which none learn but the redeemed and sealed Rev. 14. 3.
of the Lord.

The Lord in all his dealings with his people, seeks lastly to bring about the
glory of his grace.

1. He leaves them a long time in their graves of sin, before he gives them the
resurrection of grace: that they live like other men, wallow in sin as other
men; which is strange, that he that loved them so long, should leave them so
long to be as bad as any; yet this he does, because it makes for the praise of
his grace, Ephesians. 2. 2, 4, 7, 8 verses.

And this does so confound Gods People, that they wish not only Heaven, but
Earth and Ages to come, may record this love.

2. Out of men fallen he picks out usually the poorest and the vilest: The
younger Brother, most despised, and least respected in a Family, and leaves the
elder: Jacob have I loved, Romans 9. 11, 13. 1. Cor. 1. 26.
Esau have I hated.

This is strange that the Lord should choose thus; but this he does to blur the
Glory of all the World.

3. The Lord leaves many wants in his People, under which they sit sighing, and
sometime very long: Sometimes he takes away those feelings, those enlargements
they had, hides his face from them; that if ever he returns in love, his grace
may be the sweeter, and last the longer,

4. Sometimes he refuses to hear their Prayers, that when he does answer them;
at last his free grace may be adored and cried up.

5. Sometimes he humbles them with vexing sins, and pricking distempers, and
it is to advance grace. 2. Cor. 12. 7, 9.


6. In a word, you shall find the Lord so strangely carrying on matters (as if
he did not love, nor care for his people) against the hair and grain of their
desires; and when all comes to winding up, it is to advance grace.

All a man's good days, and bad days; all Gods frowns and smiles; all the Lords
food and physic; all God cares for, works, and plots for, it is to do his
people no more hurt than this, To advance his grace in them, and by them.

All his hewings and hammerings of you, his knocking you a pieces, and new
melting, and new casting of you it is that you may be vessels of his glorious
grace, that you may be able to live in the Air of Gods grace, to suck in, and
breathe out grace; and let all the powers of Hell seek to blur it, yet grace
shall conquer: Who would not be under grace! Oh poor creature! Satan is
tempting, sin vexing, yet grace must reign.

2. Act for Jesus Christ: Do the work of Christ, and finish it: Christ gives
grace, because he has given work for grace to do: Christ sets up a work in
you, that he may do work by you for himself: every Principle is for Operation:
The eye for seeing, and the ear for hearing: so grace is for work.

Now, I say, Christ has begun a good work in you; be you then at his work
daily, and finish it.

As it was with Christ the Head, so should it be with all his members; I have
finished the work which thou gave me Joh. 17. 4.
to do.

The Apostle speaking to the Saints that had grace begun in them, says he, As
you have yielded your members servants Romans 6. 19.
to uncleanness, and to iniquity -- Even so now yield your members servants to
righteousness, unto holiness.

Peter writing to them, says, The time past of our life may 1 Pet. 4. 3.
suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles.

Sirs, before you had grace, you served sin; and having grace, will you not
stir up your selves to serve Jesus Christ? Your so long service to sin, should
set a keen edg upon you to serve Jesus Christ.

You live in Times and Places wherein men have so much work of their own to do,
that Christ is neglected; and few men walk with God, or act for God.

Some take men's Examples for patterns and copies, and content themselves to do
as others do.

Others are apt to put off Christ with desires, but serve Satan indeed: Others
are catching at comforts and promises, but neglect Precepts; the Commands of
God are tedious and burthensom to them: Surely then, you in whom the work of
grace is begun, it stands you upon to be at work for God: whilst others shut up
shop, and are Bankrupts, you should drive on a Trade for him.

1. For he has set you up again: he has underlaid and stockt you with
Principles of Action; he has put you into a way of doing, and given you wheels
to move upon; he has made you Wings to fly.

Object. Many excuse their negligence by pretending inability: How often do
Saints put a fine dress upon their laziness! Alas I am nothing of my self:
except God give me an heart and strength, what can I do? Without me ( says
Christ) ye can John 15. 5.
do nothing.

Answ. Do not deceive your selves, God will not be mocked.

1. The words of Christ have this meaning, without me, that is, separate from
me, ye can do nothing; that is, till you are planted in me: Now you say, you
are planted in Christ, and therefore your excuse is but a lie: This expression
of Christ speaks no more but this, that till you be knit to Christ, you are but
dead and barren Branches, as Christ explains himself; As the branch cannot
bring forth fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye,
except ye abide in Verse. 4.
me.

Now you say, you are knit and united to Christ; and therefore away with these
couzening vizors and palliations: If you are not yet in Christ, then confess
it; if you say you are in Christ, then say not, you can do nothing.

2. The regenerate have a power to Act for God, and to do work for Christ.

First, Else there is no specifical difference between a man regenerate, and
unregenerate, if both were without strength.

Secondly, We should not have as much benefit by the second Adam, as we had by
the first Adam: The first would have communicated his Power to do good, and
being corrupted, does communicate Power to do evil: Therefore much more by
Christ have we a Power to act for God in our measure.

Thirdly, If you are in Christ, you are living Branches, vital Members, and all
life is a Power to act.

Fourthly, What is grace but a repairing of that Holiness and Image of God,
which we lost in Adam? But that was a Power to do what God required, therefore
so far as that Image is renewed, so far there is a Power.

And therefore Saints, Act for Jesus Christ: I say, you have wings, and
therefore fly upon action, soar up a lost in Service for Jesus Christ: God has
given you feet, and therefore run the way of his Commandments.

God has said to you, as Peter did to the man that was Act 3.
lame from his mothers Womb, In the name of Jesus Christ rise up and walk, and
your feet and ancle-bones received strength: And therefore God expects that you
should be upon employment for him.

If you say, It is true, we have habitual grace, a new frame of heart; but we
must have assisting grace and influence, else we can do nothing; the work is
hard, and we cannot act without new breathings.

I say, Let the duty be to nature impossible, yet the Lord is at hand to help,
even when there is no strength: He gives power to the faint; and to them that
have no might, he Isa. 40. 29.
increases strength.

You know how the Israelites pleaded impossibilities, and then the Lords anger
rose when they were ready to enter Canaan.

If you had no Christ, no Spirit, no Promise to assure you to help, you might
then let fall Duties, and cease to action, and say it is impossible I should
ever overcome such sins, or attain such a measure of grace; or bear the Cross,
or do any thing

But when Promises to assure you, and Christ and Spirit to breathe upon you,
are at hand; now to plead impossibility, is to reproach the Lord: If you were
under the Law, you might plead this; but under Grace it is horrible to make this
excuse: Remember therefore Gideon, and Sampson, and David, who went out in the
Name and Spirit of the Lord, and they were helped.

3. Know this, that the more difficult any work or duty is, the more sweetness
shall you find in it, if you break through it: He that overcomes, shall eat of
the hidden Manna: Have you not found your selves dead to Prayer? yet you fell
to it, and then would not but have took the season for a world: The husbandman
that has labored, eats afterward of his 2 Timothy 2. 6.
fruit.

You plead the difficulty of a Christian life, and therefore taste not the
sweetness of it: If you can do no more than what is easy, and pleases self,
the Lord will never let you taste the sweetness of pleasing him.

4. What do you mean to be? Like whom? Christ teaches you to breathe out this
Prayer, Thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven: Do you look for Heaven,
and will you not act as they do in Heaven? whom do you make your patterns? If
you are not like Heaven, you are Bastards, not Sons: I am sure Angels are
content to come out of Heaven to do the work of God; nay the Lord Christ
himself came down from Heaven, and was made lower than the Angels to do the
Work of God; and shall your hands shrink at it? or will you think your selves
too good to do it? You have here the noblest patterns, and most unparalled
Copies to write after: Like whom then do you mean to be? Will you draw back
from Angels work? from the work the Son of God was at? If you mean to shine as
Angels, do the Work of God with Angels; if you would be where Christ is, be at
the work that Christ was.

And let me tell you, your time is but short, and you have done but little
work, none at all to purpose; and it is not long till your Crown shall be put
upon your head; and will you not be ashamed then to wear so rich a Crown for so
poor a Service? To have God pay you so great wages for so little work done.
Certainly, if ever it come to your share to be saved, you will (when the Crown
is putting upon your head) blush for shame to think of your cowardice, and your
laziness, that you should wear a Crown, that have done so little work.

Fifthly, The Lord will do thy work: do thou but his work, and he will do
thine: The Lord will take the care and charge of thee, to bring about thy ends
for thee: many of you are sparing in Christ's work, because of so many
distractions of your own; others of you wave Christ's work out of love to your
own, I mean the World; What will become of my Family, Wife and Children? Oh
unbelieving wretches! set your hearts to do Gods Work, and he will take the care
of your Families and Children upon himself: set thy face to the Sun, and these
shadows will follow you: The Lord is a sun and a shield, the Psalm. 84. 11.
Lord will give grace and glory, [the Lord will give grace, i. e. honor and
esteem among men, the favor of men, and glory too in the World], No good thing
will he withhold from them that walk uprightly: Set thy face then toward this
glorious Sun, serve him, and these shadows will follow thee.

Solomon, you know, asked for Wisdom, that he might discern between good and
bad, and judge the people; and God tells him, because thou have asked this
thing, and have not asked riohes and honors, therefore I will give thee riches
and honors.

Solomon, his great care and work was to rule a State well, and the Lord gave
him all the rest; he set his face to the Sun, and the shadows followed him: Oh
then, Sirs, Act for God, up and be doing, do his work, and he will do yours.

There are these three Things attend the man that gives himself to do work for
God.

1. There shall not any evil hurt thee: The three children were in the fire,
and yet the fire did not, could not hurt them: In the fire, and in the water
(says God) I will be with thee, there shall not any evil hurt thee: Whereas,
if thou do not, thy good things shall, they shall hurt thee: Thy riches, and
thine honors, they shall lift thee up, and there make thy head giddy upon the
top of thy glory, and then thou come tumbling down, like a drunken fool, into
shame and hell it self: Tolluntur in altum, ut lapsa graviore ruant.

2. All creatures in Heaven and Earth shall serve the man that serves his God:
The Whale shall serve Jonah to carry him to the shore; Indeed the poor man at
that time ran from Gods work, yet because he was his Servant, the fish shall
swallow him, that it might save him: The Ravens shall feed Elijah: I will hear
the heavens, (says God) and they shall Hos. 2. 21. 22:
hear the earth: and the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil,
and they shall hear Jezreel.

Thus all creatures in Heaven and Earth shall serve that man that serves his
God: Whereas else, they all groan under thee, and above thee: The Heavens above
groan over the sinner, and cry out, How long, Lord, how long shall we bestow
our influence upon this Enemy of thine? The Earth groans under the unprofitable
servant, and cries out, How long, Lord, how long shall I bear this useless
burden? Nay Christ himself is weary of this fruitless Tree; how long shall we
stand? Cut it down, why cumbers it the ground?

3. Thou that art at thy Lords work, the Angels shall come out of Heaven to
guard thee: thou art a greater man than the greatest General under the Sun:
thou have the Angels to be thy Lifeguard: Are they not all ministering spirits
Heb. 1. 14.
sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs of salvation?

And therefore let us see who dare touch thee? Take heed Matthew. 18. 10.
(says Christ) that ye despise [or hurt] not one of these little ones: For I
say unto you, that in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my
Father which is in heaven.

Jacob saw a ladder reaching from Earth to Heaven, and Angels descending and
ascending.

Use 10. The last Use shall show you, how God makes Additions to his Saints
graces: And herein his Methods are various, if not unsearchable: yet by
fathoming we may sound some of them, though not the bottom.

As grace it self is a Mystery, so the increase of grace, especially being
carried on by such Mysteries.

And therefore the contrivement whereby God increases grace is excellent,
worth the knowing; that we may know what he is doing with us in his
Providence, and may read the Mind of God in many of his proceedings; In a
word, how shall we help on the work, if we know not Gods Method in working?

1. The Lord increases grace in his People by their Faith: Faith is one of the
Graces, and therefore needs support her self; but she is the mouth of all the
rest, that speaks for them to God in Prayer, and sucks nutriment for them out
of the Breasts of the Promises.

Sirs, The case is this; Faith lives upon Christ, and all the Graces live upon
Faith: When there is a famine in the Land of the soul, Faith goes up to our
Brother Joseph in Egypt, and brngs home Corn: Faith is the Mother-grace, and as
the old bird, the Dam flies abroad, and fetches in food to her young ones,
and distributes it to them all in the nest: So Faith takes Wing (when the
graces sit hungry, and in want at home) I say, then Faith takes Wing and flies
to Christ in the promise; she comes home with her mouth full, and serves all
the graces, they are fed by her; And therefore the Scripture says, That the
just lives by faith.

Which expression the Apostle Paul makes use of in two of his Epistles. First
in Romans 1. 17, The just shall live by faith; that is in respect of forgiveness
of sin, and in respect of Righteousness or Justification before God.

But in Heb. 10. 38, where he uses this same phrase, The just shall live by
faith; The Apostle speaks of the Saints perseverance, and standing fast in all
their troubles and temptations.

Now Faith is the prime grace, that helps and succors all the rest: Hope lives
upon Faith; for the hope of a Christian is but poor in fruition; we can hope no
longer than we believe: He that hopes and expects the things promised, must by
Faith live upon the certainty of the promise, and the power and goodness of the
promiser.

Love lives upon Faith: we can love God no longer than we believe: When the
imaginary Faith of wicked men (like a candle) dies within them, their supposed
love to God goes out with it also: They hate him in Hell, and can do no other:
we love God no longer than we have a good opinion of his love to us; it is Faith
that seeds this Lamp with Oil: We love him, because he first loved us: And
therefore when the spring of Faith is low, the stream of Love is very ebb.

Prayer lives upon Faith; we pray no longer than we believe Prayer shall be
heard: We knock no longer at Gods door, than Faith sees we are welcome.

When a man feels guilt of sin, yet Faith sees the Lord will pardon it for his
own namesake: Who is a God like unto Mica 7. 18.
thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgressions of the remnant
of his heritage? -- He will turn again, he will have compassion on us, he will
subdue [i. e. pardon] our iniquities [so the word signifies], and thou will
cast all their sins into the depths of the sea.

When a man feels the strength of sin, yet Faith sees that the Lord will waste
and subdue it; and does not this bear up grace from sinking? With what courage
does grace fight against sin, when Faith tells her, God is on your side, and
you shall overcome?

Faith finds and feels rest in trouble; Unto the upright there Psalm. 112. 4.
arises light in the darkness: The life of a Christian, is a life of Faith,
which is a life contrary to sense and reason: when the Lord kills, what, Does
he intend then to save me? yes that he does; says Faith; and therefore, Though
he kill me, yet will I trust in him; and thus is grace inlivened.

When the Lord binds me in Cords of misery, does he intend me any good? Yes,
says Faith, he intends to teach thee, and instruct thee; Blessed is he whom
thou chastenest, O Lord: Psalm. 94. 12. Verse. 13.
and teach him out of thy law: that thou may give him rest from the days
of adversity: WHILE the pit is dug for the wicked.

Faith informs the Soul, that God is upon a good work, whilst he is binding and
breaking his people: Oh! he is teaching them some high and holy lesson, his
corrections are their instructions: He is preparing them for a day of
prosperity; As it is in the next verse, That thou may give him rest from the
days of adversity, while the pit is dug for the wicked.

Where take notice of these two Things:

1. While God is chastising his People, he is preparing them for a day of
smiles and felicities: When he was breaking Job upon the wheel of Affliction,
he was but preparing him for a greater day of Honor and Prosperity.

2. While God by chastisements is preparing his people for some greater
happiness, at that very time he is preparing a Gallows for the wicked, he is
digging their pit to bury them in [ That thou may give him rest from the day
of adversity: while the pit is dug for the wicked].

While the Jews were under a Cloud, and God preparing deliverance for them, he
was at that very time preparing Hamans Gallows: The wicked (like condemned men)
are suffered to live, till their Gallows and Grave be made ready.

Now Faith is well read in Divine Mysteries, in Gods proceedings; she acquaints
the soul, that God by chastising and touching the Body, is teaching her, that
his strokes are not huntful; Nocumenta sunt Documenta.

Secondly, The Lord increases grace in his People, by preserving a tenderness
upon their Consciences; it is grace that makes the Conscience tender, and that
tenderness nurseth up grace with exquisite care in the soul: The most tender
hearted nurse is not more chary of her dear Babe, to give it suck, keep it
clean, preserve it from harms, and see it come on and prosper, than the tender
Conscience is of her grace, the sweet Babe of the Holy Ghost within her:
Blessed, yea thrice blessed are they, to whom God has given a tender
conscience: As grace withers and shrinks up by an hardness coming upon the
heart; so grace improves mightily in a soft and tender soil.

1. The tender Conscience startles at secret sins, as well as open sins; to sin
in the dark as well as in the light; his Memento (or if you please his Motto)
is, Shall not God search this out? Psalm. 44. 21.
He fears Gods Eye more than all the Worlds eye.

The tender Conscience trembles at your cunning arts and ways of sinning,
whereby in your bargains you can bring about your covetous desires under hand,
and no man discern you.

You call only those sins secret, that are done in a corner; but if in your
public dealings, you can by your subtilties come over another; Are not these
secret sins too? Tender conscience cannot swallow them: And is not grace
growing now?

2. Tender conscience is quick and sensitive of small sins, vain thoughts, idle
words, lesser oaths, wanton glances, wishes and motions to sin: He knows no
duty small, because there is no Commandment small; he calls no sin little,
because there is no poison little, no death little, no hell little; and does not
this give strength to grace?

3. The tender conscience smites the Saint after he has sinned, as often as he
sins: After sin committed, his heart gives him no rest, till he has made
his peace with God: If corrupt nature cannot but sin, yet renewed conscience
cannot but repent of sin; it cannot but rise again, if God be offended; it
cannot but meet him with humiliation: if Man be wronged, it cannot but make
restitution, or satisfaction, as Zacheus did: When David had sinned in numbering
the people, his heart smote him, I have sinned greatly in that I have done.
Surely 2 Samuel 24. 10.
grace gets ground by this.

4. Tender conscience trembles at the appearance of evil, as some eyes cannot
abide to look on the Picture or Image of a Toad; that which looks like sin, he
abhors it: it scares a holy soul from any enterprise, if it be but male
coloratum, an ill aspect.

Every thing that might any way redound to the wounding of Religion, or at
which any offense might be taken, he entertains it not; and does not this give
nutriment to grace?

5. Tender conscience is jealous of the appearance of good: as it hates the
appearance of evil, so it dares not always trust every appearance of good: The
tender conscience (as far as it has light) will try all things, and hold fast
only what is good, not what seems so: Satan deceives more easily, and destroys
more dangerously, when he assumes the shape of an Angel of light: That which is
highly esteemed among men, is abomination Luke 16. 15.
in the sight of God.

6. Tender conscience takes heed of what he knows lawful: He does not only fly
what appears evil, and try what appears good, but is coy of what he knows
lawful.

You will say, this is pure niceness, nee lless preciseness.

I tell you, you know not the Scriptures: All things are lawful, but all things
are not expedient: All things are lawful for 1 Cor. 6. 12. 1 Cor. 10. 23.
me, but all things edify not.

The judicious, tender conscience, asks Bernards three Questions, An Liceat? An
Deceat? An Expediat? Is it lawful? May I do it and not sin? But suppose it be
lawful, Is it comely? Is it becoming me a Christian? May I do it, and not
reflect upon my Profession? Is it expedient? May I do it, and not offend my
weak Brother? There are some things we must deny our selves for others sakes:
Things that are evil, we must deny them for our own sakes; and many lawful
things we must deny for others sakes: If meat make my brother to offend, I will
eat no 1 Cor. 8 13.
flesh while the world stands, lest I make my brother to offend.

7. The tender conscience observes as well what he hoth not, as what he does;
regards omissions, as well as commissions. Our Lord Christ was as much
displeased with Peter's disswasion of him from suffering, as with Satan's
persuasion to fall down and worship him; his answer was the same to both, Get
thee behind me, Satan.

Thou must as well observe what thou do not, as what thou do: The tender
conscience takes notice of every opportunity he has to do good, trembles to
neglect duty, as much as to act sin.

Thirdly, God advances grace in his People, by preserving their appetite to
Ordinances: They that are not hungry, cannot feed: It is uncomfortable to come
with a full stomach to a full Table: They look upon the dishes, while others
eat of them: These may talk of Christ and Religion, but the others feed on
them: A man's graces cannot grow strong, unless he feed; and he cannot feed,
unless he is hungry: And therefore God adds strength to his Saints graces, by
preserving appetite in them to his Ordinances.

When Peter was hungry, he heard a voice, saying, Rise and Act. 10. 13.
eat. It is Gods delight to fill the hungry with good things: Luke 1. 53.
Matthew. 5. 6.
And this it is, that Christ styles them Blessed: Blessed are they which hunger
and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled.

Hunger, though it speaks want, yet there is a blessedness attends it, They
shall be filled.

It Is a strange promise, that a man should be filled for no other reason, but
because he is hungry: Among men it is not so: In the Gospel the poor man's
hunger is his Blessing: In the World the poor man's hunger is his misery,
because men are not willing to feed him as often as he is hungry; and therefore
the poor man of the world could wish he might be never a hungry: But in the
Gospel (through Gods free grace and bounty), Blessed are the hungry, for they
shall be filled.

Their appetite makes them eat Christ, and eat promises, and eat pardon of sin,
and eating makes them strong.

Their hunger makes them prize Ordinances, and the Gospel provisions; when they
are called, they come to the marriage; they do not make excuses, but come to
the supper; and these guests God himself bids them welcome, and carves unto
them; and therefore their graces must needs thrive.

God accepts our appetite as much as if we paid ready money for his graces; Ho,
every one that thirsts, come ye to the Isa. 55. 1.
waters, buy and eat: Their hunger is instead of a price, their thirst pleases
him as much as payment; and therefore, Blessed are the hungry, for they shall
be filled.

What made David's graces thrive so well, but his appetite to the Ordinances?
One thing have I desired of the Lord -- that I may dwell in the house of the
Lord, and to enquire in his Psalm. 27. 4.
temple: -- O God, thou art my God, -- My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh
longs for thee -- To see thy power and thy Psalm. 63. 1, 2.
glory, so as I have seen thee in thy sanctuary.

David had a keen-appetite after the Ordinances, and his appetite made his
graces strong: I say, his appetite made him relish the word; How sweet are thy
words unto my taste! Psalm. 119. 103.
yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth.

And this made him feed so heartily when he came; My soul shall be satisfied as
with marrow and fatness. Psalm. 63. 5.


And now grace must needs grow, because their palate is qualified for such
delicates; they taste them with a transporting delight, and feed upon them with
extreme pleasure.

Thus God animates and strengthens his Saints graces by preserving a fresh
appetite in them to Ordinances.

And how does he preserve their appetite to Ordinances? Because this is so
necessary to keep grace alive and vigorous in the soul, therefore you shall
find God runs various Methods to accomplish it.

1. He keeps their sins in their eye, or some special sin upon their
Conscience: My sin (says David) is ever before Psalm. 51. 3.
me.

Quietness within, no trouble upon the Conscience, will in time dull the
appetite: Men surfeit upon their peace within: As a long peace corrupts a
State, and breeds sins and vices in it; a still and standing pool is full of
mud, so a continued peace in the soul begets much vanity, and many diseases in
her.

Quietness takes away her stomach: And therefore God represents some sin that
we have done to the soul, and stings the conscience with it; and then the soul
runs, and looks up to the brazen Serpent: God will not suffer your consciences
to be quiet, his design is to maintain an appetite in you to Ordinances.

2. He hides their graces from them; they think they have no grace at all, or
not true grace; they have it, there it is, but God sends it to hide it self
behind the curtain; they cannot find it; and then they cry, and their spirits
are stirred up, now their appetite is rowsed; they find an appetite to Prayer,
an appetite to Self-examination, an appetite to Christ, and to Ordinances; God
is fain to deal thus with them, to hide their graces from them, and then when
they think they are lost, they go from place to place to find them, and at last
they come (as Joseph and Mary did) to the Temple, and there they find Christ:
This God does to preserve and keep up your appetite.

3. The growth of grace is hidden and concealed from them: and here they make
heavy complaints, and conclude sadly against themselves: Surely my graces are
not of the true blood, of the royal descent, because they do not grow in me;
were they vital, they would grow; or else God has forsaken me, and I am under
his sore and sad dissertion: Thus they lie under the black Cloud; their graces
(being true) without question do grow, and yet their growth of grace is hid
from them: And why does the Lord carry things thus with them, but to quicken
and stir up their appetite, that they may have an edg upon their spirits to the
Ordinances?

And thus (though under many fears, and much doubting, yet) grace increases in
them; for as a lively and quick appetite to the Ordinances is a sign of growth,
so it is a means of the growth of grace.

4. The Lord increases grace in his people by the communion of Saints: It is
not good (says God) for man to be alone: As man is a sociable creature, so
grace loves company; nay grace needs company and society: Exhort one another
daily (says the Apostle) while it is called to day. Travelers are sensible
how dangerous it is to ride alone: Who knows what or whom they may meet with in
the way?

Communion of Saints is a Divine Ordinance: Grace cannot thrive well without
it, and we must not think to grow in grace, when we will live without an
Ordinance.

In Communion, there is Communication; in the Communion of Saints, there is a
Communication of Graces, and Experiences, and Influences: There cannot be a
building, unless there be a meeting of stones, Saints, together.

In the Communion of Saints, there is a bearing up of one another: As in a
Fabric, one stone holds and bears up another; Bear you one another burdens,
and so fulfill the law of Gal. 6. 2.
Christ.

In the Communion of Saints there is a praying for one another: Pray one for
another: And what an help is this to the Jam. 5. 16.
growth of grace?

In the Communion of Saints there is a telling of one another their faults; an
opening of the wound, that it may let out Matthew. 18. 15.
the corrupt matter; a friendly conviction to nip the sin in its bud, that it
may go on no further; and does not this contribute much to the growth of grace?

In the Communion of Saints there is a mutual mourning over 2 Cor. 12. 21.
one another, a shedding of tears for one another, which falling like dew,
cannot but moisten and mollisie the withering herb, and repair decaying grace;
Tell me, Does not this advance the work?

In the Communion of Saints, there is a restoring of one another, a setting of
bones that are out, into joint again, like curious and tender Chyrurgeons, with
gentle handling of the diseased party, not roughly, but by putting him to as
little pain as may be (for so (...) signifies), If any be overtaken Gal. 6. 1.
in a fault -- Restore him with the spirit of meekness: And does not this help
to perfect grace wonderfully?

In the Communion of Saints, there is a consolation of repenting sinners, a
providing of Cordials for lapsed souls, that faint under the sense of their
sins; an Application of comforts to them under their grief and shame: Forgive
him (says the 2 Cor. 2. 7, 8.
Apostle) and comfort him, lest perhaps such an one should be swallowed up with
over much sorrow -- confirm your love toward him.

And tell me how, Does not this cheer up grace exceedingly?

This is another means whereby God furthers grace in his People; the Communion
of Saints: And are ye not now ashamed of your selves, that you use this
Ordinance no more among you? Do you not find your graces to wither in you for
want of it?

There are strong Saints, and there are weak Saints, and the weak ones should
receive quicknings from the Benign influence of the stronger. As Pliny tells us
of a Territory in Africa, Not. Histor. l. 18. c. 22.
in which a City called Tacape is situate; I say, in this Territory (as he
tells us in his time), there stood a mighty great Datetree, having under it
growing an. Olive, under which there is a Fig Tree, and that over-spreads a
Pomgranate-tree, under the shade whereof there is a Vine -- Every one of these
(says he) live, joy, and thrive under the shade of each other: Such is the
Communion of Saints rightly planted; a company of precious Trees, where the
Olive grows under the Date-tree, the Fig Tree under the Olive, the Pomgranate
under the Figtree, and the Vine under the Pomgranate, the weak Saints under the
shadow of the stronger.

5. By want of assurance: I say, the Lord quickens his peoples graces, by
withdrawings of his Presence, and interpositions of black darkness: They lie
out in a night of sad fears and wants of assurance: Not that God delights in
these Methods, but he is fain to do so, the necessities of his Saints call for
it; otherwise they would be stark naught: They would forsake God, if God did
not forsake them for a while. For,

1. Did they always enjoy Gods smiles, they would grow fearless of God: Fear of
God is a great preservative of grace, and antidote against sin: Now fearlesness
of God is a distemper which the Saints are apt to grow into: As children are
wont to grow saucy and irreverent, when their Father dandles them too much upon
the lap of familiarity; and therefore he is fain sometimes by his frowns and
distance to take down their spirits: So though God be a Father, yet he will be
feared: Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling: Psalm. 2. 11.
And therefore to correct the sinful boldness of his Children, and cause them
to stand in awe of him, he sometimes shuts in his favor, and takes state by
concealing himself; as the Persian Kings shunned familiarity, and were seldom
seen, that they might be the more honored.

The fear of God is one of the main pillars of his Throne; and so far as he is
not our fear, he is not our God: And therefore to advance his fear in the
hearts of his people, he withdraws his face; and where fear grows, grace grows:
For the fear of the Lord, is the beginning of wisdom, i. e. the chief or
principal part of our wisdom: The Saints fear of God keeps them from Apostasy,
I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall never depart from me: and
to quicken their fear, they shall sometimes feel his absence.

2. The Lord leaves his people in wants of assurance, to cure them of
slightness of heart: There is a trifling disposition in the hearts of Saints,
they are apt to be superficial in their ways, and this God visits upon them.

They dally with duties, do them as if they did them not; without heart, in a
lazy and liveless manner: you are in an evil frame of heart, when you can do
the weighty things of God with slightness.

There are three evils in a slight and formal Commnnion with God.

1. Unfaithfulness: A slothful servant is an unfaithful servant: He that is
faithful, does his masters work with all his might: And certainly a slight
communion with God, speaks a slight love to God: Where then, there is idleness,
and indisposedness, God comes in a way of anger to whip up the slothful and
unfaithful spirit: and this stirs up grace: Negligence and dallying with duties
would kill grace; and therefore it is a mighty mercy of God to shadow himself
from his Saints, that they may be more serious in their duties.

2. The other evil in a slight and formal Communion with God in Duties, is
unthankfulness: Duties of godliness are not only a debt to God, but a reward to
us: Therefore in slightness, there is not only unfaithfulness, but
unthankfulness: Both the Majesty and Mercy of God is despised: and can God be
well pleased with such things?

3. There is a third evil in a slight Communion with God in Duties, and that is
unfruitfulness; we get nothing from God in duties, we pray slightly, and
therefore get nothing by Prayer; we hear the word slightly, and therefore
profit not by it. Now that the Lord may cure his people of this slightness of
heart, and make their graces grow, he uses this dispensation, to leave them in
want of assurance.

6. God increases his Saints graces by terrors within: he not only suspends
their comforts, but afflicts their souls, he writes bitter things against them.

1. These rowse them up to seek God: They that see themselves lost, will find a
way to God: They that have Hellfire burning in them, will value Heaven, and
pardon, and the least drop of Gods love: Oh! now promises are precious, and
Gods love neglected, is now sweeter than the honey and the honeycomb: Now they
cry, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

2. These fright them out of their dreams, and carnal slumbers; as the cry made
at midnight; that the Bridegroom comes, awoke the virgins out of their sleep.

Among the other diseases of the soul, Divine desertions cure deadness and
dullness of heart: Sometimes living men are in a lifeless state, their hearts
are so benumbed, that they seem to lie among the dead: They can hear the word
carelessly, and sleep out whole Sermons; there is no vigor nor activity in
their graces at home, and therefore the Lord hangs their souls over the mouth
of Hell, and makes them drink of that red wine, the dregs whereof the wicked of
the earth shall Psalm. 75. 8.
wring out and drink them, that by this strong potion he may rowse them up, and
quicken their dull and drowsy spirits.

3. These terrors work them more closely to Christ: And for this cause God
gives his People sad visions of sin and wrath, he shakes the soul with
Earthquakes, that she may stand faster upon her true Basis and Foundation:
These storms make their hearts gather in to Christ: That I may be found in him,
says Paul: The soul must have some dry land to stand upon; and when the flood
of Gods terrors overflow the soul, then she flies to Christ, as Noah's Dove to
the ark.

7thly, The Lord increases grace in his Saints by afflictions: he makes them
by marring them: Divine Wisdom works by contraries: he makes them shine
brighter by their Eclipses, and clears up their light by darkness, Schola
crucis, Schola lucis.

And truly, It is the property of true-born grace to grow the greater by the
cross: As the laurel tree is not smitten Plin. Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 55.
nor blasted with lightning; no more is heaven-born grace hurt by any
afflictions, but much bettered by them.

1. God increases his Saints graces by sharp sicknesses, by diseases unto
death, i. e. this startles mightily: Oh Lord! thou did surprise me
unprovided; and if thy hand had cut me off with that disease, my soul had been
cut off from heaven for ever: This enters deep upon the soul, and strikes
terror upon the heart; the Lord (I hope) shall never find me so again: This
stirs up thankfulness to the Lord, that has not only (in this trial) saved me
from the grave, but also from Hell.

2. Sicknesses deaden the Saints to the world: They that in sicknesses, are
always leaving the world, learn to dye unto the world: They have death always
in their eye: They see themselves still upon the borders of the grave: They are
ever and anon lanching in eternity: and this makes grace grow.

3. Sicknesses are searchers: Thou inquire after mine iniquity Job 10. 6.
(says Job) and searchest after my sin: When God smites our bodies, he
searches our hearts, and makes enquiry in our lives; and now (says the soul)
Let us search and try Lam. 3. 40.
our ways: When God is searching US, it is high time for US to search our
selves; and this also makes grace to grow.

4. Sicknesses dig Wells of godly sorrows in the heart: They are (as it were)
Gods Mattocks and Spades, whereby he delves deep into the center of the heart,
and digs Wells of repentance, which send forth streams of confession of sin,
which before would not run, because they had no vent, being covered and stopped
with the earth of lust, and hardness, and worldliness upon them; but now they
find a passage: When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring all
the Psalm. 32. 3. 4. 5.
day long: for day and night thy hand was heavy upon me, and my moisture is
turned into the drought of summer: I acknowledged my sin unto thee -- and thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin.

2. By poverty and narrowness of estate: Many men must Aquilone maxim gaudent,
densiores ab afflatucjus, laetioresque, and materiae firmioris, Plin. Not.
Hist. l. 17. c. 2. Jer. 6. 22.
be kept short and bare, that they may thrive in grace. Pliny says, That trees
generally like best, that stand to the Northwind: It causes them, to spread
thick, and more flourishing, and makes the Timber more strong and solid.

The Lord threatens the Jews with a people from the North-Countrey, the
Chaldean Army, which should carry them captive into Babylon: The North wind
winnowed them, and fanned all their Idolatry: They flourished gallantly in
Religion, after the North wind had blown upon them.

1. The cold blasts of poverty correct pride, and moderate high thoughts: Make
a man poor, and you make him humble: Pride is an absolute enemy to grace, and
prosperity is the seminary of pride.

The North Wind of poverty cools the courage, and tames the spirits of men; and
now they know God and themselves: Their Plumes fall, and now they will digest a
reproof, and sit upon even ground with the lower Saints: When the world frowns
upon them, they seek the smiles of God; before they were too high for him.

2. Poverty teaches them to pray: they can now fall upon their knees: those
that never called upon God, learn now to visit the Throne of grace; and cry,
Lord, Give us this day our daily bread: Nay, they long for the spirit of
Adoption, crying, Abba, Father.

Nay those that have prayed in their fullness, now pray feelingly: They can go
to God in sense of wants: before they did not hear nor feel their own Prayers:
In their prosperity, they did not care what Prayers they put off God with: Now
they set the highest rate upon Prayer, for they are fain to live upon Prayer.

An hungry belly makes a Saint hungry after Ordinances, and after Gods
Presence: When a man's debts and poverty make him say, I know not what to do,
then his soul says, Mine eyes are up unto thee, O Lord.

3. When a man sees, that God blasts all his projects and endeavors, and that
he shall not be rich in this world; then he looks after grace, and so a poor
estate makes a rich soul.

A man for a while ascribes his poverty to his great charge and family, or to
his carelessness and improvidence, or to his superfluous expenses; and therefore
brings himself into a narrower room, and says, I will try this and that way;
and he rises up early, and goes to bed late; And now, says he, I shall be
rich: But when he sees all will not do, his good husbandry and pains do not
enrich him; let him improve his utmost diligence, yet all his care cannot add
one cubit to his stature; then he looks upward, and says, Now I see, it is God
alone that gives wealth, riches are only in Gods hands; I perceive now, that
God will not have me rich in this world; And therefore, Lord, Lift thou up the
light of thy countenance upon me; give me grace instead of greatness,
humbleness of heart instead of Honor, God instead of gold.

8. God increases grace in his Saints, by awakening sin in the soul: As long
as sin lies a sleep, the Saint thinks it is not there: He conceives of himself
better than he is: A disease lying hid and dormant in the body, is supposed to
be out of doors; we think we have not, what we feel not, and therefore God
awakens sin in the soul: For,

1. Thereby it is discovered.

2. Thereby the War is maintained against corruption, till it be rooted out:
God increases grace in the Saints by their continual War and conflict with
sin: The enemy is destroyed by rising: their rising is their ruin: had they
lain still, they had lain safe.

What made Zedekiah and his people to be carried captive, 2 Chronicles. 36. 13.
but because they rebelled and rose up against Nebuchadnezzar? When sin rises,
the Saint rises and gathers forces against it; and therefore God awakens sin
in the Saints that they may raise Armies, and get new Victories over it: Were
there no War, there would be no Conquests; did not sin rise, there would be no
War against it; and therefore Sirs, God awakens pride, lusts, and sins in his
Saints, that they may hew them down; such a sin assaults them, and takes the
field against them, that in a pitched Battle they may tread it under foot, and
make an end of it for ever.

And therefore I would advise you to two Things:

1. Do not think thou art under the Power of thy sin, when thou art at War with
thy sin, and it with thee: When the soul many times has had sweet rest in God,
then to break his joy again in pieces; Satan has stirred up a sin to assault
him, and now he cries out, That all his sweet joys were but delusions; were my
state right, should I be thus assaulted again? And he thinks he is under the
power of sin, because there is a new rising of sin against him.

To answer thee, thou must know, that there is difference between time of War,
and time of Victory, between the day of conflict, and the day of conquest: Now
is our day of conflict; and that of sin which remains in thee, must rise again
in thee, that it may be subdued: When Rebeccah had twins in her, she was
troubled, and marvelled at it, and went to the Lord, who told her, The elder
shall serve the younger: So there is flesh and spirit in the Saints, and these
two are contrary, so that you cannot do the things that you would, and
sometimes cannot will: yet something opposes this; well, know it, that the
elder and stronger, shall serve the younger: Lord, it shall be so, because thou
have said it.

A man that is at War with another, and is able to raise Forces against him,
has received power against him, but Victory is not gotten presently: It Is so
here: The bruised reed shall he not break, till he bring forth judgment unto
victory; Though Thou art bruised in the conflict, yet there is no fear of
breaking; if God will not do it, none shall do it: Now, Christ will not break
thee, [ The bruised reed shall he not break], and therefore thou shall get the
Victory: only know, for the present thou have power: Thou go to all
Ordinances, to ordinary duties, thou prayest daily, and strivest daily; and
when thou meetest no help there, thou go to extraordinary duties, thou do
fast, and lie in sackcloth against thy sin, and raisest the powers of heaven,
Oh Lord, awake! Awake, thou arm of the Lord! here is a continual and hot War now
against sin: And this is the first thing I would have you consider; Do not
think thou art under the power of thy sin, when thou art at war with thy sin,
and it with thee.

2. The thing I would advise you to, is this, Be sure to improve your utmost
strength, and rise with all your might against the Lords Enemies; I mean your
sins: do not the work of God negligently, which is an accursed thing, [ Cursed
is he that does the work of the Lord negligently]; And for this cause God
casts you into sore straits.

The Israelites should have done the work perfectly, when they were commanded
to root out the Canaanites; but because they were slack, and did it
unfaithfully; therefore God left them as Briars and Thorns, to be always an
affliction to them: And this is the reason why God leaves such a lust or sin in
you to be a perpetual scourge to you in your bosoms; when you are pressed to
take up Arms for Christ against the sins of your hearts, if you fight not with
all your strength, and pursue not the Victory to the utmost, till you find your
Enemies dead before you, God may give you into their hands, to lead you into
captivity, and to hold you in chains, that will eat into your souls, and may in
this distress stand afar of, as one that knows you not.

9thly, God increases his Saints graces by the work of humbling.

Many within a while forget that they have been humbled: Time wears out all
those Characters of humiliation, that were at first engraven upon them; their
wounds and bruises they had at their first Conversion, are healed up again, and
upon this they have decayed in grace, and at last become Apostates, and the
greatest enemies to the Saints.

And therefore God (to preserve his Saints graces, and to increase them), keeps
up still the life of humiliation in them: As the radical moisture in the body
is the pabulum caloris naturalis, the nutriment of the natural heat, and the
Oil is the food of the Lamb, which its light lives upon; so humiliation is the
humidum radicale, the radical moisture, the fundamental sap, that keeps Faith
and Prayer, and the other graces alive: They that humble themselves will pray,
and seek the 2 Chr. 7. 14.
Lords face, and turn from their wicked ways: When they hear the words of the
Lords threatenings, they will rend their clothes, 2 Chr. 34. 27.
and weep before the Lord: They that are humble, they will accept of the
punishment of their iniquity; they will kiss Lev. 26. 41.
the Rod of their correction, glorify his Justice, and implore his Mercy: The
proud man thinks his little, much; the humble man thinks his much is too
little: The proud man thinks he has grace enough, the humble man thinks he can
never have enough: The proud man has high conceits of himself, the humble man
has high conceits of God: The proud man seeks himself, the humble man seeks
Gods Glory, and therefore his desires of grace are infinite, because no
measures are sufficient to serve Gods Glory: The proud man reflects upon what
he is, the humble man reflects upon what he was, that he was unprofitable, he
did serve sin a long time, too long: Many years were spent before he was
called, and all that while God lost by him, and therefore now he must Row hard,
and ply his Oars with quickest diligence; he did God much wrong, and therefore
now he must work and labor hard for him; As Paul did, I am the least of the
Apostles, that am not meet to 1 Cor. 15. 9, 10.
be called an Apostle: because I persecuted the Church of God, I labored more
abundantly than they all.

The proud man reflects upon his seize, and what he has done; the humble
man forgets those things which are behind, Phil. 3. 13. Ad humilitatem
pertinet, ut Homo defectus proprios considerans, seipsum non extollat: Aquin.
22ae. q. 35. ad. 3.
and reaches forth unto those things which are before: Is it possible that
grace should not thrive here? Oh! now it goes on amain: The proud man casts his
eye upon his Beauties; the humble man turns his eye upon his Deformities; the
proud man looks upon his graces, the humble man looks upon his sins, and then
cries out, Oh! how much dirt and dross have I yet within me, that must be purged
out! My sins outweigh my graces; so much levity of heart in me yet to be
mortified: so much self will to be expunged, and self ends to be dethroned, and
carnal wisdom to be dismounted; so much want of love to God and his Saints,
which must be heightened; so much slavish fear in me, which must be turned into
filial fear; so much studying mine own preservation, more than the Honor and
Interest of the Lord; studying my safety, more than my duty; asking how I may
be saved, oftener than how I may serve God; how little I rejoice at the
prosperity of the Gospel, if my self be in adversity; and how little I grieve
in the adversity of the Church, if I my self be in prosperity: Thus the humble
Saint, by considering his imperfections, advances on to perfection; by
advising with his own wants, is still drawing more water out of Christ's fullness.

10thly, God increases his Saints graces, by making themselves to improve and
increase them: God increases their stock by their own good husbandry.

When the noble man (in the Parable) called his Servants, Luke 19. 12.
and gave a stock of money among them, to traffic with in his absence; he
charged them to improve it to his best advantage; and one of them said, Lord,
thy pound has gained ten pounds; and another came and said, Lord, thy pound
has gained five pounds: So when the Lord Christ gives a stock of grace, and
sets up a soul, he looks that your own care should come in, and that by your
own good husbandry you should add to it: You suppose the work of increasing
grace lies in Christ alone:

This is, and is not true.

1. It is true in this sense, that the increase flows only from Christ, the
increase is his blessing: As Paul said in another case, Paul planteth; and
Apollo waters, but God gives the increase: It Is he alone that adds to the
first stock wherewith he set you up: None can create grace in the soul but
Jesus Christ: Every addition is a new creation; When David (after his great
fall) prayed for increase of grace; He says, Create in me a clean heart, O
God: When Paul stirs them Psalm. 51. 10. Ephesians. 4. 23, 24.
up to be renewed in the spirit of their mind, he adds, which is created: As
the first platform of the new man is created, so is every degree of it.

This is the difference between the growth of nature, and of grace: In natural
growth there arises out of nature a new addition, but in the growth of grace
there is a new creation. Thus far, that all your increase of grace lies in
Christ alone, is true.

2. But in another sense it is not true, that is, without the endeavor: For
you must act, that Christ may give the increase: You must work out your
salvation with fear and trembling, though God must work in you both to will and
to do: And therefore it is said to you, Add to your faith virtue, and to virtue
knowledge, and to knowledge temperance: The Disciples came to Christ, and said
Lord increase our faith; And Paul prays for the Thessalonians, The Lord make
you to increase: and yet he says to them, We beseech YOU, brethren, that ye
increase more and more.

11thly, God increases grace in his Saints, by keeping them awake: The
sluggard, and the sleeper goes behindhand, it is impossible he should thrive,
or keep cart on wheels.

And therefore God to increase their graces, keeps his Saints awake.

Sleep is [ Ligatio sensuum] the binding of the senses; and therefore to be
awake, is when the senses are free, and at their liberty.

1. Sleep shuts up the eye; the man that sleeps, sees no more than the man
that is blind: And therefore God keeps his Saints eyes open to see Temptations,
and spiritual dangers, to see the snares that are laid for them at their feet;
to see things invisible, to see Judgment at hand, to see the Tribunal set, and
the Books opened, and the Judge sitting with innumerable Angels round about him;
and now repentance thrives, and self-examination is at work, and making your
calling and election sure, goes on, and spinning of fine linen, and washing
of our robes white in the blood of the lamb, and preparation for the nuptials
with the Bridegroom: While the eye of Hope is 1 John 3. 3.
kept open, the man purifieth himself as Christ is pure.

2. Sleep locks up the ear: As long as a man is drowned in a dead and deep
sleep, he hears no noise about him; and therefore the Lord (to increase his
Saints graces) keeps their ear open; they hear the word of the Lord: they hear
and believe, they believe and tremble, they tremble and obey, they obey, and
set upon action; they read, they run, they pray, they consult with the Saints,
they enquire how did the Lord work upon you? What signs and evidences of grace
can you produce as fruits of your Election, and first fruits of your Salvation?
When you passed through the new birth, what were your pangs? How were your
throws?

3. Sleep takes away sense and feeling: The man that is locked up in sleep, as
he hears not, when you call him, not sees you, though you stand before him, so
he feels not, though you jog him by the elbow: And therefore God (to increase
his Saints graces) keeps their feeling awake and lively: their sense of sin is
still fresh in them upon their Consciences; God keeps open their wounds of
godly sorrow, that they bleed afresh upon every good occasion: they feel their
wants, and spiritual defects, their spiritual poverty; they feel how little
they grow in grace, they feel how weak their spiritual life is, how feeble
their strength, how faint their faith, how languid their Communion with God,
how cold their affections are to Christ; and are therefore very sedulous to
supply what is lacking to their graces, and to be found in an acceptable state
at their Lords coming.

1. They feel the knocks of the spirit, and are ready to open unto, and receive
him.

2. They feel Gods retreat, and absence from their souls.

3. They feel when they work by the spirit, or by their own strength: When they
pray in the spirit, or by their own gifts and parts.

12thly, God increases his Saints graces, by their exercise of their graces:
Herein do I exercise my self (says Paul) to Act. 24. 16.
have always a conscience void of offense toward God and toward man. Paul by
exercising a pure Conscience, kept a pure Conscience: so must every Saint, that
would be skilful at his weapons, be training and exercising himself in his
postures.

1. There Is no grace the Christian has, but the Lord calls for its daily
exercise: Pray, but how? continually: Continue in Col. 4. 2.
prayer.

Rejoice: But when? Always: Rejoice in the Lord always. Phil. 4. 4.
Give thanks, for what? In every thing.

2. What makes garments breed moths, but lying in the 1 These. 5. 18.
Chest or Coffer? And Iron to rust, and the stone to gather Moss, but to lie
still? What makes water in a pond to gather Mud, but because it is standing
water?

3. This makes God to exercise our graces: It may be, YOU will not exercise
grace your selves, and therefore God steps in, and does it for you: he provides
service and work for your graces: And truly, though (when God comes to exercise
your graces) it is sharp for the time, and tedious, yet it is gainful to you,
and very advantageous: Graces do never increase and thrive so much, as when God
himself does exercise them, and find employment for them.

Oh ye Saints! God sees your graces would decline and go behind-hand in you,
did he not cut out work for them: He brings thee into a Labyrinth of straits to
exercise thy Faith: In thy prosperity and fullness, Faith in God is laid aside
as useless; and thou relyest upon thine own props, and therefore God plungeth
thee into straits, that thou may exercise thy Faith on him: He loads thee
with reproaches, to exercise thy humility; he encounters thee with the other
affliction, to exercise thy patience: Poor occurrences, and trifles not worth
the naming, that meet thee every day in thy way, these distemper thee, and make
thee peevish, and then God sends some weighty load of affliction on thee, to
exercise thy humility and patience to purpose; says he, I will make thee cry
out for something.

Oh ye secure Saints! that have laid down your Watch, and are grown remiss in
your walkings, I do assure you, God has some sharp scourges and severities to
exercise you with.

There are some of you, whom I know God has a sharp scourge for.

4. Exercise of grace keeps Satan out of us, at a distance from us, from being
able to close in with us: What keeps an Enemy from coming in to a man, but by
acting his weapon, and holding him still at the swords point? What is it that
keeps an Army at distance, but the playing of the Ordinance? else they would
come up to the City, and scale the walls. So my Beloved, It Is the exercise of
your graces, that stand between Satan and your graces: The exercise of Divine
Meditation, keeps Satan out of your Thoughts and Meditations.

5. Either exercise thy grace, or Satan will act thy corruption: As one Bucket
goes down, the other rises: There is a principle of sin within, which (like a
malignant party) watches for such a time to step into the saddle; and it is
easier to keep it down, than to pull it down.

13. God keeps up, and improves the graces of his people, by giving them
discontents in the creature: he affords them no ease nor rest in any condition:
The Lord crosses them of what they look for in this world.

They desire such and such a comfort; and if they might have it, oh! they
promise themselves much happiness and rest in it: Will ye see now, how the Lord
deals with them, if they belong to him?

Either he flatly denies them the comfort they desire, they shall not have it:
or else he gives it them, but with an hundred crosses and discontents with it:
He imbitters the happiness and sweetness they promised themselves in it; and
then they cry out, Now we see that all is vanity and vexation.

See ye it not by experience, That what outward comfort a Saint delights in
most, in that God crosses him most? When they sit down to feed upon, and enjoy
it, the Lord mingleth some tart sauce or other with it, that their expectation
is broken, and find it not what they promised it would be to them; like Beer,
it has a tang with it, something that does displease them with it.

Thus (I say) does the Lord deal with his Saints that belong to him; their
dearest comfort, he pours some or other unpleasing ingredient into it, they
shall not have their full pleasure in it, that he may wean them from it to
himself: Saints, if God has a mind to save you, he will let nothing go away with
your love from him; and therefore he will put into every worldly comfort some
correctives to abate your delight in it, and that you may not take up your rest
in it.

If such an outward comfort be sweet, it shall be a sweetbryar to thee, and
scratch thee.

If another comfort be a Rose to thee, which thou delightest to smell at, it
shall be a Rose with prickles to thee; God will make it so, that thy heart may
be indifferent to it.

I say thou shall have discontent in every thing, in every comfort thou
enjoyest, in every kind of life thou live; the single state, and the married
state, shall have their thorns and burdens: If thou have an Husband, or a Wife,
thou shall have them with prickles, thou shall have riches and wealth with
adhering crosses and vexations; thou shall have credit with envy and biting
emulations; thou shall have content in nothing; and now grace thrives
exceedingly; when the soul says, All the world, all my dearest comforts in the
world are but vanity and vexation; now the Lord is magnified, and his comforts
are prized, and his presence is desired: Oh, says the soul! none but Christ,
none but Christ: It is good for me to draw nigh to God: And therefore,

14. In the next place: You shall find God increasing his peoples graces, by
taking away comforts from them: It may be their discontents and crosses in
their creature comforts is too weak physic for them; they can digest the
cross, if they may enjoy the comfort still? and therefore God is fain to part
them and their comforts: Nothing will divorce their heart, but the death of the
comfort: Their heart is wrapped up in such a comfort, and their delights and
desires go out from God to it; now the comfort must be gone, that the soul be
not lost; their affections which God should have, they put them into such a
creature-comfort, such a glass bottle; now the Vessels must be broken, that all
those affections may be spilt; the object must be removed, that their
affections may again be recalled home to God; and now when nothing is left them
to love, but God, oh! the soul sees, and repents of its folly, looks upward,
and spies a beauty in Heaven worth all.

15. God increases his peoples graces, by denying them peace in the world:
This alienates the Saints from the world, and makes them weary of it; and now
grace thrives and gets upward: Did the world entertain us with smiles, and bid
us weclcome; how fond would we be of it? How would it bewitch us? Our houses
would be our Heaven, and our possessions would be our paradise.

The worse the world uses us, the less we love the world: Saints, you that
complain that your conditions are no more quiet in the world, Do you not
remember that of Paul? The world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.
Truly, well Gal. 6. 14.
met: The world cares not a pin for me (says Paul) and I care as little for
the world.

Sirs, This is that which crucifieth you to the world; the worlds unkindness to
you.

The Lord hedgeth up his peoples way with thorns, that while they are saluting
these worldly Dalilah's, being pricked and wounded, they may fall back again
into the embraces, of their first Husband: They go away with a thorn sticking
in their sides, and then they cry out, I will return to my Hos. 2. 7.
first husband, for then was it better with me than now.

Oh happy prickings, now grace is revived and increased: They cry, Oh something
hurts me, the world will not let me alone; and O happy Oh! now is Christ
prized, and his embraces valued, Kiss thou me (says the soul) with the kisses
of Cant. 1.
thy mouth: I went to kiss the world, I wooed it, and went to kiss it, and it
pricked my lips; Oh Lord Jesus, kiss thou me, there are no thorns in thy
kisses, thy lips has honey, not thorns in them: When the Saint finds no rest
in the world, then he cries out, Return unto thy rest, O my soul: The Billows
and Tossings of the Sea makes men desire dry land; the restlesness of the Waves
makes them love the stableness of the shore.

1. Sirs, your want of peace in the world, does it not make you keep peace
within? Let me have some peace (says the soul); If I cannot have peace abroad,
let me have peace at home; if I cannot have peace without, let me have peace
within; if not in the world, yet in my conscience: Oh, this makes the upright
Saint nourish a tender Conscience in himself, that having no rest nor quiet in
the world, he may yet enjoy a sweet serenity in his own soul.

2. Want of peace in the world, does it not make you prize your peace with God?
Would you ever have prized your peace with God so much, had you had no
distractions and interruptions in the world? I doubt of it.

Sixteenthly, Another method whereby God advances grace in his people, is by
reproaches from men: Oh! this is a great Mercy of God to his People, that men
revile them, and wicked men hate them: Did wicked men hug you in their arms,
you would catch the plague of them; Their affection would be your infection.

The more the Tares embrace the Corn, the more they kill it: Necat and hedera
vinciens (says Pliny), the Ivy by clipping Lib. 17. c. 24.
and clasping the Trees, binds them too hard, and hastens their death: The
hissing of the Adder prevents your being stung by her: When wicked men hiss at
you, and spit their enmity upon you, the more you run from them: And now grace
grows, the Saints shun their company, and thereby their corruption.

The hatred of the wicked makes the Saints flock together; it increases their
love to one another: There would not be such Communion among the Saints, did
not the hatred of the world drive them closer together; and now they grow
stronger: their love to one another, and their prayers for one another grow
stronger.

Aelian tells us that the Chii had a great Sedition among them, Var. Hist. l.
14. c. 25. (...).
some of the one side would have had their Adversaries wholly expelled out of
the City; no, says a wise man, (...), by no means; but when we have got the
victory (says he) let us leave some among us, least having no adversaries, we
war among our selves: So God in his Wisdom leaves wicked men among us, least
the Saints should fall out among themselves.

But the misery is, you know not how to improve the reproaches of men to the
advantage of your graces: They slander you to be hypocrites, and proud, and
covetous, and self-conceited, and that you are secretly as bad as others.

You will say, How should we improve grace upon this?

If they judge you to be Hypocrites, and base, do you judge your selves: It may
be there is some special cause that you should judge your selves: God suffers
other men to judge you, to awake you to self-judging; however make this use of
it, and you are sure to be no losers by the reproach: If they say, I am an
hypocrite, I will try my self whether I am an hypocrite: If they call me
covetous, or proud, I will call my self to an account: Would you not be gainers
by this?

Oh! then get within your hearts, and search them thoroughly before the Lord,
and see if there be any way of wickedness in you which you have not yet
discovered; and never be quiet, till you have found out your sin, or be sure
that you are clear: And would not this be an exceeding gain to you?

2. And then when you have upon deep search cleared up your Consciences, then
consider, that though you are not what they censure you to be; yet you are
sinners, I say, Sinners before God: You know your sins in other kinds are so
many, and so great, that you should bear the more patiently to be hardly
thought of, when you know you are so bad.

If you are in truth godly, you have seen a sink of uncleanness in your selves,
and have loathed and condemned your selves often; and do you think much then to
be condemned by the world?

If you judge your selves to be so bad, should you be troubled that you are
thought by others to be bad? If you condemn your selves, is it suitable for
such a spirit that has been condemning himself, to be vexed in that he is
condemned by others? Conclude therefore, it is no great matter to be condemned
by the world, so long as we are not condemned with the world.

Seventeenthly, Again, yet God goes higher with his Saints, he assaults them
with the reproaches of Saints: Oh! the godly wound me, and speak ill of me: If
'twere others, I could pass it by; but those that are godly are upon me, and
whet their tongues against me: What shall I do now? Is God doing me good by
this? Yes, by this, if thou know how to make use of it: How? now judge thy
self most of all: when the Servants of God think hardly of you, and above all,
if it be wise and impartial men that are acquainted with you; it is then your
duty to be very jealous of your hearts and ways, to fear least you are guilty,
and to search the more diligently.

Eighteenthly, Yet further, God increases his Saints graces by Temptations, by
all sorts and varieties of Temptations: And therefore if you would look to grow
in grace, you must expect and make account of all Temptations whatsoever; I
say, you must look to dwell in the air of perpetual temptations; and so have
the four cardinal winds of temptations to be always (nay, sometimes at once)
blowing on you, and blustering about your ears: You must never think to be
free: you would fain have it always a calm and serene air; but be not mistaken,
look for an air full of windy exhalations; for the end and use of the winds, is
to open the pores of the earth for fructification, to ventilate and fan the
air, thereby to purge it, and keep it from putrefaction, to gather the Clouds
together, and then dissolve them to water the Earth, and nourish the fruits of
seeds, plants, and trees; so that as the end for which God made the Winds, is
for life and growth; so does he in his Wisdom make use of Temptations to serve
the growth of your graces.

For to be tempted, is the Way and Conduct of God over his Church, and over all
souls, and was a part of the life of the Son of God: It must be also part of
the life of a devout soul, and we must not doubt but God has great designs
upon them whom he puts into this state: For as Gods Power, so 2 Cor. 12. 9.
our grace also is made perfect by weakness; thence she receives luster; God
purifies us by contradictions and subversions; he confirms and assures us by
temptations.

You shall need to take great notice of what has been said, because there are
Christians that are of two different Judgments about this point.

1. Some expect the way of Religion should be very facile and easy to them;
and that as soon as ever they are Saints, they should sail always with a secund
or prosperous wind.

But they are far deceived, who think Piety grows among Lillies; that the way
toward perfection of grace is strewn with flowers; who imagine nothing but
sweetness; and that devotion is a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, and
consequently, that there is or should be nothing that is difficult: Which yet
they are the sooner persuaded to, in that they only seek a certain
satisfaction, and ease to their own flesh, using no violence, but fastening only
upon this, That it is sufficient for a man to do what he can.

2. There are others on the contrary, that look upon the exercises of Religion,
as so rigorous, strict, and painful, that they say of it, as the sensual Jews
did of the Land of promise, It is an ill Country, possessed of Giants, and
that eats up the inhabitants.

Here are two different sentiments, lying in extremes, and consequently faulty:
both deceive themselves.

To remedy this, the truth we are to say, is, That godliness is indeed a lilly,
but growing among thorns: Religion has its thorns, they prick, it may be hurt
us, but these thorns are laden with Roses.

As Moses found God in the burning bush of thorns; so a Christian finds God,
and Grace, and Comfort, in a Bryarbush of Conflicts and Temptations.

And as temptation was the life of Jesus, so it is the life of our souls; to
believe otherwise, were to flatter our selves.

And yet it is certain, there is much content in this warfare; for the grace and
help of God is always present, which will never fail us as long as we dispose
our selves to receive it; in this respect it is that Religion is all sweetness,
in that we are able to do all in him who strengthens us, in him who comforts us.

But lastly, God tempts his Saints by Satan, by the Devil himself; and thence I
argue, that God increases his Saints graces by the very temptations of the
Devil: God sets the Devil upon his own Saints, unlooseth the chain, and lets
him out upon them, as a Mastive, and there leaves them fighting hand to hand:
Satan is a Mastive in Gods Chain, and therefore could not come out at all to
bait us, unless God loose him, and set him on us: Was not Satan fain to get
leave of God, before he could assault Job? Yes, surely, Satan had his
Commission from God to deal with Job: The power the Devil had, God puts it into
his hands. That part of the conference between God and Satan, is worthy your
notice; says Satan to God, Put forth thine hand now -- Job 1. 11.
and he will curse thee to thy face: Says God to Satan, Behold, Verse. 12.
all that he has is in thy power: Satan moved, that God would put forth his
hand against Job, and God puts Job into Satan's hand.

Was not our Lord Christ led by the Spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted
of the Devil?

Paul had a messenger of Satan, sent by God himself to buffet 2 Cor. 12. 7.
him.

Why then should you think much, that God in his Sovereignty, uses this
discipline to exercise and increase his peoples graces, as though some strange
thing happened unto you? 1 Pet. 4. 12.
And what (I pray you) will the issue hereof be, but that you may be found unto
praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing 1 Pet. 1. 7.
of Jesus Christ?

Deo soli Honor and Gloria.
AN ACCOUNT OF SATAN'S TEMPTATIONS.
2 Cor. II. 11. Lest Satan should get an advantage of us: for we are not
ignorant of his devices.
THE way to Heaven is encountered with difficulties, and Travelers are in
danger of two things, Robbery and Murder: We are Travelers toward Glory, and
therefore we must arm our selves against both these: for there is one
master-Thief, namely, Satan, which has Interest in all the rest: Therefore
says the Apostle, Lest Satan should get an advantage of us: for we are not
ignorant of his devices.

The occasion of these words is this, There was a sad sin that sprang up (like
a weed) in the garden of the Church of Corinth: There was a man that had
married his Fathers Wife: If she were his own natural Mother, the sin was most
prodigious and unnatural, that the child of her womb, should be the Husband of
her Bed; the Son of the Father, the Father of Sons by her! an high crime! a sin
which the Heathens stamped Infamy upon.

Aristotle writes of a Camel, that killed his keeper for causing Histor.
animal. l. 9. c. 47.
him to cover his Dam; and of an Horse that cast himself down head long, after
he had done the like.

If she were his Mother-in-law, yet 'twas against the Law of Reverence; if but
his stepmother, yet 'twas a foul step beyond Nature, for the Son to uncover
the Fathers nakedness: 'twas such a sin (says the Apostle), as is not so much
as named 1 Cor. 5. 1^
among the Gentiles. The sin therefore, though it were bad enough in it self,
yet there was an adjunct that made it far worse, in that he that had done it,
was a Christian, a member of the Church, and therefore Paul charge them, to
deliver him unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that his spirit 1
Cor. 5. 5.
may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. This he writes in his first Letter
to them: and the Corinthians were soft-wax to his Impression; he commands them,
and they obey him: This spiritual physic applied to the offender, had a good
success and effect upon him; for being punished, he punishes himself, he
mourns and grieves: being cast out of the Church, he casts away his sin.

And therefore the Apostle in this his second Letter or Epistle 2 Cor. 2. 7.
to them, desires them to forgive their patient, and to comfort him: and that
for two ends: The first is in verse. 7, Lest he should be swallowed up with
overmuch sorrow.

The other is in the words of my Text, Lest Satan should get an advantage of
us: for we are not ignorant of his devices.

The first reason has respect to the patient, the poor creature that had
sinned, and was now humbled, Lest he should be swallowed up with overmuch
sorrow.

The second reason casts its aspect upon the Interest and common good of the
Church, Lest Satan get an advantage of us: In the first, he desires them to
forgive the penitent for his sake, Lest he be swallowed up with overmuch
sorrow: In the second, he desires them to forgive him for their own sakes, for
(says he) I forgave him for your sakes, lest Satan get an advantage Verse. 10.
11.
of us: for we are not ignorant of his devices.

Quest. What was the advantage that Satan was like to get of them, and of the
Church, if they did not forgive him?

Answ. To lead them into sin: Satan would have made an advantage of their zeal
to lead them into sin.

1. In abusing that power which God had given them for edification, to the
destruction of a precious soul.

2. By heightning them up (under a notion of zeal) into a rigid austerity, and
uncharitableness to their offending brother.

3. By making them guilty of spiritual murder: In whose hands (had they gone
on) this patient had been so roughly handled, that he had died in the cure, and
run into despair.

4. Their rigidness toward their lapsed brother: Satan would have made use of
it to ruin the Church, and dissolve the Society: It would have bred ill blood
in the body, begot schisms and divisions among them, offended the weak, and
made the stubborn more obstinate; if a poor penitent sinner may not be received
again into the bosom of the Church, who would be the Child of such a Mother?
Thus they would have murmured, and not without some reason: They that favored
the offending party, would have cried down Discipline and Government.

Besides, if pastors and sheep be not mutually careful of one another souls,
by Counsel and Admonition, to prevent the fall of some, and to raise up others
that are fallen; to heal the broken, to strengthen the weak, to comfort the
feeble, to cure the wounded; if all of them take not care of every one, how
should that flock subsist and continue long?

5. The false Apostles, those Apostles of Satan, who were Paul's Adversaries,
and the Gospels, would have made a strong advantage to accuse the Doctrine of
Christ, and draw a party to themselves. Thus Satan under the Mask of just
Discipline, went about the perdition and ruin not of one sinner only, but also
of the whole Church: And therefore says Paul, IF Verse. 10, 11.
I forgave any thing, to whom I forgave it: for your sakes forgave I it, lest
Satan should get an advantage of us: for we are not ignorant of his devices.

Now to look a little into the words, the Original words are (...).

1. Which Ambrose renders, [ Ne possideamur a Satana], lest we be possessed by
Satan, lest he get us into his possession.

2. Erasmus renders it, Ne occupemura Satana, the Vulgar reads it, [ Vt non
circumveniamur a Satana], lest we be circumvented by Satan, lest he cunningly
come about us, and beguile us by his wiles.

And this to me seems the right sense and meaning of the word: and so
Tertullian rendered it, [ Ne fraudemur Lib. de pudicitia.
a Satana] lest we be overreached or deceived by Satan, for his way is to work
by policy; he plays his game by craft of wit, rather than by strength of hand:
And thus the Scripture tells us of his (...), which we translate the wiles of
the Devil: Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able Ephesians. 6. 11. Id
est, adversus, Insidias. Technas, deceptiones Diaboli.
to stand, [(...)] against the cunning Methods, Arts, and Deceptions of the
Devil.

Methodus Graecis est Ars and Techna: Method with the Grecians, is Art and
Skill, and is taken in an ill sense for craft, a method of cunning, an art to
deceive: so the Ancient (...).
Glosses expound (...), circumvenire, id est, fallere, to deceive, and (...),
circumventio, that is, a deceiving: so that (...) and (...) signify the same
thing, only with this different respect, he that deceives, is said [(...)] to
do it methodically, for his handsome art and skill to do it: He that deceives,
is said [(...)] from his end and scope; for therefore do men deceive, [ Vt
(...)], that they may have more than they should, more than is their own.

And this it is which our Translation aims at, lest Satan should get an
advantage of us, that is, deceive us to our great loss, and his gain: As if the
Apostle had said, I exhort you not to continue the severity of Discipline any
longer toward the penitent offender, but receive him again with all tenderness,
and make haste to do it, lest Satan deceive you into such an oversight, as
upon your ruin to make himself an infinite gainer; not only by your austerity
to undo one poor soul alone, but the whole Church, raising schisms and quarrels
among you, filling the mouths of his false Apostles with matter against us, and
by your immoderate rigor making the Gospel more hateful. For we are not
ignorant of his devices: (...), for we are not ignorant of his notions: The
Devil is full of deep and strong notions, or plots against us: (...) consilia.
The words being opened with the key of Interpretation, affords us several
Observations: [Lest we be circumvented, or deceived by Satan].

Observe. 1. Satan has a great spite to poor souls.

Observe. 2. But he is especially inflamed with malice and malignity against the
Saints and Church of Jesus Christ.

Observe. 3. Satan is wondrous busy and active to circumvent the Saints, and
catch them in the Net of his deceits. And which is observable,

Observe. 4. Satan does practice upon the Saints by their own graces: he makes
an advantage of their zeal; by it (that was his Gunpowder-plot) to blow up
their sick patient into despair, and them into ruin: Therefore forgive him
(says the Apostle) lest we should be circumvented or deceived by Satan; for we
are not ignorant of his devices: Where observe these Doctrines:

Doct. 1. That Satan is a learned and exquisite Artist in the Trade of
deceiving souls. He is full of his cunning methods and devices.

Doct. 2. The Saints (especially Ministers) are, or should be well acquainted
with the devices or plots of Satan. For we are not ignorant of his devices.
Paul takes it for granted, that every Saint does in some measure understand
them: He is but an ill fencer, that knows and observes nothing of his Enemies
play: But my discourse shall fix upon the former of these two, to treat of,
namely,

Satan is a learned and exquisite Artist in the Trade of deceiving Doctrine.
souls. Or if you please, take it thus: Satan is a skilful artist, weaving up
continual plots and devices to catch poor souls. He is full of methods and
devices: as he has an heart, so he has an art to deceive --

Cui nomina mill,
Mill nocendi arts.
Satan exercised this device against the Church of Corinth, and this incestuous
man, to lull them asleep, lest they should awake the power of Discipline
against his sin, by which he was in a way to get advantage. First, Against the
incestuous man. And Secondly, Against the Church of Corinth.

1. Against the incestuous man, by their security to lull him asleep in his
sin: He would lay him asleep in his sin, by laying the Church asleep from
taking notice of his sin.

2. Against the Church of Corinth.

1. By making them guilty of his sin, not in doing, yet in partaking; not in
operation, yet in toleration: The Church becomes guilty of those sins she does
not bend the brows of Discipline upon: Church Officers make other men's sins
their own sins, by not admonishing, reproving, and not drawing the bow of
Discipline against them.

2. By infecting the Church of Corinth with more of the same, or the like sins
in the long run. And therefore says Paul, Know ye not that a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump? 1 Cor. 5. 6.
Paul was not ignorant (here) of Satan's device: he knew that as one weed
(suffered to grow) does shed its seed, and beget many: As a stone cast into the
water begets one circle, which by multiplication begets many more: So one
incestuous sin (tolerated) would beget another, and it another, and that
another: or the toleration of that scandalous sin would speak for the
toleration of another: If they would digest incest, they would much more in
time tolerate and concoct adultery and drunkenness, and I know not what well:
But when Paul had wrought upon the Church of Corinth to deliver the offender
unto Satan, observe how Satan does spin a new thread of device against them, of
which Paul speaks in this place. Well,

You have heard the Doctrine, which is, That Satan is a learned and exquisite
Artist in the Trade of deceiving souls. He is full of methods and devices: As
he has an heart, so he has an art to deceive.

1. I shall discourse how busy and skilful Satan is to undermine us. And then
I shall arm you against his devices: and if you have skill in both these, you
may walk the safer to Heaven.

I shall (in the first place) show you how busy and skilful Satan is to
undermine you: And that,

1. Because he is a very intelligent creature. He is (...), and therefore has
(...): As the Holy Angels are wise to do good, so the lapsed Angels are wise
and subtle to do evil. The Angels that fell, lost the goodness of their
understanding, not the essence of their understanding: I say, Satan has lost
the goodness of his understanding, but not the essence of it; he can make
pitfolds, and lay snares to catch poor souls. Satan is a very intelligent
creature.

First, He is a great Scholar. And then, Secondly, He is a deep headpiece.

1. He is a great Scholar: exceeding well read. First in the Book of the
Creature. And secondly in the Book of the Scripture.

First, He is well read in the Book of the Creature. He knows all natural
things with the causes and secrets of them, and therefore can work marvels and
wonders, though not miracles. And,

Secondly, He is exceeding well read too in the Book of the Scripture: He
studieth Scripture, not to convert, but to pervert poor souls: yet I say, he
studieth hard the Scripture, and therefore he has the Scripture at his fingers
ends: as you may see in his Dispute with Christ: IF thou be the Son of Matthew.
4. 6.
God, cast thy self down: For it is written He shall give his angels charge
concerning thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time
thou dash thy foot against a stone.

Secondly, He is a deep headpiece. He has a strong brain: he is not (as we
say) a mere Scholar; a man may be a great Scholar, and yet but a fool in other
things: But Satan is not so, he is a very elaborate politician: Eagle-eyed to
carry about his designs very exactly. I will show you in these seven following
things:

1. Satan can trace or find out the temper and disposition of the heart. He can
feel your pulse, and (as the Physician) can find out your temper: I do not say,
he knows the heart as well as God, but he knows our hearts better than our
selves: I say, he feels the pulse, and finds out the darling sin; he studies
more our hearts than we our selves, and therefore we had need to be wary.

2. When he has found out man's temper, his darling sin, he can lay a bait of
Temptation suitable to it. He discerns a proud heart, or a covetous heart, and
then he lays his Temptation to Harmonize with it. Thus you may see in Job, Jobs
Oxen were plowing, and the Asses feeding beside them; and the Sabeans fell upon
them and took them away: and why Job 1. 15, 16.
the Sabeans? The Sabeans were a thievish people (inhabiting Arabia Felix)
given to Robbery; now Satan finding out their temper, he presently sets before
them rich spoils, these are a taking Object: See (says Satan to them), yonder
is a brave prize for you, Jobs cattle. Satan finding out their disposition, he
presents an Object to them, which hits it fully: Satan (like a fisher) baits
his hook according to the appetite of the fish: and as Christ took men in their
own Element: He appeared to man in the garden, like a gardener, so does Satan,
[ Fit fera, Fit volucris, Fit toto corpore serpens], becomes all things to
seduce all men.

3. Satan is wise and watchful to take the fittest time for temptations. Thus
he sets upon Christ, when Christ had fasted Matthew. 4. 1, 2.
forty days, and forty nights, and afterward was an hungry; then the tempter
came, he lays hold on this advantage: Observe, he would not come till Christ
was hungry, to persuade him to turn stones into bread. Oh what a strength had
this Temptation from the season? Who would not make bread for himself, if he
could, when he is hungry? Hunger is keen: had Christ been full, there had not
been such an edg upon, such a weight in the Temptation.

It might seem absurd to some, that Christ should answer the tempter, who was
not worthy an answer, but a check and chiding, because his malice was
incorrigible; he was incapable of any profit or edification: and holy things
were not to be cast unto dogs.

But it is sufficient to us, that our Lord would and did answer the tempter. For

He did not answer for the tempters sake, but for our sake. For as he would be
tempted only for our good, so he did entertain the tempter, and overcome him in
that way (that is, of answer) for our good: for although he answered, none
being present but the tempter; yet he did answer, (and it is recorded by the
Spirit) for the use of the whole Church, and the consolation of all Believers.

Thus how many does Satan provoke to turn stones into bread, when he comes to
them in their hunger? Thou art in a strait, like to starve and perish; turn
stones into bread, that is, procure thy self meat and provision by unfaithful
and sinful ways: This is indeed to turn stones into bread: so he came 2 Samuel
17. 23.
to Ahitophel (in the fittest time) when he was in a passion, and saw his
Counsel cheap, and at a low rate in the Court: And when Ahitophel was not
followed, he hanged himself, and dyed.

4. Satan tempts by doing the like things which God does. Thus he hardened
Pharoahs heart, (and for ought I know Exodus 7. 9, 10, 11.
hindered his Conversion) by doing works like the same miracles which Moses and
Aaron did: When Moses turned his Rod into a serpent, the Magicians did so. And
mark what follows, Pharaohs heart was hardened. Moses turned the waters of the
River into blood, so did the Magicians. And what followed? Pharaohs heart was
hardened: Moses and Aaron Verse. 22. Exodus 8. 6, 7:
brought frogs over all the land of Egypt, so did the Magicians.

Thus to blind the ten Tribes, and take them from the true worship in
Jerusalem, Satan sets up a worship in Dan and Bethel, 1 Reg. 12. 32.
and Jeroboam ordained a feast in the eight month, on the fifteenth day of the
month, like unto the feast that is in Judah.

So you shall find Satan imitating Scriptural-truths, but with Adams on 2 Pet.
1. 20, 21. p. 362.
the addition of his own lies: He had his Poets and Fabulists, whose
Mythologies went for true reports: that the great Army of Senacherib was
destroyed, both Isaiah and Herodotus agree, but Isaiah says, It was by the
Angel of God; Herodotus says, It was by an infinite number of Mice, which in
the nightime did eat up the Leathers of their Armours, Targets, and Bridles,
and hereupon they fled.

So the Gentiles had the same stories of Scripture, but under borrowed names,
as Augustine observes: In allusion to the true History of Jonah, his
fwallowing, and egestion by the Whale; Herodotus writes of one Arion, who for
his money being thrown over Shipboard, a Dolphin took him on his back, and
being delighted with his music, carried him to Tenarus, from whence he went to
Periander at Corinth, informing him of his received injury, and strange
deliverance.

Satan knowing that it was prophesied of Christ, that he Isa. 35. 6.
should open the blind eyes, and the deaf ears, and make the lame leap like
hearts, and the tongues of the dumb to sing; he feigned an Aesculapius, and gave
out as strange wonders of him: And for better facilitating his purpose, called
him the Son of God.

The Devil would make them believe, that the fensts of the Jews were derived
from the Gentiles; when indced they came to the Gentiles from the Jews:
Plutarch says, that some of the Jews feasts, yea, their Sabbath day, and the
word Sabbas, was derived from the feasts of Bacchus; but indeed the solemnities
of Bacchus came from them, being not so ancient as Moses. And thus the Devil
damns many a soul, by letting them do the like things which God does in the
Saints: Does a true Saint believe? Satan can suggest a motion like believing
into the soul: Does a true Saint repent? Satan will do the like in some of his,
and suggest something like repentance into the hearts of his: and therefore is
he said to transform himself into an angel of light. How is Satan said to 2
Cor. 11. 14.
transform himself into an Angel of light?

When he suggests things that seem to savor of Piety, Zeal, See Annotat. upon
the place.
and Holiness, as if the motion proceeded from an Holy Angel: Whereas those
things which he suggesteth, as he suggesteth them, tend wholly to Gods
dishonor, and the souls ruin.

5. Satan tempts by dropping good things into your thoughts, when they should
be employed upon other good things. Thus when you are praying or hearing a
Sermon, there will come into your minds very gracious Meditations and desires,
good resolutions of doing this or that good work, sometimes good affections, as
of grief for your sins, and the like, all which were good at another time, but
not at that time, because the Devil throws them in unto you, to take off your
thoughts from the present duty: He will let your thoughts wander in Prayer,
upon good things, that you may be never the better for that Prayer.

And he will raise up good and holy motions in you, whilst you are hearing a
Sermon, that they might divert your thoughts from the present Sermon: Here our
deceitful hearts will be ready to think that those come from the Spirit of
grace (oh cunning Devil), but the truth is, they come from Satan: for the
Spirit of God has no such office to draw away men's minds from hearing the
word, nor to trouble men's minds in prayer, with thoughts impertinent.

6. Satan makes choice of such instruments to tempt by, as are likely to be
most effectual. Thus (you know) he did Gen 3. 6. 1 Reg. 21. Job 2. 9.
overcome Adam by Eve his second self: Again, thus he tempted Ahab by Jezzabel,
a prevailing instrument. And thus he tempted Job by his wife: and thus he
tempted Christ Matthew. 16. 22. 23.
by Peter, and therefore said Christ to Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan.

Satan can make use of our friends to do us hurt by: He tempts not only by
himself, but by instruments; and not only by such as are at a distance from us,
but by those who are nearest in relation, and by those most: He can make a
friend, a child, a wife, instrumental for our ruin: As Saul married his
Daughter to David, that she might be a snare to him. 1 Samuel 18. 21.


6. Satan tempts us by our own selves. He makes use of our own reason or
understanding to deceive our selves: he draws reason out of our own bowels to
destroy us: and here you have the first particular, where you find how busy
Satan is, and how skilful an artist Satan is to undermine us: he is a very
intelligent creature.

2. Satan is armed with malice against souls. That Is a reason 2 Particular.
Psalm. 41. 7.
that sets him upon devising devices against us: As David says, All that hate
me, whisper together against me; against me, do they devise my hurt: And in
another place, While Psalm. 31. 13.
they took counsel together against me, they devised to take away my life. So
that hatred and malice is the root of plotting and evil devices against one:
When we hate one, and bear him ill will, then we set upon devices against him.
Now Satan is full of malice against God, and then against the Church and People
of God.

1. His malice against God. To tempt men is a pleasure to his malice, thinking
himself by this means somewhat revenged of God: As he that defaceth the picture
of his enemy, when he cannot come at his person, eases his spleen a little: so
the Dog gnaws the stone, that cannot reach the thrower: so Satan makes it his
work to raze Gods Image out of man, because he cannot reach God himself.

2. Satan is boundless in his malice against Gods People, and against the
Church of God. Therefore says Paul,. God is 1 Cor. 10. 13.
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted (namely by Satan) above that
you are able: As if he had said, Satan would with all his heart lay more upon
you, than you are able to bear; Satan would break your backs, if he were let
alone, but God will not suffer it. Observe here these four things:

1. Satan's extreme malice is seen in tempting us against God, and in tempting
God against us. He does not only tempt us to sin against God, (that were malice
enough) but when we little think of it, when we are asleep, or in our business,
he is trying and tempting God against us: O extreme malice! Thus God himself
acknowledges in Job, Thou movedst Job 2. 3.
me against him, to destroy him without cause. Pure malice stirs up Satan
against the People of God; though he always pretends somewhat in them, yet the
cause is in himself: and therefore Satan has two names in Scripture, (...), a
tempter. (...), slanderer or accuser, noting his two special works, Temptation,
Accusation.

He solicites good men to do evil against God; hence he has his name, the
tempter; and he solicites God to conceive evil of good men; and hence he has
his name, the slanderer, or accuser.

2. When Satan cannot obtain against us, by one means, he endeavors it by
another. He will not give off for the loss of one game: he is not wont to give
his cause over for lost, because he cannot carry it at first: he will try, and
try again. As it was with Balaak, when he sent for Balaam to curse the Numb.
23. 27.
people, and saw the business did not prosper; Balaam could not curse them; he
brought him to another place, Come (faith he) I pray thee, I will bring thee to
another place: peradventure it will please God that thou may curse me them
from thence; though you could not do it in one place, you may in another: Satan
(if he cannot work his will one way) will try a second or third; and observe,
that when Satan tries a second means after a first, he tries a way more
probable and efficacious for his ends than the former.

3. When a weaker will not do it, he provides stronger means: As God in
punishing or chastising sinners, when a lesser Judgment will not humble them,
he sends a greater: God comes not only with another, but with sorer Judgments:
I F ye will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then I will punish ye seven
Lev. 26. 18.
times more for your sins. So Satan, if you will not hearken unto him in one
temptation, he will tempt you seven times more, and seven times stronger, as he
did Job. Job 2. 5. Job. 1. 14, 15, 16, 19.


Before he got leave to touch Jobs cattle and goods, and to touch Jobs
Children, Sons and Daughters, here was one greater than the former: for a man's
children are more than all that he has in the world besides: A man's children
are himself; in every child is the Father multiplied: the child is the Fathers
bowels, and therefore this affliction reached to the very bowels of Job. Then
after all this, he gets leave to smite Jobs body: Put forth thine hand now, and
touch his bone and his Chap. 2. 5.
flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face.

And this is greater still than the former: Jobs children were near to him, but
himself was nearer: and therefore said Satan, Touch his bone and his flesh,
that is, afflict his body; the bone and the flesh are the two chief parts, the
material parts of the body: of them the whole Fabric does consist.

The bone is as the stone or Timber in this house, and the flesh is as the Lime
and Mortar, filling of it up: Touch this, faith Satan; and here he aims at sore
affliction: for if he had said only thus, [ Touch his flesh] that might have
been made affliction great enough: But when he says [ Touch his bone and his
flesh], he aims at deep affliction: Touch him so, as that his very bones may
shatter, that the very pillars may shake: Touch him so, as that the pain and
distemper may sink into his very bones, into his marrow; the bone it self is a
part without feeling, yet to touch the bone, impotts the greatest pain that can
be felt.

4. Satan, if he prevails at the first onset, in the beginning of a
temptation, he drives on furiously, and takes advantage to rout the whole soul:
As a Troop of Horse, that having once broke the rank, goes on fiercely, hoping
thereby to rout the whole body; so does Satan: you may see it in the pitched
battle which he sought with Peter: Peter (you know) goes after Jesus to the
high priests Palace, there Peter unawares does (as it were) draw out into the
field. Well, the Devil resolves to enter into Battalia with him, ( Simon,
Simon, says Christ, Behold, Satan has desired to have you, that Lnk. 22. 31.
he may sift you as wheat): And there he does first skirmish with Peter, and
sends out a Damsel against him, Thou also Matthew. 26. 69. 70.
wast with Jesus of Galilee: but he denied before them all, saying, I know not
what thou say.

Here she breaks the rank, and gets in upon Peter: and what does Satan do now?
He drives on furiously, takes the present advantage, and sends another maid,
and she charge him more strongly: for she says to them that were there, This
Verse. 71.
fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth. Mark ye [ this fellow], and she says
it unto them that were there round about him: A worse charge than the former,
And again he denies with an oath: But Satan follows on still, and now draws up
Verse. 72. Verse. 73.
his whole body against Peter, After a while came unto him [they] that stood by
(a stronger multitude still), and said unto Peter, Surely thou also art one of
them, for thy speech bewrays thee. Verse. 74.
Then began he to curse and to swear, saying, I know not the man. And now he
routs Peter, and disperseth all his forces; for says the Text, He began to
curse and to swear, saying, I know not the man: And here you have a second
particular, Satan is armed with malice against souls.

Thirdly, Satan is armed with pride: As David says, The 3 Particular. Psalm.
10. 2.
wicked in his pride does persecute the poor: Let them be taken in the device
they have imagined.

Fourthly and lastly, Another reason that helps Satan on well 4 Particular.
in his devices, is, because he has a large conscience. Indeed he has no
conscience; Satan has conscience of sin, but he makes no conscience of sin; he
has conscience of sin, that is, smiting him with sense of guilt; but he makes
no conscience of sin, and therefore can do any thing: As a man that makes
nothing of sin, to swear nor lie, he may carry on any design, he may grow rich:
Now the Devil is such, he will swear, and dissemble, and lie, and therefore may
carry any design on foot: He did lie to Eve in paradise: and he was a lying
spirit in the mouth of Genesis 3. 5. 1 King 22. 22.
Ahabs Prophets.

Use 1. The first Use is this, If Satan be so learned and exquisite an artist
in the Trade of deceiving souls, then let us not be ignorant of his devices, as
the Apostle says, but be fore-warned, and fore-arm'd. In the handling of this
Use, I shall discover Satan's plots and temptations: Satan does tempt men,
First, Before conversion. Secondly, Satan tempts men in conversion. And
thirdly, Satan tempts men after conversion.

1. Satan tempts men before conversion, that they may not be converted.

First, To delay their repentance till they be sick: When we are sick, then we
will repent: Pain and weakness of body is no advantage to repentance, and
returning unto God: it unfits the soul for action: Hence observe what the
Apostle James says, when he reckons up the several conditions of the Saints:
Is any among you afflicted? let him pray: [he speaks Jam. 5. 13, 14.
that in general] but says he, Is any sick among you? let him call for the
elders of the Church, and let them pray over him: As if he had said, a sick man
can hardly pray for himself: Is any among you afflicted? let him pray: In
afflictions a man can pray for himself: But is any sick among you? Let him call
for the elders of the Church, and let them pray over him: As if he should say,
a sick man cannot pray for himself: he has enough to do to wrestle with his
pain and conflict: he has need to call others to pray for him: A diseased body
unfits the mind for holy duties: and therefore sick Hezekiah's praying, Isa.
38. 14.
is called chattering; like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter: The pain of
his body wrought such a disquietness and uncomposedness upon his spirit, that
he could not pray, but chatter; or [ like a crane or a swallow, so did I
chatter], that is, I Annotat.
could not speak, but sigh and groan; or, I was so full of pain, that my
Prayers were very quick and short: not sentences, but words, not words, but
syllables: not plain syllables, but chatterings: How pitiful then are they
mistaken, who put off repentance till their bodies be in pain, till they are
sick or weak? They do it upon this ground, because when the body is sick, they
think repentance is easy: It is quite otherwise.

And therefore did Satan aim to make Job sick: Satan was Job 2. 5.
confident to trouble the mind of Job, by casting Darts and Diseases into his
body: by making Job sick, he hoped to make Job blaspheme and curse God; Touch
his bone, and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face. If Satan thought
by pain and sickness to make Job blaspheme God, Do thou think that pain will
be an advantage to thee to turn to God?

It is said in Revelations, at the pouring out of the fourth Chap. 16. 9.
vial, when they were scorcht with great heat, they blasphemed God, and they
repented not, to give him glory: Let wicked men be scorcht with a fever, or
with a pestilence or sickness, and it is the way to make them blaspheme God; and
therefore it is a woeful thing to put off repentance to a pained body: pain in
its own nature, fits us rather to blaspheme and fly upon God, than fly to God.

Never think (it is one thing what God may make use of; but do you never think)
to have help for the cure of your souls, by the diseases of your bodies:
Usually we find, that either sick persons repent not, or theirs is but a sickly
repentance: Indeed a long and lingering sickness may do much; there is a time
wherein the understanding may act deliberately, and the work may be digested:
but a short sickness, and a short repentance, such as it is, I ever doubt of.

I say, Satan tempts before Conversion, namely to hinder us from entering the
ways of grace, and to keep us out of Christ: For, if we be once in Christ, we
are gone from him; he can hurt us no more than he can Christ: and you may see
how far his malice can reach, The seed of the woman shall break the serpents
head, that is, his power: The seed of the serpent shall bruise his heel, that
is, his humanity. When thou art once in Christ, he can bruise but thy heel, he
may stir up affliction, bring thee to thy grave, but shall never bring thy soul
to Hell.

At the best, pain can but restrain your lusts, it cannot heal them: A disease
can but abate the acts of sin, it can never destroy the life of sin: Death it
self cannot kill sin: the sins of wicked men live, when they are dead: The
grave cannot consume them: nor the fire of hell waste their strength: the sins
of unbelievers shall remain, not only in their guilt, but in their power to all
eternity.

Quest. But how does Satan hinder our conversion?

Answ. By kindling a stronger love in us to sin. There is in all men by nature
a love to sin, and Satan comes and blows that fire into a flame, and so our
love becomes predominant: and afterward it becomes a great work to un-love
that sin.

2. Satan tempts the unconverted these two ways:

1. By inspiring his false Prophets and Ministers. Thus he 1 King. 22. 22. 1
King. 22. 4, 5.
devised Ahabs destruction: I will go forth, and I will be a lying spirit in
the mouth of all his prophets. And again, Ahab King of Israel asked Jehosaphat
King of Judah (who came to see him) whether he would go with him to Battle to
Ramoth Gilead? Well, the King of Judah promised the King of Israel, and told
him, saying, I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as thy
horses: Afterward Jehosaphat said nnto the King of Israel, enquire I pray
thee, at the word of the Lord to day: Then the King of Israel gathered the
prophets [that is, Verse. 6.
the false prophets inspired by Satan] together, about four hundred men, and
said unto them, Shall I go against Ramoth Gilead to battle, or shall I forbear?
and they said, go up, for the Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the King.
Consider it seriously, They that admininister the Oracles of God, are the
greatest mercies, or greatest curses: When they drop from their lips nothing
but Gods mind, they are mercies; if not, they are curses.

2. Satan tempts the unconverted, by numbering more false prophets than true.
For when Satan cannot act for Truth on his side, he will act by number: He will
weigh the balance by number, when he cannot by truth: he will disgrace truth by
the greatness and multitude of number against it: for he knows what will take
among carnal and ignorant men: they are carried with quantity more than
quality: What are you (says Satan, that are but one or two) wiser than so
many? Can truth sit upon the lips of so few? If it were truth, why should not
others know it as well as you? Why should so many be ignorant of it? Thus he
carried his device upon the wings of multitude against Ahab: to hatch his
design against 1 Reg. 22. 6.
Ahab, he did sit upon the spirits of four hundred prophets, against one
Micajah: so there are many loose lives against one Christ: though there be many
(now a days) that teach men by their words and doings, that men may live
loosely; yet Christ says, Broad is the way to destruction, and narrow is the
way to life: So that the fewness of those that carry on the way to life, is a
Testimony of the truth of it.

3. Satan tempts the unconverted, by putting men out of conceit with the godly,
that they are proud and Hypocrites.

Secondly, Satan tempts men in conversion: He can play his part here also: he
is cunning everywhere to destroy: if he cannot keep sinners from conversion, he
will hinder them in conversion: Now Satan temps men in conversion,

1. By putting hard thoughts of God himself into them; and therefore no marvel
if they have hard thoughts of godly men: When such a soul is coming unto God,
he is by Satan waylaid with this, namely, that God will never pardon him; he
would repent, but dares not: he takes God for his Enemy: Satan would fain make
a poor soul that is coming unto God, think that God is his Enemy, and will not
save him; it is one of his Masterpieces to bring the love and good will of God
into suspicion: Oh! says he, why should I repent? I shall not be accepted: and
this is no small weapon.

And thus Satan deals with grown Saints, and strong Christians; and therefore
surely the temptation is a strong Engine, it has more than ordinary strength
in it: He practiced thus against Job 1. 16.
Job, The fire of God (says the messenger) is fallen from heaven, and has
burnt up the sheep: Mark ye, why did Satan consume Jobs sheep with fire? He
stirred up the Sabeans Verse. 14, 15.
to take away his Oxen and Asses, and why not the sheep? why, to provoke Job
(if he could) to be passionate against God, and (for that was his great design)
to curse and blaspheme God, to beget an opinion in Job, that God was now his
Enemy, as well as Man: The fire of God is fallen upon the sheep, thou can not
put this off as thou might do the other, and say, this is but the malice or
covetousness of the Sabeans, that rob me of my goods; no, thou shall see now,
that God himself is angry, heaven frowns upon thee, the fire of God consumes
thee: Turn over the Records of all antiquity, and see whether ever God dealt
thus with any, but those cursed Sodomites, upon whom God rained fire from
heaven: Was God their enemy in that punishment? Behold, he sends such an one
upon thee; though God hates nothing so much as sin, yea nothing but sin, yet he
would fain save the sinner: Now then bring your souls to this, either I will be
a natural man still, or else I will get into Jesus Christ: Sirs, If you live in
sin, you will lose your souls: if you throw away sin, you shall be received
into the bosom of Christ's love.

2. In conversion one device by which Satan tempts is, when poor creatures are
coming home to God, to fright them with fearful blasphemies. As for example, he
will first tempt or suggest to thee, that there is no God; and this temptation
springs immediately from Satan's hatred of God: he would annihilate God.

But now to oppose Satan in this his device, how shall I encounter him? Thou
must arm thy self against this temptation, thus:

Answ. 1. Tell him, Satan thou know there is a God: thou would have me
believe there is no God, and yet thou know that there is a God: The Devils
also believe [that is, that Jam. 2. 19.
there is one God] and tremble.

Answ. 2. (And observe it): in that the Devil tempts thee, that there is no
God, should be a means and argument to thee to believe more certainly that
there is a God: Satan would keep you from believing that which he cannot but
believe: And this should be a strong argument to make us believe that there is
a God: for were there no God, the Devil would never tempt to think that there
is a God.

3. Another temptation to men in conversion is this, My heart is hard, I cannot
repent of sin: I cannot be sorry for my sins.

Oh! you must venture your soul upon Jesus Christ, for free pardon and
justification; you must take Christ, and he will give you a soft heart, he will
give you repentance unto life: Acts 5. 31.
You must take Christ for pardon, and for repentance also, that you may be
pardoned.

Quest. But may I before I repent, take hold of Christ for pardon? May one that
cannot repent, lay holy and lean upon Christ?

Answ. 1. There Is difference between one that cannot repent, but would:

2. And one that does not repent, and will not; cares not to repent.

1. He that does not repent, and will not, he may not take hold of Christ, nor
lay claim to him.

2. But he that cannot repent, but would, he may lay hold of Christ, that he
may repent: and he will go to Christ (nothing shall stave him off) to fetch
repentance from him: I say, he may go to Christ for repentance: See how David
did do so, Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within
me.

There are two snares and nets which the Devil sets for people.

1. One is, that they hope to be saved by Christ, and never care to be humbled,
nor to be sanctified: and in this the profane are caught.

2. Another snare which Satan lays, is to make men labor for Humiliation,
Holiness, Mortification, Obedience, and not labor to believe: and in this
well-meaning people are caught. For the first:

First, They that hope to be saved by Christ, and never care First snare.
to be humbled, nor to be sanctified, these are sadly in Satan's snare: he holds
them deadly: for Faith which justifies, makes holy, though it does not
justify by its holiness: Faith makes thee a new creature: that Faith is none
of Gods making, that does not make thee a new man: And therefore it was the
speech of Francis Spira, in his desertion and anguish of spirit, Page 114.
I will not (says he) derogate from the certainty of savingfaith, and the
promises of the Gospel, for they are most sure; but yet take heed of relying on
that faith that works not a holy and unblamable life, worthy of a Believer;
believe me (quoth he) it will fail, I have tried it: and therefore he much
commended to them the Epistles of Peter, which press sanctity and chastity.

Secondly, The other snare which Satan lays, is to make men Second snare.
dig and labor in the Mines of Humiliation and Holiness, and subduing their
sins, and not take pains to believe.

1. Here Is labor in vain, for that which can never bring thee Christ, nor
salvation, and that Satan knows, and therefore puts men on it, to make them
spend time and pains to no purpose: he puts them in a way where Christ is not,
that they may not find Christ where he is: As Rahab sent the men of Josh. 2. 5,
6.
Jericho away toward Jordan to seek for the spies, when she hid them in the
stalks of flax: So Satan sends men a traveling after Christ over Hills and
Dales, over the hills of Duty, and high strains of Holiness, and days of
Humiliation: And therefore as Christ said to Martha, so say I to these, Ye are
careful about many things [how to subdue your sins, and be humbled for them]
but one thing is needful, that is, to come to Christ, and believe in him: do
this, and you shall be saved.

2. When ye have believed and received Christ, then you shall be able to do all
things; then you shall have, 1. Mortification and Victory over your lusts. 2.
Sanctification and Ability to duty, and not before: These be the Births of
believing; you must believe before you can have these: As a woman must be
married to a man, before she can have lawful children by him: Were it not a
simple thing for a woman to expect children legitimate by a man, and then she
would marry him?

As absurd it is to expect, First to have legitimate graces in the soul, and
then to believe, to be sanctified, and get victory over sin, and then to
believe in Christ; for Faith (which does espouse thee to Christ) is the cause
of all true Mortification and Holiness, as marriage is of children: As the
Apostle tells you, Ye are married to another, even to him who is raised from
Romans 7. 4.
the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God. Christ is (as it were)
the Father of all our graces (of him we received grace for grace); and when he
has married us to himself, he begets them in us.

Of his grace he conveys grace to us, and he never does it but by our Faith in
him: for it is by Faith that he lives in us, and we in him: and holiness is the
means by which Christ after he is believed in, brings them that believe in him,
to salvation.

And this removes that objection that troubles many, repentance Act. 2. 38.
and conversion is requited to pardon of sin: Repent and be baptized every one
of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the holy Ghost. Again, Repent ye therefore, and be
converted, that your sins may Act 3. 19.
be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of
the Lord. Once more, For him has God exalted Act. 5. 31.
with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to
Israel, and forgiveness of sins. How then shall I believe his promise of mercy
to the pardon of my sins, that cannot clear my Conversion to my Conscience?
None can enter into the Kingdom of God, except they be born again of the John
3. 3. Romans 8. 13.
spirit: If I live after the slesh, I shall dye.

Here are two questions consounded, they must be distinguished and taken
asunder.

1. What manner of persons they be whom God admits into Heaven?

2. What manner of persons may receive. Christ unto Justification of life? For
the first,

1. God indeed receives none into Heaven, but those on whom he has written the
golden Characters of sanctification.

And now brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of Act. 20. 32.
his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among
all them which are sanctified. For the second, who may receive Christ?

2. I say, any one (whoever he be) that finds his own guiltiness and death, and
is affected with it in his heart. Every burdened sinner, hearing Christ
propounded in the Covenant of Grace, with this only condition of believing in
him, may come to him for life.

Christ and the Covenant of Grace is offered to unregeneraete Mr. Wilson Help
to Faith 80, 81. Ibid.
men, who being enabled by Gods Spirit to perform the condition [which is to
believe in Christ] Christ is theirs.

A man must not stay to receive Christ, till he first find in himself
regeneration and repentance toward God, which is wrought out of it: but he
must first believe, that in Christ he may receive the promised Spirit unto his
new creation, or conversion unto God: for Christ is given, to give us these
things: he is sent to bless men, in turning them from their sins: And Act. 3.
26. Act. 5. 31.
him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a prince and a savior, for to
give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins.

And therefore we are not to look first to find Repentance and Conversion in
our selves, and then come to Christ to obtain forgiveness; but we must seek
both in him: we must take Christ, that we may have these from him: as the woman
that had an incurable Issue,

1. Believed that she should be healed, if she touched the Hem of Christ's
garment.

2. She ventured and resolved in her self to touch him.

3. Upon the touch, felt in her self that she was healed; so poor sinners that
feel loathsome diseases of sin in them, are to go. and venture to touch Christ,
and to expect pardon and ho liness from him: And therefore see your error, you
who will not believe, till you have first grace strengthening you to duty, and
subduing sin in you: if you could clear up your Conversion, and find these
things in you, then you could believe, and not else; and therefore thou must
first believe in Christ, before thou can clear up thy Conversion to thee: To
answer this Branch, how shall I believe, till I clear up my Conversion?

Thirdly, There is a double Act of Faith.

1. There is (indeed) an act of Faith which cannot be had Mr. Arcker, P. 30.
till this be had, which Divines call the reflect act: where by a soul believes
that it does believe, believes that it is in Christ, bebelives that it is in a
saved condition; before this act can be, there must be repentance and holiness,
and trial of our graces. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith: prove
your own 2 Cor. 13. 5.
selves: know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except
ye be reprobates? This act presupposes Faith, and is a knowing, that we have
Faith: This is not the necessary means to salvation, but to assurance and
comfort.

2. There is another act of Faith, namely the direct act, which is believing:
not a believing that I do believe; nor a believing that Jesus Christ is mine:
but a believing on Christ, that Christ may be mine, and that I may be saved and
sanctified by him: and this must be before we can repent: we must not stay from
this act of Faith, till we can clear up our Conversion to us; but believe in
Christ, that we may love God, and clear up our Conversion to our selves: For
(mark you) Faith is one part or grace of thy Conversion: Thou can not clear
up thy conversion, till thou do believe; surely, then thou must first believe
also in Christ, as well as repent, that thou may clear up thy conversion to
thy soul. And therefore when Satan shall tempt thee, what have thou to do to
cast thy self upon Christ, seeing thou know not that he is thine? What right
have thou to put thy self on Christ, and art not sure he is thine? Oh, says a
soul, if I might trust my self on Christ, I would.

Thou may cast thy soul upon Christ, before thou know Note.
him to be thine: Observe, there is a twofold trusting and relying upon Christ:
1. The one is at a venture, without a persuasion Mr. Archer, p. 20.
of an Interest in him, grounded on Gods free offer of him to all sorts of
people: This is the ground of our first believing, on our first coming to him,
and entertaining of him; for if this were not, people would never receive him:
This seems to be no more than a confidence in his ability and willingness to
save all that come to him: Thus the man that had the leprosy, came and cast
himself on Christ at a venture: he knew that Christ could heal him: and
therefore faith he, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. He is not
sure that Christ would heal him, only makes a venture upon the pleasure and
goodness of Christ to heal him.

2. The other is a more certain thing, grounded on the Knowledge of an Interest
in Christ: Because a soul knows it has Christ for its own. therefore it rests
on him confidently for salvation. This [ trust] follows the Knowledge of our
believing, and is a further act and degree of Faith, and comes after our coming
to him, and receiving of him: The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, Psalm. 18.
2.
and my deliverer: My God, my strength in whom I will trust; my buckler, and
the horn of my salvation, and my tower.

O my God, I trust in thee, let me not be ashamed: let not mine Psalm. 25. 2.
enemies triumph over me.

And therefore poor sinners, let me (oh let me) invite you to Jesus Christ: I
tell you, Christ and Justification by Christ, are free for any person
whatsoever, to obtain by believing: See John 6. 35, I am the bread of life: he
that comes to me, shall never hunger; and he that believes on me shall never
thirst: [He that comes, he that believeth] that is, any one that comes, any
one that believes: It is an indefinite proposition, and is equivalent to an
universal: It is as much as to say, whosoever comes; as it is elsewhere
expressed, [ That whosoevrr believes in him, John 3. 16.
should not perish, but have everlasting life] that is, any person whosoever
may [upon believing] obtain Christ and Life by him: The meaning is not only,
that Christ is free for all sorts of people (for all sorts of people shall
actually have Christ, because God has his elect of all sorts, both poor and
rich, bond and free, Jews and Gentiles, young and old, men and women, wise and
foolish, one nation and another); but that there is no particular person in the
world (to whom the Gospel comes) who may not by believing have Christ and
Salvation by him: Christ is so freely tendered to all comers, to all receivers,
to all that believe in him, that there is no person of any Country or
Condition, of any Age or Sex, or Sins whatsoever, but by believing he may have
Christ, and Grace, and Holiness by him.

This was typified by the years of Jubilee: In those years any servant of the
Hebrews might go from his master, and be set free, if he would accept of it:
which did teach and typifie, that any person whosoever, that is by nature a
servant unto Sin and Satan, might go out, be set free by Christ under the
Gospel, if he would accept of it: for the years of freedom, and of Jubilee,
typified the year of grace by Christ, as you may see in Luke 4. 19, where
Christ is said to preach [(...)], Ainsworth.
the acceptable year of the Lord, that is, the Jubilee: for he dying Lev. 25.
10.
in the last Jubilee that ever the land had, set all free for ever that would
receive him. So the brazen serpent was a figure Numb. 21. 8, 9.
of Christ: Now the law of the brazen serpent was this, That if a Serpent had
bitten any man, when he beheld the serpent of brass, he lived: Every one (says
God) that is bitten, when he looks upon it, shall live. What Is the meaning of
this? That whosoever believes in Christ (mark ye, whosoever, any Joh 3. 14, 15.
one, every one that will look upon him, and believe in him) should not perish,
but have eternal life, as himself expounds it.

The brazen serpent was free for any Israelite that was stung, any one might go
and look on it, and be healed; so Christ is free for any sinner that would be
healed, as he explains it: God so loved the world (that is, the Gentiles as
well as Jews), that whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have
everlasting Verse. 16. John 12. 32. Mark 16. 15. Verse. 16.
life. And in another place, And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw
all men to me: And therefore Christ appoints his Disciples to preach the Gospel
to every creature (that is, to every man and woman ye meet with, to any
Gentile, as well as to any Jew,) and then adds, He that believes shall be
saved. Christ then (and salvation by Christ) is free for any person, if he will
believe.

Indeed where the Gospel is not preached, the people are not commanded to
believe; and so obedience cannot be exacted from them, nor they punished for
the want of it: yet the commission of mercy and pardon given out, is no way
limited [in regard of persons] but tenders mercy and pardon without restriction
of persons upon believing: and therefore wherever it comes, it offers Christ
and Salvation free for every person of them whatsoever, to be obtained by
believing.

In a word, this was typified by the Proclamation of Cyrus: ye know their
coming out of Babylon was a figure of our coming 2 Chr. 36. 23.
out of our spiritual captivity: Now the Proclamation of Cyrus ran thus, Who is
there among you of all his people? The Rev. 22. 17.
Lord his God be with you, and let him go up. Like that in the Revelations,
Whosoever will, let him drink of the water of life freely.

Any Jew might have liberty and freedom from captivity, upon the terms of
accepting it, for it was granted to all whosoever, to depart, that would
depart: Now, though it is true, all did not take it, and so were not delivered;
yet freedom was free for every one that would accept it.

And therefore, sinners, I do here invite ye all to come to Christ, not only
for pardon, but for grace, and for conversion and repentance: It is true, he
will never give you pardon without conversion, but he will give you conversion
for pardon: Do not keep off from Christ, till ye are converted; but go to
Christ for conversion; he will receive you all, if you will all go to him.

I am a most loathsome creature, a most loathsome wretch: and Object.
will God look on me? will he love me if I go to him? May such a vile loathsome
sinner as I go to so a Holy God? will God put me into his bosom? And therefore
when a poor soul is enlightened to see his sin, he is at a stand, he dares not
go and converse with God for a pardon: Arm thy self against this Temptation, in
these following things I shall give you.

1. Therefore if thou art loathsome, thou have the more need Answ.
to go to God, that thou may be cleansed: because thou art loathsome, thou
have the more need to fly to him: Thy foulness and loathsomness should not
stave thee off from Christ, but drive thee unto Christ: because men have filthy
diseases, therefore they go unto the Bath: because Naaman had a leprosy,
therefore he went and washed in Jordan: so because thou have dirt on thy soul,
go to the blood of Christ to wash thee.

2. Though God be holy, yet he will receive loathsome sinners when they come to
him, that they may be purged: As when Isaiah cried out, Woe unto me, I am
undone, because I am a man Isa. 6. 5.
of unclean lips. Thou think thy self undone (because thou art unclean) if
thou go to God; and Isaiah thought himself undone (because he was unclean)
in that God came to him: But what then? what was the issue? Then flew one of
the Seraphims Verse. 6, 7.
to me, having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from
off the Altar; and he laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this has touched
thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged.

Isaiah cries out, I am undone, because I have seen the Lord, and am unclean:
But the Angel says, Be of good cheer, thine iniquity is taken away, and thy
sin purged. Soul, thou say thou art unclean, but would thou be purged? I
dare not go to God, because I am unclean, but would thou be purged? Then thou
shall have a live cole from his altar, a holy cole dropped down from heaven: He
will baptize thee with the holy ghost, and with fire.

3. If loathsomness of sin should keep us off from going to God, then none
should ever be saved: because loathsomness and uncleanness is the state of
every man: But we see God has entertained loathsome sinners, say they, why not
me?

4. Thou art loathsome and filthy by sin; well, thou can never cleanse thy
self: thou art not able to put beauty on thine own soul; thou can not thy
self wash one drop of dirt off thy nature, and therefore surely thou may and
must go to Christ, that he may cleanse thee, else it will never be done: As the
Apostle tells us, The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from 1 John 1.
7.
all sin.

Object. God says in one place, He desires not the death of a sinner: and yet
he has appointed men to damnation. How can God be just in this? God has
appointed all things from eternity: If he has appointed me to salvation, I
shall be saved; and if God has appointed me to damnation, I shall be damned,
whatever I do.

Answ. Thou art not to look to Gods Appointments, but to Gods Commandments. God
does not first show people that he has elected them, and then and thereby
persuade and bring them to believe: But election is concealed as a secret
thing: and by Gods offering Christ freely to every one to be had by believing,
his free offer does encourage them to believe; and God giving them the gift of
Faith, they believe, and come to know that they are elected unto life eternal.

There was never in the Divine will, any such decree of damning any man, though
he should believe and live holy: yea, God has established and published unto
all men a quite contrary decree, that whosoever believes in his Son, shall not
perish, but have John 3. 16.
everlasting life.

You must lay hold on Christ, and hang there, and continue hanging there.

Object. But I shall never hold out: It is to no purpose at all for me to lay
hold on Christ, for I shall not hold my hold, I shall be beaten off again.

Answ. 1. It is true, you should be beaten off again, you could not hold your
hold, did you lay hold either by your own strength, or upon your strength? But
when you lay hold on Christ, you are kept not by your own power but by the
power of God through faith unto salvation. When you lay hold 1 Pet. 1. 5.
on Christ, Christ lays hold on you, and keeps you safe by his power for
heaven: before a man casts himself upon Christ, or is in Christ, he is his own
keeper, and therefore has but a poor keeper.

2. Another soul-staying argument to assure thee of thy keeping, thy
perseverance, is this, When once a soul is taken into Christ, it has not only
all sins past pardoned, but also pardon laid up for all sins to come: There is
forgiveness with thee, Psalm. 130. 4.
that is, there is a perpetual stock of pardon going in God for all our daily
sinning; and therefore does Christ bid us still pray, Forgive us our
trespasses, because there lie pardons with God ready beforehand for all sins
that we do act, as well as for what we have acted. And for all that is to come,
as well as for that which is past: And therefore Paul tells you, There is no
Romans 8. 1.
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, that is, after they are in
Christ, there is no instant of time, wherein it can be said, that they are
under the sentence of Condemnation: Now were it not that there is pardon laid
in beforehand for all sin that is to come, it might, upon every acting of a
new sin, be said, that now they are under condemnation: for if the least sin be
not pardoned, there is condemnation: but this cannot be.

3. Perseverance is a gift that is purchased by Christ. Christ has as truly
and as really laid down his blood to purchase thy perseverance as thy pardon:
and therefore can thou be sure of any thing by virtue of Christ's purchase?
thou may he as sure of perseverance. God knew at first, that thou could no
more keep thine hold on Christ, than thou could at first lay thine hold on
Christ: And therefore,

To you that mind not Christ at all, but are still bent upon your lusts, and
sins, and will not let him rule over you, oh receive Christ, be exhorted to
come in, and believe in him: Else,

1. You shall have as much fear of Christ, as of God: and as much danger from
Christ, as from God: for Christ will be angry with you, as well as God: Kiss
the Son lest he be angry, and ye Psalm. 2. 12.
perish from the way.

2. Such shall not only perish, but perish worse than others; they are dead
already, but shall dye worse: they are fallen in Adam, but shall fall further:
And Simeon blessed them, and Luke 2. 34.
said unto Mary his mother: behold this child is set for the fall and rising
again of many in Israel, and for a sign which shall be Matthew. 10. 12, 14, 15.
spoken against. One Text more, And when ye come into an house, salute it. And
whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of
that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet. Verily, I say unto you, It
shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of
judgment, than for that city. And thus I have showed you how Satan hinders thee
in conversion, by tempting thee, that thou can not believe thou art dead in
sin; arm thy self against this temptation thus: I know I cannot belleve of my
self. And this is the first thing thou must do, namely, to believe that thou
can not believe of thy self: and thus thou may overshoot Satan in his own
Bow: and when thou see thy self so lost, that thou can not believe of thy
self, thou art a step in thy way to heaven: And know this, that it is the
condition of all, till they have new hearts and new spirits.

And now observe; you that will not believe till you are sanctified, and find
something in your selves.

1. You keep your selves off from believing: for you cannot believe that Christ
is yours, till you believe in Christ.

2. It Is pride in you, that you will not have all ground of hope and mercy to
be in God, and none in your self: For (observe it) you will ground your
salvation only on Christ; but you must see somewhat in your selves, before you
will believe.

3. You Eclipse the shining forth of Gods free grace: you darken its Beams: for
Gods grace is free grace: now whilst ye will not believe, but first will be
able to do somewhat, you make not Christ nor Justification a free gift; nor can
it be free grace in God: and so whilst you do not see Gods free grace, you do
not exalt him, nor magnify him so much as you should.

4. It is a darkning of Gods Truth, for you dare not venture yours souls on
Gods bare word, but you must see somewhat done in you, before you will credit
him: for though he says, that whosoever comes to Christ, and believes in him,
shall be saved and sanctified, yet you will not believe, till ye find your
selves sanctified, and so dare not trust his word; and therefore it is that the
Scripture makes an unbeliever, to make God a 1 John 5. 10.
liar.

5. You totter your assurance, and make it reeling and unstable; Timo. Rogers
in his right way to believe, p. 93, 96.
for if you ground your assurance upon your graces, then as they have risings
and abatings, so will your assurance rise and fall, ebb and flow.

Oh then, be exhorted to believe: for you that believe but weakly, oh believe
more, and strengthen your Faith: for you that believe but weakly, you wrong God
and Christ, and your selves very much, as if Christ the second Adam were not as
good to help you, as the first Adam was to hurt you

Use last, I shall conclude with this point: look for a day of temptation, and
prepare for a day of temptation.

First, Look for a day of Temptation: For,

1. Man is born to temptations. Although affliction comes not forth of the
dust, neither does trouble spring out of the Job 5. 6, 7.
ground: Yet man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward. Mariners that
go in Ships on the Sea, look for storms: This world is a Sea of troubles:
Travelers look for thieves and encounters.

This life is the Field of trials, and therefore you must look for Battles:
Soldiers in the field stand in Battalia; whilst you are in this world, you are
in your enemies Country.

3. Temptations must come. Jesus was led up of the spirit 1 Cor. 11. 19.
into the wilderness to be tempted of the Devil: for there must be also
heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest among you.

Secondly, Prepare for a day of Temptation. Remember Prove. 24. 10, If thou
faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small. 1. Prepare for inward
temptations: Fears within, 2. Prepare for outward temptations, frightnings
without.

1. Prepare for outward temptations from the world. If ye were of the world,
the world would love his own: but because ye John 15. 19.
are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the
world hates you: and Satan will tempt ye in and by the world.

1. It is a dark day. Afflictions are called darkness: and darkness is
terrible: the night is doleful and uncomfortable: Oh! get light in this dark
night: First, The light of Knowledge and Wisdom to see your way. Secondly, the
light of comfort and peace: this will guide you and uphold you.

2. It is a strong day. We wrestle not with flesh and blood [that's but weak]
but with principalities and powers: Satan is strong, and Temptations are
strong, especially when we are weak: and therefore store up strength.

1. The strength of God, and the strength of Christ: I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me.

2. Feed upon the present ordinances of Christ. Concoct them, and turn them
into nutriment: Christ fed the people, lest (said he) they should faint in the
way: If you hear the word, but feed not on the word, you will faint in the way:
Rebuke your selves, that you have not fed so heartily upon the Ordinances of
Jesus Christ: O repent, and whet up your appetites: now get good stomachs to
the word of life: What the Angel of the Lord said to Elijah, so say I to yon,
Arise 1 King. 19. 7, 8.
and eat, because the journey is too great for thee: And he arose, and did eat
and drink, and went in the strength of that meat forty days and forty nights.

3. Get the spirit within you: Ye are of God, little children, 1 John 4.4.
and have overcome them, because greater is he that is in you, than be that is
in the world.

4. Get humility: there is great strength in humility: The humbled Christian is
the strongest Christian: An humble heart will bear a great affliction, when a
proud heart cannot bear the least: Let a man deny himself, and take up his
cross, and follow me: Self-denial is humility, and the self-denying Christian
will be able to take up the Cross, and carry it after Jesus Christ.

2. Prepare, as for outward, so for inward Temptations: Outward trials bring
inward Temptations along with them.

1. Temptations to doubt of Gods love, as Gideon said [when the Angel told him,
The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valour]. Oh my Lord, if the Lord be
with us, why then is all Judge. 6. 13.
this befaln us? And where be all his miracles which our Fathers told us of,
saying, Did not the Lord bring us up from Egypt? But now the Lord has forsaken
us, and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites.

2. Temptations to cast off God. Then said his wife unto him, Job 2. 9.
Do thou still retain thine integrity? Curse God and dye.

3. Temptations to unbelief: When poverty and want of all things come upon you,
can God, or will God sustain me? When I have nothing of mine own, shall, or can
I live upon the air? Yea, they spoke against God: they said, Can God furnish a
Psalm. 78. 19. 20.
table in the wilderness? Behold he smote the rock, that the waters gushed out,
and the streams overflowed, Can he give bread also? can he provide flesh for
his people?

4 Temptations to sin; to save and shift for your selves by sin: As Abraham was
tempted to lie, and said that Sarah was not his wife, but his sister: Peter to
save himself, was tempted to deny Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, In the third place -- Satan tempts after Conversion.

1. He tempts new converts by pride. Young Christians that are newly born, are
subject to this sin. For,

1. They are come (as it were) into a new world, and therefore know not what
ground they stand on: And as a child that has a new garment, the first day he
wears it, or for a little while, as long as it is new, he is so proud, that he
does nothing but show it, and will go abroad to show his new clothes; so the
Saints at their first Conversion, when they have put on the new man, as long as
it seems new, are very proud of it, and very fine in their own eye, and delight
to show abroad their graces, and will go in company to show their new gifts and
clothes, none so forward to speak or censure as they.

Thus the Disciples were at first very proud and self-conceited Matthew. 19. 27.
for their leaving all for Christ, as you may read; Behold we have forsaken
all, and followed thee, what shall we have therefore? That is, we have done
that which this young man would not.

2. A little grace (in a new convert) seems great; a little grace in a new
convert seems great, and a great deal of grace in an old convert seems little:
I say, a little grace in a new convert seems great.

1. Because being but newly, and but smally enlightened, he does not see all the
dimensions of grace: he does not yet see what quantity is in grace, what an
abundance of grace is necessary to such and such duties, such and such
temptations.

2. Again, a little seems a great deal to him that had lately none. As
twopence or a groat is a great deal in a poor man's purse, that had not so much
there he knew not when: And a man that has not a foot of land left him by his
Father in the world, and lives thereafter very poor and needy; if an Uncle or
Kinsman should dye, and leave him but ten pound lands a year, he would count it
a great deal (indeed, it is a great deal to nothing), and would count himself
as good a man as he that has his hundred a year.

So a Saint that has newly set up in the world, and was worth nothing a week a
go, to him a little sum of grace seems a great deal: and he (poor soul) is as
brag and brisk of his little Tenement, as he that has his hundreds; and indeed
a little grace is a great deal in respect of nothing: There Is a vast difference
between the least entity and nothing: Contradiction (which is between ens and
nonens) is the greatest opposition: There is a far greater difference between
little and nothing, than between little and great: for there is some proportion
between a little and great, but there is no proportion at all between nothing
and little: between no being and little being: because in that which is not,
there is nothing to answer the Being of that which is, though it be never so
little.

3. Because a new unexperienced Convert thinks he can do a great deal with what
he has. As a man that is in health, seeing a log or a burden lying before him,
thinks that he can easily lift it till he comes to try: and a young spark that
feels some blood in his veins, and vigor in his sinews, thinks that he is able
to beat or cope with a man of great stature.

So a young Saint thinks that he is able to do great matters: Matthew. 20. 22.
When Christ asked the Sons of Zebedee, Are ye able to drink of the cup that I
shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?
They say unto him, we are able.

4. Because their graces are fresh, and lively, and active, therefore they
think they are strong and great.

5. The young Convert is unexperienced: 1. He knows not what a great measure of
grace is required to grapple with a little corruption: A sin that is but little
in compass, has a great deal of weight in it: as a Bullet of Lead, that is but
little in circumference, yet weighs heavy and weighty.

2. Satan tempts young Converts by laying burdens upon them.

1. To make the way of grace unpleasant to them.

2. By laying burdens on them greater than their graces, too heavy for their
young graces to bear: Grace at the first birth is but weak and tender; a soul
newly sanctified, is like a glass, you know a fly may walk upon a glass; you
have oftentimes seen a fly to go up and down, being a light body, whereas a
great weight put upon it, would break it and shatter it all to pieces.

So a light affliction may walk up and down upon a new Convert; but a heavy one
would break him: Now Satan would lay heavy afflictions upon young Saints, great
burdens upon little Christians.

2. He tempts the Saints (a while after their Conversion) to security,
lukewarmness and worldliness. You seldom see a new convert troubled with these
sins: for then they are altogether upon the wing, they are newly awakened out
of sleep, and therefore (as a man that has slept a long time, and is awakened)
cannot suddenly fall asleep again; so they having slept so long in the bed of
nature, and being awakened, cannot in the morning of their conversion fall
asleep presently again: and they mind not the world, they can do nothing but
pray, and hear, and read, and meditate; for a while the business of the new
life takes them up.

But I say, Satan observes his time, and when they have been up, and spent a
good part of the day, then he tempts them to take a nap, and after much
exercise and glorious duties, they fall asleep, and grow secure: Thus the Angel
of the Church of Ephesus he left his first love: And the Angel of the Church of
Rev. 2. 4. Rev. 3. 15.
Laodicea, he became lukewarm, and was neither hot nor cold.

3. Satan tempts them into sin, to the worst of sins; that is Satan's delight, to
make the Saints sin: as David to adultery.

1. Satan brings a Saint into sin, by making him confide in his habitual
graces: as if his inward grace were enough to carry him out against a
temptation; whereas, had thou Adams grace (without effectual assistance from
God) it could not uphold thee against one assault. Thus he brought Peter upon
the stage, by making him presume upon his inherent love to Christ, and so he
fell and lost the day.

2. Satan brings a Saint into sin, by making him confide in his former
experiences: Because he has overcome such a temptation, and baffled such a
lust, therefore he thinks he can do it again; or bear the shock of another
temptation as strong: But though former experience may be our comfort, yet it
is not our present support: Our standing for the future, depends not on the
former experience, but on renewing and corroborating grace from God.

3. Satan tempts men into sin, by representing the world to them in glory: as
Satan took Christ into an exceeding high Matthew 4. 8.
mountain, and showed him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the Glory of them:
Satan can set a curious paint upon foul faces; he sets a gloss upon the world,
and so men become covetous and self-seekers.

4. By blowing up old lusts to sparkle afresh: as fire almost out, may be blown
into a flame: Like David, was blown up 1 Samuel 25. 22.
into a wild fire of Revenge, that none of Nabals house should live.

5. Satan tempts men into sin, by persuading them it is for God, by making you
intend it for the Lord: Thus when Israel made the golden calf, and committed
idolatry, Aaron made Exodus 32. 5.
proclamation, and said, To morrow is a feast to the Lord, unto whom a feast
should have been kept; and to him they intended this their service: see Satan's
depth! they commit idolatry, and pretend it for service to the Lord.

Fourthly, Satan tempts to duty. You will think this a strange phrase, that
Satan should drive you to duty, to pray, or hear, and that I should call doing
duty, a temptation.

1. Thus Satan tempted Saul to duty, to offer sacrifice: he should not have
offered sacrifice till Samuel came, and Satan 1 Samuel 13. 8, 9.
tempted him to offer sacrifice before Samuel came: Satan will tempt us to
duty, when it is not our duty: when duty is a sin, he will tempt us to it: as
sometimes Satan tempts to prayer, when we should not neglect our calling:
sometimes Satan tempts to fasting, when we should not neglect our bodies.

2. So he will tempt us to duty, so as to make duty a cloak for sin: As the
Israelites thought they might take liberty to sin, as long as they served God
in his new moons, and sabbaths, and sacrifices: and thus it is with many
amongst us, they presume the rather to sin, because they think to make amends
for it afterward by duty, or by some good deeds, as Prayer, Confession, Alms,
etc. an horrible thing, to think that God will be thus corrupted, and made to
wink at our sin! But the greatest service will not excuse the least sin.

3. He will tempt us to duty, when it is death to do the duty: Thus he tempts
men to the sacrament, when it is death to go to the Sacrament unsanctified, and
unprepared: as he tempted the Israelites to long for flesh, when it was death
to long for it: While the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was chewed,
Numb. 11. 33.
the wrath of the Lord was kindled against the people, and the Lord smote the
people with a very great plague.

4. Satan tempts from duty, by plausable reasonings: Thus Satan tempts a soul
to leave duty, and bid farewell to Prayer, and Sacraments, and Sermons: Why so?
I am not the better by Prayer, nor Hearing, nor Reading, nay (methinks) I am
far the worse, and therefore I Will never hear more, nor attend Sacraments more,
for my condemnation will be the greater: To this, I answer (and observe) arm
your self thus:

Answ. 1. It is better to perish in duty, than out of duty. Whatever comes on
thee, let God find thee doing his will; be the event what it will: Let death
take thee praying, and hearing; let death take thee waiting upon God for Faith
and Grace: It is better for thee it should be so, because thou art doing thy
Masters will: And therefore say, I Will pray, and dye praying, though I be never
heard; because praying is my duty, and for Gods Glory: Let me dye in a duty
that glorifieth him.

2. Thou can never perish in duties, if thou art found in them, in Obedience
to God; thou may be like to perish in thy own sense, but thou shall never
perish, (I say) if thou art found in them, in Obedience to God: Obedience never
went without success: God will lose himself as soon as he will let obedience
lose it self: Duty may lose a soul, but Obedience to God in duty; never yet
lost a soul to this day.

3. It is but a may be, if thou perish in duty, and in ordinances: It is a
shall be unto thee, to perish out of duty; for duty is thy food, thou must live
by duty: If a man eat food, it may be he may perish, though he does eat; but if
he will not take food at all, he shall perish; so it may be, thou may perish
in praying, and hearing, and receiving Sacraments, but thou shall certainly
perish in the neglect of these.

4. God will at last speak to thee in duty, for it is his way, wherein he will
be found: God speaks not at first,

1. To show us the worth of the mercy. As when a man is hardly entreated to
part with a thing, it is because it is a thing of some value: a mean gift he
will part with at the first word, or it may be without asking. So God gives
mean things (as riches and honors in this life) to men without asking, to them
that never call upon his name: But spiritual mercies, as peace of soul, joy and
assurance of his love; these he does not give suddenly and casily, not because
he is hard to be entreated, (for he does purpose to give them before we ask
him), but to show us the worth of those rare and matchless mercies, of what
value they are of.

2. To strengthen and breathe our faith. As wrestling does add strength to arms
and body; so praying, and praying again, does strengthen faith: as use and
exercise in running, strengthens the lungs, and lengthens the breath; so by
much praying, faith is well breathed: Jacob by wrestling all night, is stronger
to wrestle in the morning: the Angel said, Let me go, for the Genesis 32. 26.
day breaks: and he said, I will not let thee go till thou bless me: He grew
stronger and stronger, [ I will not let thee go] he was stronger at last, than
at the first.

3. To keep us in the exercise of some other graces. He does not at first give
us assurance of his love, to keep us in the exercise of Prayer, and longing
after his loving kindness: He does not presently (as soon as we ask him) Crown
us with victory over a temptation, that he might keep us in the exercise of
humility and self-loathing: he denies us (for a while) some one comfort or
grace for the exercise of another: For this thing (says Paul) I be sought the
Lord thrice, that it might 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9.
depart from me. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my
strength is made perfect in weakness.

4. To let us know that the grace or comfort we ask, is his gift of grace, of
free grace, not a debt unto our persons, or our prayers: that when we have
prayed never so long, yet he gives freely.

5. To discipline us in humble obedience, and waiting on him; to teach us our
place, that we may know our selves, that it is our duty to wait upon him as
long as he pleases; and that we may understand his greatness and distance above
us: God will keep up his place in the hearts of his people, and therefore will
make them wait long before he gives in the things they pray for.

Yet I say, for all this, God will at last speak unto thee in duty, for it is
his way wherein he will be found: He bids thee pray, therefore thou shall speed
in Prayer: He bids thee hear, therefore thou shall meet him one time or other
in hearing his word: When God sees a Saint resolves to pray for a mercy
promised, as soon as ever he begins to pray for it, God resolves to bestow it,
though he does not manifest it to thee after many a prayer, that he will give
it: See Dan. 9. 23, At the beginning of thy supplications the Commandment came
forth: that is, God has revealed to us Angels, and to me especially, the
secret of his Counsel concerning the Restoration of Jerusalem, Isa. 65. 24.
and the Duration thereof, even to the Messiah.

6. Sometimes (such is Satan's depth) a Saint does sin out of love to Christ.
You would think this very strange, yet it is very true: a Saint (I say) does
commit some sins out of love to Christ. Thus Peter sinned fearfully, when
Christ told them that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the
Matthew. 16. 21, 22.
elders, and chief priests, and scribes, and be killed: Peter took him, and
began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord: this shall not be unto
thee: Peter took him, that is, took him by the hand, and led him aside, as they
use to do, who would talk familiarly with a friend; or took him, that is,
embraced him; be it far from thee, that is, thou have deserved no such shameful
death; this shall not be unto thee, that is, we will not suffer thee to go to
Jerusalem to be slain; or [let not this be]. Peter did all this out of his love
to Jesus Christ: yet Christ called him Verse. 23.
Satan.

So again, when Christ washed his Disciples feet, Peter would John 13 8.
not let Christ wash his feet, Thou shall never wash my feet: This was out of
love and respect to Christ: Peter thought Christ too good to wash his feet, and
therefore put him off: But it was a great sin, insomuch that Christ says, If I
wash thee not, thou have no part in me.

So again, when the Samaritans would not receive Christ, his Luke 9. 54.
Disciples James and John said, Lord, will thou that we command fire to come
down from heaven, and consume them, even as Elias did?

7thly, Satan tempts to extremes. Satan will not have you do a thing in season;
and when it is too late, then he will make you mad upon doing of it: Thus he
would not let the children of Israel go into Canaan, when they had the gate of
season open, and when they had Gods good will to go in: But when 'twas too
late, when 'twas a sin to desire to go, when God had shut the gate of
opportunity, and set a lock of prohibition on it; as you know when you walk or
travel, you shall find gates, not only shut, but a lock also put upon them for
security; and then you conjecture, that not only you cannot, but you must not
go through such a place or piece of ground: or where there was a style to go
over a man's land, when you come again, and find the style taken up, and a hedge
made; you conclude that now it is not the owners pleasure that any passengers
should make a thorow-fare there any more.

So it was with Israel, God offered them, and made a style for them to step
over into Canaan: The Lord thy God has set the Deuteronomy. 1. 21.
land before thee, go up, and possess it, and then they would not; for they
sent spies to search the land, and upon their report wept and murmured, and
wished, Would God we had dyed in this Numb. 14. 2.
wilderness.

Use 2. If Satan be so learned and exquisite an Artist in the Trade of
deceiving souls, then humble your selves in that you are so capable and
receptive of Satan's motions: He is a willing agent, so we are willing patients:
we are wont to say, that the receiver is as bad as the thief, and the harlot
that entertains the motion, is as bad as the adulterer: So (my Beloved) when
Satan tempts, and you sin, you are as bad as the tempter; you are his Harlots,
that consent to his adulterous motions: thy consent to his temptation makes
thee one with him: What makes two persons at any time one? Consent. Thus
consent makes two persons one in marriage, and consent makes two persons one in
a Design or Action: so thy consent with Satan, makes thee one with Satan, and
as bad as he is.

If an adulterer should tempt a man's wife to lewdness, though he would hate the
Adulterer, yet he would lay the greatest blame upon his wife, and take it most
unkindly from her, and break his heart with grief, that she (whom he loved so
well) should deal so ill with him? So when Satan (that great Adulterer) tempts
thee to sin, though Christ hates him for it, and will at last be revenged on
him (for jealousy is the rage of a man: Prove. 6. 34.
therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance), yet he takes it most
unkindly at thee, that thou Saint, whom he loved so well; that thou sinner, for
whom he shed his blood; that thou professor, who art his bride, should hearken
to such a base fellow as Satan is.

And therefore do not put your sins off from your selves to Satan; do not think
that because he tempts you, you shall not answer for them: I will give you two
noted Instances to the contrary. The first is Adam and Eve: Eve was tempted by
2 Cor. 11. 3. 1 Timothy 2. 14. 1 Chr. 21. 1.
the Serpent, (and mark ye, she was deceived and beguiled by him), and yet see
how God curses Adam and Eve for that sin, and entails curses to all their
posterity for it. The second Instance is that of David, who was tempted by
Satan to number the people. Now to discover our vileness, note these two things:

1. Satan cannot compel us to sin, only persuade us; he has only a persuading
slight, not an enforcing might: And therefore James tells you, that every man
when he is tempted, is enticed James 1. 14.
and drawn away of his own lust: Though Satan has a hand (and that no small
one) in tempting of us; yet, because he does only allure us, and lay baits for
us, but not constrain us, because he cannot make us sin against our wills,
because our own lust carries the chiefest stroke; therefore he says, Every
man is tempted and drawn away, not by the Devil, but by his own lust: for Satan
can do nothing but by our own lusts.

2. Because in obeying Satan's Temptations, we do our own wills: We do not sin
to serve Satan, but to please our selves: Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.
As wicked men in doing Gods work, aim at themselves; so in doing Satan's work,
we do it to serve our own selves, and therefore it is our sin.

Use 3. If Satan be so learned and exquisite an Artist in the Trade of
deceiving souls, then watch against Satan.

1. We talk of Travelers, that have seen the world over: 1. Satan a Traveller.
one ever saw so much as Satan; he has seen Earth, seen the Sea, seen Hell,
seen Heaven as he says himself, that he came from compassing, or from going to
and fro in the earth.

2. Great Conquerors have been crowned for Victories, and 2. Satan a Conqueror.
Extention of their Kingdoms: Satan is beyond them all: Saul has slain his
Thousands, David his ten thousands, but Satan his millions.

3. If we know that we have an adversary at the next door, 3. Satan an Accuser.
that pryeth into all our courses, and upon the least error will sue us on an
Action of Trespass, we will be circumspect to disable him of advantage: Satan
no sooner spies our wanderings, but he presently runs with a complaint to God,
and prefers Bills against us in the Star Chamber of Heaven; where the matter
would go hard with us, but for the Great Lord Chancellor of Peace, our
Advocate, Jesus Christ.

Use 4. Resist him. It is the Apostles precept, Whom resist, 1 Pet. 5. 9.
steadfast in the faith.

Quest. But you will say, How shall I resist him?

Answ. 1. Resist thy self, and thou resistest Satan. I say, thou must resist
him, by resisting thy self: Resist thy self, and thou shall resist Satan: for
Satan tempts thee by thy self: he tempts us, by making us do our own works:
oppose thy self, and thou opposest Satan: stand on thy guard against thy self,
for Satan tempts thee by thy self: Store up Wisdom against him, that thou may
be an Artist against his Temptation: Encounter with him, find out the
outgoings of Satan.

Answ. 2. Satan does tempt thee, by not tempting thee: As God is said to punish
us, by not punishing us: not to punish us, Hos. 4. 14.
is the greatest punishment: so Satan does tempt you, by not tempting you: he
tempts you to pride, by not tempting you to gross sins: Because the Pharisees
were not Adulterers, Extortioners, nor such gross sinners as publicans,
therefore they were proud, and despised salvation by Christ: The Devil will not
tempt some men to gross sins, he sees which way their vein goes, and will
make use of their own righteousness to exalt them, and then break their necks
with it: How strongly does he tempt civil men, by not tempting them? By not
tempting them to be drunkards and adulterers, he tempts them to be
Justitiaries, not to see their need of Jesus Christ: He makes them think
themselves better than Saints, because he tempts them not to do such gross sins
as some Saints have done; so he tempts thee to security and quietness in a
sinful estate, by not tempting thee with thy sins, nor troubling thee with the
fears of Hell.

Know (my Beloved) that God loves us, as well when he does us evil, as when he
does us good in this world: Satan will go about to persuade thee in afflictions
(as thou must look for them) that God hates thee, and cares not for thee: if he
loved thee, he would not use thee thus as he does: Be not deceived, make God
thine, and then be cheerful in every state: It becomes a gracious man to
rejoice in afflictions, in sickness, in poverty, in weakness, in reproach, in
persecution: Satan in all afflictions would befool thee, and make thee believe
any thing, as if thou were no body with God, because thou art sick, or poor,
and no body in the world; it is his delight to fill thee with sorrow: But I
say, it becomes a gracious man to rejoice in afflictions.

Oh that you would or could digest this principle, and believe Note.
it, and act it, namely, outward evils are to be received in the same manner,
and with the same mind, that good things are received with: you receive health
with joy, and riches and peace with joy; oh you should receive sickness, and
weakness, and poverty in the same manner: says Paul, We glory in tribulation,
Romans 5. 3. And again, As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, 2 Cor. 6. 10. The
sorrow of the Saints should be like the joy of the wicked, only in appearance:
Paul had only a shadow of sorrow [ as sorrowful], but his joy was substantial
and lasting, [always rejoycing] though his outward estate cast up, amounted but
to this [ poor and having nothing], yet he was always rejoicing: Why so?

Because God is the same in all varieties: God loves us, as well when we are
poor, as when we are rich; as well when himself smites, as when he heals: he is
as good to us when we receive evil, as when we receive good: And therefore if
God be the same, surely we ought to be the same too, and our faith the same:
Now thou mournest, heretofore thou did rejoice; now (it may be) thou art in
want, but thou have had abundance, and therefore thou art dejected and sad, and
can scarce lead one comfortable day for disquiets and castings in thy
thoughts: We have a saying, [ Faelicem fuisse, miserrimum]; it is a miserable
thing to have been happy: But it is vain; a godly man is happy in the midst of
all his misery: he may say with Luther, Let him be miserable that can be
miserable, I cannot: He that has not a God to lose, nor a soul to lose, cannot
be miserable, whatsoever he loses: while Christ is safe, a believer has no
reason to be unsatisfied.

And this will discover the truth of grace to you, your joy in God: When we
have outward mercies, we think we rejoice in them, only as pledges of Gods
love, when indeed we rejoice more in the benefits themselves, than in the
benefactor: The discovery is, by our drooping and dejection under the Cross: If
it had been Gods favor only we had rejoiced in in our prosperity, why then is
the copy of our countenance changed? for Gods favor is still the same to his
in affliction, as it is in prosperity; happily greater.

So again, observe thy self in a sickness, thou will say, oh I am hindered from
doing God service by sickness, as if thou desiredst health merely to do God
service: this is thy hearts deceitfulness: Satan would make thee believe that
thou desire health to do God service, when it is out of love to health it
self: For,

1. Every state that God puts us into, is the best service to him. When God
puts us into sickness to serve him, there is the best service: A master takes
that service best from a Servants hands, which he commands him to do; so if God
commands thee to be sick, and commands thee to serve him on a sick bed, this is
the best service; thy master would have thee employed there.

2. God may, yea has as much use of our lives in our troubles, as in our
comforts. We may do much business for God on a sick bed: we may do God as much
work when we are bound hand and foot in a prison, as when we are at liberty:
Passive obedience brings as much glory to God, as active does: Afflictions are
the highest services and employments of grace. Oh! but my graces are weak.

1. God will put weak grace to no more work than it can do: 1 Cor. 10. 13.
There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man: but God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able: but
will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear
it. He shall feed his flock like Isa. 40. 11.
a shepherd; he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his
bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young.

2. God will raise up little grace (sometimes) to act above its strength:
though the babe be but weak, the nurse is strong; so, though grace be weak, the
spirit is strong: And he said 2 Cor. 12. 9.
unto me, my grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in
weakness.

3. God will not leave his works imperfect; when he begins a work, he compleats
and carries it through. He is a rock Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
(says Moses) his work is perfect. What he said concerning the house of Eli, I
may apply hither, when I begin, I will also 1 Samuel 3. 12.
make an end, that is, I will do it fully, I will do it perfectly, for the end
of a work is its perfection: it is so in spirituals, when he begins a work of
grace, he will make an end: Bring my sons from Isa. 43. 6, 7.
far, and my daughters from the end of the earth; even every one that is called
by my name: for I have created him for my glory, I have formed him, yea, I have
made him. God does his work exquisitely, or, (as we say) artificially; yea
those works that we look upon, as full of confusion, are full of order; and
those works, in which we see no form, or nothing but deformity, even these will
one day appear admirable in beauty and comeliness. That which Paul speaks to
Timothy, bidding him do the work of an 2 Timothy 2. 15.
Evangelist, bidding him show himself a workman, that needs not to be ashamed;
is most true concerning the great God, he will do all his works, so that he
needs not to be ashamed.

AN ACCOUNT OF GODS TEMPTATIONS.
Genesis XXII. 1, 2. And it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt
Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham. And he said, Behold here am I.

And he said, Take now thy Son, thine only Son Isaac, whom thou love, and get
thee into the land of Moriah: and offer him there for a burnt-offering, upon
one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.


THIS Chapter presents you with a story that has no parallel; all ages have
stood amazed at it, not knowing whether they should more wonder at Gods
Command, or Abraham's Obedience. Here is an admirable composure or mixture of
joy and sadness, sadness and joy: you may (so we do it with holy reverence)
liken it to a Comedy, whose property (as some have said) is to begin with
trouble, and end in cheerfulness. The subject matter of this story is Abraham
tempted to sacrifice his Son Isaac, or (if you please) God tempting Abraham to
sacrifice his only Son. You have here,

1. The Temptation.

2. The effect of it.

First, The temptation is, that Abraham must sacrifice his Son.

Secondly, The effect of it was an Obligation upon Abraham to perform this
service: and therefore you shall find at the third verse, that Abraham rose up
early in the morning, and sadled his ass, to dispatch quickly what he was
commanded: Gods Command, and Man's Obligation are [ Relatum and Correlatum]
Relatives. Indeed Gods Command, and the Creatures Obedience are not Relatives,
for where God commands, obedience does not always follow; but his command, and
our obligation to obey, are Relatives, secundum esse, the one does necessarily
put the other in being.

In the temptation you have,

1. The efficient, God.

2. The act, did tempt.

3. The subject of the Temptation, Abraham, God did tempt Abraham.

4. The means whereby God did tempt him, by giving him an extraordinary command
[such as was never before nor since given to any man] for the Father to sheath
his sacrificing knife in the throat of his own son, verse the second: Where the
Hebrew words are wondrous emphatical: --

(...) Take now thy Son, thine only one, [or thy only begotten one, unigenitum,
so some render it] whom thou love, even Isaac. Rabbi Solomon observes a
Gradation, thus, Take thy Son, but says he [that is, Abraham] I have two Sons,
therefore says God, (...) thine only son: says Abraham, either of them is the
only son of their mother, therefore says God, (...), him whom thou love:
says Abraham, I love both, therefore says God, Isaac, whom thou love so
well.

But how was Isaac his only son, when he had Ishmael also? because he had
Ishmael, therefore the septuagint render it [(...)] thy beloved one; so at the
12 and 16 verses the septuagint render (...).

But Isaac was his only Son remaining in his Family, for Ishmael was gone: Thy
only son by thy wife, thy legitimate Son as opposed to Ishmael, begotten of the
Bondwoman: thy only son to whom the promise is made, and of whom the Messiah
is to come: (...) take him now; do thou thy self take him, and offer him for a
burnt-offering; do thou do it by thy self, not by another; by thy own hand, not
by another.

This Command of God was just, and no ways contrary to that standing Law,
(...), thou shall not kill: For though it be unjust, and against that law for
any man to take away the life of a party not guilty of a Capital Crime,
deserving death; yet just it is, and God may justly command man to take away
the life of a person never so innocent, for these reasons.

1. Because that law [ thou shall not kill] did not bind God.

2. And chiefly [ a potestate Dei], from the Authority of God, because God is
the supreme Lord, and has [ jus vitae and necis in omnes], an absolute
Dominion of life and death over all, which no creature has, or can have.

3. [ A potentia Dei], the power of God: And that,

1. Because God could restore life taken away, and raise up Isaac again: which
man cannot do, nay, it is above the sphere of all created activity.

2. God, if he never restore the life on earth that he takes away, yet he can
give a better life, an everlasting life in the room of it: You see then the
command was just, and this was the Medium, or the means whereby God tempted
Abraham.

5. The end of this Command was,

1. To try Abraham, and make proof of him, whether he loved God, or his Son
Isaac more.

2. And to manifest unto Abraham himself, his faith and love to God.

3. And to make him a rare example and pattern of both to all future
generations.

6. You have the circumstance of time, when God tempted Abraham, or (if you
will) the order and succession of this temptation, at the first verse. After
these things (...). Indeed (...) signifies words: But that signification cannot
stand here; it signifies (as (...) in the Greek also) things and matters: Which
will give occasion to explain a Text to you, Psalm. 65. 3. Iniquities prevail
against me, as for our transgressions, thou shall purge them away. Where, by
iniquities you must by no means understand David's iniquities or sins (as if he
had said, My sins or iniquities prevail against me), but the iniquities or
unjust courses of his adversaries, they prevailed against him.

But the words are (...), words of iniquity; words, put for things, things, or
matters of iniquity, not David's own, but his Adversaries practiced by them
against him; that is, their unjust courses prevailed against him to the trouble
and vexation of him, and of Gods People; yet, says he, as for our
transgressions (which had given their Adversaries such power against them),
thou [upon our serious seeking of thee] have purged them away, that is, have
pardoned them.

Well then, to return to my Text, God tempted Abraham after these things, that
is, those things that went before; but how long this was after, it appears not
by the Text, save only, that Isaac was then of sufficient age and strength to
carry a burden of wood for sacrifice, being then (as Josephus says) five
Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 14.
and twenty years old, Abraham one hundred and twenty five, and Sarah one
hundred and fifteen: though the Hebrews (some of them) say that Isaac was
thirty seven years old.

After these things God tempted Abraham, after all the preceding passages of
his life, more particularly, after so many and so great promises made to him by
God, concerning the multiplication of his seed by Isaac, or after so many
temptations he had passed through already; God brings up this in the Rear, and
tempts him again.

The Hebrews (as Paulus Fagius relates) say, that Abraham was tempted ten times
by God.

1. When he was commanded to leave his Country, and his Kindred.

2. When he was driven by the famine, to go and sojourn in Egypt.

3. When Sarah was taken off him by Pharaoh, and he in danger of his life, and
she of her honor.

4. When he fought against the four Kings, of whom Lot was taken prisoner.

5. When he married his maid Hagar, because he seemed in vain to expect Issue
from Sarah.

6. When Hagar had conceived by him, being used hardly by Sarah, she fled away.

7. When he was commanded to be circumcised, being now an old man.

8. When Sarah was taken from him again by King Abimelech.

9. When he was commanded to banish Hagar and his Son Ishmael out of his Family
for ever.

10. When he was commanded to sacrifice Isaac: here was a long series or chain
of Temptations, and the last link was the heaviest.

We come now to the Explanation of the words, the Text says, That God tempted
Abraham: It will be necessary to understand the meaning of it: for to tempt is
a shrewd word, Satan is called the temptex, and it is ascribed here to God. I
answer, to tempt in the Hebrew is (...), and sometimes (...), and this is the
word in my Text here.

(...), And God did tempt Abraham: In the Greek (...) and (...), to which the
word (...) is akin, it is the same properly with [ Experiri, or periculum
facere] to try one, to make trial of, to take the experience of. And so the
Schools describe it, [ Tentare est proprie Aquinas 22. ae. q. 97. art. 1.
experimentum sumere de eo qui tentatur], to Tempt is to make a trial or
experience of him who is tempted: And so Hesychius says that (...) is properly
(...); Experimentum capere, to take an experiment or trial of.

And thus God tempted Abraham, that is, made a trial of, he tried Abraham what
he would do, whether he were good metal or no, whether his dependence on God,
and love to him were true gold, or counterseit.

And for God to make trial of a servant, cannot carry so much as a shadow of
evil in it, and therefore it might well have been translated thus, It came to
pass that God tried Abraham.

2. Again, you must know, that to tempt or try another, is the effect of
ignorance: For (as Aquinas says) [ Nullus 22 ae. ^^ 97. ar. 2.
experimentum sumit de eo, de quo est certus], no man makes a trial of him, of
whom he is certain, what or who he is, or what he can do.

The end of trial is to know, I say, we therefore try, another, that we may
inform our knowledge: and therefore all proper temptation springs from ignorance
or doubting. When we try a man by some experience, whether he loves us or no,
it is because we know not, but would know whether he loves us: when we are
assured of his love to us, we try him no longer.

Quest. You will say then, How could God try Abraham? Did not God who made the
heart, know the heart of Abraham? Did not God who knows all things, know that
Abraham feared God? Certainly God who knows the thoughts a-far of, knew
Abraham, and all that was in Abraham, and what Abraham would do; he knew
beforehand Abraham's affections to him, and therefore how is it said, that God
tempted Abraham?

Answ. There is a twofold trial.

First, A proper: And

Secondly, A metaphorical trial.

1. To try properly, is [ actio nescientis] an action of him who knows not the
heart, of him whom he trys and tempts; for (as you heard) he trys that he may
know: [ Tentatio propria est latentis animi alicujus exploratio], A proper
tempting, is the trying of a man's mind or disposition that lies latent and out
of our sight: We know not what is in him, and therefore we try him: And thus
God tempted not, tried not Abraham: he needed not this trial, that he might
know Abraham: Neither did Abraham's sacrificing his Son add any thing to Gods
Knowledge. But,

2. There is a metaphorical trial, or a temptation by similitude, when God does
a thing like unto those, who try that they may know; men make trial, that they
may know, and God acted in this thing like to men: and therefore he is said to
tempt or try Abraham, though he knew all before he tried him. I conclude with
that excellent expression of Cassiodorus, [Tentat Deus ut erudiat, homo ut
sc^at, Diabolus ut seducat], Psalm 26.
The Devil tempts that he may seduce, man tempts that he may know, or learn,
but God tempts that he may teach or instruct.

So then God tempted Abraham, that is, he commanded that work whereby Abraham
was tempted or tried, but he did not try or tempt Abraham to gain any further
Knowledge to himself.

Object. But you will say, It seems the contrary: for when Abraham would have
really slain his son Isaac, says God, Now I know that thou fear God, seeing
thou have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son from me.

Answ. I might here cumulate the Answers both of the ancients and moderns.

1. Some understand it [ me tanimice] that God should be then said to know,
when he makes others know [ Significando per efficientem causam id quod
efficitur], by the efficient cause, signifying the effect: as we say [ Dies
laetus] a joyful day, because it makes men joyful, and [ Frigus pigrum] dull or
slow, cold, because it makes men slow and dull; Tristis lupinus (says Virgil)
sad Lupine (a kind of pulse, Pliny) because it makes men sad.

And according to this Hypothesis, (...) in Kal, should be put for (...) in
Hiphil, and thus Saint Augustine, (lib. 4. de Genes. ad liter. chap. 9.) Nunc
cognovi, id Tom 4. in quest super Genes. quest. 57, 58. Et sermon Domini in
monte, lib. 2. cap. 14. So Tom 9. in Johannem tract 43. and Tom. 10. sermon 72.
est, nunc feci, ut cognos ceretur], Now, I know, that is, now I have made that
it may he known: and [ Tom. 5. de Civitate Dei, Lib. 16. Cap. 32.] Nunc scivi,
id est, nunc sciri feci. Psalm. 78. Nunc cognovi, id est, nunc feci te
cognoscere; ignotus enim sibi quilibet est ante interrogationem Tentationis,
probatus autem Abraham factus est cognitus sibi. After the same manner does
Chrysostom expound it, writing upon the place [(...)]; now I have made known to
all men, how thou worshippest God with a sincere love.

2. Others understand it of Gods Approbation, for [ Verba notitiae] words of
knowledge, with the Hebrews, [accipiuntur cum affectu and effectu] signify
affection: Now I know that thou fear God, that is, I approve this work of
thy Obedience as an eminent testimony of thy filial fear, and sincere love.
Hilarious, scientia Dei dupliciter consideratur, vel ut notitia futuri, vel, ut
approbatio facti: illo modo Deus omnia novit ab aeterno, hoc quaedam in
tempore, dum rem, quam cognoscit, aperte approbat, eamque sibi probari
luculenter declarat.

3. Others understand it of a practical or experimental Knowledge: God perfectly
knew Abraham's mind before: but now he sees and beholds it in the work it self.
If we take it in this sense, it is but a making God to speak here [ more
hominum], who when they have made trial of a thing, say then that they
perfectly know it.

4. I conceive that God speaks here (...), for the Lord speaks with man after
the manner of men: so that when he says, Now I know that thou fear God, the
plain meaning is, Thou have done that thing at my Command, by which, had thine
affection been hid from me, it would have been made evident, how dearly thou
fear and love me.

God is sometimes pleased to tempt and try his people: Or Doctrine.
thus, The Lord God thinks it good to tempt or make trial of his Children. You
must take notice, in Scripture you shall find; First, That God is said to tempt
man. Secondly, And Camero. page 185. col. 1.
man is said to tempt God. But we read not in Scripture, that the good angels,
or devils are tempted. The reason whereof may without absurdity be enquired (if
it can be found out) because they are also intellectual and rational creatures,
and it is the rational nature that is subject to Temptation: And the reason
seems to be this, because

The holy angels, such is their condition, that they indissolubly adhere to
God: the evil angels, or devils, such is their condition, that they immutably
adhere to evil: and therefore Temptation here has no place.

But now it is otherwise with man: his condition is mutable, and his state is a
state of Temptation; he has yet heaven to lose, and hell to fall into; if he
takes not care; as long as he is in this life, he is in the way of winning or
losing, and therefore here he is upon the stage of Temptation.

But the Devils are in their center, out of which they cannot be moved: The
devils cannot be changed, and the holy angels cannot be altered.

Quest. But upon this account (you will say) there is no ground at all why God
should be tempted, for he is unchangeable.

Answ. God in himself is such, that he cannot be tempted; yet by the ignorance
of man, it comes to pass that God is tempted.

But I say, in Scripture you shall find that,

1. God is said to tempt man. And,

2. Man is said to tempt God.

1. Man is said to tempt God; and this is, when a man makes a trial of God,
whether he be wise, or powerful, just, or true and good.

To tempt or try God, may be sometimes good, and sometimes bad.

1. Sometimes there is a good and lawful trial and tempting of God: When we
humbly and submissively put him to do something to confirm our faith. Thus
Gideon tried and proved Judge. 6. 37, 38, 39, 40.
the Lord: Gideon tempted or proved God, but 'twas acceptable to God, because
he did it simply with an humble heart. But,

2. To tempt God, is for the most part taken in an ill sense: I say, there is a
sinful tempting of God, and it arises either out of distrust, or impatience,
or rash presumption, or pride, or too much confidence: of this you may read in
Exodus 17. 2, 7, When the people wanted water, it is said, They did chide with
Moses: and Moses said unto them, Why chide you with me? Wherefore do you tempt
the Lord? At the seventh verse, And he called the name of the place Massah and
Meribah, because of the chiding of the children of Israel, and because they
tempted the Lord, etc.

2. God is said in Scripture to tempt man: which is the business of my Text,
and the subject of this present Discourse: And herein I shall (God willing)
show you four things:

1. That God does tempt man.

2. It stands with Gods Holiness to tempt man, his Holiness and Righteousness
to tempt man.

3. Why God tempts man.

4. How God does tempt man.

1. God he does tempt man: he does tempt and try men. He makes experience, and
tries what they are, and what is in them: When the children of Israel came to
Marah, the Exodus 15. 25.
waters were bitter, and the people murmured, saying, What shall we drink? And
God showed Moses a tree, which when he had cast into the waters, the waters
were made sweet; and (says the Text) there he proved them. So in Exodus 16. 4,
they murmur for want of bread, And the Lord said unto Moses, Behold, I will
rain bread from heaven for you: and the people shall go out, and gather a
certain rate every day, that I may prove them, whether they will walk in my
law, or no. God tempts his people, and it is to try them and prove them,
whether they will serve him, and his designs. And in Deuteronomy. 8. 2, Thou shall
remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the
wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thy heart,
whether thou would keep his Commandments, or no. So that to prove, is no more
than to tempt, and to tempt is no more than to prove: God led Israel through
the wilderness, through many difficulties, it was to prove and tempt them to
know what was in their hearts.

Object. But it is said in James 1. 13, 14, that God tempts no man; Let no man
say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with
evil, neither tempts he any man: But every man when he is tempted, is drawn
away of his own lust, and enticed. Here it is said, that God tempts not any
man, yet it is said in my Text, That God tempted Abraham: How can these stand
together?

Answ. There is a twofold way of Temptation.

1. There is Tentatio probationis.

2. There is Tentatio seductionis.

1. There is a tempting by way of Trial or Probation: and thus God (as ye
heard) tempted Abraham to try his Obedience: and he tempts his people to prove
their graces; he presents them with Trials, that their graces may be known, or
their pride discovered, and brought low.

There is a tempting by way of seducement: and thus is James to be understood,
that God tempts not any man, that is, he seduceth and enticeth no man to sin:
he suggests no evil, nor instilleth any impure thoughts, nor casts any sinful
insusions into the heart: Thus, be sure of it, God he tempts not, either by
inward solicitation, or by such an outward dispensation, as may enforce to sin;
he that is the ultor or avenger of sin, cannot be the Author of sin: Thus let
his people look upon him, he tries their obedience, but does not stir them up
to sin.

2. It stands with Gods Holiness and Righteousness to tempt and try his people.
That you may understand this, you must know that,

1. There are Temptations which are good. And

2. There are Temptations which are evil. Gods Temptations or Trials of men are
very good; for as you heard, God cannot tempt to sin; and our answer to that
Text in Jam. 1. 13, would resolve you here, and untie this knot: Yet for
farther Dilucidation, I pray you understand, that to make a Temptation good,
there are three things required.

1. He that tempts or tries another, must have [ jus tentandi] a Right or
Authority to do it.

2. He must have a just and good end.

And Thirdly, He must tempt or try in a just way, or by righteous means.

1. He that tempts or tries another, must have jus tentandi, a just Right or
Authority to do it: and this Right God has to tempt and try men: For they are
his creatures, and the work of his hands: He has a glorious Sovereignty and
Dominion over Angels and Men which he made: Have not parents a power to try the
Obedience of their Children, so the means they use be just and lawful? May not
a General try the Valor and skill of his Soldiers? and do not you try and
prove the swiftness of your horse? Nay, may not a mam (a just measure being
observed) try his own strength?

Seeing then God is the supreme Rector and Governor of the World, surely he
has an undoubted Right and Authority to tempt and try the dispositions of men,
and the virtue of his Saints.

2. To make a temptation good, he that tempts or tries, must have a just and
good end: and this leads us to the

3. Point, why God tempts and tries his people: and that is threefold,

1. His own Glory.

2. To manifest the virtues of his people.

3. To manifest and draw out their infirmities.

1. One end why God tempts and tries his Saints, is to manifest and discover
their graces, virtues, and perfections; and this was one reason why God tempted
Abraham; God tried Abraham, that it may be known that he feared God: Did not
God know it before? Yes: but, Sirs, God speaks after the manner of men; he
deals with man, after the manner of men: God knew Abraham loved him, and feared
him, but God speaks to Abraham as a man, Now I know that thou fear me, and
love me: God will have the graces, virtues, and perfections of his Saints
manifested and discovered.

2. Another end why God tempts and tries his people, is to discover and draw
out their infirmities: [ Vt latens creaturae vitium patefiat], that some latent
vice or sin of the Creature may be made manifest: Thus the Text says
concerning Hezekiah, 2 Chr. 32. 31.
That in the business of the ambassadors of the princes of Babylon, who sent
unto him to enquire of the wonder that was done in the land, God left him, to
try him, that he might know all that was in his heart.

Sirs, Hezekiah, God had appeared in doing great wonders for him; when
Sennacherib came with a great Army against him, the Lord sent an Angel which
cut off all the mighty men of Valor, and the Leaders and Captains in the Camp
of the King of Assyria; then there came Ambassadors from the King of Babylon to
Honor and Court Hezekiah, because God had done so much for him: By this
transaction Hezekiah grew proud, and God let him alone, and left him, to try
him: It is one of Gods glorious works to tempt a proud man, and leave him to
himself. Observe the difference between the second temptation: First when he
tempts a man to discover his graces, this is from God himself; but when God
tempts to discover sin, it is the cause of him who is tempted, and not in God
who tempts him.

3. The third end why God tempts his people, is for his glory. Job was tempted
most sadly; and though the temptation was executed by Satan, yet it was
instituted and appointed by Gods Ordination.

God had owned Job for his servant, and his brave servant too, for an upright
man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil: Have you so good and high an
opinion of him, says Satan? do but touch his estate, and his body, and he will
curse thee to thy face: say thou so, says God? tempt him, says God, and try
him to the uttermost, I will give thee a Warrant and Commission to do it: Satan
sets upon him, as far as God enlarged his Commission: and Job was grievously
afflicted, yet found upright in the main, steel to the back, and made Gods word
good: How did God gain glory over Satan here? Glory to his truth: what God had
said of Jobs commendation, Job verified: Glory to his Holiness, that he kept
upright and gracious servants: Glory to his excellency and all sufficiency,
that his servants will not part with him for any other master; let their
afflictions and hardships in his service, be what they will; they will not
change their God, he is a better Lord and Master with afflictions, than the
World is or can be with all sugar'd-sops of honor or prosperity: his service
is worth all their afflictions and sorrows in it; that poverty with God, is
better than riches, and reproaches with God are better than honors: How is
Gods worth and glory magnified here by Jobs Temptations?

2. God gains Glory from his Saints themselves, I say, his tempted Saints: They
will afterward admire, and adore, and thank, and praise him, that his
Sovereignty would make use of them unworthly wretches, for his service, and
honor them with any employment for him: that his free grace would give them
grace to engage for him, rather than sin: that his power would bear them up
with strength under their trials and temptations, for they ascribe all, both
Combat and Victory, to his power, saying, Who was sufficient for these things?
that his power should be made perfect in their weakness; that he should by weak
instruments do such great things; preserve small sparks of fire in so great a
Sea of trials, and keep weak candles alive in the face of such strong winds and
assaults; that God by such poor twigs as they are, should beat the old great
serpent: Oh, this makes much for the praise of his power, that his mercy should
watch over them in their temptations, and turn all to their good, refine them
from their dross, accept what was good in them, and pardon what is evil, and at
last deliver them out of all; I tell you, when God shall appear, he will be
glorified and admired in all his Saints for these things, even for their trials
and temptations.

3. If the Saints do stumble and fall when they are tried by God, yet it makes
for his glory: What makes for their good, makes for his glory, when by their
fall some secret sin is discovered, as pride or self-confidence; their latent
dispositions are made known, and their hearts are exposed to their view; does
not this make to the glory of his wisdom? When their sin is cured by sinning,
does not he appear a most skilful physician? When being wounded by their fall,
they are healed and pardoned, does not this make to the glory of his mercy? Do
they not cry out, Who is a God like unto thee, that pardonest iniqnity? When
they rise again out of sin, and grow more strong by their falls; when they are
raised, where others break their necks, does it not make to the glory of his
power? So that every way, Gods trials and temptations make for his glory; they
make for their good, and therefore for his glory: God tempts the godly and the
ungodly, he does it for his glory: By Abraham's temptation his faith was brought
to light; by Hezekiahs temptation, his pride was detected.

And therefore the temptation whereby God tries man, cannot but be good, and
always good, as it proceeds from God, although sometimes man abuses it to his
hurt; for (as we said) God tempts both the godly and the ungodly, and the event
in both is sometime good, and sometime bad; as men are either confirmed by the
grace of God, or being destitute of it, are left to themselves; although God
always makes the event [otherwise bad enough] to turn at last to the godly to
their good, that by their falls coming to see and acknowledge their weakness and
infirmity, they may with so much more diligence (through Gods grace) work out
their salvation with fear and trembling.

And thus (as we hinted before) by Abraham's temptation, his glorious faith was
tried and brought forth to light: By Hezekiahs temptation, his vanity and
weakness was detected, that so he might walk afterward with more caution and
humility.

3. To make a temptation good, he that tries, must do it in a just way, by good
and lawful means: for we must not do evil, that good may come: and God will not
do evil, that good may come of it; nay God is so holy, that he cannot do evil
that good may come of it.

And this leads us to the fourth point:

4. How God does tempt and try: and here I must tell you, that God does tempt
and try men two manner of ways:

1. Immediately.

2. Mediately.

Immediately, By himself.

Mediately, By instruments, by Satan, sometimes; by wicked men other times; but
always justly. How does God try and tempt his people?

1. He tries and tempts his people by giving them Commands. We try our children
by giving them something to do: some special command to obey: God tempts his
Children by commanding them sometimes such things as are difficult and
offensive to nature, ungrateful and displeasing to the flesh, absurd to reason:
Thus he tempted Abraham in my Text, by a command, he commanded him to sacrifice
his Son, his only Isaac: Thus Christ commanded the young man to go and sell
all, and follow him: Unhappy man! that had the command, but had no love to obey
the command: For when he heard such a command, he went away sorrowful, for he
had great possessions. Matthew. 19. 22.
And why went he away sorrowful? that Christ should command that which he was
not willing to perform.

Sirs, This is the case of many of you, Gods Commands are your trials, and God
commands you to repent and leave sin presently; and you go away sorrowful: God
commands you to part with your beloved sin, your sweet or profitable sin, and
you go away sorrowful.

2. God tempts by afflictions and persecutions, and these are great
Temptations, and make the heart heavy: there is spiritual joy and outward
heaviness at the same time; wherein 1 Pet. 1. 6.
ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season ye are in heaviness through
manifold temptations; that is, afflictions; their salvation in Christ made them
rejoice, their temptations at the same time made them heavy: here was sour and
sweet, gladness and heaviness (like the twilight) at the same time, in the same
subject together.

Sirs, sirs, God will tempt his; if you be his, God will tempt you with
afflictions, he will make you know what metal you are of, and therefore will
one time or other throw you into the furnace.

3. God tempts and tries his people by the prosperity of the wicked, and this
to weak nature is a sore affliction; when their own affliction, and sinners
prosperity face one another, they see themselves in poverty, and Gods Enemies
wealthy; they see themselves pestered with sickness, and sinners frolic in
their health and jollity; their own bones withered, and the bones of the
ungodly full of marrow; Oh! sometimes, it is a temptation as keen as a Razor,
Verily, I have cleansed my heart in Psalm. 73. 13. 14.
vain, and washed my hands in innocence. Why? what is the matter? do you ask
me? says he it is because it is in vain to serve the Lord; for while the
ungodly prosper, I am plagued all the day long, and chastened, every morning.

4. God tempts by mercies, by giving men mercies, talents and opportunities, to
see what they will do with them, and how they will improve them: And thus God
has tempted you kindly, and tried you sweetly a long time with Mercydays, and
Gospel-days; oh the golden seasons of grace that have for many years dropped upon
you! Oh the melting dews of salvation, and refeshing showers of peace and
liberty that have daily wet you! so that you have been as a watered garden, and
God has been trying you with these all this while: and where is the fruit ye
have brought forth? where is your growth of grace? Well, look to it: God will
reckon for them: And thus God tempts and tries sinners with his patience and
long-suffering, he has made his cisterns to run with Wine of prosperity and
health upon them: And know thou not, O man, that the goodness of God leads
thee to repentance? Oh take heed: Sinner, thou have been long upon thy trial: I
say, God has been trying how these would work.

5. God tempts by objects and occasions. As sometimes you will lay a piece of
money in the way of a child or servant, to try their faithfulness, and prove
their truth, whether they will pilfer or steal yea or no; that you may know
whether you may trust them hereafter, or not; so does God tempt and try the
Sons of men, by presenting them with objects and occasions; that is, unlawful
objects, and occasions to sin. This is an holy Act of God, for he does not move
the heart God tempted or tried Joseph, when he had an opportunity: but behold
brave Joseph, says he, How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God?
to sin, only presents the outward object to try the heart.

The goodly fruit of the tree of knowledge was a standing object in our parents
eye to try them every day: It was there in their eye, yet forbidden fruit; they
could not but see it, yet they must not touch it.

So, Sirs, Gods Providence presents you with various objects, it presents some
with beauties, with honors, with a rich protion, with a wedg of gold; What
should we do now in this case? say, here is a temptation, a trial from the Lord
upon me; and be sure we be jealous of our eye and affections.

Some (it may be) will think Providence lays this object in my way, therefore I
may be meddling with it: Oh no; we must not make the Providence, but the Precept
of God our only Rule: and know that God tempts us, and tries us by objects and
occasions.

6. God tempts by delays: Sinners tempt God by their delays of repentance, and
God tempts his people by his delay of answers; they pray, and he defers; they
press him to answer, and he delays: God (as you heard) promised Abraham a Son,
and by his delay (as it were) denies performance; for delay bears the image
and semblance of denial: and God makes him wait five and twenty years for
performance. Afflictions are heavy, they are biting and cutting temptations: A
short affliction seems long, but length of affliction adds weight unto it, and
puts many grains into it; Oh! it is a sore temptation; and yet thus God tempts
and tries his people; they call to day, and he comes not; then they cry, and
cry aloud, and yet he hears not: and this makes them cry, How long, how Psalm.
35. 17.
long, Lord! Lord, how long will thou look on? Rescue my soul from their
destructions, my darling from the lions. How long, Psalm. 79. 5.
Lord, will thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like fire?

These how longs are great temptations to our natures: and this may be thy
case, poor soul, and then you will find this how long a bitter temptation.

7. God also tempts by way of Denial, and in some things this is a sore trial;
for if delay be a great temptation, Denial must needs be a very great one; we
sue to God for a thing that is desirable, we long for it, and God says, no, to
our suits: We ask for the life of such a friend, or relation, and God replies
with a negative vote; we lift up our hands for deliverance out of the Cloud of
such afflictions, and the hand of God makes it thicker and darker on us: we
move God for great mercies, and he gives us great Denials: This is to put our
submission to the trial, to put our resignation to his Will and Wisdom, to the
trial; our patience under his Sovereignty; to the trial.

Use 1. Did God tempt Abraham? what, Is God himself wont to tempt and try his
people? How should this make us walk before the Lord in fear and trembling?
Pray and tremble, profess and tremble; meditate and tremble?

Sirs, It is no wonder to hear that Satan will tempt us, or that the world will
tempt us, or to hear that our own flesh or corruption will tempt us, all this
is no wonder; but to hear that the Great God himself will try and tempt us,
that God will be at this work with us, and set upon us, ah! what a wonder and
astonishment is it! How should it fill our hearts with fear and reverence! How
should we entertain this truth with holy and humble trembling! Surely, this
should extinguish onr frolicks, and annihilate our pride, and awaken our
security: God himself is resolved to be a tempter, I mean, to try his people,
and call their graces out to service: Oh! then watch, and pray, and fear; for
the Devil to come and charge you with his Pistol, is matter of fear enough; but
if God himself will come with his Pistol cock't and charged upon you, oh! this
is formidable: I say then, watch, and pray, and fear.

Use 2. Learn here to act faith: you must act faith in the greatest and most
gain-faying temptations: Difficulties and Impossibilities are the true objects
of faith; you must believe, when it seems a contradiction to believe: Abraham
was to believe that he should have an innumerous posterity in Isaac, and yet he
is commanded to kill Isaac: Can these two stand together? Isaac shall live to
be the Father of many Nations, and yet Isaac shall dye by the hand of his
Father: When Isaac is once gone, where is my seed? where is my blessing? And
yet Abraham believes, and his faith triumphs over the difficulty: his faith
makes him an acute logician, and solves the knot of contradiction: Abraham knew
that he had to do with a God: he believed that God for his promise sake would
raise up the same Isaac, when he had killed him.

Sirs, It is hard and mysterious to believe, when Gods own Providence seem to
cross his own promises: Yet then we must believe, I say believe in God, when
his own Providence seem to go against his own promises: God will one time or
other be as if he were killing you; now, Sirs, to believe is a work indeed, and
you must now believe.

Quest. How shall we in this ease, at this dead-lift, believe and act faith?

Answ. 1. Fill the soul with Gods infiniteness: Gods way is not your way (
says faith), nor his thoughts as your thoughts; but as the Heavens are above
the earth, so are his thoughts beyond yours, and his ways beyond yours: Faith
lodges this principle in the soul, that God is infinite; and having laid that
principle there, when difficulties and discouragements arise, saying, You see
now in what distress you are brought, now you see there is no hope at all of
your deliverance; true indeed, says the believer; I see there is no way in
reason, in any ones reason, but God is infinite: I see many difficulties, but
God is infinite: the soul by faith being filled with the apprehensions of Gods
Infiniteness, is carried unto him through all difficulties and discouragements:
Now to him that is able to Ephesians. 3. 20, 21.
do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power
that works in us: Unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout
all ages, world without end. Amen.

2. Let thy faith lay up, and lay hold on this principle, that Gods love is
immutable: Soul, whom God once loves, he ever loves: has he loved thee? then
he can never unlove thee: With him there is no variableness nor shadow of
turning: Fix here then, it is a strong electuary in a day of fainting:
afflicted Saint, what is the matter? My strokes are from God himself: yet he
loves thee: But God has hid his face from me yet he loves thee.

3. Act faith in temptation, that God will be with you: he will be at thine
elbow; you know that blessed promise, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.

4. In trials and temptations act your faith in this, that God governs and
moderates all temptations; there is never a temptation, but it is from Divine
ordination, and therefore is managed by the reins of Divine moderation: so that
as the expert Rider rules the horse, and the skilful Coachman by his dexterity
guides the Coach; so the wise and merciful God governs the temptation, he holds
the temptation in his hand with Curb and Bridle; he allots it its bounds, and
graciously prescribes its measure, so that it shall not be upon you out of
measure; Oh! what a rare comfort is this to a poor soul, that a God so good,
circumscribes temptation within limits; it may flow in upon you, but shall not
overflow you; I say, it shall not overflow the banks, God himself will keep
and bound it within its channel; its Waves may drench you, but they shall not
drown you: The Great God that says to the Sea, Hitherto shall thy proud waves
go, and no farther, the same God sits upon the waters of every temptation.

5. In all your trials and temptations, act your faith upon this principle,
that God will extract good out of them; this is the Royal prerogative of God to
do so; it is his peculiar, and he will do so; it is spoken of him as one of his
incommunicable excellencies, that God commanded light to shine out of darkness:
It is the property of the Devil to draw evil out of good, and darkness out of
light; but it is the sweet property of a gracious God to draw good out of evil,
and light out of darkness; he will turn the shadow of death into the morning;
tempted souls, the Lord who tries you, will extract good out of your trials and
temptations.

Use 3. Expect a perpetual succession of temptations: [ Tota fidelium vita
tentatio est] all the life of Believers is a temptation. When one leaves you,
look certainly for another: In your new birth you are born to temptations; this
life is but a long chain of successive and continued temptations: The
temptations of Abraham were many: some casting up the accounts of his
temptations that are recorded, reckon them to be ten; it may be, I may find
more: concerning his habitations, he was to change them thrice.

1. He left his own Native Country (at Gods Command) and quit all his kindred,
and dwelt in Charran. Act. 7. 3, 4.


2. From thence he went (at the same command) into Canaan; whither must he go?
to a place he knew not, to men that knew not him.

3. And there God gave him no inheritance in it, no not so Act. 7. 5.
much as to set his foot on, which seems to be [(...)], a gift, and no gift; to
promise to give him a land, and then to give him not a foot of land in it, a
shrewd temptation!

4. Then there was a famine in the land of Canaan, and Abraham Genesis 12. 10.
was fain to go down to Egypt; Canaan does not afford him bread, which yet he
must believe shall flow with milk and honey to his seed.

5. In Egypt he was tempted about Sarah his wife, and he said Genesis 12. 11. to
17.
she was his sister. And Pharaoh took her into his house; he was under danger
of his life, and (which was worse) his wife was under danger of her chastity.

6. Then when he came into Canaan again, Lots Herdsmen Genesis 13.
and his fell out, where they should feed their cattle, and they did separate
from one another, and Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan; he had brought Lot
along with him, and nourished him as his child in his bosom, and now to be used
so unkindly by Lot, here is another temptation.

7. Then Lot his kinsman is taken prisoner, and Abraham is Genesis 14.
fain to engage himself in a War against four Kings, for the rescue of Lot
taken Captive.

8. Then he was afflicted for want of an heir, and complains to God, What will thou give me, since I go childless? Genesis 15. 2.


9. Then again, as he is offering sacrifice, and the Sun was going down, an
horror of great darkness fell upon him, and he Genesis 15. 12, 13.
received sad news from God, that his seed should be a stranger in a land that
is not theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred
years.

10. Then he is tempted with the delay of performance: God Genesis 16. 1.
promised him a Son, but tries him sorely with delay of performance; the
execution of performance is put off: And Sarai Abraham's wife bare him no
children: Abraham was old ere he had the promise and hope of a Son; and still
the older, the more incapable; yet God makes him wait five and twenty years for
performance.

11. Then at his wifes persuasion he goes in to Hagar her Genesis 16. 5.
maid, and she brings him a Son called Ishmael, and there falls out discord and
contention between Sarai and Hagar, and Sarai chides Abraham for it, and lays
the blame upon him.

12. Then God commands him to be circumcised, and to circumcise all his seed,
and all that were in his house: And Genesis 17. 24.
Abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was circumcised in the flesh of
his foreskin. Indeed circumcision was the sign of the Covenant, and Abraham was
not only content to wait for God, but also to smart for him: God bids him cut
his own flesh, and he is willing to carry this painful mark of the love of his
Creator, not regarding the soreness of his body for the confirmation of his
soul.

13. Then he is tempted again by Abimelech, and says, that Genesis 20. 2.
Sarai his wife was his sister, and Abimelech takes Sarai his wife from him.

14. Then he is sorely tempted again by the ejection of his Son Ishmael: for
Sarah said unto Abraham, Cast out the bondwoman Genesis 21. 10, 11.
and her son: for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son,
even with Isaac. And the thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight, because of
his son.

15. Then he is tempted here: God commanded him to kill and sacrifice his Son;
all the former were but easy tasks of faith to this: all ages have stood
amazed at this, to sacrifice his Son! All the other were but mole-hills to this
great Mountain: Do thou take pleasure in humane sacrifice? or if thou will
have it, must I be the Monster of all parents to do it? must my hands destroy
the fruit of mine own loins? If thou will have him, must I my self do it? what
none else, but I my self must do it? A temptation most transcendent! and yet
this follows after all the rest.

Sirs, What say you? Do you think to live quiet? you have been tempted, and now
you hope. to be quiet: mistake not, look for more still, and more yet, and more
continually: Do you think at the end of a temptation, there is an end of
temptations? No, no: they must begin again: God has more work for you to do:
God will not suffer his servants to loiter and sit idle: Have thou been
afflicted, and tried, and tempted? thou will be so again: God will not give
over with thee: and therefore expect a perpetual series of temptations.

Use 4. Think not the worse of the state of grace, because of trials and
temptations: Be not discouraged in it: It is God, the gracious God that tempts
Abraham, and will tempt and try his Saints: and these temptations the Devil
makes use of to work your hearts back again: When ye were in your natural
condition, then your heart was quiet, your conscience quiet, and the devil
quiet, and your friends quiet, and did not speak evil of you; and the world
quiet, and did not hate you nor trouble you: But now you begin to look toward
Jesus Christ, now conscience condemns, now the Devil accuses, now your
friends, your former friends, they speak evil of you, the world abuses you,
your neighbors scorn and molest you: I appeal to thee [man or woman] in thine
own soul; Do thou not think that thy former condition was an ungodly
condition? Yes, I confess, yes; and yet then thou wast quiet, then conscience
quiet, then friends quiet, then Satan quiet, but now conscience accuses, and
now Satan accuses, and the world accuses, and friends speak evil: Oh, say
then, my condition is now far better; when I was bad, and my condition was
dangerous, then all was quiet, and therefore my condition now with trials and
temptations is far better.

When I was going to hell, all was quiet; when I was like to be lost, then all
was quiet, and therefore I will not change states with my self for all the
world; I would not be in my former lost condition with all my quietness for a
thousand worlds: I will prize my condition of faith and grace with trials and
troubles infinitely above my former condition, come what will come: Gods
Wormwood is better than the Devils Honey. Well then, be not discouraged, 'twas
God that did, and does try his Saints.

Use 5. Compose and frame your hearts for hard services: store up strength for
great and strong encounters: God has difficult work for his people to do; it
may be, Saint, he has employed thee hitherto but in easy service, and thou
think it will be always so: but thou art mistaken.

You know not what dear Isaac, what precious jewel God will have thee part
with, and sacrifice to him.

And therefore be up at work, labor hard for grace, to fit you for hard
services: The little Be, when it is season with her, is upon the wing of
Diligence, she is out in the morning, goes to every flower, brings in to her
hive, and stores up for winter, and wilt not thou do so?

Shall the Be; the little Ant be wiser than thou art? have they souls to save?
and yet they provide for nature, and lay up for difficulties: Awake then,
awake; shall those silly creatures be at work, and will thou loiter? Go to the
Ant, thou sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise.

Many of you [I fear] will miscarry in your trials and temptations through your
present loiterings: It has been honeymoon with many of you, whilst others have
been chastned every morning, and you think it will be so still: and this undoes
you: you think God will put you to no harder work than he has done, and so you
overthrow your selves.

There Is never a person in this Congregation knows what day of difficulty and
temptation is coming over him; not one of you knows what hot service God has
yet for you: Little did Abraham think a day before, to hear that command from
God, Go and sacrifice thy Son, thy only Son Isaac: Little do thou know, how
soon God will say to thee, Be sick, be afflicted and terrified in conscience;
how soon he may withdraw his face, give thee up to doubtings and terrors:
little do thou know how soon God may say unto thee, as he did to Moses, Go up
to mount Nebo and dye: Oh then, store up strength for great and hard services
and temptations.

Use 6. Expose not your selves unto temptations: It is said here in the Text,
that God did tempt Abraham: Abraham did not seek temptation, but God did tempt
Abraham; to seek temptation is a sin; but when God tempts us, it is a way to
honor: When we expose our selves to temptation, a thousand to one but we fall
and break a limb, an arm or a leg; but when God tempts us, if we seek to him,
and keep to his rules, we may expect a blessing.

Christ teaches us to pray, Lord, lead us not into temptation: but surely we
are not to lead our selves into temptation.

1. Ye heard, that to a lawful temptation; he that tempts and tries, must have
[ jus tendandi] a right and authority to tempt; God being our Lord, and the
supreme Rector, having absolute government over us, has [an (...)] an
Authority to tempt us and try our graces: but we are not our own, we are his,
and not our own; we are not at our own command, nor in our own power; we may
not do what we will with our selves, and therefore we may not offer our selves
to temptation.

2. When God tempts us, and leads us out into the field of Trial, we may expect
his help and presence: his assistance goes along with his temptations: But when
we tempt our selves, and put our selves to trials and troubles, we can expect
no success, nor look for Gods Assistance, because we are out of Gods way: let
him that brings us in, bring us off again: If God bring us into temptation, he
will bring us off; but if we bring our selves into temptation, we must bring
our selves off again.

Use 7. Saints, look upon your daily afflictions, as your temptations.

1. They are sent from God upon you, as your temptations, to try you and refine
you: Observe then with what humility you receive them, for they are sent to try
your humility; observe with what patience and meekness you bear them, for they
come to try your patience: observe into what nutriment you concoct them, for
you must feed upon them, and eat them, to kill corrupt humors, and to breed
good blood and spirits: I say, observe then what fruits they bring forth, for
though they are not joyous, but grievious for the present: Heb. 12. 11.
yet afterward they yield, (or God looks they should yield) the peaceable fruit
of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby. God will come to you,
as the Master did to the fig tree, to seek fruit on you: I must tell you, God
expects as much fruit from your temptations, as from your mercies: Gods Eye is
upon you, he looks what you are doing.

2. Afflictions ( per accidens, through our corruptions) are great temptations
to sin, and therefore you had need observe your selves strictly under your
daily afflictions: I say, they are great temptations to sin: for though it be
said of Christ, that he was in all points tempted like as we are, yet Heb. 4.
15.
without sin: But in our infirmity of the flesh, we are seldom tempted by
afflictions, without sin: Although affliction does not quite vanquish and
overcome us, yet always almost at the very first onset, it does (like a great
blow) dizzy the brain, and makes us give back: If we be not thrown down, yet we
reel and stagger; and sometimes it lays us flat, and our faith lies sprawling
upon the ground: In affliction there are two things:

1. Sensation. And

2. Temptation.

1. In affliction there is Sensation [doloris sensus] the sense of pain and
grief, and this Christ felt as well as we: we cannot, and he could not taste
affliction without pain: as we are affected with Dolor, when evils lie upon
us; so was Christ, he felt sharp and keen pain. and thus Christ was tempted in
all things, and in the same manner, as we are, as to sense of pain and grief,
yet without sin. But,

2. In affliction there is also temptation to sin: and because it is so true,
that great temptations arise out of afflictions, therefore are afflictions
Antonomastice called temptations, they tempt sadly to murmuring and impatience,
to wrangling and expostulation with God, to unbelief and doubting of his love,
nay, to cast off God: Does God himself tempt me thus, and afflict me thus? and
shall I serve such a Master? Ah! look how ye are under your daily afflictions.

Use 8. Does God tempt Abraham, Abraham his friend? Then you may be the
tempted, and yet the beloved of the Lord: God tempts and tries his dear ones:
all is in love.

1. He tempts his dear ones; he tempts those whom he loves dearly: Abraham was
high in Gods Books, one of his intimate and bosom-acquaintance, and yet God
tempts Abraham: Nay, to give you a greater instance than Abraham, Jesus Christ
was tempted: I say, Jesus Christ was Heb. 4. 15.
in all points tempted like as we are, and yet the beloved of the Lord: he was
the tempted, and yet the beloved of the Lord: he was tempted (...) eminently,
superlatively, more than us all, and yet he was beloved of the Lord; (...)
eminently and superlatively above us all.

So that ye may be the tempted, and yet the beloved of the Lord: nay, Jesus
Christ was tempted of God himself: he was not only tempted by the tempter, but
by his dear Father, God himself: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

2. All is in love: he tempts in love: he not only tempts his beloved, but he
tempts them in love: that he may love them the more, and they in the Issue love
him the better: How much more did God love Abraham, when he saw him forget
himself to be a Father, and his own child to be his Son, for his sake?

By my self have I sworn (says the Lord) for because thou Genesis 22. 16, 17.
have done this thing, and have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son: That in
blessing, I will bless thee, and in multiplying, I will multiply thy seed as
the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the Seashore: and thy
seed shall possess the gate of his enemies: And did not this message from
heaven (think you) kindle a greater flame of love in Abraham's bosom toward God?
without doubt it did: God loves Abraham more, Abraham loves God more than ever
he did: When Abraham saw Gods design, and had his Son delivered safe to him
again, How was his heart filled with a spiritual torrent of joy! He gained the
experience of Gods love to him, and of his love to God, and would not have
unwished the temptation again upon any terms.

3. God tempts, and all is in wisdom: God tempts his Beloved in wisdom: he
corrects his Children, as well as his Enemies; but when he corrects them, it is
in much prudence and wisdom.

Quest. But how shall I know that God tempts me for my good? How shall I know
that God afflicts me, and tempts me in love.

1. Why, first, because he loves thee: whom he loves, he tempts and proves them
in love: you imagine he loves you, but you do not feel that he loves you: the
sense of Gods love would put all these out of doubt.

2. You may know he tempts you in love, if ye be faithful unto him in
temptations: if you depart not from God in the day of temptation: God is trying
and tempting his people at this day, and it may be it will be a sad day, and a
dark day of temptation; it may be it will be a strong day of temptation, and of
long temptation: and you would know whether he tempts you at this day in love,
then make choice of suffering rather than sin, of affliction rather than
defection: The Heb. 10. 38.
just shall live by faith (says the Apostle) that is, shall hold out by faith
in the day of temptation: But if any man draw back, my soul (says God) shall
have no pleasure in him.

Would ye know whether God proves you at this day, and tries you in love? then
put on the whole armor of God, that ye Ephesians. 6. 11, 14.
may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil. Stand therefore, having
your loins girt about with truth, etc. Watch ye, 1 Cor. 16. 13.
stand fast in the faith, (...), quit your selves like men: be strong. Stand
fast in the liberty wherewith Christ Gal. 5. 1.
has made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. Stand
fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together Phil. 1. 27, 28.
for the faith of the Gospel. And in nothing terrified by your adversaries,
which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and
that of God. So stand fast in the Phil. 4. 1.
Lord, my dearly beloved.

3. Cleanse your hearts from hypocrisy: see that your souls are right before
the Lord, and then Gods Temptations are all in love: all goes right with
upright hearts: The upright Prove. 11. 20.
in their way are his delight.

4. You may know whether God tempts you in love, by the issue and fruits of
your temptations. Abraham sinned in temptation, and Saints may sin in
temptation: In a temptation you would know whether you shall hold out; I will
not prophecy, but I will give you a sign: have you held out through former
temptations? thou may hold out through others.

Use 9. You beloved of the Lord, bear Gods Temptations with willingness and
patience: The Apostle stirs up the Hebrews to learn practically this lesson:
Despise not thou the chastening Heb. 12. 5, 9.
of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him.

Furthermore (says he) we have had Fathers of our flesh which corrected us,
and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the
father of spirits, and live?

Gods Temptations are your gain: not your loss, but your Gods Temptations are
your gain, therefore bear them with willingness and patience. 2 Cor. 4. 16.
gain: if he tempts you by losses, your loss is your gain: your wants will be
your riches, your outward poverty will be your spiritual wealth: what you lose
one way, you will get another: what you lose in the flesh, you will get in the
spirit: Though the outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by
day, says Blessed Paul; the soul grows new, as the body by pressures grows
old: Afflictions may make thy outward face look withered and aged, but thine
inward man grows young and vigorous by them.

It is good for me (says David) that I have been afflicted. Now then, bring
your heart to this, and bear all the temptations of the Lord with willingness
and patience.

Use 10. See God on the top of every trial or temptation: God (says the Text)
did tempt Abraham: you will say, God tempted Abraham by word of mouth, by an
express command; Is God wont to tempt and try men thus in these days?

I answer, no, you heard that God does tempt and try men two manner of ways:

1. Immediately, by himself: thus he tempted Abraham, thus was Christ led by
the Spirit to be tempted in the wilderness.

2. Mediately, by means and instruments, by Satan sometimes, by wicked men
other times; yea, by Saints also sometimes, as the Lord Christ was tempted by
Peter, when he spoke of his sufferings, Be it far from thee, Lord: this shall
not be unto Matthew. 16. 22. Job 2. 9.
thee. And Job was tempted by his own dear wife, Curse God, and dye. And this
is the Order of God at this day: you see the means, the instruments of
temptation; but though God be not seen, yet he stands upon the top of every
temptation; no wheel moves in the world, but by the direction and counsel of
the first mover: There is a concatenation of causes, and God is at the upper
end of the chain, and nothing can be done by any link of the chain of second
causes, without the first cause.

In the fourth to the Hebrews, there it is said that Jesus Christ Verse. 15.
was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin: Mark it, his
Temptations were in all points like ours; Temptations may be taken,

1. For sufferings: Or,

2. For temptation to sin, as having a power or causality moving us thereunto:
As for Christ's sufferings, they were exactly like unto ours: To that end he
took a Body and Soul, and in his state of humiliation lay actually under them,
and felt them: As for temptation to sin, that is inward and outward: Inwardly
indeed he was not tempted, but outwardly he was, by men and devils, more than
ever man was, and was tempted to the same kind of sins (at least some of them)
which we being tempted to commit, yet he never sinned.

Now the Apostle tells you there, that he is touched with the feeling of our
infirmities: [We have not an High priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities]; Nay, because he was tempted like as we are, he
cannot but be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, that is, he cannot
but be inwardly affected with the sense of our temptations. Sirs, your
temptations touch him, the temptations that you feel touch him: his very bowels
are full of the feeling of your infirmities, he is acted with mercy and
compassion toward you, and he would have man to know it: That which is the
object of his compassion, is our infirmities, that is, sins of the soul, and
pains of the body, but chiefly sin; infirmity here is sin and punishment, sin
and suffering, which makes our case very miserable: Some will think that Christ
is not touched with the feeling of my sins, others will think Christ is not
touched with the feeling of my sorrows: but ye are mistaken, poor souls, ye are
mistaken; says the Apostle, we have an High priest that is touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, with the sense and feeling of both, of your sin and
guilt, of your sorrows and sufferings: Whatever troubles you, troubles Christ:
and the reason why he is so sensible of our sad conditions, is, because he was
tempted in all points like unto us: Christ as God, is infinitely merciful; but
he became man, tempted man, that he might be sensible of our infirmities with
our own humane affections; that he might pity man with the affections of a man,
with such affections as we are wont to pity one another; and therefore he was
not only man, but a tempted man, because experimental knowledge, and practical
sense, is the most effectual.

Hearken then, you tempted souls, how deeply is Christ touched with the feeling
of your infirmities, who was himself a tempted man, as ye are; he was in all
points tempted like unto us: This is that wonderful way which God by his
profound Wisdom contrived to make his mercy greater (and in some sort) more
than infinite: he would have a kind of knowledge of man's infirmities, which as
God, and Infinite, he could never have.

AN ACCOUNT OF MAN'S TEMPTATIONS.
Psalm. LXXIX. 41. Yea they tempted God, and limited the Holy One of Israel.
THIS Psalm is [(...), and (...)] Exhortative and Instructive.

1. The Psalm is [(...)] Suasive and Exhortative; in the first verse, Give ear,
O my people, to my law: incline your ears to the words of my mouth.

2. The Psalm is [(...) or (...)] Instructive and Teaching; I say, for their
choice Instruction, and gathered out of the Records of Gods Providence toward
his own people, the Jews; at the second verse, I will open my mouth in a
parable: I will utter dark sayings of old: which we have heard and known, and
our Fathers have told us: We will not hide them from Verse. 3. 4.
their children, showing to the generations to come the praises of the Lord,
and his strength, and his wonderful works that he has done, etc. And that
which the Psalmist would instruct them in, is to obey God, and adhere to him in
dependence and subjection: And not to be as their Fathers, a stubborn and Verse.
8.
rebellious generation, that set not their heart aright: and whose spirit was
not steadfast with God. He warns them against Rebellion, because their Ancestors
and Fathers sinned at that rate, and were severely punished by God. Where you
may observe by the way,

Observe. That to say, our Forefathers did thus and thus, therefore so will we,
is no good argument: Shall we be wiser than our Forefathers? yes, that you
must, or else you may smart for it. The Holy Ghost here tells them, that they
must not be as their Fathers; no sirs, you must be better than your
Forefathers, the Light of the Gospel should make you far better; and time
should make you better, and experience should make you better; the example of
Forefathers is not to be followed, except wherein they followed the Lord.

What time the Prophet (whoever he was) penned this Psalm, is uncertain; yet
because he gives us the History of the Rebellion of the Israelites in the
wilderness, and in the land of Canaan, down to David when he was King; it
therefore seems probable, that it was written either in the later days of
David, or else in the days of Solomon. The Psalm contains a long series and
concatenation of Gods kindnesses to Israel, and Isreal's ingratitude toward
God, and then the Divine punishments upon that ungrateful people.

Gods free love drops benefits and wonders upon them, and then their
ingratitude extorts punishments from him: Thus it pourtrayes Gods dealings of
mercy with his people, and never in justice, but when mercy was abused.

The Method and Contexture of the Psalm, is to set out one while Gods benefits
to Israel; another while their ungratefulness to God, and then his just
punishments upon them: thus it looks like Hangings of Arras, pictured with
interchanged Rows of various Colors.

The benefits of God to Israel are stupendous, and therefore their sins
against such a God are prodigious; to enumerate both, as they lie in order,
would fill up too much time; among their sins, you may cast an eye upon one or
two of them in my Text, Yea they turned back, and tempted God, and limited the
Holy One of Israel.

In the words, there are two sins mentioned.

1. They tempted God.

2. They limited the Holy One of Israel.

As for that expression, (...) which we translate, [ and they turned back] that
is, say some, to go back again into Egypt, or as others, returned back to their
old wont of Rebellion, I say, it has no such meaning here; it is an Hebraism,
and should be rendered, [ they returned and tempted] that is, [ saepius
tentaverunt], they often times tempted him, or they tempted him again, as in
Genesis 26. 18. In the Hebrew it is, and Isaac returned and dug, for he dug
again: and so we translate it there: and in Dan. 9. 25. it is in the Hebrew, The
street shall return and be built, for it shall be built again: So here, and
they returned, and tempted God, that is, they tempted God again. And as they
tempted God, so they limited God, (...), and they limited the Holy One of
Israel, that is, they put bounds to his power, thinking thus with themselves, [
Illud potest, hoc non potest], that he could do, this he cannot do, as it is in
the twentieth verse: He smote the rock, and the waters gushed out -- but can he
give bread also? can he provide flesh for his people? He is called here (...),
the Holy of Israel, (a defect of the substantive, and is to be supplied, as
Isa. 5. 16.) that is, the Holy God of Israel.

1. He that is holy in himself, and sanctifies those that are Lev. 20. 8.
Ezekiel. 20. 12.
his: I am the Lord which sanctify you.

2. And the holy of Israel, who was in Covenant with them, and was to be
worshipped, and served by them; and separated them from all other Nations to be
a holy people to himself.

But the other expression, or sin of Israel, is the subject of my discourse,
(...), and they tempted God. Where you have,

1. The subject, or agent, they, that is the people of Israel.

2. Their action, or sin, they tempted.

3. The object, God, they tempted God, nay, they returned, and tempted God;
that is, they tempted him again and again: as it is in Numb. 14. 22. And have
tempted me now these ten times. In our last discourse, you heard that God
tempts man: And it came to pass, that God did tempt Abraham. Now Genesis 22. 1.
you shall hear, that Man tempts God: and that is the Observation.

Sinful man is so bold and impudent, as to tempt the Lord God: Doctrine. Isa.
7. 13.
And herein, as Isaiah said, Hear ye now, O house of David; Is it a small thing
for you to weary me? but will ye weary my God also? So may I say unto you, Hear
ye now, Is it a small thing unto you to tempt men, to tempt one another? but
will ye tempt God also? In the handling of this point, I must show you,

First, What it is to tempt God: To tempt one in the General, is to make a
trial of one.

1. Either concerning his Qualities, whether he be good, or bad, whether he be
real, or counterfeit.

2. Or concerning his good will and affections to you. Thus you will make a
trial of a friend, that professes love to you; it may be you will go to him,
and ask to borrow a sum of money of him, only to try him, and his good will to
you: and this is to tempt him.

3. Or concerning his abilities; What a man can do. Thus we try Scholars in the
University, for their degrees; and thus persons, learning, and parts are (or
ought to be tried) when they enter into the sacred function of the Ministry,
whether they are fit for that great work of the Lord: thus we set men to preach
or expound Scripture, to try them how they can preach or expound the Scripture:
And this is to tempt them. And thus the Sons of men tempt God, and try him. To
tempt God is to make a trial of him, whether God be amnipotent, or faithful,
and true in his word; I say, to make a trial, whether God knows and sees our
actions, or whether God can do such a thing, or will do such a thing for you;
and this is to tempt God, and thus men tempt the Knowledge of God, and the Power
of God, and the Will of God.

And thus you may tempt God [ verbis vel factis], in words, or in deeds. To
tempt in Scripture has a threefold acceptance:

1. Sometimes it signifies to try, to make a trial of one: and thus men tempt
God (as you have heard).

2. To provoke and irritate; and thus some take it in the 1 Cor. 10. 9. Neither
let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted: Let us not tempt, that is,
provoke Christ, as it is in verse. 22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are
we stronger than he? They that provoke God, do (as it were) challenge him into
the field, and try what he can do, or what he will do.

3. To tempt [in Scripture] is to solicit to evil: as when Satan tempted
Christ, and tempts men, and when one sinner tempts another to sin; and thus
also men tempt God, sinful men will tempt God to sin, they will try whether
they can draw God in to sin with them.

Secondly, The Schools distinguish man's Temptation of God, first into a direct,
and secondly interpretative tempting of God.

1. A direct tempting of God, is when a man by word or deed intends to tempt
God, and try him whether he be wise, or good, or can, or will do such a thing;
when we intend to tempt God, then it is a direct and intentional Temptation of
God.

2. There is an interpretative tempting of God; when though we intend not to
tempt him, yet we do the same thing which he does, who has a design and desire
to tempt God: So that this sin may be committed, when you do not intend it; you
may tempt God, when you have no express purpose to do it; when you do that
which is ordinable to nothing else, but to make a trial or experience of God,
and to prove his Power, or Goodness, or Knowledge.

As when a man goes on in a wretched course of life, and yet hopes to find
mercy at the hour of death, he intends not (it may be) to try Gods mercy, yet
he does that which is good for nothing but to make an experience of his mercy.

3. You must know that,

1. There is a good or lawful tempting of God.

2. There is a sinful tempting of God: There is a commendable, and there is an
unwarrantable tempting of God.

1. There is a good and commendable temptation of God, which is lawful; which
is so, when it springs,

1. A bono principio, from a good principle, or an holy heart and purpose.

2. When it is done in a lawful way, or by a good action.

3. When it is bottomed upon a good ground; that is,

1. When we have a call from God to it, his command and promise to bear us out.

2. When we have a just necessity to do it.

4. It is a lawful tempting of God, when it tends to a good end: This is a
lawful tempting of God, when it proceeds from a good principle, and is done by
good means, and tends Tentatio bons est quae ex principio bono seu animo
sancto, ac bono medio seu mode^^^ bonum finem tendit.
to a good end, and (as you heard also) is bottomed upon a good ground, a
lawful call, and a just necessity to tempt and try God.

1. To make our tempting and trying of God lawful and good, it must spring from
a good principle, or an holy heart, that is, a love of knowing the Truth, or
Power, or Justice of God: When we make a Trial of God out of love to God, and
his glorious Attributes, that we may be ravished with the beauty and splendor
of them.

2. It is a lawful tempting of God, when we have a command to try him: and then
we sin in not tempting God, Isa. 7. When the Lord had promised what he would do
for Judah, and the house of David, and what he would do against Syria and
Ephraim, (says he to encourage Abaz faith) in ver. 11. Ask thee a sign of the
Lord thy God: ask it either in the depth, or in the height above. As if he had
said, For the confirmation of thy faith, and the assurance of the truth of Gods
word, ask a sign, that is, try God by asking somewhat to be done, some unusual
and extraordinary thing to be done by him; thus make a trial and experience of
him, whether he means as he says, whether his heart agrees with his word; to
know this, ask a sign, make a trial, put him to it: No, says Ahaz, I will not
ask, neither will I tempt the Lord. You Verse. 12.
would think this was Religiously, but it was Hypocritically spoken; he
pretended he would not sin, that if he ask't a sign, he should go against the
Command in Deuteronomy. 6. 16. Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God, as ye tempted him
in Massah. As if a man should tempt God, by doing that which he is invited by
God himself to do. Ahaz here had a Command to try God: it was Gods gracious
indulgence, and kind condescent to Ahaz to bid him ask a sign, that is, if thou
art hard to believe me, ask a sign, and try me, I give thee this offer, but he
would not; it was his rebellion not to tempt or try God, when he had a Command
to tempt and try him. And herein was his sin also the greater, because God
would have given King Ahaz a sign, not for himself only, but for the
edification and instruction of the whole people; and therefore he is reproved,
as an hinderer of the common good, and public salvation, in that he would not
ask a sign.

3. It is a lawful tempting or trial of God, when there is a just necessity;
when we really stand in need of his extraordinary appearance: when ordinary
means fail, then to trust in him, and expect his unusual presence, it is not
unlawful. Thus when Pharaoh pursued Israel, and his Army was in the Rear of
them, and the Red Sea before them, Moses said unto them, Stand still, and see
the salvation of the Lord, which Exodus 14. 13.
he will show to you, to day. And when the children of Israel were in the
wilderness, and could have no bread, nor could meet with water, then they were
to try what God could do for them, and to expect relief from him out of the
ordinary course: they were called by God into the wilderness, and therefore had
a call to try God, and seek experiments of his mercy and power for them.

4. It is a lawful tempting of God, when it is to a good end.

1. As for confirmation of our faith: thus Gideon tempted, or proved God, Judge.
6. 36, 37, 38, 39, 40 verses. And Gideon said unto God, If thou will save
Israel by mine hand as thou have said, Behold, I will put a fleece of wool in
the floor: and if the dew be on the fleece only, and it be dry on all the the
earth beside, then shall I know that thou will save Israel by mine hand, as
thou have said. And it was so for he rose up early on the morrow, and thrust
the fleece together, and wringed the dew out of the fleece, a bowl full of
water. Where faith he at the 39th verse (...), let me tempt, or prove, I pray
thee, but this once with the fleece. Gideon being conscious of his own
infirmity and weakness, and out of a desire to obey God, and for the
confirmation of his faith, and his more cheerful obedience in a most dangerous
design which God had set him upon, asked, and obtained a sign: I suppose he
asked this sign by an instinct and impulse from God himself.

2. When it is for Gods glory, and the public good; for the salvation of
souls, and the progress of the Gospel, and the splendor of Christ's name: And
thus the Apostles prayed that God would be with them in their Ministry, by
stretching forth his hand to heal, and that signs and wonders might Acts 4. 29,
30.
be done by them.

2. There is a sinful tempting of God: A sinful tempting of God is, which wants
those conditions, or ingredients spoken of before. Briefly thus, [ Quae
principio, medio, aut fine peccat], a sinful tempting of God is, that which
fails in principle, means, or end. You shall see an instance of this sinful
tempting of God in Matthew. 22. 15. to 22. Then went the Pharisees, and took
counsel, how they might entangle him in his talk. And they sent out unto him
their disciples, with the Herodians, saying, Master, we know that thou art
true, and teach the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any man;
for thou regardest not the persons of men. Tell us therefore, what think
thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not? But Jesus perceived
their wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me ye hypocrites? Show me the tribute
money, and they brought unto him a penny. And he said unto them, Whose is this
image, and superscription? They say unto him, Caesar's. Then says he unto them,
Render therefore unto Caesar, the things Verse 21.
that are Caesar's; and unto God, the things which are Gods.

They came to Christ, that they might tempt him, that is, to try what he would
say, to see what words would drop from him, which they might gather up to his
hurt: And their tempting of Christ sprang not,

1. From an holy, but a wicked principle, not a love of knowing the justness
and truth of Christ, but an hatred of him.

2. The Medium, or means they used, was as bad; they commended him to the
s^ies, that they might cut his throat. [ Master, we know that thou art true,
and teach the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any man; for thou
regardest not the person of men. Tell us therefore, what think thou? Is it
lawful to pay tribute unto Caesar, or not? Did ye ever hear such gilded
flattery? Though they spoke nothing but truth, yet nothing did they speak in
truth, here was no sincerity in their speech, but a cunning simulation of his
goodness, honesty, and fidelity.

3. Their end was bloody and cruel, in all these fair speeches they sought the
blood of Christ; they tempted him, that Verse. 15.
they might entangle him in his speech.

1. Here was an intentional tempting of Jesus Christ.

2. They tempted him with their words.

3. Their end was to destroy him.

Again, in a sinful tempting of God, this is also another ingredient, when we
make a trial of him, [ Sine vocatione, sine necessitate, sine causa], without a
call, without necessity, without a cause.

Lastly, Sinful tempting of God, is either [in excessu, or defectu] in the
excess, or defect.

1. In the defect, when God is tempted, by our unbelief, diffidence, distrust,
and doubting of his power, presence, promises, and will, to do any thing for
us; so men tempt God, [ Omittendo quod oportet] in omitting what ought to be
done by them.

2. In the excess; when God is tempted, [ nimia confidentia], by too much
confidence; when with the abuse of his promises, and the neglect of the Divine
Method and Order he has prescribed, they will presume of Gods Presence, and
seek a trial of his assistance, and expect his mercy and preservation. To
conclude, when men in doing what they Sive faciendo quod non oportet, sive
omittendo quod oportet.
ought not, or in omitting what they ought to do, [ Neglectu licitorum, vel usu
illicitorum], in the neglect of things lawful, or the use of things unlawful,
they seek a trial, or experiment of the favor or power of God, they tempt him
sinfully: and of this sinful tempting of God does our Doctrine speak, when it
says, Sinful man is so bold and impudent, as to tempt the Lord God. And of
this I shall show you,

1. That sinful man is so bold as to tempt and try God.

2. It is a sin thus to tempt and try the Lord God.

3. Why does sinful man tempt and try God?

4. And then, what we have showed but in the general, we shall show you in
particulars, what it is to tempt God in a sinful way.

1. Sinful man is so bold as to tempt God: You may see this in the 18th verse
of this Psalm, And they tempted God in their heart, by asking meat for their
lust. And in my Text, They tempted God, and limited the Holy One of Israel. And
at the 56th verse, They tempted, and provoked the most high God, and kept not
his testimonies. And when I say, that sinful man is so bold as to tempt God, I
wrap up the godly also in this expression: For, though they are godly, yet they
are not perfectly godly; indeed they are sinfully godly, I mean, they have sin
in them mingled with their godliness; I say then, that good and gracious men
sometimes tempt the Lord.

Zacharias tempted God: The Scripture gives him and his Luke 1. 6.
wife this character, That they were both righteous before God, walking in all
the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, blameless: and yet Zacharias
sinfully tempted God. You know, while he was executing the Priests office,
there appeared unto him an Angel of the Lord, and told him, Thy wife Elizabeth
shall bear thee a Son, and thou shall call his name Verse. 13.
John.

But Zacharias said unto the Angel, [(...)]; Verse. 18.
whereby shall I know this? Here he tempted and tried God, verbis, in words or
speech; How shall I know the truth of God in this message? For I am an old man,
and my wife wellstricken in years; that is, we are both unlikely for such a
thing; and therefore [(...)]; How shall I know Cornelius a lapide in loc.
this? by what shall I know it? that is, give me a sign, show me a miracle to
prove the truth of what thou promises: and the Angel gave him a sign, but
'twas a sign of rebuke, he struck him speechless for it, he hanged up a sign at
his mouth, Behold, thou shall be dumb, and not able to speak, until Verse. 20.
the day that these things shall be performed: He shall ask no more questions
for forty weeks, because he asked this one distrustfully.

2. It is a sin thus to tempt and try the Lord God.

1. Because it is against the Royal Command: his Regal Authority has forbidden
us to tempt him, ye shall not tempt Deuteronomy. 6. 16.
[ or try] the Lord God, and therefore Jesus Christ himself durst not do it.
When Satan, having set him upon a Pinnacle Matthew. 4. 5, 6, 7.
of the Temple, said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down:
Christ said unto him, It is written, [that is in Deuteronomy. 6. 16. There (says
Christ) it is written] Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

2. To tempt and try God, is against the Reverend and Religious respect to God,
which the creature should bear toward him: we may tempt our inferior, but it
is boldness to tempt our superior.

3. In every such Temptation, or tempting of God, there is an undervaluing of
God. Will the Lord be gracious unto me? I will try him: thus we tempt the
goodness of the Lord: thus we tempt God, because we suspect his Power, and his
Goodness and Ability.

3. Why does sinful man tempt God, and try him?

1. Sometimes it springs from unbelief, and doubting of Gods Power, and his
Promises, Exodus 7. 17. Is the Lord among us or not? In the wilderness of the
Children of Isreal's tempting of God, was a doubting of Gods Care and
Providence, and Power and Wisdom, of which they had so many arguments,
assurances, and promises from him.

In Numb. 14. 22. Their tempting of God ten times, sprang from their not
believing him in all his signs which he had showed Verse. 11.
among them, and what that unbelief was, appears by their words at the 2d
verse, Would God that we had died in the Verse. 13.
land of Egypt, or would God we had died in this wilderness: And wherefore has
the Lord brought us unto this land, to fall by the sword, that our wives, and
our children should be a prey? Thinking that God could not preserve them, or
else would not go along with, but leave them to be devoured by the people of
the land: as you may see at the 9th verse. Now if you ask, why sinful men tempt
God, it is from unbelief; sometimes it springs from presumption, believing more
than God has promised: they hope to be saved, although they live in sin; they
are too confident, and have too much faith, they are over-believing.

4. What is it sinfully to tempt and try God? You must know (as you have heard
already) that man may tempt God, [ Et in excessu, and in defectu], both in the
excess, and in defect.

1. They tempt God, who neglect second causes, and use Neglectu licitorum.
not means which God has prescribed: when thou expectest God alone to help
thee, or give thee a mercy, which thou ought to come to by thy own labor
and cooperation, this is to tempt and try both the Power and the Will of God.

They that will not labor with their hands, but put it upon God to provide for
them, these tempt the Lord: they that will not manage their estates, but put it
upon God to help them, they sin most grievously. It is true, Gods Providence
does all things, yet thy Providence must work with his Providence, as a servant
under it.

In Prove. 10. 22. It is said, The blessing of the Lord, it makes rich: and yet
at the 14th verse, it is said, The hand of the diligent makes rich. How stand
these two together? they are not opposita, but subordinata, not opposites, but
subordinate the one to the other.

Gods blessing makes rich, as the principal cause, and the diligent hand makes
rich, as the instrumental cause under Gods blessing: there must be a wheel in
the middle of a wheel, the wheel of diligence in the wheel of Gods blessing:
there must be a hand in a hand, the hand of diligence in the hand of blessing:
the diligent hand cannot make rich without Gods blessing, and Gods blessing
will not make rich without a diligent hand. So they tempt God, that divide the
spirit from the Ordinance; that look for Revelations and discoveries without
Gospel Ordinances; that look for grace without the Word; that look for light
without the candle of the Ministry; that neglect Sabbaths, neglect Ordinances,
and sit at home and say, God will give them faith. Ah ye true Phanaticks! for
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: the word cannot work
grace without the spirit, the spirit ordinarily will not work grace without the
word. So they tempt God, that look for God to subdue their sins, and they do
nothing; God must master their lusts, and unruly desires, but themselves will
not strive, nor fast, nor pray, nor deny themselves, nor wound their flesh. As
if an Army should stand in Battalia against the Enemy, and not strike one
stroke; were not this a mad tempting of God, and horrid self-murder? Up, sirs,
then, and your selves fight the good fight of faith against your lusts: Victory
over sin is a mercy which thou must come to, by thy own labor and
cooperation: it is God indeed that hews down the strong oaks of our lusts, but
the Ax wherewith he does it, must be in our hands: If ye through the spirit
mortify Romans 8. 13.
the deeds of the body, ye shall live. So they tempt God, that will go in the
way of means, but not far enough: many will pray against sin, but not practice
against sin: as if a sick man should pray for his health, but will take no
physic for his health; or he that has a dangerous wound should pray to be
healed, but will apply no plaster: they that pray for their children, but do
not educate them, instruct, reprove, correct them, they tempt God, in that they
do not use all the means; for as Solomon says, Foolishness is bound in the
heart Prove. 22. 15.
of a child: but the rod of correction shall drive it far from him.

They that argue, if we are elected, we shall be saved, though we live as we
list, and if we are not elected, we shall be damned, though we live never so
holy, and endeavor never so carefully; these tempt God egregiously: for God
electing to the end, elects also to the means; hence that saying; [
Praedestinatio est praeparatio gratiae in praesenti, and gloriae in futuro],
Predestination is a preparation of grace for the present, and of glory for the
future.

And therefore, whereas thou say, If I am elected, I shall be saved, though I
live as I list, the inference is most false; for then,

1. Conversion and Grace should be commanded in vain, and because
predestination alone should bring men to heaven; which is a foolish conceit, I
say, predestination alone brings no man to Heaven; it is but the first link of
the chain.

2. Election or Predestination carries the means to salvation in the Womb of
it; so that this conditional proposition, though Paul continues a blasphemer,
yet by virtue of his Election, he shall be saved, is so far from being true,
that the contrary ought to be inferred; if Paul be not converted, it is
impossible he should be saved, though elected, because God who elected Paul to
be saved, elected him to be saved by conversion, not by rebellion; by faith,
not by unbelief.

And whereas thou say, if I am not elected, do what I can, live I never so
holy, though I should believe, and repent, I shall be damned by reason of the
infallible decree.

I answer: There was never any such decree at all in the Divine Will, of
damning any man, though he believed and changed his life, and returned to God:
I tell thee, there was never any such Decree at all in the Divine Will, but the
contrary, which God would have established for ever as most sure and certain;
and promulged abroad to all men, That whosoever believes, shall not perish, but
have everlasting life, and he that will have the son, shall have life. Oh
comfort! unspeakable comfort! and therefore come in, souls, come in and take
Christ, ye sinners, and fear not Reprobation, ye shall be saved. Sirs, let me
in short give ye a blessed word, fear sin, and fear not reprobation: if ye fear
sin, reprobation can do ye no hurt.

To conclude, as long as you remain unconverted, to presume of your election,
[Stultitiae est] it is folly; to affirm your reprobation, [Insaniae est] it is
madness: for this is to praedamn thy self, or damn thy self beforehand; that
is, you cannot say, you are elect, till you are converted; to say, you are a
reprobate, though yet unconverted, is to stop up your way (with your own hands)
unto salvation.

To cast our selves upon any immediate providence, when means fail not, is to
tempt God, to disobey instead of believing God: we may challenge God on his
word, we may not strain him beyond it Thus, Satan when he had set Christ upon
the Pinnacle of the Temple, bade him, If thou be the Son of God, cast Mat. 4. 5,
6.
thy self down. Satan would have persuaded Christ, by casting himself down, to
make trial whether God would deal with him as a Son, that is, preserve him, or
no: But Jesus said unto him, It is written, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
Verse. 7.
God. Christ replieth, that this is a tempting of God; for,

1. Christ needed no such evidences of his being the Son of God, for there came
a voice from heaven, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased. This
was sufficient testimony, Mat. 3. 17.
he needed not another proof, such as Satan would have him to give.

2. There were steps in the Temple, by which Christ might descend, and
therefore needed not to tempt God, or put him to such an Act of immediate
Providence to preserve him; we must not desire God to give any extraordinary
proofs of his care of us, when he has provided the ordinary means for our
safety.

Yet let me tell you, that when all means seem to lie dead before us, then to
cast your self upon immediate providence, for God to work, is no sinful
tempting of God; and therefore I said, to cast your selves upon any immediate
providence, when means fail not, is to tempt God: but when all means have left
you, then to trust God, and try what he will do, is no tempting of God: Did not
Jehoshaphat with the whole Church do so? We have no might against this great
company: 2 Chronicles 20. 12.
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee; that is, to look and
try what thou will do. Sirs, Is God tied to means, or will you tie God to
means? when means fail, will God fail his people?

Yes, you will say, in this very point lies the case, for when all means are
gone, and have left us, it is a sign that God is leaving and giving over to
help; for as means presenting it self, is a sign of Gods Will to help, so when
all means are gone, it is a sign that God is giving over to help: and therefore
we must sit down, and leave off to act faith.

This is indeed a rational arguing, according to nature, but not according to
faith: and therefore let me tell you, you are quite mistaken; for when death
sits upon the lips of the second cause, and speaks nothing but terror, then,
even then, you are to believe, and put God to work for you: Although Habbak. 3.
17. 18, 19.
the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall the fruit be in the vines, the
labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock
shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet I
will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation: The Lord God
is my strength, and he will make my feet like hindes feet, and he will make me
to walk upon mine high places. Here the Church believes, when all means are out
of the way.

This is no tempting of God, because you have his promise: the promise and
faith is the buckle and clasp fit for one another; now the Lord does not only
promise to help his children, but he promises to help when all means fail: When
the poor Isa. 41. 17, 18
and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst,
I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them: I will
open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of the valleys: I will
make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry-land springs of water.

Ah, ye Christians! that you would believe at this day: Will ye only believe
when means are strong, and have life in them? ye have read of the unbelief of
the people of Israel, when they were in the wilderness, they wanted ordinary
provision, and they murmured, and were full of unbelief, so that the Lord was
angry with them, and slew them, and they never came into the land of Canaan:
but I pray, what was their unbelief, for which God did slay them? was it this
that they did not believe when they had means? No; but that they did not
believe when all means failed, this was their unbelief. You say you are afraid
to believe, when you have no means, because God has commanded you to use the
means: But know, I pray you,

1. There is a time when God takes away the means to try our faith: And how
do thou know, whether this be not the day and the time? Thou say thou
can not believe, because means fail; it may be, it is the time of thy trial,
God sends this time of purpose to try thee.

2. God has commanded you to use the means when you have them, but where has
God forbidden you to trust in him when you have no means?

2. God is tempted, when men are addicted too much to the means: as Thomas,
when the disciples told him, We have John 20. 25.
seen the Lord; said he, except I shall see in his hands the print of the
nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into
his side, I will not believe. What was this but to tempt Christ? Sirs, when we
prescribe God the manner, the measure, then we tempt and try God.

3. They tempt God, that use unlawful means; for all that Vsu illicitorum.
own a God, will grant that all means work in virtue of the first cause, and
can do nothing without a Divine Presence, and therefore all expect Gods
blessing in the use of means. We (say you) must use the means, and God must
give the blessing, and therefore when ye use unlawful means, ye tempt God to
cooperate with means unlawful; you try him whether he will bestow his
concurrence with you in a way unlawful; you prove him whether he will make his
Providence go along with you in indirect means to serve your end: He that tells
a lie to prevent a danger, or save his life, tempts God, and trys him to
favor, and bless that lie unto his safety.

4. Men tempt the Knowledge of God, when they make trial, whether God is
acquainted with things below, and knows what they are doing. When Ananias and
Saphira sold their Acts 5. 9.
possession, and kept back part of the price, says Peter, How is it that ye
have agreed together to tempt the spirit of the Lord? Whether these did
purposely go about to tempt the Spirit, or no, is questioned; if so, then it
was an intentional and direct tempting of the Spirit: However, though they did
not intend it, yet 'twas an interpretative tempting of the Spirit, that is, it
is called a tempting of the Spirit, and taken to be such, because it was such a
fact, as they could do no more, who had intended to tempt the Spirit.

But how was the Spirit of God tempted in this Act of theirs? The act did tend,
(though it may be, they did not intend it), I say, the act did tend to this, to
make a trial, whether the Spirit knew their fraud, or not, and knowing of it,
whether he would punish it: Their act spoke in this language (as if themselves
had said), Can it be, that the Spirit should know or find out our deceit? And
so the meaning of Peter's words [ How is it, that ye have agreed together to
tempt the spirit of the Lord?] is this, How is it that ye have Deodat. in loc.
agreed together to make a profane trial, whether he knew your fraud, or no?
As if by this secret and fraudulent conveyance, you would try or make an
experience whether the spirit were privy to your deceit, or no.

Thus, Sirs, when men sin in secret, they tempt Gods Knowledge; it may be not of
set-purpose, but their actions tend to it: Is Gods eye upon us? can we not sin,
but God must know it? can we be nowhere out of his Presence? Their actions
behind the curtain, put God to the trial, whether he sees them, or no.

Hypoorites tempt Gods Knowledge: they do (as it were) make a trial, whether the
beams of his Knowledge reach the dark center of their hearts, and his eyes read
their cunning ends, and self-designs: to play the Hypocrites, and carry on
private Interests under the veil of profession; what is it, but to try whether
they cannot hide their plots from God?

But oh fools! for, does the influence of the Sun and Stars pierce down into
the deep bosom of the earth, and there beget metals and minerals, and shall
not Gods Knowledge much more reach the heart of man? The Lord knows the thoughts
Psalm. 94. 11.
of man, that they are vanity.

5. They tempt God, who without a call cast themselves into danger, to make
trial whether God can, or will deliver them. Scripture teaches us, that when
danger is upon us, we may hope well, relying on God for help; but we must not
cast our selves rashly into danger, that God may help: we may trust God in
difficulties, that he will help, but we must not throw our selves into
difficulties, expecting God to help. This was Satan's method of tempting Christ,
he would have had Mat. 4. 5, 6.
Christ to cast himself down from the Pinnacle of the Temple, that is, throw
himself into danger, and try whether God would not preserve him, For it is
written (says he) he shall Psalm. 91. 11, 12.
give his angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands they shall bear
thee up: lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone. But says Christ,
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, that is, by casting thy self without a
call into danger: for Satan, though he alleged Scripture, yet hides some words
which show the meaning of it. The Psalmist says, He shall give his angels
charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: and what are thy ways, but
actions agreeable to thy calling, and thy duty? And thus he shall give his
Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways, that is, in those
courses that are appointed thee of God.

But these words, To keep thee in all thy ways, the Devil leaves them out, and
clips the sentence, and therefore Christ tells him, It is written again, thou
shall not tempt the Lord thy God; that is, by going out of our way, and casting
our selves into danger without a call, and then say the Lord will deliver us.
It had been contrary to Christ's way, and his duty, to have thrown himself down
from the Pinnacle of the Temple: he had gone out of his way, had he done so.

Sirs, when we go out of Gods precincts, we go out of Gods protection: a King
undertakes the safety of his Subjects, whilst they travel within due hours, and
keep the Kings highway, else not: so has God promised to preserve us, and his
Angels to take charge over us, while we hold his way.

If a man should throw himself into a deep River, where in an ordinary way he
could not but be drowned, and say, God is able to preserve me, and make me swim
out; you will say, he is a madman, his faith is frenzy, and it is a most horrid
and prodigious tempting of God.

So they tempt God, that engage themselves to afflictions, to poverty, loss of
estate, without a call: and therefore they that suffer, must be sure they have
a good ground, and a good cause, and truth of their side, else they sinfully
tempt God to provide for them.

Hitherto I refer wilful and indiscreet marriages: when persons, neither of
whom have any competent subsistence, shall marry together; they know not how to
live and maintain themselves, and yet say, God will provide, this is to tempt
God: they cast themselves into the disaster of irremediable poverty, and into
the deep gulf of a thousand sorrows and temptations, and yet say God will
provide, what is this, but a sottish and sinful tempting of the Lord God? So
they that expose themselves to the occasions and temptations of sin, saying God
will keep them from sin, these tempt God.

As servants that will venture to live in Papists houses, and say, God will
preserve us from contagion, or when servants cast themselves into a profane
family, and say, God (I hope) will not suffer me to be the worse for it, or
when serious christians shall make choice to tie themselves in marriage to
profane and carnal persons: or when a man shall engage himself to sinful
company, and say, Though they be naught, God will keep me, and take care of me,
all these tempt God: as if a man should throw himself into the fire, and say I
shall not burn, God will keep me; or, as if a man should run himself into an
house where the plague is, and say, God will keep me from infection.

6. God is tempted, when we are not satisfied with his revealed will,
sufficiently made known to us, but require further arguments, and so put him to
the trial. And thus we may tempt God in point of Doctrine; when we will not sit
down content (I say) with the revealed will of God, when we refuse to believe
that which is testified to be his Will, but require more arguments thereof, as
of a matter still uncertain. Acts 15. 7.
When some Teachers would have imposed Circumcision upon the believing
Gentiles, Peter argued against it:

1. Because God sent him to Preach the Gospel to Cornelius, and his Family, and
others his Kinsmen and Friends, whom he had called together, all of them
uncircumcised Gentiles. God would have the Gospel Preached to them, and they
accordingly had, and received the faith, and yet were not circumcised: this was
one argument, why they should not be circumcised.

2. God also (says Peter) gave them the Holy Ghost, even Verse. 8.
as he did unto us: and by this, God which knows the hearts bare them
witness; that is, by giving them the Holy Ghost, testified from heaven, that
they were accepted of him, though they were not circumcised; and therefore,
says he, Why tempt Verse. 10.
ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples? Ye tempt God by urging
Circumcision upon them; that is, your laying that yoke on the
Gentile-Christians after such evidences of Gods will to the contrary, is a
tempting of God.

Sinners, you thus tempt God, you tempt God, who believe not his clear
dictates, but call into question his certain commands. God commands ye to be
holy, and to walk strictly and exactly; yet you doubt of it, whether it be so
or no; you think you need not be so holy: though the Command revealed is clear
as the Sun, yet you doubt whether God himself be so strict, or whether his will
is, that you should walk by so strict a rule; now you tempt God, and try him
whether he made such Commands seriously, or in jest, whether he be in earnest,
or in sport, when he says, Be ye holy, for I am holy.

7. They tempt God, that lay unnecessary yokes upon the necks of the disciples.
As Peter says, Why tempt ye God, to Act. 15. 10.
put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, etc. Deodate gives this gloss upon
it, Why do ye make a rash trial without any necessity or command, even with
danger of sinister success, whether God will give them the will to submit
themselves to a burden so odious to them, and the power of bearing it, without
being moved to impatience and revolt? arguing, that such a course was to make
the poor Gentile-Christians to revolt from the Gospel of Christ.

8. Doubting hearts tempt the Lord, Can the Lord forgive? or will the Lord
forgive such a sinner as I am? This comes to that pass in the 78th Psalm. v.
18, 19. They tempted God in their heart, they said, Can God furnish a table in
the wilderness? Poor souls, let us pity one another: our doubting, is a
tempting of God: let us then throw our selves upon his free promise, and fear
nothing.

9. Men may tempt God in holy duties.

1. When we perform holy duties in our sins: and here we tempt God [ in
excessu] in the excess, with too much confidence: men will pray to God in their
sins, they will approach his Presence, face him in duties, call him father, be
bold with him in their addresses, come every day before him, and yet keep their
sins. Call him father, and yet hate the Saints; what an impudent tempting of
God is this? they challenge him to be their God, and yet hate holiness: they
will perform religious duties, and yet scorn at Religion.

2. We tempt God in holy duties, by cold and indifferent performance. Sirs,
consider, oh consider seriously, you pray, it may be, but you pray with
slightness of heart; there is a certain wantonness, and trifling disposition in
the heart, that you are wont to be superficial and imperfect in your ways:
perhaps you will not leave off duties, but you do them; as if you did them not,
without heart, in a loose, lazy, formal, lifeless manner; now ye tempt God,
both the majesty and the mercy of God is despised: and can God be well-pleased
with such things? If ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? Mal. 1.
8.
and if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy
governor; [that is, try him with such a gift], and will he be pleased with
thee, or accept thy person? No: he will not; showing that when you offer such
gifts to God, you do but tempt him, and try his patience. It is an high
presumption, and temptation of God, to offer that to God, which we durst not do
to a superior mortal man; to perform duties to God with a slight heart, it is
a slighting of God.

3. A man tempts God in holy duties, when we do them to try God what he will do
for us, in things of which we have no promise: as when men have tried all ways
and means of their own to be rich, and all will not do; now they will become
religious, and set up duties in their families, to try this way also; if God
will prosper them in the world, and give them of the dew of heaven, and the
fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine: and here is a double sin,

1. In that they make Religion to serve the world, and subordinate Divine
duties to carnal and earthly ends: here Religion is the means, and the world
set up as the end: the end is always (in the intention of the agent) nobler
than the means: they that worship God for the world, have an higher esteem of
the world, than they have of God or his worship.

They tempt God to give them outward things, which (it may be) he will not:
thus Balaam tempted God.

10. They tempt God, who dare God, and try his patience, 1 Cor. 10. 9. Neither
let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of
serpents. Neither let us tempt Christ, that is, let us not by our provoking
sins dare Christ, and try his patience, whether he will make good upon us his
threats against sin: when we go on in sin, we make (as it were) undue trials of
his mercy and patience: to tempt God, Grotius in locum.
is to make an experiment how far his patience will go, and how long it will
endure and hold out.

11. They tempt God, who try him whether he will not be better than his word:
Sinners cannot deny, but the Word of God says, Neither fornicators, nor
idolaters, nor adulterers, 1 Cor. 6. 8, 9.
nor thieves, nor drunkards, nor covetous, nor extortioners shall inherit the
kingdom of God. They see this, they that are guilty of these sins, see this,
and cannot deny it; yet they hope, that though this be Gods word, yet he will
be better than his word. We hope God will not be so strict, and so severe as he
says; we trust he will give a relaxation, and will not do all he says in his
word; if God will be as precise as his word, we are undone; if God will be no
better than his word, woe to us.

O ye tempters of God! how can ye be saved? I say, this is to tempt God,
whether he be firm to his own word, or no; constant to his own sayings, or no;
this is, Facere Deum ludionem and ridiculum, I say, this is to make God a mere
stageplayer, ridiculous in his most grave transactions: What is this, but to
make him light and unconstant to his most solemn pronunciations?

12. They tempt God, who live in known sins against the manifest word of God;
they make a trial of him, whether he will punish them for their sins, or no:
whether he can be angry, or will be angry with sin, or no: this is
Interpretativa tentatio, a tempting of God by Interpretation. Sirs, as often as
men sin against their own consciences, they do presumptuously tempt God, or try
whether God will be just, or no; whether he be holy, or no: thou love such a
sin, and live in it; now thou temptest God, whether he loves it and likes it
also; and at length thou think that God is such a one as thy self.

13. They tempt God, who attempt things above their parts and power, confiding
in the Divine assistance, which is not promised them: thus many tempt God by
entering into the Ministry; they undertake a great work, and are not underlaid
with a stock of abilities, but they venture upon confidence of Divine
assistance: but where has God promised thee his assistance? he never promised
his assistance to those that are unable: he fits for the Ministry, but never
promised assistance to the unfit.

14. They that put off their repentance from the present to the future-time,
and doubt not but God will give them grace and conversion whenever they list,
tempt God exceedingly. To repent, and turn to God, is a work above the sphere
of man's ability: who can change his own heart? Oh! but God will meet me with
his assistance hereafter: poor man, Who told thee so? I am sure God never did.

15. They tempt God, who bring Gods Actions to the test and trial; who subject
his dealings to unjust examinations.

16. To conclude. Some men tempt God to sin, were he capable of such a
temptation. Indeed James says of God, Jam. 1. 13.
that he is (...), God cannot be tempted with evil, or tempted to evil; yet
many are so audacious as to tempt God to do evil.

Use 1. The Use is this. Oh let this point humble us: for who of us have not
been tempters of the Lord, both in our days of unregeneracy, and since we gave
up our names unto him; both in our days of unbelief, and since also in our days
of faith?

When we loved and lived in sin, how did we continually tempt God, and since he
manifested and revealed himself unto us, how often, how often have we tempted him
most unkindly, and unfriendly? God may say to every one of us, You Numb. 14. 22.
have tempted me these ten times: How have we indulged known sins? and favored
secret lusts, and prayed free grace to accept of us in our beloved sins, and
tried his mercy to pardon us in our love to sin against his revealed will?

How coldly have we prayed against an endeared corruption? nay have we not
secretly prayed, oh! that God would spare me this sweet sin? oh! that God were
of my mind, that I might enjoy this pleasing sin: have we not at least tacitly
wooed God to a compliance with us! and how indifferently have we conflicted
with our pleasing sins, as if we were loath to over come them?

How often have we tempted God with our impatience, our murmurings, our
unbelief and discontents? How often in our afflictions have we called God to an
account, brought his Actions to the test, and subjected his dealings to our
unjust examinations? and tried them by our touchstone?

Use 2. The second Use. Oh then let us take heed of this great sin of tempting
God: Sirs, you may trust him, you may not tempt him: God by all his promises
meant to encourage your faith, not your presumption.

1. To tempt God, is a grieving of God: The Psalmist brings in God speaking
thus to the Jews, When your Fathers Psalm. 95. 9, 10.
tempted me, and proved me, and saw my works: Forty years long was I grieved
with this generation. Tempting of God through unbelief, and not submitting to
his Government, is a vexing of his Spirit, and a provoking of him to reject the
sinner; Forty years long was I grieved with this Verse. 11.
generation -- unto whom I swear in my wrath, that they should not enter into
my rest: They tempted God, and this grieved him, and vexed him, and then he
swear, they should not enter his rest.

2. To tempt God, is a destroying sin: Neither let us tempt 1 Cor. 10. 9.
Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of serpents.

Use 3. A last Use shall be to give you some antidotes, and then I have done.

1. You must get the clear eye of faith: by faith sometimes we understand the
promises; when we do not, the work of faith is to commit the soul to God, as
unto a faithful creator: Faith will tell thee, when God frowns upon thee, he
loves thee: Faith will help thee to commit thy soul unto God, Jobs afflictions
made way for him to heaven.

2. Stay his leisure, whatever your wants and conditions are, stay his leisure,
go not before God, stay his leisure; if thou will be but content to stay Gods
leisure, thou will never go out of the way: set faith and grace at work to help
thee to look upon the time as short: the mercy when it comes, will be
infinitely sweeter than if thou should pull it off with thine own hand: this
will help thee to wait Gods leisure.

3. Contentation is a rich antidote against tempting of God. The defect of this
Contentation leads us into many temptations and sins, both against God, while
we murmur at his will and dealings with us.

And against our neighbor, whose prosperous estate, being better than ours, we
envy at. And therefore, sirs, if we have food and raiment, let us be therewith
content, that we may not trouble the waters, nor disquiet God nor our own souls.

AN ACCOUNT OF Christian Piety.
2 Timothy III. 12. Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution.
PAVL was the Author of this Epistle; the person to whom he Writes it, was one
that had much of Paul's heart, 2 Timothy 1. 2.
Timothy, whom he styles, his dearly beloved Son; not by natural, but, 1. By
spiritual generation: Paul begot him to God by the Ministry of the Gospel.

2. And Timothy was also Paul's Son by imitation; he took Paul's stamp upon him,
and resembled him, as a natural Son does his Father; and therefore Paul in his
first Epistle calls him (...); his right Son, his true Son, one that followed
him to an hair, 1 Timothy 1. 2.
not spurious, nor degenerate.

3. And therefore he was Paul's Son in affection: Paul loved him, as any Father
ever did a Son; and he Paul, as any Son ever did a dear Father.

And therefore in both his Epistles, the Ink in which Paul dips his pen, were
his warmest Bowels, to write to his beloved Timothy.

The design of these Epistles, is various instructions, teaching Timothy, how
he should govern the Church, which he calls the house of God, what Doctrines
also he should Preach to the Church; and several Admonitions exciting him to
read and study, study and read the Scriptures, to execute his office with an
intrepid spirit, to be indefatigable in Preaching the Gospel, 2 Timothy 4. 2.
(...), in season, and out of season. In a word, to fear nothing in the race of
his Ministry, but act resolution, fortitude, and patience in bearing the
afflictions of the Gospel.

In this Context (where our words lie) Paul would settle and corroborate
Timothy [ab exemplo], by setting himself A causa procatarctica. Verse. 10, 11,
12.
an example before him. But thou have fully known my Doctrine, manner of life,
purpose, faith, long-suffering, charity, patience, persecutions, afflictions --
yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.

In which words you have,

1. An Act. And,

2. The Object.

First, Here is Timothies Act, Thou have fully known, all these things in me,
which (I hope) will raise up your spirit to do the like; (...), Thou have fully
known.

The Object which Timothy knew so fully, is expressed by Induction.

1. Of Paul's Virtues.

2. And of his Sufferings.

First, His virtues; Thou (O Timothy) have fully known my Doctrine, manner of
life, purpose, faith, long-suffering, charity, patience.

Secondly, His sufferings: Thou (O Timothy) have fully known my persecutions,
afflictions.

1. And they are described [ a circumstantia loci, or ubi], from the places,
where his afflictions and persecutions met him, Which came unto me at Antioch
at Iconium, at Lystra, what persecutions I endured.

2. From the event or consequent of them, [ But out of them Or, a Contrario.
all the Lord delivered me].

3. From the common subject of them, or from the community of them: they are [
accidentia communia] common accidents; yea, and all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. And therefore you must not be scared at
them, Timothy, but resolve to have your share in them with such noble
companions.

The words are a Proposition, Categorical and Affirmative; for they affirm that
all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. Where you
have,

1. The Subject, i. e. the persons who are spoken of, and they are all that
will live godly in Christ Jesus.

2. The Praedicate, or the thing that is spoken or said of them, and that is,
They shall suffer persecution.

And the Proposition is universal also, for it affirms that all that will live
godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.

I shall not discourse of the Praedicate, or latter part of the Proposition,
namely, the Godly's suffering of persecution, for this is a common Theme; and
it is so true, even to our sense and experience, that I need not speak to it.

I shall therefore confine my self to the Subject, or first part of the
Proposition, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus]; because I think it most
concerns us to know what it is to be godly in Christ Jesus, for herein the
Knowledge of our eternal interests lies: and if we can discern, that we are
godly in Christ Jesus, we shall easily deduce our Title to Christ, and a Right
to eternal glory in him.

Now in our discourse upon this subject, we must inquire,

First, What is meant by godly?

Secondly, Why this expression [ in Christ Jesus] is added, and what it
imports, all that are godly in Christ Jesus.

1. What it is to be godly: The words are, All that will [(...)], live godly,
or after a godly sort; now godly presupposes godliness, as the Concret does
the Abstract: for godly and godliness are [ Conjugata] Conjugates, and godly
men are denominated, or called so from godliness.

Now (...), godliness, among other sounds it gives in Scripture, speaks or
signifies Religion, or the true way of worship of God.

2. Having now showed you what the word [ godly] means, we come to the Addition
[ in Christ Jesus]: All that will live godly in Christ Jesus. For we might
easily suppose, that it had been enough for the Apostle to have said, All that
will live godly, shall suffer persecution: Why then does he say, or what need
had he to add, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus?

I Answer,

1. This expression [ in Christ Jesus] is added as [ specifica differentia], a
specifical difference to distingush the Christian Religion from all the rest:
[(...),] to be Religious, or Religion is the Genus, and [ in Christ Jesus] is
the difference Constitutiva.
constituting the essence of true Religion, putting it under such a kind, and
dividing it from all other Religions, as from Divisiva.
Judaism, which hates Christ, and Graecism, or Ethnicism, which derides Christ,
and all salvation by him.

The Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 22, 23.
but we preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the
Greeks foolishness. The Jews sought salvation by their legal righteousness, and
the Greeks by their moral virtues, the Christians by Christ crucified. And so
the meaning is this, All that will live godly, or religiously in Christ Jesus,
that is, that profess the Religion of Christ, or the Christian Religion, they
whose Religion is Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. And so they did in
those days, those Primitive times, when the very name of Christ was so hated by
the Jews, and the Doctrine of salvation by Christ (in opposition to all their
Gods) was so impugned by the Gentiles.

Yet, because Christian Religion requires the highest holiness, and therefore
carries a Divine Energy and virtue in it to supernatural actions, it consists
not in word only, but in power. No Religion sanctifies, but this that is of
Christ Jesus; what she teaches, she infuseth into the hearts of her Children;
she is spirit and life, because she carries Christ in her; and Jesus Christ
came to reform and renew the world, to destroy sin, and dethrone Satan, and
bring down Heaven upon the Earth, and put God and Man into an Unity again.

2. Therefore this expression [ in Christ Jesus] speaks not only an outward
profession of Christ Jesus, but also an Union with Christ Jesus, and an oneness
with him: So that to be godly in Christ Jesus, is to be one with Christ Jesus;
for this is the high privilege which Christian Religion puts upon her true
Disciples, that Christ dwells in them, and they dwell in him. This is an high
Divinity; they are united to Jesus Christ, as the branch to the tree, the graft
to the stock, the members to the head; and if united, then they must also be
one with him, and by reason of this unity, do not only partake of his grace,
but also his spirit and life, in the same manner as we say, the members move
not themselves, nor live but by the life of their head. So that to live
christianly, it is not enough to say that we must be in grace, but we must live
in the spirit and life of Jesus: Forasmuch as we are one with Christ, we must
live his life, and be acted and guided by his Spirit. That life of Union which
makes us one with him, causes us to live in his spirit and life. Not I, but
Christ Jesus Gal. 2. 20.
lives in me: And therefore the life of a Christian, is the life of God
himself, who lives in us by his Son. Whence it follows, that as the Father
lives in the Son, and the Son in the Father; so we live in Jesus, and Jesus in
us: and because Jesus lives in us, the Father also lives in us; as you may find
in Job. 14. 23. If any man love me, he will keep my words, and my father will
love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.

3. This expression [ in Christ Jesus] speaks causality; because all that live
godly, are in Christ Jesus, as the effect in its cause, they have all their
Being of grace from Jesus Christ: I say, they are in Christ, as the effect in
its cause.

They are in Christ Jesus, as

1. In the efficient cause.

2. In the exemplary cause.

3. In the conserving and supporting cause of all their graces.

1. They must be in Christ as in the efficient cause of all their graces. For
God in giving us Christ in our nature, makes him thereby the principle of a new
life in us, and wills, that as himself is the principle of the life of his Son
in eternal generation; so his Son should be the principle of our life in the
new Regeneration of our souls, with the washing of Ephesians. 5. 26. John 5. 21.
water by the word. As the Father raises up the dead, and quickneth them, even
so the Son quickneth whom he will, whether dead in their graves, or dead in
their sins. And again, As the Father has life in himself, so has he given the
Son to Verse. 26.
have life in himself: i. e. to give life to others.

2. The godly are in Christ as their exemplary cause. They form up themselves
to him. Men cannot be godly, unless they make Christ their Samplar; so that to
live godly in Christ Jesus, is to act and live like unto Jesus Christ, to make
him the Idaea of our graces, and the partern of our life. All that wear the
name of godly upon them, are obliged to imitate Jesus Christ: The greatest
honor we can give him, is to conform our selves to his life and intentions; to
imitate Jesus Christ, maintains our adherence to him. I beseech you, observe
it, we adhere no longer to Christ, than we are like him, and we are not in him,
if we do not imitate him.

Our life then must be a lively Image of the life of Jesus Christ. The first
use a Christian is to make, is to look upon the Son of God as the Prototype and
Exemplar of his life and actions, to express and represent him (as it were) to
the life. As the Son of God is the Image and Resemblance of his Father, so must
the Christian be of the Son. We must be by grace, what Jesus is by nature: the
Son of God is the true life, and true model of our life.

Our interior and exterior life then must imitate and regard the exercises of
the soul of Jesus Christ, and the actions of his sacred life.

What Paul says in another case. As we have born the 1 Cor. 15. 49.
image of the earthly [Adam], so shall we also bear the image of the heavenly,
i. e. of Christ's glory; when we come to glory; so as we have born the Image of
Adam, imitating him by sin, and following him by our own inclinations, we must
also bear the Image of Jesus Christ copying out his life and actions.

God gave us a Law as a Rule of life; but he gives us a living Law, a living
Rule, and form of life in Christ, and shows us in him the manner of
conversation that we must follow, to live christianly, that is, to live a new
life.

My Beloved, we should never have understood the dimensions of life, as it
lies in the law, had we not seen it acted in Christ Jesus. By looking on, and
taking some measure of the excellent life of Jesus Christ, we come to know what
the life of holiness is, that is commanded in the law.

And, observe it, The Lord Christ came not only to set himself before us to
imitate him, but to give us a grace and power to imitate him, and put on his
likeness: As Paul says, I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

Consider it seriously, Many because they lean upon Christ for pardon, and upon
his righteousness alone for salvation, believe lustily, that they are in Christ
Jesus. But ye are not in Christ, till ye live his life; your vital imitation of
Christ, speaks your Union to Christ; if you are not like him, you do not live
in him.

To imitate Christ,

1. We must shun all manner of sin; for he knew no sin. 2 Cor. 5. 21. 1 Pet. 2.
22.
And again, it is said of him, Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his
mouth. And it is said there, That he left us an Verse. 21.
example, that ye should follow his steps, who did no sin, neither was guile
found in his mouth. So then here lies our imitation of Christ, that as he had
no sin, so we must strive to have no sin in us. And, my Beloved, to what end
are we religious, and pray, and put on a devout form upon our selves, if we
favor our sins in us? To pray against sin, and yet indulge sin us, is to play
the greatest hypocrites: to pray like Christ, and not live like Christ, is the
rankest dissimulation.

And that you may put your selves into a perfect resemblance of Jesus Christ,
you must mortify nature in you; for Christ was pure in his nature, he was not
only free from acts of sin, but had an unstained nature: and therefore to be
like Christ, you must get all stains of sin out of your nature; you most
mortify the Spirit and Inclinations of Adam in you; you must root out of the
foundation of your soul, I say, you must put out of the very foundation of your
Being, all hidden principles, all oppositions, inclinations and customs
contrary to holiness.

And therefore Mortification (which is in a manner lost among Christians) must
be both inward and outward, nay chiefly of the inward man. The keen edg of
Mortification must fall directly upon the root, the nature of man, the heart
and spirit of Adam in us.

And therefore, though to abstain from gross sins, makes a fair and goodly show
in the flesh, yet it is insignificant, and stands for nothing before God and
Christ without the other.

Spiritual sins are the souls poison, the souls death: and there is no carnal
sin could reign in us, were it not held up by some spiritual sin: spiritual sin
is the root upon which all carnal sins grow. Spiritual sins are the Devils
sins, he cannot act bodily and fleshly sins; he can be no drunkard, nor
adulterer; he is a spirit, and sins as a spirit: so are those sins we speak of,
proper to the souls nature that is a spirit; as self-love, hatred of God,
Idolatry, error in the mind and understanding, admiring of our selves, seeking
our own glory, pride, unbelief, fears, cares, desires.

These are spiritual wickednesses, by these are we set farthest from God; nay
by these we become Anti-Gods, and are the very pictures of the Devil; he cannot
be a drunkard, or adulterer, but he can be proud, and envious, and malicious,
and contentious, and self-seeking, and vainglorious, and in these we play the
Devils.

And therefore I say, our Mortification must be inward, it must fall upon our
inward and spiritual man of sin within us.

And therefore by Mortification we understand not only corporal austerities,
such as affect the sense, as macerations, fastings, and other external
exercises, which rob the sense of what is most agreeable to it, which though
they be good, and sometimes necessary, yet are not the principal; but we intend
(I say) inward Mortification, whereby a man purifies his heart, annihilates the
sources within, drys up the fountains, and pulls up the inward roots of vice;
he dies to himself, kills the seeds of self-love, though hid in every thing,
gets victory over himself and his inclinations; his principal care is to
annihilate his reason, and understanding, his will, his intentions, his
desires, his propensities, as far as they are corrupted, choosing in all things
that which is most pure.

And now he becomes most conformable to the spirit and purity of Jesus Christ.

And therefore to this he wholly addicts himself; herein he is very vigilant,
he knows it generally as a maxim, that the more the heart of man is filled with
the creatures, and the love and regard of himself, the more he is separated
from God, void of his spirit and true virtue.

2. To imitate Jesus Christ, is not only to do what is good, but to do it in
the spirit and disposition of Jesus.

Men will be doing good actions, they cannot help it, they have so much light,
and are so inwardly convinced; but we must remember that our actions must be so
done, as to be Christian, and worthy the Son of God. They must be holy, and to
be holy, they must be accomplished in the spirit, and by the principle of
grace, i. e. the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Jesus. Our actions, to be Christian,
must be done in the spirit and disposition of Jesus Christ; that is, Christ
must do them in us, the spirit of Christ must act them in us: we must do all
with the very heart of Jesus Christ; you know all our good actions are nothing
without the heart, My son, give me thy heart. Now the heart from which we do
them, must be the very heart of Christ in us. Thus Paul gives witness of
himself: God is my Record, how greatly I long after you all, in Phil. 1. 8.
the bowels of Jesus Christ. So, if you reprove sinners, if you tell others
their faults, if you do works of mercy, you must do all in the bowels of Jesus
Christ.

So then, it is not enough barely to do what the Son of God has done; we may
deceive our selves herein, believing we do much when we do nothing of value;
because Jesus Christ being man as we are, and conversing among them, no doubt
but we may find some conformity and resemblance to him, even among the wicked
in the common states of men. Many suffer, and are oppressed, many poor and
humbled, many sequester themselves from the pomp of the Court, and live in the
obscurity of a retired life; many fast and pray, and do almost all the outward
actions, that the Son of God did upon the earth. He was man as we are, we are
men as he was; he did good, we do some good; this is no imitation of him.

The reason is, because it is not enough to do what he did; but we must do it
with the spirit, in the disposition, and by the sacred principle that he
operates. This few persons mind: it is not enough to do, but we must do it by a
principle of grace, not of general grace (comprised under the common name we
give to all the gifts of God), but of grace which gives us Christ, communicates
to us his spirit, and puts us into the holy disposition of his soul; and doing
all things by this principle, we imitate the Son of God, so far, that our
natural and common actions are withdrawn from their meanness, and are of great
account with God, as being operated by the same principle, and with the same
dispositions of the Son of God.

Herein appears the great difference between Christian virtues, and moral or
humane. A man that has refined principles and perfections, and acts according
to them, may be called good; but a man that is in Christ, is a new creature,
and has another goodness, a new goodness, and his actions are conformable to
this new Being and life. To difference Christian virtues from Moral, we must be
one with Christ, and consequently must not operate but with him; for this cause
he gives us his spirit whereby we act, or he acts in us. It follows, they are
not so much our virtues, our graces, as these of Jesus in us.

The spirit and disposition of Jesus Christ in all his services looked upon the
Will of God, the glory of his Father: I seek John 5. 30. John 6. 38. John 8.
49, 50. John 7. 18.
not mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. I came down from heaven,
not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. And again, I honor
my father, I seek not mine own glory: He that speaks of himself, seeks his
own glory: but he that seeks his glory that sent him, [as Christ did] the
same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him. You see what Christ aimed at,
and which way his spirit and disposition looked out, in all his actions the
will of his Father, the glory of his Father; and in pursuit of that does what
is most contrary to his own interests, conceals nothing, though it cost him
never so dear to declare it: his Fathers honor only sat upon his spirit.

Now if you would truly and rightly imitate Jesus Christ, you must not only be
found doing good, but you must do it in the spirit and disposition of Jesus
Christ. Thou must not honor thy self, nor seek it from others; you must not
attend your own advantages, somewhat of glory or profit to your selves, but
labor only the bringing honor to God. If we imitate Christ, Jesus Christ does
all in us, acting and referring all our actions to the glory of his Father, as
Christ did; so must the Christian, his center must be the bosom of God, all his
actions and sufferings must be pure, and referred to the glory of God; his
intentions must look only upon God, his desires must be only to please God, his
care only to follow God, his contentment wholly in God. Thus, I say, his
thoughts, his designs, his works must bear the Image of Jesus Christ; he must
do all of God, all to God, and all for God.

3. We must imitate Jesus Christ in self-denial.

4. We must imitate Jesus Christ in accepting humiliations and sufferings. If
any man will be my disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and
follow me. The Apostle also, who is but the echo of Christ, resounds the same
lesson, when he says, That Jesus Christ suffered for us, [and that 1 Pet. 2.
21.
we must imitate him] leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps.
After this surely we cannot in reason find any thing hard; for if Christ from
his birth to his death has espoused sufferings, and embraced the cross:
Wherefore should we refuse [being his Children] to live and dye as he did? For
as the Christian must be the Image of Christ, so he must bear with Jesus Christ
all sorts of commotions, and pains, humiliations and sufferings, that our life
may be an express Image of his life, which appeared always in desertions,
lowness, and sufferings; so ours must be but the same state of sufferings, when
he calls us thereunto.

5. Imitate Jesus Christ in love: the love of a Christian must be the same with
that of Jesus. Herein appears the great difference between Christian virtues,
and Moral or Humane. For instance,

The love that God requires of a Christian, must not be,

1. That of a Pagan, who loves them that love him.

2. Nor that of a Politician, who loves according to his humor or interest.

3. Nor that of a Jew, who loves not but out of an hope of reward promised, or
a fear of judgments.

The love of a Christian must be the same with that of Jesus Christ, that is,
he must love with the same love wherewith Jesus loves; he must love with the
love of Jesus, as he must live the life of Jesus. Walk in love, as Jesus Christ
has John 13. 34.
loved you: I give you (says Christ) a new Commandment, that ye love one
another, AS I HAVE LOVED YOU. To love is no new Commandment, this law was
imprinted in our hearts from the beginning of the world; but the manner of
loving is new, that is, to love by the same love wherewith Jesus loved us. Now
thus must we love, we must love with a new love, the new love of Jesus has
made it a new Commandment. Oh! how great is this love! how pure! how free from
all self-interest! how strong and powerful, since it is the same love that made
Jesus to be born, and dye for us, even then when we were his enemies, and sin
reigning in us!

And therefore we must love our enemies, with the love of Jesus Christ: we must
love our enemies with the same love, wherewith Christ loved us when we were his
enemies. And therefore we must pray for enemies, for so did Christ for his:
Father forgive them; so did Steven, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.

3. Christians are in Christ Jesus, as in the conserving and supporting cause
of their graces. The Saint is in Christ much like as the accident is in its
subject, for as [ Accidentis esse est inesse], the Being of an accident,
consists in its being in the Subject; so the very being of a Christian lies in
his being in Christ; he lives, and his graces live, while he is in Christ; he
is lost, and all his graces are lost, if he be once separated from Christ:
Abide in me, and I in you; as the branch John 15. 4.
cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine, no more can ye
except ye abide in me.

Sirs, Are ye in Christ? be sure you keep in him then, for out of him ye dye
and give up the ghost; as the fish dies out of the water, and the coal dies out
of the fire, so grace dies and expires out of Jesus Christ.

4. This expression [ In Christ Jesus, [All that will live godly in Christ
Jesus] speaks subjection to Christ. We cannot be in Christ, but we must be in
him as our Head and Sovereign; we are in him [as Regnum in Rege] as the
Commonwealth is in a King, that is, in the Power of a King, and as the members
are in the head, under its Regency, to be ruled by its Influence and Authority;
so are we in Christ: we are in him, that we may be under him, to be ruled and
guided by him. The Son of God has infinite rights to US, and we have infinite
obligations to him, which the shortness of our days will not give us leave
sufficiently to admire, nor the weakness of our spirits to comprehend.

The law of subjection to Christ is fundamental, and belongs to the
constitution of Gods spiritual Kingdom: for government, in the very essence of
it, is an order of superiority and subjection; the constitution of government
lies in determining the person that shall govern, and the parties that shall be
governed: so the constitution of this Divine and Spiritual Kingdom of God is in
his appointment of the Sovereignty of Christ, and the Subjection of Man to him.
Sovereign and Subjects are the essential or integral parts which give essence
to government, and constitute its being and existence: to obey is the essence
of Subjects: this subjection is the very essence of the Church, and so of the
Christian.

Our subjection to Christ consists,

1. In an act of Honor and Adoration.

2. In an act of Oblation.

1. In an act of honor and adoration. The Lord Christ, the Son of God, is
infinitely adorable, and we are obliged to honor and adore him with so much
necessity, that the very Devils and Damned are forced in some way to do it. To
form this Act, we must acknowledge Jesus Christ the Son of God, both God and
Man; we must regard him as our Sovereign and Redeemer, as the cause and
principle of all our happiness; we must annihilate our selves before him, and
humble our selves even to the bottom of our souls; we must accept him as our
God, King, and All.

2. Another act of subjection to Jesus Christ, is an act of Oblation; whereby
the soul offers her self wholly to Jesus Christ, and renouncing her self,
resigns into his hand all that she is, all the power that she has over her
self, over all her actions, over all things; and to make her self more the
servant to Jesus in a perfect condition, she renounceth her own liberty, and
all the use she can make thereof, giving it up into the hands of the Son of
God, of whom she received it, granting him all the right that he had to dispose
thereof, to order it as he pleases; that being so resigned to Jesus, she may
not have any thing more, nor be any thing more, but that he may be all, have
all, and operate all in her. This act puts the soul into a perfect denudation,
and makes her entirely dependent upon Christ to be led according to his will.

1. Let us then acknowledge the Sovereignty of Jesus over all creatures, and
over us in particular. Confessing that he is our King and Sovereign; let us
adore his Supreme Authority: it is life and happiness to know and to serve
Jesus Christ.

2. Let us submit actually to his Power, not out of constraint or necessity, as
rebels, or slaves, but out of choice, love, and fidelity, as our Prince and
Jesus.

A Christian in this state looks upon himself only as a servant to Jesus, and
acts in all things only in the spirit of humility and subjection to him.

This state of service is proper and essential to the creature in regard of
God: the creature is essentially dependent and subject to the Creator. It is an
indispensable estate, the creature may as soon cease to be, as cease to depend
on, and be subject to the Creator.

It is essential also unto all Christians: the first step of our entry into the
Church, and into Faith, the first operation of grace upon our souls, is to
become servants to Jesus Christ. This subjection is the first promise we make
to God by a solemn public profession in the Church by baptism; there we devote
our selves to Jesus Christ, to belong to him, to depend on him, and we enter
our selves into the state of servants, and vow our selves to Jesus Christ as
such. So that by one and the same sacrament, we are made the Children of God,
and received his servants; and consequently we are in the house of God, both as
Sons and Servants; yet so, as that we are his Children by grace, his Servants
by nature. The state of subjection is essential to the Creature, and to the
Christian; so the same state is essential to the Piety of Christians, and a
godly life; and therefore they who would establish themselves in Piety or
Godliness, must begin their establishment in this subjection, for we must bear
a relation of love and inclination to Jesus Christ, as we do of purchase and
necessity; we are so much the more Gods, and consequently the more perfect, by
how much we are the more abased and divested of our selves, entirely depending,
and faithfully operating under the Power and Will of him, who makes himself
ours, that we may be his; and has purchased us to himself at an inestimable
rate.

In three points the soul of solid Piety, and the perfection of Christianity
consists,

1. That we are united to Christ as our head, and we his members.

2. That in this Union we live by his Spirit.

3. And follow his motions.

The soul then must resign and offer up to Christ her heart and will, her
understanding and power, to the wisdom, will, and power of Jesus Christ in all
matters of eternal salvation.

This resignation is the root and ground of all obedience and service; by it we
renounce all other Powers, Lords, Masters, Teachers, Redeemers, and especially
the Devil, World, and Flesh, so as to account them our Enemies.

And seeing the person submitting is a guilty person, this resignation cannot
be performed without an inward acknowledgment of his own sin, guilt, baseness,
misery, with godly sorrow; a detestation of sin, and a returning to obedience
again. And being guilty persons, impotent and unable to help our selves; in
this resignation we renounce all confidence in our selves and all other things,
so as wholly to rely upon Gods mercy, and Christ's merit, as without which we
must perish everlastingly, which so works upon us, that by subjection we do
gladly and willingly bind our selves to be his perpetual servants and vassals.

And therefore as according to law, the slave is no more his own, nor has any
right over any thing, but is wholly left to the power and pleasure of his
master; so by this Obligation the Christian puts himself as nothing before
Jesus Christ; he gives place to all his rights of Nature and Grace to be only
the subject of Christ's Power and Divine Will.

And though we are all servants to Jesus Christ by right and purchase, (as we
said before), yet we will be such also out of good will and affection, giving
him a new power over us, i. e. by our own voluntary consent, and free choice,
to be so, that we may be Captives to his love, as well as to his Power, and
submit to the designs of the eternal Father, who Col. 1. 13.
did so graciously deliver us from the power of darkness, and translated us
into the kingdom of his dear son. This, this it is to be in Christ, to be in
Christ, is to be in this subjection to Jesus Christ.

And now, My Beloved, we who say, we have taken Christ, and are in subjection
to him, let us weigh well what we say, and consider with what sincerity and
faithfulness we deal with the Son of God. For seeing that we avouch that we
leave our selves wholly to him in the quality of servants, and make profession
to have nothing which is not his, and of him; and that we yield up all to him,
even to the use of our own life and natural liberty: What have we more to think
of, but sincerely and faithfully to accomplish what we profess? What have we
more to do, but to make our life conformable to what we say? i. e. to subject
our selves in will and deed to the Greatness and Sovereignty of Jesus Christ: I
say, in will and deed, for it would avail but little, to say it only with the
mouth, and have it in the thought, if all our actions be full of our own will;
I say, it were to little purpose to subject our selves by words to the
Sovereignty of Jesus Christ, to the conduct of his Spirit and motions, if in
the management of our life we follow the Spirit of the World, and live in a
continual desire to satisfy our selves and our own inclinations. Let us mind
this, because so many deceive themselves in the godly life, which they so
easily profess, contenting themselves with the superficies, and eglect the rest.

Remember that he, who says, we must adore God in Spirit, said also, we must
adore him in Truth.

5. This expression in Christ Jesus [All that will live godly in Christ Jesus]
speaks the end of a godly life: Christ Jesus is the end of a godly life: they
that live in Christ Jesus, do live to Christ Jesus: to live in Christ Jesus, is
not only to live by the virtue of Jesus Christ, but also to the glory of Jesus
Christ, to seek his praise, and to have his honor in our eye: the godly life
is not only from Christ, but for Christ. And therefore they that live godly in
Christ Jesus, they derive it from him, and direct it to him; they breath for
him, and bring forth all their actions for him: for this is essential to an
Evangelical life, to do all in the strength of Christ as their root, and to do
all for Christ as their end.

And if this be a godly life, to live to Christ; then let us so think of him,
and so do, that from henceforth our hearts and mouths may neither speak nor
think, but of him; that all things else may be of no savor to us, that nothing
enter our spirit, which resenteth not the Spirit and Odor of Jesus Christ, and
respires not his honor and glory. I say, let us be vigilant and faithful to do
and desire nothing but the honor of Christ, to regard nothing but his pleasure
and glory, so as to have no eyes but for Jesus; no more life, but what is
consecrated to the honor of his Sovereignty and Greatness.

Use. We have showed you what a godly life is, and how you may attain a godly
life. Let us now stir you up to attain this godly life.

1. Let me take St. Paul's word to Timothy: that which he recommends to him, is,
Piety; Exercise thy self unto godliness. 1 Timothy 4. 7.


Truly all virtues are good, and all suitable to the state of a Christian, the
acquisition and practice of them all useful and necessary; but he would have
his prime and chief care be, To exercise thy self unto godliness: for godliness
is the Ornament and Mistress of all other virtues; it leads us to God, and
makes use of all virtues to conduct us thither; and having no Object but God,
teaches us the worship and honor that we must render to him, and like a good
mistress, puts us into a ready and easy practice of virtues, and entertains us
in the exercise of actions that honor God, and are acceptable to him.

2. Godliness is profitable: as Paul says in the same place, Bodily exercise
profits little, but godliness is profitable to all 1 Timothy 4. 8.
things, having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to
come.

True godliness is one of the principal foundations on which Christian
perfection stands, and is supported. In the conduct of men all actions and
exercises of their life are ruled according to the Piety, and (as we commonly
say) according to the Devotion they have. If their Piety be not well-laid, the
rest of the Christian life will be unconstant, and its exercises very uncertain
and superficial; as we see in the devotion of many, which is only in the
exterior, Who (as the Apostle says) having the form of godliness, deny [and
despise] the power thereof. In such souls we see nothing solid, nothing but
inconstancy in their lives, imperfection in their actions, disquiet,
disturbance, and adherence to several creatures in their spirits; a small blast
of adversity over-turns them.

Object. But it is an hard thing to be godly: we have Satan opposing us, and he
is too hard for us, besides our own corruptions and strong temptations.

Answ. While we strive to be godly, we may safely expect the Presence of God:
he is never wanting to those that seek after him, and never fails those that
engage in his quarrels. As he who plots sin, shall be sure to find Satan
standing at his right hand; so he that pursues after God and Holiness, shall
find God nearer to him, than he is to himself. God has not forsaken the earth;
but as he sustains the whole universe, much more those who are seeking grace
and participation of himself.

Are you then striving to be godly, and aiming at a Divine life? His almighty
arms will bear you up, and he will cherish you with his own goodness. Wheresoever
God beholds any breathings after himself, he gives life to them, as those which
are his own breath in them: where there is any serious and sober resolution
against sin, any real motion toward God, there is the blessing of heaven in it.
He that planted it, will also water it, and make it to bud and blossom, and
bring forth fruit.

Object. But a godly life is an afflicted life.

Answ. You have heard that grace in us is the life of Jesus in us. We ought
then to know what his life was.

The life of Jesus is, Divinely Humane, and Humanely Divine: he is God and Man,
and therefore lives a life Divine, and a life Humane.

As God, he lives the life of God in the bosom of his Father; a life of Glory,
Power, and Majesty.

As Man, he lived the life of Man in lowness, humiliation, in impotence, in
sufferings; so that at the same, he is living in the bosom of his Father, and
dying on the arms of the Cross.

There he reigns and governs, and judges all the world; here he is accused, and
accursed, condemned and crucified; at the same instant, he is in the exaltation
and greatness of his Majesty, and in the lowness and humiliation of our
Humanity.

Such also ought the Christian life to be: on the one side it is great, seeing
grace makes us the Children of God, elevates and unites us to God. On the other
side the same life is obscured, dejected wholly in the spirit of humiliations
and privations: for grace cannot reign in the soul without operating therein
annihilation, death, and humility.

Again, The Saint by his Union to the Son of God, is raised Ephesians. 2. 6.
up, and made to sit in heavenly places in Jesus Christ. And at the same time
the life of a Christian is exposed here to Temptations, derided by men, and
condemned by the world; at the same time it is in the greatest cherishing of
God, and under the fiercest agitation of the Cross.

So that an afflicted godly life should be no wonder, being compared with the
life of Christ. Besides, God enlightens the soul by grace; it is granted, but
it is in annihilation, he upholds her, but it is in confounding her; he unites
her to him, but it is in separating her sometimes from himself: and she remains
separated from God, as long as she remains upon earth. While we are in the
body, we are absent from the Lord; 2 Cor. 5. 6.
so she is at once united and separated.

Again, This is the Conduct of God over his Church. If we reflect upon the
highest works, we shall find he puts not on the Ornament of Grace, he lays not
the foundation of her estate, but in lowness, his grace, his gifts, his spirit,
and his communications. When did he come down from heaven, and give her his
law, with such appearance of glorious Majesty, as never the like was, but when
he had brought her into a wilderness?

When the Lord Christ instituted the Sacraments, which are Conduit-pipes to
convey his graces to his Church, he chose bread, water, such things as are
mean, little or nothing esteemed among men.

In the Birth of the Church, he took the Cross for the Throne of his Empire, a
Calvary for his Seat-Royal; he rejected an estate by Poverty, Sufferings, and
Martyrdom: and at this day he does the same in the Regency of his Church.

And according to Gods proceedings in the Conduct of his Church, is likewise
his carriage in the sanctification and government of our souls; he leads them
by the Cross, he retires from them, he hides himself, he leaves them in
privations, he humbles them, annihilates them, smites them, overthrows them.

Whereby is discovered, how they are (as I think) deceived, who in their
devotions and religious exercises seek resentments, enjoyments, content and
satisfaction, and would know and feel the excellency and elevations of grace; I
call it a deceit (as I suppose) for Christian grace consists chiefly in
privations, in lowness, in rigours, and that is it they stand most in fear of,
and avoid.

But as the life of Jesus began in poverty, and ended on the Cross; so a
perfect Christian, who would live a life of grace, must resolve to walk among
Thorns, to bear privations, and sustain desertions; for the Cross and Thorns
are things proper to Christian-grace, and to the love of Jesus.

Let us not so much seek after assurance of heaven as a thing to come, as after
heaven it self present in us. For where Heaven comes into a heart, it will
bring its own light, comfort, and assurance along with it. Get Heaven into your
soul, and you will easily have the assurance of Heaven.

Let us have a fire in a room, and we shall quickly have the light and warmth
of it there also.

Men seek the assurance of Heaven as a thing to come, but neglect the present
power and possession of Heaven it self in their souls. Oh! let us get the Sun
it self into us, and then we shall not be without its shine and smiles within
us.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and are to be Sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel.
PResent State of New England.

Burges's Husbandmans Companion.

Burges's Englands Bond.

Adams's Catechism.

Survey of Quakerism.

A view of Antiquity, by J. Honor.

Abyssus Mali, or Man's Corruption by Nature, by W. G.

England's present and most great incumbent Duty, by Robert Perrott.

The Ark of the Covenant opened, or a Treatise of the Covenant of Redemption.

Janewayes Life.

Meads Almost Christian.

Mr. Cawtons Funeral Sermon, Preached by Mr. Vincent, and Mr. Hurst.

Phelpes Caveat against Drunkenness.

Wadsworths last Warning unto secure Sinners.

Kidder on the Sacrament.

Wells Funeral Sermon, by Mr. Tho. Watson.

Mr. Wadsworths Funeral Sermon, Preached by Mr. Bragg.

Bishop Reynholds Meditations on the Fall and Rising of St. Peter.

Practical Divinity of the Papists, proved to be destructive unto Christianity,
and Men's souls.

Burroughs's four Treatises.

Dr. Collins on the Canticles.


