Meteors: OR, A plain Description of all kind of Meteors, as well Fiery and
Ayrie, as Watery and Earthy: BRIEFLY Manifesting the Causes of all
Blazing-Stars, Shooting-Stars, Flames in the Air, Thunder, Lightning,
Earthquakes, Rain, Dew, Snow, Clouds, Springs, Stones, and Metalls.

By W. F. Doctor in Divinity.

LONDON, Printed for William Leake at the Crown in Fleet Street, between the
two Temple Gates, 1655.

To the Reader.
I Shall not beg your pardon for publishing this Book; for as it is none of mine
(being written by a famous and learned Divine) so I do not set it forth
relying on my own judgment, but had the opinions and approbation of diverse
persons of known abilities, who knew best what is most useful for public
Benefit. And I may (without breach of Modesty) affirm, that there is not in our
Language any Book of so small a bulk, contains so much of the Doctrine of
the Meteors. We daily behold and view diverse Meteors, but very few are skilled
in their Causes; but those that are not, may be informed. And I must tell you
also, that this Book on perusal has been found so advantageous, that a person
of quality has lately taken pains to make diverse worthy Observations upon it,
which here I have subjoyned, because you should not pay for two Books instead
of one. These Observations were never published till now, and I trust thou will
find the Author did thee a Courtesy. Farewell.

The Table.
The first Book.
WHy Meteors be called Unperfectly mixed. 3. Why they be called perfectly
mixed. 3. The general cause of all Meteors, and first of the material cause.
4. The places in which they are generated. 10.
The Second Book, of fiery Meteors. 13.
The generation of the Impression, called Burned Stubble, or Sparkles of fire.
14 Torches. 15 Dancing or leaping Goats, ibid. Shooting and falling Stars. 16
Burning Candles. 18 Burning beams and round pillars, ibid. Burning Spares,
ibid. Shields, Globes, or Bowls, 20. L^mps. ibid. Flying Dragons, or fire
Drakes, ibid. The Pyramidal pillar, like a Spire or broched steeple. 23 Fire
scattered in the Air, ibid. Lights that go before men, and follow them abroad
in the fields in the night season. 24 Helena, Castor and Pollux. 27. Flames
that appear upon the hairs of men and beasts 29. Comets, or blazing Stars. 30
Apparitions. 35 Colors, wide gapings, and deep holes which appear in the
clouds. 36. Wide gaping. ibid. Round openi^g Hiatus. 37.
The third Book, of Airy Impressions. 37.
Of Winds. 38. Earthquakes. 41. Diverse kinds of Earthquakes. 43 How so great
winds come to be under the earth. 46 The signs and tokens that go before an
Earthquake most commonly. 47 Thunder. 50 Lightning, 55 Fulgetrum. ibid.
Coruscation. 57 Fulgur. 58 The fourth kind, called Fulmen. 59. The first kind.
60 The second k^nd. 62 The third kind. ibid. The marvailes of Lightning, and
their causes. ibid. Storm Winds. 67 Whirle winds. 70 The fired Whirlewind, 72
Circles. 73 The Rainbow. 77 The Milk way, called of some the way to S. James
and Watling-street. 81 Beams or streams of light appearing through a cloud.
86 Of Many Suns. 89 Many Moons. 92 Wonderful apparitions. 94
The fourth Book, Of watery Impressions. 100
Of Clouds. 101 Mists. 103 Empty clouds. 104 Rain. 106 The signs of Rain.
109 Monstrous or prodigious Rain. 111 Dew. 115 Hoare frost. 117 Hail, Snow.
118, 120. Springs and Rivers. 121 Fountains, Brooks, Rivers. 123 Lakes. 125
Hot Baths, ibid. The diverse tastes that are perceived in wells, 126 A recital
of such Rivers and Springs, as have marvelous effects, whereof no natural cause
can be assigned by most men, although some reason in a few may be found. 127 Of
the Sea. 132 The saltness of the Sea, 133 The ebbing and flowing thereof. 134
The fifth Book, Of earthly Meteors, or bodies perfectly mixed. 135
Of Earth^. 136 Liquors concrete 139 Metals 142 Gold. 143 Silver. 145 Copper.
146 Tynne. 148 Lead. ibid. Iron. 149 Quicksilver. 150 Stones. 151 The diverse
kinds of stones 153 The virtue of stones. 154
FINIS.
THE FIRST BOOK.
FOr as much as we intend in this Treatise, to declare the causes of all those
bodies that are generated in the earth called Fossilia, as well as those other
Impressions named of their height Meteors (which no writer hitherto has done,
that we have seen) the common definition given by the most Writers, in no wise
will serve us; and whether we may borrow the name of Meteoron, to comprehend
the whole subject of our work, we are not altogether out of doubt; although
the Philosopher deriving it from doubtfulnes, giveth^us some color so to take
it; and peradventure we might be as well excused to apply it to Minerals, as
other authors are to use it for earthquakes: yet to avoid all occasions of
cavilling at words, we shall both define and also describe the subject of our
matter on this manner: It is a body compound without life natural: and yet to
stop one hole, because here wants the name of the thing to be defined; it is
no new thing to them that have read Aristotle's works, Aristot.
to find a definition of that whereof there is no name. But what need you be so
precise (will some man say)? mean you so to proceed in all your discourse? no
verily, but because many of quick judgment, not considering the style to be
attempered to the capacity of the readers, will impute the plainness to the
ignorance of the Author, we thought good in the beginning to pluck the opinion
out of their minds that (as the common saying is) they may know, we have skill
of good manners though we little use them.

The Meteors are divided after three manner of ways: First, into bodies
perfectly and imperfectly mixed: Secondly, into moist impressions and dry:
Thirdly, into fiery, airy, watery, and earthly. According to this last division*
we shall speak of them in four books following: but first we must be
occupied a little in the general description of the same, that afterward shall
be particularly treated of.

Why they be called imperfectly mixed.
THey are called imperfectly mixed, because they are very soon changed into
another thing, and resolved into their proper elements of which they do most
consist, as do all impressions, fiery, airie, watery: as snow into water,
clouds into waters etc.

Why they be called perfectly mixed.
THe last sort, namely earthly Meteors, are called perfectly mixed, because
they will not easily be changed and resolved from that form which they are in,
as be stones, metalls, and other mineralls.

According to the quality of the matter, they are divided into moist and dry
impressions, consisting either of Vapors or Exhalations. Vapors are called
moist, and exhalations dry, which terms must be well noted, because they must
be much used.

Of the general causes of all Meteors; and first of the material cause.
THe matter whereof the most part of Meteors does consist, The material cause.
is either water or earth: for out of the water, proceed vapors, and out of the
earth come exhalations.

Vapor, as the Philosopher says, is a certain watery thing, What be vapors, and
what exhalations.
and yet is not water; so Exhalation has a certain earthly nature in it, but
yet it is not earth.

For the better understanding of Vapors, understand that they be as it were
fumes or smokes warm and moist, which will easily be resolved into water,
much like to the breath that proceeds out of a man's mouth, or out of a pot of
water standing on the fire. These vapors are drawn up from the waters and
watery places by the heat of the Sun, What the middle region is, shall be told
afterward
even unto the middle region of the air, and there after diverse manner of
meeting with coldness, many kind of moist Meteors are generated, as sometimes
clouds and rain, sometime snow and hail; and that such Vapors are so drawn up
by the Sun, it is plain by experience: for if there be a plash of water on a
smooth and hard stone, standing in the heat of the Sun, it will soon be dry;
which is none otherwise but that the Sun draws up the water in thin Vapors:
for no man is so fond to say, that it can sink into stone or metal; and it is
as great folly to think it is consumed to nothing: for it is a general rule, A
general rule.
That that which is once a thing, cannot by changing become nothing: wherefore
it follows, that the water on the stone, as also on the earth, is for the
most part drawn up, when the stone or earth is dried.

Exhalations are as smokes that be hot and dry, What Exhalations be.
which because they be thin, and lighter then Vapors, pass the lowest and
middle Region of the air, and are carried up even to the highest Region, where
for the excessive heat, by neerness of the fire, they are kindled, and cause
many kind of impressions. They are also sometimes viscose, that is to say,
clammy, by reason whereof, they cleaving together and not being dispersed, are
after diverse sorts set on fire, and appear sometimes like Dragons, sometimes
like Goats, sometimes like candles, sometimes like spears.

By that which is spoken of Vapors and Exhalations, it is evident, that out of
the fire and air, no matter whereof Meteors should consist, can be drawn,
because of their subtilty and thinness. For all Exhalation is by making a
grosser body more thin: but the fire (we mean the elemental fire, and not the
fire of the Kitchen chimney) is so subtle and thin, that it cannot be made
thinner; likewise the air is so thin, that if it be made thinner, it is
changed into fire; and as the fire, if it were made thicker, would become air;
so the air being made grosser, would be turned into water. Wherefore to
conclude this part, the great quantity of matter, that causes these Meteors,
is taken out of the earth and the water. As for the air and the fire, they are
mixed with this matte^ as with all other things, but not so abundantly, that
they may be said the material cause of any Meteor, thoug^ without them none can
be generated. The efficient cause of all Meteors, The efficient cause.
is tha^ cause which makes them; even as the Carpenter is the efficient cause
of an house. This cause is either first or second.

The first and efficient cause is God the worker of all wonders, according to
that testimony of the Psalmist, which says, Fire, hail snow, ice, wind and
storm, do his will and commandment; he sends snow like wool, etc.
Almighty God therefore being the first, principal and universal cause
efficient of all natural works and effects, is also the first cause of these
effects, whose profit is great, and operation mavelous.

The second cause efficient, is double, either remote, that is to say, far
off or next of all. The farther cause of them as of all other natural effects,
is the same; the Sun with the other Planets and Stars, and the very heaven it
self in which they are moved; But chiefly the Sun, by whose heat all or at
least wise the most part of the vapors and Exhalations are drawn up.

The next cause efficient as the first qualities, are heat and cold, which
cause diverse effects in Vapors and Exhalations.

But to return to the heat of the Sun, which is a very near cause, it is for
this purpose two ways considered.

One way, as it is mean and temperate; Otherwise, as it is vehement and
burning. The mean, is by which he draws vapors out of the water, and
exhalations out of the earth, and not only draws them out, but also lifts
them up very high from the earth into the air, where they are turned into
diverse kinds of Meteors.

The burning heat of the Sun is, by which he burns, dissipateth and
consumes the vapors and exhalations before he draws them up, so that of them
no Meteors can be generated.

These two heats proceed from the Sun, either in respect of the place, or the
time; but most properly according to the casting of his beams either directly
or undirectly.

In place where the Suns beams strike directly against the earth and the
water, the heat is so great, that it burns up the Exhalations and Vapors, so
that there are no fiery Meteors, much less watery: as it is in the South parts
of the world, under and near to the Equinoctial line.

But in places where the beams are cast indirectly and obliquely, and that
where they are not too nigh to the direct beams, nor too far off from them;
there is a moderate heat, drawing out great abundance of matter, so that in
those Countries, many Meteors of many sorts are generated, as in the far North
parts are few but watery impressions. Also in Autumn and Spring are oftener
Meteors seen, then in Summer and Winter, except it be in such places where the
Summer and Winter are of the temper of the Spring and Autumn. Let this be
sufficient for the Efficient causes of impressions, as well first and
principal, as second and particular. Concerning the formal and final cause,
we have little to say, because the one is so secret, that it is known of no
man: the other so evident, that it is plain, to all men. The essential Form
of all substances, Gods wisdom comprehends; the universal chief and last
End of all things, is the glory of God. Middle Ends (if they may be so called)
of these impressions are manifold profits to Gods creatures, to make the earth
fruitful, to purge the air, to set forth his power, to threaten his
vengeance, to punish the world, to move to repentance; all which are referred
to one end of Gods eternal glory, ever to be prased, Amen.

Of the places, in which they are generated.
THe places in which Meteors are caused, be either the air or the earth: in
the air be generated rain, hail, snow, dew, blazing stars, thunder, lightning,
etc. In the earth be wells, springs* earthquakes, metals, minerals, etc. made,
and as it were, in their mothers belly begotten and fashioned. But for the
better understanding hereof, such as have not tasted the principles of
Philosophy, must consider that there be four elements, Earth, Water, Air, and
Fire, one compassing another round about, saving that the waters by Gods
commandment are gathered into one place, that the land might appear. The
highest is the sphere of the Fire, which touches the hollownesse of the moons
heaven: the next is the air, which is in the hollownesse of the fire: the air
within his hollownesse comprehends the water and the earth, which both make
but one sphere or Globe, or as the common sort may understand it, one ball. So
each element is within another, as scales of a perch are one above anothes: or
(to use a gross similitude) as the peeles of an Onion are one within another:
after the same sort from the highest heaven to the earth that is lowest, What
the regions of the air be
one part that is greater compasses round about another that is lesser. But
for this present purpose it is to be known, that the air is divided into
three regions, the highest the middle and the lowest. The highest because it is
next to the region of the fire, is exceeding hot: the lowest being next the
earth and waters, is temperate, and by repercussion or striking back of the
Sun beams waxes hot, and by absence of them is made cold, being subject to
winter and summer. The middle region of the air, is always exceeding cold,
partly because the sun beams cannot be cast back so high, and partly because
the cold that is there, between the heat above, and the heat beneath it, is so
kept in, that it can not get out, so that it must needs be excessively cold:
for the water and the earth, being both cold Elements, after the Sun setting
in the night season, do cool the air, even to the middle region. But in the
morning the Sun rising warmeth the air, so far as his beams which are
beaten back from the earth and the water, can extend and reach; which is not
so high as the middle region, and by heat on both sides is enclosed and kept,
saving that a little thereof falls down in the night, which the next day
with much more is driven back again. Wherefore this region being so cold, is
dark and cloudy, in so much that some doting Divines have imagined purgatory to
be there in the middle region of the air. In the highest region be generated
Comets or blazing stars and such like of diverse sorts. In the middle region
clouds, rain, storms, winds etc. In the lowest region, dew, frost, hoar-frost,
mists, bright rods, candles, burning about graves, and gallowses, where there
is store of clamy, fattie or oily substance, also lights and flaming fires seen
in fields, etc. And thus much for the general causes of all Meteors.

THE SECOND BOOK
Of Fiery Meteors.
A Fiery impression, is an Exhalation set on fire in the highest or lowest
region of the air, or else appearing as though it were set on fire and burning.

They are therefore divided into flames and Apparitions. Flames are they which
burn indeed, and are kindled with fire. These are discerned by four ways; by
the fashion of them, by their place, by the abundance of their matter, and by
the want of their matter. Their placing is after the abundance and scarcity of
the matter whereof they consist: for if it be great, heavy and gross, it
cannot be carried so far as the middle region of the air, and therefore is set
on fire in the lowest region: if it be not so great, light, and full of heat,
it passes the middle region, and ascends to the highest, where it is easily
kindled and set on fire.

According to their diverse fashions, they have diverse names: for they are
called burning stubble, torches, dancing or leaping Goats, shooting or
falling stars, or candles, burning beams, round pillars, spears, shields,
Globes or bowls, firebrands, lamps, flying Dragons or fire drakes, painted
pillars, or broched steeples, or blazing stars, called Comets. The time when
these impressions do most appear, is the night-season: for if they were
caused in the day time, they could not be seen, no more then the stars be seen,
because the light of the Sun which is much greater, dimmeth the brightness of
them being lesser.

Of the generation of the impression called burning stubble or sparkles of fire.
The generation of this Meteor is this; Sparks of fire.
when the matter of the Exhalation is in all parts alike thin, but not
compacted or knit together, then some part of it being carried up into the
highest Region, by the fiery heat is set on fire before another part that
comes up after it, and so being kindled by little and little, flies abroad
like sparkles out of a chimney, insomuch that the common people suppose, that
an infinite number of stars fall down, whereas it is nothing else but the
Exhalation that is thin, kindled in many parts, sparkling as when sawdust or
cole-dust is cast into the fire.

Of Torches
TOrches or firebrands are thus generated: Torches.
when the matter of the exhalation is long and not broad, being kindled at one
end thereof in the highest region of the air, it burns like a torch or
firebrand, and so continues till all the matter be burnt up, and then goes
out; none otherwise then a Torch when all the stuff is spent, must needs burn
no longer.

Of dancing or leaping Goats
DAncing Goats are caused when the exhalation is divided into two parts,
Dancing Goats
as when two torches be seen together, and the flame appears to leap or dance
from one part to the other, much like as bals of wild fire dance up and down in
the water.

Of shooting and falling stars.
A Flying, shooting, or falling star, Shooting Stars.
is when the exhalation being gathered as it were on a round heap, and yet not
thoroughly compacted in the highest part of the lowest region of the air, being
kindled by the sudden cold of the middle region, is beaten back, and so
appears as though a star should fall, or slide from place to place.
Sometime it is generated after another sort; for there is an exhalation long
and narrow, which being kindled at one end burns swiftly, the fire running
from end to end, as when a silk thread is set on fire at the one end. Some say
it is not so much set on fire, as that it is direct under some Star in the
firmament, and so receiving light of that star, seems to our eyes to be a
Star. Indeed sometimes it may be so; but that i^ is not so always, The
Epicurians Opinion.
nor yet most commonly, it may be easily demonstrated. The Epicureans, as they
are very gross in determining the chief goodness: so they are very fond in
assigning the cause of this Meteor. For they say, that the stars fall out of
the firmament, and that by the fall of them, both thunder and lightning are
caused: for the lightning (say they) is nothing else but the shining of that
Star that falls, which falling into a waterie cloud, and being quenched in
it, causes that great thunder, even as hot Iron makes a noise if it be cast
into cold water. But it is evident, that the stars of the firmament cannot
fall, Ps. 148
for GOD has set them fast for ever; he has given them a Commandment which
they shall not pass. And though they should fall into the clouds, yet could
they not rest there, The greatness of Stars
but with their weight being driven down, would cover the whole earth.

For the least star that is seen in the firmament, is greater then all the
earth. Here will step forth some merry fellow which of his conscience thinks
them not to be above three yards about, A proof of the Stars greatness
and say it is a loud lie; for he can see within the compass of a bushel,
more then 20 stars. But if his bushel were on fir^ 20 mile of, I demand how
big it would seem unto him? He that has any wit will easily perceive, that
stars being by all men's confession, so many thousand miles distant from the
earth, must needs be very great, that so far off should be seen in any
quantity. Thus much for the shooting or falling stars

Of burning Candles.
WHen the Exhalation carried up into the highest part of the air, Burning
candles.
is in all parts thereof of equal and like thinness, and also long, but not
broad, it is set on fire and blazeth like a candle, until the Exhalation be
quite consumed.

Of burning Beams and round Pillars.
THese are caused, Burning Beams and round pillars
when the Exhalation being long and not very broad, is set on fire all at once,
and so burns like a great beam or logge. The difference of Beams and
Pillars is this; for beams are when they seem to lie in length in the air,
but they are called Pillars, when they stand right up, the one end nearer to
the earth then the other

Of Burning Spears.
BUrning spears are generated, Burning Spears.
when a great quantity of exhalations, which may be called a dry cloud, is set
on fire in the midst, and because the cloud is not so compact, that it should
suddenly rend, as when thunder is caused, the fire breaks out at the edges of
the cloud, kindling the thin Exhalations, which shoot out in great number like
fiery spears, or darts, long and very small; wherefore they continue not long:
but when they fail, within a short while after, more fire breaking out, they
shoot as many more in their place: and likewise, when they are gone, others
succeed, if the quantity of the matter will suffice, more then a douzen
courses. This impression was seen in London, Anno Dom. 1560. the thirty day of
January, at eight of the clock at night, the air in all other places being
very dark; but in the North-east where this cloud burned, it was as light as
when the day breaks toward the Sun rising, in so much that plain shadow
of things opposite was seen. The edge of this cloud was in the fashion like
the Raynebow, but in color very bright, and oftentimes casting forth almost
innumerable darts of wonderful length, like squibs that are cast into the
air, saving that they move more swiftly then any squibs.

Of Shields, Globes or Bowls.
THese Meteors also have their name of their fashion, Shields, Globes or Bowls.
because they are broad, and appear to be round; otherwise their generation
differs not from the cause of the like impressions before mentioned.

Of Lamps.
THe Lamp consists of an Exhalation that is broad and thick, Lamps.
but not equally extended; namely, smaller at one end then at another, which
being kindled about the midst thereof, burns like a lamp. The cause why,
as well this impression, as many other, appears round, is not for that
always they are round indeed, but because the great distance causes them to
seem so. For even the square forms far off seem to be round. (...) is written,
that a Lamp fell down at Rome, when Germanicus Caesar set forth forth the fight
of sword players.

Of flying Dragons or fire Drakes.
Flying Dragons, Flying Dragons, or fire Drakes,
or as Englishmen call them, fire-Drakes, be caused on this manner. When a
certain quantity of ^apors are gathered together on a heap, ^eing very near
compact, and as it were ^ard tempered together, this lump of ^apors ascending
to the region of cold, ^forcibly beaten back; which violence ^f moving is
sufficient to kindle it; ^lthough some men will have it to be ^used between 2
clouds, a hot and a ^^ld; then the highest part, which was ^iming upward, being
by reason more ^btill and thin, appears as the Dra^ns neck, smoking, for that
is was ^ely in the repulse bowed or made ^^oked, to represent the Dragons
belly. ^e last part by the same repulse turned ^ward, makes the tail,
appearing ^aller for that it is both further off, ^ also for that the cold
binds it* ^is dragon thus being caused, flies ^ng in the air, and sometime
turns and fro, if it meet with a cold cloud eat it back, to the great terror
of (...) that behold it: of whom some (...) it a fire Drake: some say it is the
^ill himself, and so make report others. More then 47 years ago^, on May day,
when many young folk went abroad early in the morning, remember by six of the
clock in the forenoone, there was news come to London, that the Devil, the
same morning, was seen flying over the Thames* afterward came word, that he
lighte^ at Stratford, and there was taken an^ set in the Stocks, and that
though h^ would fane have dissembled the matte^ by turning him self into the
likenes^ of a man, yet was he known well enoug^ by his cloven foot. I knew some
the^ living, that went to see him, and returning, affirmed, that he was seen
flying in the air, but was not taken prisoner. I remember also, that some
wished he had been shot at with Gun^ or shafts, as he flew over the Thame^ Thus
do ignorant men judge of the things that they know not. As for the Devil, I
suppose, it was a flying Dr^gin, whereof we speak, very fearefu^ to look
upon, as though he had (...) because he moves, whereas it is n^thing else but
clouds and smoke: (...) mighty is God, that he can fear (...) enemies with
these and such like op^rations, whereof some examples may be found in holy
Scripture.

Of the Pyramidall Pillar like a spire or broached Steeppe
THis sharp poynted pillar, Of Spires
is generated in the highest region of the air, and after this sort: When the
Exhalation has much earthly matter in it, the lighter parts and thinner (as
their nature is) ascending upward, the grosser, heavier, and thicker, abide
together in the bottom, and so is it of fashion great beneath, and small
poynted above, and being set on fire it is so seen, and thereof has his name.

Of fire scattered in the air.
FIre scattered in the air, Fire scattered.
or illuminations, are generated in the lowest region of the air, when very
dry and hot Exhalations are drawn up, and meeting with cold clouds, are sent
back again, which motions do set them a fire; whose parts being not equally
thick or joined together, seem as though fire were scattered in the air: Yea
sometimes, the whole air seems to burn, as though it would rain fire from
Heaven, and so it has come to pass, burning both Cities and Towns. Then
judge how easy it was for God to rain fire upon Sodom and Gomorra, for their
sins and wickedness.

Of lights that go before men, and follow them abroad in the fields, by the
night season.
THere is also a kind of light that is seen in the night season and seems to
go before men, Light that goes before men, and follows them in the night
or to follow them, leading them out of their way into waters, and other
dangerous places. It is also very often seen in the night, of them that sail
on the Sea, and sometime will cleave to the mast of the Ship, or other high
parts, sometime slide round about the Ship, and either rest in one part till
it go out, or else be quenched in the water. This impression seen on the
land, is called in Latin Ignis fatuus, foolish fire, that hurts not, but
only fears fools. That which is seen on the Sea, if it be but one, is
named Helena; if it be two, it is called Castor and Pollux.

The foolish fire is an Exhalation kindled by means of violent moving, when by
cold of the night, in the lowest region of the air, it is beaten down; and
then commonly, if it be light, seeks to ascend upward, and is sent down
again; so it danceth up and down. Else if it move not up and down, it is a
great lump of glewish or oily matter that by moving of the heat in it self,
is enflamed of it self, as moist hay will bek indled of it self. In hot and
fennie Countries, these lights are often seen, and where is abundance of such
unctuous and fat matter, as about Churchyards, where through the corruption of
the bodies there buried, the earth is full of such substance: wherefore in
Churchyards, or places of common burial, oftentimes are such lights seen,
which ignorant and superstitious fools have thought to be souls tormented in
the fire of Purgatory. Indeed the Devil has used these lights (although they
be naturally caused) as strong delusions to captive the minds of men with fear
of the Popes Purgatory, whereby he did open injury to the blood of Christ,
which only purges us from all our sins, and delivers us from all torments
both temporal and eternal, according to the saying of the wiseman, The
souls of the righteous are in the Hands of God, and no torment touches them.
But to return to the lights, in which there are yet two things to be
considered. First, why they lead men out of their way. And secondly, why they
seem to follow men and go before them. The cause why they lead men out of the
way, is, that men, while they take heed to such lights, and are also sore
afraid, they forget their way, and then being once but a little out of their
way, they wander they wot not whither, to waters, pits and other very dangerous
places. Which, when at length they hap the way home, will tell a great tale,
how they have been led about by a spirit in the likeness of Fire. Now the
cause why they seem to go before men, or to follow them, some men have said
to be the moving of the air, by the going of the man, which air moved, should
drive them forward if they were before, and draw them after if they were
behind. But this is no reason at all that the Fire, which is oftentimes three
or four miles distant from the man that walks, should be moved to and fro by
that air which is moved through his walking, but rather the moving of the air
and the man's eyes, causes the fire to seem as though it moved, as the Moon
to children seems, if they are before it, to run after them: if she be before
them, to run before them, that they cannot overtake her, though she seem to be
very near them. Wherefore these lights rather seem to move, then that they be
moved indeed.

Of Helena, Castor and Pollux
WHen the like substance in the lowest region of the air, Helena, Castor,
Pollux.
over the Sea, by the like occasion is set on fire, if be one only, it is
called Helena; if their be two, they are called Castor, and Pollux. These
impressions will oftentimes cleave to the mast, and other parts of Ships, by
reason of the claminesse and fatness of matter. Helena was of the Heathen men
taken as a Goddess, the daughter of Jupiter and Leda. Castor and Pollux were
her brethren. Helena was the occasion that Troy was destroyed; therefore the
Mariners by experience trying, that one flame of fire appearing along,
signified tempest at hand, supposed the same flame to be the goddess Helena,
of whom they looked for nothing but destruction. But when two lights are seen
together, they are a token of fair weather, and good luck: the Mariners
therefore believed that they were Castor and Pollux, which sailing to seek
their sister Helena being carried to Troy by Paris, were never seen after and
thought to be translated into the number of the Gods that gave good success to
them that sail, as we read in the last Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles,
that the Ship wherein S. Paul sailed, had a badge of Castor and Pollux. A
natural cause why they may thus foreshew either tempest or calmnesse, is this;
One flame alone may give warning of a tempest, because that as the matter
thereof is compact, and not dissolved; so it is like, that the matter of the
tempest (which never wants) as wind and clouds, is still together, and not
dissipated, then is it like not long after to arise. By two flames together may
be gathered, that as this Exhalation which is very thick, is divided: so the
thick matter of tempests is dissolved and scattered abroad by the same cause
that this is divided. Therefore not without a reason, the Mariner to his mates
may promise a prosperous course.

Of flames that appear upon the hairs of men or beasts.
THere is another kind of fiery impression, Flames upon hairs of men and
beasts.
which is flames of fire upon the hairs of men and beasts, especially horses.
These are sometime clammy Exhalations, scatered abroad in the air in small
parts, which in the night, by resistance of the cold, are kindled, cleaving on
horses ears, on men's heads and shoulders that ride or walk. In that they
cleave upon hayres, it is by the same reason that the dew will be seen also
upon hairs or garments, whose wool is high, as frize mantels and such like.
Another sort of these flames are caused, when men's or beasts bodies being
chafed, send forth a ^at and clammy sweat, which is in like manner kindled as
the sparks of fire that are seen when a black horse is curried. Livius.
Servius Tullius.
Livius reports of Servius Tullius, that as he lay asleep, being a child, his
hair seemed to be all on a flame, which for all that did not burn his hair or
hurt him. The like history he recites of one Marius a Knight of Rome, that as
he made an Oration to his Soldiers in Spain, they saw his head burning on a
light fire, and himself not ware of it. Thus much concerning these Flames.

Of Comets or Blazing Stars.
A Comet is an exhalation hot and dry, Comets or blazing Stars*
of great quantity, fat and clammy, hard-compact like a great lump of pitch,
which by the heat of the Sun is drawn out of the Earth into the highest region
of the Air, and there by the excessive heat of the place is set on fire,
appearing like a star with a blazing tail; and sometime is moved after the
motion of the Air which is circular, but it never goes down out of the compass
of sight, though it be not seen in the daytime for the brightness of the Sun,
but still burns until all the matter be consumed. An argument of the
greatness is this, that there was never any Comet yet perceived but at the
least it endured 7 days; but much longer they have been seen; namely forty days
long, yea fourscore days; and some, six months together. Wherefore it must
needs be a wonderful deal of matter that can give so much nourishment for so
great and fervent fire, and for so long a time.

There are considered in a Comet specially the Color and Fashion, which both
arise of the disposition of the matter.

Their Colors be either white, ruddy, or blew. If the matter be thin, the
color is white; if it be meanly thick, then is the Comet ruddy, after the
color of our fire; but when the matter is very thick, it is blew, like the
burning of brimstone. And as the matter is more or less after this disposition,
so is the Comet of color more or less like to these three principal colors:
some yellowish, some duskish, some greenish, some watchet, etc.

In Fashion are noted three differences; for either they seem to be round, with
beams round about, or with a beard hanging downward, or else with a tail
stretched out sidelong in length. The first fashion is when the matter is
thickest in the midst, and thin round about the edges; the second is when the
Exhalation is upward thick, and in length downward also meanly thick; the third
form is like the second, saving that the tail hangs not down but lies aside
and is commonly longer then the beard.

The time of their generation is oftnest in Autumn or Harvest: for in the
Spring there is too much moisture, The temper of the four quarters.
and too little heat to gather a Comet; in Summer is too much heat which will
disperse and consume the matter that it cannot be joined together; as for
Winter, it is clean contrary to the nature of a Comet which is hot and dry,
Winter being cold and moist: therefore no time so meet as Autumn.

Now for so much as many Learned men have gone about to declare the
signification of Blazing stars, The signification of Comets.
we will omit nothing that has any shadow of Reason, but declare what is
written of them.

Such things as are set forth of the betokening of Comets are of two sorts: The
first is of natural; The second of Civil or Politic Effects.

They are said to betoken Drought, Barrenness of the Earth and Pestilence.

Drought, because a Comet cannot be generated without great heat; and much
moisture is consumed in the burning of it.

Barrenness, because the fatness of the Earth is drawn up whereof the Comet
consists.

Pestilence, for so much as this kind of Exhalation corrupts the Air, which
infecteth the bodies of men and beasts.

The Second sort might well be omitted, Aristot.
saving that Aristotle himself disdaineth not to seek out Causes for some of
them.

Generally it is noted of all Historiographers, that after the appearing of
Comets most commonly follow great and notable Calamities. Beside this, they
betoken (say some) Wars, Seditions, Changes of Commonwealths, and the Death of
Princes and Noble men.

For what time Comets do shine, there be many hot and dry Exhalations in the
Air, which in dry men kindle heat whereby they are provoked to Anger: of Anger
comes brawling: of brawling, fighting and war: of war, victory: of victory,
change of Commonwealths: then also Princes living more delicately then other
men, are more subject to infection; and therefore dye sooner then other men. If
it were lawful to reason of this sort, we might enduce them to betoken not
only these few things, but all other things that chance in the world.

Yet these predictions have a show of Reason: though it be nothing necessary;
but it is a wonder to see how the Astrologians dote in such devices; they are
not ashamed to an earthly substance to ascribe an heavenly influence, and in
order of judgment to use them as very stars. Surely, by as good reason as to
the Celestial stars they attribute Divine influences and effects. But this
their folly has been sufficiently detected by diverse godly and learned men,
and this place requires no long discourse thereof. Wherefore this shall
suffice, both for the natural Causes of Blazing stars, and also for all Flames
in general. It follows therefore that with like brevity we declare the Causes
of Fiery Apparitions.

Of Apparitions.
AN Apparition is an Exhalation in the lowest or highest Region of the Air,
Apparitions.
not verily burning, but by refraction of light either of the Sun or of the
Moon seeemeth as though it burned: which appearance of color rises not of the
mixtion of the four qualities, as it does in bodies perfectly mixed, as Herbs,
Stones, etc. but only the falling of light upon shadow: the light is instead of
white, and the shadow of darkness instead of black. These diversely mixed
according to the diverse dispositions of the Exhalation, which ministers
variety by thickness or thinness, cause diverse Colors.

There be commonly recited three kinds of Fiery Apparitions; Colors,
Wide-gapings, and Deep holes which appear in the Clouds.

Of Colors.
Colors are here meant when there is nothing else to be noted but the Colors
of the clouds: Colors in the Air.
and they are caused (as it is said) by casting the light into the shadowy
Cloud, according as it exceeds more or less in thickness; whereof some be
very bright-white, and that is when the Exhalation is very thin; some
yellowish, when the Exhalation is thicker; some ruddy, when it is meanly thick;
and very black, when it is very thick. The red and ruddy Colors are seen in
the morning and evening, when the light of the Sun is not in his full force:
for at other times of the day his light is too vehement, clear, strong and
peircing. Thus much of Colors.

Of Wide-gaping.
Wide-gaping is caused when an Exhalation is thick in the midst, and thin on
the edges, Wide gaping of clouds in the Air.
then the light being received into it, causes it to appear as though the sky
did rend, and fi^e break out of it.

Of round opening Hiatus.
These holes called Hiatus, Round opening in the Air.
differ from Wide-gapings in nothing but that they be less, and therefore seem
as though they were deep pits or holes, and not rending or gaping; And these be
those Apparitions that appear Fiery, and yet be not so indeed. Therefore let
this be sufficient to have showed the natural Causes of all Fiery Meteors.

THE THIRD BOOK.
Of Airy Impressions.
UNder the name of Airy Impressions, be comprehended such Meteors, whose matter
is most of the Air. Of this sort be Winds, Earthquakes, Thunder, Lightnings,
Storme-Winds, Whirlwinds, Circles, Rainbowes, The White Circle, called of some
WATLING street, many Suns, many Moons.

Of Winds.
THe Wind is an Exhalation hot and dry, Winds.
drawn up into the Air by the power of the Sun, and by reason of the weight
thereof being driven down, is laterally or sidelong carried about the Earth.
And this Definition is not to be understood of general Winds that blow over all
the Earth, or else some great Regions; but besides these there be particular
Winds which are known but only in some Countries, and them not very large.
These Winds oftentimes have another manner of generation, and that is on this
manner;

It must needs be confessed, The second kind of winds.
that within the globe of the Earth be wonderful great holes, caves or
dungeons, in which when Air abounds (as it may by diverse Causes) this Air
that cannot abide to be penned in, finds a little hole in or about those
Countries as it were a mouth to break out of, and by this means blows
vehemently: yet that force and vehemence extends not far; but as the wind
that comes forth of bellows, near the coming forth is strong, but far off is
not perceived: so this Particular Wind, in that particular Country where it
breaks forth, is very violent and strong, in so much that it overthrows
both trees and houses, yet in other Countries not very far distant, no part of
that boisterous blast is felt. Wherefore this Wind differs from the general
Winds both in Qualities and Substance or Matter: for the Matter of them is an
Exhalation, and the Qualities such as the nature of the Exhalation is, very
Airy, but not Air indeed: but of this particular Wind the Matter and Substance
is most commonly Air.

There is yet a third kind of Wind, The third kind of Wind.
which is but a soft, gentle and cool moving of the Air, and comes from no
certain place (as the general Wind does) yea it is felt in the shadow under
trees, when in the hot light and shining of the Sun it is not perceived. It
comes whisking suddenly, very pleasant in the heat of Summer, and cease by
and by; this properly is no Wind, but a moving of the Air by some occasion.

As for the general Winds, they blow out of diverse Quarters of the Air now
East, now West, now South, now North, or else inclining to one of the same
Quarters: Among which the East Wind following the nature of the Fire is hot and
dry; the South Wind expressing the quality of the Air is hot and moist; The
qualities of the winds and the four quarters of the world.
the Western blast agreeing with the Waters property, is cold and moist; the
North that never was warmed with the heat of the Sun, being cold and dry
partaketh the condition of the Earth. The quality of middle wind.
The middle Winds have middle and mixed qualities, after the nature of those
Four principal Winds, more or less, as they incline toward them more or less.

Generally the profit of all Winds, The profit of wind.
by the wonderful wisdom of the Eternal God, is very great unto his Creatures.
For besides that these Winds alter the Weather. some of them bringing rain,
some dryness, some frost and snow, which all are necessary; there is yet an
universal Commodity that rises by the only moving of the Air, which were it
not continually stirred as it is, would soon putrify, and being putrified would
be a deadly infection to all that has breath upon the Earth. Joh. 3.
Wherefore this wind whose sound we hear, and know not from whence it comes
nor whither it goes (for who can affirm from whence it was raised, or where it
is laid down?) as all other Creatures beside, does teach us the wonderful and
wise providence of God, that we may worthily cry out with the Psalmist and say,
Psalm. 104.
O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all etc.
Let this be sufficient to have showed the generation of the Winds.

Of Earthquakes,
AN Earthquake, Earthquakes.
is a shaking of the Earth which is caused by means of wind and Exhalations,
that be enclosed within the caves of the Earth, and can find ^o passage to
break forth, or else so narrow a way that it cannot soon enough be dilivered.

Wherefore, with great force and violence it breaks out: and one while
shakes the Earth, another while rendeth and cleaves the same: sometime it
casts up the Earth a great hight into the Air, and sometime it causes the
same to sink a great depth down, swallowing both Cities and Towns, yea and
also mighty great Mountains, leaving in the place where they stood, nothing
but great holes of an unknown depth, or else great lakes of Waters.

Of diverse kinds of Earthquakes.
Diverse Authors write diversely of the kinds of Earthquakes, Diverse kinds of
Earthquakes.
some making more and some less, but we shall be content at this time to
comprehend them in four sorts.

The first kind is when the Earth is shaken laterally, to one side, which is
when the whole force of the wind drives to one place, and there is no other
contrary motion to let it. This wind, if it be not great, shakes the Earth,
that it trembles as a man that has a fit of an ague, and does no more harm:
but if it be great and violent, it loses the foundations of all buildings, be
they never so strong, and overthrows whole Cities, but especially the great
buildings, and not only such buildings, but sometimes also casts down great
Hills, that cover and overwhelm all the valleys under them. Many noble and
great Cities have been overthrown by this kind of Earthquake. Twelve Cities
overthrown with one Earthquake.
It is written, that twelve of the most beautiful Cities, and most sumptuous
buildings in all Asia, were overthrown and utterly destroyed with an
Earthquake. How often Antiochia, yea within short time was destroyed, they
which have read the Histories, can testify.

How terrible was the Earthquake that shook Constantinople a whole year
together, Constantinople the chiefest City of Greece, now the Turks Palace.
that the Emperor and all the people, were fain to dwell abroad in the fields
under tents and pavilions, for fear their houses would fall on their heads, it
is recorded in the Chronicles, and worthy to be remembered.

The second kind is, The second kind.
when the Earth with great violence is lifted up, so that the buildings are
like to fall, and by and by sinketh down again: this is, when all the force of
the winds striveth to get upward, after the nature of gunpowder, and finding
some way to be delivered out of bondage, the Earth that was hoysied up,
returns to his old place.

The third kind is a gaping, The third kind.
rending, or cleaving of the Earth, when the Earth sinketh down, and swalloweth
up Cities, Earthquake on the Sea.
and Towns, with Castles, and Towers, Hills and Rocks, Rivers, and Floods, so
that they be never seen again.

Yea the Sea in some places has been drunk up, so that men might have gone
over on foot, until the time of tide or flood returning covered the place with
Waters again. But in the land, where this Earthquake swalloweth up any City, or
Country, there appears nothing in the place thereof, Aristot.
but a mavelous wide and deep gulf, or hole. Aristotle makes mention of
diverse places, and regions that were overthrown with this kind of Earthquake.

The fourth kind, The fourth kind.
is when great mountains are cast up out of the Earth, or else when some part
of the land sinketh down, and in stead thereof arise Rivers, Lakes, or Fires
breaking out with smoke and Ashes. It causes also overflowings of the Sea,
when the Sea bottom is lifted up, New Islands in the Sea.
and by this means arise many Islands in the Sea, that never were seen before.
These and other such miracles, are often found In the Writers of Histories,
also in the Philosophers, as Aristotle, Aristot.
Seneca, Seneca.
and Plinius. Plinius.


Nevertheless, Plato.
the effects of some as most notable, it shall not be unprofitable to recite. A
wonderful Earthquake.
Plato in his Dialogue entitled Timeus, makes mention by the way of a
wonderful Earthquake, Africa, Europe, Asia, the three parts of the earth
Maremediterraneum, because it goes through the midst of the earth.
whereby not only Africa was rent asunder from Europe and Asia (as it is indeed
at this day, except a little neck by the red Sea) the Sea entering between them
that now is called Mare Mediterraneum: but also a wonderful great Island,
which he affirms, was greater then Africa and Asia both, called Atlantis, was
swallowed up, and covered by the Waters, Atlantis an Island.
in so much, that on the Sea called Atlanticum, for a great while after, no
Ship could sail, by reason that the same huge Sea, by resolution of the Earth
of that mighty Island, was all turned into mudde.

The famous I Will of Sicilia was also sometime a part of Italy, and by Earthquake
rent asunder from it^ Seneca makes mention of two Islands, Thereon and Therea,
Senecca. Thereon and Therea. Arist. Herodotus. Egypt sometime a gulf of the Sea.
that in his time first appeared. It should seem both by Aristotle, and also
by Herodotus, that Egypt, in ancient time, was a gulf of the Sea, and by
Earthquake made a dry land. During the reign^ of Tiberius the Emperor, twelve
notable Cities of Asia were overthrown in one night, etc.

How so great Winds come to be under the Earth.
THe great Caves and Dens of the Earth, must needs be full of Air
continually: but when by the heat of the Sun, the moisture of the Earth is
resolved, many Exhalations are generated as well within the Earth as without;
and whereas the places were full before so that they could receive no more,
except part of that which was in them, were let out in such countries where the
Earth has few pores, or else where they are stopped with moisture, it must
needs follow, that these Exhalations striving to get out, must needs rend the
Earth in some place, or lift it up, so that either they may have free passage,
or else room enough to abide in.

Of signs and tokens that go before an Earthquake most commonly.
THe first, The signs of an earthquake.
is the raging of the Sea, when there are no tempestuous Winds to stir it,
yea, when the Air is most calm without Wind.

The cause why the Sea then rages, is, that the wind begins to labor for
passage that way, and finding none, is sent back, and soon after shakes the
land.

The second sign is calmness of the Air, and cold, which comes to pass by
reason that the Exhalation that should be abroad, is within the Earth.

The third sign, is said to be a long thin struck of cloud seen, when the
sky is clear; after the setting of the Sun. This (say they) is caused, by
reason that the Exhalation or Vapor, which is the matter of clouds, is gone
into the Earth.

Others affirm, that it is the Exhalation that breaks out of some narrow hole
of the Earth, out of which the rest of the wind cannot issue, neither will it
wait the time: wherefore within a while after, it seeks and makes it self
by sudden eruption a broader way to be delivered out of prison.

Also the Sun, certain days before it appears dim, because the Winds
that should have purged and dissolved the gross Air, that causes this dimness
to our eyes, is enclosed within the bowels of the Earth.

The Water in the bottom of deep wells is troubled, and the savor thereof
infected, because the pestilent Exhalations that have been long enclosed within
the Earth, do then begin a little to be sent abroad. For thereof comes it,
that in many places where Earthquakes have been, great abundance of smoke,
flame, and ashes is cast out, when the abundance of brimstone that is under the
ground, through violent motion is set on fire and breaks forth. Finally, who
knows not, what stinking Minerals and other poisonous stuff do grow under
the Earth? wherefore it is no wonder, if Well-water, before an Earthquake, be
infected: but rather it is to be marvelled, if after an Earthquake there follow
not a grievous Pestilence, when the whole mass of infection is blown abroad.

Last of all, there is heard before it in the time of it, Thundering under the
earth.
and after it, a great noise and sound under the Earth, a terrible groaning,
and a very Thundering, yea, sometimes when there follows no Earthquake at all,
when as the wind, without shaking of the Earth, finds a way to pass out at.
And these for the most part, or at least some of them, are forewarnings, that
the most fearful Earthquake will follow, then the which there is no natural
thing that brings men into a greater fear. Cato.
Cato was very curious to confess himself, that he repented that ever he went
by water, when as he might have gone by land. But what land can be sure, if it
be the Lords will by this work of his to shake it? what building so strong,
that can defend us, when the more strong, the more danger, the higher, the
greater fall?

Of Thunder.
THunder is a sound caused in the clouds by the breaking out of a hot and dry
Exhalation beating against the edges of the cloud. Thunder.
It is often heard in Spring and Summer by reason that the heat of the Sun then
draws up many Exhalations, which meeting in the middle region of the Air with
moist and cold Vapors, are together with them enclosed in a hollow cloud: but
when the hot Exhalation cannot agree with the coldness of the place; by this
strife being driven together made stronger and kindled, it will straight break
out, which sudden and violent eruption causes the noise which we call Thunder.
A Similitude is put by great Authors, of moist wood that cracketh in the fire:
A similitude.
we may add hereunto the breaking of an egg in the fire, of an apple or any
like thing; for whatsover holds and withholdeth enclosed any hot wind, so
that it can have no vent, it will seek it self a way by breaking the skin,
shell or case. It were no ill comparison to liken Thunder to the sound of a
gun, which be both caused of the same or very like causes.

The sound of Thunder is diverse; after which men have divided the Thunder into
diverse kinds, Diverse kinds of Thunders.
making first two sorts, that is, small Thunder and great. But as for the
diversity of sounds, generally it comes of the diverse disposition of the
clouds, one while having more holes then at another; sometime thicker in one
place then in another.

The small or little Thunder is when the Exhalation is driven from side to side
of that cloud making a noise, and either for the small quantity and less
forcibleness, Small Thunder, and the kinds thereof.
or else for the thickness of the clouds walls, is not able to break them, but
rumbleth up and down within the cloud, whose sides be stronger then the force
of the Exhalation is able to break, it runs up and down within, and striking
against the cloud and moist sides, makes a noise not unlike the quenching of
hot i^on in cold water.

And if the Exhalation be meanly strong, and the cloud not in all places or
like thickness, it breaks out at those thin places with such a buzzing as
wind makes blowing out of narrow holes.

But if the cloud be so thin that it cannot keep in the Exhalation, although it
be not kindled, then it blows o^t with like puffing as wind comes out of a
pair of bellows.

A great Thunder is when the Exhalation is much in quantity, Great thunder and
the kinds whereof.
and very hot and dry in quality; the clouds also very thick and strong, that
easily will not give place to the wind to escape out.

Wherefore if the Exhalation do vehemently shake the cloud, though it do not at
the first disperse it, it makes a long and fearful rumbling against the sides
of the cloud, until at the last being made stronger by swifter motion, it
dissolveth the cloud, and has liberty to pass out into the open Air; the cloud
dissolved droppeth down, and then follows a shower of Rain.

Otherwhiles it shakes the cloud not long, but straight way rendeth it a long
space and time, whose sound is like the rending of a Broad-cloth, which noise
continues a pretty while.

And sometime it discusseth the cloud at once, making a vehement and terrible
crack like a gun, sometime with great force casting out stones, but most
commonly fire which sets many high places on fire. As in the year of our
Lord 1561. the Fourth day of June, the steeple of Saint Paul's Church in London
was set on fire, as it has been once or twice before, and burned.

The noise of Thunder though it be great in such places over which it is made,
How far thunder is heard.
yet is not hard far off, especial-against the wind; Whereof we had experience
also in the Year of our Lord, 1561. on Saint Matthias day in February, at the
evening, when there was a great flash of Lightning and a very ter^ible crack of
Thunder following; they that were but 15 Miles from London Westward heard no
noise nor sound thereof; the Wind that time was Western.

The effect of Thunder is profitable to men, The profit of thunder
both for that the sweet shower does follow it, and also for that it purges
and purifieth the Air by the swift moving of the Exhalation that breaks
forth, as also by the sound which dividing and peircing the Air, causes it to
be much thinner: which may be verified by an History that Plutarch in the life
of Quincius Flaminius reports, Plutarchus T. Quincius Flaminius.
that there was such a noise made by the Grecians, after their Liberty was
restored, that the Birds of the Air that flew over them were seen fall down by
reason that the Air divided by their Cry, was made so thin, tha^ there was no
firmity or strength in i^ to bear them u^. And let this suffice for Thunder,
which Lightning succeeds in treaty, that seldom is from it in nature.

Of Lightning.
AMong the diverse kinds of Lightnings which Writers in this knowledge do number,
Lightning.
we shall treat only of four kinds; yet so, that under these Four all the rest
may be comprehended. Fulgetru^. Coruscatio. Fulgur* Fulmen.
The names we must borrow of the Latin Tongue; the first is Fulgetrum, the
second Coruscatio, the third Fulgur, the fourth Fulmen.

Of Fulgetrum.
FUlgetrum we call that kind of Lightning which is seen on Summer nights and
evenings after a hot day. Fulgetrum.
The generation hereof is such; when many thin, light and hot Exhalations by
the immoderate heat have been drawn up from the Earth, and by the absence of
the Sun be destitute of the force whereby they should have been drawn further
upward; yet something ascending by their own nature, in that they be light and
hot, they meet with the cold either of the night in the lowest region, or else
of the Air in the middle region; and so by resistance of contraries (as it has
been often before rehearsed) they are beaten back, and with vehement moving set
on fire. This Lightning commonly goes out in the Air terrible to behold, not
hurtful to anything, except sometime when the matter is earthy and gross,
being stricken down to the earth, it blasteth corn and grass with other small
hurt. Sometime it sets a barn or thatched house on fire.

The Color of this Lightning as of all other, The color of this Lightning.
is diverse, partly according to the matter, and partly according to the light.
If the matter be thin, it is white; if the substance be gross, it is ruddy,
like flames of fire. In great light as in the day, it appears white; in the
night, ruddy: yet sometime in the day time we may see it yellow, which is a
token that the matter is wonderful thick and gross. Old Wives are wont to say
that no night in the year except one, passes without Lightning, but that is
true as the rest of their Tales, whereof they have great store.

Of Coruscation.
Coruscation is a glistering of fire, rather then fire indeed; Coruscation.
and a glimering of Lightning, rather then Lightning itself: which is two
manner of ways: One way, when clouds that be lower then the upper part of the
Earth, without the compass of our fight are enflamed, and the reflection of
that flame is cast up into our sight, appearing in all points like Lightning,
saving that the Air where it appears, is so clear, that we are persuaded, no
Lightning can be there caused. Another way is, when there be thick clouds over
us, and commonly a double order of clouds, one above another: if Lightning or
any other Inflammation be in the upper part of these clouds, the light of them
peirceth through the lower parts as through a glass, and so appears as though
it Lightened, when perhaps it did Lighten indeed, yet that which we saw, was but
the shadow thereof: and this is often without Thunder.

Of Fulgur.
FUlgur Fulgur.
is that kind of Lightning which follows Thunder, whereof we have spoken
before. For when that violent Exhalation breaks forth, making a noise as it
beats against the sides of the cloud, with the same violence it is set on
fire, The lightning is not before the thunder, though it seem so.
and casts a great light, which is seen far and near. And although the
Lightning appear unto us a good pretty while before the Thunderclap be heard,
yet it is not caused before the noise, if any Thunder at all follow, but either
is after it or with it. Wherefore that we see it before we hear the Thunder,
may be ascribed either to the quickness of our Sight that preventeth the
Hearing, or else to the swift moving of the fire and the light thereof to our
eyes, Sight preventeth hearing.
and the slow motion of the Sound unto our ears and Hearing.

These three kinds of Lightnings are more fearful then hurtful, but the
fourth seldom passes without some damage doing.

Of the fourth kind, called Fulmen.
THe most dangerous, violent and hurtful kind of lightning is called Fulmen,
whose generation is such as follows: What time a hot Exhalation is enclosed
in a cloud and breaking the same, bur^reth forth, it is set on fire and with
wonderful great force stricken down toward the Earth.

The crack of thunder that is made when this Lightning breaks out, is sudden,
short, and great, like the sound of a Gunne. And oftentimes a great stone is
blown out with it, which they call the Thunderbolt, which is made on this
manner.

In the Exhalation which is gathered out of the Earth, is much Earthly matter,
The thunderbolt cast out of the clouds.
which clortering together by moisture, being clammy by nature, consisting of
brimstone, and other metalick substance by the excessive heat, is hardened as a
brick is in the fire, and with the mighty force of the Exhalation strongly cast
toward the Earth, and strikes down steeples, and high buildings of stone, and
of wood, passes through them, and sets them on fire; it cleaves trees and
sets them on fire: Strongest things are most hurt of lightning.
and the stronger the thing is that resists it, the more harm it does to it.
It is sharp-poynted at one end, and thick at the other end, which is caused by
reason that the moyster part, as heavier, goes to the bottom of it; so is the
top small, and the bottom thick.

Men write, How deep a thunderbolt goes into the earth.
that the thunderbolt goes never above five foot deep, when it falls upon
the Earth: which stands with reason, both because the strength of it is
weakened before it come so near the ground, and also because the continual
thickness of the Earth breaks the force, were it never so great.

Both Aristotle, Aristot. Seneca. Plinius.
Seneca, and Plinius divide this lightning into three kinds.

Of the first.
THe first is dry, Day lightning.
which burns not to be felt, but divides and appears with wonderful
swiftness: For being subtle and pure, it passes through the pores of any
thing, be they never so small; and such things as give place unto it, it
hurts not; but such things ^s resist, it divides and peirceth. For ^t will
melt money in men's purses, Money melted in men's Purses, and swords in Scabberds.
the purses being whole and unharmed. Yea, ^t will melt a sword in the
scabberd, and not hurt the scabberd at all. A wine ^essell it will cleave, and
yet the wine shall be so dull that by the space of three days, it will not
run out. It will hurt a man's hand, and not his glove. It will burn a man's
bones within him ^o ashes, and yet his skin and flesh shall appearefaire, as
though nothing had come to him. Yet otherwise the whole man in the moment of an
hour shall be burned to ashes, whereas his clothes shall not seem to have
been touched. It will also kill the child in the mothers belly, and not hurt
the mother: And all because the matter is very subtle, and thin, burning,
and passing through whatsoever it be, that will not give it free passage.

Of the second kind.
The Second kind is moist: Moist lightning.
and because it is very thin, it burns not to ashes, but only it blasteth or
scorcheth trees, corn and grass: and by reason of the moystness it makes all
things black that it comes near, as moist wood burning is smoaky, Why it
makes black.
and makes things near it to be black and smoaky.

Of the Third kind.
THe Third kind is most like our common fire that we have here on the earth
of gross and earthly substance; Gross lightning.
wherefore it leaves a print where it has been, or else consumes it into
ashes, if it be such a body as will be burned with fire.

Of the Marvels of Lightning, and their causes.
BEside the wonderful effects of lightning, The mmrvell of lightning.
that have been already remembered, there be many other which hereafter ensue,
with the reason and causes unto them belonging; as thus:

The nature of Lightning is, to poison beasts that are stricken therewith,
Lightning poysoneth.
as though they had been bit by a Serpent. The cause of this is that the matter
of Lightning is much infected with Brimstone and other poisonous metallike
substance, because it is thin, and gives them passage into every part of the
body.

It is notable that Seneca writes how winevessels of wood being burned with
lightning, Seneca. Wine not running, the Vessels being broken.
the wine would stand still, and not run out: the reason hereof, is, the swift
alteration and change, whereby also all the clamminesse of the wine is drawn
to the outward most part, and so keeps in the wine as in a skin, that by the
space of three days it will not run. It will also poison wine, insomuch that
they which drink thereof shall either be mad or dye of it: the cause hereof was
set^ forth before.

Lightning that strikes a poisonous beast, Lightning pur^eth a poisonous beast.
purges it from the poison, in so much that it causes a Serpent or Snake
which it kills, to breed worms, which otherwise it would not do: A Snake
breeds no Worms
but being purged from the natural poison by the swift peircing of the
Lightning, nothing lets but that it may breed worms as all other corrupt
flesh will do.

If Lightning strike one that sleeps, it opens his eyes; Lightning opens
his eyes that sleeps, and closes his that waketh.
and of one that waketh, it shuts the eyes. The cause is this, that it
waketh him that sleeps, and kills him, before he can close his eyes again.
And him that waketh it so amazeth, that he winketh, as he will do at any
sudden chance: so he dies, before he can open his eyes again.

All living things turn their face toward the stroke of the lightning, Living
things turn their face toward lightning.
because it is their nature, to turn their head if any thing come suddenly
behind them. The rest that have their face toward it when it comes, never
turn before they be killed.

The Reason why it kills the child in the mothers womb, not hurting the
mother, is the tenderness of the one and the strength of the other, when the
lightning is not vehement; otherwise both should dye together.

Sometime Lightning burns only the garments, shoes or hair of men, not
hurting their bodies, and then the Exhalation is nothing vehement.

Sometime it kills a man, and there appears no wound without, Garments
burnt, the body unhurt.
neither any hurt within, no not so much as any sign of burning: for then the
Exhalation which being kindled is called Lightning, is wonderful subtle and
thin, so swiftly passing through, that it leaves no mark or token behind it.

They that behold the Lightning, Lightning causes blindness, swelling or
Leprosy.
are either made blind, or their face swells, or they become Lepers; for that
Fiery Exhalation received into the pores of their face and eyes, makes their
face to swell and break out into a Leprosy, and also dries up the Chrystalline
humor of their Eyes, so that consequently they must needs be blind.

Eutropius shows that the same day in which Marcus Tullius Cicero was born,
Eutropius, Marcus Tullius Cicero. Apulia.
a certain Virgin of Rome riding into Apulia, was stricken with Lightning, so
that all her garments being taken from her without any rending, she lay stark
naked, the lasing of her breast being undone, and her hose-garters untyed, yea
her bracelets, collars, and rings being all loosed from her: Likewise her horse
lay dead, with his bridle and girts untyed.

The places of them that are burnt with Lightning, The wounds of Lighting cold.
are colder then the rest of their bodies, either because the greater heat
draws away the lesser, or else because that by the great violence the vital
heat is quite extinguished in that place.

The Sea-Calf is never hurt with Lightning: Sea Calfe not hurt with lightning.
wherefore the Emperors Tents were wont to be covered with their skins.

The Bay Trees and Box Trees are never, Bays and Box Trees seldom hurt with
Lightning.
or seldom stricken with Lightning; The Cause of these may be, the Hardness of
their Skin, which has so few Pore-holes, that the Exhalation cannot enter
into them. The Eagle Jupiters harnesse-bearer.


The Eagle also among Fouls, is not stricken with Lightning; Wherefore the
Poets feign, that the Eagle carries Jupiters Armor, which is Lightning. The
Reason may be the thickness and dryness of her feathers, which will not be
kindled with so swift a fire.

Of Storm Winds.
A Storm Wind is a thick Exhalation, violently moved out of a Cloud, Storm
winds.
without inflammation or burning.

The Matter of this Storm is all one with the Matter of Lightning, that has
been spoken of: namely, it is an Exhalation very hot and dry, and also gross,
and thick, so that it will easily be set on fire; but then it has another name
and other Effects.

The Form or Manner of the generation is such;

When abundance of that kind of Exhalation is gathered together within a
Cloud, which needs will have one way out or other, it breaks the cloud and
causes Thunder, as it has been taught before: but if the matter be very
thick, and the Cloud somewhat thin, then does it not rend the Cloud, but
falling down, beats the Cloud before it, and so is carried as an arrow out of
a bow.

It does always go before a great sudden shower: For when the Cloud is broken,
the water must needs fall down. Also it is so gross and so thick, that it
darkneth the Air and makes all the Lowest Region of the Air to be in a manner
as a dark Smoaky Cloud.

It causes Tempests in the Sea, and Wonderful great Danger to them that bear
Sail; whom if it overtake, it brings to utter destruction.

So sudden is this kind, that it cannot be resisted with sudden help: so
violent it is, that seeble force cannot withstand it.

Finally, It is so Troublesome with Thunder, Lightning, Rain, and Beasts:
besides these, Darkness and Cold, that it would make men at so near a Pinch, to
be at their Wits End if they were not accustomed to such Tumultuous Tempests.

Wherefore it were profitable to declare the Signs that go before it, to the
End Men might beware of it.

But they are so common to other Tempests, that either they are known well
enough, or else being never so well known, in a Seldom Calamity they would
little be feared.

The Sea-ships subject to more Danger, have more Help, if it be used in Time:
But no Signs foreknowne can profit the Dweller of the Land to keep his House
from Ruin, except it were to save his Life from the fall of his Mansion.

The sudden violence of this Tempest to him is more seldom times, but more
incurable when it comes then to the Mariner who has some Aid to look for by
his coming* the other if he escape with his life, may comfort himself that he
was near a great danger, and cast with himself to build up his House again.

Of Whirlwinds.
A Whirlwind, is a Wind breaking out of a Cloud, Whirlewinds.
Rouling or Winding round about, overthrowing that which stands near it, and
that which comes before it, carrying it with him aloft in the Air.

It differs from a Stormy Wind in three points.

First, in the Matter which is less in Quantity, and of thinner Substance.

Secondly, in the Moving, which is Circular, Winding about: whereas the Storm
blows Aslope and Sidelongs. Also a Whirlwind, in the Moving divides not it
self abroad and blows Directly, as the Storm does.

And Thirdly, in the manner of the generation; for a Storm does always come
out of one Cloud; but a Whirlwind sometime is Caused by means of two Contrary
Winds that meet toether.

In like manner, as we see in the streets of Cities, where the wind is beaten
back from two walls, meeting in the midst of the street, there is made a
little whirlwind, which whisking round about, takes up the dust, or strawes,
and blows it about, after the very similitude of the great and fearful
whirlewind.

The reason of the going about is this, that when the walls beat back the wind
from them, which abounds in that place, and those winds when they meet, by
reason of equal force on both sides, can neither drive one the other back
again, nor yet pass thorrow one the other; it must needs be, that they must
both seek a way on the side at once, and consequently be carried round about,
the one as it were pursuing the other, until there be space enough in the
air, that they may be parted asunder.

The matter of a whirlewind, is not much differing from the matter of storm
and lightning, that is, an Exhalation hot and dry, breaking out of a cloud in
diverse parts of it, which causes the blowing about. Also it is caused, as it
has been said, by two, or more winds, blowing from diverse places, which may
be of particular causes, that have been showed before in the Chapter of winds;
this tempest is noisome to man and beast, Sea and Land, things living, The
troubles of whirlewinds.
and life lacking: For it will take up both men and beasts, stones and clods of
earth: which when it has borne a great way, will not be so courteous as to set
them down again, but negligently lets them fall from a great height, or
else violently throws them down to the earth.

It breaks Trees, winding them about, and pulling them up by the roots. It
turns about a Ship, and bruiseth it in pieces with other mischiefs besides.

Of fired Whrlewinds.
SOmetime a whirlewind is set on fire within the cloud, Fired whirlewinds.
and then breaking forth, flies round like a great cartwheele, terriblie to
behold, turning and over browing all dry things that it comes near, as
Houses, Woods, Corn, Grass, and what soever else stands in the way.

It differs not from a whirlewind, saving that it is kindled and set on fire,
so appearing, else the generation of both is called one.

Of Circles.
THe Circle called Halon is a garland of diverse colors that is seen about the
Sun, Circles about the Sun, the Moon, and other Stars, Jupiter and Venus
Planets.
the Moon, or any other Star, especially about Jupiter or Venus, for their
great brightness. It is called of the Greeks a compassed plat, of the Latins,
a Crown or Garland.

The matter wherein it is made, is a cloud of equal thickness, or thinness,
coming directly under the body of the Sun, the Moon, or other Stars, into
which the light of the heavenly body is received and so appears round,
because the Star is round: Circles in the water.
as a stone cast into the water, makes many round circels, dilating in
breadth, until the violence of the moving is ended; so is it in the air; the
light beams peircing it, cause broad circles to be dilated, which appear
white, The colors of circles.
purple, black, red, green, blew, and other colors, according to the
disposition of the clouds matter. The cause of such colors, is showed before
in the peculiar treaty of colors.

This circle is oftener seen about the Moon, then about the Sun, because the
heat of the Sun draws the vapors too high, where it cannot be made. Also,
because the night is a more quiet time then the day from wind, it is more often
in the night, then in the day. Seldom, about other Stars, because their
light beams, are too weak often to pierce a cloud: yet oftener about small
stars then the Sun, because the light of the Sun pierces the cloud more
forcibly, than that this Halon can many times be cause.

Otherwhiles it is seen about a candle, Circles at bout a candle.
which must be in a very thick and gross air of such proportionate
thickness, that it may receive the light as the cloud does from the stars, as
in the smoaky places, or hot houses.

This kind of circle is sometimes like a Rainebow, saving that it is a whole
circle unless the star under which it is caused, be not all risen, or else
the cloud, in which it is seen, The fignes of these circles.
be not all come under the Star, or after it has come under some part thereof,
be dissolved from the rest.

These Circles be sings of tempests and winds, Virgilius, Aratus, Poets.
as witness both Virgil, and Aratus.

The Wind shall blow from that quarter, where the Circle first begins to
break. The cause whereof is this, that the Circle is broken by the Wind that
is above which is not yet come down toward us, but by this effect above; we
may gather, both that it will come, and also from what quarter.

A great Circle about the Moon, Sign of Frost.
betokens great cold and frost to follow after.

But if it vanish away and be dissolved altogether, Sign of faite weather.
it is a sign of fair weather.

If it be broken in many parts, Sign of tempest.
it signifies tempest.

If it wax altogether thicker and darker, Sign of rain.
it is a forewarning of rain.

One alone, Ptolomeus Sign of fair weather.
after Ptolomee, pure and white, vanishing away by little and little, is a
token of fair weather.

Two or three at once, portendeth tempest: if they be ^uddy, they show wind to
come; Sign of Snow.
and toward snow, they seem as it were broken and rocky.

Being dark or dim, they signify all these foresaid events, with more force
and abundance: it is oftener caused in Autumn and Spring, then in Winter or
Summer: the cause is the temperatenesse of the time.

The cause why it appears sometime greater, and sometime lesser, is in the
quality of the matter, which as it is gross or thin, will more or less be
dilated and stretched abroad, and also as some will have it, of the weakness
of man's sight. Of which, Aristotle Aristotle.
brings an example in one Antipho, Antipho.
which did always see his own image before him in the air, as in a glass:
which he affirms to have been for the weakness of his sight-beames that
could not pierce the air, so that they were reflected again to himself.

And thus much for Halon, and the causes, signs, or tokens of it.

Of the Rainebow
THe Rainebow, Raynebow
is the apparition of certain colors in a cloud, opposite against the Sun,
in fashion of half a Circle. Possidonius said, it was the Suns looking
glass, Possidonius
wherein his image was represented, and that the blue color was the proper
color of the cloud; red of the Sun; all the other colors of commixtion.

It differs manifoldly from Halon: for the Raynebow is always opposite
against the Sun: but Halon is directly under it.

They differ not only in place, but also in fashion: the Raynebow is but half
a Circle: the Halon is a whole Circle.

Likewise they vary in color: for the Raynebow is more dim, and of purple
color; the Halon, whiter and brighter.

Also, in continance; for the Rainbow may continue longer then Halon.

The image of the Rainebow may be seen on a wall, A (...) stone (...)
the Sun striking through a fix poynted stone, called Iris, or any other
Crystal of the same fashon; also through some glass window.

Halon is seen about Candles, in smokie places, as are baths and kitchings.

The manner of the generation of the Rainebow is such: There is opposite
against the Sun, a thick watery cloud, which is already resolved into dewy
drops of rain, A similitude.
is (for a gross similitude) is seen on the potlid, when the Water in the
Vessel has sodden, or is very hot, the lid will be all full of small drops of
water, which come from the water in the Vessel; first, by heat resolved into
smoke; after, when it cannot go at large, it is resolved again. Wherefore
upon such a cloud, the Sun beams striking, as upon a smooth glass, do
express the image of the Sun unperfectly, for the great distance. Or else the
Sun beams striking into a hollow cloud, where they are refracted or broken,
and so come to the eyes of him that beholds the Rainbow.

The similitude thereof is seen, when men sail or row in Boats, The similitude
of the Rainebow.
the Sun shines upon the water, which casts on the vessels side, the
colors and image of the Rainbow.

Lifewise, water in an urinall holden against the Sun, receives the light,
and shows colors on the wall.

There be two kinds of Rainbows, one of the Sun, Rainbow of the Sun.
another of the Moon; the one by day, the other by night: the Rainebow of the
Sun often, Rainbow of the Moon.
but of the Moon very seldom, in so much that it can be but twice in fifty
years, and that when the Moon is in the East or West, full in perfect
opposition.

It has not been many times seen since the writing of Histories, yet
sometimes, and for the rareness, is taken for a great wonder. Yet is it in
color nothing so beautiful as the suns, but for the most part white as
milk: other diversities of colors are scant perceived. When it appears, it
is said to signify tempest.

The time of the Rainbow is often after the point of Autumn, both for the
placing of the Sun in competent lowness, and also for abundance of matter,
seldom or never is the Rainebow see about the midst of Summer.

There may be many Rainebows at one time, yet commonly but one principal, of
which the rest are but shaddows and images; the second shadow of the first,
the third of the second, as appears by placing of their colors.

It remains to show why it is but half a circle, or less, and never more;
and why the whole cloud receives not the same colors that the Raynebow has.
The cause of the first is, because the center or middle part of the Raynebow,
that is Diametrally opposite to the center of the same, is always either in
the Horizon (that is, the circle cutting off our fight of Heaven by the earth)
or under it. The cause why the whole cloud is not colored, is, because that in
the midst, the beams as strong, pierce through, but on the edges where they
are weaker, they are reflected or refracted.

Now for so much as GOD made the Raynebow a sign and Sacrament of the promise,
some think it was never seen before the flood: their reason may be this, that
the earth, after the first creation was then so fruitful, that it needed hone
or very little Rain, so that such dark clouds were not often gathered, the
fruitful ground not so easily remitted his moisture, that then was fat and
clammy, hard to be drawn up: so it might be, that there was no Rainebow
before, as we cannot find that ever, it rained before. But whether it were or
not, it is certain, that then it became a Sacrament, whereas it was none
before which when we behold, it behooves us to remember the truth of God in all
his promises, to his glory and our comfort.

The milk way, called of some the way to S. James, and Watling Street.
THe milk way is a white circle seen in a clear night, The white circle seed
in the night
as it were in the firmament, passing by the sings of Sagittarius and Gemini.

The cause thereof is not agreed upon among Philosophers, whose opinons I
thought best to report, before I come to the most probable causes.

First of all, Pythagoras is charged with a Poetical fable, pythagoras
as though it had been caused by reason that the Sun did once run out of his
path way, and burned this part, whereof it looks white.

Others, as Anaxagoras and Democritus said, Anaxagoras Democri^^^
that it was the light of certain Stars, shining by themselves, of their
own light, which in the absence of the Sun might be seen. But this opinion is
also false; for the Stars have no light of themselves, but of the Sun: also
if it were so, it should appear about other Stars.

Democritus is also reported to have said, that it was nothing else but
innumerable little Stars, which with their confuse light, caused that
whiteness: to this opinion, Cardanus.
Cardane seems to subscribe.

The Poets have four fables of it: one of Phaeton, Phaeton.
which on a time guided the Chariot of the Sun, and wandering out of the way,
did burn that place, wherefore of Jupiter he was stricken down with lightning.

The second, That it is the high street in Heaven, Ovid. Me^a.
that goes straight to Jupiters palace, and both sides of it the common sort
of gods do dwell.

The third, Hebe.
that Hebe, one which was Jupiters Cupbearer, on a time stumbled at a straw,
and shed the Wine or Milk that was in the Cup, which colored that part of
Heaven to this day: wherefore she was put out of her office.

The fourth, Apollo.
That Apollo stood there to fight against the Giants, which Jupiter made to
appear, for a perpetual memory.

Theophrastus, Theophrastus.
a Philosopher, affirmed, That it was the joining together, or came of the 2
half Globes, which made ^t appear more light in that place then another.

Others said, it was the reflection of the shining light of fire or star
light, ^s it is seen in a glass, but then it should ^e moveable.

Diodorus affirmed, Diodorus.
that it was Heavenly fire, condensed or made thick into a circle, and so
became visible, whereas the rest, for the pureness, clearness, and thinness,
could not be seen.

Possidonious, Possidonius.
whose mind to many seems very reasonable, said, it is the ^nfusion of she
hea^ of the Stars, which therefore is in a Circle, contrary to the Zodiake,
Zodiake.
(out of which the Sun never wandereth) because it might temp^^ the whole
compass with vital and livel^hea, Although in my mind he has rather expressed
the final cause, then the efficient.

Aristotle's opinion is, Aristotle.
that it should be the beams of a great Circle which (...) caused by a cloud
or Exhalation draw^ up by those Stars, which be calle^ Sporades. Sporades.
This opinion of Aristotle's (...) misliked of most men that have travailed in
this science; and worthil^* For if it were of the nature of elements as
Exhalations are, it would be at length consumed. But this circl^^ never
corrupts, therefore it is not (...) Exhalations. Also it neither increase^
nor diminishes, which is a plain pro^^ that it consists not of elemental
matter, although Aristotle seem to make double circle, one celestial, another
elemental.

The last opinion is, of them that (...) it is the nature of heaven, thicker
(...) substance, then other parts of Heaven be, having some likeness to the
substance of the Moon, which being light ^^ed by the same as all the Stars b^
appears white. And this opinion I take to be most probable, because that
sentence of Star light seems not so reasonably, to be only in that place,
and not elsewhere.

The final cause of this Milke-white circle, has been already touched in the
opinion of Possidonius, Possidonius
whereunto also Plinius in the 18. Book, Plinius
and 29. Chapter of his natural History agrees, affirming, that it is very
profitable for the generation and fruitful increase of things that grow on the
ear^h.

The Mathematitians that have measured the breadth thereof, affirm, The
breadth of this circles
that toward the north it passes over the Ecliptical line of the ninth
sphere, from the 18. degree of Gemini, unto 2 degrees of Cancer, which is 13.
degrees and toward the South, from the 8 degree of Sagittarius, to the 13
degree of the same sign: and because it is there divided into two branches (as
may easily be seen in a clear night) it reaches from 24 of Sagittarius, to
the 2 degree of Capricorn.

This circle, if it be of the nature of Heaven, is unproperly placed among
Meteors or impressions: but because of Aristotle's mind, who will have it to be
an impression kindled, and their opinion which think it proceeds of the light
of Stars, it is not without good cause in this place treated of.

Of beams, or streams of light, appearing through a Cloud.
THere is yet another kind of impression caused by the beams of the Sun,
Beams or streams.
stricken through a watery cloud, being of unequal thinness, and is thinner
in one part then in another, so that it cannot receive the beams in any other
form, then that they appear direct or slope downward of diverse colors; and
the same that are the colors of the Rainebow, though not so evident, because
the reflection is not so strong. They vary in colors: some are more urple or
ruddy, when the cloud is thicker; some yellow and whitish, when the cloud is
thinner, and so other colors are caused likewise, whereof you may read the
proper cause in the colors of clouds and other like parts of this Treatise.

The common people call it the descending of the holy Ghost, or our Ladies
Assumption, because these things are painted after such a (...) Others say that
it is rain, striking down in another place, as though they (...) see the drops
falling. And they are (...) altogether deceived, but in the time; for soon
after it will rain, because this impression appears out of a watery cloud.
They are called by diverse names, as Rods, Wands, Cords of Tents, unto which
they are not touch unlike staves and little pillars, when they seem greater
and thicker, many being joined together.

The Rainebow, the Circles, and these light Beams, are all of one manner of
generation, in so much that if you divide the Circle, it shall be a Rainbow; if
you draw it straight in length, it makes streams or beams. Herein they
agree, namely, in form and matter, but they differ in outward form, which we
may call fashion, as the one is round, the other half round, and the third
direct, straight or falling aslope. Also they differ in place about which they
stand: for streams are only about the Sun; Rainebowes about the Sun
often, and seldom about the Moon; but circles both about the Sun and the
Moon, and also about any other of (...) the Stars, yet rather and oftener
about bright Stars.

To make an end of these streams, they appear diversely, after the fashion and
place wherein the cloud hangs, in respect of the sun; for sometimes they are
seen only in the edge of a cloud, all the breadth of that cloud: sometime
through the midst of a cloud, being thinner (...) then in other parts, and then
they are spread round about like a tent or pavillion used in War. They are most
commonly seen in such times as there (...) abundancee of rain, which they by
their apparition do signify not yet to be ended.

And thus much concerning direct light beams, called Rods, etc.

Of many Suns. Many Suns at once.

IT is strange and marvelous to behold the likelihood of that which Alexander
the Great, Alexander the great.
sending word to Darius, Darius.
said to be impossible, that Two Suns should rule the World. But oftentimes,
men have seen, as they thought in the firmament, not only two Suns, but
oftener three Suns, and many more in number thought not so often appearing.
These, how wonderful soever they appear, proceed of a natural cause, which we
will endeavor to express. They are nothing else but Idols or Images of the
Sun, represented in an equal, smooth, and watery cloud placed on the side of
the Sun, and sometimes one both sides, into which the Sun beams being
received, as in a glass, express the likeness of fashion and light that is
in the Sun appearing as though there were many Suns* whereas indeed there
is but one, and all the rest are images.

This thick and watery cloud, is not said to be under the Sun; for then it
would make the Circles, called crowns or garlands: it is not opposite to the
Sun, for then would it make the Rainbow: but it is said to be on the side
where the image may be best represented. Also it may not be too far off, for
then the beams will be too feeble to be reflected: neither yet too near; for if
it so be, the Sun will disperse it: but in a competent and middle distance:
for so representation of many Suns is caused.

They are most often seen in the morning and evening, about the rising or
going down of the Sun, seldom at noone time, or about the midst of the day,
because the heat will soon dissolve them: yet have there been some seen, which
began in the morning, and continnued all the day long, unto the evening. Many
sm^l Suns like stars. Similitude.
Sometimes there appear many little Suns, like unto little stars, which are
caused after the same sort as we do see a man's face to be expressed in all the
pieces of a broken glass. So when the cloud has many separations, there
appear many Suns, on one, side of the true Sun, sometimes great and sometimes
little, as the parts of the cloud separated are in quantity.

They do naturally betoken tempest and rain to follow, The signification of
many Suns.
because they cannot appear but in a watery disposition of the Air.

Also, if they appear on the Southside of the Sun, they signify a greater
tempest, then if they appear on the North-side. The reason is alleged,
because the Southern Vapor is sooner resolved into Water then is the Northern.

For a supernatural signification, they have oftentimes been noted to have
portended the contention of Princes of kingdoms: As not long before the
Contention of Galba, Otho, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius.
and Vitellius for the Empire of Rome, there appeared three Sun. Also of late,
toward the slaughter of Lewis King of Hungary, were seen three Suns, betokening
three Princes that contended for the kingdom, namely Ferdinnando since
Emperor, John Vayvode, and the great Turk.

Of many Moons.
AFter the treaty of many Suns, it were not hard for any man without farther
instruction to know the natural Cause of many Moons; Many Moons.
For they are likewise Images of the Moon, represented in an equal Cloud, which
is watery, smooth and polished, even like a glass.

Some call them (as Plinius says) night-Suns; Plinius.
because they, joined with the light of the true Moon, give a great shining
light, to drive away the shadow and darkness of the night.

It were superfluous to write more of their Causes or Effects, which are all
one with those that have been declared of the Suns.

It may be doubted, Why other stars are not so represented.
why the other stars do not likewise expness their image in watery Clouds; and
so the number of them, as to our sight, should be multiplied.

It may be Answered that their light or beams are too feeble and weak to
express any such Similitude or likeness in the watery Clouds. For although they
have garlands or circles about them, that are caused in a Vapor that is under
them, yet it is manifest that this Apparition has not need of so strong a
light as is required to print the images of them in the Clouds. Again, the
Garlands are direct under, and therefore apter to receive such Apparition.

It may be again Objected that the Stars have their Image perfectly and
sufficiently expressed in glasses here on the Earth; Objection.
yea and at the daytime, when their light is either none, or most feeble and
weak: as we see it is used at Midsummer to behold that great star called Syrius
in a glass even at Noondays. Syrius a great Star seen at noone in Summer.


Also we see every night the image of the Stars in calm and quiet standing
waters: then what should let but that their images might also be expressed in
watery Clouds?

Hereto may be answered that the Let is in the Cloud, An answer.
which is neither so hard as is the glass, nor yet so continual as is the
water, but consists of innumerable small drops: so that except the light of
the stars were stronger, it can in them express no uniform images of them, as
it does in glasses and in the water. Notwithstanding, in Writers of Wonders we
read some such likething sometime to have chanced.

There has been often seen many Suns in the daytime and after the Sun
setting: at the rising of the full Moon there have appeared many Moons, which
was by this means, that the same Cloud that received the Sunbeams in the
morning, tarried in the same place, and at the Moons rising was ready also to
receive her image.

Of Wonderful Apparitions.
WE will close this Book with a brief declaration of the natural Causes of many
things that are seen in the Air, Wonderful apparitions.
very wonderful and strange to behold, which in these latter Years have been
often seen and beheld to the great admiration of all men, not without the
singular providence of God, to forewarne us of many dangers that hang over us
in these most Perilous Times.

The apparitions of which, as it is most wonderful, so the searching of the
Cause to us is most difficult: a great deal the rather, because no man has
hitherto enterprised (to my knowledge) to seek out any cause of them, but all
men have taken them as immediate miracles, without any natural mean or cause
to procure them.

And I truly do acknowledge that they are sent of God as wonderful signs to
declare his Power, and move us to amendment of life; indeed miraculous, but not
yet so that they want a natural cause; for if they be well weighed and
considered, it is not hard to find that they differ much from such Miracles as
are recorded in the Scripture and admitted of Divines. So that as I abhor the
Opinion of Epicurus to think that such things come by Chance, but rather by the
determined purpose of Gods providence: so I consent not with them that suppose
when any thing is derived from any natural cause, God the chief and best Cause
of all things is excluded.

Some of these Wonderful Apparitions consist of Circles and Rainbowes of
diverse fashions and placings, as one within another, the edge of one touching
another, one dividing or going through another, with like placing of small
Circles about great Circles or parts of small Circles, some with the ends
upward, some downward; some aside, and some across; but all for the most part
in uniform order constituted or placed for the order of them pleasant to
behold, but for the strangness somewhat fearful. Such a like Apparition is made
with the Suns or Moons images joined unto these Circles set also in good and
uniform order.

The cause of all these is the meeting together of all those several Causes
that make the Circles, Rainbowes, Streams and Images of the Sun or Moon, which
joined all together, make the wonderful sight of Rainbowes, positions of
Circles, Optice. Catoptrice
Crosses and diverse Lights which pertain to the knowledge of Optice and
Catoptrice that teach how by diverse refractions and reflects, ons of beams such
visions are caused. So that he which will know how they are generated, must
return into the several Treatises of Rainbowes, Circles, Streams and Images of
the Sun or Moons and if in them he find not knowledge sufficient to instruct
him, I must send him to the Demonstrations of Perspective, where he shall want
nothing.

Another sort of them, no less often beheld within these few years then the
former, but a great deal more strange and wonderful to look upon, are the
Sights of Armies fighting in the Air, of Castles, Cities and Towns, with whole
Countries, having in them Hills, Valleys, Rivers, Woods, also Beasts, Men and
Fouls, Monsters of which there are no such kinds on the Earth, and finally all
manner of things and actions that are on the Earth, as Burials, Processions,
Judgments, Combats, Men, Women, Children, Horses, Crowns, Arms of certain
Noble men and Countries, Weapons of all sorts, sometimes Stars^, Angels as they
are painted with the Image of Christ crucified, beseiging of Castles and
Towns, many things and gestures done by men or beasts, thevery Similitude of
Persons known to the Beholders; as of late was seen the very Image of the
Emperor Charles, insomuch that they which beheld it, put off their Caps,
thinking verily it had been he: and of John Frederick Prince Elector of Saxony,
who that time was Prisoner with the Emperor: Also the Image of small Crosses,
which has been not only in the Air, but also on the Earth, on men's apparel,
on dishes, platters, pots, and all other things, so that the Jews have been
full angry that they could neither wash nor rub them out of their apparel. In
Germany also Fires and many such things as it were long stories seen in the Air.

All these wonderful Apparitions may be caused two manner of ways; the one
Artificially, the other Naturally.

Artificially, by certain glasses and Instruments made according to a secret
part of that knowledge which is called Catoptrice; Catoptrice.
and so peradventure some of them have been caused; but

The most part (doubtless) Naturally, when the disposition of the Air has been
such, that it has received the image of many things placed and done on Earth.

And because it is apt to receive diverse images, as well in one place as in
another, these monstrous forms and strange actions or stories proceed of the
joining of diverse forms and actions: as if two Histories were confusedly
painted in one, the whole Picture would be strange: or (as the Poet says) if a
Painter, Horarius.
to a man's head, should set a horses neck, and after, diverse feathers.
Sometimes also one image is multiplied in the Air into many or infinite, as are
letters and crosses which fill the Air, even beneath: And the light of the Sun
received into little parts, makes to appear as it were many small stars.

Let this suffice concerning these wonderful Apparitions: once again
admonishing the Reader, though I have enterprised to declare these by natural
Reason, yet verily believing that not so much as one Sparrow falls to the
ground without Gods providence. I do also ackowledg Gods providence brings
these to pass, to such ends as before I have showed, using these causes as
means and instruments to do them.

The Fourth Book.
Of Watery Impressions.
THose be Watery Impressions that consist most of Water.

In the Treaty of them are wont to be handled these Impression; namely, Clouds,
Rain, Dew, hoar Frost, Hail, Snow, Springs, and the great Sea it self.

Of Clouds.
A Cloud is a Vapor cold and moist, drawn out of the Earth and Waters by the
heat of the Sun into the middle region of the Air; Clouds.
where by cold it is so knit together, that it hangs until either the weight
or some resolution causes it to fall down.

The place wherein the Clouds do hang, is said to be in the middle region of
the Air, because men see it is necessary that there should be a cold which
should make those Vapors so gross and thick, which for the most part are drawn
so thin from the Earth, that they are invisible as the Air is.

And although they are known often times, as Aristotle witnesses, Astristor.
to be in the lowest region of the Air, near to the Earth, insomuch that
sometimes they fall down to the Earth with great noise, to the great fear of
men, and no less loss and danger: yet may it be reasonably thought that these
Clouds were generated in the middle region of the Air far distant from the
Earth, which by their heaviness do by little and little sink down lower into
the lowest region, and sometimes also fall down to the Earth.

The Common Opinion is, The height of the Clouds.
that they go not higher then nine mile; which because it leans to no
reason, is uncertain.

Albertus Magnus whose reason also is to be doubted of, Albertus Magnus.
affirms that the Clouds do scarce exceed Three miles in height when they are
highest.

And some let not to say that oftentimes they ascend not past the half of One
mile in height.

Again, Others pretending to find out the truth by Geometrical Demonstrations,
make it above Fifty mile to the place where the generation of Clouds is.

How these men take the distance from the Earth, it is uncertain: whether that
they assign the least distance and mean it from the highest parts of the
Earth as are hill tops, or from the common plain.

Again, whether they that assign the highest distance to be from the lowest
valleys of the Earth, or from the hill tops.

The Reason before showed, moves me to think that the most usual and common
generation, I mean the condensation or making thick of these thin Vapors into
Clouds, is in the middle region of the Air: but for the distance of the Clouds
when they be generated, I think they be sometime Nine mile, sometime Three
mile, sometime Half a mile, and sometime less then a Quarter of a mile from the
Earth.

Of Mists.
THere be Two kinds of Mists; Mists.
the one ascending, the other descending.

That which ascends, goes up cut of the Water or the Earth as Smoke, but
does not commonly spread over all other parts: it is seen in Rivers and moist
places.

The other Mist that goes down toward the Earth, is when any Vapor is lifted
up into the Air, by the heat of the Sun, which being not strong enough to draw
it so high that the Cold may knit it, suffers it after it is a little made
thick, to fall down again, so it fills all the Air with the gross Vapors, and
is called Mists, being usually a Sign of fair Weather.

Of empty Clouds.
THere be certain Clouds that are empty, Empty oleuds.
and send no Rain; they come of two sorts.

One sort are the Remnants of a Cloud that has rained, which cannot be
converted into water for their dryness.

Another sort is of them that are drawn up out of wett and dry places, and be
rather Exhalations then Vapors; that is, they be dry, hot and light, so that it
were hard for them to be turned into Rain: they look white like flocks of
wool, when the light strikes into them.

There be also empty Clouds, which when the Winds have dispersed abroad any
Cloud, are scattered over all the sky: but these Clouds though for a time they
be empty, yet because they consist of such a substance as is watery, they may
be, and are oftentimes gathered together, and give plentiful Rain.

Of the Colors of Clouds we have spoken in the Second Book of Fiery Meteors,
Of the colors of Clouds.
where those Colors and the causes of them are described, which seem to be
Fiery, or may be thought to be Inflammations or burnings, as to be Red, Fiery
and Yellowish.

But besides those there be White, Black, Blew and Green.

White clouds be thin, and not very Watery: so that the light received in them,
makes them to appear White.

Black clouds be full of thick, gross and earthly matter that makes them look
so dark.

Blew clouds be full of thick drose and earthly, as the Black: so the light
received in them, makes them to seem Blew.

Green clouds are altogether watery, resolved into water, which receiving into
them the night, appear Green as Water does in a great vessel, or in the Sea and
Rivers.

Of Rain.
AFter the generation of clouds is well known, Rain.
it shall not be hard to learn from whence the Rain comes.

For after the matter of the cloud being drawn up, and by cold made thick (as
is said before) heat following, which is most commonly of the Southern wind,
or any other wind of hot temper, does resolve it again into Water, and so it
falls in drops, to give increase of fruit to the Earth, and move men to give
thanks to God.

There be small showers of small drops, and there be great storms of great
drops.

The showers with small drops, proceed either of the small heat that resolves
the clouds: or else of the great distance of the clouds from the Earth.

The streams with great drops contrariwise do come of great heat, resolving
or melting the cloud, or else of small distance from the Earth. Whereof we see
a plain experiment, when Water is powered forth from an high place the drops
are small, but if it be not from high, it will either have no drops, or very
great.

The cause why rain falls in round drops, is both for that the parts desire
the same form that the whole has, which is round, and also that so it is best
preserved against all contrary qualities: like as we see Water powered upon dry
or greasy things to gather it self into roundels, to avoid the contrariety of
heat and dryness.

It is not to be omitted, Why rain water is not salt.
that rain Water, although a great part of it be drawn out of the Sea, yet
most commonly it is sweet not salt.

The cause is, because it is drawn up in such small Vapors, and that salt part is
consumed by the heat of the Sun.

The rain water doutlesse does more increase and cherish things growing on the
Earth, then any other Water wherewith they may be Watered, because the rain
Water retains much of the Suns heat in it that is no small comfort to all
growing plants. The Water that comes from Heaven, in rain, will sooner come
to putrefaction, or stinking, then any other, because it has been made very
subtle by heat and also for that it is mixed with so many Earthly and
corruptible substances.

Rain water, Avicen.
that falls in the summer, by Avicens judgment, is more wholesome then other
Water, because it is not so cold and moist as other Waters be, but hotter and
lighter.

Sometime there is salt rain, Salt rain.
when some Exhalation which is hot and dry, is commixed with the Vapor whereof
the rain consists.

Sometime it is bitter, Bitter rain.
when some burnt Earthly moisture is mixed with it.

This rain is both unwholesome, and also unfruitful. In these countries,
there is great store and plenty of rain, because the Sun is of such temperate
heat, that it gathers many Vapors, and by immoderate heat does not consume
them. But in the East parts, in some ho^ Countries, it never or seldom is seen
to rain, as in Egypt and Syria, but in stead of rain, Egypt has the River
Nilus, The River Nilus.
whose overflowings do marvilously fatten the Earth. In Syria and other like
Countries they have more plentiful dew then we have, which does likewise make
their Earth exceeding fruitful.

Seneca testifies that the Rain soaketh no deeper into the Earth then ten Foot
deep. Seneca.


Of the Signs of Rain.
FIrst, Signs of Rain.
If the Sky be red in the morning, it is a token of Rain, because those Vapors
which cause the Redness, will be shortly resolved into Rain.

If a dark cloud be at the Sun rising, in which the Sun soon after is hid,
it will dessolve it, and rain will follow. If then appear a cloud, and after,
Vapors are seen to ascend up to it, that betokens rain.

If the Sun or Moon look pale, look for rain.

If the Sun in the East seem greater then commonly he appears, it is a
sign of many Vapors which will bring rain.

If the Sun be seen very early, or few Stars appear in the night, it
betokens rain.

The often changing of the Winds, also shows tempest.

The most sure and certain sign of rain is the Southern wind, which with
his warmenesse always resolves the clouds into rain.

When there is no dew at such times as by nature of the time there should be,
rain follows: for the matter of the dew is turned into the matter of watery
Clouds.

If in the West, about the Sun setting there appear a black cloud, it will
rayn that night, because that cloud shall want heat to disperse it.

When much dust is raised up, and when the woods make a great noise, some
tempest is toward.

Hard stones will be moist, and sweat against rain: lamps and candles by
sparkling, frogs crying, Trees breaking, leaves falling, and dust clottering,
forewarne us of tempest.

Fleas, flies and gnats, bite sore toward a tempest, Kin^ feed greedily, birds
seek their victuals more busily: for in the gross Air disposed to rayn,
their stomachs are hotter, and they more hungry. But these kind of signs
pertain not so properly to Meteorologie, as to Mariners and Husbandry, which
have a great many more then these. And Virgil in the first book of Georgikes,
has a great number for them that list to learn. Wherefore let these hitherto
suffice.

Of monstrous or prodigious rain.
HItherto we have made mention only of natural rain, Of Monstrous Rain.
and that which is common, which no man does marvel at. But there is some time
such rain, that worthily may be wondered at: as when it raineth worms,
frogs, fishes, blood, milk, flesh, stones wheat, iron, wool, brick, and
quicksilver. For historic makes mention, that at diverse times, it has rayned
such things whose natural cause, for the most part, we will go about to
express, notwithstanding, accounting them among such wonders, as God sends
to be considered for such ends, as we have before declared, Worms and Frogs.
Worms and Frogs may thus be generated: The fat Exhalations are drawn up
into the Air, by a temperature of hot and moist, such vermin may be generated
in the Air, as they are one the Earth, without copulation of male and female.
Or else that with the Exhalations and Vapors, their Seed and Eggs are drawn
up, which being in the clouds brought to form, fall down among the rain.

Likewise the spawn of fishes, Fishes.
being drawn up, makes fishes to rain out of the clouds. Milk.
The vehement heat of the Sun in Summer, and specially in hot Countries,
draws milk out of the Paps of Beasts and Cattle, which being carried up in
Vapors, and dissolved again into milk, falls down like rain.

After the same manner, Blood.
the Sun also from places where blood has been spilt draws up great quantity
of blood, and so it raineth blood.

It raineth flesh, Flesh.
when great quantity of blood being drawn up, it is clotted together, and
seems to be flesh.

Avicen says, That a whole Calfe fell out of the Air; Avicen.
and some would make it seem credible, that of Vapors and Exhalations, with the
power of heavenly bodies concurring, a Calfe might be made in the Clouds. But I
had rather think, that this Calfe was taken up in some storm of Whirlwinde,
and so let fall again, then agree to so monstrous a generation.

It is a great deal more reasonable, Stones.
that stones of earthly matter gathered in clouds, should be generated as we
said before of the Tunder-bolt. Yet some men think, that wind in Caves of the
Earth breaking upward violently, carries before it, earth and stones into the
air, which cannot long abide, but fall down, and are counted among prodigious
rain. Exhalations that be earthly and drawn out of clay, Brick.
have much gross substance in them, which gathered together, and by great heat
burned in the clouds, make brick, which is no great marvel.

He that has seen an Eggs-shel full of dew drawn up by the Sun into the Air,
Wheat.
in a May morning, will not think it incredible, that Wheat and other Grain
should be drawn up in much hotter Countries then ours is, much rather the
Meal or Flower which is lighter.

A certain mostinesse, like Wool, Wool.
as is upon Quinces, Willowes, and other young Fruits and Trees, is drawn up
of the Sun among the Vapors and Exhalations, which being clottered together,
falls down like locks of Wool.

Quicksilver, Quicksilver.
all men know with small heat, will be resolved into most thin Vapors, whereof
when quantity is drawn up, it falls down again: As it is read, that once
at Rome it rained Quicksilver, wherewith the Brazen Money being rubbed it
looked like silver.

Titus Livius makes mention that it rained chalk, Chalk. T. Livius.
whereof the cause cannot be hid to them that read how stone and brick come in
the Air.

Iron has also rained out of the clouds, Iron.
and sundry times, as Histories witness, whereof this has been the cause. The
general matter of all metals which is quicksilver and brimstone, with the
special matter of mixtion that makes Iron, were all drawu together and there
concocted into the metal: so came the strange Rain of Iron.

Avicen says he saw a piece of Iron that fell out of the clouds, Avicen.
that weighed about an hundred pound weight, whereof very good swords were
afterward made.

Of Dew.
DEw is that Vapor which in Spring and Autumn is drawn up by the Sun in the
daytime, Dew.
which because it is not carried into the middle region of the Air, abiding in
the lower region, by cold of the night is condensed into water, and falls
down in very small drops.

There is common Dew, and sweet Dew.

One kind of sweet Dew is called Manna being white like Sugar, Manna.
which is made of thick and clammy Vapors, which makes it so to fall thick and
white. It falls only in the East parts.

As for that Manna which God rained to the Israelites, it was altogether
miraculous.

In Arabia (as Plinius writes) is a very precious kind of Dew that is called
Ladanum, Plinius. Arabia.
which falling upon the herb Cusus, Ladanum. Cusus.
and mixed with the juice of that herb which Goats do eat, is gathered off
Goats hairs and kept for a treasure.

There is another kind of sweet Dew that falieth in England, called the
Meldews, which is as sweet as honey being of such substance as honey is: it is
drawn out of sweet herbs and flowers.

There is also a bitter kind of Dew that falls upon herbs, Bitter dew.
and lies on them like branne or meal; namely because it is of an Earthly
Exhalation, and so remains when the moisture is drawn away: This Dew kills
herbs.

The common Dew drunk of Cattle does rott them, because the matter is full of
viscosity, bringing them to a fluxion.

There be Three things that hinder Dew from falling; that is, great heat, great
cold, and wind; for Dew falls in the most temperate calm time.

Of Hoare-Frost.
HOare frost, Hoare frost.
or white frost, is nothing else but dew congealed by overmuch cold. The South
and East wind do cause dew, but the North and Northern winds do freeze the
Vapors, and so it becomes hoar frost; which if that excessive cold had not
been, should have turned into dew.

The dew and the hoare frost agree in three things, namely, in matter, in
quality of time, and place of the generation. In matter they agree; for they
are both generated of a subtle and thin Vapor, and also small in quantity.

In quality of time they consent, for both are made in a quiet and calm time:
for if there were great wind, it would drive away the matter, and so could
there be no generation.

Thirdly, they are both generated in the lowest Region of the Air; for (as
Aristotle affirms) Aristot.
upon the high hills there is neither dew nor hoar frost.

They differ also in three things. For the hoare frost is congealed before it
be turned into water; so is not the dew.

Secondly, The dew is generated in temperate weather, the white frost in cold
weather.

Last of all, hot Winds, as the South and East, do cause dew; but cold winds as
the North and West, do cause hoare frost,

Hoare frost does often stink, because of the stinking matter whereof it
consists, which is drawn out of lakes and other muddy and stinking places.

Of Hayle.
HAyle is a hot Vapor in the middle Region of the Air, Hayle.
by the cold of that Region made thick into a cloud, which falling down to the
sudden cold of the lowest Region, is congealed into Ice.

There be so many kinds of Hail, as there be of rain: The fashion of hail is
sometime round, which is a token that it was generated in the middle region of
the Air, or very near it; for falling from high, the corners are worn away.

When the Hail stones are square, or three-cornered, the hail was generated
near the earth.

Oftentimes there is heard a great sound in the Cloud as it were of Thunder
before hail, or of an Army fighting, etc. The cause is, That Vapors of
contrary qualities, being enclosed in the Cloud, do strive to break out, and
make a noise, even as cold water does, being put into a seething pot.

In Spring and Harvest-time is often hail, seldom in Summer and Winter. In
winter there want hot Vapors, in Summer the lowest region is too hot to
congeale the rain falling down. In Spring and Autumn, there want neither hot
Vapors to resist the cold, nor sufficient cold to harden the drops of that hot
shower of rain.

The hail stones are sometimes greater, and sometimes lesser; greater, with
greater cold; and lesser, with lesser cold.

There is seldom hail in the night, for want of hot vapors to be drawn up.

Sometime hail and rain fall together, when the latter end of the cloud, for
want of cold in the lowest region, is not congealed.

Haile-stones are not so clear as Ice, because they are made of gross and
earthy vapors, Ice is congealed of clear water.

Hail is sooner resolved into water, then Snow, because it is of a more sudden
and swift generation.

Of Snow.
SNow is a cold congealed by great cold, Snow.
before it be perfectly resolved from vapors into water.

Snow is white, not of the proper color, but by receiving the light into it,
and so many small parts; as in foam, or the white of an egg beaten.

Snow is often upon high hills, and lies long there, because their tops are
cold, as they be near to the middle Region of the Air; for oftentimes it
raineth in the valley, when it shows on the Hills.

Snow melting on the high Hills, and after frozen again, becomes (...) hard,
that it is a stone, Original^ of Crystal.
and is called Crystal.

Other matter of Snow, because they are common with Rain, are needless to be
spoken of. To be short, feet is generated even as Snow, but of less cold, or
else begins to melt in the falling.

Snow causes things growing to be fruitful, and increase, because the cold
drives heat unto the roots, and so cherishes the plants.

Of Springs and Rivers.
THe generation of Springs is in the bowels of the Earth, and therefore
something must be said of the body of the earth. The earth, though it be solid
and massy, yet has it many hollow gutters and veins, in which is always
air to avoid emptiness: for the ignorant in Phylosophie must be admonished,
that all things are full, nothing is empty; Nothing is empty.
for nature abhors emptiness; so that where nothing else is, there is Air
and Vapors, which by cold, as it has often been said, will be resolved into
drops, as we see experience in marble Pillars and such like hard stones toward
rain.

This Air and Vapors therefore being turned into drops of water, these drops
sweat out of the earth, and find some issue at the length, where many being
gathered together, make great abundance of water, which is called a Fountain
or Spring. The cause why such Springs do run continually, is, because that Air
can never want in those veins, which by cold will always be turned into
water, so that as fast as the water runs forth, so fast is air again
received into the place, whereby it comes to pass, that so many Springs are
perpetual, and never dried: but if any be dried up, it is in a hot Summer, and
such Springs also they be, whose generation is not deep in the earth, and
therefore the Vapors may be made dry, and the earth warm, so the Spring may
fail.

There be four kinds of springs; fountains, brooks, Rivers and lakes.

Of Fouutaines.
Fountains be small springs, Fountains.
which serve for wels and conduits, when there is but one place where the Water
is generated; and that is not very abundant, either because it is of small
compass, or small veins, and not many.

Of Brooks.
Brooks, boornes or fordes, Brooks.
be small streams of Water, that run in a channel like a river. They are
caused when either the spring occupies a great compass, or else two or three
small springs meet together in one channel.

Of Rivers.
RIvers are caused by the meeting together, Rivers.
not only of many springs but also of many brooks and fords, which being
received in diverse places as they pass, are at the length carried into the
broad Sea for the most part. Howbeit some Rivers as swallowed up into the
Earth, which perchance run into the Sea, by some secret and unknown channels:
some Rivers there be, that hide their heads under the Earth, and in another
place, far off, break out again. They Write also, that some Rivers being
swallowed up of the Earth, in one Island do run under the bottom of the Earth
and Sea, and break forth in another Island. There be also many great Rivers,
that run under the Earth in great Caves, which never break forth. Astristot.
Aristotle shows of ponds and lakes, that be under the Earth. Seneca.
And Seneca speaks of a pond that was found by such as dug in the Earth,
with fishes in it, and they that did eat of them, dyed. As Eeles that be found
in dark places, as Wells that have been dammed up, etc. are poison,

Of Lakes.
LAkes are made by the meeting together of many Rivers, Lakes.
Brooks and Springs into one deep valley: whereof some are so great, that they
have the name of the Seas, as the Lake called Hircane, or Caspian Sea. These
Lakes sometimes unlade themselves into the Sea by small Rivers, sometimes by
passages under the Earth.

The cause of the swiftness of Rivers, is double; for they are swift, either
for the great abundance of waters, or else because they (...) down from an
hilly place, as the River Rhene falls down from the top of wonderful high
hills.

Of hot Bathes.
SOme waters that are generated and flow out of veins of Brimstone, Hot Baths.
are sensibly warm, and some very hot, because they run out of hot places.
These waters being also drying by nature, are wholesome for many infirmities
specially breaking forth of scabs, etc. Such are the Baths in the West Country,
and S. Anne of Buck-stones well in the North part of England, and many other
elsewhere.

Of the diverse tastes that are perceived in Wells.
FOr a general reason, Tastes of waters.
the waters receive their taste of that kind of earth through which they run as
through a strayner. Some salt, that run through salt veins of the earth: some
sweet, that be well strained, or run through such mineralls as be of sweet
taste: some bitter, that flow out of such earth as is bitter by adustion or
otherwise.

Some sour or sharp, like vinegar, which run through veins of Allome,
coperas, Aristotle. Well water used for Vinegar.
or such minerals. Aristotle writeh of a Well in Sicilia, whose water the
Inhabitants used for Vinegar.

In Bohemia Bohemia.
near to the City called Bilen, is a Well that the people used to drink of in
the morning, in stead of bunrt wine.

And in diverse places of Germany, be Springs that taste of such sharpeness.

Some have the taste of Wine; as in Paphlagonia is a Well that makes men drunk
which drink thereof; Paphlagonia.
which is, because that water receives the ^^^osity of Brimstone and other
Minerals through which it runs, and so fills the brain as wine does.

A recital of such Rivers and Springs as have mavelous effects, whereof no
natural cause can be assigned by most men, although some reason in a few may
be found.
CLitumnus, Marvelous waters.
which makes Oxen that drink of it white, Clitumnus Propert.
is a River or Spring in Italy, Propert, lib. 3. This may be the quality of the
water, very phlegmatic. Boetia.
In Boetia is a River called Melas, Melas.
that makes sheep black if they drink thereof.

Seneca speaks of a River that makes red hairs: Seneca.
These two with the first may have some reason, that the quality of the reason
may alter complexion, and so the color of hairs may be changed, as we see in
certain diseases.

In Lybia Libia
is a Spring, that at the Sun rising and setting is warm, at midday cold, and
at midnight very hot. This may be, by the same reason that welwater is colder
in Summer then it is in Winter. Seneca writes, Seneca.
that there be Rivers whose waters are poison: this may be naturally the water
running through poisonous Mineralls, taking much fume of them. Other Wells that
make wood and all things else that can be cast into them, stones, such wells be
in England, the cause is great cold.

Another Well makes men mad that drink thereof. This also may have as good
reason, as that which makes men drink: As also that Well which makes men
forgetful by obstruction of the brain.

The same Seneca speaks of a Water, that being drunk, provokes unto lust
and lechery. And why may not that quality be in a Water which is mixed with
diverse Mineralls and kinds of earth, which is in herbs, roots, fruits and
liquors?

S. Augustine speaks of a Well in Egypt, S. August.
in which burning Torches are quenched, and being before quenched, are lighted.

Among the Garamants is a Well so cold in the day, Garamants
that no man can abide to drink of it: in the night so hot, that none can abide
to feel it.

It is incredible that is written of a Well in Sicilia, Sicilia.
whereof if Thieves did drink, they were made blind.

In Idumea was a Well that one quarter of a year was troubled and muddy, Idumea.
the next quarter bloody, the third green and the fourth clear.

Seneca writes of another Well that was six hours full and running over,
Seneca.
and six hours decreasing and empty: perchance because it ebbed and flowed with
the Sea or some great River that was near it.

In the Hill Anthracius is said to be a Well, Anthracius
which when it is full, signifies a fruitful Year: when it is scarce and
empty, a barren and dear Year. The sufficiency of moisture makes fertility, as
the want causes the contrary.

Men say there is a River in Hungary, Hungaria.
in which Iron is turned into Copper: which may well be, seeing Ink in which
is but small Coperas, and artificially mixed of Iron, does counterfeit Copper in
color. In this stream may be much Copperas, and that is naturally mixed.

Both Seneca Seneca.
and Theophrastus Theophrastus.
witness that waters there be, which within a certain space, being drunk of
sheep, (as Seneca says) or of birds (as Theophrastus will have it) changes
their colors from black to white, and from white to black.

Vitruvius Vitruvius.
writes, that in Arcadia Arcadia.
is a Water called Nonacrinis, Nonacrinis.
which no Vessel of Silver, Brass, or Iron can hold, but it breaks in
pieces, and nothing but a Mules hoof will hold it and contain it.

In Illyria, Illyria.
Garments that are holden over a most cold Well, are kindled and set on fire.

In the Isle of Andros, Andros.
where the Temple of Bacchus Bacchus.
stood, is a Well, that the fifth day of January flowed wine.

Isidore says, Isidore.
there is a Well in Italy, that heals the wounds of the eyes.

In the Isle of Chios Chios.
is a Well that makes men dull-witted that drink thereof.

There is another, that causes men to abhor lust.

Lechnus, a Spring of Arcadia, Lechnus.
is good against abortions.

In Sicilia are two Springs, Sicilia.
of which one makes a woman fruitful, and the other barren.

In Sardinia be hot Wells, Sardinia.
that heal sore eyes.

In an Isle of Pontus, Pontus.
the River Astares overfloweth the fields, Astares.
in which whatsoever sheep be fed, do always give black milk.

In Aethiopia Aethiopia.
is a Lake, whose water is like oil.

Also many Springs of Oil have broken forth of the Earth, which comes of the
viscosity or fatness of the same earth.

The Lake Clitory in Italy, Clitory.
makes men that drink of it, to abhor wine.

The Lake Pentasium Pentasium.
(as Solinus Solinus.
says) is deadly to Serpents, and wholesome to men.

Seneca writes of certain Lakes that will bear men which cannot swim.

And that in Syria is a Lake, Syria.
in which bricks do swim, and no heavy thing will sink.

It is said, that the River Rhene Rhene.
in Germany will drown bastard Children that be cast in it, but drive aland
them that be lawfully begotten.

The River in Hypanis Hypanis.
in Sythia, Sythia.
every day brings forth little bladders, out of which flies do come that die
that same night.

Matrona. Matrona.
the River of Germany, as the common people say, never passes day but he
takes some prey.

Of the Sea.
THe Sea, The Sea.
in this treatise has place as a mixed substance: for else the element of
Waters being simple, were not here to be spoken of.

The Sea is the natural place of the Waters, into which all Rivers and other
Waters are received at the length.

And here it is to be understood, that the very proper and natural place of
the water, The natural place of the water.
were to cover all the Earth, for so be the elements placed: the Earth lowest,
and round about the Earth the Water, about the Water, the Air, and about the
Air, the fire.

Genesis 1.
But God the most mighty and wise creator of all things, that the Earth might
in some parts be inhabited of men and beasts, commanded the Waters to be
gathered into one place, that the dry land might appear, and called the dry
land Earth, and the gathering of Waters he called Seas.

In the Sea are these two things to be considered; the saltness, and the
ebbing and flowing.

Of the saltness of the Sea.
THe saltness of the Sea, according to Aristotle's mind is caused by the Sun,
Aristot.
that draws from it all thin and sweet Vapors to make rain, leaving the rest
as the settling or bottom, which is salt. But men of our time, peradventure
more truly, do not take this for the only and sufficent cause to make so
great a quantity of water salt, but say, that the Sea, by Gods wisdom; is
gathered into such valleys of the Earth, as were otherwise barren and
unfruitful; such Earths are salt, the Sea Water then mixed with that Earth,
must needs be Salt; else Rivers by Aristotle's mind, should be salt as well as
the Sea. The Reader may choose which opinion is most probable.

Of the ebbing and flowing.
THe ebbing and flowing of the Sea, Ebbing and flowing.
as Aristotle Aristot.
sermeth to teach, is by reason of Exhalations that be under the Water, which
drives it to and fro, according to contrary bounds and limits, as upward and
downward, wide and narrow, deep and shallow. This opinion of Aristotle also,
as more subtle then true, experience teaches men to mislike, and to ascribe
the cause of ebbing and flowing, to the course of the Moon, which rules over
moisture as the Sun does over heat: for from the new Moon to the full, all
humors do increase; and from the full to the new Moon decrease again. Also,
the very true time of the ebbing and flowing may be known by the course of the
Moon, with whom, as the Lady of moisture, we will close up the fourth book of
m^yst and watery impressions.

The fifth Book.
Of earthly Meteors, or bodies perfect^y mixed.
THis last Treatise contains such bodies whose chief matter is the earth,
Earthly bodies.
and are called perfectly mixed, because they are not easily resolved into the
chief matter whereof they are generated. These are divided into four Kinds. The
first be diverse sorts of Earth: The second be Liquors concrete: The third be
Metalls and Metallikes: The fourth be Stones.

This division is not altogether perfect, both for that there be many of these
Minerals which partake of two kinds, and also for that the names of these kinds
may be said of others. Yet minding as plainly as can be, to declare the things
themselves; the controversy and cavillation of names, shall not greatly
trouble us, especially seeing we pretend not to teach Philosophers, but such as
need a ruder and plainer instruction. They may therefore be content with this
division, which shall not serve them to dispute of these matters, but to
understand the truth of these things that they desire. Of these four therefore
we will speak orderly and generally, not minding to treat of every particular
kind (for that were infinite) but to open such universal causes, as they which
have wit may learn (if they list) to apply unto all particulars.

Of Earths.
THe Earth is an element, one of the four, cold and dry, Of Earths.
most gross and solid, most heavy and weighty, the lowest of all other in
place. When I say an Element, I mean a simple body uncompounded. This Earth is
no Meteor, but as it was showed in the water, to the end there should be
generation of things. There is no Element that we have which is pure and
simple, but all are mixed and compound. Our fire is gross and compound, so is
our air, our water, and our earth: but the earth notably and above the rest,
is mixed. For the pure and natural Earth is dry and cold; but we see much to
be moist, and much to be hot. The natural earth is black of color: but we see
many Earths white, many yellow, and many red. So that first, the greatest part
of the Earth is mixed with water, that makes it to cleave together, with air
and some fire, which make an oily, fat or clammy earth, as is clay made, etc.

Another great part is dried, not into the natural dryness of the first
quality, but as a thing once mixed, and after dried, either by cold, as sand,
gravel, etc. or else by heat, as chalk, oaker, etc. And yet somewhat more
plainly and particularly to discourse upon these causes, admitting the natural
color of the Earth to be black, of the water to be blue, of the air to be
white, and of the fire to be ruddy, it follows, that upon the mixtion of
these colors, or chief domination of them, all things have their color.

The gross substance of the Earth therefore being diversely mixed with other
Elements, and those mixtures again being eftsoons altered by diverse and
sometime contrary qualities, has brought forth so many kinds of earth, as
clay, marble, chalk, sand, gravel, etc. Clay is mixed with fat moisture,
taking his Color of the mixture with red from white; but being cold, it is not
so fruitful as Marble, which is not always so moist as it. Chalk is an Earth
by heat concocted, after diverse mixtions, and dried up. Oker, both yellow and
red, with such like, are of the same nature, with mixtion of red, more or less.

Sand and gravel, are dried Earths, as it were frozen by cold: gravel is
gross and apparent; sand, though it be finer, is of the same generation,
consisting of many small bodies, which are congealed into stones. Sand seems
to be clay dried by cold, and clotted together into small stones; whereof some
are thorow-shining, which were the moist parts; the thick were of the gross
part: the same is gravel, but of greater stones consisting. The like judgment
is to be given of all other kinds of Earth, whose generation by the similitude
of these will not be very hard to find out. They that list to know the diverse
kinds of Earths, must have recourse to Plinius, Cardanus, Plinius. Cardanus.
and other Writers, that recite a great number of them: but these are the
chief and most common kinds.

Of Liquors concrete.
WE take not liquors concrete so largely as the word does signify, for then
should we comprehend both the other kinds following. But only those liquors,
called in Lattine Succi, which are as it were middle between metalls and
stone, of which, some being fat and oily, do burn as Brimstone, Sea-coles,
Jet, bitumen, etc. and the kinds of all these. Othersome do not burn, as Salt,
Alum, Copperas Saltpeeter, etc. and the kinds of these.

Of the first sort, which are generated of Earthy and Airy Vapors, Fumes and
Exhalations, the chief and most notable is Brimstone, which seems to be the
matter of all dry and hot qualities that are in Earthly Meteors. The rest are
generated of such like Vapors as Brimstone is, but then they be diversely mixed:
as the coals have much Earth mixed with Brimstone; Jet seems to be all one
but better concocted then coals. Of Amber is great contention, whether it be a
mineral, or the sperme of a Whale: for it is found in the Sea, cast upon the
shore. Now the Whales seed being of the very same qualities, is taken more and
less concrete of diverse hardness; some almost as hard as Amber: some softer,
and some liquid: yet Cardan plainly defines, that Amber is a Mineral. Whether
he have reason or experience, contrary to the vulgar opinion, let them consider
that list to contend. These Minerals that will resolve with fire, it is
apparent, that they were concrete with cold: in that they burnt, it is
manifest, they have a fat and clammy substance mixed with them, as the other
kind has not, which will not resolve so well with fire as with Water; which be
salt, copperas, saltpeeters, etc. These burn not, being watery, Earthy, and
not fat, unctuous, nor clammy.

These be of diverse colors, black, as Coals, and Jett, because there is much
Earthy substance mixed with their sulphurous matter. Some be sheere, as Salt,
and Allome, having a substance Watery dried, and concrete. Copperas is green,
because it has much cold matter that is blue, mixed with it. Salt, the most
common and necessary of all these liquors concrete, that be moist and not
fatty, has two manner of generations; one natural, and the other artificial.
The natural generation is when it is first generated in the Earth; after
comes the water of the Sea, and is infected with it; out of which the Salt is
again artificially gathered. Of these liquors concrete, be those strange wel^
and springs infected, of which was spoken in the latter end of the fourth book.
Most notably Brimstone causes the hot Bathes, and burns in Aetna of Sicilia,
and Vesuvius of Italy, Aetna and Vesuvius.
casting up the Pumice stones, of which is no place here to treat.

Of Metals.
MEtals Metals
be substances perfectly mixed, that will melt with heat and be brought into
all manner of fashions that a man will.

Of these the Alchymists say there be Seven kinds to answer to the Seven
Planets; Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, Iron, and Quicksilver that they
call Mercury. Mercury.
But saving their Authority, Quicksilver is no more a Metal then Brimstone,
which is as necessary to the generation of Metal as Quicksilver is. For they
all agree, that all Metals are generated of Sulphur, that is Brimstone, which
because it is hot they call the father; and Mercury, that is Quicksilver,
which because it is moist, they call the mother: so by as good reason may they
call Brimstone a Metal as Mercury.

Then there remains but Six perfect Metals; Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead
and Iron.

Of Gold.
THat most unprofitable and hurtful of all Metals, Gold.
Gold which most men dispraise, and yet all men would have, is of all other
Metals the rarest: it is only perfect, the rest are corruptible.

Gold never corrupts by rust, Why Gold rusteth not.
because it is pure from poisonous infection, and most solid, that it receives
not the Air into it which causes all things to corrupt. It is perfectly
concocted with sufficient heat and mixture of Sulphur: all other Metals either
are not so well concocted, or else they have not the due quantity of Brimstone.

This opinion has also place among the Alchymists, The opinion of the
Alcumists.
that because Nature in all her Works seeks the best End, she intends of
all Metals to make Gold; but being let, either for want of good mixture, or
good concoction, she brings forth other Metals, indeed not so precious, but
much more profitable; and the less precious, the more profitable: for there is
more use to the necessities of man's life in Iron and Lead, then in Gold and
Silver; but either the beauty or the perfection, or at least the rareness of
Gold and Silver have obtained the estimation of all men, so that for them is
sold all manner of things, holy and profane, bodily and spiritual.

What pains do not men take to win Gold? Every man has one way or other to
hunt after it: but the Alchymist despising all other ways as slow, unnatural
and unprofitable, labors either to help Nature in her work, as of unperfect
Metals to make perfect, or else to force Nature to his purpose by his
Quintessences and Elixars, so that whatby purging, what by concocting, what by
mixing of Sulphur and Quicksilver and much other like stuff, at length he
turns the wrong side of his gown outward, all the teeth out of his head, and
his body from health to a Palsy, and then he is a Philosopher, and so he will
be called.

Of Silver.
SIlver Silver.
the most pure Metal next unto Gold, has indifferent good concoction in the
Earth, but it wants sufficient heat in the mixture that makes it pale.

It is found (as they say) running into diverse veins, as all other Metals be,
but this most specially, after the shape and fashion of a tree lieing along
with a body or stock, of proportion like to the body of a tree, also with
armes^, branches, leaves and fruits.

This Metal Silver lacks sufficient heat, and therefore comes neither to
the color, solidity nor perfection of Gold, and is generated in cold
countries, near unto the North and South Poles, in so great quantity, that the
Husbandmen when they plow their ground, turn up silver among he clods in their
daily labors, which they do hide and conceal, least the greedy Princes for
Coveteousness of the Metal, should overturn and destroy their land.

The Gold Mines are contrariwise most found in the hot Countries of India and
Aethiopia, because in them is sufficient of heat for that unhappy generation.

This Silver also the Alchymists would fain make by Ai^; but Mercury the chief
Master of the Work, is so subtle and so sly, that nothing can hold him,
nothing can kill him: for if the glass be not very thick, he will soon break
out of prison, and so there is nothing left.

Of Copper.
COpper in color coming nearest to Gold, being not so solid nor massy (for of
all Metal Gold is the heavyest) gives way to Corruption, being infected with
that green Mineral Copperas.

Hereof be diverse kinds, Brass, Latin and such like, which differ in
digestion; the Copper being purest, is of best digestion and nearest unto Gold:
and so the rest in like degrees.

Copper is most like Silver in the weight and in the hammering: wherefore the
Alchymists have learned to make it white, that it deceives men's sight and
handling: but the Gold miths do easily try it, and by the taste of counterfeit
Silver make Copper again.

Copper or Brass does always grow near to the Mine of Copperas, which running
with it in the digestion or natural concoction, hinders it of perfection,
makes it to stink, and to be eaten of a green rust.

Much ado the Alchymists have to tu^n it into Gold, if it might be: they
dispute very reasonably and conclude almost necessarily in their Talk, that it
may be converted into Gold as a body that wants little of perfection, which
may be easily added unto it: but in conclusion of the work, it is an harder
matter to bring to pass, then it was to purpose, before they had done it, to
build an Abbey at every Miles end upon Salisbury Plain, as one was minded.

Of Tin.
Tin Tin.
whereof great plenty grows in the West parts of England, in beauty and
color comes nearest to Silver, and of Silver wants nothing but solidity
and hardness: for Tin is raw and undigested metal, also very porose and
compact, which causes it to crash when it is broken or bitten: so it fails
of heat in the commixtion, and also sufficient digestion in the Earth:
otherwise it is a fair and profitable metal, to serve the use of them unto
whom Silver and Gold are not so plentiful.

Of Lead.
LEad Lead.
also found in great abundance within this Realm, is a raw and undigested
metal as Tin is, but yet of better digestion then commixtion: for it is
mixed with a gross earthy substance, which makes it to be in color so black
and so fowl to corrupt: so that of the same Fumes and Exhalations (which if
they had been pure and well digested, if the place and matter would have
suffered should have been concrete into Silver) for lack of the same, Lead is
generated, which coming plentifully, does better service then Silver.

Of Iron.
IRon Iron.
the most necessary and profitable of all other metals (and yet as ill used of
many as any other) is generated of such substance as Silver is, but mixed with
a red Mineral which ^ateth it with red rust, and also being of too extreme
digestion, passing ^ll other metals in hardness. And as other metals to the
perfection of Silver want sufficient concoction, whereby ^hey come not to the
same hardness: ^o Iron passes and exceeds Silver in ^mmoderate digestion.
But though it ^ome not to the perfection of Silver, God forbid that all Iron
had been tur^ed into Silver: for then we should ^ore have missed it then silver
or gold, ^e want of which would hinder us nothing at all.

Of Quicksilver.
THough Quicksilver be no metal, Quicksilver.
yet because it is the mother of all metals, something is here to be spoken of
it.

There be diverse and sundry opinions, both of the generation and also the
qualities of it, which make the generation hard to find out. For if the quality
were certainly agreed upon, there were an easier way found to try out the
generation.

Some affirm that it is exceeding hot, and that they would prove by the swift
peircing thereof into other things that be porose.

Others say it is exceeding cold, and that they prove by the exceeding weight
of it. As for the peircing, they say it is caused of the exceeding moistness,
of which quality both parts d^ grant that it is. Concerning the generation,
some have said that it is pur^ and Elemental water: some again have thought
that it droppeth out o^ heaven, and is a part of the heavenl^ stance. And
others say that it is generated in the Clouds, and falls down in the feilds
in a Circle, on those round Circles which are seen in many feilds, that
ignorant People affirm to be the rings of the Fairies dances.

It is certain that Quicksilver has diverse times fallen out of the Clouds, as
we have declared in the Treatise of Wonderful and Mavelous Rain: but
whether it so fall in ^ircles it is doubtful. The most probable opinion is,
that it is generated of moist Vapors of the Earth, coacted by cold, much like
to Water, as Brimstone is of hot fumes, coacted by cold, much like to fire. And
thus much of metals.

Of Stones.
STones, Stones.
the fourth kind of Earthly mixed bodies have two manner of generations, by
most contrary qualities for heat does harden moist bodies into stones; and we
see that, clay, it makes exceeding hard brick.

Also the Thunderbolts in the clouds are generated by heat, as before has been
showed. But cold does by congealing, generate many more stones then heat does;
for the most part of all the stones that are dug out of the Earth, are
generated by cold, which is able to convert any other kind of mixed substance
into stone, as has been partly showed in the nature of wels and springs, of
which, there be some in England, which by their cold, turn wood, or any like
thing into stones. I have seen a piece of rotten wood, which to sight was very
light, and like wood, but in handling, a very stone that was taken out of such
a Well. Also of other things taken out of the Earth, turned into stones, I have
seen and found my self, fl^^s; with head and wings, very hard stones; also, I
have seen a heart, a birds tongue, a beasts stone, a pear, a plumme, and
diverse other things turned into hard stones.

Of diverse kinds of stones.
STones may first be divided into rude and beautiful: the rude contain those
great Rocks, Rocks.
which are generated by many small parts joined together, and the common pibble
stones that be found every where in the Earth, Pibble stones.
among gravel, and on the shore of the Sea, or bancks of the Rivers. These are
generated of gross and Earthly humors, congealed by cold: and because they be
neither fair of color, nor through shining, and also common, they are
contemptible. The fair or beautiful stones, be either great or small. The
great be as marble of diverse kinds and colors, alablaster, Marble.
and such like, which being hard and well concocted, may be polished and become
beautiful. Their color is as they are mixed, being uncongeled, so is their
pureness. The small are more precious, and they be either thick or pellucide.
The thick be neither so fair nor so precious, Aehates. Jasper. Prassios.
as the Achates, the Tasper, Prassios, etc. These consisting of a pure matter,
and not very watery, are congealed into such stones. The clear stones be
liquore concrete, as the Diamond, the Saphir, the Emerald, etc. they are
praised for their greatness, hardness, clearness, Diamond. Saphir. Emerald.
The praise of precious Stones.
and fair colors, of which enough has bin spoken, saving that some be of
opinion, that these be generated by heat, because the best are found in hot
countries, in the East, and in the South. Answer may be made, that the hotter
the Air is, the colder is the Earth: so that reason is of small force.

Of the virtue of Stones.
SOme perchance, The virtue of Stones.
would look that we should make a long discourse of the virtue of stones, and
would be well content that we should treat of diverse properties of gemmes and
precious stones, which matter though it be out of our purpose (which
considers only the generation) yet seeing it is not out of their expectation,
some thing briefly, and yet sufficiently shall be said of the virtue of stones.

That virtue that is ascribed unto them, is either Natural or Magical. The
virtue of Stones, either natural or magical, Magnes.
Natural virtue, is either that which is known to have a natural cause, or a
natural effect, as the Magnes or Loadstone to draw Iron, which is by a simitude
of nature, and such an appetite as is between the Male and the Female. Also,
the said Magnes moves toward the North, and as some say, there is another kind
found in the South, that draws toward the South. They say, that there are
great hills of this stone in the North and South, which makes it look that way.

Others bring a Mathematical reason, which because it is more curious then can
be understood of the common sort, not exercised in Geometry, I omit.

The Jet and Amber draw hairs, Jet and Amber draws chafe.
chafe, and like light matter, but being before chafed, for heat is attractive.

Also the precious Stone called Astroites, Astroites, a Stone moves in vinegar.
moves it self in Vinegar, the sharpness of the Vinegar peircing it, and the
air excluded driving it forward.

These virtues because I have seen, I have set for an example; generally all
other like natural virtues, proceed of like natural causes, which by their
effect, the ingenious must seek to find out.

As for Magical Virtues, they be they which are grounded on no reason, or
natural cause; which if they take effect, it is rather of the superstition and
credulity of him that uses them, then of the virtue of the stones. As that an
Emerald increases love, a Saphir favor, a Diamond strength, and such like
virtues, Albertus Magnus,
of which Alberius in his Age, surnamed the Great, took pains to write a Book,
which I suppose to be Englished.

To conclude with the cause why Stones melt not, as Metalls do, may be gathered
by that which has been said before, because they are congealed past that
degree, and also because there is left in them no unctuous or clammy matter.
Let this suffice for Stones; and and so the whole purpose is at an end.

OBSERVATIONS On Dr. F. his BOOK OF Meteors.

By F. W.

LONDON, Printed for William Leake at the Crown in Fleet Street.

CHAP. I.
Of the Earth.
IT is a great Question amongst Philosophers, Whether the External and Visible
Riches and Plenty which grows and springs on the face of the Earth: or the
Internal and Hidden Treasure be more precious and valuable?

Flowers and Fruits, Corn and Cattle, and all other external terrestrial Births
are of most rare and exquisite use for mankind: but the Earth is an Element not
only beautified without, but most richly stored within with great Varieties of
admirable Creatures, both pleasant, rare and profitable for humane Content and
Conservation.

From this very Consideration the Philosophers of Old reckoned and esteemed the
Earth as the first and most ancient of all the Gods, and so styled her Ils
l'appelloient lamere grand and la mere de dieux. Antoine du verdier En la
Relligions de Pagens.
The Grandmother or Mother of all the Gods. And the Heashens did not only honor
the Earth as a Mother, but did adore her as a Goddess, giving her the names of
Ops, Cibele, Rhea, Proserpina, Vesta, Ceres, and other Appellations to signify
the diversities and several effects and virtues which she produced.

The Earth was called Ops, Ops.
which signifies Aid, because she affords aid and comfort to all Creatures
inhabitant on her: And Pausanias reports that near the River Crasside in
Greece, there stood a little Temple dedicated to the Earth, wherein she was
adored Dea largi pectoris as the Goddess of the open and large breast, freely
feeding all her Children which in numerous companies were ranged by her.

Her Robe was rich and glorious, embroidered with the most pleasant flowers of
all colors: and she was adorned with a Mantle of Tissue whose ground was a
beautiful Green, signifying her great Plenty of all things wherewith Mankind
might be affected, as most valuable and precious; and such are her rich Mines
of Gold, Silver, Copper, Brass, and Iron: or yet more highly prized
Commodities, as precious Stones, and rare rich Gems of all kinds.

CHAP. 2.
Of Metalls.
THe visible beauty of the Earth is obvious to every eye, which is not the
subject here in hand: Her abstruse and hidden riches, Preciosa periculaterrae,
as Boethius calls them; her precious Metalls and Mines, which force men to be so
bold and ingenious, are the matter of this Discourse: These Aristotle calls
Corpora perfect mixta, inanimate bodies of complete mixture, made up of
Sulphur and Quicksilver, the veins of the Earth being composed of a fit
temper for such production: Some Philosophers make the (...) of Metallum, from
(...), which signifies a change effected in the Subterranean Veins with long
labor and much difficulty.

Some Naturalists are more short, and seem more plain; affirming, That Metalls
is that which is pliable by the hammer, and hard: Stones are hard, but not
pliable, and Wax and Mud are pliable, but not hard.

CHAP. 3.
Of the number of Metalls.
MEtalls are seven in number, as the Planets are; Gold, Silver, Amber, Iron,
Lead, Brass, Copper. Gold presents the Sun, Silver the Moon, Amber called
Electrum Mercury, Iron Mars, Lead Saturn, Brass Venus, and Copper Jupiter; or
else the seven may be distinguished thus: All Metal is perfect, soft and pure
as Gold; or it is pure and hard as Silver; or it is hard and impure as Iron; or
it is soft and impure as Lead: And for Amber, it is compounded of Gold and
Silver, as Cyprus Copper is made of Brass and Iron, containing an equal
substance of Brass and Iron, which causes that too much concocted, and high
tincted is easily changed into Brass, and rechanged again into Copper.

CHAP, 4.
Of Gold.
GOld is Metallnm puriffimum, the purest Metal of all others; and nature never
took delight to make a more perfect elementary substance then Gold is; and
therefore in price and estimation, is far above all other riches.

The Composition of Gold is proportioned in equal quality, fitly Correspondent
in the symmetry of the elements which compound it; it is even in the Originals
so purified already, as are the simple and pure Elements, in such sort, that by
their conjunction together in equal power, there is engendered so delicate and
perfect a mixture of indissoluble union, composing an accord so faithfully,
that there is made thereby an incorruptible Past, which is permanent to all
eternity, in the excellency and goodness thereof; wherefore Gold cannot be
vanquished by injury of time and antiquity; neither can contain in it felt,
nor support any excre^^ncy and superfluity of Rust; for though it be put into
the water or fire, and there remain a long space; yet it is never stained, nor
accepts it any other quality but what is Natural. Nor yet does Gold fail any
whit, which is a sole privilege belonging to this royal Metal, all other
being subject to alteration and corruption, for though Gold be drawn into the
smallest wire, and be extenuated as fine as the threads in the Spiders wed; and
though it be buried in the most piercing medicaments as are Sublimatum,
Verdegrease, Salt, Venegar, and that it remain three thousand years therein, it
will not for all that be corrupted, but rather the more refined, provided the
Gold be perfect, and not sophisticated and false.

CHAP. 5.
Where Gold is found.
GOld is found in diverse manners, to wit, mixed with Sand as in Bohemia: on the
shore-side amongst the water near to Goldborough and Risegrond; and amongst the
stones in mountains, as in Calecut, and in the Indies.

The Generation of Gold is usually on the tops of Mountains, because that
there in the highest places the Sun does more easily purify that which
retains too much earthiness in it: and when the Rain and Torrents do flow
down, they carry the Gold down with them to the foot thereof, where it is
gathered amongst the sand, or else in waters near thereunto, whether it is
driven by the violence of floods, except the Ground perhaps open with those
inundations, and the Gold fall into the gaping jaws of the Earth, and so stick
there. Now it is observable, that that which is found in the entrance of the
Mine, is not the purest, but is as an earnest to invite to farther labor and
pains. That which is found in Waters and Rivers is fished for, and is in form
of little Grains: In Rocks and Mountains it is taken out by delving and
digging. And there be three sorts of Mines, some are called Pendent, some
Jacent, and some Oblique and turning: Pendent are those which are found in the
superficies and tops of Mountains: Jacent are low, and lie in plain fields:
Oblique have a cross Course, whether it be to that which is Pendent, or Jacent,
all whereof is driven by Rivers into the next floods.

CHAP. 6.
Of Silver.
THe most noble amongst Metalls next to Gold, is Silver; for though Copper in
color, and Lead in weight do nearest approach unto Gold; yet in Tenuity of
substance, in pureness and fastness, Silver is so like unto it, that good
silver may be rightly said to be imperfect Gold in substance; sailing in
color, and that by succession of time, it is sometimes changed into Gold, as
in many years space Lead turns into Silver. The Mines of Silver are more
ordinary then Mines of Gold; and it is usually engendered in four manners, to
wit, either in the Earth, or in Brass, or in Lead, or in Stones, which being
purged and melted, yield some quantity of Silver. In the Mountain called Mons
Regius, stones retain very much Silver, which being put in the fire, there is
found in every pound of silver that runs out of them, half an ounce of Gold
at least.

Silver is many times found to be mixed with Copper, as in Alsaria, near to the
Rhine in the Mountains of S. Anne, and in Messein. When Silver is separated
from Lead, it leaves a scum which is called Lithargyrium, which is a kind of
impure Lead.

CHAP. 7.
Of Quicksilver.
Quicksilver is called Materia Metallaris, the matter of the Metalls; and
though it have the name of Silver, yet in nature it approaches nearer to Gold;
for it is like unto it in Tenuity and weight, and to Silver only in color.
And notwithstanding the opinions of many Chemists, Quicksilver is not a
Metal, but a Water condensate, not by heat (for it is not hardened) nor by cold
(for then it would be a stone or metal) but by some other terrestrial rare
and pure portion, whereby it comes to be weighty and cold, splendent and
liquide, and is therefore ranked amongst those metalline substances which
differ but little from water; and it is common in experience, that the
Mountains wherein Quicksilver is found, are very green and full of fountains.

CHAP. 8.
Of Electrum or Amber.
MAny Authors, Philosophers, and Chemists, disagree in their opinions and
discourse of Amber; some reckon Amber amongst pliable and hard metalline
substances; others will not acknowledge it but to be but the gum of a Tree
producing Rosin which is common in Arabia.

Philemon writes, that in two places of Scythia, Amber is dug out of the
ground like a kind of stone, and in one place it is white, and in another it is
yellow; to omit this Argument, and to agree with those who allow Amber to be a
Metal, is most consonant to reason: The nature and property of it is a mean
betwixt Gold and Silver, and such is the true and natural Amber: as for that
which is used for Beads, it is but artificial.

Amber partaketh more of Gold then Silver, because it is more pure, and more
apt to be wrought; for if it consist more of Silver, it could not endure the
forge and hammer.

Vessels are made of Amber, some for beauty, some for profit: and if composed
of true and good Amber, they will discover poisons by cracking, and making
signs of an Arch within: for when the rare humidity thereof comes to be
consumed by the force of venom, it cracketh, and the color changing in the
Vessel, it seems in stead of the great splendour thereof, there does a kind of
stain represent it self like unto an Arch. Now that this Metal is more rare,
is ignorance that knows not the virtue; or avarice, that greedily thirsts
after Gold and gain.

CHAP. 9.
Of Iron.
IRon is taken out of the Earth, and to make it Malleable, the mass thereof is
laid to dry in the Sun; and that which is Earthy, does soften and moulder with
the Rain, as that which is moist does melt with the Sun; which as the venom of
it is consumed in the Furnace by the fire, by how much more it is purged in the
fire, by so much the more it is pure in its goodness, in such sort as that
which is earthy, does at last turn to schales and dross, and the most subtle
part thereof does convert into Steel.

CHAP. 10.
Of Steel.
THe common Steel is artificial extracted Iron, Iron more excellently purged,
and a little Marble added thereunto; but in many places there is Natural
Steel, namely in Persia very good, and in the Chaldean Isle, and near Damascus,
whereof the best Cemiters and Faulchions in the world are made, which cut so
well, that there is no Rasor, be it never so well steeled and tempered, that
has a more keen and sharper edge; for this cause some say, That there are
some kinds of Steel and Iron so excellent, that weight for weight, they are
esteemed of greater price then Gold.

CHAP. 11.
Of Lead.
LEad is a gross dull Metal, Procreated and Consistent of more impure
Quicksilver, and more feculent and crass Sulphur; it least indures the fire of
any Metal, and therefore soonest melts. Galen says, Lead buried long in
moist subterranean Caves and holes, increases in magnitude and weight, and
therefore is a Cover (if well considered) less proper for any buildings but
where the Roofs are of infinite strength. There be diverse kinds of Lead, some
red, some white, some balck, and a fourth sort of a m^an quality betwixt white
and black, found in the mountains of Bohemia. The Ore of Lead is melted in
furnaces, and is let run through pipes out of the furnace, whether the
Workmen will. Lead is an incongruent and malignant Metal to all others; and if
but one ounce be mixed incorporated with one hundred ounces of Silver or Gold,
the mixture will reader the whole mass brittle and fragil; and so it will be in
all like proportions.

CHAP. 12.
Of Tin.
TIn is a white Metal somewhat like to Silver for i^s splendour and whiteness,
and yet not much above Lead for its softness and porosity. And this is the
difference betwixt Tin and white Lead, that the one is ingendered where there
is some Silver mine or vein, but the other is generated apart without the
company of so rich a Neigbour.

CHAP. 13.
Of Brass.
BRass is a more impure Metal: which composed of much sulphurous matter, is
more hot, light, and less pory, and so less subject to corruption and rust by
reason of all moisture and humidity (almost) consumed in it.

In times past, it was very usual to make Shields and Bucklers, and Pike^, and
Lances thereof, as Homer reports how Menelaus pursued Paris with a brazen
Lance. This Metal is proper for ^rumpets, because it makes a great noise in
Dorick music, and inflameth men to Combat: That of Cyprus is harder, and
therefore better then any other.

CHAP. 14.
Of Copper.
COpper, or Orichalcum, is Latten, or as some call it as factitium, artificial
brass; it represents with it a golden Complexion, but is somewhat more yellow
then Gold; some because of Copper, make two kinds of Brass, the one Natural,
the other Artificial; the best has spots of shining Gold intermin gled; and
the Merchants tell us, that in Nova Hispania in America, a piece of it has bin
found of two hundred pound weight. The Artificial brass, commonly called
Copper or Latten, is very ordinary; and the most excellent is that which in
four pounds of brass, does contain in it one pound of white Lead. Also when
the white Lead is mixed to the eight part of brass, then is the Copper very
good; but it is base when mixed with black Lead: the use of Copper is chiefly
for fair instruments, as Ordinance, Cauldrons, and such like, wherein it is
more excellent then brass; and it gives no ill taste or smell to meat boiled
in it.

FINIS.
The Table.
OF the Earth in general, Chap. 1 page 159 Of Metalls, Chap. 2. p. 161 Of the
number of Metalls, Chap. 3. p. 162 Of Gold, Chap. 4. p. 163 Where Gold is
found, Chapter 5. p. 165 Of Silver, Chapter 6. p. 166 Of Quicksilver, Chapter 7. p. 167 Of
Electrum or Amber, Chapter 8. p. 168 Of Iron, Chapter 9. p. 170 Of Steel, ibid. Of
Lead, Chapter 11. p. 171 Of Tin, Chapter 12. p. 172 Of Brass, Chapter 13. p. 173 Of
Copper, ibid.
Printed or sold by William Leake, at the sign of the Crown in Fleetstreet
between the two Temple Gates: These Books following.
YOrk's Heraldry, Folio A Bible of a very fair large Roman letter, 4^ Orlando
Furioso, Folio Callis learned Readings on the Stat. 21. Hen. 8. Cap. 5. of
Sewers. Perkins on the Laws of England. Wilkinsons Office of Sheriffs Persons
Law. Mirror of Justice. Topics in the Laws of England Sken de significatione
verbor^. Delaman's use of the Horizontal Quadrant. Wilby's 2d set of Music, 3,
4,, 5, and 6 Parts. Corderius in English. Exercitatio Scholastica. Nyes Gunnery
and Fireworks. Cato Major with Annotations. Mel Helliconium, by Alex. Ross.
The History of Vienna and Paris. Lazarillo de Tormes two Parts. Posing of the
Accidence. Man become guilty, by John Francis Senalt, and Englished by Henry
Earl of Monmouth. The Idiot in 4 books. The life and Reign of Hen. the eighth,
written by the L. Herbert. Aula, (...) or the house of Light. The For^ Royal
of ^ ly-Scriptures. by 1. H. ^ A Tragedy of Christ's Passion, written by the
most learned Hugo Grotius, and Englished by Geo. Sands. Mathematical
Recreations, with the general Horologicall Ring, and the double Horizontall
Dial, by William Outhtred. The Garden of Eden, or an Accurate description of
all Flowers and Fruits now growing in England, with particular rules how to
advance their Nature and Growth as well in Seeds and Herbs, as the secret
ordering of Trees and Plants, by Sir Hugh Plat. Knight, the 2d Edition
enlarged.
PLAYS.
Hen. the Fourth. Philaster. The Wedding. The Hollander. Maids Tragedy. King
and no King. The grateful Servant. The strange Discovery. Othello the Moor of
Venice; The Merchant of Venice.

