A full and true Relation Of the great Defeat given to Sir Ralph Hopton By Sir
William Waller: Certified by several Letters from Sir William Wallers
quarters. viz. General Brown. Lieut. Colonel Harrison. Captain Drinkwater.


Showing how our Forces March 28. beat the Enemy at a Skirmish, and on Friday
March 29. gave them an Overthrow, and utterly routed them.

Wherein were slain; The Lord Ruthen, General of the Kings Army. The Lord John
Brother to the Duke of Lenox. And many more Commanders and Officers of note,
and 150. Common Soldiers.


Besides which they took from the Enemy, 7. Drakes. Sir Edward Stowell
Colonel. Coll. Beards brother in Cheapside. Captain Chidley. Captain Jackson.
Captain Seamore, Lieutenant Keto. 3. Ensigns. Thomas Middleton. Francis
Constable. James Ducket, Corner. And diverse other prisoners of note,


And by directions from the States of both Kingdoms, an Order for
Thanksgiving for the said Victory, by JOHN WOLLASTON, Mayor.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, and Andrew Coe, according to Order. 1644.

A FULL RELATION OF A GREAT VICTORY Obtained by Sir WILLIAM WALLER, Against
Sir RALPH HOPTON:
As it was read by severll Ministers in the Pulpit before their Congregations
in the ^ity of London.
UPON Friday March the 24. last, Sir William Wallers forces joined battle with
Hoptons forces, each party being supposed to be about 10000 strong both in
horse and foot, the battle lasted from eigt of the clock in the morning till
five at night; but about five of the clock the Lord made the enemies hearts to
fail, so that they ran away, the whole Army routed, ours pursuing, and
slaying many in the pursuit.

Lord General Ruthen, and Lord John brother to the Duke of Lenox are both
slain, and about 150 of the common Soldiers, many also are taken prisoners, and
most of their Commanders are either wounded, slain, or taken prisoners; with
many other considerable persons, who were taken prisoners* by our Officers. Not
above three of the London Brigade are lost, nor above twenty of the whole Army
(as is supposed.) For all which extraordinary mercies, it is earnestly desired
by Lieutenant Colonel Harrison of the Yellow Regiment, that all possible
praises may be rendered to the Lord of Hosts, the sole worker of all.

This Relation is confirmed by several Letters; as from General Brown,
Lieutenant Collonell Harrison, and Captain Drinkwater.

Taken prisoners the same day:
I. Colonel. III. Captains. I. Leivtenant. IIII. ^^llers also taken and VII.
Drakes, I. Old Priest.
and many others of note, conserning which more is certified in Captain Drink
waters Letter following

To his loving and dear Wife, Mistress Elizabeth Drinkwater, at the Blev Bore
in Friday Street, in London.
Sweetheart,
YEsterday being Thursday, we skirmisht all day with the Enemy, some being
taken on both sides, and some and some few killed: Th^s day we had a sound
Battle, it began at eight a Clock in the morning, and lasted until five at
night, at which time the enemy betook them to their heels, and are run away to
Winchester, and Basing house, as we are informed. Our Horse pursued them, and
do still follow the pursuit; we have sent Scouts after them, to know where they
are: Sir William Waller and Sir William Balfourd are still in the pursuit; we
have killed many, amongst which is one General Ruthen, and the Lord John
Brother to the Duke of Lenox, and many more; but as yet I can write no certain
number. We have taken a hundred and fifty prisoners, and wounded many; and I
do not know of thirty killed of our side. Tell my Brother Robert that Captain
Milton is taken prisoner, and carried away; but I hope to morrow he shall be
redeemed, if they fly not quite away. After our fight, we followed the Enemy
to this Town, where we arrived about ten of the Clock at night, and are going
as fast as we can to Winchester after them, and it may be we may have another
Battle.

I pray God prosper our endeavors, which I doubt not but he will do, he has
been this day and night good unto us, and has showed himself a gracious
Father unto us beyond expectation, and in particular I have seen his power and
mercy to me, b^^^g engaged, and almost past hopes to come off alive, but
blessed be his name, and I pray God make me ever to praise his name for the
same. It was the bravest battle fought on both sides, (by all reports) ever
since the wars began, the Armies did consist of about ten thousand apeece,
little or no difference, but God was the God of battle who will never forake
his just war.

News comes in that seven Drakes are taken by our horse in the pursuit, which
I hope will hold true, I will write the Relation more fully by the first I can.
But Hoptons forces are quite routed for the present and ran quite away, and we
pursuing as I have writ, when we shall return I know not; I pray God send us a
merry meeting, fear nothing, but that God that has preserved me, will bring
me safe home, and so until I see you and ever, I leave you to God, and will
ever rest,

Your ever loving Husband, THOMAS* DRINKWATER*
POSCRIPT.
There were taken prisoners, Sir Edward Stowell Colonel, Colonel Beard his
brother in Cheapside, Captain Chedley, Captain Iackson, Captain Edmond,
Lieutenant Kite, three Ensigns, Thomas Middletin, Francis Constable, James
Ducket Coronet,
and diverse of note, are taken prisoners.

Tell Mistress Gosslee her husband is very well, and so are all my Officers, and
all my company, except one of my soldiers wounded.

Dated the 29 of March, 1644.


By the Mayor.
To every Minister within the City of London Liberties, Line of Communication,
and Bills of Mortality.
THE extraordinary blessing of God upon the forces under the command of Sir
William Waller, and Sir William Belford, against the Army led by Sir Ralph
Hopton, for the destruction of the Parliament, this city and Kingdom in a
battle near Winchester, yesterday being Friday, the 24. of this instant
March, which continued from eight of the clock in the morning until night,
wherein the enemy was absolutely routed, and pursued many miles with good
execution, being signified unto me by the most Honorable Committee of both
Kingdoms, requires a more solemn thanksgiving then upon so short warning can
be performed, especially considering that this mercy has been beyond
expectation, cast from heaven into our bosoms, so soon after our late fasting
and humiliation, after that sad blow about Newark.

I do heartily (according to the Order of the said Committee of both Kingdoms)
desire and require you, to morrow being the Lords day, to give notice of this
goodness to your Congregation, using your best endeavors to quicken them to
the highest pitch of thankfulness to the God of our. Mercies, and to engage
their hearts and hands yet further, to help the Lord against the mighty, with
their prayers, and all other helps of money, arms, horses, men, or other
provisions, for the instant making up or supplying abody of horse and foot, to
go out and follow the enemy, to prevent the rallying of his men, or raising of
new forces, to do further mischief, that God may give an end to the present
Calamities, and restore a stable peace in this afflicted Nation, to the comfort
of all Gods people in all the Kingdoms.

And what God shall move the hearts of men to subscribe and contribute, or what
men they shall send out or maintain to this most necessary service, not only
my self, but the Committee of the Militia, do make it our joint request, that
you, with some others well affected, would set down in writing, and return
upon Monday morning next, without fail, to the Commitee of the Militia at
Guildhall.

Dated this 30. of March. 1644. John Wollaston, Mayor.

FINIS.

