A full and certain Relation concerning the Horrid PLOT Of the PAPISTS.

AND The Barbarous and Bloody Murder of Sr. EDMUND-BURY GODFREY, one of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace.

Who was found on the 17 th. of October last most inhumanly Murdered in a field
about three miles from London.

With an Exact Account in what manner he was found, and what wounds he had on
his Body.

Together with the most noble manner of his being Buried, and the Text of the
Sermon there Preached before many Thousands of persons of Quality that attended
the Corpse in Honor to his memory.

London, Printed for Lawrence White in Whitecross Street, 1678. With Allowance.

A true Narrative concerning the Plott of the Papists, and the Murder and
Burial of Sir EDMUND BURY GODFREY, etc.
GReat is the malice of wicked men, and their Cruelty not to be expressed; the
best of Kings have had Plotts and Conspiracies against them, and the most
innocent men have been barbarously murdered; The day before Michaelmas day
last, there was some Discovery made of a most horrid Plott, laid by Jesuits and
Papists, against the Life of our Sovereign Lord the King (whom may the Arm of
Almighty God Protect and preserve, and cloth all His Enemies with shame and
Confusion) as also that they had Conspired to Overthrow the Protestant
Religion, alter the Government, etc. Upon which some persons were taken and
sent to Newgate, and several other Discoveries have since been made, and
persons Imprisoned but of particulars we have no Commission, it is out hope and
good men's Prayers, that the villainy may be wholly discovered, and those
concerned in it deservedly punished.

And so I shall proceed to give you an account of the Murder of Sir Edmund
Bury Godfrey, who may be called the first Martyr in this Cause, For this worthy
Gentleman being one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, was concerned in
taking the Examinations upon the first Discovery of this Treasonable design and
(as became him) was very diligent therein; whereby it is verily believed some
Papists conceived such a malice against him as occasioned his lamentable
Murder, for going forth on Saturday the 12th. of October, from his House in
Greens Lane near Charing Cross, he neither came home to Dinner, nor returned at
night, which much amazed his Servants, but from that time till the Thursday
following, no certain tidings could be heard of him, although all earnest and
diligent Inquieries and Searches were made for him; but on Thursday the 17th.
of October his body was found in a field out of any Road or Path, near a place
called Primrose Hill, about three miles from London, The manner how he came to
be found, is Related thus, Two persons going to an Alehouse, called the white
house, two or three fields off, on some occasion, to go the nearest way cross
over this field, and near the Hedge, saw as they thought, a Sword and Belt, and
a stick and a pair of Gloves, but supposing them to belong to some person that
was gone into the ditch to ease himself, did not meddle with them, but told the
man of the Alehouse of it, who as they returned would go with them to see the
things, because (as he said) there had been several Soldiers out that way of
late a Hedge-Hog-Hunting, and possibly some of them might have carelessly left
them behind them; coming to the place, they found a Belt and Scabbard, but
without a sword, and the Gloves and stick lying as aforesaid, and o^e of them
going to take them up, perceived something like a man in the Ditch, and going
nearer, a body lying on its belly in the ditch with a sword run clear through
him and remaining therein, Hereupon they immediately called an Officer, who
with several Neighbors came to the place, the sword was run in just under the
lest pap, and stuck forth at the right side of his back, about seven or eight
inches. The Officer knowing it to be the body of Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey, and
^aving removed it out of the ditch, found in his Pockets seven Guinnies, four
broad pieces, and two small pieces of Gold, four pound and half a crown in
Silver, and three Gold Rings about him, it is believed the villains had a design
to murder his Reputation as well as his person, and left him in this manner
with his money, to make it be thought that ^e Murdered himself: But it is well
known he was a more judicious and christian person, and had a plentiful Estate,
and no color for such a scandal, and that which makes it plain to be an
inhumane Murder in them, are these circumstances.

First, there was nothing missing about him but his band, and his Pocketbook
wherein he used to carry the Examinations of such as came before him, which
probably these Murderers had occasion for, that it might be concealed.

Secondly, th^re was no sign of blood in the ditch, nor thereabouts to be seen.

Thirdly, There was a Seam or Circle about his Neck, and the blood settled in
the upper part, whereby it appears that he was first strangled before he was
run through, and as for his large laced band, which he went from Home with, on,
and now was missing, it is like being a long neckt man and using to wear a high
Collar, when they came to strangle him, he might struggle, and they could not
do it without tearing it to pieces, and so durs^ not bring any of it with the
body, least it should discover the violence they had used to him.

And lastly, the soles of his shoes were as clean as if he had been but just
then brought off a bed or out of a Chamber, and that he was killd elsewhere and
brought thither a little before he was found is evident, because on the Tuesday
before, which was four days after he was first missing, the owner of this field
having lost a Calf, searching diligently along this ditch and two other men
with him, and then there was neither body in the ditch, nor Belt Gloves or
Stick on the banck, upon all these circumstances, and many others, the Coroners
Jury gave in their Verdict, That he was wilfully Murdered.

In pursuance of which the King's Majesty out of his zeal to Justice, and
detestation of such ^orrid villainy, was pleased to set forth first a
Proclamation, and then a Declaration, whereby be graciously promises o^ his
Royal Word, that whoever will discover the Murderers shall have five Hundred
pounds, and if any of them will discover the rest, he shall be sure of pardon,
and the Five Hundred pound too; there are some persons in hold upon suspicion,
and it is hoped it may come out shortly to the glory of God, and shame and
punishment of those wicked persons concerned in it.

The Corpse being Imbalmed, was kept till Thursday the last day of October, and
then was carried in most Noble manner, from the Great Hall of the Corporation
of Old Bridewel (whereof he was one of the Governors) unto his late Parish
Church being St. Martins in the Fields; never was seen a more solemn, or decent
Funeral, Eight Knights, and all Justices of the Peace held up the Pall, All the
Aldermen of the City attended the Corpse, and above an hundred Ministers that
came of their own accord without any invitation, but that of respect to his
memory, and of persons of Quality and other company the crowd was so great,
that the Train reached at once from Bridewel beyond the New Exchange in the
Strand, and the Church so crowded, that persons of Quality had offered great
sums of money to get a place in any seat where they might hear.

The Reverend Dean of Banger, in Wales, Minister of that Parish, Preached a
most Excellent Sermon from that suitable Text, 2 Samuel. Chap. 3. ver. 34. As a
m^n falls before wicked men, so fellest thou, and all the people wept over
him, which being finished, he was decently interred with great lamentation,
especially of the Poor, whom he had always made it his business to employ and
relieve, and had given and lent several hundred pounds to that Parish on that
Account.

An Epitaph, on Sr. Edmund Bury Godfrey.
UNder this weeping Marble, Reader, lies.
The Peoples Love, the Nations Sacrifice,
A First-rate Martyr, and to raise thy dread
A Justice most unjustly Murdered.
Whom Popish Bloodhounds did^s^ fast pursue
They would have killed his Reputation too.
But that is Immortal, and shall never want
Esteem, whilst there is Priest or Protestant.
The one to spread his Praise in noble writ
The other to Admire and Honor it.
FINIS

