A Full and True Relation of the Taking CORK, by the Right Honorable the Earl
of Malborough, Lieut: Genesis of their Majesty's Forces: Together with the
Articles of their Surrender.
LAst Night we received the joyful News of a Surrender of Cork, and the
Perticulars of that Seige, which were as follows.

On the 20 th of September 169^. the whole Fleet sent with the Earl of
Malborough having made the Coast of Ireland toward Night, lay by, and next
Morning by break of day they stood in for the Harbors Mouth. There were on
each side two Block-houses, on each of which were 4. pieces of Cannon, and
which played very warmly; but as soon as 2 of our Friggots had played a
Broa^side, they quitted those Forts and run away. About 12 at Noon the Ships
came as high as Passage, where was also another Redoubt: But as soon as the
Enemy espied our Men landing in Boats, they scoured as hard as they could
drive. Here part of our Men landed that Night, and encamped. The next Morning
being the 22 d, the rest were debarqued, and began to march up toward the
Town, which was 6 Miles thence, they arrived at Night within a Mile of it, and
there encamped. The 23 d. the Earl of Malborough sent a Summons to the
Governor to Surrender, which he very peremptorily answered, and hung out a
Bloody Flag; firing several Guns. But there being an Outwork which the Enemy
had lately made to secure a Hill, which commanded the Castle. My Lord
Malborough resolved to attack it, it giving him so advantageous a Post;
accordingly a 1000 Musketeers were detached out of the whole Body, and about 3
in the afternoon they marched to attack it. The Enemy that were in it, as soon
as they spied our Men approaching fired one Volley, and then ran into the Town.
The Great Guns fired mightily, however our Men took Possession hereof, and of
the Hill, and that Night made a very good Lodgment. The 24 th they prepared
Batterys on this Hill; also took Possession of several Out-posts, which were
very necessary to annoy the Enemy. There was great firing with Muskets all
that day. Several Deserters came to us out of the Town, giving an account, that
on the 20 th 2 Regiments came into them from Kinsale: That the Garrison was 400
strong, and that they seemed resolved to defend it. We were also informed, that
General Scravenmore was 5 Miles on the other side of the Town, with 1500 Horse
and Dragoons. That Night our Battery was finished and 6 Cannon placed thereon.
On the 25 th about one in the Morning, the Enemy made a little Sally, but our
Men were so watchful that they were presently beat in again, and about 20
killed of them. About break of day our Guns began to play against the Castle:
And by the advantage of this Hill our Muskets annoyed them very much; and
about 12 at Noon our small Friggots came up to the Key with Tide of Flood, and
battred the Castle. Toward Night we could see some of the Stones of the Wall
begin to shake down. That Night several Deserters came to us* and informed us
our Cannon had done great execution that Day; had killed several, and put them
into great consternation. The 26 th by break of day our Guns began to batter
again; and the Wall began to tumble down, so that by Night there was a pretty
good breach. That day 500 Horse joined us, and brought in with them a great
Prey of Cattle. They left Monsieur Seravenmoore on the otherside with the rest,
to prevent any releif that might come. That day also arrived the Duke of
Wirtemberg with 2 Danish Regiments of Foot. On the 27 th our Cannon contined
battering, so that by about 4 in the afternoon it had made a very fair Breach
fit to enter. Therefore at Night it was resolved that next Moning our Men should
Storm the Town: the design being laid that 200 Grenadiers, with Hand Grenades
should lead the Van; and these to be seconded with 300 Fusileers, and then 2
Battalions of Foot to sustain all in Case of Necessity. The 28 th at 8 in the
Morning, all these things being disposed, and the Signal upon point of giving:
The Enemy perceiving our design hung out a White-Flag, and beat a Parlee: Which
being agreed to they sent an Officer to My Lord Malborough to treat of
Conditions; and that they might march out with Colors flying and Ball in
Mouth: But that being refused they surrendered at Mercy, as by the Capitulation
appears.

On the 29 th my Lord Malborough entered the Town, and all things being
performed according to the Articles, the Irish were made Prisoners of War; and
put under a strong Guard into the Castle. And immeditely 500 Horse were
detached to Kinsale, which we do not doubt but is surrendered, since they had
weakened themselves by sending two Regiments to Cork. Never was such Joy seen
in a Place, when all the Protestants were released, the Bells were immediately
set a ringing, and all other demonstrations of Joy. There were very great
Magazines and Stores found, but as yet we have not the Particulars.

Capitulations given to the Garrison in Cork, by the Right Honorable the Earl
of Malborough, Lieutenant General of their Majesty's Forces in Ireland.
I. To receive them Prisoners of War, giving my Word that there shall be no
Prejudice done either to Officers, Soldiers, Inhabitants or Clergy of the said
Garrison, and will use my Endeavors to obtain his Majesty's Clemency toward
the said Garrison.

II. They shall deliver up the Old Fort within an Hour at farthest; and
tomorrow, at 8 a Clock in the Morning, the two Gates of the City, to those
whom he shall order.

III. They shall put at Liberty immediately all the Protestants that are in
Prison, without any pretense whatsoever to the contrary.

IV. They shall put in a secure place all the Arms, as well of the Garrison as
of the Inhabitants, of what Condition or Religion whatsoever.

V. They shall give a just Account of the Magazines as well Ammunition as
Provisions: And the Governor of the City shall make a List of them, signed
with his Hand; which shall be put into the Hands of our Commander of the
Artillery.

MALBOROVGH TERRON RYCOT.

Dated at the Camp before Cork this 28 th of September. ^ 1690.
Licensed

October. 4. 1690. J. F.


