(...). OR, The Beloved Disciple.

A SERMON PREACHED At the Funeral of the Honorable Sir ROBERT HARLEY, Knight
of the Honorable Order of the Bath; at Brampton. Brian in Hereford-shire.

December 10. 1656.

By THOMAS FROYSELL, Minister of the Gospel at Clun in Shropshire.

CANT. 4. 9. Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse, Thou have
ravished mine Heart, with One of thine Eyes, with One chain of thy neck.

Chap. 7. 6. How Fair and how Pleasant art Thou, O L^ve, for Delights.

London, Printed by M. S. for Thomas Pa^khurst at the three Crowns over against
the Great Conduit at the lower end of Cheapside, 1658.

Imprimatur, Edmond Calamy.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber.

TO Colonel Edward Harley, Eldest Son of the Famous Sir Robert Harley, Knight
of the Honorable Order of the Bath.
SIR,
THough your Own Virtues Spring you Rivers of Honor in the Hearts of Gods
people, yet the Tide of your Fathers Worth flowing in brim's the banks: Much of
your Honor lies in being the Son of Sir Robert Harley. (...) Prove. 17. 6.
It Is your Honor to be the Son of such a Father, and 'twas his (...). Menan.
apud Stob.
Joy to be the Father of such a Son: Truth is, a good Father is Gods Gift to
the Son, and a good Son is Gods Gift to the Father.

2. Yet you must not think to lie so Fresh and Orient in the opnion of Many
Christians of these Times: They have changed their Opinion of Truth it self,
and therefore much more of Her Children: Ver^^ a^mo^ constantia probatur.
Ambros Epi. 40. Quos amor verus tenuit, tenebit. S^^ in Thyes^.
They are not Now, what they were before: They forsake the Light, and then say,
that Others are in the Dark. They that change their Principles, Stella c^dens
non est stella, Cometa fuit.
will change their Judgments of you, and all that are like you: I conceive,
the Death of Profane men is Indigestion, through a mortal Coldness in their
stomach not turning the food of life at all into Nutriment: The Death of these
Men is over-digestion. Fit etiam assa^io a calore praeternaturali in epace, cum
nutrimentum aduritur, Humidumque sine modo extrahitur, etc. unde lepra,
lichene^, scabi^s etc. Rod. Goden.
As immoderate Heat in the bodily digestion, exhausting and burning up the
humid moisture of the nourishing matter, breeds Leprosies, Ringworms, Tetters,
and Scabs: So in Religion, a preter-naturall Heat heightning the Concoction
into adust Choler of Pride and zeal, begets Leaprousies of Opinions, Errors,
Separations, Contentions, and Scabs of Railing against the Ordinances and
Ministers of Jesus Christ: Vti neque qui^ ex alimento fit sanguis, ex sanguine
spiritus, eo hauriendus est sanguis: nam quae jam eo perfectionis de^enere, ut
sint sanguis vel humor roscidus, u^^eriori concoctione siunt deteriora. Ger.
Joh. V^ssi^s.
When Religion is come to its Due Perfection or Digestion, so as to become
blood and spirits in us, by farther Concoction is made worse: Every Degree
beyond that tends destructive to the spiritual Estate: These Men are as
inflamed Enemies to the Growth of the Gospel, as those that are Profane; and
truly their Reproaches A malis vituperari, laud^^i^est Sen. (...), ^ixit Anaxag.
are our Honors: but I hope you will tread in your (...) Greg. N^z.
brave Fathers steps, and stick close to the Good old way of Truth and
Godliness.

3. Sir, This Sermon such a one as it is, You had ^^^^^ved it long ago, as soon
as You ^^lled for it, had not God given me other work, Passive work, to
undergo: The Cloud of God upon me and my Family (which hung long upon us) wrapped
me up in sad Diversions: I hope the Heb. 1^. 1^. (...). Chrysostom.
Result of it will be the Peaceable fruit of Righteousness.

4. Sir, The Subject of the Sermon is the Gracious Saint, as the Object of Gods
Love: Who the more lovely, the more beloved; because he has the more of God in
Him, for God to love. (...); Chrysostom.
Gods Love to man is the Wonder of the World, and should be the Stupefaction
and Ecstacy of the Saints: What is Man that thou art mindful of him! Man laid
himself so low, that He was not worthy of one thought of God: A Deo Amari
exuperat omnem mundi favorem: a Deo Inhabitari exupera^ omnem mundi Splendorem
and magnificentiam. Salom. Glassius.
The love of God is the Saints unvaluable Treasury; Their Joy here, their
Heaven hereafter. If the Early Glimmerings of Gods love upon a soul shroud so
much Joy within their beams, what will the Meridian Rays of Glory be when they
shall be revealed? Quomod^ possemus illum diligere, nisi prior ille diligeret?
si pigri eramus ad amandum, non simus Pigri ad redamandum. August. (...).
Plutarc.
If God love us so much, How should we love God! Oh then! how should Our End be
his Honor, which is All he has from us for All we hold of him. None know his
Love, till they feel their Love to him.

5. If it were Possible, we should live above repentance; so to Act that we
need not to Repent: Though Repentance be a great Grace, yet it is greater Wisdom
(...). Epicharm. apud Stob.
not to sin, that we may not need the salve of Repentance: a Medicine is very
Precious, yet not to wound our selves is far better, that so we may not need
the medicine: Repentance is (...), dixit Pindar.
a Grace of After-wisdome: oh, let us be the Sons of Prometheus, rather than of
Epimetheus; Not to sin is better than to Repent when we have sinned.

6. How Choice should we be, how we Act our life since we have but One life to
Act! We have not a (...). Epic. (...). Eurip.
brace of lives here, that we might Correct in the other, what we have done
amiss in the first; that we might Recover in the latter, what we have lost in
the former: We have but One Arrow of life to hit the Mark with; and if we shoot
that at Random, we loose All; God will not put a second Arrow into our bow
again: we had need then be good Archers with One Arrow.

7. Yet alas! how little of our time do we live? Ourwhole Volume of Time is but
a short Compendium, a Moment to Eternity; yet how little of this little do we
live to God, or to our souls! The Heathens observed, that (...)
our Sleep divides half our life with us, and takes half from us; Sleep is the
dead part of our life: (...) A^^^. Ethic. l. 1. c. 8.
He that sleeps is doing nothing, it is the Privation or Parenthesis of action;
and yet (oh the misery!) the living part of our life is in most of us but a
spiritual Sleep of Carelessness and Security: He that is not upon action,
sleeps while he is awake.

8. Only the gracious man does enlarge his life, he enjoyes a double life; He
that spins a Gracious life, draws out a double thread, He lives twice, Ampliat
atatis spatium sibi vir bonus; Hoc est vivere bis, vita posse p^ime frui. Ma^t.
for he joyeth in what is spent, and enjoys what is present: A wicked life
past is lost; but, to live, and Review our former part of Life with joyful
Reflections on it, is to live Twice.

9. Our work here should be to live above the world: Our design in the world,
should be to live above the world: We that are traveling beyond the world,
should walk above the world: Why should we be taken with Riches, seeing we
shall be taken from Riches? and taken with Honors, who shall be taken from the
Honors of this world?

10. Our Body is but Dirt handsomely tempered, and (...), Epict. (...). Xenoph.
artificially formed, a little moystned Earth: We derive our Pedigree from the
dirt, and are a kin to Clay: The poor and beggarly Elements are our Materials;
as they are the Seeds of our being, so of our dissolution: How should this
humble us! we that are but dust, should lie as low as dust in our own eyes:
What is lower than Earth? He that rises out of the Earth, has no Ground why
he should be lifted up: What Pride should there be in Mud walls? How should we
dye daily! for we moulder and dissolve daily; we are no sooner touched, but we
are cracked.

11. Death is Necessary and In-evitable; it waits not our consent, we must dye
whether we will or no: Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required Luke
12. 20.
of thee: It shall be Required of thee: It shall be Required, that is, (...),
est poscere a volente* (...) a ^olen^e. Casaub. ad Theophr. Ch^^. (...)
fetched from thee, whether thou will or no; if thou will not deliver it up
willingly, it shall be taken from thee against thy will: Death is an Inflexible
Messenger, and Resolves not to go without that it comes for, it will not
Desire our soul of us* but Require it, This night thy soul shall be required of
thee: We will and Require you, is the language of them that are in Authority,
and will not be denied; and in this Commanding language speaks The King of
Terrors: Oh then, let us not so much desire to live, as study how to dye; what
a sad thing is it to dye by force? When Death shall find us Eager to live, and
not prepared to dye? Un-preparation makes our natural Death a violent death;
They dye miserably, who dye desiring to live.

12. Our great Care (...).
should be not to blast the precedent Flower of our life with a Blot at last;
not to blemish the fair Copy of a Good conversation with an Erratum in the End:
There Is many a famous Professor has gone off the Stage without an
approbation, because he lost himself in his last Act: nay, (which should make
us most watchful, when we are drawing toward our Epilogue) Glorious Saints,
many, if not the most of them, when they grow ancient in Religion, they take a
nap before they go to Bed: The wise Virgins fell a sleep, a little before the
Bridegroom came: Moses when he almost arrived at Canaan, within the sight of
the Land, yet for one sin lost it: a long Profession makes many secure in the
latter End; but the stone is swiftest in motion, when it is nearest the center:
O Sir, Our Last should be our Best, and the sweetest at the bottom; the
farther your day goes on, watch the more, Men are more prone to drop asleep in
the afternoon: and let me tell you, It Is not Outward temptations that overcome
us, but Our own corruptions, not the most tempestuous temptations, but our
superficial Professions; ah then! let us build firm, and lay our
superstructure upon an unmovable Foundation: Godliness is the Great house
that we are building: now some build (as Christ says) upon the sand, and that
House falls, others build upon a Rock, and that House stands, Mat. 7. 24,
to 28. It Is not the strength of Temptations, but the vanity of the builders
that causes the fall of the House: It Is (...).
Chrysostomes Observation, You see (says he) it is not the Force of
Temptations, but the Folly of the Builders that brings the Ruin, for There is
Rain, and Here is Rain, There are floods, and Here are floods, There the winds
blow, and Here the winds beat too, the one builds, and the other builds, The
Building is the same, and the temptations are the same, but there is not the
Same End, because there is not the Same Foundation; so that it is not the Nature
of the Temptations, but the Imprudence of the Builders that causes the Ruin.

Sir, Whilst I am writing these things, Our Glass is running: Your Time and
mine flies faster then my Pen: We had need improve That Highly, which is
posting from us so Swiftly: Our days are shorter then a Post; Lord! what Have
then do they make! a Post is engaged to ride hard; and sometimes he rides upon
pain of Death, with a Halter about his neck: So do we, (though the vain Sons
of Men think not so) Every step we take is upon Pain of Eternal Death; if
either we loyter, or betray our Trust, Negligence or Unfaithfulness will be
our Halter: Souls are choice ware, Eternity a dreadful Abyss, and God will
not be Trifled with: oh then! let not us sit still, whilst time is running: no
time is ours, but what is present; and that is past as soon as it is present:
Therefore to Jesus Christ I commend you, with Him I leave you, through him
desiring All spiritual blessings in heavenly Places upon you, So Prays He, who
is

Clun, December. 22. 1657. SIR, Your most Obliged Kinsman, and most Humble
Servant, THO. FROYSELL.

THE Beloved Disciple.
DAN. 9. 22, 23. O Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee Skill and
Understanding; at the beginning of thy Supplications the commandment came
forth, and I am come to show thee, For thou art Greatly beloved.
WE have marched all this day in Sable Posture, (I pray, we may all walk in
white one day with Jesus Christ) This present Scene of sorrow becomes us: As
the Air receives several Impressions from the superior bodies, she looks
lightsome when the Heavens shine, and sad again, when they look black again
upon her; so when the Celestial providence shall change her countenance upon
us, it is our duty to change our aspects.

Our loss is very great; We have lost a Chief Man, one that was a Common and
Public Good, The Sun of this Country is Set; Sir Robert Harley gave a great
light to these parts: We are wont to say of fair weather, it is pity it should
do any hurt, because we are loath it should ever leave us: I am sure, I may
say, it is pity that Good men should due and leave us, that Brave Sir Robert
Harley should ever be missed among us: He was as choice a Piece as our Age has
known, A man that was the Rariety of men, A Man whom his descent had elevated
above the rate of ordinary men, and a man whose veins Free Grace had filled
with nobler blood: A man of whom I may say in the words of my Text, Thou art
greatly Beloved.

These Great words in my Text are spoken literally of Daniel, of him I must
speak a while, that he may lead me into the bosom of my discourse, O Daniel
thou art Greatly Beloved.

First, Daniel was a Choice Flower, which the hand of Captivity transplanted
out of his native Garden into Babylon to grow there: in the Reign of Jehojakin
when Jerusalem was taken, Daniel was one of those who were brought to Babylon;
The Precious Children of God are Commoners with the wicked in Public woes and
Calamities.

Secondly, The strange soil where He was Transplanted, did not (as it does
some Trees) kill his Growth, this gallant plant (though in Babylon) shoots up
into length of parts and Graces, of learning and loveliness; Trueborn Grace
will thrive any where: as a vehement flame makes fuel of whatsoever it meets;
so divine Grace makes all things its nutriment, it turns banishment and
adversity into Rich food: Every Condition is its Pasture.

Thirdly, But the wonder is, that Daniel and his brave Companions being snatched
from the means of Grace, should yet excel so much in Grace: but when God takes
his beloved ones from under the ordinary showers of his Ordinances, He wets
them with extraordinary dewes: when he deprives them of the breasts, he nurseth
them with the hand: it is our Prudence to prize the means of Grace, but if
Providence shall bring us into a wilderness, 'Twill feed us with Manna from
Heaven.

Fourthly, Daniel was of Royal Extraction, at least of noble Derivation: Some
say, He was a Sprig of the Royal Tree, the family of the Kings of Judah; if
not, he was a Ray of the splendent Nobility, that did shine about the throne,
he was of the one or the other, for it is said in the first chapter at the third
verse, that the King spoke unto the Master of the Eunuchs, that he should bring
Certain of the Children of Israel, and of the Kings Seed, and of the Princes;
and among these were Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: Grace is Sometimes
grafted into Greatness: Noble Persons many times are Illustrious Saints.

Fifthly, Daniel was but young; some date him but of ten years, others raise
his age up to twenty years, when He was carried into Babylon: it seems Grace
did espouse him in his Youth: We find him strong and strenuous in Grace as soon
as he was in Babylon, in that he would not eat of the Kings meat, nor taste of
the Kings wine, least He should defile himself: He was able to encounter an
high temptation with a magnanimous spirit: if his Grace was then of so large a
Volume, surely the first Edition of it was long before: if the fruit was then
so big, I question not but it began to blossom betimes: Grace did espouse him
in his youth: Oh! how should this shame and shake old men and women not yet
converted? whose Sun is almost setting, but no Grace at all in them as yet
rising? It is a Huge advantage to Consecrate our Selves to God in our First
years: Sweet Daniel, his youth was wiser than others age; his dawning was
brighter than their noontide, his Spring Exceeded their Autumn, oh! It Is an
Heaven to set out toward Heaven betimes: The finest Traveling is in the
morning, Aurora musis amica.

Sixthly, Daniel was a great Student, he did wade in the Rivers of Humane
Learning, and Court the Sciences with such diligence, that within a short time
He did espouse them: it is said in Dan. 1. 4. that the King took order that He
and the others with him should be taught the learning and the tongue of the
Caldeans, and at v. 17. God gave them Skill in all learning and wisdom; that
is, they followed their Studies hard, and God Crowned their Endeavors with an
Extraordinary blessing: For all Arts are from God, who is the Alpha, the first
Cause of every Good thing, the Inventer of all liberal Sciences: This is a
Pattern For Young Gentlemen, oh! that they would write after this Gallant Copy,
Give up themselves to the Study of Generous Arts, and to the Power of
Godliness; I say, that they would cast of idleness, and vanity, and
prophannesse, and give themselves up to noble Studies, and to Godliness into
the bargain. This noble Daniel he studied and prayed, he prayed and studied; he
was learned and holy, and he was holy as well as learned: his Graces made him
sit to serve a God, his learning and Parts made him fit to serve a King: For
his Parts the King often conversed with him; For his Graces, he often conversed
with God, and God in Visions with him; ^hen Learning and Religion meet in a
Great Person, they Render Him Useful and Honorable.

Quest. But how durst Daniel live in a Heathenish Court the Center of all
Temptations? How could he dispense with himself to walk among the snares of sin
and Idolatry?

Answ. 1. He was cast thither by Providence; It was not the place of his choy^;
but his Captivity.

2. God that called him thither, Crowned him there with Extraordinary strength:
When God calls Hee'il Strengthen: He was able to own God in the open face of
the Court, he feared not the Snares his Enemies laid for him: He prays, and
opens his casement ^oward Jerusalem, he will not omit that Circumstance, though
with imminent peril of his life: He had more then a Lions Spirit that ^eared
not the Den of Lions.

3. God set Daniel there in the Court to Negotiate with the King, for the Good
of his Church and people: It Is propable, that he was a Great Instrument to
obtain of Cyrus the Jews liberty to Return out of captivity: Some say, that
Daniel lived and dyed in Babylon: when the Jews returned with Ezra to their
Land, Daniel would not; he stayed to promote the welfare and safety of the
Jews with Cyrus.

In my Text an Angel is sent by God from Heaven to tell him, Thou art greatly
beloved, we may style him Daniel the greatly beloved, the greatly beloved of
God.

If you ask why he should wear this style Greatly beloved above many others.
you must know,

First, That Daniel was a man raised to a transcendent height of Grace above
others.

Secondly, He was deeply devoted to prayer and fasting.

Thirdly, He was emptied out of himself into a Sea of love to the Church of
God: for he was wasting himself in fasting and wrestling with God in prayer
for Jerusalem, when the Angel courts him with this salutation, O Daniel thou
art Greatly Beloved.

The words in the Original are (...) For thou art Desires, or Delights: in
Scripture the Abstract is with Excellent Emphasis and Energy put for the
Concret, or the Substantive for the Adjective, in Ezekiel. 35. 15. Thou shall be
desolate, O mount Seir, the word is (...) Thou shall b^ Desolation, that is,
most desolate: In Prove. 14. 1. Folly, is put for a woman of Folly, or a foolish
woman, Every wise woman builds her House, but Folly [i. the foolish woman]
plucketh it down with her Hands: In Genesis 3. 6. The woman saw that the Tree was
good for food, and that it was Pleasant to the eyes, (...) A Desire to the
eyes, that is, Desideratissima, most desirable: so Strength, for strong Isa. 3.
25.
men, or men of Strength; and Pride, for proud men, or men of Psalm. 36. 11.
Pride, Let not the foot of Pride, [i. of proud men] come against me, the
Abstract shows that they were very Proud men indeed: So here in the Text, Thou
art Desires, or Delights, Gods delight, the man of his delights, very much
delighted in: and so should that Text (for ought I know) be expound^d in James
2. 13. He shall have judgment without mercy that has showed no mercy, and
mercy rejoices against judgment, that is, Merciful men, or men of mercy
shall rejoice against Judgment, that is, in an Evangelicall sense they shall
not fear the judgment of God: So here in the Text, thou art Desires or
Delights, that is, thou art a man of Desires or Delights: and so it is fully
Expressed in Chap. 10. at v. 11, 19. there it is (...) man of Desires, that is,
Desirable man, Thou Gallant man, more lovely, and more loved than others.

Let me add, these Abstracts in a Plural form, enhance the Notion of the word
to a superlative degree; a man of Understanding holds Prove. 11. 12.
his peace; it is of the Plural (...)
number, a man of Understandings, for, a man of Very Great Understanding: Prove.
1. 20.
so Solomon speaking of Jesus Prove. 9. 1.
Christ, says he, Wisdom cries out, Wisdom has builded her house; Wisdom
is one of Christ's Names, but the word is Wisdoms, (...)
that is, the greatest and chiefest Wisdom: Jesus Christ is called Wisdoms,
for Honors sake, as if he had said, the Wisdom of wisdoms: So here Daniel is
called in the Plural number Desires or Delights, (...)
that is, One most dearly Desired, or Delighted in; that is, as we render it,
Greatly Beloved.

When Daniel is styled a man of Desires, some would understand it actively,
that is, a man that was full of desires after the Churches Good, the Jews
deliverance, and Gods glory: I remember Gerhard on 1 Pet. 1. 10. [ of which
salvation the Prophets have enquired and searched diligently] says, Daniel was
called a man of Desires, because he desired so much the knowledge of the coming
of the Messiah our Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore for his desires, the Period
of Time wherein Christ should come, was manifested by the Angel to him: but I
rather apprehend it otherwise, and understand it Passively, He is called a man
of Desires, because he was so much Desirable, or, as we translat^ it, Greatly
Beloved: For it is frequent in Scripture in this sense; what is more Excellent,
and more prized than others, is so styled, in Dan. 10. 3. I ate no (...) bread
of Desires, that is, no dainty food, which men's palates delight in above other:
in Ezekiel. 26. 12. (...) Thy Pleasant houses, Houses of thy Desire, that is,
stately Houses which you count your paradises: so in Genesis 27. 15. Rebekah took
Goodly raiment of her eldest son Esau, (...) Raiment of Desires, that is,
Costly Raiment, which we desire to put on rather than others: So here, Thou man
of Desires, that is, Desired or Beloved of God above others, his deliciae, his
delicate one, his darling. It Is usual, you see, in the Jews language to call
such things desired, as were had in greater Esteem among them: such a one was
Daniel in the eye of God, O Daniel, thou art greatly beloved; Whence I take up
this Observation.

1. Some Saints are greatly Beloved: Some Saints are higher in Gods Esteem,
than others are.

Again, from the Time, when the Angel came to Daniel from God with this High
Salutation, which was while Daniel was fasting and praying, I observe, that

2. Prayer is the Valley of Visions, the mount of Heavenly Raptures.

There God feasts his Saints with divine appearances: if ever you would be
ravished with hints of love, or special discoveries, then it is when you are at
prayer. It is to be observed concerning Christ himself, that he had the
brightest sunshines of his Fathers discoveries upon him, when he was moving in
the Orb of prayer: In Mat. 3. it is said that Jesus when he was baptized, the
Heavens were opened, and the Spirit of God* descended like a Dove upon him, And
lo, a voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased; Luke adds, that Jesus being baptized, and praying, the Heaven was Luke
3. 21.
opened: The Holy Dove came upon Christ from Heaven, while Christ was soaring
up to Heaven upon the wing of Prayer: in the same Evangelist, Luke 9. 28, 29.
it is said, that Jesus Christ went up into a mountain to pray, and as he
prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his reyment was white
and glistering; See, prayer is a Glorifying Ordinance: The Son of God, as he
prayed, did shine as the Sun; Prayer drew Glory down out of Heaven upon him:
Would ye meet with Glorious transfigurations upon your souls? Go up then to
Mount Tabor, and pray. But the Doctrine I shall speak to, is

Doct. Some Saints are Greatly Beloved: All the Saints are beloved, but some
Saints are Greatly Beloved. Some Saints are more in Gods than others are, his
desire and delight runs out in a fuller Tide on some than it does on others;
His love is tender to all, but it is higher to some: The more grace one Saint
has above another, the more God loves that Saint above another*

To explain this we must take notice that Gods love has several objects.

1. There is his love, whereby he loves himself.

2. And his love whereby he loves Res extra se positas, things out out of
himself.

First, He loves himself, as the greatest good: God loves himself first and
best: every thing that has sense and understanding loves it self, and God who
knows himself to be the Best Good, cannot but love himself Best; and therefore
it is said, the Lord made Prove. 16. 4.
All things for himself.

1. The Creation of all things is the Birth of his love to himself; which he
made as mirrours to reflect his own Excellencies: when he made those Beauteous
Paires of Heaven and Earth, he did it to glorify himself, being the Glasses to
behold his own wisdom and all mighty Power.

2. And when God destroyed the old world, 'twas out of love to himself; for
therein he glorified himself: in those waters he saw the Image of his Justice;
They were the looking Glass of That Attribute, and therefore God is said To
laugh at and Rejoice in the destruction of a Sinner, because he is pleased with
the Economy of his own Laws, and the Excellent proportions He makes of his
Judgments to their sins: Thus when he destroyed Pharaoh he did it out of a
supreme love to himself, and his own great Name; And in very deed for this
cause I raised Exodus 9. 16.
thee up for to show in thee my Power, and that my Name may be declared
throughout all the Earth: Sinner, Take heed and put a stop to thy Race in sin,
if thou go on a little further, it may be, God cannot spare thee for his
Names sake: He must punish for the Honor of his Name, he cannot but love
himself, and therefore cannot but punish Sinners out of Respect unto his Name:
He is Engaged to punish, because he is Engaged to himself.

3. So he Acts all his works of mercy chiefly out of love to himself: He loves
his people, but he loves them for the love he b^ars to himself, and delivers
them for the love he bears to his own name, His Name being put upon them: They
in themselves are not worth his deliverances, and when their sins plead against
their deliverance, his own name intercedes for them, But I had pity for my holy
Ezekiel. 36. 21. 22, 23.
Name, which the House of Israel had profaned among the Heathen whither they
went, etc. that is, You are worthy no pity, yet I will have pity for my holy
Name; That he might free his Name from Base aspersions and Imputations.

Secondly, God has love which flows out of him upon the creature, I say, God
has love for himself, and he has love to bestow upon the creature too; for
the Creature is the Work of his hands: It Is natural to all men to love their
own works, and what they have curionsly formed, to spend many a pleasing fight
upon it: An Artist when he has made an Excellent and comely piece, is in love
with it, because it is the Elaborate product of his own conception, and has
stamped the Image of his Rich Idaea and fancy on it: and thus the Scripture
brings in God, viewing and feasting his eye with a delightful Complacency upon
all his works that he had made; and God saw every thing that he had made, and
Genesis 1. 31.
behold it was very good; He looks and loves, he loves and looks upon every
thing that he had made, not only man, but Every thing that he had made: He
looks upon man, and loves his moral goodness that he had carved in him; he
looks upon every thing, and loves the natural goodness he had stamped upon
them. Gods Love twofold.


This large love of God comprehends all the Creatures in it, not 1. Common.
only the Rational but the Inanimate Creatures in the Bosom of it, I say,
his love, whereby he willed their being, and still preserves their being; and
whatever Prints and Characters of himself they have, takes pleasure in them,
as an Artist does in his Rare Composures.

But there is a Special love of God, 2. Special.
his choice love, which Elevates and lifts some persons up to a supernatural
state in Jesus Christ; this is that love we are speaking of. God beholding the
lump of fallen man as a vast Dunghill or Heap of Dirt, saw no difference of
Persons in it, but all Equally loathsome and filthy; how could it be otherwise?
for one piece of dung is not sweeter than another, one dram of dirt is not
cleaner than another: I say, God casting his Eye upon that Noisome and
unsavory Mixon, his wise and good Pleasure thinks meet to have benign thoughts
toward some, he takes these up into his Divine purpose, and in time takes them
out of their sordid state, with Curious artifice he refines them from their
filth, and sets up a Fragrant work of Grace in them; he writes them his Sons
and Daughters, and gives them an Estate of Eternal Glory, and all in Jesus
Christ.

This is his special Love, which we must distinguish into his love of Good
will, and his love of Complacency.

There is observed a difference between these.

First, His love of good will precedes Amor Benevolentiae.
the work of Grace, and goes before it: This love finds us Sinners, and makes
us Saints: This love of God is not founded upon Reasons in the Object: with
this love he loved us first, before we being Justified by his Grace could love
him: This love finds nothing in us for which he ought to love us: This love
gives us Grace, as the Apostle says, God for his great love wherewith he loved
Ephesians. 2. 4, 5.
us, even when we were dead, has quickened us together with Christ: This love
can have to Cause but it self.

Secondly, This love is free, Nullis meritis, nisi bonitate amantis excitatus,
not stirred up by any objective Goodness in us, but only the self-moving
Goodness of him that loved us; it sees no loadstone in us to draw it out, nay,
it finds sin and sordidnesse upon us, and yet he loves us: He loves us without
Necessity, without Attractive, and without Engagement; nay, let me say, if
there were any motive in us why he loved us, it was because we were miserable
and Unworthy his love: But the truth is, nothing did incline and dispose his
heart to us, but his own will: Of his own will begat James 1. 18.
he us, and the same will that begat us, passed by others: Gods love to
himself, is Natural and Necessary; But his love to his Creatures is not, he
has mercy on whom he will have mercy: It is a free love and a free mercy, He
has mercy on whom he will have mercy: O! wonder at God, all ye his Saints, and
beloved ones, in his mercy to you; let it cast you into an high Trance of holy
admiration.

Thirdly, This Love of God, The love of his good will, is equal to all his
Saints, in many Respects.

1. In respect of the act of his will, (as the Schoolmen say:) God Equally
wills Good to all his Saints, though he does not will Equal Good to all his
Saints: He does not more will Good to one than to another, though he wills more
good to some than to others; There are no degrees in his will, though there are
degrees in the things willed.

2. So Election does equally pass upon them all, and not upon one more than
another: God cannot be said to choose one, more than another, of them whom he
has Chosen; and therefore they are called under one word [ the Election] The
Election has obtained Ro^. 11. 17.
it, because they are all equally Elected.

3. In respect of the common benefits of salvation by Jesus Christ, they are
all Equally favored and accepted.

1. They are all Equally Redeemed by Jesus Christ; The Lord Christ did die
Equally for all those his Father gave him, none can say, he intended me in his
death more than another, neither did One of us Cost him more than Another.

2. In Gods Gracious act of vocation or calling them to Jesus Christ, they are
Equally looked upon.

3. They are Equal in Justification: it may be one is more justified than
another Extensively, but not Intensively; that is, one has more Sins forgiven
than another, but Intensively, as our Justification consists in Gods gracious
Repute or acceptance of us as just and righteous, so they are all Equal.

Again, in respect of the Applicaion of Christ's Righteousness, so there is a
graduall difference: Some receive it with a stronger faith than others, and
apply it according to their necessity and indigence, therefore we may say, some
partake of it more than oothers; yet because Justification is an act of God
pardoning believers, whom he pardons, he pardons equally, though all that are
pardoned are not equal sinners.

Again, in respect of Righteousness imputed, all believers are equally just:
for as they are justified, they stand just before God in the most perfect
Righteousness of Jesus Christ; and by it the weak Christian is justified, as
well as the strong: upon this account the faith of the Saints (though unequal
in degrees) is yet said to be Alike or Equally precious. The 2 Pet. 1. 1.
merit of Christ is Equally imputed to all that believe: And the Reward of his
merit in respect of of substance (which is Eternal life) is equally given to
all that believe.

4. Their adoption is equal; They are all equally the Sons of God, God is not
more Father to one than to another, they have an equal Right to the
Inheritance.

5. Again, all the Promises of the Covenant of Grace that concern the
Essentialls of Salvation, are equal to them all, and are fulfilled in one
believer as well as another: to give an instance, the Promise of perseverance
is to every Saint as well as to any: as the least Star is as firmly six't in
its Orb, as the glorious Sun; and there is no more danger of the falling of the
one than of the other: so the weakest Saints are as sure to be kept in the
sphaere of Perseverance unto salvation, as the Saints of the first magnitude:
it is not strength of Grace, but Gods love and constant influence that preservs
the strongest Saints, and the same attends the weakest. Thus far his Love of
Good will is Equal.

Yet (let me add my thoughts) in respect of some special Flowers in the Garland
of salvation, this love of God, His love of Good will is not Equal to all the
Saints.

God gives higher Measures of Grace to some than he does to others; and what
are the Graces of his Spirit but the Golden Signalls of his love? it is a Rule
in the Schools* To love another is to will Good to another, and [ Si amare sit
bona velle alteri, cum majora bona velle sit magis amare] if to will Good to
another be to love them, then to will greater Good is greater love; and
therefore (says Zanchius) we must hold this proposition, where there are
Greater and more gifts of God, there God is said to love more, because the
gifts of God are the love tokens of his benevolence or Good will.

And as God gives different degrees of Grace, so he gives different degrees of
Glory; he Crowns his greater Graces with greater Glory: For as all that believe
in Christ are Equally justified, but not all Equally Endued with Grace; so all
believers shall be Equally saved, but not all Equally Glorified; but of this in
its right place afterward.

Fourthly, This love of God, His love of Good will is always uniform and like
it self; it has no risings nor fallings, it knows no Ebbings and flowings,
this immanent love is a permanent love; incapable of any Intension, or
Remission, Augmentation, and Diminution, or any Alteration; it is always at
full tide: The sins of the Saints weaken not this love; it loves them always at
the same Rate; when he casts them down, this love bears them up; when his anger
does condense and thicken like a Cloud upon them, this love, His love of Good
will, sits in the upper region of serenity looking with the same aspect of
kindness still upon them; when he banisheth them from his presence, this love
goes with them and keeps them company; when his corrective justice gives them
up to sin to humble them, this love sanctifies their sins and Falls to them, it
turns their sins to their greater Good, it refines them by their pollutions, it
makes their Poison a Sanative Cure to them: In a word, in all Gods desertions
of his Saints, this love of Good Will forsakes them not, in respect of this
love they are never deserted.

Secondly, But of this special Amor Amicitiae seu Complacenciae.
love of God to his People there is another fragrant Sprig, which is called his
Love of Complacency, or his Love of Friendship; whereby he takes pleasure in
them as suitable to him; is pleased with something in them, that is pleasing to
him: Thus he cannot take pleasure, no not in his vessels of Election, not as
yet sanctified, because they have nothing in them as yet pleasing to him: It is
one thing for God to wish or will the Creature well, another thing for the
Creature to please and delight his will: God wills Nothing but what, is
Pleasing to him, yet you must not gather thence, that wicked men are therefore
Pleasing to God, because God them well; For Been Velle and Been Facere. To will
Sinners well, and to do Sinners Good, is in truth a thing Pleasing to God
(because it is agreeable to his mercy) and yet sinners are not therefore
Pleasing to him.

By his love of Complacency, he considers something in men that does Please
him: In this sense 'Paul says, Without Faith it is Heb. 11. 6. Romans 8. 8.
impossible to Please God, or be Pleasing to him; and they that are in the
flesh cannot Please God.

God by his love of Good will does good to creatures miserable, lost, and no
way lovely; This is amor collationis, His love whereby he confers beauties on
them, which afterward render him amiable in his Eye, and capable to please him.

Gods love of Good will falls upon Naked Persons; Gods love of Complacency
falls not upon Naked Persons, but upon Persons Clothed and decked with Grace:
The object of Gods love of Complacency is not [ Bonum Physicum and Entitatirum]
The Entitative Good or Being of the Creature, but [ Bonum ethicum and morale]
The moral Being or Gracious Goodness of the creature: Thus as there is in men
more or less which pleases God according to the degrees and Fruits of Grace
in them, so he loves them more or less, with his love of Friendship and
Complacency.

First, This love of God follows the work of Grace in the Creature: They must
have Grace stamped upon them, before he can take Complacency or delight in them,
Such as are upright in their Prove. 11. 20.
way are his delight: In Respect of his love of Good will, it is said, We love
him because he first loved us: 1 John 4. 19.
In respect of his love of delight, it is said, He that loves me shall be John
14. 21.
loved of my Father. In respect of his love of Good will, it is said, God so
loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever John 3. 16.
believes in him shall not perish but have Everlasting life; In respect of his
love of Complacency, it is said, The Father himself loves you because ye have
loved me, and have believed John 16. 27.
that I came out from God.

His love of good will is his preventing Amor praeveniens.
love, whereby he loved us, before we desired it.

His love of friendship is his Amor Consequens.
consequent love, which follows not only his former love to us, but also our
love to him: and therefore says Christ, He that loves me shall be loved of my
Father, and I will love him: as the Father and the Son by their first love
provoke ours, so by their second love they reward ours; Gods love of good will
makes men love God; by his love of good will he makes them righteous; with his
love of Complacency he loves them being righteous; in respect of the love of
his Good will they are the effects of his love; in respect of his love of
Complacency they are the objects of his love; If any man (says Christ) love
me, he shall be loved of my Father. But How can any man by nature love Christ,
or love God? Therefore I say, Gods love of good will [ facit homines Dei
amantes] makes men lovers of him.

His love of good will is the fountain and spring of our love to him; it begets
our love to him, as the image of his love to us: To Love God, is the gift of
God, our active love whereby we love him, and our passive love whereby we are
beloved of him, are both the gifts of God, and the gifts of his free and first
love.

Yet there is a love of God whereby he loves us not, till we love him; He
cannot love thee with delight till thou art Lovely: Gods love of good will
makes the object, his love of Friendship does presuppose the object; he cannot
love thee as his Friend till thou art his Friend; There is no Friendship
without mutual love; he cannot love thee as his child, till thou art his
child; he does not love thee as thy Husband, till thou art his Spouse: I say,
he cannot love as an Husband, till he is thy Husband; and he is not thy
Husband, till thou take him to be thy Husband. But does not Gods love begin to
me? Does not he love sinners first? and make suit to them as a lover, before
they love him? yes, with the love of Good will: He bears good will to thee, and
therefore he breaks his mind to thee in the Gnspell, and wooes thee (it may be
long) before thou love him; but he does not love thee with the love of
Espousalls, till the Nuptial day, till thou can find in thy heart to have
him, and the marriage-knot be tied up, and thou take him for thine Husband: He
cannot love thee with this Relationlove, till thou come under this
Relation-bond.

Secondly, This love of God, his Love of Complacency is a necessary love: His
love of Good will is free; his love of Complacency is necessary: ah dear God!
he loves us freely, that he may love us necessarily: As 'twas free to God (at
first) to make man, but if he would make him, he must of necessity make him
Righteous, and love him so made; so when man was fallen, 'twas free to God
whether he would show him any good will or no, whether he would repair his
Image again in him or no, but if it be his Pleasure to Restore him, he cannot
but love his own design; if it be his pleasure to set up a new Creation, he
cannot but love his new Creation. His love of Good will is (as I may say) his
Rectorall love, his love of Friendship is his Foederall love: his love of Good
will is his love of Dominion, whereby he loves whom and where he pleases to
love; his love of Friendship is his love of Communion, whereby he is engaged by
Covenant to love his Friends, to love those that love him.

Thirdly, This love of God, his love of Complacency, admits varieties of
weather, and looks with several faces upon his Saints: It has its Spring and
its Fall, it has its summer and has its winter, it rises as our obedience
rises, and falls as our obedience falls; it grows hot and cold according to
the vicissitude of his peoples tempers, as they are hot or cold in their
affections: according to his love of Complacency and Friendship he is said
sometimes to smile, and sometimes to frown upon us: as long as David walked
close with God, his love did shine upon him, but when David sinned in the
matter of Vriah, his love of Complacency did retire, and draw in its beams from
him: In respect of this love, God is said to forsake and desert his Children,
his Desertion of them is the departure of this his love in some degree from
them: as the Philosophers say, There is a lux, and lumen, light inherent in the
Sun, and light fluent from the Sun, that is ever Perfect and Permanent; but
this may suffer changes, and be obscured: so Gods love of Friendship, our sins
may lessen it, and our recoveries make it rise brighter on us: Look then to
your walkings.

Lastly, This love of God, his love of Complacency and Friendship, is unequal
to his Saints; its higher to some, its lower to others; its more to some, and
lesser to others, according to the measure and proportion of their Graces: Some
are Greatly Beloved, and some are Not so Greatly Beloved with this love; as the
Sun shines hotter upon some Climates, than it does upon others; and the water
overflows some Pastures more than others: The Sweeter Rose a Saint is, the more
deliciously God wears him in his Bosom; He does Enlarge his graces in them,
and then Enlarge his heart toward them. To conclude, John the Evangelist was
One whom Christ loved marvellously, he was the Delight of Jesus Christ, his
Benjamin, therefore he is called, the Disciple whom Christ loved: and as Christ
loved him above others, so he loved Christ more than others did; for he stood
by the Cross when all the other left him, and fled away for fear.

And now having given light of Explanation to the point, I am next to make
proof of it.

First, In Isa. 41. 8. God speaks with high and honorable Respects of Abraham,
Abraham my Friend, a huge Favor and Princely title from Gods mouth: But are
not all the Saints the friends of God? yes, but Abraham was his friend (...),
by way of eminency, God admitted him into nearer Communion, he lay deeper in
Gods bosom than others did: All the holy Saints of God are his friends and
dear ones, but Abraham was (as it were) the crown and cream of all his friends,
and therefore says he, Abraham my friend.

It Is observed by some, that among the Jews their King had one whom he loved
and conversed with above the rest, and him they called the Kings friend: The
King had more friends than one, all that 1 Kings 16. 11.
were of his Council, and his Officers were called his friends, because he
committed his great affairs to their hands, and steared all his designs by
their advice, yet among them all the King had some one Courtier called the
Kings friend by a specialty: as Hushai is called 2 Samuel 15. 37.
David's friend, and it is said of Solomon, that Zabud the son of Nathan was his
Principal Officer, and the Kings Friend, that is, his singular 1 Kings 4. 5.
and darling friend (that had the quintessence of the Kings friendship) the
Cabinet of his most retired communications: and in this sense is Abraham styled
the friend of God; God carried his heart upon his lips to Abraham, Shall I hide
from Abraham that thing Genesis 18. 17.
which I do? Abraham was Of Gods Privy Council; all were not, and all are
not: surely then God bears more Respects to some Saints than he does to others.

Secondly, God associates himself more familiarly with some Saints than with
others, which is a sign of more entire love: Thus he did with Moses, And there
arose Deuteronomy. 34. 10.
not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to
face: And when Aaron and Miriam swelling with Envy, burst out into mutiny
against Moses, see how God does interpose for him, and highly magnify him, And
he said, hear now my words, if there be a Numb. 12. 6, 7, 8.
Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known unto him in a Vision,
and will speak unto him in a Dream: My servant Moses is not so, who is
faithful in all mine house; with him will I speak mouth to mouth, even
apparently, and not in dark speeches, and the similitude of the Lord shall he
behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?
They eclipse and diminish Moses, God advances him: They equal themselves to
Moses, God prefers him to them: Their Plea was that God had spoken by them, as
well as by Moses Gods Reply is that he had in a more affectionate and sociable
correspondence spoken to Moses than to them, with him will I speak mouth to
mouth: God spoke to the best of them, but either in a Dream, or Vision, but to
Moses he spoke with more lively Representation, The similitude of the Lord
shall he behold, God would have them know, that he puts a great difference
between them and Moses; he professes that he has, and will show more respects
to Moses, than to them.

Chytraeus says, it is very likely and probable, that the Son of God did with
the same face, and form of humane nature which he afterward assumed, show
himself friendly and familiarly to Moses, and our first Parents: and to that
speech, wherein 'twas said, that there arose not a Prophet since in Israel
Deuteronomy. 34. 10.
like unto Moses, some observe that Moses surpassed all the other Prophets, not
only in sublimity of Prophecies, but also in Excellency and number of
Miracles; for Moses within one age only, wrought seventy six Miracles, when
the rest from the beginning of the world quite down to the ruin of the first
Temple, wrought only seventy four, as Manasseh Ben Israel reckons them:
besides, Moses (they say) had one hundred and seventy three conferences with
God, which none of the Prophets had.

Thirdly, God Preferres some Saints above others: Though these three men, Noah,
Daniel, and Job, Ezekiel. 14. 14.
were in it, they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness,
says the Lord God: and again, Though Moses and Samuel stood before Jer. 15. 1.
me, yet my mind could not be toward this People. Now the Lord does instance in
these, as those that could do more with him, than any others, and upon whom
his heart was set upon above others; as if he should say, though my dearest
friends that sit at the stern of my heart, and could move me which way they
please, should come and Plead, yet I would not yield: as if God had said, if
any could persuade me, they were the men that should do it.

Fourthly, God does Glory in some Saints and servants, more than others: Have
thou considered my servant Job, that there is none Job 1. 8.
like him in the Earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God and
escheweth evil?

1. Have thou considered my servant Job? it is (says one) as if you should say
to a man come down from the City into the Country, were you at Court? did you
see the King? because he is the most Eminent and considerable Person; so does
God speak here of Job.

2. Again, My Servant Job: when God says, My Servant, he does (as it were)
glory in his Servant, God speaks of him, as a man does of that which he
glories in: As the Saints glory in God, when they say, My God, and My Christ,
this is a kind of glorying and triumphing in God; so this Expression of God
carries such a sense in it, My Servant Job, as if it were his honor to have
such a servant, one that I am proud of.

3. But God has not done yet glorying in Job, he adds another grain, That
there is none like him in the Earth: God speaks not this high Praise of Job in
Reference to the wicked, as if none of them were like him, that's too low, but
in Reference to all the Saints, that were then upon the Earth, among those
there was not such a man as Job, none of them all like him, they were not
equal to him in this or that or the other Grace, Job was a man above them all,
thus God glories in him: I say, God does glory in some Saints more than in
others.

Fifthly, God shows some Saints Extraordinary favors: He Exempts them from the
common condition of all the Saints, they are Exceptions from the general rule:
and surely, Extraordinary favors do not flow from ordinary love: The Apostle
says, that ' It Is Appointed unto men once to die: but Enoch must not die, he
must not go the common rode of man kind, the Text says, He was translated that
he should not see death, he soared up to Heaven (as if Adam had been taken out
of Paradise before he sinned) upon the wing of immortality: so, Elijah must
receive an unparalleled Honor, die like other men he must not, but God sends
for him in state, he Rides in his Glittering Coach drawn by Angels to the
Gates of Glory: Surely these were Gods Greatly beloved.

Sixthly, God would have us love those Saints most, to whom he has given most
Grace: and when we love those more that are Gracious, we are the more like to
God.

Seventhly, God, for ought I know (though some learned Heads speak the
contrary) gives some Saints more Glory in Heaven than he gives to others.

Their objective beatitude will be Beatitudo. 1. Objectiva.
one and the same, which is God himself, One God among them all.

Their Receptive Beatitude, that is, their Participation of God will 2.
Formalis, as the Schoolmen speak.
be Equal and the same too in the Essentialls of it, the Beatificall vision
shall be communicated to them all, they shall all have the fruition and
possession of God, but they shall not all drink the same measures: Or, if you
will, more Plainly thus, Life eternal in the substance of it, is one and the
same, equally given to all that are saved: as by Christ's Righteousness we are
Equally justified, so by his merits we are equally saved, and equally made
partakers of the Inheritance: but in the Degrees of Glory, so it is unequally
distributed, to some more, to some less: Different degrees of glory answering
the Different degrees of grace (bestowed upon his Saints) in this life, and
proportioned to the different degrees of labor and service they have gone
through for him: and this is that which Ambrose says, God gives to all that
are saved aequalem mercedem vitae, non gloriae, an equal reward of life, not
of glory.

1. And this appears by that Expression, in 1 Cor. 3. 8. Now he that planteth
and he that waters are One, and every man shall receive his own reward
according to his own labor: a different reward according to their different
labor: he speaks of the Faithful Servants of Jesus Christ, he names himself
and Apollo in particular, himself as Planting, and Apollo as Watering, and
each of them shall receive (...), their proper reward acc^rding to their proper
labor.

2. Again in 2 Cor. 9. 6. Paul tells us, He which sows sparingly shall reap
sparingly, and he that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully: Here is a
sparing reward to a sparing liberality, and a bounteous reward to a bounteous
liberality: The Harvest answers the measure of seed, he that sows but little,
shall reap but little; and he that sows much, shall reap more: and this
Harvest Paul in another place refers to the life to come, Gal. 6. 6, 7, 8. The
present time is the time of sowing, the future time is the time of reaping, the
Harvest is the End of the Mat. 13. 39.
World.

3. In 1 Cor. 3. 11, 15. There are Teachers that build Gold, Silver, Precious
stones upon the Foundation; and there are other Teachers that build wood, hay
and stubble upon the Foundation: The work or Doctrine of the One will abide the
fire (says the Apostle, v. 14.) and he shall receive a Reward; but those
Teachers that lay wood, hay, stubble, upon the Foundation, yet (if their
Errors be not damnable) they shall be saved (says the Text) yet their work
shall be burnt, and they shall suffer loss, that is, they shall be deprived of
much of that reward they should have had, and which the other shall have who
build gold, silver, and precious stones upon the foundation, Jesus Christ.

4. Lastly, I would fain understand that Text in Luke 16. 22. where it is said,
that Lazarus was carried up by the Angels into Abraham's bosom: The Expression
is taken from the custom of the Jews at their Feasts, as John at supper lay
in Christ's bosom: Therefore Abraham sits above Lazarus at the Royal Feast of
Glory, Abraham has a Diguiority there beyond Lazarus.

I must now give you the Reasons.

Reas. 1. And first, they that have more Grace, are more like him than others;
They bear his Image in a Greater Print: Parents* though they love all their
Children well, yet they love them most, that resemble them most, the Parent
loves that Child most, that has most of the Parent In it: as God is the
Father, so he is the Idaea of the Saints: God is the Idaea of the Saints, and
the Saints are his Reflections: I conceive therefore that God cannot but love
them most, that have most of himself in them: He does by an holy Necessity of
nature love them most, that have most Grace: For God is holy not by will, but
by Nature: His will is not antecedent to his holiness, it is natural to him to
hate sin, and it is natural to him to love Grace, and therefore to love more
grace with more love.

Reas. 2. Some of the Saints love God more than others do: as some Herbs are
hot in the fourth degree, and other^ hot but in the second or third degree;
such are the graduall inequalities of love in the several Saints of God: some
are Warm in love, others are Hot in love to him: All love him unfaignedly,
some love him Flamingly: All are serious in love, but some are scorcht with
love to him; as David, My zeal (says he) has consumed me, because mine
enemies have forgotten thy Psalm. 119. 139.
word: His love to God was so Extreme Hot, that it did even Exhaust and dry up
his Moisture; My zeal has consumed me: Holy affections are able to work upon
the body no less than natural affections; Tell him that I am sick of love:
Now Love is the curious and quaint Grace of the Soul: The Queen Grace of the
Soul, that transports God himself (as it were) into amorous Passions; when
God does but hear once that a soul is fallen in love with him, his heart is
wounded presently, and bleeds Enamoured streams of desire after her, I love
them that Prove. 8. 17.
love me: Love delights and dwells with love; and they that love most, in them
God dwells most; they have most of his company, and are Ravished most with the
Heaven of his presence.

Reas. 3. Some of the Sains seek Gods Glory with most ardent and Hyperbolicall
strains of zeal above others, the Rest of the Saints cannot come near them: In
Romans 9. 3. There says Paul, I could wish that my self were accursed from
Christ, for my Brethren, my Kinsmen according to the Flesh: Paul's deep Desire
of Gods Glory, drowns the desire of his own Felicity: This Text does crucify
the most learned Interpreters, they know not how to understand it; I shall
only take up a word of Chrysostom concerning it, he says, We are so far from
Paul's love that therefore we cannot understand his saying, we reach not Paul's
meaning because we have not his Affection: and Origin says, What wonder,
seeing the Lord was made a Curse for his servants, that his servant would
become accursed for his brethren? Now surely, those that so highly prize Gods
glory above others, are beloved above others.

And now we are arrived at the Application.

Use 1. Oh! what shall I say to sinners? or what will sinners say to this
Point? I tremble, when I think of them: yet I can tell you what they will say;
their judgment is, at least their report and language is, that God loves them
as well as the best: Poor souls, how are ye mistaken! for,

First, Sinners are in the dark, and therefore cannot see who are their
Friends, or who are their Foes: They cannot see whether God loves them, or God
hates them; and because they pass safely, they think that all are Friends, God
is their Friend, and Christ is their Friend, they think that Gods naked
Patience is his love, and that Gods mere longsuffering is his dear love; they
cannot distinguish, they are in the Dark: A man cannot read letters or
manuscripts in the dark; now sinners are in the dark, how then can you read
Gods special love to you? Gods special love is written in a small print, in a
Spiritual Character; you cannot read the prints of Spiritual love with a
carnal Eye: you think, God loves you, because you thrive in the world; you
think, he loves you, because he does not smite you: Alas! alas! you are in the
dark; For oh! what a difference is there between the wrath of God and the wrath
of man? for men punish when they are Angry, but God forbears to punish when he
is angry: God is more displeased when he dissembleth a fault, than when he does
presently punish; There is no Greater punishment, than not to be punished, nor
yet a sharper Scourge than not to be scourged: Sirs! God is very Angry when he
defers punishment unto Hell.

Secondly, Again, Sinners Anticipate: It is the boldness and presumption of
sinners, to take unto themselves divine Privileges, before they should: They
say, God loves us, though they go on in their sins; whereas they cannot know
that God loves them, till they come out of their sins; they deceive themselves
by Anticipation: Oh! says a sinner, Christ dyed for me, though he be not yet
converted; whereas he cannot possibly know that Christ dyed for him till he be
converted: Thus he rests in his Condition, and damns his soul, because he
Anticipates Gods love; he takes it for his own before his time.

Thirdly, Love assimilates the object: divine Love begets after its own
likeness; whom God loves, he stamps his image and qualities upon them: As many
as Rev 3. 19.
I love I rebuke and chasten, why so? to refine them from their dross, and
make them more splendid and bright, like himself: Ye Ephesians. 5. 8.
were darkness, but now ye are light 1 John 1. 5.
in the Lord; why so? because God is light, and therefore he takes away the
contrariety, that they may be like to him: It is the Nature of Agents to make
their passives like themselves; Iron is a dark and opacous body, but put it
into the fire, and the fire will make Iron shine, like it self; Sinner, God
does so, if God love thee, he will Gild thee with his own Rays upon thee, and
make thee shine like himself; The coldest water, fire makes it warm like its
self; God acts thus; where he loves, he makes the worst sinner in the world
like himself; Amicitia pares aut recipit aut facit.

Fourthly, Again, Gods love runs parallel with his word; his love is of the
same dimensions with his word; whom his word condemns, his love does not
acquit; whom his word Excludes, his love will not admit; if his word make thee
not a pass to Heaven, his love will give thee no allowance: Now sinner! the
word is against thee, Be not deceived, (says the word) Know ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God?

Sinners! let me then turn this Use into Exhortation: Does God love his Saints?
Sinner, let this principle make thee long to be a Saint.

First, Mourn over all that time, wherein thou have lived out of the Beams of
Gods love; Thou have lived in a Cold Climate all this while: some of you are
warm with wealth, and warm with riches, but you have lived all this while out
of Gods blessing in the warm Sun; I say, Though you have lived all this while
in the warm Sun, yet you have lived all this while out of Gods Blessing: Do ye
think, God can love you in your drunkenness, or love you in your oaths, and in
your impurities? is it possible that God who is light, should take pleasure in
works of darkness? No, no, East and West are inconsistent, Antipathies will
not incorporate; as soon may light and darkness be Espoused together, and
midnight be married to the noon day, as God Embrace a wicked soul in the
Nuptial bed of love: Away, away, then from under the dark side of this
prodigious Cloud. Vita non est nisi iis, quibus lux est, God is life to none,
but them to whom he is light: It Is likeness that breeds liking, he cannot like
you till he sees his likeness on you: God and sinners are opposite, God is
Good, Sin is Evil, God and Sin Good and Evil are Summa Opposita, the Great
and Grand Opponents of the world; God is the chiefest good, Sin is the chiefest
Evil, now that opposits may be made friends, there must be a change somewhere,
either on Gods part, or on our part; God cannot change, with him there is no
variableness nor shadow of change, God will not change, there is no reason he
should, he is holiness and goodness it self, his perfection stands in an
indivisible point; he must not alter a whit, and therefore sinners, you must be
changed, or you must be damned; of necessity there must be a change, and the
change must be on our part: as we see in an Instrument, those strings that are
out of tune, are brought to them that are in; so it is we, that must change and
alter, and not God: Go then, and mourn over all that time, wherein you have
lived out of the Beams of Gods love.

Secondly, Let this make you long to be Saints; if you would be the Saints of
God, you should be the friends of God; if you would un love your sins, God
would love you too: You that are Great sinners, come and be Great Saints, and
you also shall be Greatly Beloved.

There are two things that would make you Saints.

1. Believe the Transcendent Glories and Ravishing Joys to come.

2. Make no question but they may be yours.

First, Believe the Transcendent Glories and shining Joys to come, laid up for
the Saints of God; I say, believe them, and your hearts cannot but be taken
with them; It is impossible that any man who believes those infinite and
un-imaginable joys, should not desire them, he cannot but use the means to
obtain them: It is not directly in the Nature of man to neglect so great a
Good, if he thoroughly believes the Greatness and Goodness of it; he cannot
easily choose any thing else, who believes the worth of it: I say, Faith is a
belief of things that are infinite, things so great, that if they be so true
as great, no man that has his reason, and can discourse, that can think, and
choose, that can desire and work toward an End, can possibly neglect them;
such infinite joys would make you leave your finite joys; such unlimited
pleasures would make you scorn these poor and narrow pleasures of sin that are
but for a season: This is one thing that would make you Saints presently.

Secondly, And then make no question but they may be yours: They may be all
your own, if you will, you may have them as well as any one that already has
them, You may be saved as well as any that's already saved, God only stays and
waits your Consent; will thou not give thy Consent to match with Christ, and be
saved? shall sin hinder thy so much happiness? why does God Offer you Heaven,
but for you to make choice of Heaven? Make Choice Deuteronomy. 30. 19.
of Heaven, and have Heaven: why does God open his shop, and set all his
Glorious Wares and Treasures before you, but that he would have You to be his
Chapmen? Sinners! God sends his Ministers to tender all these Glories to you,
and his Majesty himself stands waiting your Leisure, his patience bears, his
justice forbears, his mercy entreats you, and his Spirit strives with you to
persuade you, and will you make any Question then but Heaven may be Yours? why
did the Lord of Glory come down from Heaven, but that sinners might go up to
Heaven? Sinners! a way is made for You to Heaven through the sides of Jesus
Christ.

Use 2. Saints, how should this stir ye up to Excel in Grace? Does God love
them most, that are Crowned with most Grace? Saints! this should wing ye with
an holy Ambition to be Eminent in Grace; not to be Ordinary in Grace, but
Eminent in Grace; not only to Get Grace, but to Grow in Grace: oh! what a sin
is it to sit down under Ordinary Grace, I say, to sit down under so little
Grace, when they that have much Grace are much beloved? and they that have more
Grace are the more beloved? they that are great in Grace are greatly beloved? O
Daniel, thou art Greatly Beloved: Filial and ingenuous natures strive after
the highest degrees of their Fathers love. In 1 Pet. 2. 20. The Apostle
Exhorting Christian Servants to suffer wrongs with Patience, says he, What
Glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your Faults ye shall take it Patiently?
but if when ye do well and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is
acceptable to God: But it is some Glory to suffer Patiently even then when we
suffer for our Faults: Patience under deserved punishments has its praise and
glory also: It is some glory to suffer patiently, when we suffer meritoriously,
and to die patiently when we die worthy of death, Patience under the
Punishments we deserve is a Virtue: How then does the Apostle say, What Glory
is it, if when ye be buffeted for your Faults, ye shall take it Patiently? I
answer, The Apopostle speaks Comparatively; it is true, to suffer with patience,
when we suffer for our deserts, is some glory and commendation, but it is no
Glory at all in comparison, I say, compared with that Noble patience, whereby
we suffer meekly when we suffer unjustly; There Is no glory at all in the other,
in comparison of this, this, oh this (says the Apostle) is acceptable with
God: This is an Eminent Patience, and shall have Eminent Acceptance with God.
Sirs, God would have his Saints to step up unto an Eminency in in Grace; he
would have them suffer most patiently, when they suffer most wrongfully;
whatever is more Choice and Excellent in Grace than other, he would have his
Saints soar up thither: And Sirs, methinks this one thing were enough to blow
you up into a flame of desires, I say this, The more Grace you have, the more
Dear you are to God; They that are Greater in Grace are Greatly Beloved: The
more Grace you lay up in you, the more love does God lay out upon you. Saints!
what say you? shall not this awake you? The more Grace is in thee, the more
would God love thee: The more holy thou art above others, the more would God
love thee above others.

Secondly, Nay, the more Grace thou have, the more God loves thee above thy
former self; he would not only love thee more than others, but love thee more
than thy former self; as thy Graces increase in thee, his love would increase
toward thee; as thou growest better, he would love thee better. Luke 2. 40.
it is there said of Jesus Christ himself, The Child grew and waxed strong in
Spirit, and it is added at v. 52. That as he Increased in wisdom and stature,
he increased in favor with God and man: Do thou (says Luther) understand the
word of the Evangelist most plainly without any Gloss, that our Lord received
increases daily, as in body, so in spirit, as other men are wont to do: I say,
Jesus Christ in respect of his humane nature did grow and improve in soul and
body; His soul improved in wisdom, his body in stature, and thus increas^d in
favor with God and man. This phrase is taken out of 1 Samuel 2. 26. And the
Child Samuel grew (...) and was in favor both with the Lord and also with men:
I say, the Evangelist seems to fetch his expression from this Text, to show
that Jesus Christ put himself into the same condition with other the sons of
men; as Samuel grew in Grace and favor with God, so did Christ: The more
Illustrious the Image of God is in the Creature, the more is God delighted in
the Creature. Now the Image of God was more Radiant and shining in Christ a
man, than in Christ a Child; and therefore Christ is said to increase in
Favor: Neither does this derogate from the Honor of Christ, (for this was
done by the wise disposure of God so ordering it for our sake) for upon the
same account, you might say that 'twas unworthy of Christ to be a Child: but
Jesus Christ did Empty himself for our sake, His descent was our ascent, his
Emptying of himself was the Fullness, or Filling of us; he came so low as to
grow in Spirit, and as he grew in spirit, he grew in favor with God: This
knocks aloud at your doors, and bids you rise out of your beds of slumber and
security. Saints, why do ye not put on for more Grace? are ye not ambitious
every day to be loved more and more of God? to advance into his favor further
to day than you were yesterday? to get up higher still into his heart? Then Act
your Graces, and increase your Graces, The more Grace thou bast, the more will
God love thee above thy former self.

Thirdly, He will give more Grace to thee, the more thou have the more he will
give thee: at first, God gives Grace where there is none; and then (because he
loves his own work) where he has given the Blossoms of Grace, he gives
additions of Grace, and the more Grace thou have, the more he will still give
thee: It hosoever has to him shall be given, and he Mat. 13. 12.
shall have more abundance: God gives Grace for Grace, to Grace Improved he
makes New and Fresh additions of more Grace: as a Father gives his Son at first
a stock to set up with, and seeing him to be a good Husband, and thrive upon
it, then he lays out more upon him, the sons care is the fathers encouragement
to give him more; so does the Lord Jesus Christ, He delights to John 15.
give where his gifts do thrive, and to disburse most, where his Graces
flourish best: Every branch that bears fruit he purges it, that it may bring
forth more fruit.

Fourthly, He will manifest himself more to thee, than to others; he will
converse with thee more than he will with others, thou shall know more of his
mind, and drink in larger depths of his discoveries: Paul was a great Saint,
and the more Grace he had the more Revelations he had; 2 Cor. 12. 2, 4.
oh! what a Revelation had he, when he was caught up into Paradise, into the
third Heaven, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful [or
possible] for a man to utter?

Fifthly, He will love thy services more than others; he would love to hear
thee pray, and thee repent: the more Grace thou have in thee, the less of the
Flesh there is in all thy duties; the more Heavenly and Holy thou art, the more
of God and the less of man is in every service.

Sixthly, The more Grace, the more Masculine and Heroic hearts you will have for
God: Grace Ennobles the heart, and the Higher it reseth in the heart, the
higher it raises up the heart: you would propose high things to your selves,
you would dwell nearer God, and soar up nearer the ultimate end; you would be
able to scorn sin, and the world, you would not only resist sin, but you would
be able to scorn sin and the world, you would trample upon temptations with the
foot of disdain, you would have brave spirits in a good cause, you would
estimate public good beyond all private reflections and self interests, you
would open your hands liberally for God, and the Gospel, you would embrace
sufferings cheerfully, and look upon death with fresh blood in your cheeks.

To Heroic Grace all services are more facil and easy, than to those that
have but ordinary Grace: Heroic Grace differs from ordinary Grace [ Non specie
sed tantum Gradu] not in kind, but only in degree; as heat in the fourth
degree differs from heat in the first or second, and therefore add new degrees
still unto your Grace and then 'twill come to be Heroic Grace: It is a part of
Badnesse not to grow better.

Use 3. In the next place I must lay down an Use of Caution, as an Antidote
against some Emergent thoughts and surmizes that may arise from this point.

First, Afflicted Saints have not less of God, love than others: They that are
more afflicted are not less beloved, and yet the afflicted children think not
so, they conceive their Father loves them less than others, because he
Afflicts them more than others, They interpret his love by his Rod: It is true,
There is a great similitude between a Curse and a Cross, and oftentimes the
children are deceived by it; but I pray, mistake not your selves, sometimes,
They are in deepest Sufferings that are his dearest Darlings: Jesus Christ, the
best beloved, was put to the worst Sufferings, Jesus Christ was (...) He was
greatly beloved, and yet greatly afflicted; Jesus Christ was the King of
sufferings, The King of Saints was the King of Sufferings, and the Gospel is
directly a Covenant of sufferings and sorrows: The old Law was built much upon
Promises of Temporal prosperity, the Gospel is founded in Temporal
adversity: The Heirs of God are Heirs of Sufferiugs: Jesus Christ was a Pattern
of sufferings, and the Gospel of Christ is a Covenant of sufferings; and the
Saints must be followers of Christ in this Covenant of sufferings: as men do
well and suffer ill, so they are dear to God; whom he loves most, he afflicts
most, and does this with a design of the greatest mercy in the world.

Secondly, God does not love them more than others, that have more gifts than
others, but that have more grace than others: for gifts qualify, but graces
sanctify; gifts may make thee an able man, but it is grace that makes thee an
amiable man.

Thirdly, God does not always love them more than others, that do him more
service than others; for he that has less grace, may do God more outward
service, because he has more outward power and estate: a man that has less
Grace may have more Purse than a better Saint, and such a one may give more to
the Gospel, and pour forth more Acts of Charity, than a better Saint that has
more grace and less means can do: Nay a man that has no grace at all (moving
in an Orb of Power and greatness) may do God more service in some things
than many private Saints can do. Jehu in rooting out Ahabs family, and Baals
Idolatry, did more for God in that case, than all the Saints in that Kingdom
could have done: oh then look to your graces, God loves grace and your services
for your graces.

Whom then does God love more than others?

First, Great Persons matched with graces suitable, are Gods greatly beloved;
Those that are more Noble in Family, and more Noble in Grace too, are greatly
beloved: for this is a Rule in nature, those Creatures are most Honorable,
which have the greatest power, and do the greatest good: Greatness is a brave
subject for Grace, Gracious Great men are Great Stars, stars of the first
Magnitude, they give more light than a Constellation of lesser stars and meaner
Christians; How does their light shine before men, and our Father glorisied in
Heaven? and as they shine brighter than others in the lower Heaven, so I doubt
not but they shall shine brighter than others in the upper Heaven: How
Exemplary are their Examples? How convincing and compelling is their Golinesse?
How powerful on others is the power of Godliness in them? If for their
Greatness They are styled Gods. How near are they to God when they Act God in
their Greatness?

Secondly, Men of great parts adorned with Graces proportionable are Gods
greatly beloved: Thus Christ's Apostles were his greatly beloved, and after them
his Ministers are his chiefest favorites above others: These are Gods great
Love Tokens to his Church and people, they are Gods Incarnate Angels to his
Church, so they are styled, The Angels of the Churches: Now Angels are not
only Holy Creatures, but Intelligent Creatures; as they are Gracious, so they
are Gifted Creatures.

Thirdly, God loves those more than others, that believe more than others,
because Faith gives most glory to God: I think none will deny, but tha^ Grace
which ascribes most glory to God, is the darling-grace, most tenderly beloved;
and such is Faith: Faith Honors God, and Humbles the Creature; it greatens
God, and annihilates the Creature.

1. Faith advances free grace in our justification: Here she lays man in the
dust, and lifts free grace upon the throne, ascribing all to mercy, nothing to
merit, admiring free love, having the least thoughts of selfe-worth: Faith
decks Christ alone with the golden feathers of a saving righteousness, and
deplumes the Creature of all gay and proud Imaginations, amidst all her graces
she relies only on free grace.

2. Faith (in respect of grace and sanctification) lives only as a receiver,
that's her Name in Scripture, As many as received him: and What have thou which
thou have not received? Faith comes to Gods door, and knocks there, as a mere
beggar: she confesses that her self is the gift of God, and that all Grace is
the gift of God; she waits as a beggar at Gods gate for every Grace.

3. So when she has the principle of Grace, she depends wholly upon divine
Influence and assistance for the acting of Grace; the new Creature cannot move
without the breathings of the Spirit upon it: The Spirit must plant graces in
the soul, and then must dwell there and be with them still, to keep them in
being, and keep them in action.

4. Faith sets up the strength of God: A believer has no opinion of his own
strength, when he prevails with God, it is with a power which he has from
God, I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

5. Faith pleases God: wicked men may serve God, and some wicked men do him
eminent service, they who are evil, may do that which is good for the matter
of it: but tho it be possible to serve God without faith, yet it is impossible
to please God without faith; tho God may be pleased with a work, which is done
without faith, yet he is never pleased with the Person doing any work without
faith.

Fourthly, God loves them more, that are more humble: I dwell with him that is
of a contrite Isa. 57. 15.
and humble spirit: thou desire not sacrafice, thou delightest not in burnt
Psalm. 51. 16, 17.
offering; what is it then, God takes such delight in? The sacrafices of God
are a broken spirit: Let Gods love Exalt you, but let his gifts and graces
humble you: and surely the more solid and ponderous Grace is, the more it
humbles; the weightier a piece of Gold is, the more it presses down the
scale: Have ye learning and parts? let me tell ye, the modest opinion of our
knowledge, is better than knowledge: Humility in Excellency Excels
Excellency it self; I could wish, every one that has gifts and parts, that
like Moses, he saw not the beams of his own face.

Fifthly, God loves them more that are more selfe-denying; that are not
selfe-seekers, but seek his glory more than others: The upright are his delight.

Sixthly, God loves them more, that love him more: Love is the loadstone of
love; Love has an attractive virtue, it draws God down from his throne into
the soul, He dwells with love: What a great drawing power then has a great
love? This is the divine language of Lovers, I live, yet not I, it is my
beloved that Gal. 2. 20.
lives in me: I love my self not with my own love, but with the love of my
beloved, that loves me: I love not my self in my self, but my self in him,
and him in me.

Lastly, God loves them more, that are more Active for him: Idle Christians,
and idle Professors, God nauseates: what is a thing that is of no Use? It is a
Nothing: so says Job to his miserable comforters, his friendlesse friends, For
now ye are nothing: Ye ob 6. 21.
are nothing for ye contribute nothing of comfort to me; They that speak not to
purpose, speak nothing. What is Idleness, but a privation of diligence, or
absence of Action? and privations are nothings: lazy Professors are but so
many privatives, they are not workers, they are not Agents, they profess and
do nothing; They believe in Jesus Christ, and yet do nothing for Jesus
Christ: The Philosophers say that in Nature there is no Vacuum, I could wish it
were so in Christianity. But I have done with this Use.

Use 4. Yet this speaks Comfort to weak Saints; to Saints of more infirmities,
and lesser Graces than others: You will presently object and say, then the Lord
cares not much for me; he will scarce look upon me, I have so little grace; if he
loves according to grace, I shall have love little Enough, for I am sure, I
have grace little enough; such and such Saints shall go away with all his love.
But be Comforted, you that are young Christians, and weak Christians, for

First, God loves you too; nay God loves his weak Saints with more love of
Compassion, though he loves great Saints with more love of Communication: as we
love our young, as well as our strong; nay, we love our babes and young ones
with more tenderness, than we do our strong ones. Aristotle observes it a
special instinct of nature, whereby Parents are most tender of the youngest
Children, because they can least help themselves: so the weakest Saints have
the most kisses from God, the Parent kisseth the babe and little child, when
the elder child is not kissed; For, says he, this is but a little child: And
so, when the Prodigal comes home, the Father falls upon his neck, and kisses
him, why? but because upon his first Return, he is a Babe in Christ.

Secondly, Because thou have but little grace in thee, do not say, that Gods
love is but little, for a little grace is the gift of great love, 'twas great
love in God, to give thee any grace: little grace is of a great price, as a
Pearl of small size, is of huge worth; God gives himself to thee in the least
grace: little grace shall have infinite glory; and therefore little grace was
the gift of infinite love.

Thirdly, Thy time is coming, wherein God will love thee as much, as greater
Saints; it may be, more: for as thou growest up to more grace, God will love
thee with more love. Sometimes one that is but a child, (when another is a man)
grows taller by far than the other: so though thou art now but a child in
grace to a greater Saint, yet thou may be taller in grace one day than he is;
and then Gods love will be higher to thee than to him.

Fourthly, Some Saints Excel in one grace, and some in another: Though some
Saints over-match thee in this or that grace, yet (it may be) thou do out-bid
them in some other graces. Thus do some reconcile those two Scriptures, in 2
Kings 18. 5. there it is said of Hezekiah, that after him there was none like
him among all the Kings of Judah: and in 2 Kings 23. 25. there it is said of
Josiah, that like unto him there was no King before him, that turned to the
Lord with all his heart: It is said of Hezekiah, that after him there was no
King like him, yet it is said of Josiah, that before him there was no King like
him: How can truth stand in both these? When it is said of Hezekiah, that after
him there was no King like him, it is to be understood of some particular Grace
especially wherein he Excelled, that is, his trusting in the Lord; as it is
said, He trusted in the Lord, so that after him there was none like him, they
explain it thus, He brake in pieces the Brazen serpent, that Moses had made,
and in this and other acts of Reformation, he met with strong opposition, his
Princes and great ones (some of them) did not like what he did, and ('it is
probable) they discourage him, and tell him, if you do those things, if you
change these things, if you change these ancient customs, you will bring a
world of trouble upon your self and the Kingdom, you will make your people
mutiny, the Brazen serpent, which you go about to stamp to powder, it was of
God; yet (says he) I care not for all you say, I will do my duty, and trust
God with the Issue: Thus of all the Kings that were after him, there was none
like him in trusting in the Lord. And as for Josiah, of all the Kings that were
before him, there was none like him in another particular, his zeal for the
Lord. Thus some Saints Excel in one Grace and some in another.

Fisthly, If thou can not attain Greatness in Grace, yet be sure to have
uprightness in Grace: An upright Saint loves God by himself, abstracted from
the world; It is to be doubted, that many of us love not God abstracted from
the comforts, liberties, and enjoyments we have with him: many of us (I fear)
would count our profission our punishment, were we to suffer reproach, and
poverty, for our profession: as one that loves a woman in her fine clothes and
apparel that sets her out; so do many love God whilst he is dressed up in
Rich Roabs of liberality and bounty to them, these set him out to their carnal
Eye: but an upright Saint loves God abstracted from the world, when he is
disrobed of all Gifts and Bounties to them.

And this leads me now into the Discourse of this great man, and great Saint,
whose Funerals we at this time Celebrate; He was a Great Man by birth, he was
a Great Saint by Grace, and therefore Greatly beloved: I shall not speak the
Greatness and Antiquity of his Honorable Family, although these shining
Adjuncts set him out in brightness and splendor to the Eye of the world, yet
because they make not a man Greatly beloved in the Eye of God, I shall rather
speak of those Titles of Honor that are not written in Dust, those things that
did Greaten his Greatness.

I know he had his Humanities, for we are all but men, till we are Glorisied
Saints, and then our infirmi-(...) Parts: This Country lay under a Veil of
darkness till he began to shine. He set his first choice upon that
Transcendent Holy man, Mr. Peacock in Oxford, but God took him to Heaven, which
prevented his coming to Brampton: Then Providence led him to the knowledge of
that nowblessed servant of God, Mr. Peirson, whose Exemplary Graces and
Ministry shed a rich Influence abroad the Country.

And as God removed godly Ministers by Death, he continued still a succession
of them to you, not only Brampton-Brian, but Ye also of Wigmore, and Ye of
Leyntwardine, owe your very souls to Sir Robert Harley, who maintained your
Ministers upon his own cost, that they might seed you with the Gospel of Jesus
Christ.

3. He was the Pillar of Religion among Us: How would he countenance
Godliness? his Greatness Professing Christ brought Profession into Credit,
and cast a luster on it, Profession began to grow and spread it self under his
shade.

4. His Planting of godly Ministers, and then Backing them with his Authority,
made Religion famous in this little corner of the world.

Oh! what comfortable Times had we (through Gods mercy) before the wars! how
did our Public meetings shine with his Exemplary Presence in the midst of them!

5. He would feed heartily upon the Ordinances: He came with hunger to them,
and did afterward digest them into real Nutriment; How would his heart melt
under the word, and dissolve into liquid Tears! I have seen him thaw and
distill, as the weeping Trees under the winter-Sun beams.

6. He did deal much in Prayer: He would Embark no undertaking till he had
fought God, he would frait his Vessel, hoyse up the mast, and spread the
sails, (he would not neglect the means) yet he would by Prayer beg the winds,
and wait the Gales of Providence to set his ship a going.

7. His house was an house of Prayer: 'twas the Center where the Saints met to
seek God.

8. He was noble in his liberality to the Saints in their wants: Their
Necessity was his Opportunity.

9. He was spirited with a keen hatred of sin and prophannesse: He would not, I
may say, he could not brook it in any under his Roof; he would often say, He
cared not for the service of one that feared not God.

10. He was a friend to Gods friends: They that did love God, had his love,
Gods people were his darlings, they had the Cream of his affections; if any
poor Christian were Crushed by malice or wrong, whither would they fly but to
Sir Robert Harley?

11. Again, if at any time he had been Angry, he would quickly desire to be
Reconciled, saying, We must take heed least the Devil come between.

12. He loved his Children most tenderly, I think, no man in the world carried
more of a Fathers dearnesse in him, than he did; yet he would never bear with
any Evil in any of his Children: he would often say to them, I desire nothing
of you but your love, and that you keep from Sin.

13. The soul of his Religion was sincerity: he knew no End but to serve God,
and to be saved. I shall in this place bring in a notable speech of his about a
year and half since; when a most Eminent Minister of the Land came to visit
him, and ask't him, what comfortable Evidences he had of his salvation? he
answered, He had nothing to rely upon but Jesus Christ, and he knew no Religion
but sincerity.

14. He was a great honourer of Godly Ministers: he carried them in his bosom,
of all men in the world they sat next his heart, he did hug them in his
dearest Embraces; I must tell you he was their Sanctuary in Evil Times: How
often has he interposed between them and dangers? when sinful Greatness did
frown upon them, this great man would show himself upon the stage for them.

When Mr. Pierson was questioned before the Bishop, Sir Robert Harley was not
afraid to appear constantly in his defense; I could tell you, that he felt the
frowns and displeasures of a near Relation, rather than he would desert that
Servant of Jesus Christ: When Dr. Stoughton and Mr. Workman were in trouble,
Sir Robert Harley accompanied them to the High Commission, which made the
Archbishop dart frowns upon him.

15. He was also a Magistrate, and herein (I must tell you) he was animated
with a most nimble Soul of Zeal against Sin: He was full of spirits against
all dishonours done to God, he was a Terror to Evil works, he knew no Respect
of Persons in a business wherein God was wronged: among other things, how
would he Vindicate the Sabbath from tempt? Prophannesse durst not appear upon
the face of it, by this means the Congregations were frequented on the Lords
days, and many thousand souls prevented from their sinful sports, sat under
the droppings of the word.

16. He paid a dear devotion of love to the Lords day ( that Pearl of the
week) when the licentious sinfulness of times cried it down, how often have I
heard him plead it up with Excellency of Arguments?

And in his own Practice he rose always Earlier upon the Lords day (and days
of Humiliation) even to the times of his extreme weakness: He rejoiced still
when the Sabbath came, and was usually more cheerful that day, than others,
even in his sickness: He wept much, when his servants suffered him to sleep on
the Lords day later than he used, although he had not rested all that night.

17. He was one that did Swim deep in the Tide of Fasting and Humiliation; I
have seldom seen an heart broken upon such a day as his was wont to be: He was
one that did stand in the Gap, that did sigh and cry for the Abominations done
in the Land, and for it God set a mark upon his forehead: Though his Castle was
ruined, yet God set a Mark upon him, when the naked Sword that Messenger of
death walked the Land and looked keen upon you: And God set his seal of safety*
upon his dear Lady, That Noble Lady and Phaenix of Women dyed in Peace, though
surrounded with Drums and noise of War, yet she took her leave in Peace; The
sword had no force against her, as long as God preserved her, he preserved the
Place where she was. And the man clothed with linen set a Mark also upon the
forehead of his Children, for when they with the Castle were surrendered up, God
made their Enemies to treat them gently, he had his Jewels sent safely to him
by the hand of Providence.

18. He was (I know not how often) chosen by his Country to the High Senate and
Court of Parliament: and there (that I may speak within my knowledge) He was a
bright and glorious Star in that shining Constellation; as some Stars are more
Excellent than others, so was he there: He was a Man of fixed Principles,
Religion and solid Reformation was all the white he shot at; He appeared all
along for a Settled Ministry, and the liberal Maintenance thereof: He procured
the Ordinance for settling the Ministers at Hereford: His Compass without
Trepidation or Variation stood Constantly Right to that Pole, the Good of his
Country and Gospel, which he kept ever in his Eye. And though his loss were
Vast in those Destroying times, yet he labored not for Recompense of his
private losses, nor received any in the world.

He was very Zealous against Superstition and Heresy: and for Church
Government; when one of the Parliament said to him, Sir Robert Harley, why are
you thus Earnest for Presbytery? you see it is so opposed, that it is in vain
to seek to settle it: he Replied, Let us so much rather be Earnest for it,
though we gain it by Inches* what we obtain now with much difficulty and
opposition, shall be of use one day, when there shall not be heard so much as
the sound of a Hammer.

19. He could (when he was put to it) live by Faith: In the Wars, when the
stream of his Estate (which should have maintained and watered him and his
Family) was diverted wholly from them, he would say often, Dear Children, it
may be God will bring us to want Bread, some say, it is base to live from hand
to mouth, but I am of another mind, I find it the best way of living: and
(which was an high Expression) Who can be afraid of Gods Providence? welcome
what the Lord sends, if it go well with the Church it is no matter.

20. His soul was Paved with humble submission to God in hardest dispensations:
When after the Wars he returned into the Country, and came to see with what
face Brampton looked, he rode toward his Castle Gate, and seeing the Ruins,
put off his hat, and said, God has brought Great Desolation upon this Place
since I saw it; I desire to say, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken,
and blessed be the name of the Lord, in his good time he will raise it up
again; when his House is built, God (I trust) will build mine: and observe,
that he took Care to build this House or Place of worship, and let his own lie
buried still in its Woeful Ruins.

You have had the fair and sumptuous Prospect of his Life, which stood alost
like a beauteous City upon an Hill.

Let us now follow him to his Sickness, which (you know) confined him some
years to his Chamber: And here I see the seven stars, or seven Celestial
signs appear in the night of his Sickness.

First, The greatest trouble of his sickness to him was, that it disabled him
from Enjoying the Public Ordinances: He dearly loved the solemn Assemblies,
one day in Gods Court was better to him than a thousand: The want of the
Public Ordinances was the sickness of his sickness.

Secondly, His divine employment: Most of his time (both day and night) whilst
he was detained in his Chamber, was spent in hearing some good Book or the
Scriptures read to him: he used very often to hear the 17 Chapter of St. John,
and the 8 to the Romans read to him; and those two Golden Texts in the 8 to the
Romans, All things work together for Good to them that love God: and, He that
spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with
him also freely give us all things? He would repeat often, saying, He knew no
such Cordialls.

Thirdly, His Victory over Satan: It pleased God about two years since to
permit Satan to buffet him several times; once he lay all night, and slept
not, and he was heard to say often, Lord rebuke the Tempter, Lord give Victory,
Lord be Gracious, with these Expressions he spent five or six hours: in the
morning he spoke very cheerfully, and said, he would be laid to sleep; and
having taken quiet Rest he awaked, and said, that all the sins of his life had
been laid before him that night, and those things ( he said) that he had long
forgotten, he then Remembered: He said, the Tempter had been very busy, but
blessed be God, I did not sleep until I had made my peace with God, through
Jesus Christ: Then he cheerfully said a little while after, God may let Satan
buffet us for a time, but he shall never prevail; after this, his
cheerfulness continued without interruption.

Fourthly, His willingness to die: He was wont to say, Many wish to live over
their lives again, that they might mend what had been amiss; I would not be
to live over my life again, least I should make it worse, I would not for all
the world be young again, because I would not be so far from Heaven: And he
would say to his Children, when he had them about him, I have taught you how to
live, and I hope I shall teach you how to die.

Fifthly, His patience under his sharp sufferings: His disease was Stone and
Palsy: and they that know these, must look for Tortures; yet in his sharpest
Pains and Torments, he would mollify them with this consideration, That is
Best which God cloth; He would often say, The will of the Lord be done, above
all, and in all, for that is best of all: and he would support himself under
his sharp pains with this Meditation, Heaven will make amends for all: and
sometimes, when asked how he did, he would answer, Poor, but going to Heaven as
fast as I can: his lips (like an honey comb) would drop such sweet Expressions
as these, If the Lord see it best for me, that the stone in the Bladder should
be the way to bring me to Heaven, his will be done, It is better to die of the
stone in the Bladder, than of the stone in the heart: Thus (if you observe) he
fed his Patience, under the divine hand, with divine arguments: That place of
Scripture, I Cor. 10. 13. There has no temptation taken you, but such as is
common to man, but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted
above that you are able, He did often mention with joy, saying, it was the
first place, whereby God gave him Comfort: and some few days before his death,
when he was in much pain, he said, Blessed be God who brings this place with
comfort to me, whereby I had received first joy, and so repeated those words,
There is no Temptation, etc. adding further, Blessed be God, Blessed be what
comes in the the name of the Lord, Lord be gracious. Thus you see his Admirable
Patience.

Sixthly, His love to the Glory of God, and the Church of God: To joy under
great afflictions is a hard matter: water quenches fire, yet his joy in that
which concerned God his affliction could not extinguish: he was wont to pray
constantly since the ruins and desolations of Brampton, that God would restore
the Gospel hither, and two days before his death he rejoiced exceedingly, when
he was told that this Place of Public worship was finished. About three days
before his Death, when he arose and went to prayer (as he constantly used to
do) though not able to Enlarge in Prayer, because of weakness, he Prayed for
the Ruin of Antichrist, for the Churcher of God beyond Sea, naming Savoy,
Switzerland, Germany. Upon the Fifth of November, though very weak, and under
great pains, yet he blessed God for the Great mercy of that Day to the Church,
and the Nation, and to himself, who was of the Parliament, when the Powder Plot
was intended, and for the many Mercies God had vouchsafed him to see, since
that time in the Church, and in his own Family, for his Lady the mother of his
children, who (he said) was gone to Heaven before him, and for his Childrens
Children, and for his Hearing, which being lost, God restored him perfectly:
Thus the day before he dyed he kept A day of Thanksgiving to God for all his
former mercies: oh! what spiritual and Angelical Elevation of heart was this?
his soul was Musical, like the Swan he sang before his death; which leads me to
another Branch,

Seventhly, his faith and assurance: a godly Minister speaking to him
concerning his dissolution, he said what matter is it, if my poor cottage be
falling here below? I am sure of a fair house upon the Top of yonder hill. A
day or two before his Death, the 5 of Job being read to him in course, he said,
he that has been with me in six troubles, will not leave me in the seventh.
And lastly, having ( like good old Jacob) given his blessing to all his
Children that were then at home, and to his Grandchildren, desiring the Lord to
bless and sanctify them particularly, I say, having don this about an hour
before his death, though under Extreme Pain, he said, Blessed be God for this
quiet Peace: Thus his Peace with God shined like a Candle in his heart, till
his lamp of life went out with these last words, I die, Lord be Gracious; In
the flame of these words his soul (like the Angel of God that appeared to
Manoah) ascended and went up to Heaven: Thus this Glorious Saint went up to
Glory.

In the best times there were few or none better, in these declining times he
has left almost none like him among us, I pray God to double the Spirit of
deceased Elijah upon his surviving Elisha: The Lord repair the Ruins of this
Castle, and build up this Great Family for the Glory of his Name in these Parts.

Before I leave, I cannot but tell you, how God has taken Three brave men of
late from us; The First upon whom the lot fell was Mr. Richard More of Linley,
the next was Mr. Humphrey Walcot of ^alcot, and now it has fallen upon
Renowned Sir Rubert Harley: I mention them here together, because these Three
were the Triangles of our Country; and whilst they lived were special friends,
and of one heart for God in the concernments of his Gopell. And now I have
done, only to put you in mind a little of your selves, you see, you are dying
creatures, oh then! Consider your later End: The consideration of our last End,
should be the Exercise of our First thoughts; to consider our end, would be the
end of our sins, and the Resurrection of our Repentance: Ashes keep fire alive,
so this consideration, that we are Dust and Ashes will keep our Graces alive.

FINIS.

