A Full and Particular Relation of the Taking the Town and Forts of KINSALE,
and how they were Besieged both by Sea and Land.
Licensed

October 10. 1690. J F.



COrk being happily surrended, and brought under his Majesty's Obedience, by
the successful Hand of Providence, and the great diligence and conduct of the
Earl of Malborough, whose next Care was to reduce Kinsale: And accordingly on
Monday the 29 th of September 1690. he detached Brigadier Villers and Brigadier
Newhausel, with 500 Horse and Dragoons, to Kinsale, to summon the Place. They
arrived about 2 in the Afternoon within halt a Mile of the Town, and sent a
Trumpeter to them, offering them to be Prisoners of War, if they would
immediately surrender; otherwise to assure the Governor, he should certainly
be hanged, for resisting a Victorious Army, in case he staid till Cannon were
brought before the Walls. The Governor answered very haughtily, and threatened
to hang up the Trumpeter, for daring to offer him such mean Conditions. But as
soon as our Horse appeared, he presently gave Order to his Men to set Fire to
the Faggots he had prepared in all parts of the Town, in order to burn it on
the first Appearance of the enemy: Which as soon as done, they all run out of
the Town to the Old Fort. But our Men, espying that, presently got in, and
quenched it before it had burnt one House, and only met 7 or 8 of the enemy,
who stayed behind to plunder, whom they presently cut in pieces. As for the two
Forts, which are at the Harbour's Mouth, the Old Fort, being the nearest to the
Town, was sent to to surrender; but O Sullivan More, who was in it, refused,
and said he would hold it out to the last Man, firing his Cannon, and hung out
a bloody Flag. The like did Sir Edward Scot, who commanded in the other Fort,
over against the Old Fort. Upon which the Brigadiers immediately sent away to
the Eearl of Malborough to acquaint him with the state of things, and to desire
him to send 2 or 3 pieces of Cannon and three Regiments, to the New Fort: And
for the Old one, if they had 300. Men, they had Cannon enough in the Town. My
Lord Malborough did upon Tuesday the 30 th send what was desired, but, the
March being long, they came but within 4 Miles of the Town that Day. The 1 st
instant, those that went to the New Fort struck off at Brown's Mill, and those
that came to the Town arrived there about 4 in the Afternoon. The 3 d. early in
the Morning, the Brigadiers having got Horses, etc. in a readiness, and having
fitted 3 pieces of Cannon, which were ready mounted in the Town, they drew them
up to the top of Compass Hill, which commanded the Old Fort, and began to play
upon it: After 4 hours firing the enemy were forced to cease, for this Hill
commanded them so, that not a Man could stir but either the Cannon or some of
our Muskets hit them. In the Night our Men marched gently down the Hill; which
the enemy espying, fearing some Assault designed, bear a parlee, and surrendered
on the Terms offered them. There were 90 Men in it, who were conveyed to the
Town, and a Guard set over them; and 200 of our Men presently marched into it.
This was of great Advantage to us, for besides that it commanded part of the
New Fort; it also hindered 3 rich Ships, who were about to steal out.

On the 4 th, about 8 in the Morning, 12 of our Frigots appeared in the Bay of
the Old Head, and after drawing themselves into a Line, they all saluted the
New Fort with full Broad-sides; and at the same time by a Signal concerted
between them, the Land Forces fell down the Hill, whilst our Cannon played to
cover them: Also 500 Seamen were put on Shore at Oyster Haven, and brought with
them some Scaling Ladders and Grapling Irons. About 4 in the Afternoon all
things being ready, the Scaling Ladders were raised up against the Walls, and
our Men run up with that Vigor, and repeated Huzzas, that the Enemy had no
time to think of their Defense, but were put into such a Confusion, that they
retired into the Fortress in great Disorder, except 40, who were not nimble
enough, and were put to the Sword. Never was so warm an Attack known, for the
Land Forces on one Side, the Seamen on the other, and the Ships to the Water,
thundered forth such Peals of Cannon, that there was no possible resisting. Our
Men being thus possessed of the Platform, the Enemy hung out a White Flag, and
were accepted of as Prisoners of War. Thus we became Masters of one of the most
considerable Fortresses in Ireland, and of the best Port and Harbor in the
whose World. In the Fort there was found great store of Ammunition and Arms.
The Irish were 300 at first, but 80 were killed in the taking of it. We had on
our side about 30 killed and wounded. At Night the Men of War came into the
Harbor with the Tide of Flood, and after casting Anchor, they fired a round
for this joyful Success, and all other demonstrations of Joy imaginable. There
were 5 Prizes in the Harbor, whereof one a French Privateer of 11. Guns. Now
his Majesty has entirely subdued all this Western Part of Ireland, and by the
Situation of this Port, his Majesty's Men of War will be able to intercept any
Supply which the French can send to those Rebels that stand out in Connaught;
so that by Christmas they must of necessity perish, if they continue obstinate
in their Rebellion, except his Majesty will extend his great Mercy toward
them, and vouchsafe to receive them into Protection, upon their Submission to
him.

LONDON; Printed for Langley Curtiss near Fleet-Bridge:


