A Full and True ACCOUNT OF THE Surrendering of CHARLEMONT On Wednesday the 14
th. of this Instant May.
With the Number of Great Guns, and Stores of Ammunition found in that GARRISON.
Chester May 19.
YEsterday came an Express from Ireland, to the Lord Scravenmore, which
immediately was dispatched to the King by Adjutant Else, who will be with you I
doubt not this Night: It brings us the welcome News of the Surrender of
Charlemont on Wednesday last, the Irish Marching out with Bag and Baggage,
being Six Hundred Men. They left in the place Eighty Barrels of Powder, and
Seventeen Brass Guns, with Ball and Match answerable. They were reduced to a
small Quantity of Provisions, having left behind them, but the Quarter of a
Horse Salted, and very little Meal, not a handful for each. We are further
assured, That the Enemy have quitted Dundalk, and some say Ardee and Carling
ford, of which we expect a Confirmation.

I am advised, That last week Colonel Steward, with a Detachment of Five
Hundred, went to the Walls of Dundalk, and brought off One Thousand Head of
Cattle, he gave them in the Garrison all Invitation to come forth, but would
not be prevailed on, though they were Three Regiments in the place. God grant
our Forces speed the Success, and a happy Reducement of that Kingdom.

Advertisement.
THE Memoirs of Monsieur Deageant: Containing the most Secret Transactions and
Affairs of France, from the Death of Henry IV till the beginning of the
Ministry of the Cardinal de Richelieu. To which i^ added, A Particular Relation
of the Archbishop of Embrun's Voyage into England, and of his Negotiation for
the advancement of the Roman Catholic Religion here; together with the Duke of
Duke of Buckingham's Letters to the said Archbishop about the Progress of that
Affair: Which happened the last Years of King James I. his Reign. Faithfully
Translated out of the French Original. Printe^ for Richard Baldwin in the
Old Bailey. 1690.

London: Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old Bailey. 1690.


