A Full and True ACCOUNT OF THE Notorious Wicked Life of that Grand Impostor,
John Tailor;

One of the Sweet-Singers of Israel, Who was Committed to the King's- Bench,
for speaking Blasphemy; and on Monday last, was Confined close Prisoner to the
Common-Side for uttering Treason against his Majesty.

To which is added, One of his Profane Songs, Copied Verbatim out of his own
Book; which he sent to Muggleton (whom he calls Brother): And a farther
Inspection, to the Base Principles of those of his Sect; The Sweet-Singers of
Israel; or, Family of Love, than any yet has been Printed.

With Allowance.

London, Printed for Benj. Harris, near the Royal Exchange, 1678.

A Full and True Account, of the Notorious Wicked Life of that Grand Impostor,
John Tailor, one of the Sweet-Singers of Israel, etc.
SInce the late Account we gave you of the Lewd Principles, and Profane
Practices of the Sweet-Singers of Israel, (as they call themselves); we have
made a much farther Impection into their Impieties; and indeed find them so
Absurd, and contrary to all Religion and Honesty; and also, that they (the
Professors of them) are so Diligent and Industrious, to Recommend them to the
Embraces of the Vulgar; that we held our selves obliged by Conscience, to
exhibit this Ensuing Narra^ive, wherein the Luxurious and Profane Life of this
Grand Imposter, John Tailor, the well-disposed Reader will find, that this
Impious Sect of The Sweet Singers of Israel, or, Famyly of Love, ought not only
to be Excommunicated out of the Conversation of all good Christians; but
indeed, to be Excluded the Benefits of a Civilized Commonwealth:

But before we wade into the muddy History of this Impostor's Life, we thought
good, to premise, that we will insert nothing concerning this John Tailor, but
what in effect we received from his own Lips, or else, extracted from his
Manuscripts which any one, for the expense of a groat or six pence, to be spent
with him in drink (in the Prison) may either hear, or see.

He came up to London above Twenty Year since; but being destitute of
Employment (not having been bred to any Trade,) she was forced to wander about
the City, in little better Degree, than that of a Vagabond: And being destitute
of Friends, that might Contribute to his Relief, it was not long ere he felt
the Effects of Necessity: But by his Art and Dexterity, at last, over-came all.

Being Naturally of an Inquisitive Nature, he made it for some time his
business to haunt Conventicles, and Seditious meetings, where finding that many
of their Teachers were much admired, and mightily treated and encouraged, by
their Ignorant proselytes; and finding in himself, that he had as much
Impudence, (if not Learning) as the best of them, he presently resolved to set
up for himself: And as the Devil would have it, at that time (when Profaneness
it self, might have bin Licensed, so that the Prophaner could any way
contribute to the Establishment of the then Usurper) there were an upstart Sort
of Religionists, called Ranters; whose lewd Lives, and loose Principles, did so
exactly jump with the Vicious inclinations of this John Tailor, that he firmly
resolved, when he had altered it, by foysting-in some other obsolete Tenets of
forgotten Heretics, to pitch on the Profession of no other Opinion but this;
which he terms, The Sweet singers of Israel, or, the Family of Love. And having
just as much Learning, as was necessary to contribute to his Purpose; that is,
by the help of it he could make a shift to read English and Write it in a hand
Unintelligable to any one but himself; it was his Misfortune, to light on an
old Treatise, of the Heresy of the Nicolaitans; which admitted of a Community
with Women, or, that it was lawful for them to have Carnal knowledge of each
others Wives: With many more Irrational, Irreligious, and Ridiculous Fopperies;
which, Artificially blended among those of the Ranters, made such a Hodg-Podg
of Nonsense, that it would have pusseld Adam himself, had he bin living, to
give it a Name.

However, by these wicked Contrivances, dureing the late Tyranny and Rebellion,
he made a shift to delude many ignorant Adherents, and had in a good measure
picked up his Crumbs; when that peculiar care taken for the promotion of the only
True Religion, which he providently imagined would be the inseparable
Concomitant of his Majesty's happy Restoration, frighted him from these evil
Practices, and forced him Clandestinly, in Holes, and Corners, to whisper that
damnable Heresy, which before he had the impudence to maintain, even in the
Face of a Considerable Congregation. After this, we heard nothing of him for
many Years, till here of late taking advantage of that merciful Indulgence,
graciously permitted 10 more moderate Discenters, he has again endeavored to
Revive his damnable Tenets; but with such ill success, that as he was
preferring them to some Wiser and Honester than himself, they intercepted him,
speaking Blasphemy; For which he had two fair Trials at Westminster, and was
found Guilty of the Indictments; and thereupon deservedly Committed to the
Kings Bench Prison in Southwark, there to remain till he Recanted his former
Blasphemous Pretentions, to be the Son of God etc. and could deposite the sum
of One Thousand Marks, which he was Fined in, for the asserting that, and many
more wicked and unheard of Blasphemies.

As for his behavior, since his Commitment to that Prison, it has been so
debaucht, and profane, that even his Fellow Prisoners are both aweary and
ashamed of him; if he meets with my one will treat him, he will drink liberally
till he is drunk, repeat and affirm, his Blasphemy, That he is the Son of God,
That it is impossible for him to Sin; with thousands of other horrid, and
irreverend expressions, which ought rather to be racked up in the Embers of
oblivion, than disturb the Ears of any well minded Christian.

Till Monday last he Continued to content himself with these, and such like
hideous enormities, to the great exercise of the Patience of those poor
Confined Creatures, who were by force obliged to be his Auditors; but then, as
if the Devil, who certainly agitated him all that while, had hitherto wanted an
Opportunity to effect his design, he was then so great with him, as to Prompt
him to add Treason to his Blasphemy, which the Sincere Loyalty of Several of
his Fellow Prisoners, who overheard him, being not able to endure to hear, and
indeed the Laws of the Land warning them to the Contrary.

As their duty was, they presented an Enformation against him, in such manner,
that order was sent to the Marshall, to keep him Close Prisoner to the Common
side, till he should be sent for, from thence to Newgate, and take his Trial
at the Old Baily, there to receive Sentence for his fact according to Law.

In the Interim, for a Taste of these Sweet Singer's Devotion, we shall give
you one of their Special Songs; made by this John Tailor, and sent to his
Brother Muggleton (as he calls him) Which, with much Affectation, as well as
Affection, they Sing to an old Ballad-Tune: The words are these extracted
Verbatim, out of his own Manuscript; and therefore, not to be mended.

I.
Come Muggelton, my Brother; why should we live at Ods?
Muggelton, be not mistaken; for certain we are Gods:
Come, let us live in Love with God and Man;
There is but one true Record in the Land.
Gods Kingdom is at hand; Muggleton come in,
From thy Backsliding, to the Spirits Guiding.
The Rose and Crown; God's Love is Life Eternal,
The Spring of Life Renowned.
II.
Muggleton, thou may believe me, I love thy very Soul:
Thy Inventions do beguile thee, they make thee play the fool.
Let go thy Ram and Dam to Hell, for aye;
The Love of God is free, no partial way.
Come Muggleton a way, Juball does Sound;
Come into his Bosom, that mine heart has Chosen:
Large is his Love; Come Shake-hands in the Kingdom,
Which no Man can remove.
III.
Come Muggleton, Brother; Behold, and have Regard:
We both stood in the Pillory; we shall have o^e Reward.
God is but One in All, and All in One; What should hinder our Communion?
Come Muggleton, come Home, and dwell with me.
The Love of God is Pure, and shall endure: Our Heart ^^ Gods:
Like Gods, and so like-minded: We cannot live at Ods.
This Tailor has, I believe, above Five hundred of the same Profane and
Non-sensical sort of Songs in one Book of his own Writing; which, as he would
have his Silly Admirers believe, were Inspired into him, by the Divine Spirit:
But, how little they savor of any such Original, we will leave the Reader to
Judge. -- There is not a Tune to be named, from Pudding-Pies, to Iohnny
Arm-Strong, but these People have, as they call it, a Divine Song to it.

A Woman of their Profession ( Betty Roan, by Name) came into the Room, whilst
we were with Tailor; and sung us one, of almost Half-an-Hour long, to the Tune
of, Ienny come tie my Bonny Cravat: Aggravating the irreverence with such
Antic and wanton Gestures, as could not but engage us into a great Amazement;
and could not but have Operated the like Consternation in any modest, or
Considerate Christian, that had bin in our, Room.

The Publisher of this Paper, went himself to learn the Truth of this matter;
and has Delivered nothing in this Paper, but upon certain knowledge of the Truth
of it.

FINIS.

