THE FRIENDLY VINDICATION OF Mr. DRYDEN From the CENSURE of the ROTA BY His
CABAL of WITS.

Danda est hellebori nostro pars magna Poetae,
Nescio an Anticyram ratio illi destinet omnem.
CAMBRIDGE, Printed in the Year M.DC.LXXIII.

The Friendly Vindication OF Mr. DRYDEN, etc.
THe excellent Mr. Dryden taking into serious consideration the Affairs of Wit,
and having made an Assignation to that purpose with some flourishing
Ingenuities, no less conscious than admirers of his Fame: One of the forwardest
urged the immediate discussing the severe Censure of the Rota of Oxford; which,
though seeming only to point at Granada, did collaterally reflect on all his
Plays and Poems whatsoever. Mr. Dryden, not a little surprised to hear of
Critical Engines levelled at his Sieges, Conquests, and the like, was meekly
falling into a swound almost past recovery by tweaking of his Nose; till one of
his ingenious Friends putting him in mind how the King had made him his
Laureat, and how his Muse had accomplished him for her Hero, in both which
respects it did not become him to discover that she had placed her Ensigns of
Wit in so unsteady and pusillanimous a Brain as his might appear to be, (did he
not suddenly recollect his Spirit according to that Expression in his
Maiden-Queen, spoken by her Handmaid Astrea, Act. 1.) You were gay humored,
and you are
Now pensive Melancholic in the first Impression.
--
Once calm and now unquiet --
Not to say that few Poets besides Mr. Dryden, ever treated a Queen with so
light and homely an Entertainment of Words, as, Gay-humour'd, and the rest in
these two ridiculous lines.

A Knavish Wit here, that had a good mind to have been nibling at the
foregoing Expression, which signified no more in all those words, than to say
that the Queen was at some one time in better humor than at another: yet as he
was of Mr. Drydens Cabal, said, he should rather infuse into his soul (in this
Conjuncture) some Doses of Maximins and Almanzors Heroical Bravery, and not
give himself up to his Pursuers: like that simile of the Hare in Annus
Mirabilis, of which two whole Stanza's are paraphrastically, and somewhat more
compendiously rendered, thus, Even as the fearful Hare, when cours'd on Plain,
And longer cannot her flight maintain,
By the fierce Dog, with flix turned up does lie,
Who though not killed, yet cannot fly.


The Reader may suppose that Mr. Dryden was in almost as cold a fit as the Hare
he describes, wherefore not in a condition to be asked by what reason he calls
fearful, so timorous a Creature as a Hare naturally is; since no man ever heard
of a valiant Hare: or why he presumed to apply this mean simile to Prince
Ruperts Ship and some others, when disabled in their fight with the Dutch;
which if allowed, does rather imply that the Prince and the rest, had run away
like the Hare at first, and would have done so afterward, in imitation of a
Hare, had it been in their power; and not have encountered the Enemy with that
magnanimity that appeared throughout this action. But though this simile
squared so ill with the gallantry of the Action; a fault not to be pardoned in
Poetry, since its Illustrations and Metaphors should not only suit, but
endeavor to exalt, (and not depress, as it is observable in Mr. Dryden) the
greatness of the Subjects it treats of; According to this of Horace,
Incoeptis gravibus plerumque and magna professis,
Purpureus late qui splendeat, unus and alter,
Assuitur pannus. --
Yet this Gentleman who spoke last was so indulgent to Mr. Drydens Repute, that
he advised him, rather than yield to any thing that could be objected against
his Poetry, to turn the line in his first Part of Granada, mentioned by the
Rota, This is my will, etc.
into This is my wit, and this my wit shall be.
Adding, that he conceived his Muse had not made a more useful conversion for
him of any Verse of his. That he had proved they had kindness enough to
justify what he had, or could write, though they barked for his sake, at
better Wit than any of his.

At which, some conflict passed betwixt the Pale and Vermilion of his Cheek, (a
thing very incident to such Complexions, when made Creatures of Fame) as also
some melancholy puffs and swellings against the Rota, as if he had been
inclinable to break silence with this pathetick and Courtly Expression
delivered by his Maiden-Queen -- I must tell you, it is a saucy ^ome say (...)
first Copy (...) consuming ^stead of ^cy, not ^ch a better ^ithet joined (...)
Boldness.

Boldness thus to press on my Retirements.


Here one made a Querie, whether Saucy was not a pretty Sawce-box word annexed
to boldness. Another of his Comrades, who had Authority enough over his Person
and Muse, to pass his Raillery, said, that his restoration of spirit in this
Issue of his affairs, put him in mind of that Poetical Expression of his in
Maximin, Page 4. Midst this was heard the shrill and tender cry
Of well pleased Ghosts, which in the storm did fly,
Danced too and fro, and skim'd along the ground,
'Till to the Magic Circle they were bound.


Here one took notice how excellently Mr. Dryden had described the Voices,
Music, and Dancing of Ghosts; or if you please, an Antimask of Ghosts in the
Air. But why shrill and tender should be the pleasing ornament of their Voices,
since in it self no delightful way of speaking, or singing, was to be left to
the discussion of Ghosts and Mr. Dryden alone: though they could not but
condescend, that Mr. Dryden did deserve a tender Rebuke at least, for this
harsh and gentle fiction, which his Pen had so musically bestowed on Ghosts.
That it was true, that out of their respects to him, they had often endeavored
to blind the World from observing the incongruity of such Metaphors, (as saucy
boldness, shrill and tender, and the like,) not seldom used by him in this
inconsistent manner of Expression, the better to wing his Muse to her height;
or that she might fly in any storm, or dance to and fro, or skim along the
ground, as he and she thought best: since he had merited that kindness from
them, by his most ingenious converse and writing (besides some other more
secret obligations) as also to cry up and preserve the honor of the Laurel
conferred on him. Wherefore considering the Opposition which he and they have
had, or may have; especially at this time, when his Muse is so perniciously
attaqued by the Rota, and other malignant Critics: they thought fit to desire
him for the better strengthening of himself, to apply these Verses likewise of
his Maximin to his present dangers, They Coursing it, that is to say, The Rota
coursing his Muse.
They coursing it, as he were fenced within
And saw this dreadful Scene of Fate begin.
which is his very conjuring expression, placing, as he were, in stead of,
while we were.

Another said ingeniously enough, that the Censure of the Rota, or its Author,
passed on his Poems and Plays, did very pertinently metaphor the volubility and
rotation of Poetical fortune in neglect of his Wit; which it became him
confidently to resent according to this in Maximin, where his Muse had often
threatened bombast-vengeance on Gods and Men: Provoke my rage no further, least
I be
Revenged at once, upon the Gods and Thee.
At this some could not choose but smile (though his Entire Admirers) to think
what a supreme Divinity Mr. Drydens Muse was, that durst thus threaten all
Powers, Divine and Human.

Mr. Dryden being pretty well refreshed by swallowing these Cordials extracted
from his Muses Limbecks, after he had cleared some drops of cold sweat from his
forehead, and rubbed it to some Confidence, with due Obeisance made to these
his Friends and Applauders, together with some pangs of thought, (not much
unlike his Inspirations) Replied, That be must always acknowledge the support
his Wit received from the Esteem and Vogue they allowed though his Enemies
called making his Party and Faction, it had been hitherto his good providence:
nay added, That (among themselves) he had no reason to expect applause without
it. That he still implored the same favorable Aspects from them, and that they
would dare all Eyes which should observe or read his Writings with any
reflections on their faults: though they may believe that it troubled not a
little his Conscience, that notwithstanding their assignation of favor to his
late New Play called Love in a Nunnery, the Town should conceive it Justice to
condemn both his and their Endeavors. Upon which, he more instantly desired
them for the future to clap and hawl more exceeding for his sake, lest he sink
by the Censure of the World, as well as the Rota's: that whatsoever was his,
might be reverenced as a Play, and so voted, though without Intrigue or Wit.
And since they had put him into a way to strengthen himself with his own Lines,
he uttered these in Maximin, (a Play fruitful enough for such quotations) for
their more kind memorial, using the word Plays, in stead of Wars, We are not
sure to morrow will be ours,
Plays, have like Love, their favorable hours;
Let us use all, for if we lose one day,
That white one in the Crowd may slip away.


He desired them to forgive the large extent of this Petition, though perhaps
the Rota might conceive it Nonsense amongst the rest; it being not usual in
the English Tongue, to call a fair, serene, or prosperous day, a white day:
That he desired them to impute this Inspiration to a Dream he had of white
Money, to be shared in the Playhouse. Adding, that nothing less could square
with his profit, than wholly appropriating the fame and perquisits of Wit, (at
least of one Playhouse) to himself: for which purpose, he could not but with
all humility, implore their Embargo on all others Poets that might possibly
impair his repute, and Trade of Writing, though their Consciences were so
guilty as to believe his Plays the worst.

That the Drama did require too many drams of Wit (he hoped they would excuse
his Clinch) to be compounded by his Genius; which in the beginning of his
undertaking he sufficiently observed, as was evident to them and the World, in
his Practices to gain Proselytes to his Muse. As also his humble and supplicant
Addresses to Men and Ladies of Honor, to whom he presented the most of his
Plays to be read, and so passing through their Families to comply their
Censures beforehand: confessing ingeniously, that had he ventured his Wit on
the Tenter-hooks of Fortune (like other Poets, who depended more on the merit
of their Pens,) he had been more severely entangled in his own Lines long ago.

To this, one of his Associate Wits replied, That he thought it reasonable
(were his profit not too deeply concerned) to persuade him to desist from
Writing, as some Poets had discreetly and timely observed, like that of
Juvenal, Frange Miser Calamos --
since he was as egregious already as black and white could make him. But
however, if he were taken for no good Comick-Poet, or Satyrist; he had found a
way of much easier License, (though more remarkable in the sense of some) which
was, not only to Libel men's persons, but to represent them on the Stage too:
That to this purpose he made his observations of men, their words and actions,
with so little disguise, that many beheld themselves acted for their Half
Crown: yet after all, was unwilling to believe, that this was not both good
Comedy, and no less good manners. Besides, that he had been so frankly obliging
as (where he could not use a Character, or apprehended the License) to assign
it to some other Poet of his Cabal, or exchange one Part for another, it may be
Club Wit too, the better to set men forth: That this was a Sir Positive Truth
Mr. Dryden had not forehead enough to deny.

At which, there being observed a guilty variety in his Countenance -- A
certain Gallant stepped forth and said, that what was past, was past: besides,
that Mr. Dryden had made his submissions and recantations most ingeniously both
by word and writing: that he conceived a person of Honor, had a Letter
dedicated to the Fire, even by the Hangmans hands, if the injured should think
it necessary; therefore what was done was candid enough as to that particular.
If Mr. Dryden courted more his security than honor, he was not to be blamed,
if his temper found it convenient: Or it might be interpreted his Kindness, in
not being willing to put so much Wit as his own to hazard, especially since he
proved it so dear to his Admirers. That it was enough to Cajole the fiercest
Hector, employed on any such account to him; as perhaps it succeeded with Sir
Fretchevil Hollis, from this Verse in Annus Mirabilis, Young Hollis, on a Muse
by Mars begot.
No less than Youth, Wit, and Valor, chained together in one line; besides
such a way to beget a Hero as is not to be found in any Poet; except that of
his Almanzor, as extraordinarily begot by Mr. Dryden on his Muse.

Here he extolled the charming Wit of Mr. Dryden, that could so prepossess the
hearts of men.

In a word, where he had figured any on the Scene, or Press, he was no less
plyant to take them off as dexterously again: That it was Mr. Dryden's Bizarre
in Wit, and Poets must be allowed so much variety, as sometimes to exceed the
limits of Moderation and regular Characters.

Mr. Dryden was in some disorder here, as indeed the mention of Regular parts
and Characters could not but concern all his Plays, and did most especially at
this time put him in mind of his dear beloved Almanzor; in honor to whom, he
had adorned the Frontispiece of Granada with, -- Major rerum mihi nascitur Ordo,
Majus opus moveo.
and was now no inwardly lamented by him, as suffering by the Academick Rota,
not only as an abominated Hero, but as one who with his untruly Lines had broke
most scornfully the Right Reverend Priscians head, with some other deformities
-- he was going to add, a gloomy smile arose, but that it appeared by Mr.
Dryden, -- Cited by the Rota out of the Granada.
That the more he heard,
A more severe and sullen Joy appeared.


Another was saying that Mr. Dryden's Wit could be both blunt and sharp; and
that the edge of day might possibly have this operation on his Muse when she
awaked his Verse too early, or out of humor; wherefore he advised Mr. Dryden
to try what Effect the edge of Night would have on his Imagination; and
perhaps the Metaphor might be better allowed going to Bed, or Drunk: desiring
him to recollect what time of the natural Day it was, that he writ the Prologue
before the Maiden Queen, beginning thus, He that writ this, not without pain
and thought,
From French and English Theaters has brought
The exactest Rules, by which a Play is wrought.


Whether Mr. Dryden was no^ confident enough, in putting such a Panegyric of
himself before a Play written with so feminine an Intrigue and Genius, as may
be perceived by what has been instanced already, in stead of troubling the
Brain with further Remarques.

At which another replied briskly, that it was Mr. Dryden's Interest to be
allowed to speak, write, censure of Men and Wit as he pleased; that he had done
it hitherto fortunately enough, and that for his sake they must so applaud him,
which was well enough (...) before by himself.

That it must be granted on all sides that Mr. Dryden has Wit, or was to be
thought witty --

Here one of his Comrade-wits cried, Hold, That it was not good to proceed on
that ground, because it was fallacious, and would be answered by many, in
saying, That he never had that Judgment or Wit he pretended to, for a Reason
mentioned by the Rota, and such a one as Mr. Dryden could not deny.

Wherefore the Logic of the Argument being in effect no more but this, Either
you have a Gig, or have lost a Gig, Which may be answered by saying, You never
had a Gig.

But he forbore to apply it to Mr. Dryden. He proceeded to show, That
whatsoever was Mr. Dryden's Wit, it was well enough proportioned to receive
what praises they could bestow upon it; or what could be given by himself, to
himself: To which purpose, his dealing with Ben Jahnson (though dead, and of
Immortal Fame with the judicious) was very observable, in that Mr. Dryden, who
had at one time thought fit to call his Comedy, with the rest of his Time,
mean, low, or as you have it in this hobling Verse of his mentioned by the
Rota, Then Comedy was faultless, but 'twas course,
(not to examine the consistency of course and faultless,) At another time had
otherwise sung a Parallel of his Muses Fame with Ben. Johnson's, as in his
Prologue to the Maiden Queen, where he vain-gloriously enough calls that Play
-- a mingled Chime
Of Johnsons humor, and Corneille's Rhyme.
But how Johnsons humor, could make such Music with Corneille's rhyme, is not
to be understood otherwise, than as Mr. Dryden has made his own Commendation
and it chime together. Which may be called another Bizarre in Mr. Dryden.

As for his Comedy, it was objected by some, that it was as great an offense to
good Morality, as his Maximin was to Christianity. That his Marriage a la Mode,
and his Love in a Nunnery, were most excellent Collections of Bawdery. But the
wonder was, how Mr. Dryden came to conceive his fulsome Conceits to be refined
Wit; as he had suggested to his Friends, since Bawdery had never that repute,
before Mr. Dryden writ it. That in good Comedy, there were innumerable
Excellencies relating to Wit and Manners, to which there was some fear that his
Genius would never arrive: which shows, that if his Invention be not free and
airy enough for that purpose, his Imagination (whatsoever his person is) was
sufficiently lascivious. But perhaps Mr. Dryden conceives of the success of
Plays, as Martial did of some licentious Writings of his: Non possunt sine
mentula placere.
or which is all one, the Dildo of Mr. Drydens Muse, so neatly applied to the
females of the Town.

He that said this, though a great favourer of Mr. Dryden, could not but grant
that there were a great many Contradictions and Mistakes in the management of
his Muse.

Here another took up the Discourse, saying, That since they were now met thus,
it was not unfriendly to proceed to some Reformation of Mr. Drydens Wit and
Manners together; as well as they had hitherto in a headlong manner vindicated
him to the World. In order to which, it was to be told Mr. Dryden that he in
the sense of some, with no less Arrogance and Ignorance, taxed Virgil the
Prince of Latin Poets, then he had injured Ben Johnson the best of English;
that in his Preface to his Annus Mirabilis, notwithstanding to adorn that
miraculous Poem he had transversed many things of the incomparable Virgils, (as
may be seen by his acknowledgment, and Marginal Notes to that purpose,) yet he
there says thus of him: Though he describes his Dido well and naturally, in the
violence of her passions, yet he must yield to Ovid in that of Myrrha, the
Biblis, the Althea of Ovid.

And a litte after, That if I see not more of their souls, then I see of
Dido's, at least I have a greater concernment for them.

He added, That he could not choose but reprehend this soloecism of commendation
in Mr. Dryden: wondering with what Brow he could say, that if he saw not more of
their souls then he saw of Dido's, yet he had a greater concernment for them.
How this would pass, or could quadrate with any favorable allowance of sense,
he could not imagine. For to say that Dido's was the more large, the more
heroic, the more passionate Soul, yet must not concern Mr. Dryden's Ingenuity
so far as the others, he thought fit to understand it amongst the rest of Mr.
Dryden's Bizarrs in Wit and Judgment. And that he would not choose his
Panegyricks of most Poets, since they were either Impertinent, or Contradictory
to what he could wish in him. Wherefore he would mind him of what some Critics
may retort upon him, (who though they take it not well, yet do not judge it
worth their labor to vindicate the matchless Wit of Virgil) that if they see
not more of his Love, than was to be seen in his Eliza the Maiden Queen, or
what they saw in his St. Catherine, or his Light buskined Queen Almahide; (that
made Boabdalin her Cully, though her King and Husband, in order to the Embrace
of her more strenuous Almanzor,) or if they perceived the same effects of his
Muse in Maximin and Almanzor, as also throughout those Plays convertibly
varied, he was not to believe they could be much concerned with his Characters;
or that most of his Friends would not wish that Mr. Dryden would either improve
his Muse, or give over writing.

At this Mr. Dryden began to be in a cold Sweat again; till promised that the
discussion of Maximin and Granada should be deferred to a farther debate, if
his concern required it.

Which a forward Wit of his Party perceiving, said, That the Gentleman that
spoke last (though he could not contradict his Judgment) had mistaken the
Intrigue that Mr. Dryden endeavors to hold with the World: that Mr. Dryden
writ as well as any man that could write no better; and was no less himself in
his last Play, called Love in a Nunnery; the fate whereof had occasioned him to
confess, that he sometimes by their help had slur^ed a Play on the Audience,
and that it was his utmost expectation and desire, that they would continue
still so kind as to question nothing of his; that it had been likewise
acknowledged by him, that he intended the same, for this last Catholic
Intrigne of his, which he called pawming of a Play on the Town.

The Expression was something odd, it was yielded, and represented his hearers
no less than Sots and Gulls, to be bubbled thus of their Understandings by him.
That Mr. Dryden's Education was not so exact, as that no mixture was to be
found in his Manners as well as Wit: that he was a Poet in Olivers time, and
something more subservient to his Principality; but these were things to be
handled at another meeting, if Mr. Dryden thought fit: adding that he did write
more for Profit than Reputation, or collaterally for both. The first of which,
he allowed to be the more absolute Mistress of his Muse, as was hinted by
himself before? though it is true that as an Ambidexter in Wit, he intended to
engross both solely to himself. But he was to know that Mr. Dryden's words did
not always declare his meaning, and were varied as best served his turn;
sometimes for money, sometimes for both money and fame; another time for fame
See the conclusion of his Letter to Sir R. H. before his An^. Mirab.
above all things, who by no means must be allowed other than the best Poet in
England, and had so caused himself to be given out by his Friends; which cannot
but be acknowledged another quaint variety in Mr. Dryden.

One asked whether upon the beforementioned diversities observed in Mr.
Dryden, he might not heroickly describe himself by saying this Verse in
Maximin, I reel and stagger, and am drunk with light.
That it must be acknowledged, that Mr. Dryden could not deserve less than to
be soberly blamed; and so they had done and should do farther, as occasion
offered. He said, that it had been granted already that Mr. Dryden had been
held an odd man enough always, by some who had proved him. Notwithstanding, if
his merit was small, they were sorry he had taken so much pains to divulge it;
which they did unwillingly instance to him at this time, considering he was
something pensive and indisposed, as being under a gloomy sullen Censure of the
Rota's; and his Muse to undergo a severe penance for his assignations of Love
in a Nunnery; all which it was hoped he would suffer with a shrill tender
^asiness of mind, if she could not inspire him with a more proper and secure
remedy. As likewise, not to be enraged from these gentle stroakings of his
Friends, or hope from thence more safely to kick at their Counsels, like this
of Horace, Hunc male si palpere, recalcitrat, undique tutus.
When on the other side, it is but taking advice from his own Verse, and
receive this noise and hubbub about his Wit, no more disturbed then if A horrid
stillness did invade his Ear.


For his Plays, it was unanimously accorded, that though they wished them well,
they resolved henceforth to be more just to his failings than they had hitherto
appeared, and not endeavor the pawming of them on the Town, if his Wit had no
better a trick to thrive by.

Asking some pardon of the World for so long concealing his defects, or
mistaking his Wit, to the neglect of better: That if he did employ some vacant
hours of his Muse for his vindication against the Rota, they thought it not
amiss (at least before he writ any more Plays) since his Audience was resolved
to construe his sense a little better than yet they had done.

And since Mr. Dryden and his Muse, are best extolled by his own Pen, it was
thought fit to annex this honorable and pacifick Wish to his future
Productions of Wit; (taken out of his Maximin) using only the word Writing in
stead of Thousand,

Thus, So may thou live thy Writing Years in Peace,
And see thy Airy Progeny increase.


FINIS or not FINIS As Mr. Dryden pleases.

