THE FALL OF A Great Visible Idol By the coming of the INVISIBLE POWER, And
SUBSTANCE.

In this day and time of the Lambs War which is come.

Wherein Christ the true Light is exalted at the right hand of God, who dwells
and walks in his people which are his Temple.

Which does bring down the boasting Baptists that has highly exalted
themselves upon the high and dark mountains of their own imaginations, as may
be known by their own principles which are herein answered with something to
the simple hearted that are among them, concerning water baptism and breaking
of outward bread, which these Baptists has so much Idolized in the night.

Thus says the Lord, cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh
his Arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord, for he shall be like the
heath in the desert, and shall not see when good co^^eth, Jer 17. 5. 6. And
blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is, Jer.
17. 7, for it is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh presiteth nothing, the
words that I speak unto you they are spirit, and they are life, John 6. 63.
From a true friend unto all that loves truth in the inward parts, in true love
and pity unto the lost sheep, that they may be of the house of Israel. Joseph
Fuce.

London, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
165^.

This is to the Reader that he may the better understand.
NOw first of all (before thou come to the matter hereafter written) thou art
to be turned unto a measure of the true light in thy own conscience, and with
it to search thine own heart, and to see whether there be not envy or
prejudice lodging in thee against the way of truth, which has been so
abominably abused and evil spoken of, as if it were the most damnable Heresy
that ever was declared, in so much that people has often been stirred up by
their Teachers into a great rage against the truth, before they know it, or
has heard us declare it, or seen our writings (so as to understand the matter)
and therefore if there be any of the envious ones leaven in thee, let that be
laid aside, and wait thou in the light, not turning to the one hand, nor yet to
the other, not joining with me nor against me, before thou do understand
rightly the things there spoken of in love to thy poor soul, but wait in the
pure fear of the Lord to feel the Power of God to arise within, and rent the
vail which has been over thy heart, that so the measure of the true light may
come up in thee to bare rule, so as to give thee the true knowledge and the
right understanding, for happy is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that
gets understanding, for it is better then the gain of gold, and except the
light make these things manifest thou can not understand this which I have
spoken of, in the wisdom of God which I have received, and this knowledge
comes a far off (the wisdom of the flesh) therefor I will ascribe wisdom and
righteousness unto my Maker, for he that is perfect in knowledge is with God
the fountain of wisdom and true knowledge, and verily I shall leave the truth
of my words to answer the witness in thy own conscience, and be thou so honest
to thy own soul (before thou judge) to try these things aright with that
which will not lie in thee, that is the true balance and just weight that
weighs things a right, that so thou may come to be persuaded (in thy own
mind) who are in the truth it self, that gives true peace unto the soul, and
who are in the profession of the truth without the possession, in the
hypocrisy, but have no true peace.

And truly I have seen the hypocrisy, and great deceit of those Baptists many
times, at several places where they have opposed the very life of truth withal
the strength and subtilty they have received from the wicked one to deceive the
hearts of the simple even to the grieving of my soul, to think that ever these
Baptists should so impudently gainsay the truth and life of what they prosess
in words, and often I have been moved of the Lord in the power of the spirit,
to reprove them for their lies and false accusations, which they have brought
against us that witness forth the truth, against their deceit, and when I have
so done, I have had peace in the light, and did not desire nor think to lay
their wickedness open unto the world in Print, but rather desired they should
have owned reproof and repented, and have turned unto the Lord in time (as some
has done that did walk with them) but they have despised reproof, and hated
instruction, and set themselves against the light and spirit of the Lord, until
his anger is kindled against them.

And now seeing how they have set themselves against the truth, and will not
cease to pervert the right way in going on in their d^ceit, bending their
tongues like a bow for lies, thereby to deceive the hearts of the simple;
Therefore the Lord has put it into my heart to begin to lay open their
wickedness (in Print) for the truths sake, and in true love and pity to the
poor simple-hearted people, that they may not run so rashly into their snares,
to go with them they know not whether, until their steps take hold on Hell; for
they have openly denied the true light, as is hereafter mentioned, and they
that walk in darkness know not whether they go; and therefore thou that love
thy own Souls peace, be warned in time to weigh things rightly with that which
is a Just weight and true Measure in thy own Conscience, so may thou come to
be persuaded in thy own mind who are in the right way, and then let the light
be thy guide in it to walk, that so thou may come in due time to have peace
with God in the Covenant of light and life for evermore.

At a Meeting at Nethurst, upon the 24th of the 6th Month, 1659. appointed by
Matthew Caffin Baptist, but there were several of the chief Baptists in all
these South parts, namely, William Jeffery, Matthew Caffin, John Parsons,
William Steel, and several others of Kent and Sussex.
It was pretended by the Baptists, there to show the cause wherefore they could
not join with the Quakers, as they with other scoffers in these last times call
us the People of the Lord; but in stead of proving any Just cause why they do
not own and join with us, they gave sufficient cause for us (and all that fear
the Lord) to deny them, and to have no fellowship with them, except they repent.
And the cause they gave us at this Meeting (and at other places) was those
errors, damnable heresies and lies, which are hereafter mentioned and
answered, as moved by the Spirit of love to all the simple-hearted people, that
does desire to walk in the way of truth unto Zion the City of the living God,
where Peace is to be enjoyed for evermore.
FIrst the Baptist affirmed, That the Eternal Spirit that was in Christ was not
the Savior of the world.

Answ. Here they deny the true God to be the Savior of the world, who was in
Christ the Author of Eternal Salvation, the ground and foundation of all
truth, who is a Spirit and is Eternal, and God the Father, and Christ the Son
(whose Name is called the Word of God) and the Eternal Spirit or Holy Ghost are
one, and the Father was in the Son, and the Son was in the Father, John 14. 11.
and he that has seen the Son has ^oh 10. 30
seen the Father, and God who is the only Invisible and Eternal Spirit, saved
all the holy men of God in the days of old since the beginning, and when the
old world was drowned God saved Noah, 2 Pet. 2. 5. and the Eternal God said by
the Prophet Isaiah, Look unto me and be ye saved all the ends of the earth, for
I am God and there is none else, Isa. 45. 22. there is no God effectual besides
the Eternal Spirit, that is a Just God and a Savior, verse. 21. and this
Savior said, I, even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior, Isa.
43. 11. And the Apostle said, The Lord is the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 17. and this
Eternal God (who is a Spirit) was he that saved all the holy men of God, and
they both Prophets and Apostles called God their Savior, 1 Timothy 4. 10. Titus
7. 3. and this Everlasting God and Eternal Spirit, (that was the ^ Pet. 1. 1.
^ude 25.
only Savior of all the holy men of God) the Apostle said, to wit, That God
was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19. and Christ was
in God, and sometime the Apostle called Christ Lord and Savior, and they also
called God their Savior, for they were one in the beginning before the world
was; but the Baptists does not see how Christ ^ut the bo^y without ^he Spirit
is dead, ^am. 2. 26.
and God are one, as one of them said, and therefore denies the Eternal Spirit,
that was and is in Christ's body to be the Savior; and so blaspemously has
denied both the Father and the Son, and there is no Savior besides the Eternal
Spirit, which was God manifest in the flesh; and if any should read this, and
not perceive the things of God, and so not believe the Words of truth; read the
13th of Hosea, and 14th verse, were God says, Yet I am the Lord thy God from
the land of Egypt, and thou shall know no God but me, for there is no Savior
beside me; and all those that reads this with a right understanding may see
and perceive the Baptists to be ignorant of the Power of God; and also of the
Scriptures, which does so largely speak of that God (that was in Christ) to be
the only Savior; but time might fail us to bring all those Scriptures which
does speak of God to be the Savior.

Baptists Affirmed, That Christ was not come to them yet the second time, nor
yet to any man upon the face of the earth.

Answ. Here the Baptists has manifested themselves openly to be Reprobates
according to the Scripture, and therefore it is no marvel why they oppose the
light in others so much, seeing they deny Christ the light to be come to them
the second time, and there were such in the Apostles days that sought a proof
of Christ speaking in the Apostle Paul, who said unto them, Examine your selves
whether ye be in the Faith, prove your own selves, know you not your own selves
how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13. 5. and now
you may see the Baptists, yea the very chief among them are Reprobates, out of
the Faith the Saints were in, who preached Christ in them the Hope of Glory,
and said, He is come that is true, and they were in him that is true, even in
his Son Jesus Christ; and so they that did receive him at his coming to dwell
in them, he gave them an understanding how to preach him up in others, and also
in Heaven at the right hand of God; but they that do not know him come to them,
they do not know him in any other Creature in Heaven or in earth, and where the
true Christ the Son of God who is a quickening Spirit does not Rule, there the
Antichrist rules, the son of perdition rules, the old man of sin reigns in
them and over them, and he makes them subject to sin; and now Antichrist is
come up very high in these Baptists, and he does appear very bold in them,
insomuch that they deny the true Christ to be come the second time to them or
to any other Creature, but the Scripture is so far a witness against them that
all the moderate people may see that they are ignorant of the things of God,
and also of the Scriptures, and so altogether unfit to preach unto others; for
how can any truly preach Christ to come to others, that does not know him come
unto themselves, Paul was a persecutor before he knew Christ revealed in him,
but after it pleased God to reveal his Son in him, then he was fit to preach
the manner of his coming in others, Gal. 1. 16. and Christ said unto his
Disciples, he dwells with you and shall be in you, I will not leave you
comfortless, I will come to you, John 14. 18. and John in his Epistle said, We
know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding that we
may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son
Jesus Christ, 1 John 5. 20. here John said he is come, but the Baptists says
he is not come, and so are out of the Faith and Doctrine that the Apostles were
in; and John spoke of such false prophets that were entered into the world as
these Baptists are, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
this is a deceiver and an Antichrist, 2 John 7. (Mark) he does not say there,
he that denies that he was come, or shall come, but he says, who confess not
that he is come in the flesh (Mark that) for both Papists and other Priests,
and the Baptists and we do all believe that he did come in the flesh, and was
crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem, and also that he shall come at the
last day to Judge the quick and the dead, according to the Scriptures; but this
is the great controversy which we have with all those about this matter, that
is, whether Jesus Christ be manifested or come in the flesh now according to
the Scripture; but all that resist the light that lights every man that
comes into the world, they resist the true Christ which the Apostles and we
say is come in the flesh, and they receive the Spirit of Antichrist, and become
one with that, and so resist the true light, the true comforter, the man of
sorrows, that puts an end to sin; and John in the Spirit or the Spirit in John,
said in the Revelation, Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear
my voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him and he
with me, Rev. 3. 20. he that has an ear let him hear what the Spirit says.

The Baptist denied, That Christ was that crucified oftener then once.

Answ. Here you may see the Baptists chief principles are to deny the true
Christ the Son of God, who proceeded from the Father to seek and to save that
which was lost; but the Baptists renders evil against him that came for good
unto all men, even to the lost, to seek and to save that which was lost, and he
gives to every man that which is good, this is the true light which lights
every man that comes into the world, and this is he the Baptists deny, and
whom the Jews were so much against, and did often deny him,, saying, Crucify
him, crucify him, and release unto us Barrabas, and he was crucified without
the Gates at Jerusalem, at the place which is called Calvary, Luke 23. 33.
there was one time spoke of where Christ was crucified without the Gates, and
after that John said he was crucified in the streets of the great City, which
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, Rev. 11. 8. that was another time and
place spoken of; and the Apostle Paul who had been a persecutor, and was
converted after Christ's suffering (without the Gate at Jerusalem) and after the
Church was gathered and grown up (so as to taste of the good Word of God, and
the power of the World to come) then he writes to the Hebrews concerning some
that crucified to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open
shame, Heb. 6. 6. the Son of God was the true Christ, which was crucified by
the Jews without the Gates at Calvary, and in spiritual Sodom and Egypt, and
also by such as departed from the Faith; for they crucified to themselves the
Son of God afresh (take notice of that) That you may see plainly how the
Baptists deny the true Christ, the Son of God, the Lamb slain from the
^oundation of the world.

The Baptists affirmed, That the Comforter spoken of in that 14th of John to
come again to the Disciples, was not Christ.

Answ. Christ in that 14th of John said, the Father should give them another
Comforter; but he did not say it was not Christ that should come to them which
was then with them, but on the contrary said, he dwells with you and shall be
in you, verse. the 17th. and so he was to be known after another manner, not
after the flesh without them, for he was manifested unto them in that form of
flesh, and so became of no reputation, and passed through outward things, and
suffered the contradictions of sinners in the time of doing his Fathers Will,
for which he was sent in that form; then when all was fulfilled, both outward
Baptism with water, and outward Circumcision with hands, then he said, all is
finished, and gave up the Ghost, and went to the Father from whence he
proceeded, and then was there no necessity of those outward things, nor Command
to do them from God as before, because they were fulfilled, yet for a time they
were a little used by them that came unto all in those things, that they might
win some out of all those things (which was to decrease) up to Christ that was
to increase and prevail mightily in those with whom he dwelt until he went to
the Father, and after he was risen he appeared unto his Disciples in another
form, and after that he appeared in them, they did not tell people of his being
among any people without them as he was known; but said, know you not your own
selves how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates; but these
Baptists they deny his so coming again, and says it was not Christ, although
Christ said so plainly in John 14. ^. and if I go and prepare a place for you,
I will come again and receive you unto my self; and in verse. the 18th Christ
said unto them again, I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you, but
the Baptists said it was not he, and so would make Christ the liar, in as much
as they can, with their lying divinations of their own brain, saying, the
Comforter there spoken of was not Christ, although he himself said, I will come
to you, and John said he was come unto them, and they were in him, even in his
Son Jesus Christ, this is the true God and Eternal life; little Children keep
your selves from Idols, 1 John 5. 20, 21.

The Baptists affirmed, That it was Blasphemy to say that those things spoken
of to Christ's Disciples in Matthew. 24. was fulfilled in that age.

Answ. Christ said then to his Disciples, many should come in his Name, saying,
I am Christ, and shall deceive many, and said, Lo here, or lo there is Christ,
believe them not, go not forth, for the true Christ was to be known within
them, and he said unto them, they should hear of wars and rumors of wars, and
earthquakes was to be, and the love of many shall wax cold, because iniquity
shall abound; and the Disciples was to be afflicted and persecuted, and killed
at the last of their age, and the Sun was to be darkened, and the Moon was not
to give her light for a time, and all these things is spoken in the 24th of
Matthew, and the Scriptures there and in other places does plainly prove that
these things were to come to pass in the Apostles age; and therefore Christ
bids them watch, and be always ready, because the time was nigh, but the day
and hour no man was to know until it came; and Christ said to his Disciples,
Matthew. 24. 34. Verily I say unto you, this Generation shall not pass till all
these things be fulfilled; and in the 14th verse Christ said, And this Gospel
of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness to all Nations,
and then shall the end come; but the Baptists counts that blasphemy for us to
affirm that the end of all those things was come, and so fulfilled in the
Disciples age before that Generation passed away, as Christ said; Further I
shall prove out of the Scriptures that these things did come to pass.

First concerning false Prophets and Antichrists, they were to come unto the
true Prophets and Apostles, to deceive them (if it were possible) and they did
so come as Christ said they should; and the Disciples, Apostles and Prophets
that did watch (as Christ said they should) they did see the false prophets and
deceivers come privily in the very form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof, 2 Timothy 3. ^. and John said in his first Epistle 2. 1^. Little
Children, it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come,
even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know it is the last time; and
John said, Many false prophets are gone out into the world, 1 John 4. 1. but
first they came unto the Church, but they resisted them, and overcame them, and
then they went into the world, and the world heard them, verse. 4. 5. and so
has the world been deceived ever since the Apostles days, in the night which
Christ spoke of to come wherein no man could work; but if I should undertake to
declare as much as might be spoken of both of the true Apostles and Prophets,
and false apostles and prophets, surely time would fail me, but this is a
sufficient proof for this particular; also the Disciples were to see Jerusalem
compassed about with Armies, and then was there wars, and the Sun and Moon was
to be darkened, and there was to be earthquakes, and there was darkness, for it
was said from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the Land unto the
ninth hour, Mat. 27. 45. and when Jesus cried with a loud voice and yielded up
the Ghost, behold, the vail of the Temple was rent in twain, from the top to
the bottom, and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent, and the graves were
opened, and many bodies of Saints arose, Mat. 27. 50, 51, 52. And Christ said
the Gospel should be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all Nations,
(Mark) and then shall the end come. And when Paul questioned whether the Gospel
had been so preached, he said, have they not heard? yea verily, their sound
went into all the earth, and their Words unto the ends of the world, Romans 10.
18. and then came the end of all those things according to Christ his Words;
but the Baptists call that Blasphemy.

The Baptists affirmed, That neither Abraham, nor Isaac, Peter nor Paul was
redeemed from the curse, nor out of the fall, nor are not yet; neither is
Abraham, Isaac nor Jacob in the Kingdom.

Answ. The fall of man was into transgression of the righteous Law and Command
of the righteous God of Heaven and earth, and so man fell from God out of that
state which he was created in, into sin and iniquity, which separated between
God and man, yet God had an eye of pity unto man in that fallen sinful
separated condition, and God made a Covenant with man whereby man might come
again unto himself out of the fall, and the Covenant was, that the seed of the
woman should bruise the serpents head which tempted and led away into sin, that
so man might come again unto God out of sin, and so the Seed or Word of God
(which was with God before the World was made) became as a Genesis 14. 19. Genesis
15. 1. Genesis 22. Genesis 17.
hammer unto the head of the serpent to bruise it; and God talked with Abraham
when he appeared unto him, as a man talks with his familiar Friend, and God
blessed him, and made a Covenant with him, and changed his name from Abram to
Abraham, for a Father of many Nations have I made thee said the Almighty, whose
everlasting Covenant was with Abraham and his Seed for ever, and the Covenant
was to be in their flesh, Genesis 17. 3. and Abraham the Father of the faithful
was perfect and did see Christ's day, and he rejoiced to see Christ's glorious
day, who said, before Abraham was I am, John 8. 56. 58. And Noah was perfect
and God saved him; and Enock was translated by Faith, that he should not see
death, Heb. 11. and they were redeemed out of the fall, and from under the
curse up to God, who blessed Abraham the Father of the faithful, and they that
were of Faith pleased God, and were and are blessed; but they that were of the
wicked one, and did always resist the holy Ghost, they were and are under the
curse in the fall, and the wrath of the just God comes upon them, but Enoch and
Noah walked with God, Genesis 5. 22. Genesis 6. 9. and David said, Into thine hand I
commit my Spirit, thou have redeemed me O Lord God of truth, Psalm. 3^. ^. Now
the Baptists in the envy and bitterness of their spirit has manifested their
ignorance of the ^criptures, and also of Redemption out of the fall, in saying
those notable holy men of God were not redeemed out of the fall. But now thus
says the Lord that created thee O Jacob and he that formed thee O Israel, fear
not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by my name, thou art mine,
Isai. ^3. ^. Isai. 63. 9.
and the Apostle paul when he spoke even to this very thing concerning himself,
and they that were redeemed from under the curse (mark that) he says, Christ
has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, etc Gal. ^. 13. and Peter said they
were not redeemed with corruptable things, as silver and gold, from your vain
conversation received by tradition from your fathers, but with the precious
blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot, 1 Pet. ^. 18.
^9. and so it does appear they were redeemed unto God the Judge of all by the
blood of the Covenant, or Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, and the
Saints and Elders which were in heaven were redeemed unto God, out of every
kindred, and and tongue, and People and Nation, and they sang a new song,
saying, Thou art worthy to take the book and to open the Seals thereof, for
thou wast slain and hast-redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred,
and tongue, and People, and Nation, Revel. 5. 9. and the Saints conversation
was in heaven, and are in the Kingdom of Heaven, although the baptists say,
neither Abraham, Isaac, nor Jacob was in the Kingdom, neither are they yet in
the Kingdom says the Baptists, who shuts up the Kingdom of Heaven against men,
for they neither go in themselves, neither suffer they them that are entering
in to goin, and so are found in the Pharisees and Hypocrites practices, see
Mat. 23, ^^. there was entering into the Kingdom then, and there was those that
did hinder men from going into the Kingdom then, and as it was then so it is
now, as it does appear by these Baptists that say neither Abraham, Isaac nor
Jacob was in the Kingdom, and so are found out of Christ's Doctrine, and
altogether contrary to his words, as they are in the Scriptures of truth; which
are profitable for correction (of such unprofitable talkers as these envious
ignorant Baptists are) and for instruction of the simple; now when Christ spoke
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, he said they were in the Kingdom, but the
Baptists say they are not in the Kingdom. Now when you have read the Baptists
words, and Christ's words, then let the witness be Judge who is the liar. And I
say unto you that many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down
with Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of Luke 16. 22.
Heaven, Mat. 8. ^^. here Christ says with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in
the Kingdom of Heaven, and in Mat. ^^. he speaks of entering into the
Kingdom, and John spoke of his brethren in the Kingdom Revel. 1. 9. and Paul
speaks of some that were come unto Mount Sion, unto the City of the living God,
the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to innumerable company of Angels, to the general
Assembly and Church of the first born which are written in Heaven, and to God
the Judge of all, and to the spirits of Just men made perfect, Heb. 12. 22. 23.
they were redeemed out of the fall, up to God the Judge of all, and they had
received the Kingdom, and were in Heaven, and all that fears the Lord truly
may see the Baptists far unfit to Preach the way into the Kingdom of God,
seeing they are yet in the fall and Kingdom of darkness, and thinking all
others to be so, and there they labor (as may be seen by these principles of
theirs) to keep others in darkness and unbelief, and so do not enter
themselves, neither would they have others to be translated into the Kingdom of
the only dear Son of God, there to find rest and Peace for evermore.

The Baptists affirmed that no man could come into that state that Adam was
created in on this side the grave.

Answ. This is a denying Christ's suffering to do the work which the Father sent
him about, which was to seek and to save that which was lost, and to quicken
man that was dead in trespasses and sins, and Christ did finish the work which
the Father gave him to do; although the effect of the Baptists words is to deny
it. Now see what the Scripture says. The Son of man is come to save that which
was lost, Mat. 18. 11. and the Saints were saved, as in 2 Timothy 1. 9. 1 Cor. 15.
2. for since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead,
1 Cor. 15. 21. and this the Apostles witnessed and declared unto them that had
been dead in trespasses and sins on this side the grave, and you has he
quickened, Ephesians. ^. ^. (mark) for we are his workmanship created in Christ Je^^^
^n^^ good works, which God has before ordained that we should walk in them,
verse the 10. and so they were come out of the sin and transgression (which
Adam was dead in) up to God again, who was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, and the Law of the Spirit of life did make them free from the Law of
sin and death on this side the grave, and then there was no condemnation to
them that were in Christ Jesus which walked not after the flesh but after the
Spirit, and that was on this side the grave, for they could do nothing against
the truth but for the truth in Christ Jesus, who is the express Image of his
Fathers Person, and in him and by him was man created in Christ Jesus; and the
Apostle Paul said on this side the grave, O death where is thy sting, O grave
where is thy victory? the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
Law, but thanks be to God which gives us the victory Eccl. 11. 3.
through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15. and if victory be not received on
this side the grave (which these Baptists speak of) it will not be at all known
unto them that are cut off in their sins; for where the tree falls there it
lies, whether it be toward the North or toward the south, for the time is at
hand, he that is unjust, let him be unjust still, and he which is filthy let
him be filthy still, and he that is righteous let him be righteous still, and
he that is holy let him be holy still, Revel. 2^. 11. he that can receive it
let him.

Matthew Casfin one of the Baptists affirmed, that if he were in that first
state that Adam was created in he should not be mortal, nor thirsty, sick nor
weary.

Answ. Thou that say neither Abraham, nor Isaac, nor Peter nor Paul was
redeemed from the curse, nor from the fall, and that no man could come into
that state that Adam was created in on this side the grave, thou have
manifested Zach. 5. 1. 2.
thy self to be yet in the fall, in sin and darkness, and transgression, not yet
come to Adams first estate; which was a living soul, but under the curse which
is gone forth, as a fiery flying roll; and in that fallen estate thou have
exalted thy self over a people to be their Teacher, who counts themselves
members of the Church of Christ; for how can thou tell what thou should
have done, that art not come to Adams first estate (mark) yet art intruding
into those things which thou know not, as it appears by thy saying thou
should not be mortal, thirsty, sick nor weary, and it is no marvel to me to
see such contention and confusion among those Baptists that does own such
messengers that comes in their own name, which are not redeemed out of the fall
into Adams first estate, but art in the will worship, beguiling unstable souls
through thy voluntary humility, intruding into those things which thou have not
seen, vainly puffed up by thy fleshly mind, and all may read there were such,
Col. 2 18. and they that are not yet hardened amongst those scattered people,
that were once made tender (by something of God in their consciences which they
knew not) oh I say let them with speed return their minds again to the witness
in them, and that will let them see how the Lords hand is and has been much
against the Baptists since they resisted the light; therefore he has scattered
them so much in their imaginations, that they are divided into opinions like
the Priests, and therefore it is high time for all people that fear the Lord to
come out from among them, and wait in the light of Christ, which would then
appear to lead them out of darkness, by the footsteps of the flock, toward the
rest at Noon, Cant. ^. ^.

The Baptists at that meeting affirmed, that the light which we Preach (whom
they call Quakers) they do deny, and trample under foot, but John Lukes at a
meeting soon after appealed to the light in every ones conseience which Joseph
Fuce spoke of.

A. Here the Baptists has declared the very cause why they are in so much
confusion, errors and Popish Doctrine and lies, and so full of envy and
bitterness of spirit against us the people of the Lord, which bears witness
unto the true light which is Christ, seeing that they deny the light which we
Preach, and trample it under foot (as one of their chief Teachers said) but
another said, he appealed to the light in every ones conscience, which Joseph
Fuce spoke of, which is Christ the true light which lights every man that
comes into the world, John 1. ^. and no other do we Preach to be Christ but he
that said I am the light of the world, he that follows me shall not walk in
darkness but shall have the light of Life, John 8. 12. John 12. 46. which is
Christ the true light which lights every man that comes into the world, John
1. ^. and this is the light which we have Preached up at the right hand of God,
who dwells in his people according to the Scriptures, and no other Christ do we
own but he which all the Prophets bare witness of, and that John said was the
true light, as we have proved very plainly by the Scriptures, and that
thousands of people know which are not come yet to walk in the light, but if
they do not harden themselves but fear the Name of the Lord, in due time they
shall know the rising of the Son of righteousness with healing under his wings,
and the wicked shall be brought down in them and for them, and now all moderate
people may see these Baptists to be blasted with a thick mist, and overcome
with gross darkness, who make it their work to deny the true Christ the Son of
the only true God, and so denies the Father also; for no other light do we
Preach to be the Christ, the Savior, the Son of God; but he that has said I
am the light of the world, and he that believes in him is not condemned, but
he that believes not is condemned already, and this is the condemnation, that
light is come into the world and men love darkness rather then light because
their deed^ are evil, John ^. 19. And here their Teachers are found one against
another about the light, and now people may see the Apostles words are true who
spoke of such boasters, proud blasphemers, having a form of godliness but
denying the power, and now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these
also resist the truth, men of corrupt minds, reproba^e concerning the faith,
But they shall proceed no farther, for their folly shall be made manifest to
all men (that reads this with the light) as theirs also was. 2 Timothy 3. and take
notice what Pet^r says, but there were false Prophets also among the people,
even as there shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in
damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord tha^ bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift d^struction, ^ Pet. ^. 1. and these Baptists that deny the
E^ernal Spirit to be the Savior of the world, and also deny the true light,
and so they now while they are in their form crying up outward things to be
Ordinances for a prerence, and so bring in damnable Heresies. And so did the
Pharisees (that were exceeding wicked) cry up the Temple and such things, and
for a pretense made long prayers, Mat. 23. ^4. But whosoever shall deny me
before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven says
Christ, Mat. 10. 33. therefore be warned in time you that be not past feeling,
for this I know, that it had been good for such wicked blasphemers that they
had never been born, ^hen so lightly and rashly to deny the only Son of God,
which is the light of the world; for he that despised Moses Law dyed without
mercy under two or three witnesses, of how much sorer punishment suppose ye
shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has
counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified as an unholy
thing, and has done despite unto the Spirit of grace, Heb. 1^. 28. 29.

Another Baptist at Nethurst meeting before mentioned affirmed, That Christ was
not a Spirit, and bid one Humphery Killing^eck prove i^ if he co^ld.

Answ. God is a spirit, John 4. 24. and Christ said he and his Father was one,
John ^0. 30. and he is a quickening Spirit the Scripture says, but the Baptist
says he is not a spirit, for they make flesh their arm, and therefore look
without to know him after the flesh, although the Apostles said they were to
know him so no more (mark) Thus says the Lord, Cursed be the man that trusts
in man and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord, for
he shall be like the hea^h in the desert and shall not see when good comes,
J^r. 17. 5. 6. and blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord and whose hope
the Lord is, J^r 17. 7. and the quickening Spirit is both Christ and Lord. Now
concerning Jesus Christ our Lord, h^w he came in the form of a man, or how he
took flesh upon him, he was of the seed of Abraham and David according to the
flesh, and declared to be the Son of God with power according to the Spirit of
holiness by the resurrection from the dead, Romans 1. and when the fullness of
time was come God sent forth his Son born of a Virg^n, and made under the Law,
and then he made himself of no reputation, but Gal. 4.
took upon him the form of a servant, and so came under Tutors and Governors
for a time, in that form of a man, or in that body which was prepared under the
Law, in the time of signs, and types, and figures and shadows of good things
to come, and there was Ci^cumcision without, and Baptism with outward water,
and Synagogues and Temples made with hands, and he like unto other men came
into those things in that body of flesh which he ^ook upon him, and so
fulfilled all those things which did signify of that which is become more
excellent unto us, and so he passed through those things which were but
shadows, and went to his Father from them as a shadow, for it is said a cloud
received him out of their sight, and while he was among them in that form, he
was also rejected and grieved to see their wickedness, in so much that he wept
over them, and was taken by wicked hands and cruc^fied, and put to death, and
slain and pierced by them, and was laid in a Sepulcher (a figure) and rose
again the third day according to the Scriptures, and appeared unto Mary like a
gardener, and also he appeared unto his Disciples in another form, Mark 16. and
so he tasted death for every creature; for in him was life, and the life was
the light of men, and he said, John 10. I lay down my life that I may take it
again, no man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self, I have power to
lay it down, and I have power to take it again; and so he took flesh upon him
and offered once for all, who perfected for ever them John 6.
that are sanctified, but the flesh profits nothing, and he was one with the
Father before the world was made, and he w^nt to the Father again, and was and
is one with the Father, and he and the Father are one, John 1^ ^0. but neither
the Jews nor these Baptists does not see how; for they neither know the Christ
of God nor the Father that say he is not a Spirit, Joh. 8. ^. but the natural
man receives not the things of the Spirit of God for they are foolishness unto
him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor.
^. 1^. and therefore the Baptists being natural says, Christ is not a Spirit,
but they in whom Christ is revealed know him to be a Spirit, as the Apostle
said, and so it is written, The first man Adam was made a living soul, the last
Adam was made a quickening Spirit, ^ Corin. 15. 45. (mark) that you may see how
carnal the Baptists are.

Another Baptist at the aforementioned meeting affirmed, That Christ and God
was not one.

Answ. This is altogether contrary to these Scriptures which are Christ's own
words, read these Scriptures in the light and you need no farther proof, I and
my Father are one, Joh. 10. 30. Holy Father keep through thine own name those
whom thou have given me, that they may be one as we are, Joh. 17. 11. and now
people may see with the light that is risen in the conscience how these
Baptists has separated themselves sensual, having not the Spirit, Jude 19.

And when these Baptists were justly charged with confusion, for speaking three
or four together to one of us, Matthew Caffin said to Joseph Fuce, it was to
make him silent; and also when Matthew Caffin was required to prove what he had
accused us of, or else he had proved himself a false accuser; then Matthew
Caffin Baptist Teacher said, they were fain to cavil hard with us, and many
such like swelling words and boasting false accusations and affirmations
against the truth and us that own it; but their proud boasting words being so
unsavory, I shall not meddle with them all, they are too many, but those that
are so much against the truth, I am constrained to answer for the truths sake,
and in the Power of the Spirit did I justify the truth against its gainsayers
to their faces, and then they fled into confusion and cavilling, making use of
that to make us silent, (as Matthew Caffin said) and all that does understand
the Scriptures of truth knows such there were, and such there are, as Peter
said, There shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in
damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2. 1. Now if their hearts should be vexed,
because their Ezekiel. 3. 9.
folly is so manifested openly, they may blame themselves, for these damnable
heresies were taken from their own mouths at the meeting aforementioned, and
most of them were affirmed by Matthew Caffin one of their chief Teachers, who
said, they were fain to cavil hard, and use confusion to make us silent; who
did then as at other times earnestly contend for the Faith which was once
delivered unto the Jude 3.
Saints; but now mark what James said, But if ye have bitte^, envying and
strife in your hearts, glory not and ly' not against the truth, this wisdom
descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilishs, or where envying
and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work, ^ames 3. 14, 15, 16. And
those Baptists were found boasting themselves enviou^ly, and cavilling hard,
and in confusion, as Matthew Caffin said, and gloried into his own shame, and
the rest of the Baptists that resist the truth, let it be especially to them
that were with him and did not reprove him; such as is here mentioned and
answered, have they often brought forth since they opposed the light and
gainsayed the truth, and so by their fruits are they known unto those that do
not wilfully resist the light.

More of the Baptists Principles declared and affirmed by Matthew Caffin
(Baptist Teacher) at another time and place, as is hereafter mentioned, at
Chichester upon the 30th day of the 3d month, 1659.
MAtthew Caffin affirmed, That Christ and his Spirit was distinct one from the
other; and at a Meeting at Henry Copeses at Ellsted in Surrey he declared and
stood to affirm the same thing again before many people at that Meeting.

Answ. Here this deceiver goes about to divide Christ, or to make people
believe there is a dead Christ without a Spirit, for James says, The body
without the Spirit is dead, James 2. 26. and Christ said, I am alive for
evermore, Rev. 1. 18. and this deceiver has falsely said, we deny the
Resurrection; but now it is fallen upon his own head, for if Christ's body were
without a Spirit, then were it dead according to the Apostles Words, and if he
were dead without a Spirit (according to the Baptists doctrine) then were he
not risen; so in effect he has plainly denied the Resurrection, but if
thousands should deny him, yet he abides faithful and lives forever; you may
take notice there were such that came among the Corinthians that were in
contention, and Paul asked them whether Christ were divided? or was Paul
crucified for them, as if one might be as possible as the other; but of a truth
Christ is not divided, but he is both Lord and Christ, and the Lord is that
Spirit which proceeded from the Father, and went again unto the Father, and he
and the Father is one, and all that does truly and rightly know these things,
they must be converted into the light first, for great is the Mystery of
Godliness. And now if there be any so wilful as not to believe that Matthew
Caffin is a deceiver, by all these forementioned fruits of his, which are
sufficient proofs, (mark) then see how William Jeffery one of his chief
brethren proves plainly that Matthew Caffin is led by the spirit of Antichrist,
and in a very deceitful secret way denies Christ come in the flesh, but that
ignorant envious man William Jeffery did intend that should have been a proof
against us, but it does not at all concern us, for all people that has heard
and rightly understood our Doctrine of Christ and his Spirit, (which is in his
body) they know we have declared Christ to be a quickening Spirit in his body,
and also to be the head of the Church, which is his body, as the Scriptures
says, Ephesians. 5. 30.
Col. 1. 2^. and the Saints were Members of his body, and of his flesh and of
his bones, and he was their head over them and in them all, Col. ^. 11. and so
in his Name and Power do we preach him up to be the light within the body, and
not apart from the body as Matthew Caffin has affirmed him to be distinct the
body from the Spirit; But how fit a proof has William Jeffery brought against
his brother and fellow-messenger Matthew Caffin in the 68 page of their own
book with their names to ^^, in the 68 page William Jeffery his words chiefly
is to prove them to be led by the spirit of error, and the spirit of
Antichrist (mark) that preach up the Spirit of Christ apart from the body or
flesh of Christ, (and as it is before set down) Matthew Caffin did several
times say and affirm, that Christ and his Spirit was distinct one from the
other, and so the one of these proves the other to be a deceiver, (mark)
William Jeffery his words in the 68. page of that book (called the deceiving
Quakers discovered) how plainly he proves his brother a deceiver, and also
himself and the rest of the Baptists, who do generally believe and say that the
body or flesh of Christ is above the skies, in some place they call Heaven, and
his Spirit in them which has been dipped in water, this is generally held forth
by them, and so it is plain they do say the Spirit of Christ is in them a part
from the body, which they say is above the skies in Heaven; but if it were as
they say, then has William Jeffery overthrown their whole faith (which is
vain) and proved them all deceived and deceivers as well as himself and Matthew
Caffin; but with the light all moderate people may see these Baptists to be in
the night (and not to have a Vision) that could not see how William Jeffery
went to overthrow their whole faith, before it came openly forth printed into
the world; but now it is manifested their form is dead, and they in it appear
nakedly, for all their high-swelling words, and to be all deceived and
deceivers; And for Zions sake I cannot hold my peace, the love of God is so
strong in me unto simple-hearted poor Souls, but after the Fathers love is
manifested unto them, and they reject it, then I may say as the Apostle said,
But if any be ignorant let him be ignorant, 1 Cor 1^. 38

At a Meeting at Covole the 28th of the 6th month, 1659. the aforementioned
Matthew Caffin (Baptist Teacher) affirmed, That Christ does not come in us,
that is, in their bodies; and he also said, He d^nied that to be Christ that
was in people, and many words to that effect.

Answ. These Baptists chief Principles are to deny the true Christ, at the
Meetings where they come, and that exceeding boldly and impudently, as all
sober people may see that reads this with the least measure of light; for that
was the true Christ which all the true Prophets bore witness of, and that Moses
writ of to come amongst the people, and h^ did proceed from God, and dwelt
amongst Joh^^ 14.
his Disciples, and they beheld his glory, the glory, as of the only begotten
of the Father full of grace and truth, and he John 14. ^
told his Disciples, he dwells with you and shall be in you, for said he, I
will not leave you comsortless, I will come to you, John 14. 17, 18. and this
was the true Christ the light of the world, and the eye of the body, who
proceeded from the Father, and went unto the Father, and come again unto the
Disciples, which waited to know him that was to come and be in them, and he did
come to them within, and the Antichrists came unto them without, but greater
was he that was in them, then he that was in the world, or they that were
without them, and so by his power in them they withstood the false prophets and
Antichrists, and then went they into the world, 1 John 4. ^. but Christ the Son
whom the Father sent to be the Savior of the world, was then come again
according to his former promise, and was in them and they in him, as it was
said in John 14. 20. and if you that read this, do not believe he did come
again so soon to them, see what John says, And we know the Son of God is come,
and has given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we
are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ, this is the true God and
Eternal life, ^ John 5. 20. and so the Scriptures testify of him to come and
be in his Disciples, and they in him; but the Baptists says plainly, he is not
come in their bodies, and that is the ground why they are so enraged like the
troubled Sea, because they have resisted him that said, Behold, I stand at the
door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come into
him, Rev. 3. 20. but the Baptists has kept him out, and so are Reprobates
concerning the Faith which he works in them that receive him at his coming;
and the Apostles bid the Corinthians examine themselves whether they were in
the Faith, Prove your own selves, know you not your own s^lves how that Jesus
Christ is in you except you be Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13 5. and now all may see
that they were Reprobates that d^d not know Jesus Christ in them, and so are
these Baptists now that do not know Jesus Christ in them, and now is it seen
and proved plainly that these Baptists are led by the spirit of Antichrist in a
reprobate state, not confessing Christ to be come in the flesh, but denying him
in themselves, which is the very cause why they so wilfully resist and gainsay
him in others, where he is come up a swift witness against unrighteousness; and
so according to the Scriptures it is proved that the true Christ did come and
dwell with his Disciples in the form of the flesh, and did go away unto the
Father, and came again unto his Disciples according to his promise, and they
knew he was come in them to dwell, but this was not after the flesh, for they
were to know him so no more, but as he appeared, they were to see him as he is,
1 John 3. 2. and they did know him come in them a quickening Spirit, for by him
were they quickened who had been dead in trespasses and sins, he that reads with
the light may understand.

And now I shall prove again he does not only deny Christ to be come in their
bodies or flesh, but he also denies that to be the Christ that was in people;
and now if you will at all regard the Scriptures of truth, with the light you
shall see how plainly ^ shall prove out of the Scriptures that to be the true
Christ the Son of the only true God that was in people, that you may all see
how the Baptists has denied both the Father and the Son, and would go on
deceiving and being deceived.

First see what Christ says unto his Disciples, At that day ye shall know that
I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you, (Mark that) John. 4. 2. and so
it is plain that Christ said they should know him in them which was the true
Christ which lights every man that comes into the world; and Paul to Timothy
said, Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ
might show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should
hereafter believe on him to life everlasting, 1 Timothy 1. 16. here the Apostle
speaks of the true Christ suffering in him, and first to show it forth for a
pattern (mark that) and Paul told the Galathians what a persecutor he had been
of those that preached in the Name of Christ, while he was among the professing
Jews; But when it pleased God who separated me from my mothers womb, and called
me by his gace to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the
Heathen, Gal. 1. 15, 16. and Christ was in them the Hope of Glory; and the
Apostle said, Little children of whom I travel in birth again until Christ be
form^^ in you, Gal. 4. 12. and again the Apostle said, but that with all
boldness, as always, so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether
it be by life or by death, Philip. 1. 20. and God was their Father, who was
above all, and through all, and in Ephesians. ^ ^
them all, and Christ was at the right hand of God in them all, and Christ
lived in Paul, and he said, The life that I now live in the flesh, I live by
the Faith of the Son of God, Galat. 2. 20. Many more Scriptures might be
brought to prove that Christ was in people, whom the Father sent to be the
only Savior of the world; and that was the true Christ which was in them, and
they were in him, as John said, He is come that is true, and we are in him that
is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 5. 20. but these Bap^ists have
denied him to be the Christ, And them will he deny before his Father which is
in Heaven, Matthew. 10 33. And so you may see how the Baptists preaches Christ
in words, but now when they are tried they deny him to be come in them, and
also deny him in all others; and now it may be said by some (that are ignorant
of the things of God) that Christ did say unto his Disciples, He would go away
and come to them again, and be in them; and that the Apostle said, He was come,
and was in them; but yet they speak of his coming to Judgment, and also of
their waiting for him until he did come, and all this is true.

I shall answer it in short for the truths sake; all that did wait and watch in
a readiness for his coming in them, they knew his appearance in them, and also
the Resurrection from the dead without, for he was manifest with them and
revealed in them, and they preached him so to come in like manner unto others;
and the Apostle bid them watch and wait for his coming, and the Apostles
themselves did meet with such, and wait with them for his coming, and hoped to
see him appear in them in due time unto whom he had been preached, and among
whom they had labored; and the Apostle Paul said, My little children of whom I
travel in birth again until Christ be formed in you, Gal. 4. 19. and so they
looked for his coming into them, and for his appearance, even as we do now (in
whom he is come to rule in our hearts) and the Apostles did look, and we do
look for his coming in the Clouds of Heaven, and all his holy Angels with him
at the last to Judge the secrets of men, according to the everlasting Gospel;
and this is the Word of truth to all that can recieve it.

And now all you simple-hearted people which desire to know the truth
concerning water baptism, and breaking of outward bread, whether you have been
dipped or would be dipped, if you were sure God did require it of you, who have
thought or do think water baptism and breaking of outward bread had been
commands of Christ to his Disciples after his Resurrection, and so to all
believers after the Apostles decease.

And now in the fear of the Lord lend your ear and hearken diligently that your
Souls may live, for in true love and pity unto your poor Souls do I write unto
you of these things, even as it has been manifested unto me in the light which
gives the true knowledge of the things of God unto they that are spiritual; And
by the Revelation of the Spirit I have perfect knowledge given unto me of those
things which the natural man does not know, because they are spiritually
discerned, and revealed by the Spirit unto the Children of the Lord, to the
praise and glory of our God, and to the comfort of their Souls which are
redeemed out of death, to re^oyce in God the Savior for ever.

And when there does arise in you a desire to read and understand these things,
then let your minds be turned unto the light of Christ in your Consciences,
which is so freely given unto you, for to make manifest that which may be known
of God unto you, and in you, (mark) and when the mind is turned unto the light,
then will the darkness and ignorance be manifested to be within, which is the
very cause why people does not rightly understand the things of God when they
speak or read of them with their minds blinded, and the nobility of their
understandings clouded with enmity against the light, and therefore does not
know those things they read or speak of (but naturally as bruit beasts) yet
will they be judging or saying this or that is their Judgment or Opinion;
then, when they are contradicted, they wring or wrest the Scriptures (to their
own destruction) thinking thereby to uphold their Opinion, and so to get
victory over one another, such is the Pharisee practice, who love to have the
praise of men (in these our days;) and therefore now you simple-hearted that
would walk in the right way but do not know it, I do write unto you, that you
may not be hasty, and so run rashly into any opinion, but believe in the light
in your own Conscience, for he that Isa 28. 16.
believes shall not make haste, and then waiting in the light, the power of
God will arise in due time, and rent the veil, and overturn the dark
mountains, and so may you come to Romans 14. 5
be persuaded in your minds; and such was the Apostles Doctrine when there was
striving or contending about days, even as there is among the chief Baptists
now; and so now people may see the Baptists are gone into Opinions and Sects
like the Priests, some for one thing and some for another, one Sect for free
Will and another for Election (as they call them) and another Sect of them are
among the shadows and figures observing the seventh days for their sabbath,
which God gave unto the Children of Israel for a sign, Ezekiel. ^0. 1^. and the
Apostle said unto the Colossians, Let no man therefore Judge you in meat or in
drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath day,
which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ, Colos. 2. 16,
17. Now they that do not go into the observation of the Sabbaths cannot be
Judged in them by any man, (mark that) but the Apostle Judged some among the
Galatians, saying, Ye observe days and months, I am afraid of you least I
have bestowed my labor in vain, Gal. 4. 1^. for his labor was to bring them
out of the observation of days, and outward things, to Christ within, who is
Lord of all days, yea he is and shall be known Lord of all, and therefore it is
his right to Rule over all when he comes, and therefore be not offended when he
would arise to Rule and Reign in you, for blessed are they that are not
offended in him, who has born the iniquity of us all, and he lights every
man that comes into the world, and that light is the Law of the Spirit, which
is of him, and this Law is their Teacher that love it and are guided by it out
of darkness unto Christ, which is the Lawgiver, that takes away the sin, and
fulfills the righteousness of the Law in man, and then man is at the end of the
Law, with Christ, who brings in Grace and Peace and everlasting righteousness,
within them that first become obedient Gal. 3. 24.
unto the Law which is light within, which was our Schoolmaster and the
Apostles Schoolmaster to bring them to Christ, who fulfilled those visible
things in which he was in, and passed through, for in the time of Circumcision
when eight days were accomplished for the Circumcising of the Child, they
called his Name Jesus, Luke 2. 21. and he was baptized of John in Jordan, for
so he came unto John to fulfill that Ministration as well as Circumcision, but
John would not a had it so, yet Christ said suffer it to be so now, for thus it
becomes us to fulfill all righteousness; and when he was baptized, then was not
that fulfilled? (mark) straight way he went out of the water, Mat. ^. 16. then
began John's Baptism to decrease, and Christ's Baptism to increase which was more
excellent, and so after Christ ha^ been in the Synagogues and Temple made with
hands and in water Baptism, he came Mat. 23. 38.
out of them, and said behold your house is left unto you desolate, and he came
straight way out of the water, and left them there that would not leave that
and follow him the fulfiller of all th^se things, into the Kingdom of rest and
peace Joh. 3. 15. Pet. 4. 7.
for ever, (Mark) then they that abode in the Temple-worship cried the Temple
of the Lord, yet were in envy against Christ the Lord of all who left their
Temple desolate; and they that were baptized (after a little time) ran into
contentions, because Christ was not among them in the water to keep them out of
the contention, but then he had left both Temple and water, and they that did
not leave those things to follow him who is the Prince of peace, they were and
are in the contention, in and about those things which were fulfilled, because 1
Cor. 1^ 11. 1 Cor. 3. ^.
Christ the Prince of peace was not with them, then to keep them out of the
strife contention and envy which they were in that did not follow Christ, who
went straightway out of the water, and out of the Temple and Synagogues and
left them desolate.

But if any of you tender hearted ones should be ^u^stioning, whether Christ
did not command water Baptism afterwords unto his Disciples when he sent them
forth to Preach and Teach.

Now be low with your minds turned in to the light, waiting in the fear of the
Lord, that you may be the si^^er to understand my answer, which shall be unto
you according to the Scriptures, and I hope shall be plain to satisfy all
reasonable moderate people concerning water Baptism. For verily I say unto you
I had never any command from the Lord to be baptized with outward water neither
to Baptize any creature in outward water, but the Lord has commanded me to do
that which is far greater and much more harder to the creature, but by the
power of his Spirit in the light was I made able to do it, yet of my self have
I nothing to boast of, because the work is the Lords, and the power by which it
is done, and I his servant have said unto some of those Baptists Teachers, if
they could prove water Baptism to be a command of Christ in this day, I should
own it, but they could never yet bring me any Scripture (that would serve for a
plain proof) without wresting, and also I have searched the Scriptures in which
I find written how Christ sent forth many Disciples then, as now also, and I do
not find any where in the Scriptures that he sent them to Baptize in water
after John's Baptism decreased, there is in Matthew the 10. Mark 6. Luke ^. and
10. Chapters, how Christ sent forth many Disciples and commanded them what they
should do in his Name, but water Baptism is not mentioned there; but if any
should say he baptized then himself, for he was not crucified then,

I answer and say, he did baptize, but his Baptism was not with water but with
the Holy Ghost and with fire, Mat. 3. 11. and Christ said verily, verily I say
unto you, he that believes on me, the works that I do shall he do also, and
greater works then these shall he do, because I go unto my Father, John 14. 12.
and so it does appear John's Ministry of Baptism was with water but Christ's with
the Spirit, for he both Circumcised the heart and ears, and baptized with the
Holy Ghost and with fire, which were spiritual things, and the Apostle said
therefore seeing we have this Ministry as we have received mercy we faint not,
for they were believers, 2 C^r. ^. 1.
and were to do the same works that Christ did, and so as he did so were they
to do by the power of his Spirit in them; and all those that believed, and came
to be of the body (after Christ Ascended up on high) they were all baptized by
one spirit into one body, the first of the Corinthians 12. 13. And the spirit
was with them, and they with the spirit did bring or baptize into the one body,
by the power and sword of the spirit which is the Word of God which they
handled, so it is plain their works were spiritual, and their weapons were not
carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.
4. and they Ministered spiritual things, 1 Cor 9. 11. and consider rightly that
place of Scripture the 28. of Matthew which the Baptists so often has brought
to prove water Baptism to be a command of Christ to his Disciples, but that
Scripture does not at all speak of water, and they are not only wrong in
putting water in the room of the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, but
also in their not going forth into all the world to Preach the Gospel to every
creature, for so was that command, Mark 16. 15. And it is said, go ye therefore
and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28. ^9. (Mark) there is nothing spoken at all
of water, but there Christ commands them to teach and baptize in the Name of
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, which Name saves, for his Name is exalted
above evety name, and is a strong Tower, and the righteous flee unto it and are
safe, and so they Pro 18. 10. Phil. 2. 9.
were to bring into or baptize in that which saved and kept them safe that
believed through the Preaching of the Gospel in the Name and power of God; but
the Baptists say they that believe should be baptized with water, as if there
were no difference between the Name that saves and a little water, which can
do no more then the Hypocrites did which made clean the outside, but were as
filthy within as the Baptists are that are against the spirit and life it self,
for it is not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 21. and the Apostle
said there was one Lord, one Faith, Ephesians. 4. ^^
one Baptism, and the spiritual Baptism is the only Baptism which by the power
and the operation of the spirit that was in the Apostles they brought people
into the one body which Christ was the head of, and they baptized them in the
Name, and there would Christ be in the midst of them that met in his Name, to
keep them in unity and peace, for he is the Prince of Mat. 18. 2^. Isa. 9. 6.
peace, but those Baptists that are in contention among themselves, and in
confusion some for one thing and some for another, some observing one day for a
Sabbath, and some observing another, they may perhaps have been baptized in
water, but I am sure they are not baptized by the one spirit into one body and
Name of Christ, for then would Christ be in the midst of them, to keep peace
among them, but there is bitterness, strife and contention in the midst of
them, and Christ said unto them that were baptized in his Name, and were to
bapti^e in his Name, whatsoever they ask of the Father in his Name they should
receive it, and now let all the tender hearted Baptists be awakened to search
and examine themselves whether they be in the faith; and have asked of God in
the Name, or out of the Name of Christ; They sur^ly do know whether they have
received that which they have asked for or not, and so may they come to know
whether they have been baptized as Christ commanded in Mat. 28. or as the
Baptists teachers has imagined, and so they have wrested that Scripture as
they do others to their own destruction, and thereby has deceived many others,
making them believe water is there included, or that is a command for water,
when water is not so much as mentioned there, but the Name which saves all that
are in it (mark) how plain the Scriptures proves a great difference between
water Baptism and the Baptism in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
for there were some in the Apostles days that after they did believe were
baptized into John's Baptism, but they had not heard of the holy Ghost (mark)
how they might have bin deceived with John's Baptism had not they come to Paul
who examined them about the matter, and found how they were led back into John's
Baptism, and then he taught them, and then they were baptized in the Name of
the Lord Jesus; for it is said concerning Paul when he came to Ephesus, and
finding certain Disciples, he said unto them, Have ye received the Holy Ghost
since ye believed? and they said unto him, we have not so much as heard whether
there be any holy Ghost; and Paul said unto them, unto what then were you
baptized? and they said unto John's Baptism; then said Paul, John verily
baptized with the Baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, that they
should believe on him that should come after him, that is on Christ Jesus; when
they heard this, they were baptized into the Name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 19.
from the first to the fifth verse, and now see whether the chief Baptists have
not need to be taught and baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, for all their
water Baptism, which was John's Ministration? and now concerning other
Scriptures which has been brought by the Baptists, as the 10. of the Acts,
where Peter asked a question indeed about water, but commanded them to be
baptized in the Name of the Lord, and Philip Baptized the Eunuch in water but
the name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost is not mentioned there, see Acts 8.
38. so it is plain there is a destinction and great difference between water
Baptism, and the Baptism of the spirit, or in the name that saves, but some
may say there was water spoken of, and practiced by some, I say yes, they did
in their freedom use water baptism, which was John's Ministration, and Paul (who
was not behind the very chiefest Apostle) for he said he labored more then
them all, yet not I (said he) but the Grace of God which was in him, and he did
Baptize Crispus and Gains and also the household of Stephanus he baptized, but
yet he thanks God he baptized no more of them, for he said Christ sent him not
to baptize, but to Preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1. 17. and now it is plain if it
could be proved that some of the Apostles were sent to Baptize with water, that
would be nothing to them now that speak of baptizing with water, for what would
that be to those Baptists which dippeth in water now, seeing Paul, (who after
them that Christ spoke to in Mat. 28.) was made an able Minister of the Gospel
by the Revelation of Christ in him, and Christ sent him among the Gentiles or
heathen, not to Preach up water Baptism, and so to bring them into the water,
(mark) but to Preach the Name of Christ among the Gentiles, and to bring them
into the name which saved them, and so all people that does understand those
things may see all that ever the Baptists have done is but by immetation
according to their imaginations, for if that which the Baptists bring for the
proof of their command to Baptize did not reach unto Paul, who was so eminent,
surely it does not reach unto these Baptists, but Paul did Circumcise, and
baptize by permission for a time as it does appear, that he might win the more
out of those old things (which was to pass away) unto Christ that makes old
things away, and then the new creature is witnessed which avails, for it is
said neither Circumcision nor uncircumci^ion availech but a new creature, Gal.
6. 15. and so people may understand wherefore Paul (as well as others) did
baptize, although they might not be sent to Baptize nor Circumcise, yet he did
both, for he became all things to all that he might win some out of all, unto
Christ the end of all things, that was to stand but their time, but when the
Baptists were in strife, one for Paul and others for Apollo and Cephas, but
then they were carnal, 1 Cor. 3. 3. and then Paul told those Baptists plainly
he was not sent to Baptize, 1 Cor. 1. 17. and 1 Cor. 1. 12.
some went to subvert those believers (that were turned from among the Gent^les
nnto God) saying they must be Circumcised after the manner of Moses, or else
they could not be saved, but when the Apostles and Elders, and brethren, and
the whole Church was met together at Jerusalem (and when they had conf^rred
about the matter, it seemed good unto the Holy Ghost and unto them to write
letters and send them with chosen men, unto An^ioch, and this was the substance
(which is there mentioned) of their letters, to let them know, they gave no
such command for Circumcision, or such things, (mark) and how they laid no
greater burden upon them then these necessary things, saying that if ye abstain
from meats offered to Idols, and from blood, and from things strangled and from
fornication, from which if you keep your selves, ye shall do well, fare ye
well, Acts 15. 25. and here you may see there was neither Circumcision, nor
observing the seventh day for a Sabbath, neither water Baptism or any such
things laid upon the Church that from among the Gentiles were turned unto God,
neither by the Holy Ghost, nor the general Assembly of Saints at Jerusalem, and
therefore if any come among the people now, to cry up Circumcision or water
Baptism to be a command of Christ to us, because there was Circumcision with
hands and water Baptism practiced before Christ's Resurrection, and after by the
Apostles, yet the Scripture says no greater burden then these necessary
things before mentioned in Acts 15. for we see now the Circumcision is that of
the heart, and the Baptism is with the spirit in the name which saves, and so
now there is no need of those old outward things because the end of them is
come within, which is Christ the better hope, and his B^ptism is with the
spirit into the one body, and his Circumcision is of the heart and ears, and so
he sits the true worshippers to worship the Father in the spirit and in the
truth, and such are built upon the Rock (which the gates of Hell cannot prevail
against) and therefore cannot be moved when the sects of the Baptists or
Priests, or they of the Circumcision comes like the troubled Seas foaming out
their own Jude 1^.
shame against the Lamb and his followers who gets the victory over all through
sufferings, and blessed are all those that wa^teth in the patience faithful
unto the end.

And now concerning outward bread and wine, which the Papists and the several
Sects of the Priests, and likewise the Sects of the Baptists use concerning and
pertaining to their worship, some calling of it the Sacrament, and some the
Lords Supper, and every one uses those good creatures according to their vain
imaginations, and every Sect of them counts their own way right, to use bread
and wine and Pro. 16. 2
water, concerning their worship both Papists and Baptists, and all the other
Sects of Priests which cry up visible things to be Ordinances of Christ
pertaining to their worship, and such worships now is not the true worship of
the true God the Father, for he is and ought to be worshipped in the Spirit and
in the truth; and all that are out of the Spirit in the visible bread and wine
and water, they are the false worshippers, both Papists and other Sects as well
as they, for they are all subject to the creatures more then to the Creator,
who is worshipped in Spirit and in truth, and all the Statutes and Ordinances
(after the fall into the transgression) in reference to visible things
pertaining to the Worship of God in those forms, was ordained in time for to
stand their time as shadows, types and figures of good things to come in due
time, and the end of all those things did come, and those that did not know the
end of all those things come, to redeem the mind to God in due time (mark they
Idolized them, and they were their Idols, set up out of their time by the
Idolatrous worshippers, H^o. (...) 2^. 1 Cor. 12. 31.
for in due time God sent forth his Son, (a more excellent way) a new and
living way, and they that received him in due time he changed them out of the
old things which had their time to be set up and to stand until fulfilled, and
then it was time for them to fall and have an end when Christ had been in them,
and fulfilled them, and was come out of them again, and then will-worshippers
they sought to hold them up out of their time, and thereby drew people from
Christ into those things; but Christ called out of those things to take up the
Cross and follow him who fulfilled those things, and he sent (those that
followed him) forth to call others, which were without ready to perish with
those things, and therefore to come into the Fathers house, for all things were
ready there, and they that would not forsake those things and come into Christ
where all things was ready, they should Luke 14.
not taste of the Supper; and it is said as they were eating, Jesus took bread
and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it unto his Disciples, and said, Take
eat, this is my body, and he took the Cup and gave thanks, and gave it to them,
saying, Drink ye all of it, for this is my blood of the New Testament which is
shed for many, for the remission of sins, Matthew. 26. 26. 1 Cor. 11. 24.

And now both Papists and Baptists, and many other carnal-minded people
imagines that bread and the cup of Blessing to be outward bread and wine, and
therefore they will be eating and drinking outward bread and wine, and when
they have been asked to prove their practice to be a Command of Christ by the
Scripture, then they have run to those Scriptures as if they would have proved
something for them, but we find those Scriptures to be against them, for there
it is said in Matthew. ^6. 1 Cor. 11. The Bread was his body which was broken for
them, and the Cup was his blood which was shed for the remission of sins, but
the natural man does not know the things of God, because they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2 1^. and so they eat visible creatures, and do not dicern
the Lords Body; now the visible bread and drink is for the satisfying the
hunger and thirst of the visible body, being received in the fear of the Lord;
but the bread of life, and the fruit of the heavenly Wine does satisfy the
hungry Soul, and the immortal Soul that hungereth and thirsts after
righteousness cannot be satisfied without that Bread of Life and Blood which
Christ gave unto his Disciples, and with the light you may easily perceive that
proved to be the spiritual meat, for Christ said, I am the Bread which came
down from Heaven, John 6. 41. but that troubled the professing Jews, even as
our words of Truth does trouble both Papists and the rest of the Sects that use
visible bread, and set that in stead of the invisible Bread of God which came
down from Heaven and gives life unto the world, John 6. 33. and when we say the
bread and drink which Christ gave unto his Disc^ples was his body and blood
according to the Scriptures, then they wonder, and some of them has said, how
could he give them his body to eat and drink? and such was the Jews carnal
reason, when Christ said, The bread that I will give, is my John 6. 52
flesh; then the Jews strove among themselves, saying, How can this man give us
his flesh to eat? then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily I say unto you,
except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no
life in you, John 6, 51, 52, 53. but this was a hard saying unto the Jews, and
also to the Disciples that looked without at the flesh and blood that was
visible, insomuch that many were offended and went back, and walked no more
with Jesus, for he said unto them, Does this offend you? What and if you shall
see the Son of man ascend up where he was before, it is the Spirit that
quickneth, the flesh profits nothing, the words that I speak unto you they
are Spirit, and they are Life, verse. 63. and so he did give his body and blood,
and life unto his Disciples, as he said in Matthew. 26. for he had life in
himself to give John 5. 26.
unto whom he would, and unto this agree those Scriptures which speaks of
heavenly and spiritual gifts that were given unto the Saints which were to feed
the flock of God with that which they had received, and they did feed some with
the milk of the Word that were as new born babes, and 1 Cor 3 ^. Heb ^ 1^.
some with strong meat as they were able to bear it; and so they broke bread,
or divided the Word aright as good stewards of the manifold grace of God, 1
Pet. 4. 10 and so that which they received of the Lord they ministered unto
others 1 Timothy 2. 15.
according to their gift or ability, as Paul said (after he had asked the
Corinthians whether they had not houses to eat and to drink in) For I have
received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, 1 Cor. 11. 23. and
they had received the word of reconciliation, and the life and truth it self,
and that they declared and delivered a right according to every ones ability,
and so they break bread from house to house as Acts 2. 46.
the Scripture says, And they kept the Feast, but not with the ^^aven of
malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of s^ncerity and truth, 1
Cor.^. ^. and this was their manner of breaking of bread, or ministering
spiritual things, who did not handle the Word of God deceitfully, but divided
that a right which they had seen, tasted and handled, which was 2 C^r. 4. 2.
Heb. 6 5, 1 John 1. 1.
good unto them, whose affections were set upon things above those natural
things which the natural man looks at.

Now you may see there is not a word in Scripture that ever Christ or the
Apostles did Command breaking of outward visible bread, but Christ (whose Words
were Spirit and Life) said, I am the bread that came down from Heaven, that a
man may eat of and not dye; again he said, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son
of man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, John 4. and the true
worshippers worship the Father in Spirit and in truth, and he that eats of
Christ's body (the bread of Life) shall live by him, said Christ, John 6. 57.
and he said the bread that he brake and gave to his Disciples was his body, and
the cup was his blood which he gave them, then (mark) what he said, But I say
unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine until that day
when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom, John. 5. 1. and he that
will drink of the fruit of this vine with Christ, must first come into the
Kingdom of God, for there is the Throne and Table of the Lord known; and when
one of them that sat at meat with him heard these things, he said unto him,
Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God, Luke 14. 15. Here it
speaks of eating and drinking in the Kingdom of God, but the natural Jews and
Baptists does not know how those things should be, because they are spiritually
discerned, and so they deceive themselves and others, that set up and cry up
visible things in the room of that which is invisible, and such beguile people
in a voluntary humility, intruding into those things which they have not seen,
vainly puffed up by their fleshly, earthly and sensual knowledge, and not holding
the head, such the Apostle Pa^l speaks of to the C^l^ssians, that they might
beware of them, saying, Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments
of the world, why as though living in the world are ye subject to Ordinances?
touch not, taste not, handle not, which all are to perish with the using after
the commandments and doctrines of men, which things have indeed a show of
wisdom, in will worship and humility, and neglect of the body, Col 2. And so in
love and pity unto poor Souls have I freely declared and rightly proved that
which first I received of the Lord in the Light which gives the right
understanding, h^ that can receive them, let him do it freely in the Light.

THE END.

