A Full and Perfect RELATION OF A Great and Signal Victory Gained by the
English and Hollanders OVER THE FRENCH.
Translated out of Dutch.
Licensed,

August 24. 1689.


TWO such great Armies as those of the Prince of Waldeck, and of the Marshall
D' Humieres being so nigh each other, as our late Relations have informed us,
it could not well be expected they should be long in such a Posture without
entering upon Action: And accordingly we have now an Account of a considerable
Rencounter that happened between them, on the 25 of August, N. S. wherein the
French were the Aggressors, but to their own loss, as you may see by the Letter
which the Prince of Waldeck writ to the States General, and which he sent them
by an Express. The Letter is as follows:

Highty and Mighty Lords,
UPon the Advice we received this Morning, That the Marshall D' Humieres was
upon his March with his whole Army, which within a few days had been Re
enforced with Six Thousand Men, we fired some Pieces of Cannon, to intimate
this motion to a great party of Your Lordships Army, which was gone out to
Forage: In the mean while the Vanguard of the Enemy attacked the Village
Forge, where were Posted Eight Hundred Foot, to cover the Forragers; they were
Commanded by the English Colonel Hodges, by Lieutenant-Collonel Goes, and by
the Major of the Regiment of Hesse; this Attack lasted Two Hours, and our Men
behaved themselves with an unexpressible Courage, until such time as that
Monsieur Roo, Major of Horse, who had been sent to bring back the
Lieutenant-Generals, Webbenum, Marlborough, and D'Hubi, with the Forragers came
in to their Succors with some Gavalry; then our Men fought Retreating against
the whole French Army which came pouring upon them, until that they came to a
rising Ground near the little City of Walcour, where we had posted a Battalion
of the Troops of Lunenburg, which was also Reinforced with another of Colonel
Holle; The French attacked this City with the utmost fury during Two Hours and
a half. Lieutenant General Ailva advanced to Succor it, with Three Regiments,
of which he had detached that of the Brigadier Talmusch: Lieutenant General
Marlborough followed with the English Horse Life-Guards, and Two English
Regiments: Major General Slangenburg advanced also with some Detachments of
Foot on the other side of the Town, which caused the French to retire in such
great confusion, that they abandoned their Canon and their Powder, with a vast
number of Dead and Wounded, of whom we know not yet precisely the number. In
this Occasion we took a great many Prisoners, of the number of whom are Three
Captains of the Guards, and Monsieur D' Artignan, Commanding the Guards. After
their Retreat, Two Drums came to demand of us a Suspension of Arms, for the
carrying off their Dead and for the looking after their Wounded: They informed
us, That Six Battalions of the Guards, who were present in this Action, were
for the most part defeated. The loss on our side is not considerable, saving
Lieutenant-Collonel Graham in the English Troops, and the Major of the Dragoons
of Zell, who were killed; and a Captain and a Lieutenant, with some of our
Forragers, who were snapt up by the Enemy; and there were but very few killed
or wounded in the City. After that the French were Retreated, our Troops
continued in their Posts till Night. The Count De Nassaw, Marshall De Camp,
and all the other Generals, and Officers behaved themselves extremely well in
this Occasion: All the Soldiers showed extraordinary Courage, as well as
Eagerness to be engaged with the Enemy. The Victory would not have stopped here,
if we could have pursued the Enemy further; but the Situation of the Ground
was an invincible Obstacle to the Pursuit. The English did more particularly
Signalize themselves in this Action, having given singular Proofs of their
Bravery. I congratulate your Lordships upon the good Success of this Encounter,
hoping that God will further Bless your Arms after a more peculiar manner, as
well as your Government. I am, etc.

From the Camp near Thill. Chasteau, Aug. 25. 1689. very late at Night.

At the bottom of this Letter which was made public by Order of the State,
there is another from an Officer of the Army to one of his Friends, dated
Friday morning on the 26th. of this Month S. N. It says, that they had been all
the Night at their Arms, and that Prince Waldeck had spent the Night in his
Coach, visiting the Camp, and giving the necessary Orders in this Conjuncture.
That they were informed the Enemies had lost Two thousand Men. That at the
moment this was writing they heard Firing, and that it was believed some
Parties were again engaged. And that in short it was not doubted but that the
French would seek to take their Revenge. It is observable that the English and
French Guards were Engaged against each other, and that Fortune still continued
to decide in favor of the former. The French Army is said to consist of 34000
Men.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE History of Gustavus Adolphus, Surnamed The Great King of Sweden, together
with the Life and Reign of His Successor after Christina Carolus Gustavus
Count Palatine. Translated out of French by Ferrand Spence Servant to Their
Majesty's. Sold by R. Clavil, W. Not, D. Newman, T. Dring. S. Crouch, and J.
Hindmarsh, and most other Booksellers. The True Interests of the Princes of
Europe in the Present State of Affairs to oppose the French King: Or
Reflections upon a Pamphlet written in Frinch, Entitled, A Letter from
Monsieur, to Monsieur, concerning the Transactions of the Time. Printed for
Sam. Crocch. The Dilucidator: Or, Reflections upon Modern Transactions, By way
of Letters from a Person at A^sterdam, to his Friend in London. Published
weekly. London: Printed and are to be Sold by R. Tailor. at Stationers Hall.
London: Printed for S. Crouch, at the corner of Pope's Head Ally, over against
the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. MDCLXXXIX.


