PROPOSALLS Of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, AND The General Council of
the ARMY, Held at Windsore, December. 23. 1647. UPON The late Resolutions in
Parliament, for bringing in the six Months Arreares of Assessements by the 15.
of January next, and for the taking off Free Quarter, and Disbanding. Also some
particular exceptions against the Billetting of Soldiers only in Innes,
Tavernes and Alehouses, with their Desires thereupon. Presented to both Houses
of Parliament, by Colonel Sir Hardresse Waller, Friday December. 24. 1647. With
a Letter from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, to the honorable William
Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of COMMONS.

BY the Appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the General
Council of the Army. Jo. Rushworth, Secretary.

London: Printed by Robert Austin. 1646.

Mr. Speaker,
AT a General Council of the Army this day held, the enclosed Particulars
were agreed upon to be represented to the Parliament, which I humbly desire may
be taken into consideration; and remain

Your humble Servant, Thomas Fairfax.
Windsore, 23. December. 1647.
For the honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the honorable House
of Commons.
Proposalls of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the general Council of
the Army: Held at Windsore December. 23. 1647.
Presented to both Houses of Parliament, by Colonel Sir Hardresse Waller, 24.
December. 1647.

UPon the late Resolutions in Parliament concerning the taking away of
Free Quarter, and disbanding supernumeraries, we find diverse things which
require a further consideration, in order to the more secure and effectual
dispatch of that work, wherein we shall shortly offer our humble Advise and
desires.

But at present we find an immediate necessity, to take notice of what has
past on Tuesday last the 21. instant, in an Ordinance prepared for the bringing
in of six months Arreares of Assessement by the 15. of January next; and for
the taking away of Free Quarter thereupon: wherein we observe,

1. It is provided and ordained, That no Officer or Soldier, shall enter into
the House of any person or persons who shall duly pay their Assessement,
without his consent, except Innes, Tavernes, Victualling-Houses or Alehouses.

2. Nor shall take away Victuals, or other provisions for Horse or Man,
without consent of the owner, and due satisfaction given to him for the same.

As to the first of these, we must desire the Houses to consider, That if the
Soldiery must not have so much as Lodging or Stable room, but at Innes and
Alehouses without the owners consent: it will follow,

1. That is like to fall out oft-times, and in many Towns, that there will be
more Men or Horse to Quarter, then the Innes, or Alehouses have room for.

2. That Soldiers must either pay for their victual and horse meat at such
rates as the Innes where they quarter will reckon, as to other guests, or else
give large satisfaction to the Inne-keeper for their lodging and stable room,
so as they may have liberty to take their victual and horsemeat at other
places where they can agree for it cheaper; otherwise an Inne-keeper where the
lodging or stable-roome is taken up by Soldiers, will lose the whole benefit
of his Inn, which is his livelihood: And if the soldier either must pay the
Inne-keeper at the rates of other guests, or satisfy him for his lodging and
stable-roome at such rates as to countervaile his ordinary gain, It is most
evident, that the Soldiers whole pay, nor scarce the double of it, would not
satisfy at such rates, and unless either the pay, or way of Quarter be such,
as that the Soldier may above the charge of his victual or Horse-meat, save
something for other uses, we believe few Soldiers will be found to serve,
that intend to be honest.

And we fear the Soldiery that shall consider the consequences of these
limitatitions of Quarter, may be too apt to misunderstand it, as if those that
shall not have the benefit of disbanding now as Supernumeraries, should be left
to be worse then disbanded, even to be necessitated to a sudden dissolution,
without any benefit of Conditions at all.

For our parts, if it be found that the safety and quiet of the Kingdom will
admit it, we shall be as ready to disband all as any: but whilst the
Parliament finds cause to continue any Forces in the Kingdom, we must
earnestly desire, they may have that allowance of necessary billet which is
allowed in all Nations where any Soldiers are kept, and particularly, that
they may still be allowed lodging and stable-roome at such houses where they
shall by order be duly and equally billetted.

To the second particular in the Ordinance aforementioned, we are well
satisfied and presume all Soldiers will be content (when they shall be duly
supplied with pay in hand wherewithal) to pay for their victuals and
horse-meat at such rates as they can agree upon: only we must desire, these
cases may be provided for;

1. That for the first fortnight after the Soldiery shall be drawn into
Towns and Garrisons, and until the Parliament shall there supply them with
pay, (as in our late Propositions to the Commissioners) they may have horse
meat and man's meat at the places where they shall be billetted, at the rates
allowed for the Army, which the Officers are to undertake to see paid.

2. That upon all occasions of Marching where any Soldiers shall by Order be
billeted (not lying above two nights at a place) they may have their diet at
the same rates, and Horse meat also, if the Landlord have it of his own.

By the appointment of his Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the General
Council of the Army. Jo. Rushworth Secretary.
Windsore 23. December. 1647.
FINIS.

