SEVERAL LETTERS SENT From His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, AND The Officers
of the Army.

TO THE Right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
LONDON, in Common Council ASSEMBLED.

With their Answer to the said Letters.

Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of London, 1647.

royal blazon or coat of arms
FOR THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the
City of LONDON.
Right Honorable,
WE received yours of the Eighteenth of this instant, whereof, though all
passages were not so answerable to our expectation as we hoped, yet we
apprehend the same good affection in you toward this Army, as was expressed in
your former Letter: And that not only from the assurance of the worthy
Gentlemen, (your Commissioners) again sent to us; but also from that
information we have received of your extraordinary endevors to procure Money
for the Army: To prevent further raising or listing of Soldiers, and to
procure those already Listed to be disbanded, (some Persons of your Militia
only, having been active for the raising of(...)

And for the things expressed in our Representation though of weighty importance,
yet because they will require time, they shall be no occasion to impede our
remove, and in the mean time both by Proclamation from his Excellency, and all
other ways we shall endeavor, That the accustomed supplies to your City, may
be freely sent up.

To conclude, we say from our hearts, That as our especial ends are the glory
of God, and the good of this whole Land, so our endeavors shall be to
prosecute the same without prejudice to the being or well-being of Parliament
in general, (the maintenance whereof we value above our own lives) or (as we
have formerly said) of this Parliament in particular, but altogether in order
to the good and peace of this Nation, and with a most tender regard to your
City, to which we profess we shall by all actions make good all engagements
tending to the security thereof, in what way your selves shall desire,
consisting with the good of the whole Kingdom, you making good your mutual
correspondency with us, not doing any thing to our prejudice in the prosecution
of our just desires and endeavors.

St. Albans, June 21. 1647.
WE hear (even now) since the writing of this Letter, that (yesterday) diverse
of the Reformadoes came again (in a threatening manner) to Westminster, the
House of Commons then sitting, to the great affrightment and terror of diverse
faithful Members then present, and to discouragement of others from their
attendance there; so that we cannot but perceive that the freedom of this
Parliament is no better than that those Members (who shall according to their
consciences endeavor to prevent a second War, and act contrary to their
ways, who (for their own preservation) intend it, they) must do it with the
hazard of their lives; which indeed is a thing so destructive to Parliaments,
and Freedom, that we conceive our selves in duty bound to endeavor to the
utmost to procure redress therein.

June 22. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAXand the
Council of War. Jo. Rushworth, Secretary.

For the Right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the
City of LONDON.
My Lord and Gent.
WE have in all things dealt clearly and plainly with you, and hope we shall
continue still to do so. As soon as the worthy Alderman, and the other two
Gent. your Commissioners came the last night to us; we acquainted them with
our purpose to draw the Head-Quarter to Uxbridge, that so me might contract
our Quarters which have hitherto lien scattered: at which place we hope to
receive that which will be satisfaction to the Kingdom, and will remove
obstructions out of the way of Justice; wherein if right were done, we should
let you and all the world see, that we would be so far from pressing near
your City of London, it should be indifferent to us to march not only to the
distance already prescribed, but to any part of the Kingdom we should be
commanded to by the Parliament; we have asked nothing hitherto but right in the
things that are known, as if they were proved an hundred times before them
from whom we have sought them, which if granted would not only be a Justice
to the Army, but would let the Kingdom see the Fountain in a way to be
cleared, without which nothing of force or power would be a security to any
man. We wish the name of privileges may not lie in the balance with the
safety of a Kingdom, and the realitie of doing Justice, which as we have said
too often we cannot expect whilst the persons we have accused are the Kingdoms
and our Judges; A little delay will endanger the putting the Kingdom into
blood, notwithstanding what has bin said, if it be confidered that in wales
(besides under-hand-workings in your City) and other places, men are raised,
and that in no small numbers. And are not those men in the Paliament who have
continued faithful to the principles of common interest from the beginning of
the Parliament to this very day, still awed by the concourse of Reformado
Officers and others to their doors? Expense of time will be their advantage
only who intend to bring evil purposes to pass: we have written this to you
for your satisfaction, that so nothing may be done without giving you a perfect
account of our intentions and ends; And still to continue our assurance to you,
That should necessity bring us nearer to the City, our former Faith given you
shall be observed inviolably, there being nothing more (next the good of the
Kingdom) in our thoughts and desires, then the prosperity of your City.

Barkhamstead, June 25. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and the Council of War. Signed; Jo. Rushworth.

For his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax, Knight General of the Forces raised by
the Parliament, and his Honorable Council of War.
May it please your Excellency, and the honorable Council of War.
We the Major, Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council assembled, having
received yours to us of the 21. and 22. and your Excellencies to our Committee
of the 23. instant; with a Copy of a Remonstrance directed to the Parliament;
did send three of that number yesterday to acquaint you with our resolutions
thereupon, since which we have caused Copies of those Letters to be presented
to both Houses, desiring their direction concerning the residing of some of
that Committee continually with you in the head-Quarter; and that according to
our former requests the Reformadoes and other Officers and Soldiers raised for
the service of the Parliament, might be required forthwith to repair into
their several Counties, there to receive such satisfaction as is or shall be
appointed by Parliament; and that if any Soldiers be listed upon the Votes of
the Committee of Lords and Commons, and Committee of the Militia, that they may
be forthwith discharged. Whereupon several Votes were made, unto which we
desire to be referred.

We have also taken those Letters (with another received from those we sent
yesterday, and a Copy of a Letter dated the 24. instant, delivered to the
Commissioners of Parliament, and yours of the 25. instant) into further
consideration, thereby observing the constancy of your expressions, to do
nothing in prejudice either of the Parliament or City, and of your purpose by
Proclamation, and otherwise, to endeavor that the accustomed supplies of this
City may be freely sent up; all which we do with all due thankfulness
acknowledge, and to preserve aright understanding with you, we have appointed
the said Committee, or six of them at the least, continually to reside in your
head-Quarter, and do intend to make it our request to the Parliament, that who
ever have or shall endeavor to raise any forces to engage this Kingdom in a
new War, may be discovered and prevented therein; and that you may receive
satisfaction equal to those that have left the Army, so soon as it is
possible for the Parliament to perform the same; relying upon the assurance
you have given us, that your special ends are the glory of God, the good of
this whole land, and the safety of Parliament and City. To conclude, the near
approach of your Army to this City, causes us once more to desire you to take
it into your most serious consideration; for albeit you do not come to offer
any violence to us, yet we have and shall suffer very much in our trade and
price of Victuals by reason thereof, which we hope you will be so sensible
of, as to prevent it in the suture, by removing further off, and by taking such
a course that we may receive no further prejudice either in the one or the
other, which is our earnest desire, and that in your endeavors to save the
kingdom from ruin, you do not overthrow the fundamental constitution of
Parliament, which is essential to the well-being thereof.

London 25. June, 1647. By command of the Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the
City of London, in Common Council assembled. Michel.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen and Common Council of the
City of LONDON.
IT was last night resolved by the General and Council of War, for present
not to Advance any of the Army nearer London; but whereas the Foot (being all
quartered then at Watford, Uxbridge, and Colebrook were very troublesome and
burdensome to those places, It was only Ordered, That the quarters of the
Foot should be enlarged for the ease of those places; whereupon (by a mistake
of that Resolution in the setting out of quarters) some Regiments had quarters
assigned for enlargement at places lying much forwarder toward London, as far
as Harrow on the Hill, Hayes, Cranford, Harlington, Bedfont, Feltham and
Hanworth; This morning, so soon as this was understood by the General and the
Officers, there were Orders immediately sent out to stop the Regiments, and now
none quartered nearer London then Watford, Rislip, Ikeham, Hellindon, Cowley,
Drayton, Hamsworth, Stanwel and Stanes, which make a line about fifteen or
sixteen miles distance from London: And to avoid any disquieting to the
Parliament or City upon future apprehensions, His Excellency and His Officers
do promise, That there shall be no farther Advance, either of the Army, or any
quarters of it, any nearer to London, without timely notice thereof, and of the
Reasons of it, to the Parliament and City.

Uxbridge, June, 26. 1647. By the appointment of his Exlency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and the Council of War. John Rushoworth.


