A Full and clear ANSWER to a false and scandalous Paper, entitled; The
humble Remonstrance of the grievances of all his Majesty's Posts of England,
together with Carriers, Waggoners, etc.
THe great and many conveniences that have come to this Kingdom, by erecting
of a Letteroffice, both in respect of Trade and correspondencie, are better
known to every particular person by experience than expressed.

Whereby any man may with safety and security send letters into any part of
this Kingdom, and receive an answer within five days. (A benefit not known
to this Kingdom before the erection of the said Office.) If any man know a
more speedy or safe way of sending their letters, or do better like the old
way, by Carriers or Foot-Posts, such are left to their free liberty, none are
compelled to send their letters this way, none restrained from using the
carriage of letters, as formerly they did: This is all that is desired, or
claimed by that Patent, whereby the Letter-office is erected; If this be a
Monopoly, it is most humbly desired, the High and Honorable Court of
Parliament may judge, whose justice has ever been imp^ored, never declined; or
the Judges of the Kingdom, and not the noise and clamor of Posts, Carriers,
Waggoners, etc.

The first attempt that ever was made of carrying letters this way, was by one
Jude, and that only between London end Plymouth, who carried them in
fourteen days, as the Carriers of Exeter did. Jude was displaced by an order
of the Council Table, and the Posts put in, who continued it in the same way
once in fourteen days, whereas now an answer may be had once in five days,
there is not so much as a color of any attempt of carrying letters this way in
any other Rode in England, but Plymouth, until it was settled by Thomas
Witherings, who when he did first undertake this way, his Majesty and the
Lords of the Council, who had formerly taken away the place from Jude, and
settled the Posts of Plymouth, considering the many advantages that might come
to the Kingdom, by this speedy way of intelligence, did by the same power they
were placed, remove them again, and by a Proclamation dated about July 1635.
his Majesty did express his pleasure, that Thomas Witherings should have the
carriage of the said letters, who would settle it in a better and more speedy
course: whereupon he undertook the said work, and for a long time, after his
said undertaking, it cost him some weeks 20. l. 30. l. 40. l. more than he
received, to the great weakening and hazard of the ruin of his estate. It is
very true, that until he had his patent of his Office granted unto him for
his life, which was in the year 1637. he did in some places lay horses of his
own, in others he did make use of the ordinary Posthorses, and because he
desired quick dispatch, he paid them for a guide and a horse to carry the
male 6. d. per mile, after not conceiving a guide necessary, he made only use
of one horse, and paid 3. d. per mile.

Surely yet there is neither injury nor injustice done to the Posts; for
Plymouth Posts, the same power that placed them, removed them: for the other
Posts, they have 3. d. per mile, which is more than ordinary pay. But the
objection which seems to carry the greatest show, or color of probability
with it is; That the Postmasters had for formerly 4000. l. per annum fee, only
for carrying his Majesty's packets, that Witherings has reduced this to 2053.
l. per annum, and yet puts a greater burden upon them, by carrying his male;
has displaced many of them received 4000. l. for Post-places.

If this be but clearly understood, there will be no color of complaint
against Witherings, either of injustice or oppression: The posts, time out of
mind, have been placed and removed by the King, at his will and pleasure, and
their fees increased or lessened, as the use and necessity of their service
required: So as if his Majesty shall discharge all his posts, or any in such
Roads, or shall retrench their wages to half the proportion, it is no
injustice, if it be not sufficient to maintain them, they are not forced to
do the service: But it seems notwithstanding this abatement of wages, it is
yet gainful, out of their own showing, else Witherings could never have
received 4000. l. for posts places as they pretend. But be they gain or
loss, how does it concern Master Witherings other than thus: the King agrees
with Master Witherings, that the Posts shall carry his male of letters, Master
Witherings does agree with his Majesty, to pay to the several Posts according
to a Reglement made in writing such sums, accordingly he has constantly paid
these sums. If these proportions be not a sufficient reward for their service,
it is not to be doubted, but if this shall be made appear unto his Majesty
by petition, or otherwise, but that care will be had of them: but is there the
least color, why any man should be demanded from Witherings, who undertook
not to satisfy all the Posts, but only to pay such sums according to a
Reglement, which comes 2053. l. per annum, and the carriage of his maile of
letters, according to the ordinary and common price of 2. d. ob. per mile,
would not cost above 700. l. per annum. And it has been acknowledged by most
of the Posts, that Master Witherings in this, did a very good service to the
Posts, for now they were constantly paid; whereas they say there were great
arrears upon them before this undertakings. And whatever is pretended, their
pains is rather less than more, since the carriage of the maile; for they are
bound to carry his Majesty's packets, when ever they come. And it seldom
happens, but there are one, two, or more packets goes along with the maile,
which might have been carried, if the maile had not gone: and the Secretaries
of State (if the business be not very pressing) do many times stay a day or
two, until the maile go, which otherwise must have gone by Expresses, and so
the burden is not so great as is pretended; for it is very certain, that
they must go as often, if not oftener, if they did not carry the maile.

Master Witherings never displaced any of the Posts, neither received he one
penny to his own use for Postplaces, the place of Postmaster of England was
conferred upon the Secretaries of Estate, who observing ancient Orders did
displace many that were not qualified accordingly, as such as did not live upon
their Places, or by reason of infancy, or other disabilities did not or are not
fit to exercise their Places in person; but Master Witherings says, that few
or none to his knowledge were put out of their Places, though incapable; but he
that came in did make them some satisfaction: and Master Witherings says, that
he out of his own purse has paid money to bring diverse of them into their
Places, and in particular he paid 60. l. for Edward Hutchins place, which is
now so far from being acknowledged as a favor, as is turned upon him as a
crime by an ungrateful person.

As concerning the 1500. l. which is most falsely and scandalously pretended was
given to the Secretaries of Estate for the supporting and securing of this
Monopoly Patent, this since the sequestration of the said Office is said to be
paid by Master Burlemache to the Postmasters.

This Office in June 1637. was granted to Master Witherings for life, and
whilst it was a charge unto him (as at the first it was, and whilst the said
Office was a settling, which by the care, industry, and charge of the said
Master Witherings was settled as now it is, and cannot for the ease of the
Subject be settled in any better manner, he enjoyed this Office, but when this
Office was fully settled, and it began to be a benefit, this Office was by a
hand of power without hearing the said Witherings, my without the least crime
either proved or objected against the said Master Witherings sequestered into
the hands of Burlemache a stranger, borne a man not able to satisfy his own
debts, and against whom a Commission of Bankrupts has issued, and therefore it
is conceived a man neither fit to execute that Place, nor able to make
satisfaction, if it shall be adjudged this Place has been sequestered against
Law and Justice, and that he shall be put to account for such sums as he has
received. This Place was not taken from Master Witherings because it was a
Monopoly or grievous to the People, for certainly then it would not have been
executed in the very same way, nay worse than it was before the sequestration,
for the very Proclamation that issued out upon the sequestration, whereby every
one was to bring their Letters to Burlemache, makes the execution of the place
in M. Witherings a president for Burlemache, and says that it shall be
executed in the very same way, and that nothing but the Place shall be altered,
so as it is now no Monopoly in Burlemaches hands, nor any ones else, it is
only a Monopoly in Master Witherings, and only during the time that he
executed the place in the judgment and opinion of these men: but Burlemache
has been very liberal of Master Witherings Office to the postmaster, he has
allowed them 1500. l. morethan ever Master Witherings did: Envy and Malice
cannot say but Master Witherings paid all such moneys unto the posts during all
the time he enjoyed the said Office as by covenant and agreement he was bound
to pay, and what reason can there be imagined that Burlemache before any
judgment or any other legal proceeding who cannot pretend the least color of
claim nor interest in the said Office but is only a person trusted with the
said Office (at the best) to account for the profits received to such as have
right thereunto, should without the consent of Master Witherings pay out of the
said Office 1500. l. per annum, more than formerly was paid, or by agreement is
due, unless it be to animate the Posts, and to foment complaints against
Master Witherings, to the end he may the longer continue the said Office in his
hands, and this is the rather to be believed, because those that are the
greatest prosecutours in this cause against Master Witherings have had very
large and great pensions and additions to their former wages out of his Office,
as 10. s. per diem to Edward Hutchins, and 5. s. per diem to Castlon.

M. Witherings says, that he believes there were great arreares due to the
Posts before his undertaking, and that if any truth could come from those
persons, they would acknowledge that Master Witherings has with all the
industry and care that was possible, and withal the power of friends he could
make, labored to procure them their arreares, and what moneys he could get he
did faithfully and honestly pay unto them without expectation of one farthing
for his pains; nay, he can fully prove and manifest that he has paid good
sums of his own moneys to them that he never as yet received from his
Majesty. This sequestration is so prejudicial to his Majesty's service and
interest, and the good and benefit to the Posts that they are now in arrear of
their wages since the sequestration into Burlima^hes hands 2000. l. and he no
ways able to pay it; but in Master Witherings time they were all punctually
paid.

This business has been referred to a Committee, to hear many pretended
grievances and complaints, who have sat above threescore times, have heard
Council and proofs on both sides, and notwithstanding all those clamours, it
is humbly appealed unto that honorable Committee, whether any thing upon all
those hearings have been proved or voted against the said Witherings, other
than the procuring of the Carriers of Ipswich and Norwich to be attached and
imprisoned upon the then Secretaries Warrant, which is now under the judgment
of the Honorable House of Commons how far he is guilty of it.

FINIS.

