A Full and True RELATION Of his Excellency the Pope's Nuncio Making his
Public Entry at Windsor on Sunday the Third of this Instant, July 1687.
THE Town of Windsor was so full of all sorts of People (from all parts) that
some of the Inhabitants were astonished, and 'twas very difficult to get
Provisions or Room, either for Horse or Man; nay many Persons of Quality, and
others, were forced to sit in their Coaches and Gallashes, almost all the Day.

So great were the expectations of all People to see this Ceremony, supposing
it to be greater than ordinary, by reason there has not been any Public
Minister of State from the Pope, for above 140 Years, that has made any
Public Entry, as I am informed.

All the Spectators supposed he would set out a little after Noon, but did not
till between Five and Six of the Clock in the Afternoon; at which time his
Excellency took Coach (it being one of his Majesty's for that purpose) at his
own Lodgings, the Duke of Grafton and Sir Charles Cotterel being in the Coach
with him; his Excellency was Clothed in Purple, and a Gold Crucifix hanging at
his Breast.

The First that appeared in this Ceremony, was one of the Knight Marshal's Men
on Horseback, and after him two others followed on Foot; after them went his
Excellencies Footmen, being Twelve in Number, their Coats being all of a dark
gray colored Cloth, with White and Purple Lace. After them followed the Coach
of State, in which was his Excellency, having four Pages to attend him, two on
each side, taking hold of the Coach; their Coats were very richly Laced. His
Excellency had Three Coaches with Six Horses a piece in each Coach. Immediately
after his Excellency, in two of his Coaches were Ten Priests; his Coach of
State going empty. After them went the Lord Chancellors, Two of the Lord
Presidents, the Lord Privy Seals, and the Lord Chamberlains Coach; there were
Eighteen Coaches more besides them, with Six Horses a piece; in which Number
the Lord Bishop of Durham's was one, and the Bishop of Chester's another. In
this Order they went up to the Castle, where they stayed about a quarter of an
Hour, and then his Excellency returned back to his Lodgings.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1687.


