A Full and True ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT THE Sessions of Oyer and
Terminer, Holden for the City of London, County of Middlesex, and Jail-delivery
of Newgate; WHICH BEGAN AT THE Sessions House IN THE Old Bailey, On Wednesday,
September. 6th. and Ended on Thursday, September. 7th. 1682. Wherein is Contained
the Trial of many Notorious Malefactors, for Murders, Fellonies, Burglary, and
other Misdemeanors, As likewise the TRIAL of Ralph Benton for Killing the Boy
in Walbrook, and what relates to the Sister of Stephen College. TOGETHER, With
the Names of those that received Sentence of Death, the Number of those Burned
in the Hand, Transported, and to be VVhip'd.
LONDON, September. 6th. 1682.
THis Day the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, began at the Sessions House in the
Old-Bayly, holden there for the City of London, County of Middlesex, and
Jail-delivery of Newgate, until the 7th. of the said Instant, where the
Proceedings were as follows.

James Farrel and Robert Hurling were Indicted for the Murder of John Price a
Brick-maker, at Hammersmith, the manner, as it appeared upon Evidence, thus;
The two Prisoners coming into an Alehouse, called for drink, and within a
while after for Cards; but there being no Cards in the house, one of them
pulled a pack out of his Pocket, and seeing several Brick makers and such like
laboring Men drinking, euticed them to play with them, which they did, till a
Quarrel happened about the Reckoning, and foul play; whereupon Farrel drew his
Sword, and his Companion, and pursued one of the Countrymen out into the
Street, then returning and finding his Companion Scuffling with Price, he run
him into the body 10 Inches, and after that another was run through the Arm:
They pleaded they did it in their own defense, and expressed a great deal of
sorrow, notwithstanding which they were both found Guilty of Wilful Murder.

John Clifford an Under-Chamberlain in an Inn, was Indicted for Robbing a
Gentleman that lodged in his Masters House, of a piece of Gold, valued at 32
Shillings, which he afterward sold to a Goldsmiths in Fleet Street, where in
Conclusion, it was found he made many frivilous Excuses, but notwithstanding
was found Guilty.

Ann Purkinson was Indicted for Robbing her Mistress of six Silver Spoons, two
Silver Dishes, a Silver Porenger, several parcels of Linen and wearing
Apparel, part of which, upon her being Apprehended, (...) found about her, and
other things she confessed were Sold and Pawned, but being Tutered in Newgate,
upon her Trial she denied her former Confession, yet the proof being positive
by Sir William Turners Clerk, and others that Apprehended her, she was found
Guilty.

Hester Wainwright was Indicted for Robbing a Gentlewoman in St. Andrews
Holborn, on the 6th of July last, of a Mantua Gown, several Silk Petticoats,
Linen, wearing Apparel, and ten pounds eleven Shillings in Money, the Gown and
several other things being taken about her; she Pleaded that she took them up
amongst her own Clothes, and knew not but that they were her own till she came
to open them; but it being proved that she Stole them, and wore the Gowns
publicly, she was found Guilty.

Sarah Chambden was Indicted for Robbing the House of Nicholas Finch, in the
Papish of St. Clements Danes, of Plate Linen, Bedding, and other things of
great value, the person Robbed being her Sisters Husband, but all the proof lay
upon two Porengers that were found in her Lodging, which she alleged were
given her by the Prosecutors Wife deceased, and the Fact pretended to be
committed, being of a long standing, the Jury brought her in not Guilty.

One Mary Wilson was Indicted by her Husband of that Name, for Marrying with
one Hambleton, whom he alleged she was married to several years after she was
his Wife, but she denying that Marriage, and alledgeing that she was Wife to
none but the Prosecutor, he produced Justice Boly's Clerk with her Examination,
wherein she confessed both Marriages, alleging that her other Husband was in
Town, but that he had so great a love for her, that he would not appear against
her for fear of taking away her life, and the proof being defective, she was
acquitted.

Thomas White was Indicted for breaking open the House of Edward Hull, and
taking from thence Goods of a considerable value, which he absolutely denied,
but not being able to give a Testimony of his good living, or having any to
appear for him, and some of the Goods being proved to be found of his
disposing, he was found Guilty of Felony only.

Catherine Arnold was Indicted for breaking open the House of William Harvy, in
the daytime, and taking thence several Goods of value, but the Evidence being
only Circumstantial, and no positive proof, she was acquitted.

Rebecca Handcock was Indicted for Stealing a Silver Tankard, valued at 5l.
from one Mr. Mekins in St. Giles's in the Fields, on the 12th of July last, the
Circumstances was these; She in the company of another, who now gave Evidence
against her, coming to the prosecutors door to beg an Alms, (as the Witness
swore) went into the House, and came out with something bulky in her Lap, and
it was proved by the Servants, that at that time the Tankard was lost, and that
upon a Warrants being taken out against her, she absented her self from the
place of her abode for three Weeks, but she alleged upon demand of what she
had in her Lap, that it was a Loaf, which when she went in, she had in her
Pocket, and there pulling it out, she put it in her Lap, so that the Jury
perceiving her to be a simple Indigent Woman, they, upon return of their
Verdict acquitted her.

Ann Jaxon was Indicted for Stealing of ConeySkins, to the value of 7 pounds,
from a Furrier, the Evidence against her was a Youth, who at that time was
Confederate with her, who swore that she gave him two Shillings to let her into
the Shop, and promised he should not want money; he swore likewise, that she
being in, packed up the Skins into a Bag, and went away with them, but there
being no material Evidence, the Jury acquitted her.

Simon Beale was found Guilty for stealing a Brandy Taster, which he said the
Woman of the house droped into his Pocket unknown to him.

Jeffery Coleman was found Guilty of Robbing his Master, viz. one Mr. Tann of
Hornsey, of Cloth and other things, part of which were found about him, as he
was going to dispose of them.

William Cook and William Chaple two Leighter-men, were Indicted for Stealing
several Hanks of Raw Silk out of a Bail, as they were Towing it from on board
a Ship.

Peter Hodges and Robert Rogers were Indicted for breaking open a House at
Eling, and stealing Cloth, Pewter, Brass, Bedding, and other things with which
they were taken upon the Road; one of them pleaded he had no Relation to 'um,
but that he overtook the party that had them upon the Road; the other pleaded
he was hired for sixpence to carry them to Brainford, but they being in
several Stories, and the proof being plain that they were seen about the house
at the time it was Robbed, they were both found Guilty.

Martin Aubry being Indicted for Stealing a Tankard, pleaded Guilty:

Samuel Neve was Indicted for Stealing a Horse and a Mare, which he stole in
Gloucestershire, and brought to the Black Lion Inn in Water-Lane, to which
Indictment he pleaded not Guilty, and laid all the fault upon one that was
dead in Prison, saying; They were his Horses and Mare, and that he only got him
to let him ride from Henly to London upon one of them, for which he gave him
two Shillings; but it appearing he upon his coming to the Inn had owned one of
them, the Jury found him Guilty of the Felony.

John How being Indicted for Stealing a Silver Tankard valued at ten pounds,
pleaded Guilty.

One Stephen Aslington was Indicted for killing Francis Featherstone of
Kinsington, in July last, the Circumstances as appeared upon trial, were these,
The Prisoner and the deceased drinking together, with several others, the
Prisoner went down into the Garden, and the deceased followed him, where they
fought, not any words of provocation having passed on either side, in which
Encounter e're any could come in, the latter received a desperate Wound, of
which he instantly died, but the Prisoner alleging that what he did was in his
own defense, and that he knew not of any fighting when he came out, but that
the other forced him to it, the Jury brought it in Se defendendo.

Ralph Benton an Ensign of the Train'd-bands, and Pewterer in Walbrook, was
Tried for the death of Andrew Williams a Youth, who on the 29th of May, was by
Mr. Benton knocked down for attemping to destroy the Bone-fire made before his
door, but it appeared by the Chyrugeon who dressed him, that his Wound was
perfectly Cured, and that he had been in the Country, and upon hi^ return
confessed himself well, that an agreement had been offered to be made in his
behalf, but that he afterward falling sick dyed; many Eminent Physicians gave
their Testimony, declared that he dyed of a Malignant Feavor, and that the
Feavour was not caused by the Wound; but others affirming that great quantities
of blood issued out of his Mouth and Nostrils, after he was dead, and that they
believed the Wound caused the Feavor, and the Feavor his death, the Prisoner
was found Guilty of Man's-slaughter.

Fardinando Hews, Elizabeth Mays, and Dorothy Watson, were Indicted for
High Treason, in Clipping His Majesty's Coin, but there being but one witness
against them, which is not sufficient in that case, they were acquitted.

No Indictment was this Sessions preferred against Godwins Wife, Sister to
Stephen College lately Executed, who was Committed upon the Accusation of her
Husband, for speaking Treasonable words.

There were this Sessions 9 Persons received Sentence of Death, Viz. Hester
Wainwright, James Farrel, Robert Hurling, Peter Hodges, Robert Rogers, Ann
Parkinson, Mary Panks, Richard Wolley, and Thomas Stocdale; 10 Burnt in the
hand. 4 to be VVhipp'd, and one set aside for Transportation.

FINIS:
Printed for T. Benskin in St. Brides Churchyard. 1682:


