A full Account of the Apprehending of the LORD CHANCELLOR, in Wapping; As he
was designing to make his Escape: As also the Manner how he was brought before
the Lord Mayor; and from thence committed to the Tower, December 12. 88.
IT is a generally received Maxim in this Kindom, That no Man struggled with
the Laws of England, but he got a Fall: Of which you have new a great Example
in the present Lord of Wemm, Lord Chancellor of England; who ambitious of
Honor and Grandeur balked at no Violation of the Ancient and Fundamental Laws
of this Realm, to hoist himself into Exorbitant Power. His Bold and Lofty
Deportment, when Chief Justice, and his Domineering Pride, when Lord
Chancellor, are too well known, and he is now become himself an Example, That
Breach of Law in England is but a Sandy Foundation. For after all his Ranting
Vainglory and Imperious Pomp, finding White Hall too Hot to hold him, he was
forced to quit his glorious Purse and Mace, and so flunk away, with a
Resolution to leave the Nation, which he has Disturbed with his Pernicious
Counsels; and to avoid the Reward of his Misdeeds, by seeking Shelter in a
Foreign Climate: For Flight, by the Law of England always implies Guilt.

To this Purpose, laying aside his Gold Frogg-Button Gown, he put himself into
the Habit of a Seaman, with a Fur-Cap, instead of his Beaver and
Diamond-Buckl'd Hat-Band; and for the present took Sanctuary in Anchor and
Hope-Alley, perhaps, because he thought there might be some kind of Spell in
the Sign, and Willing still to have Hope for his Friend, left his Heart should
break. There he sent for the Master of a Collier to bargain with him, for the
Hire of his Vessel to carry him beyond Sea, out of Harms Way.

But the Mate more cunning then the Master, smelt a Rat, and full of
Suspicions, goes and informs the Headborough of the Place, of the whole matter:
Who considering the present Condition of Affairs, resolved to see whether it
were a Man or a Mouse, who was making such haste out of the Kingdom. And so
taking his Staff of Authority, went to the House in Anchor and Hope Alley
aforesaid, in the Hamlet of Wapping aforesaid; and going up Stairs, found a
certain Person in Seaman's Habit, as aforesaid, laid upon a Bed, between two
Blankets (without any other Wapping Accommodation, so far as we can hear of,
for his Spirits were low) upon which, whether it were by Instinct, or by some
Private Whisper of my Lord's Fate in his Ear, he gave him a broadside
Question, and asked him, Whether he were not the Lord Chancellor or no? To
which the Man between the Blankets replied, He was. With that the Headborough
thought it his Duty to apprehend his Lordship; and so having feiz'd him,
carried him to one Captain Jones's House, a Master of a Ship, till he could get
a Coach and more Assistance, and then brought him to the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor's House in Grocers Alley. It is not to be imagined what a Train his
Lordship had to attend him, all the way from the Place, where he was taken;
which caused a great Fear in his Lordship; and made him earnestly desire the
Headborough, To secure him from the Fury of the People, not valuing the Expense
of his Protection, whatever it might be. Upon which there was a Person ordered
all the way to sit in his Lap before him, to receive the Mire and Dirt, if the
Mobile should prove unmannerly.

When he was brought to Grocers Hall, the Multitude that followed him, filled
all the Court to that degree, that there was no going in or out: To whom the
Lord Mayor, appearing from his Balcony, delivered himself in few Words to this
Purpose, That he desired them to let him but have free Passage to and fro, to
his own House, and he would take Care to acquaint the Lords of the Council,
that they might have Justice done; and a good Account of their Prisoner. And
these Words his Lordship was forced to repeat twice, by reason of the Noise
below in the Yard. From thence the Lord Chancellor was sent to the Tower;
where we leave him at present to his own serious Thoughts and Considerations.

FINIS.

