A Full and True ACCOUNT Of the Sad and Dreadful FIRE Which Happened in the
Borough of Southwark, On the 22 of September 1689. Between the Hours of One and
Two in the Morning, etc. And the manner of Seizing a Notorious Papist.
24. Sept. 1689.
ON the 22d of this Instant September, about Two of the Clock in the Morning a
Light, more than ordinary, was espied in a Stationer's Shop in the Rules over
against the King's Bench Prison in Southwark; which increasing more and more,
gave a Suspicion to the Watch, and Others, that it could be no Candle: But
whilst they were Intentive to consider it, they pla^nly perceived the House
was on Fire; proceeding thereupon to give Notice to the Family, and sorce the
Doors, In hopes to quench it before it could get any Head, but their Endeavors
proved ineffectual* for no sooner it got Air, but bursting out at the Windows,
it raged with such vehemence, that all which could be done, was the saving of
the Peoples Lives. When having consumed that House, with the Goods* and
Furniture, it took hold of the next; and so making its progress on the
West Side of Southwark, where Booths for Shows are placed in the Fair-time,
notwithstanding extraordinary showers of Rain had fallen before, it caught hold
of the Deal boards, and fi^ed the Booth called Parker's Booth, and so the
adjoining Timber; which falling to the Eastward, fired the other side of the
Street. And both at once being in a Flame, not only much hindered People from
passing with their Goods, but increased the Consternation: For the Buildings
being Timber for the most part, and generally old, with many intricate Alleys
running backward, the Flame, driven on by the Wind, raged extremely,
notwithstanding Endeavors that were used on all Hands to suppress it.
Whereupon, lest the other Booths taking Fire, should assist it in its progress,
they were ordered to be pulled down, and, accordingly, many of them were
overthrown, and the Boards and Rafters removed, when about Three of the Clock
part of the King's Bench Prison took Fire, which caused a great Cry amongst the
Prisoners; and such as had their Lodging in the Forepart of the Prison were
removed backwards: But it is credibly reported, during the Consternation, two or
three of them made their Escapes amongst the Crowd.

The Engines being by this time brought, and a great number off Hands employed,
only the Front of the Common Side of the Prison received Damage, yet the Fire
on both sides the way not only spread in the Front North and South, but with
great Vehemence burnt backward; so that the Inns, known by the Signs of the
Falcon, and the Half Moon, were flaming both at once, the quantities of Hay and
Straw causing them to blaze in a terrible manner, and sheets of Flame broke
off, and carried by the* Wind scorched, and much endangered the Houses at a
very considerable distance, so that Powder being brought, Order was given for
the blowing up such Houses as stood most convenient to give the Fire a Check
which was accordingly done, and the Pipes cut to supply the Buckets and Engines,
many of the Soldiers Quartering thereabouts using Indifatigable Industry; not
only in Suppressing the Fire, but in helping the distressed People who seemed
every where to be in a Hurry and Confusion to carry off their Goods: For the
Terror of the Rageing Element was such, that it seemed to Threaten at a great
distance, which caused the People accordingly to make a timely preparation for
a Removal; but by blowing up, and the Interposition of some strong Brick houses
whose Walls stopped the Flame; about Four of the Clock it began to Abate, and
so by degrees the Fuel on which it fed being Consumed, and the Wind slacking,
between Five and Six of the Clock it was brought under, and a Stop put to its
further Progress.

In this Lamentable Fire which lasted about Four Hours, between. Fourscore and
a Hundred Houses are Reckoned to be Burnt and blown up, Besides a great many
Shattered and Defaced, the loss of Goods of diverse kinds is held to Amount to
an Extraordinary Value, several Families by reason of the Swiftness of the
Fires Progress having no time to Remove, Especially any thing Considerable. How
it began whether by the Carelessness of a Candle, or otherways, Remains doubtful
Reports and Conjecturals being various: As likewise does the Burning of the
Child in the House where it first began, said to be left in the Cradle through
have and forgetfulness.

That which is observable is, That there was one Man, who was heard to be
liberal in his Tongue, above all others, in speaking suspicious and reflecting
Words; whereupon he was presently seized, and brought before Mr. Justice Evans,
and upon Examination was found to be a Roman Catholic having Crucifixes,
Beads, and other Trinkets about him, and therefore was committed Prisoner to
the Marshalsea.

Licensed

Sept. 23d 1689.
ADVERTISEMENT.
In Plow-Yard in Grays-in Lane, lives Doctor Thomas Kirleus a Collegiate
Physician, and Sworn Physician to Charles II, until his Death: Who with a Drink
and Pill, hindering no Business, Cures all Ulcers, Scabs, Scurfs in the Face, or
elsewhere: King's Evil, Leprosy, and Venereal Disease, expecting nothing if he
Cures not. Of the last, he has Cured above 500 persons in this City, many
after Fluxing. It quickly and safely Cures it in the beginning, which cannot be
done with Mercury, without danger of Life. The Drink is 38. the Quart, the Pill
1 s. the Box, which is two Purges. They excel all Purges in cleansing all
Crudities and Impurities, and so prevent and Cure many Diseases, and especially
the Gout and Stone. In all Diseases he gives his Opinion for nothing, and his
Medicines for little.

London, Printed for T. R. near Fleet-bridge. 1689.


