THREE LETTERS, From the Right Honorable SIR THOMAS FAIRFAX, Lieut. Genesis
CRVMWELL and the Committee residing in the Army.

Wherein All the Particulars of the Great Uictory obtained by our Forces
against His Majesty's, is fully related, fought the 14 of June, 1645.

With a List of the Names of such Colonels, Captains, Lieutenants, Ensigns,
and other Officers, both of Horse and Foot there taken prisoners. And the
Resolution of both Houses upon the same.

Die Lunae, 16 June, 1645. ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, that these Letters, with the List of the Prisoners, be forthwith
printed and published, with the Order of both Houses concerning the same.

Io. Brown. Cler. Parliament.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the sign of the King's Head in the
Old Bailey. 1645.

TO THE HONORABLE WILLIAM LENTALL Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons.
Mr. Speaker,
BEsides the General account, I have already given, by one of my servants whom
I sent up to London yesterday, I thought fit to send this bearer Mr. Boles, who
may more particularly inform you. Concerning the abundant goodness of God to
this army, and the whole Kingdom in the late victory, obtained at Naseby
Field: The whole body of their foot taken and slain, such a list of the
prisoners, could be made up in this short time I have sent, the horse all
quitted the field, and were pursued within three miles of Leicester: their
Ammunition, Ordnance, and carriages, all taken, among which there were, two
Demi Cannons, a whole Culverin and a Mortar piece besides lesser pieces: We
intend to move to Leicester, as soon as we have taken Order with our
prisoners, and wounded men: all that I desire, is, that the honor of this
great never to be forgotten mercy, may be given to God in an extraordinary day
of thanksgiveing; And that it may be improved to the good of his Church, and
this kingdom: which shall be faithfully endeavored by,

Sir Your most humble servant, THOMAS FAIRFAX.
Harborough June 15. 1645. Major Genesis Skiypo^ was shot through his side; but
notwithstanding he continued in the field with great resolution; And when I
desired him to go off the field. He answered, he would not go so long as a
man would stand, still doing his Office as a valiaut and wise Commander. Also
Colonel Butler, and Colonel Iretan upon their first charge were both
dangerously wonnded, behaving themselves very gallantly, if I could enter into
particulars; much ought be spoken of the resolution and courage of many
Commanders both horse and foot, in this days service.

Some Irish are among the prisoners as I am informed, I have not time to make
inquiry into it; I desire they may be proceeded against above, according to
Ordinance of Parliament.



For the Honorable William Lenthall Speaker of the Commons House of Parliament.
SIR,
BEing commanded by you to this service, I think my self bound to aquaint you
with the good hand of God toward you, and us, we marched yesterday after the
King who went before us from Daventry to Haverbrow, and quartered about six
miles from him, this day we marched toward him, He drew out to meet us, both
Armies engaged, we after three hours fight, very doubtful, at last routed his
Army, killed and took about five thousand, very many Officers, but of what
quality we yet know not, we took also about two hundred Carriages all he had,
and all his Guns, being twelve in number, whereof two were Demie-Cannon, two
Demie-Culverins, (and I think) the rest Sacres, we persued the enemy from
three miles short of Harbrough to nine beyond, even to sight of Leicester
whether the King fled. Sir this is none other but the hand of God, and to him
alone belongs the Glory, wherein none are to share with him, the General
served you with all faithfulness and honor, and the best commendations I can
give him is, that I dare say he attributes all to God, and would rather perish
then assumne to himself, which is an honest and a thriuing way, and yet as
much for bravery may be given to him in this action, as to a man. Honest men
served you faithfully in this action, Sir they are trusty, I beseech you in the
name of God not to discourage them, I wish this action may beget
thankefullnesse, and humility in all that are concerned in it, he that venters
his life for the liberty of his Country I wish he trust God for the liberty of
his conscience, and you for the liberty he fights for, in this he rests who is,

Your most humble Servant, Oliver Crumwell.
14 June 1645 Haverbrow.
For the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker to the House of Commons.
SIR,
THis morning by day break we marched out of Guil^borow after the Enemy, after
an hours march, we discovered their Horse drawn up at Sybbertoft three miles
this side Ha^borough, an hour after their Foot appeared, this was about eight
in the morning, by ten we were disposed into a battalia on both sides, both
sides with mighty shoutes expressed a hearty desire of fighting, having for our
parts recommended our cause to Gods protection and received the word, which was
God our strength, theirs Queen Mary, our forlorn hopes began the p^ay whiles
both sides labored for the hill and wind, which in conclusion was as it were
equally divided, our forlorn hope gave back, and their right wing of Horse
fell upon our left with such gallantry that ours were immediately routed, above
a thousand ran a long with them, but such was the courage and diligence of the
right wing backed with the Foot, that they not only beat back the enemy from
their Train, but fell in with their Foot and after two hours dispute won all
the field-peices (of which some are Cannon) most of their Badgage, Mortar
pieces, Boats, nine thousand Arms much powder and match, etc. And nigh four
thousand prisoners their number was about twelve thousand, some six hundred
slain, many Commanders of note, of ours not above one hundred, our Horse are
still in pursuit and have taken many of theirs, the Standerd is ours, the
Kings Wagon and many Ladies. God Almighty give us thankful hearts for this
great Victory, the most absolute as yet obtained, the General.
Lieutenant-Generall Cromwell, and Major General Skippon (who is shot in the
side, but not dangerous) did beyond expression gallantly, so did all our other
Commanders and Soldiers, we have lost but two Captains, though this come
late, be pleased to accept it from,

Your Honors most humble Servants, Har. Leighton. Tho. Herbert.
Naezby where the fight was this Satterday 14 June 1645. Captain Potter is
dangerously wounded, but hopes of his recovery, so is Captain Cook.



Prisoners of War taken at Nazeby field, June 14. 1645. in Northamptonshire.
Colonels
Sir Richard Page. Theophilus Gilby.
Lieut. Colonels.
Woodhouse. Lauson. Burges. Thornton.
Majors of foot:
Byme. Bridge, Knight. Hue. More.
Majors of horse.
Whitford. Denn^. Hooks. Revely.
Captains of horse.
Thomton. Shaffee.
Cap. Lieut.
Carnabee. Lambton.
Officers of the Life guard of foot.
Captaiues.
Fox. Levins. Fisher. Benton. Bartee.
Cap. Lieut.
Waller.
Lieutenants.
M^ese. Brown.
Ensigns of the guard.
Chamberlain. Porter. Birkenhead. Ingoldsby. Moushall. Wildhall.

Officers of the Lifeguard of horse.
Capt. Mason, Reformado.
Officers of the Duke of Yorks Regiment of foot.
Captains.
Fitz-Morres. Widnam. Hill. Dier.
Capt. Lieut.
Hawkesworth.
Lieutenants.
Rosley. Curles. Ryley.
Ensigns.
Bunch. Rosley. Goying. Bradshaw.

Prince Ruperts Regiment of foot.
Lieut. Fisher.
Officers in Prince Maurices Lifeguard.
Capt. Gerret. Capt. Tempest. Lieut. Backster. Quarterm. Simson.
Officers of the Lord Ashleys Regiment of foot.
Captain
Walley. Iockson. Wright. Fowler. Basberfield, Reformado.
Ensign,
Ridley. Rowl^nd.
Corporal of the Field-regiment.
Officers of Sir Bernard Ashleys Regiment of foot.
Capt. Hoare. Cap. Fisher.
Lieutenants.
Weller. Simons. Smith. Harden.
Ensigns.
Chester. Homes. S^mmons.
Officers of Col. Apleyards Regiment of foot.
Captain
Terwil. Masters. Saunderson. Huband.
Lieutenants.
Middleton. Thompson. Lewin. Baker.

Officers of Col. Regols Regiment.
Cap. Diet. Cap. Glasier. Lieutenants.
Ward. Baggerly. Cause Reformado
Ensigns.
Sharp. Blenkerne, Emmings ^omes.

Officers of Sir John Paul's Regiment of foot.
Capt. Mason. Lieutenants.
Birket. Wim. Hickman. Bradford. Burling.
Ensigns.
Yeat. Glascooke. Hutchins. Price. Cook.

Officers of Col. Gerrards Regiment of foot.
Major Bishop. Capt. Bo^th. Ensign Bland. Ensign Perrine.
Officers of Col. Pages Regiment of foot.
Col. Page. Lieu. Col. Lawson. Major Sir William Bridges, Knight. Captains.
Edrington. Norton. Henson. Kerrington. Bemson. Limson.
Lieutenants.
Cartaine. Egleston. H^lkingson. Bates. Roundtree. Fl^ynee. Ballard. Roberts.
Ensigns.
Edrington. Linge. Scot.

Officers of Col. Liles Regiment of foot.
Lieut. col. Littleton. Major Fowler. Captains.
Skirough. Whitegreene. Littleton. Hecklington.
Lieut. Carter. Ensign Turpin. Ensign Littleton.
Officers of Col. St. George Regiment of Foot.
Major Whitmore. Captains.
Owen. Laurence. L^urence. Heart.
Lieutenants.
Jones. Nalsey. Jones.
Ensign Tem.
Officers of Col. Morris Regiment.
Major Whitford. Lieutenants.
Surles. Griffith.
Ensigns.
High^m. Ciscill, Reformado.

Colonel Bards Officers of foot.
Captains.
Lesley. Devoslet. Lawson.
Lieutenants.
Fowler. Twifield. Windfor.
Ensigns.
Dolison. Fair Brothe.

Col. Vaughans Officers of horse.
L. Col. Slaughter. Cap. Hosiers. Lieut. Armstrong. Cornet Edmonds. Quarterm.
Nursse. Lieut. Billingsley, Reformado.
Col. Broughtons Regiment of foot.
Cap. Hill. Cap. Pauldon. Lieutenants.
Davenport. Oliver. Morgan. Duppa.
Ensigns.
Vaughan. Pritchard. Porter.

Col. Tilli^rs Officers of foot.
Cap. Church. Cap. Dikes. Lieut. Busbirdge. Ensigns.
Harrison. Bowen. Dillon. Loftus, senior. Loftus, junior.

Sir Fulke Hunke his Officers of foot.
Lieut. Rewes. Lieut. Perryn. Ensign Smith.
Officers of Col. Lucas Regiment of foot.
Cap Lieu. Parker. Lieut. Johnson. Lieut. Cole.

The Names of His Majestiss Household Servants now in the Marshalls custody.
MR. Howen page of his Majesty's bed Chamber. Mr. Abbot their Chamber keeper.
One Sumpter Man. Four Footmen of his Majesty's. One Footman of Pr. Morrises.
Robert Marken yeamon of His Majesty's Chandry. William Waston Porter at Gate.
Roger Jellybrand of Mis Majesty's Confectionary. One Groom of the Chamber. And
one Chamber-keeper belonging to the Duke of Lenex. Nicholas Jonston belonging
to His Majesty's Groom Porter. Walter Whife belonging to His Majesty. James
Spanier Vitteler. Frances Rossell. More Prisoners of War.
Col. Bunkley of Horse. Lieutenant. Col. Godfry. Major More. Captain King.
Lieutenant Griffin. Leutenant Nightingall. Ensign Musgrave. Lieutenant Tench.
Thomas Mangainere of the Princes Troop. Richard Addrings Princes Troop. John
Piffinch. Joseph Bromehall. Sir William Vahan. Morgan Evans the Queens
Regiment.

There were many taken last night late near Leicester, and sent to Rockingam
Castle; most of the Duke of Yorkes Lifeguard, and then the colors of that
Regiment were taken: Sir John Norwich took Colonel Nevile prisoner.

Die Lune 16 Iunii, 1645.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That
Thursday next shall be set a part for a day of Public Thanksgiving to
Almighty God in all the Churches and Chapels within the Cities of London and
Westminster, and lines of Communication, for the great and glorious Uictory
obtained by the Parliaments Army, under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax
against the Forces of the King. And that Mr. Marshall and Mr. Vi^es be desired
to Preach at Christ Church before the Parliament. And that the Lord Major,
Aldermen and Common Council do meet, the Parliament there. And it is further
Ordered, That Friday being the seven and twentieth of this instant June be
likewise set a part for a Public day of Thanksgiving for this victory in all
the Churches and Chapels in the several Counties of the Kingdom under the
power of the Parliament.

Io. Brown Cler. Parliament.
FINIS.

