A FULL RELATION OF THE Scots martch FROM BARWICKE to NEWCASTLE, WITH Eighteen
thousand Foot, three thousand Horse, five hundred Dragoons, and a hundred and
twenty Pieces of Ordnance.

Also, their Message to the Governor of Newcastle, and their Propositions to
the Cavaliers, and their several Answers about the surrendering of Newcastle.

Together, with a Relation of 11. of the Earl of Warwicks Ships appointed to
fall upon 7. Ships which lay at Newcastle, laden with Malignants goods,
intended for Holland; As it was delivered to the Parliament,

By a Messenger from the SCOTS ARMY.

LONDON, Printed by Andrew Coe, according to Order. 1844.

A FVL RELATION OF THE SCOTS MARCH FROM BARWICK TO Newcastle:
THere is no cause why we sholud conceive that our brethren of Scotland have
delayed in any wise their coming, though they have not been here so soon as
some expected, but rather that we should give God praise for their so soon and
speedy march.

First, Considering the great Army which they have raised, and provision for
them, which to be done orderly, and by the brotherly assistance of that whole
Kingdom, is a great work and asks long time.

Secondly, Because they are not only ayding and assisting unto us, but also to
our brethren of Ireland, who are brought to a very low and most miserable
condition, in so much that information from thence have certified the Kirk of
Scotland that 200 at the least of the Scots are starved to death in Ireland for
want.

Thirdly, Their chief Ingenier has formed a new kind of great guns, never
before discovered, which were made purposely for this design, above three
quarters of a yard long, or some a yard, that will carry a twelve pound bullet,
to do good execution at a good distance, and yet so framed that a horse may
carry one of them, all which took up a great deal of time.

Yet nevertheless, blessed be God, they are now come into England, their
number being 18000 foot 3000 horse, and between 4 and 500 Dragoneers, and they
bring along with them 120 great guns, and other train of Ammunition, very full
and large, which came to Barwick by Sea, and there met the Army in a
convenient time, and was prepared ready for them in their march.

On Tuesday the 18 of January last they marched to Barwick, and that day was a
sore day to them, by reason of great storms and suow, that fell all the day
long, and yet such was their valiant resolutions and desire of expedition, that
they came 18 Scotch miles that day to reach Barwick, which is at the least as
much as 23 or 24 of our miles here.

They billited about Barwick that night, and there received their train of
Artllerie, which they neglected not, though after so long and weariesome a
days journey, and the next day, being January the 19 they marched out of
Barwick one Regiment after another, as conveniently as they could obtain fit
quarter in those parts.

Our brethren of Scotland brought along with them printed Declarations of the
Kingdom of Scotland, for information and satisfaction to their brethren of
England, concerning their presenr expedition, viz.

Whereas the greatest Questions that are like to arise in ths business may be
reduced to these three particulars, viz. The justness of our cause: The
lawfulness of our calling thereto: And The faithfulness of our carriages
therein: our brethren of Scotland will hereby endeavor to give satisfaction in
them all and doubt not to do it, unless there remain some, whose inveterate
malice has produced in them a resolution to be unsatisfied.

This their Declaration gave the country so good satisfaction, that they found
no opposition, and they do carry themselves so civil and well, and without
offering the least wrong to any where they come, that the country are exceeding
glad of their being come.

When the messenger that brought the message to the Parliament yesterday, left
the Scots Army, which was on Wednesday last, then they were at Addestone,
within some six miles from Answick in their march toward Newcastle, which is
about some twenty eight English miles, and then a Letter was prepared to be
sent to Colonel Glemham the Governor of Newcastle; to require the delivery of
the same up to the use of the Parliament, in England, and he does verily
believe that by this time they can give account of the same: for on Satterday
last they intended to be before Newcastle.

Colonel Glemham, it seems had marched out of Newcastle with a party, such
strength as he could make; and the Letters were delivered to him, which came
from our brethren of Scotland, sent from both the Chairmen of the Committees of
England and Scotland, which was very fair, and declared, that they did not
desire blood, but to bring in those delinquents to justice, who seek to divert
his Majesty from the Parliament. The Letter was delivered to Colonel Glemham,
and by him read to the Army then with him, which himself would not deny but
that it was very fair; and so made unto them three Propositions, at the
reading of the said Letter.

1. Whether the country should be burnt up before them and all destroyed and
said wast: To this it was answered, no, which they had reason so to do,
because there were then present many of the Gentry of those parts, who had
interest in the land there. 2. Whether they should oppose the Scots, and send
them a denial. To which it was answered, that they were altogether unable to
oppose them, because they being but two thousand foot, and some few horse, it
would be in vain to stand against them. 3. Whether an answer should be returned
to the said letters, to which some said that it were best, first to send to the
Earl of Newcastle, to know his mind: others, that it were convenient first to
send to Oxford, before an answer be returned.
But it is very probable, that by this time our brethren of Scotland are
possessed of Newcastle, for the country Gentlemen came so fast in to our brethren
of Scotland, that it caused the rest of the country to follow, so that their
Army does much increase.

And where as it is supposed that Tinmouth castle will be hard to be gained,
our brethren of Scotland make no great matter of it, and besides, the Earl of
Newcastle is preparing thitherward.

The messenger further reports, that as he sailed by the mouth of the
channel which leads to Newcastle, he saw some seven ships or more which
seemed to be fraught, and upon inquiry, it was certified that they were laden
with malignants goods supposed for Holland, whereof he gave notice to some
Commanders under the Lo^d Admiral, who appointed eleven ships to wait their
coming out, and if they came not forth before Satterday, the day appointed by
our brethren of Scotland to be at Newcastle, then to fall in and steal upon
them.

Now that our brethren of Scotland may not be looked upon with the prejudice of
strangers, we hope this firm union of this mutual Covenant will wear out,
There is a Committee of our own Nation, the most of which are Parliament men,
such to whom they have committed the trust and care of their Religion, Laws
and Liberties, joined with them, without whose concurrence nothing that
concerns us is to be transacted. And to free us of all unjust suspicion, which
if our minds are not ready to conceive, yet the malicious mouths of our
adversaries and theirs are ready to suggest, that notwithstanding their
Declaration, they have some sinister and secret ends, which may prove
prejudicial to our rights and happiness: It is hereby made known to us, that
they have freely engaged themselves, by an Article of the late treaty betwixt
the Nations, to give the public Faith of the Kingdom of Scotland unto the
Kingdom of England, that neither their entrance into, nor continuance in this
Kingdom, shall be made use of to any other ends then expressed in the Covenant,
and that treaty subscribed to them by the commissioners of both Kingdoms,
which they are resolved, to the honor of God and of this Nation, to keep
inviolate.

And they declare, that they are so far from desiring harm or loss to any of
their Brethren of England, that their sincere and real intentions are not to
add fuel, nor bring oil, but water to extinguish these lamentable combustions
and fires, which they have with so much duty and love labored to quench: That
their taking of arms is not to make Wars (if they be not necessitated) but to
obtain a better grounded and more durable Peace, for enjoying our Religion and
Liberties in all the three Kingdoms: and that the wicked (who are the unworthy
authors of all our troubles) being removed from our King, a right understanding
may be established betwixt his Majesty and his people. And as they have
solemnly sworn to protect all who shall adhere to this covenant: So do they
certainly expect, that all their brethren in England who are zealous for the
true Protestant Religion, loyal to the King, and faithful for their country,
will join with them in procuring these just desires: Which being obtained, they
shall be most willing and ready to return to their native Country, esteeming
it their greatest happiness, that Truth with Peace may be established in all
his Majesty's Dominions.

FINIS.

