MIXED CONTEMPLATIONS IN BETTER TIMES.

By THOMAS FULLER. B. D.

Let your moderation be known to all men the Lord is at Hand. LONDON, Printed
by R. D. for John Williams, at the Sign of the Crown, in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1660.

(...) (...) which sense Solomon is said to have built the Temple.

Our weaker sex has been over-strong in making and widening the Breaches in
our English Zion, both by their Purses and Persuasions. To redeem their credit,
let them hereafter be as active in Building, as heretofore they were in
Breaking down.

Such wives, who not only lie in the bosoms, but lodge in the affections of
loving husbands, who are empowered with places of Command, joining IMPORTUNITY
to their OPPORTUNITY, may be marvellously instrumental to the happiness of
our Nation.

We read of Ahab [1 King. 21.25.] that none was like him, who sold himself to
work wickedness in the sight of the Lord whom Iezabel his wife stirred up. By
the same proportion that person will prove peerlesse in piety, who has a godly
consort in his bosom, seasonably to incite him, who is so forward in himself
to all honorable actions.

II. Miraculous Care.
WE read Luke 13.11. of a woman, who had a Spirit of infirmity eighteen years,
and was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up her self. This woman may
pass for the lively Emblem of the English Nation from the year of our Lord
1642. (when our wars first began) unto this present 1660. are eighteen years in
my Arithmetic; all which time our land has been bowed together, past
possibility of standing upright.

Some will say that the weight of heavy Taxes have caused this crookedness.
But alas! this is the least and lightest of all things, I reflect at in this
allusion. It is chiefly the weight of our sins [Heb. 12.1.] which does so
easily beset us. Our mutual malice and animosities which have caused this
incurvation.

A pitiful posture wherein the face is made to touch the feet, and the back
is set above the head. God in due time set us right, and keep us right, that
the Head may be in its proper place. Next the Neck of the Nobility, that the
Breast of the Gentry, the Loins of the Merchants and Citizens, the Thighs of
the Yeomantrie, the Legs and Feet of Artificers and Day-labourers. As for the
Clergy (here by me purposely omitted) what place soever shall be assigned them;
If low, God grant patience; If high, give Humility unto them.

When thus our Land in Gods leisure shall be restored to its former rectitude,
and set upright again, then I hope she may leave off her STEEL-BODIES which
have galled her with wearing them so long, and return again to her peaceable
condition.

III. Hand on Mouth.
IT is said Genesis the 6.11. how before the flood, the earth was filled with
violence. Some will say (with Nicodemus) how can these things be, violence
being Relative, and requiring a Counter-part. Though such Tyrants were Hammers,
others must be Patient-Anvils, for them to smite upon. Such persons purely
passive in Oppression, were to be pitied, not punished, to be delivered, not
drowned in the flood.

But the answer is easy, seeing we read in the same Chapter verse. 5. That God
saw, that the imaginations of the thoughts of man was only evil continually.
God plainly perceived that the sufferers of violence would have been Offerers
of it, if empowered with Might equal to their Malice. Their Curstness was a
sharp, though their Horns were not so long, and what they lacked in Deed and
actions, they made up in Desires and Endeavors. So that in sending a general
Deluge over all, God was clearly just, and men justly miserable.

Let such English men, who have been of the depressed party during our Civil
Wars, enter into a scrutiny and serious search of their own souls, whether or
no (if armed with power) they would not have laid as great Load on others, as
themselves underwent. Yea, let them out of a godly jealousy suspect more
Cruelty in themselves, then they can conceive. Then will they find just cause
to take the blame and shame on themselves, and give God the glory, that he has
not drowned all in a general Deluge of Destruction.

IV. At last.
A Lady of quality formerly forward to promote our Civil Wars, and whose
well-intending Zeal had sent in all her Plate to Guildhall, was earnestly
discoursing with a Divine concerning these Times a little before Dinner; Her
face respecting the Cup-bord in the Room* which was furnished with plenty of
pure Venice Glasses: Now (said she) I plainly perceive, that I and many of my
Judgment have been abused with the specious Pretenses of Liberty and Religion,
'till in the undiscreet pursuance thereof we are almost fallen into Slavery and
Atheism.

To whom the other betwixt jest and earnest replied; Madam, it is no wonder,
that now your eyes are opened: for so long as this cup-bord was full of thick
and massy Plate, you could perceive nothing through them; but now so many
clear and transparent Glasses are substituted in their room, all things are
become obvious to your Intuition.

The possessing of superfluous Wealth, sometimes does hinder our clear
apprehensions of matters; like a Pearl in the eye of the Soul, prejudicing the
sight thereof; whilst poverty may prove a good Collyrium, or Eye salve unto
us, to make a true discovery of those things we know not before.

V. Mistaken.
I Beheld Honor as of a mounting and Aspiring Nature; and therefore I expected
(rationally enough as I conceive) to have found it ascending to the Clouds.

I looked upon Wealth as what was Massy, Ponderous, and by Consequence
probable to settle and be firmly fixed on the Earth.

But oh! how much is my expectation frustrated and defeated? for David [Psalm
7.5.] makes mention of honor lying in the dust: and Solomon his son [Prov.
23.5.] informs me, how riches certainly make themselves wings, and flee away
as an eagle toward heaven: what I looked for below, is tow'red aloft, and what
I expected above is fallen below.

Our age has afforded plentiful Experiments of both: Honor was near the
dust, when a new Nobility of a later stamp were in a fair likelihood to have
out shined those of a purer standard. The wealth of the Land does begin (to use
the Faulconer's phrase) to fly to lessen. And if these Taxes continue, will
soon fly out of sight. So uncertain and unsafe it is for men to bottom their
happiness on any earthly perfection.

VI. Truth.
I Saw a traveller in a terrible tempest take his seasonable shelter under a
fair and thick Tree: it afforded him protection for a good time, and secured
him from the rain.

But, after that it held up, and was fair round about, he unhappily continued
under the Tree so long 'till the droppings thereof made him soundly wet, and he
found more to condemn his weakness, then pity his wetting.

A Parliament is known to be the best Refuge and Sanctuary to shelter Us from
the tempest of violence and oppression. It is sometimes the Sole and always
the Surest Remedy in that kind. But alas! The late Parliament lasted so Long,
that it began to be the grievance of the Nation, after that the most and best
Members thereof were violently excluded.

The remedy turned the Malady of the Land, and we were in fear to be drowned by
the droppings of that Tree, if God of his gracious goodness had not put an
unexpected period to their Power.

VII. After-born.
A Lady big with Child was condemned to Perpetual Imprisonment, and in the
Dungeon was delivered of a Son; who continued with her 'till a Boy of some
bigness: It happned that one time he heard his Mother (for see neither of them
could, as to discern in so dark a place) bemoan her Condition.

Why Mother (said the Child) do you complain, seeing you want nothing you can
wish, having clothes, meat and drink sufficient; Alas! Child (returned the
Mother) I lack Liberty, Converse with Christians, the light of the Sun, and
many things more, which thou being Prison-born, neither art nor can be sensible
of in thy condition.

The POST-NATI, understand thereby such Striplings born in England, since the
Death of Monarchy therein, conceive this land their mother to be in a good
Estate. For one fruitful harvest follows another, commodities are sold at
reasonable rates, abundance of brave clothes are worn in the City, though not
by such persons, whose Birth does best become, but whose Purses can best bestow
them.

But their MOTHER-ENGLAND does justly bemoan the sad difference betwixt her
present and former condition, when she enjoyed full and free trade without
payment of Taxes, save so small, they seemed rather an acknowledgement of their
Allegiance, then a Burden to their Estate; when she had the Court of a King,
the House of Lords, yea and the Lords House, decently kept, constantly
frequented, without falsehood in Doctrine or Faction in Discipline. God of his
goodness restore unto us so much of these things, as may consist with his
glory and our good.

VIII. An Heap of Pearls.
I Saw a servant-maid at the command of her Mistrisse make, kindle and blow a
fire. Which done, she was posted away about other business, whilst her
Mistrisse enjoyed the benefit of the fire. Yet I observed that this servant,
whilst industriously employed in the kindling thereof got a more general,
kindly and continuing Heat, then her Mistrisse her self. Her heat was only by
her and not in her, staying with her no longer then she stayed by the chimney,
whilst the warmth of the maid was inlaid, and equally diffused through the
whole body.

An Estate suddenly gotten is not so lasting to the Owner thereof, as what is
duly got by industry. The substance of the diligent (says Solomon Prove.
12.27.) is precious. He cannot be counted poor that has so many Pearls,
precious brown bread, precious small beer, precious plain clothes, etc. A
comfortable consideration in this our age, wherein many hands have learned
their Lesson of labor, who were neither born nor bred unto it.

IX. Silent Sadness.
TWo Captains on the same side in our Civil Wars, Discoursing together, one
of them (with small cause and without any measure) did intolerably boast of his
personal Performances, as if he had been of the Quorum in all considerable
actions: at last not ashamed of, but weaned with his own loquacity, He desired
the other Captain to relate what service he had done in these wars; To whom he
returned, Other men can tell you of that.

We meet with many (living at the sign of the Royalist) who much brag of their
passive services (I mean their sufferings) in the late war. But that Spoak in
the wheel, which creaketh most, does not bear the greatest burden in the Cart.
The loudest Cryers are not always the largest Loosers.

How much has Sir John Stowel lost? How many new Gentlemen have started up out
of the Estate of that ancient Knight? What has the Lord Craven lost? Whither
more, or more unjustly hard to decide? Others can tell of their and many other
men's sufferings, whilst they themselves hold their peace.

Here we dare not speak of him, who, though the greatest looser of all speaks
nothing of himself; And therefore his silence puts a greater Obligation on
us both to pity him here on Earth, and pray for him to Heaven.

X. Lost and Kept.
THis seeming Paradox will on examination prove a real Truth, viz. That though
Job lost his seven Thousand Sheep consumed by fire of God [Iob 1.16.]
(understand it, by His Permission and Satan's Immission) yet he still kept the
Wool of many of them.

For Job in the Vindication of his Integrity (not to Praise but Purge himself)
does relate how the loins of the poor blessed him, being warmed with the fleece
of his Sheep, [Iob 31.20.] So much of his wool (in the cloth made thereof) he
secured in a safe hand, lending it to God (in poor people) [Pro-v. 19.17.] as
the best of debtors, being most able and willing to repay it.

Such, as have been plundered of their Estates in these Wars, may content and
comfort themselves with this consideration; That so long as they enjoyed
plenty, they freely parted with a proportion thereof to the relief of the poor:
What they gave, that they have, it still remains theirs, be safely laid up
for them in a place, where rust and moth do not corrupt, and thieves break
through and steal.

XI. All.
THe Magdeburgenses, out of a Spirit of opposition to the Papists, over-prizing
the person and Actions of S. Peter, do in my mind on the other side too much
decry him, causelessly cavilling at his words to our Savior [Mark 10.28.] Ecce
reliquimus omnia, Behold we have left all and followed thee.

What (say they) had he left? He makes as if he had left great matters, and a
mighty Estate, whereas this his ALL was not more then an old ship, some few
rotten nets, and such like inconsiderable accommodations.

But Bellarmine (always ingenuous, sometime Satirical) pays them home for
their causeless exception against that Apostle, What (says he) would they
have him have left more then he had. ALL was ALL, how little soever it was.

Different, I confess, is the Standard and Measure of men's losses in this
time. Some, in preserving of their consciences have lost manners; others Farms,
others Cottages. Some have had a Hin, others a Homer, others an Ephah of
afflictions. However those men must on all hands be allowed the greatest
Loosers, who have lost ALL (how small soever that their ALL was) and who with
the Widow [Mark 12.44.] have parted with (...), All their Livelihood.

XII. Good Accountant.
I Was present in the West Country some 25. years since, when a Bishop made a
partage of money collected by a Brief, amongst such who in a Village had been
sufferers by a Casual Fire; one of whom brought in the Inventory of his losses
far above all belief.

Being demanded how he could make out His losses to so improbable a proportion,
he alleged the burning of a PEAR TREE (growing hard by his House) valuing the
same at twenty years purchase, and the Pears at twenty shillings per annum;
(presuming every one would be a Bearing year) and by such windy particulars did
blow up his losses to the sum by him nominated.

Some pretend in these wars to have lost more thousands then ever they were
possessed of hundreds. These reckon in, not only what they had, but what they
might, yea would have had. They compute not only their possessions, but
reversions, yea their probabilities, possibilities and impossibilities also,
which they might desire, but could never hope to obtain.

The worst is, I might term many of these men ANTI-MEPHIBOSHETS, who out of his
loyalty to David 2 Samuel 19.30. Let them take all, (said he) forasmuch as my
Lord the King is come home again in peace unto his own house. But these, except
they may have all, and more then all, they ever possessed, care not a whit,
whether or no the King ever return; So unconcerned are they in his condition.

XIII. No tittle of Title.
TWo young Gentlemen were comparing their revenues together, vying which of
them were the best. My Demeans (says the one) is worth two; but mine (says
the other) is worth four hundred pounds a year.

My Farms (says the one) are worth four; but mine (says the other) are worth
eight hundred pounds a year.

My Estate (says the one) is my own, to which the other returned no answer, as
conscious to himself, that he kept, what lawfully belongs to another.

I care not how small my means be, so they be my means: I mean my own without
any injury to others. What is truly gotten, may be comfortably kept. What is
otherwise, may be possessed, but not enjoyed.

Upon the Question, what is the worst bread which is eaten. One answered, in
respect of the coursenesse thereof; Bread made of Beans. Another said, Bread of
Acorns. But the third hit the truth, who said, Bread taken out of other men's
mouths, who are the true proprietaries thereof. Such Bread may be sweet in the
mouth to taste, but is not wholesome in the stomach to digest.

XIV. Freely, freely.
A Grave Divine in the VVest-Countrey (familiarly known unto me) conceiving
himself over-taxed, repaired to one of the Governors of the Kings Guarrisons
for to move for some mitigation.

The Governor perceiving the fatten cap of this Divine to be torn; Fie, fie
said he) that a man of your quality should wear such a cap; The RATS have
gnawed it. Oh no, Sir, (answered he) The RATES have gnawed it.

The print or impression of the teeth of Taxes is visible in the clothes of
many men, yea it has corroded holes in many men's Estates. Yea, as Hatto Arch
Bishop of Mentz is reported to have been eaten up by Munster's Cosmin German.
Rats: so the vermin of Taxes, if continuing, is likely to devour our Nation.

However, let us not in the least degree now grudge the payment thereof. Let us
now pay Taxes, that we may never pay Taxes; for as matters now stand, our
Freeness at the present, may cause our Freedom at the future, if once the
Arrears of the Army and Navy were discharged.

I care not how much I am let blood, so it be not by the Adventure of an
Emperick, but Advice of a Physician, who I am sure will take no more Onces from
me, then may consist with my safety, and need does require. Such the Piety and
Policy of the present Parliament, they will impose no more Payments, then the
necessity of the Estate does extort. The rather, because they are Persons
(Blessed be God) of the Primest Quality in the Nation, and let us blood through
their own veins, the greatest part of the Payments they impose, lighting first
on their own Estates.

XV. Cry without cause, and be whipped.
I Have known the City of London almost forty years, their shops did ever sing
the same tune, that TRADING WAS DEAD. Even in the Reign of King James, (when
they wanted nothing but thankfulness) this was their complaint.

It is just with God, that they who complained without cause, should have just
cause to complain. Trading, which then was quick, and in health, has since
been sick, yea in a swound, yea dead, yea buried. There is a Vacation in the
shops in the midst of high-Tearm; And if shops be in a Consumption, ships will
not be long in good health.

Yet I know not whether to call this decay of Trade in London a Mishap, or a
Happy-misse. Probably the City if not pinched with poverty, had never regained
her wealth.

XVI. Spring began.
I Meet with two Etymologies of BONE-FIRES. Some deduce it from fires made of
bones, relating it to the burning of Martyrs, first fashionable in England in
the Reign of King Henry the fourth. But others derive the word (more truly in
my mind) from BOON, that is Good, and Fires; Whether Good be taken here for
Great, or for Merry and Cheerful, such Fires being always made on welcome
occasions.

Such an occasion happened at London last February 1659. I confess the 11. of
March is generally beheld as the first day of the Spring, but hereafter London
(and in it all England) may date its vernal heat (after a long winter of woes
and war) from the 11. of February.

On which day so many Boon-fires (the best NEW-LIGHTS I ever saw in that City)
were made; although I believe the faggots themselves knew as much as some who
laid them on, for what purpose those Fires were made.

The best is, such fires were rather Prophetical then Historical, not so much
telling as foretelling the condition of that City and our Nation, which by Gods
gracious goodness is daily bettered and improved.

But oh the excellent Boon-fire which the converted Ephesians made Acts 19.19.
Many also of them, which used curious arts brought their books together, and
burned them before all men: and they counted the price of them, and found it
fifty thousand pieces of silver.

What was a pint of ashes worth, according to that proportion. But oh in the
imitation of the Ephesians, let us English men labor to find out our
bosom-sin, and burn it (how dear soever unto us) in the flames of holy anger
and indignation. Such Boon-fires, would be most profitable to us, and
acceptable to God, inviting him to perfect and complete the good, which he had
begun to our Nation.

XVII. The Hand is All.
A Gentlewoman some sixty years since came to VVinchester-schoole, where she
had a son, and where Dr. Love (one eminent in his profession) was then
Schoolmasters. This tender mother seeing the terrible rods (the properties of
that School) began with tears to bemoan the condition of her son, subject to
so cruel correction. To whom the Schoolmasters replied, Mistress, content your
self, it matters not how big the rod be, so it be in the hand of Love to manage
it.

Alas, he was only Love in his Surname; but what says the Apostle 1 John 4.6.
God is Love, even in his own Essence and nature.

What then though the wicked be not only a rod in the hand of God; but what is
worse a sword, Psalm. 17.13. the wicked which is thy sword, they shall do no
hurt as long as God has the ordering of them.

A pregnant experiment hereof we have in (the, call it, rod or sword of) our
late Civil war which lasted so long in our land; yet left so little signs
behind it. Such who consider how much was destroyed in the war, may justly
wonder that any provision was left, whilst such, who behold the plenty we have
left, will more admire that any was ever destroyed.

XVIII. All Tongue and Ears.
WE read Acts 17.21. All the Athenians and strangers which were there, spent
their time in nothing else but either to tell, or to hear some new thing.

How comes this transposition? tell and hear, it should be hear and tell; they
must hear it, before they could tell it; and in the very method of nature,
those that are deaf, are dumb.

But know, it is more then probable that many Athenians told what they never
heard, being themselves the first Finders, Founders, and Forgers of false
reports, therewith merely to entertain the itching curiosity of others.

England abounds with many such Athenians; it is hard to say, whether more
false Coin, or false News be minted in our days. One side is not more pleased
with their own factions, then the other is with their own fictions.

Some pretend to Intelligence without Understanding, whose relations are their
own confutations. I know some, who repair to such Novelants on purpose, to know
what news is false by their reporting thereof.

XIX Give and Take.
THe Archbishop of Spalato, when Dean of Windsor, very affectionately moved the
Prebendaries thereof, to contribute bountifully toward the relieving of a
distressed Forreigner, reporting him a person of much worth and want, to whom
one of the Company replied. Qui SV A DET SV A DET.
Let him who persuades others, give something of his own.
But the Archbishop, who was as Covetous as Ambitious, and whose Charity had a
tongue without hands, would not part with a penny.

The Episcopal Party does desire and expect, that the Presbyterian should remit
of his rigidnesse, in order to an Expedient betwixt them. The Presbyterians
require, that the Episcopal side abate of their Austerity, to advance an
accommodation.

But some on both sides are so wedded to their wilfulness, stand so stiff in
their judgments, are so high and hot in their passions, they will not part with
the least punctillo in their opinions and practices.

Such men's judgments cannot pretend to the exactness of the Gibeonites Judge.
20.16. that they hit the Mark of the Truth at an hairs breadth and fail not,
yet will they not abate an hairs breadth in order to unity; they will take all,
but tender nothing, make motions with their Mouths, but none with their Feet
for peace, not stirring a step toward it.

O that we could see some proffers and performances of condescension on either
side, and then let others, who remin obstinate, and will embrace no peace, be
branded with PEREZ, Genesis 38.29. the breach be upon them.

XX. CHARITY, CHARITY.
IN my Fathers time, there was a Fellow of Trinity College Camb. a Native of
Carlton in Leicestershire, Camd. Brit. in Leicesterstire.
where the people (through some occult cause) are troubled with a wharling in
their throats, so that they cannot plainly pronounce the Letter R. This
Scholar being conscious of his infirmity, made a Latin Oration of the usual
expected length, without an R therein; and yet did he not only select words fit
for his mouth easy for pronuntiation, but also as pure and expressive for
signification, to show that men might speak without being beholding to the Dogs
letter.

Our English Pulpits for these last eighteen years, have had in them too much
Caninal anger, vented by snapping and snarling spirits on both sides. But if
you bite and devour one another (says the Apostle Gal. 5.15.) Take heed, ye be
not devoured one of another.

Think not that our Sermons must be silent if not satirical, as if Divininity
did not afford smooth subjects enough to be seasonably insisted on in this
Iuncture of time; let us try our skill whether we cannot preach without any
Dog-letter or biting-word: the Art is half learned by intending, and wholly by
serious endeavoring it.

I am sure that such soft Sermons will be more easy for the tongue of the
Preacher in pronouncing them, less grating to the ears of pious people that
hear them, and most edifying to the heart of both speaker and hearers of them.

XXI. But one Favorite.
WE read how Abraham [Gen. 25.5.] gave all he had unto Isaac, As for his six
sons, Zimran, Iokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishback and Shuah, which he had by
Keturah his Concubine; he only gave them gifts, and sent them away into the
East-Countrey.

England has but one Isaac or legitimate Religion of the Church, namely, the
Protestant, as the Doctrine thereof is established in the 39. Articles. But how
many spurious ones she has (whether six, sixty, or sixscore) I neither do
know, nor will enquire, nor will I load my Book, and trouble the Reader with
their new, numerous and hard names.

Oh may the State be pleased so far to reflect on this Isaac, as to settle the
solid inheritance upon him. Let the Protestant Religion only be countenanced by
the Law, be owned and acknowledged for the received Religion of the Nation.

As for other Sects (the sons of Keturah) we grudge not that gifts be bestowed
upon them. Let them have a Toleration (and that I assure you is a great gift
indeed) and be permitted peaceably and privately to enjoy their Consciences
both in opinions and practices. Such favor may safely, not to say ought
justly, be afforded unto them, so long as they continue peaceably in our
Israel, and disturb not the Estate.

This gift granted unto them, they need not to be sent away into the East (or
any other) Country. If they dislike their condition, they will either leave
the Land, and go over seas of their own accord, or else (which is rather to be
desired and hoped for) they will blush themselves out of their former follies,
and by degrees cordially reconcile themselves to the Church of England.

XXII. Calmly, Calmly.
WE read Genesis 3.8. that when God solemnly proceeded in the sentencing of our
first Parents, he was heard walking in the Garden in the cool of the day, to
teach men, when they go about matters of Moment (wherein not only the present
Age, but Posterity is also concerned) to be-calme their souls of all Passion.
But alas! much Reformation made (rather under, then) by King CHARLES was done
in the heat of the day, in the dog days of our civil discords, and mid-summer
Moon of our military distractions. So that possibly, when, that which was done
in the heat of the day, shall be reviewed even by the self-same persons in the
cool of the day, they will perceive something by them so reformed, now to need
a new Reformation.

But this Motion (and all that follow) I humbly lay down at their feet who have
Power and Place to reform, who may either trample upon it, or take it up, as
their wisdoms shall see just occasion.

XXIII. Try and Trust.
IT was wisely requested by the children of the Captivity, Dan. 1. And warily
granted by the Kings Chamberlain unto them, that by way of trial, they should
feed on pulse for ten days, and then an inspection to be made on their
countenances, whether the Lillies therein did look as white, and Roses as red
as before, that so their Bill of their Fare might be either changed or
continued as they saw just occasion.

Let such new practices as are to be brought into our Church be for a time
candidates and probationers on their good Behavior, to see how the temper of
the people will fit them, and they fadge with it, before they be publicly
enjoined.

Let them be like St. Paul's Deacons 1 Timothy 3.10. first be proved, then be
used, if found blameless. I cannot therefore but commend the discretion of
such Statesmen, who knowing the Directory to be but a stranger, and
considering the great inclination the generality of our Nation had to the
Common Prayer, made their Temporary Act to stand in force but for 3 years.

XXIV. Alike but contrary.
I Observe in Scripture, that Power to do some deeds is a sufficient Authority
to do them. Thus Sampson's Power to pluck down the two Fundamental Pillars of
Dagon's Temple, was authority enough for him to do it.

Eliah's Power to make fire to come at his call on the two Captains was
authority enough to do it, because such deeds were above the strength, stature
and standard of human proportion.

However hence it does not follow that it is lawful for a private man with
Axes and Hammers to beat down a Christian Church, because Sampson plucked down
Dagon's Temple; nor does it follow that men may burn their brethren with faggot
and fire, because Eliah called for fire from heaven; These being acts not
miraculous but mischievous; and no might from heaven, but mere malice from
Hell, required for the atchieving thereof.

Here it is hard to say, which of these two things have done most mischief in
England; Public persons having Private souls and Narrow hearts, consulting
their own ease and advantage, or private persons having vast designs to invade
public employments. This is most sure that betwixt them both they have almost
undone the most flourishing Church and State in the Christian world.

XXV. Chasma, Phasma.
HOw bluntly and abruptly does the seventy third Psalm begin? Truly God is good
unto Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart.

Truly is a Term of continuation, not inception of a Speech. The Head or Top of
this Psalm seems lost or cut off, and the Neck only remaining in the room
thereof.

But know, that this Psalm has two Moyeties; one Unwritten, made only in the
Tyring-house of David's heart. The other Written, visible on the Theater,
beginning as is aforesaid.

Thomas Aquinas sitting silent in a musing posture at the Table of the King of
France, at last brake forth into these words, Conclusum est contra Manichaeos,
It is concluded against the Manichees; which speech though Nonsense to the
persons in the place, at the best Independent without any connection to the
discourse at Table, had it is necessary Coherence in the mind of that great
Schoolman.

David newly awaking in this Psalm out of the sweet slumber of his Meditation,
opens his eyes with the good hand-sell of these words; Truly God is good to
Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart. A Maxim of undoubted Truth, and a
firm Anchor to those who have been tossed in the Tempest of these times.

XXVI. Share and Share-like.
CHes-Shire has formerly been called Chief of men. Indeed no County in England
of the same greatness, or (if you will rather) of the same littleness, can
produce so many families of ancient Gentry.

Now let it break the stomachs, but not the hearts: abate the Pride, not
destroy the Courage of the inhabitants of this Shire, that they miscarried in
their late undertakings, not so much by any defect in them, as default in
others.

If ten men together be to lift a log, all must jointly (...), that is, heave
up their parts (or rather their Counterparts) together.

But if nine of them fail, it is not only uncivil, but unjust, that one man
should be expected to be a Giant to do ten men's work.

Ches-Shire is Ches-Shire (and so I hope will ever be) but it is not all
England; and valor it self may be pressed down to death under the weight of
multitude.

The Ld Bacon would have rewards given to those men who in the Quest of natural
experiments, In his Advancement of Learning.
make probable mistakes, both because they are industrious therein, and because
their aberrations may prove instructions to others after them; and to speak
plainly, an ingenuous Miss is of more credit then a Bungling casual Hit.

On the same account, let Cheshire have a Reward of honor, the whole Kingdom
faring the better for this Countie's faring the worse.

XXVII. Natale solum dulcedine, e. c.
I Must confess my self born in Northhamptonshire, and if that worthy County
esteem me no disgrace to it, I esteem it an honor to me. The English of the
Common people therein (lying in the very heart of the Land) is generally very
good.

And yet they have an odd Phrase not so usual in other places.

They used to say when at Cudgel plays (such tame were far better then our
wild Battles) one gave his Adversary such a sound blow, as that he knew not
whether to stand or to fall, that he SETTLED him at a blow.

The Relicts and Stump (my Pen dares write no worse) of the long Parliament
pretended they would Settle the Church and State, but surely had they
continued, it had been done in the Dialect of Northamptonshire; They would so
have settled us, we should neither have known how to have stood, or on which
side to have fallen.

XXVIII. Seasonable prevention.
WHen the famine in Egypt had lasted so long, the Estates of the people were so
exhausted by buying corn of the King, that their money failing, they were
forced to sell their cattle unto Joseph, Genesis 47.17. and this maintained them
with bread for one year more.

But the famine lasting longer, and their stock of cattle being wholly spent,
they then sold all their Lands, and after that their Persons to Joseph, as
Agent for Pharaoh, so that the King of Egypt became Proprietary of the bodies
of all the people in his Land, Genesis 47.23. Then Joseph said unto the people,
Behold, I have bought you this day and your Land for Pharaoh.

If our Taxes had continued longer, they could not have continued longer, I
mean the Nation was so impoverished, that the money (so much was hoarded up, or
transported by military Grandees) could not have been paid in Specie.

Indeed we began the War with Brazen Trumpets, and Silver Money, and then came
unto Silver Trumpets, and Brazen Money, especially in our Parliament
half-crowns.

We must afterward have sold our stocks of Cattle, and then our Lands to have
been able to perform payments. This done, it is Too too suspicious, they would
have seized on our persons too, and have envasselled us for ever unto them.

But, blessed be God, they are stricken upon the Cheek-bone, Psalm. 3.7. whereby
their Teeth are knocked out. Our fathers were not more indebted to Gods
goodness for delivering them from the Spanish Armado, then we are from our own
English Army.

XXIX. Wolf in a Lamb-skin.
BUt where is the Papist all this while? One may make Hue and Cry after Him. He
can as soon not be, as not be active. Alas! with the maid in the Gospel, he is
not dead, but sleeps; or rather, he sleeps not, but only shuts his Eyes
in DOGS-SLEEP, and does awake when he sees his advantage, and snappeth up many
a LAMB out of our flocks.

Where is the Papist do any say; yea where is he not (They multiply as Magots
in May, and act in and under the fanatics, What is faced with faction is lined
with Popery, Faux his Dark Lanthorn (by a strange inversion) is under our new
lights.

Quakers of themselves are a company of dull, blunt, silly souls. But they go
down to the Romish Philistines, and from them they whet all the Edge-tooles of
their Arguments, a formal Syllogism in the mouth of an Anabaptist is plain
Iesuitical Equivocation.

Mean time we Protestant Ministers fish all night, and catch nothing, yea loose
many, who in these times fall from our Church as Leaves in Autumn. God in his
due time send us a seasonable spring, that we may repair our losses again.

XXX. Various fancies.
I know not what fifth Monarchy men would have, and wish that they knew
themselves.

I dare not flatly condemn them, lest I come within the Apostles reproof, 2
Pet. 2.12. speaking evil of things they understand not. If by Christ's reigning
they only intend, his powerful and effectual ruling by his Grace, in the
hearts of his Servants; we all, will, (not turn) but continue Fifth Monarchy
men, having always been of this judgment since we were of any judgment, Had
we as many Arms as fingers, we would use them all herein to embrace their
Persons and Opinions.

But some go farther, to expect an actual and personal reign of Christ on Earth
a thousand years, though not agreeing.

For herein since some make him but about to set forth, others to be well
onwards of his way, others to be allighting in the Court, others to stand
before the door, others that he is entering the Palace, according to the
slownesse or swiftness of their several fancies herein.

However, if this be but a bare speculation, and advances not any further, let
them peaceably enjoy it. But if it has a dangerous influence on men's Practices
to unhinge their Allegiance; and if the pretense to wait for Christ in his
person be an intent to slight him in his Proxy, [the Magistrate] we do condemn
their Opinion as false, and detest it as damnable, leaving their persons to be
ordered by the wisdoms of those in Authority.

XXXI. Made Loyal.
WHen King Edward the I. marched into Scotland, the men of the Bishopric of
Durham refused to follow his Standard, pleading for themselves, that they were
HALY-WORK-FOLK, only to wait on the Shrine of St. Cutbert, and not to go out of
their own Country. But that wise and valiant Prince cancelled their pretended
Privileges.

He levelled them with the rest of his subjects for CIVIL and MILITARY, as well
as HALY-WORK-FOLK, and made them to march with his Army against his Enemies.

If fifth Monarchy, ( alias first Anarchy) men challenge to themselves; that (by
virtue of their Opinion they hold) they must be exempted from their Obedience
to the Government, because they forsooth (as the Life-gard to his Person) must
attend the coming of Christ to reign on Earth; Such is the wisdom of the
State, it will make them know they must share in subjestion with the rest of
our Nation.

But charity does command me to believe that in stating their Opinions, fifth
Monarchy men's expressions are more offensive then their intentions, mouths
worse then their minds, whose brains want strength to manage their own wild
notions, and God grant their Arms may never have power to produce them into
Action.

XXXII. Attend, Attend.
SOme of those whom they call QUAKERS, are (to give them their due) very good
moral men, and exactly just in their civil transactions. In proof whereof let
me mention this passage, though chiefly I confess for the Application thereof,
which having done me (I praise God) some good, I am confident will do no hurt
to any other.

A Gentleman had two Tenants, whereof one being a QUAKER, repaired to his
Landlord on the Quarter-day; Here THOU (said he) tell out and take THY Rent,
without stirring his cap, or showing the least sign of respect.

The other came cringing and congying; If it please your Worship (said he) the
times are very hard, and trading is dead, I have brought to your Worship five
pounds (the whole due being twenty) and shall procure the rest for your
Worship with all possible speed.

Both these Tenants put together would make a perfect one, the Rent-compleating
of the one, and Tongue-complements of the other. But seeing they were divided,
I am persuaded that of the two, the Landlord was less offended with the
former, imputing his ill manners to his folly, but ascribing his good dealing
to his honesty.

God expects and requires both good Works and good Words. We cannot make
our addresses and applications unto him in our prayers with too much awe and
reverence.

However such who court God with luscious language, give him all his
Attributes, and (as King James said of a Divine, who shall be namelesse)
complement with God in the Pulpit, will be no whit acceptable unto him, if they
do not also endeavor to keep his Commandments.

It is the due paying of Gods QUIT-RENTS, which he expects, I mean the
reallising of our gratitude unto him for his many mercies, in leading the
remainder of our life's according to his will and his word

XXXIII. No Remedy but Patience.
ONce a Jailer demanded of a Prisoner, newly committed unto him, whether or no
he were a Roman Catholic? No, answered he: What then, said he, Are you an
Anabaptist? Neither replied the Prisoner. What (said the other) are you a
Brownist or a Quaker? Nor so, said the man, I am a Protestant, without wealt or
guard, or any addition equally opposite to all Heretics and sectaries. Then,
said the Jailer, get you unto the Dungeon, I will afford no favor to you, who
shall get no advantage by you. Had you been of any of the other Religions, some
hope I had to gain by the visits of such as are of your own persuasion, whereas
now you will prove to me but an unprofitable Prisoner.

This is the misery of moderation; I recall my word (seeing misery properly
must have sin in it.) This is an Affliction attending moderate men, that they
have not an active party to side with them and favor them.

Men of great stature will quickly be made Porters to a King, and those
diminutively little, Dwarfes to a Queen, whilst such who are of a middle height
may get themselves masters where they can. The moderate man eminent for no
excess or extravagancy in his judgment, will have few Patrons to protect, or
persons to adhere unto him. But what says St. Paul [1 Co. 15.19.] If in this
life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men the most miserable.

XXXIV. Pottage for Milk.
IN these licentious times wherein Religion lay in a Swoone and many pretended
Ministers ( Minions of the Times) committed or omitted in Divine Service, what
they pleased, some, not only in Wales, but in England, and in London it self
on the Lords day (sometimes with, sometimes without a Psalm) presently popped
up into the Pulpit before any portion of Scripture either in the Old or New
Testament was read to the People.

Hereupon one in jest earnest said, that formerly they put down BISHOPS and
DEANS, and now they had put down CHAPTERS too. It is high time that this fault
be reformed for the future, that Gods Word which is all Gold, be not justled
out to make room for men's Sermons, which are but parcel-gilt at the best.

XXXV. Moderate may meet.
WHen S. Paul was at Athens, Actt 18.18. Then certain Philosophers of the
Epicureans, and of the Stoics encountered him etc.

Some will say, why was there no mention here of the Peripateticks, and
Academicks, both notable Sects of Philosophers, and then numerous in the Ciry
of Athens.

The answer is this, these being persons acted with more moderate Principles,
were contented to be silent, though not concurring in their Judgments: whilst
the Epicures and Stoics were violent in the extremes, the first for the
Anarchy of Fortune, the other for the Tyranny of Fate.

PEACE in our Land like St Paul, is now likely to be encountered with two
opposite Parties, such as are for the Liberty of a Commonwealth, and such as
are for an absolute Monarchy in the full height thereof; but I hope neither of
both are so considerable in their number, parts, and influence on the People,
but that the Moderate Party, advocates for Peace, will prevail for the settling
thereof.

XXXVI. What, never wise?
IN the year of our Lord 1606, there happened a sad overflowing of the
SEVERN-SEA on both sides thereof, which some still alive do ( ONE I hope
thankfully) remember,

An account hereof was written to John Stoe the industrious Chronicler, from Dr
Still then Bishop of Bath and Wells, and three other Gentlemen of Credit, to
insert it in his Story; one passage wherein I cannot omit.

STOES Chronicle page 889. Among other things of Note it happened, that upon
the tops of some hills, diverse beasts of contrary nature had got up for their
safety, as Dog, Cats, Foxes, Hares, Conies, Moles, Mice and Rats, who remained
together very peaceably, without any manner or sign of fear of violence one
toward another.

How much of Man was there then in bruit Creatures? How much of bruitishnesse
is there now in Men? Is this a time for those who are sinking for the same
cause, to quarrel and fall out? I dare add no more, but the words of the
Apostle, Tim. 2.7. Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in
all things.

XXXVII. Recede a Title.
I saw two ride a race for a Silver Cup; he who won it, out ran the Post many
Paces: indeed he could not stop his Horse in his full Cariere, and therefore
was fain to run beyond the Post, or else he had never come soon rnough unto it.

But presently after, when he had won the wager, he rained his Horse back
again, and softly returned to the Post, where from the Judges of the Match he
received the Cup, the reward of his Victory.

Surely many Moderate Man designed a good mark to themselves, and propounded
pious Ends and Aims in their intentions. But Quere whether in pursuance
thereof, in our late Civil destruction, they were not violented to out run the
Mark, (So impossible it is to stop a Soul in the full speed thereof) and
whether they did not in some things over-doe, and exceed what they intended.

If so, it is neither Sin nor Shame, but honorable and profitable for such
persons (sensible of their own over-activity) even fairly to go back to the
Post which they have outrun, and now calmly to demonstrate to the whole world,
that this only is the true and full measure of their judgments, whilst the
rest was but the superfluity of their passions.

XXXVIII. Beat thy self.
I saw a Mother threatening to beat her little child for not rightly pronouncing
that Petition in the Lords Prayer, and forgivens our Trespasses, as we forgive
them that Trespass against us. The child essaied and offered as well as it
could to uttet it, adventuring at Tepasses, Trepasses, but could not pronounce
the word aright. Alas, it is a SHIBOLETH to a child's tongue, wherein there is
a confluence of hard consonants together, and therefore if the Mother had
beaten defect in the Infant for default, she deserved to have been beaten her
self.

The rather, because what the child could not pronounce, the Parents do not
practice. O how lispingly and imperfectly do we perform the close of this
Petition, as we forgive them that Trespass against us. It is well, if with the
child we endeavor our best, though falling short in the exact observance
thereof.

XXXIX. Without Blood.
IT passes for a general report of what was customary in former times, that
the Sheriff of the County used to present the Judge with a pair of white
Gloves, at those, which we call MAYDEN-ASSISES, viz. when no Malefactor is put
to death therein; a great Rarity (though usual in small) in large and populous
Counties.

England a spacious Country, is full of numerous factions in these distracted
times. It is above belief, and will hardly find credit with posterity, that a
general Peace can be settled in our Nation, without effusion of Blood.

But if we should be blessed with a dry Peace, without one drop of Blood
therein, O let the white Gloves of Honor and Glory, be in the first place
presented to the God of Heaven, the principal giver, and a second white pair of
Gratitude, be given to our General, the isntrumental procurer thereof.

XL. Against the Hair and the Flesh.
ALl Devils are not equally easy to be ejected out of possessed pepple; some
are of a more sullen, sturdy, stubborn nature, good (or rather bad) at
hold-fast, and hard to be cast out.

In like manner all Bosom Sins are not conquered with facility alike, and
these three are of the greatest difficulty.

1. Constitutionary sins, rivited in our tempers and complections. 2. Customary
sins, habited in us by practice and presumption. 3. Such sins, to the
repentance whereof Restitution is required.
Oh when a man has not only devoured Widows houses, Matthew. 23.14. but also
they have passed the first and second Concoction in his sttomack; yea, when
they are become blood in the Veins, yea sinews in the Flesh of his Estate, Oh
then to refund, to mangle and disintire ones demesnes, this goes shrowdly
against flesh and blood indeed. But what says the Apostle. flesh and blood
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

Yet even this Devil may be cast out with Fasting and Prayer, Matthew. 17.21.
This Sin, notwithstanding it holds VIOLENT POSSESSION, may by those good
means, and Gods blessing thereon, have a firm Ejection.

XLI. A Free Will offering.
WHen Job began to set up the second time, he built his recruited estate upon
three bottoms.

1. Gods blessing. 2. His own industry. 3. His friends charity.
Job 42.11. Every man also gave him a piece of money, and every one also an
Ear-ring of Gold. Many drops meeting together filled the vessel.

When our patient Job, plundered of all he had, shall return again; certainly
his loyal subjects will offer presents unto him (though they (alas!) who love
him best can give him least.) Surely all is not given away in making the golden
Calfe, but that there is some left for the business of the Tabernacle.

But surely those have cause to be most bountiful, who may truly say to him
what David said humbly to the God of Heaven Chron. 1.29.14. Of Thine Own have I
given unto thee.

XLII. A good Anchor.
ISaac ignorantly going along to be offered, propounded to his father a very
hard question Genesis 22.7. Behold the fire and wood, but where is the lamb for a
burnt-offering.

Abraham returned, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering.

But was not this Gratis Dictum of Abraham? Did not he herein speak
without-book? where and when did God give him a promise to provide him a lamb?

Indeed he had no particular promise as to this present point, but he had a
general one Genesis 15.1. Fear not, Abraham, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding
great reward. Here was not only a lamb, but a flock of sheep, yea a heard of
all cattle promised unto him.

It has kept many an honest soul in these sad times from sinking into despair;
that though they had no Express in Scripture that they should be freed from
the particular miseries relating to this War. Yet they had Gods Grand Charter
for it, Romans 8. 28. And we know that all things work together for good to them
that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose.

XLIII. Eyes bad, not object.
I Looked upon the wrong or backside of a piece of Arras, it seemed to me as a
continued Nonsense, there was neither head nor foot therein, confusion it self
had as much method in it, a company of thrumbs and threads, with many pieces
and patches of several sorts, sizes and colors, all which signified nothing
to my understanding.

But then looking on the Reverse, or right-side thereof, all put together, did
spell excellent proportions and figures of men and cities. So that indeed it
was an History not wrote with a pen, but wrought with a needle.

If men look upon our late times with a mere eye of Reason, they will hardly
find any sense therein, such their huddle and disorder. But alas! the wrong
side as objected to our eyes, whilst the right side is presented to the High
God of Heaven, who knows that an admirable order does result out of this
confusion, and what is presented to him at present, may hereafter be so showed
to us, as to convince our judgments in the truth thereof.

XLIV. Ever, Never.
WE read Psalm 55.19. Because they have no changes, therefore they [the wicked]
fear not God.

Profanesse is a strange Logician, which can collect and infer the same
conclusion from contrary premises. Libertines here in England, Because they
have had so many changes, therefore they fear not God.

Jacob taxed Laban Genesis 31.41. Thou have changed my wages ten times. I have
neither list nor leisure to enquire how far our alterations of Government
within these few years, fall short of that number.

But it is a sad truth, that as King Mithrydates is said to have fed on poison
so long, that at last it became ordinary food to his body: so the multitude
of changes have proved no change in many men's apprehensions, being so common
and ordinary, it has made no effectual impression on their spirits. Yea which
is worse, they (as if all things came by casualty) fear God the less for these
alterations.

XLV. Hear me out.
I Must confess my self to be (what I ever was) for a Commonwealth: But give
me leave to state the meaning of the word, seeing so much mischief has taken
covert under the Homonymy thereof.

A Common wealth and a King are no more contrary then the Trunk or body of a
tree and the top branch thereof: There is a Re-publick included in every
Monarchy.

The Apostle speaks of some Ephesians in the 2. and 12. Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel: That Commonwealth is neither Aristocratical nor
Democratical, but has one sole and single Person JESUS CHRIST the supreme head
thereof.

May I live (if it may stand with Gods good will and pleasure) to see England a
Commonwealth in such a posture, and it will be a joyful Object to all who are
peaceable in our Nation.

XLVI. Mons Mobilis.
I Observe that the Mountains now extant, to fall under a double Consideration;
Those by Creation. Those by Inundation.


The former were of Gods making, Primitive Mountains; when at the first his
Wisdom did here sink a vale, there swell a hill, so to render the Prospect of
the Earth the more grateful by the alternate variety thereof.

The second by inundation were such as owe their Birth and being to Noah's
flood: when the water lying long in a place, (especially when driven on with
the fury of the wind) corroded an Hollow, and so by consequence cast up an
Hill on both sides.

For such Mountains of Gods making, who either by their birth succeed to
Estates, or have acquired them by Gods blessing on their lawful industry,
good success may they have with their wealth and honor. And yet let not them
be too proud, and think with David (That God has made their mountain so strong
it cannot be moved) but know themselves subject to the Earthquakes of
mutability as well as others.

As for the many mountains of our Age, grandized by the unlawful ruin of
others swollen to a Tympany by the Consumption of their betters; I wish them just
as much Joy with their greatness as they have right unto it.

XLVII. Not invisible.
A Waggish scholar (to say no worse) standing behind the back of his Tutor,
conceived himself secured from his sight, and on this confidence he presumed to
make antic mocks and mouths at him. Mean time his Tutor had a Looking-glass
(unknown to the scholar) before his face, wherein he saw all which his Pupil
did, and the Pupil soon after felt something from his Tutor.

Many things have been done in Hugger mugger in our Age, profane persons
conceited that their privacy protected them from divine inspection. Some say
with the wicked in the Psalm, Tush, shall the Lord see.

But know that, Revelat. 4.6. before the Throne there was a sea of glass like
unto Crystal. This is Gods Omnisciency. Sea, there is the largeness:
Crystal, there is the pureness thereof. In this glass all persons and
practices are plainly represented to Gods sight, so that such who sin in secret
shall suffer openly.

XLVIII. Best race.
GOd has two grand Attributes, first, Optimus, that he is the best of Beeings.
Secondly, Maximus, that he is the greatest of Essences. It may justly seem
strange that all men naturally are ambitious, with the Apostles Luke 22.24. to
contest and contend for the latter, who shall be accounted for the greatest.
Outward greatness having no reality in it self, but founded merely in outward
account and reputation of others.

But as for his goodness they give it a goe-by, no whit endeavoring the
imitation thereof, whereas indeed greatness without goodness is not only
useless, but also dangerous and destructive both to him that has it and those
who are about him.

This is a fruit of Adam's fall, and flows from Original corruption. Oh! for
the future let us change this our Ambition into holy Emulation, and fairly run
a race of grace, who shall outstrip others in goodness.

In which race strive lawfully to gain the Victory, supplant not those that run
before thee, Iustle not those who are even with thee, Hinder not those who come
behind thee.

XLIX. Feed the Lambs.
WHat may be the cause why so much cloth so soon changes color? It is because
it was never wet WADDED, which gives the fixation to a color, and sets it
in the cloth.

What may be the reason why so many now a-daies are carried about with every
wind of Doctrine, even to scour every point in the Compass round about? Surely
it is because they were never well CATECHIZED in the principles of Religion.

O for the Ancient and Primitive Ordinance of Catechizing, every youth can
preach; but he must be a man indeed who can profitably catechize.

Indeed Sermons are like whole Ioints for men to manage, but Catechizing is
Mince-meat, shred into Questions and Answers (fit for children to eat, and
easy for them to digest) whilst the Minister may also for the Edification of
those of riper years) enlarge and dilate himself on both as he sees just
occasion.

L. Name and thing.
THere is a new word Coined within few months called FANATICS, which by the
close stickling thereof seems well cut out and proportioned to signify what
is meant thereby, even the Sectaries of our Age.

Some (most forcedly) will have it Hebrew derived from the word to see or face
one, (...) vidit.
importing such whose Piety consists chiefly in Visage, looks and outward
shows; Others will have it Gerek from (...), to show and appear; their Meteor
Piety consisting only in short blazing the forerunner of their extinction.
But most certainly the word is Latin from Fanum a Temple, and FANATICI were
such who living in or attending thereabouts were frighted with Spectra or
Apparitions, which they either saw or fancied themselves to have seen. These
People in their fits and wild raptures pretended to strange predictions; -- ut
fanaticus oestro
Percussus Bellonatuo, divinat and ingens
Omen habes, inquit, magni clarique triumphi.
Juven. Sat. 4. Ut mala quem scabies and morbus regius urget,
Aut fanaticus error.
Hor. in Poet.

It will be said we have already (more then a Good) many Nicknames of parties
already, which does but inflame the difference, and make the breach the wider
betwixt us. It Is confess't, but withal it is promised that when they withdraw
the thing we will substract the name. Let them leave off their wild Fancies
inconsistent with Scripture, Antiquity and Reason it self, and then we will
endeavor to bury the FANATIC and all other names in perpetual oblivion.

FINIS.
Mixed Contemplations On these Times.
I. All before.
A Dear Friend of mine (now I hope with God) was much troubled with an
impertinent and importunate fellow, desirous to tell him his fortune. For things
to come (said my friend) I desire not to know them, but am contented to attend
Divine Providence: Tell me if you can, some remarkable passages of my life
past. But the Cunning Man was nothing for the Preter-Tense (where his falsehood
might be discovered) but all for the Future, counting himself therein without
the reach of confutation.

There are in our age a Generation of People, who are the best of Prophets* and
worst of Historians; Daniel and the Revelation are as easy to them as the Ten
Commandments, and the Lords Prayer: They pretend exactly to know the time of
Christ's actual Reign on Earth, of the Ruin of the Romish Antichrist, yea, of
the day of judgment it self.

But these Oracles are struck quite dumb, if demanded any thing, concerning
the time past; About the coming of the Children of Israel out of Egypt and
Babylon, the original increase and Ruin of the 4. Monarchies; Of these and
the like they can give no more account, then the Child in the Cradle. They are
all for things to come, but have gotten (through a great Cold of Ignorance)
such a CREEK in their Neck, they cannot look backward on what was behind them.

II. True Text. False Gloss.
A Husbandman Anabaptistically inclined in a pleasant humor, came to his
Minister, and told him with much cheerfulness, that this very Seeds-time the
words of the Apostle 1 Cor. 9.10. were fulfilled, that he that ploweth may plow
in hope.

Being desired further to explain himself; I mean (said he) we husbandmen now
plow in hope, that a harvest we shall never pay Tithes, but be eased from that
Antichristian yoke for the time to come. It seems, he had received such
intelligence from some of his own party, who reported, what they desired.

He might plow in hope to reach his nine parts, but in despair to have the
tenth, especially since God has blessed us with so wise a Parliament,
consisting, not only of Men chosen, but of Persons truly the Choice of the
Nation, who will be (as if not more) tender of the Churches right then their
own interest. They have read* how Pharaoh King of Egypt, Genesis 47.22. would in
no case alienate the Lands of the Priests. The very Gypsies, who generally have
no good name, (condemned for crafty Cheaters and Cozeners) were conscientiously
precise in this particular, and they would not take away, what was given to
their God in his Ministers.

III. Foul-mouth Stopped.
AMbitious Absalom endeavored to bring a scandal on his Fathers Government,
complaining `the Petitioners, who repaired to his Court for Justice, were
slighted and neglected [2 Samuel 15.3.] See thy matters are good and right, but
there is no man deputed of the King to hear he.

But we know the English Proverb; Ill will, never speaks well. Let us do that
justice to David, yea, to our own judgments, not to believe a graceless Son,
and Subject, against a gracious Father and Sovereign,

Some malcontents, (Ismaels, whose Swords are against every one,) seek to
bring a false report on the Parliament as if the Clergy must expect no favor
not to say Justice, from them, because there are none in the House elected and
deputed, either to speak for them, or hear them speak for themselves.

Time was (say they) when the Clergy was represented in the House of Lords by
two Archbishops, and four and twenty Bishops. Time was, when the Clergy had
their own Convocation, granting Subsidies for them, so that their purses were
only opened by the hands of their own Proxies, but now though our matters be
good and right* there is no man deputed to hear us.

I am and ever will be deaf, to such false and scandalous suggestions, if there
be four hundred and odd (because variously reckoned up) in the House of
Parliament, I am confident we Clergiemen have four hundred and odd Advocates
for us therein. What Civil Christian would not plead for a Dumb man? Seeing
the Clergy has lately lost their voice, they so long had in Parliaments;
Honor, and Honesty will engage those pious persons therein to plead for our
just concernments.

IV. Atoms at last.
I Meet not either in sacred or profane writ with so terrible a Rout, as Saul
gave unto the host of the Ammonites, under Nahash their King, 1 Samuel 11.11. And
it came to pass, that they which remained were scattered, so that two of them
were not left together. And yet we have daily experience of greater scatterings
and dissipations of men in their opinions.

Suppose ten men out of pretended purity, but real pride and peevishness, make
a wilful separation from the Church of England, possibly they may continue some
competent time in tolerable unity together.

Afterward upon a new discovery of a higher and holier way of Divine service,
these ten will split asunder into five and five, and the purer moyetie divide
from the other, as more drossie and feculent.

Then the five in process of time upon the like occasion of clearer
Illumination, will cleave themselves into three and two.

Some short time after, the three will crumble into two and one, and the two
part into one and one, till they come into the condition of the Ammonites, so
scattered that two of them were not left together.

I am sad, that I may add with too much truth, that one man will at last be
divided in himself, distracted often in his judgment betwixt many opinions,
that, what is reported of Tostatus lying on his deathbed, In multitudine
controversiarum non habuit, quod crederet; amongst the multitude of
persuasions, through which he had passed, he knows not where to cast Anchor
and fix himself at the last.

V. An ill Match.
DIvine Providence is remarkable in ordering, that a Fog and a Tempest never
did, nor can, meet together in nature. For as soon as a Fogg is fixed, the
Tempest is allaid; and as soon, as a Tempest does arise, the Fogg is dispersed.
This is a great mercy, for, otherwise such small vessels, as boats and barges,
which want the conduct of the Card and Compass, would irrecoverably be lost.

How sad then is the condition of many Sectaries in our age; which in the same
instant have a Fogg of ignorance in their judgments, and a Tempest of violence
in their affections, being too blind to go right, and yet too active to stand
still.

VI. Down, yet Up.
HYPOCRIT, in the native Etymology of the word, as it is used by ancient
Greek-Authors signifies, such a one, qui alienae personae in Comoedia aut
Tragoedia est effector et repraesentator, who in Comedy or Tragedy does feign
and represent the person of another; In plain English, Hypocrite is neither
more nor less then a Stage Player.

We all know that Stage Players some years since were put down by public
Authority, and though something may be said for them, more may be brought
against them, who are rather in an Employment then a Vocation.

But let me safely utter my too just fears, I suspect the fire was quenched in
the chimney, and in an other respect scattered about the house. Never more
stange Stage Players then now, who wear the vizards of Piety and holiness,
that under that covert they may more securely commit sacrilege, oppression,
and what not?

In the days of Queen Elizabeth, a person of Honor or worship, would as
patiently have digested the LIE, as to have bin told, that they did wear false
Pendents, or any counterfeit Pearl or Jewels about them, so usual in our age,
yet would it were the worst piece of Hypocrisy in fashion. Oh, let us all
labor for integrity of heart, and either appear what we are, or be what we
appear.

VII. Caleb, all heart.
I Was lately satisfied, in what I heard of before, by the confession of an
excellent Artist (the most skilful in any kind are most willing to acknowledge
their ignorance) that the mystery of Aneiling of glass, that is, baking it so,
that the color may go clean through it, is now by some casualty quite lost in
England, if not in Europe.

Break a piece of Red glass, painted some four hundred years since* and it will
be found as red in the middle, as in the out sides, the color is not only on
it, but in it and through it.

Whereas now all Art can perform, is only to fix the Red on one side of the
glass, and that often time so faint and fading, that within few years, it falls
of, and looks pyebald to the eye.

I suspect a more important mystery is much lost in our age, viz. the
transmitting of Piety clean through the heart, that a man become Inside and
Outside alike. Oh the sincerity of the ancient Patriarchs, inspired Prophets,
holy Apostles, patient Martyrs, and pious Fathers of the Primitive Church,
whereas only outside sanctity is too usual in our age. Happy the man, on whose
Monument that character of Asa [1 King. 15.14.] may be truly inscribed for his
Epitaph; Here lies the man, whose heart was perfect with the Lord all his
days. Heart, perfect, Oh the finest of wares! All his days, Oh the largest of
measures!

VIII. Fie for Shame.
COnsidering with my self the causes of the growth and increase of impiety and
profaness in our Land, amongst others this seems to me not the least, viz.
the late many false and erroneous Impressions of the BIBLE. Now know, what is
but carelessness in other books, is impiety in setting forth of the Bible.

As Noah in all unclean creatures preserved but two of a kind, so among some
hundreds in several editions we will insist only on two instances.

In the Bible printed at London 1653. We read, 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the
unrighteous shall inherit the Kingdom of God? For not inherit.

Now, when a Reverend Dr. in Divinity did mildly reprove some Libertines for
their Licentious life, they did produce this Text from the Authority of this
corrupt edition, in justification of their vicious and inordinate conversations.

The next instance shall be in the Bible printed at London in quarto
(forbearing the name of the Printer, because not done wilfully by him) in the
singing Psalms, Psalm. 67.2.

That all the Earth may know.
The way to WORLDLY WEALTH, for GODLY wealth.
It is too probable, that too many have perused and practiced this erroneous
Impression, namely such, who by Plundering, Oppression, Cosening, Force and
fraud have in our age suddenly advanced vast estates.

IX. Little, loud Liars.
I Remember, one in the University gave for his question: Artis compendium,
Artls Dispendium, The contracting of Arts is the corrupting of them. Sure I am,
the truth hereof appears too plainly in the Pearle-Bible printed at London
1653. in the volume of Twenty four; for therein all the Dedications and Titles
of David's Psalms are wholly left out, being part of the Original Text in
Hebrew, and intimating the Cause and the Occasion of the writing and composing
those Psalms, whereby the matter may be better illustrated.

The design may be good to reduce the Bible to so small a volume, partly to
make it the more portable in men's pockets, partly to bring down the price of
them, that the poor people may the better compass them. But know that vilis in
the Latin tongue, in the first sense signifies what is cheap, in the second
sense, what is Base, The small price of the Bible has caused the small prizing
of the Bible, especially since so many damnable and pernicious mistakes have
escaped therein.

I cannot omit an other Edition in a large 12o making the Book of Truth to
begin with a loud lie, pretending this title, Imprinted at London by Robert
Barker etc. Anno. 1638.

Whereas indeed they were imported from Holland 1656. and that contrary to our
statutes. What can be expected from so lying a frontispiece, but suitable
falsehoods, wherewith it abounds.

Oh! that men in power and place would take these things into their serious
confiderations; a caution too late to amend what is past, but early enough for
the future to prevent the importing of foreign, and misprinting of home-made
Bibles.

X. Name General.
WE read of Joseph (when advanced in the Court of Pharaoh,) that he called his
eldest Son, Genesis 41.51. Manasseh, for God, said he, has made me forget all my
toil and my Fathers house.

Forget his Fathers house! the more unnatural and undutifull Son he, (may some
say) for his ungodly oblivion

O no, Joseph never Historically forgot his Fathers house, nor lost the
affection he bare thereunto, only he forgot it both to the sad, and to the
vindicative part of his memory, he kept no grudge against his brethren for
their cruel usage of him.

If God should be pleased to settle a General peace betwixt all parties in our
Land, let us all name our next-born child (it will fit both Sexes) Manasseh.
That is forgetting, Let us forget all our Plunderings Sequestrations, Injuries
offered unto us, or suffered by us, The best oil is said to have ^o Taste,
that is, no Tang. Though we carry a simple and single remembrance of our losses
unto the grave, it being impossible to do other-waies (except we raze the
faculty of memory Root and Branch out of our mind) yet let us not keep any
record of them with the least reflection of revenge.

XI. Apt Scholars.
MOthers generally teach their children three sins, before they be full two
years old.

First, Pride; Point child, Where are you fine? Where are you fine? Secondly,
Lying; It was not A. that cried, it was B. that cried. Thirdly, Revenge; Give
me a blow and I will beat him, Give me a blow and I will beat him.
Surely, children would not be so bad, nor so soon bad. But partly, for bad
precedents set before them, partly f^^ bad precepts taught unto them.

As all three Lessons have taken too deep impressions in our hearts, so chiefly
the last of revenge. How many blows have been given on that account, within our
remembrance, And yet I can make it good, that we in our age are more bound to
pardon our enemies, then our Fathers and Grandfathers in their Generation.

For charity consists in two main parts; In donando and condonando, IN GIVING
and FORGIVING. Give we cannot so much, as those before us, our estates being so
much impaired and impoverished with Taxes unknown to former ages.

Seeing therefore one Channel of charity must be the less, the stream thereof
ought to run broader and deeper in the other. The less we can Give, the more we
should forgive: But alas! this is the worst of all, that Giving goes not so
much against our coveteousness' b^^ forgiving goes more against our Pride and
Ambition.

XII. All well wearied.
TWo Gentlemen, Father and Son, both of great quality lived together, The Son
on a time: Father (said he) I would feign be satisfied how it comes to pass
that of such Agreements, which I make betwixt neighbors fallen out, not one of
twenty does last and continue. Whereas not one of twenty fail wherein you are
made Arbitrator.

The reason (answered the other) is plain. No sooner do two friends fall out,
but presently you offer your self to compremise the difference, wherein I more
commend your charity, then your discretion Whereas I always stay till the
parties send or come to me, after both sides being well wearied by spending
much money in Law are mutually desirous of an Agreement.

Had any Endeavored some sixteen years since, to have advanced a firm peace
betwixt the two opposite parties in our Land, their success would not have
answered their intentions, men's veins were then so full of blood, and purses
of money.

But since there has been so large an evacuation of both. And men begin
soberly to consider, that either side may (by woeful experience) make other
miserable, but it is only our union can make both happy; some hope there is,
that a peace, if now made, may probably last and continue, which God in his
mercy make us worthy of, that we may in due time receive it.

XIII. O INCONSTANCY.
LEarned Master Camden Treating in an Astrologicall way, under what Planet In
his Brit. p. 82.
Britain is seated, alleges but one Author, viz. Johannes de Muris, who
places our Island under Saturn, whilst he produces three, viz. the Friar
Perscrutator, Esquidius, and Henry Silen, which place Britain under the Moon.

It will add much (in the general apprehension of People) to the judgment of
the latter, that so many Changes and vicissitudes in so short a time have befell
our Nation; we have been in twelve years a Kingdom, Commonwealth,
Protecto^dome, afterward under an Army, Parliament etc. Such inconstancy does
speak us under the Moon indeed; But the best is, if we be under the Moon, the
Moon is under God, And nothing shall happen unto us, but what shall be for his
Glory, and we hope for our good; and that we may in due time be under the SUN
again.

XIV. Recovered.
TYrannus was a good word at first, ^^porting no more then a King; The pride
and cruelty of some made the (...) ill, as it does in the Modern (...)hereof.

PROVIDENCE, as good a word, as (...) ^ivinity, has suffered so much (...)
modern abusing thereof, that con^^^ncious people begin to loath and ^^te it. For
Gods Providence has been ^^^aged against Gods precepts. Kings ^^^e word was
never in our Land produced against his broad Seal. Yet Success, (an argument
borrowed from the Turks) has been pleaded as the voice of Gods approbation
against his positive and express will in his Word.

But God has been pleased to vindicate his own honor, and to assert the
Credit of Providence, which is now become a good word again. If IMPULSIVE
PROVIDENCE (a new coined phrase) has given the late Army their greatness,
EXPULSIVE PROVIDENCE (a newer phrase) has given them their smallness, being
now set by, laid aside as useless, and not set by, so far from terrifying of
any, by few they are regarded.

XV. Gratitude.
New Castle on Tyne is (without Corrivall) the Richest Town in England, which
before the Conquest was usually known by the name of Monk- Camdens Brit. in
Northumb.
Chester.

Exeter must be allowed of all One of the neatest and sweetest Cities of
England, which anciently by the Saxons was called Idem in Devon.
Monk-Town, both which names are now utterly out of use, and known only to
Antiquaries.

God has done great things already, whereof we rejoice, by the hand of our
Great General, in order to the Settlement of our Nation. When the same (as we
hope in due time) shall be completed, not only New Castle and Exeter shall
have just cause with comfort to remember their old Names, but every County,
City, Market Town, Parish, and Village in England, may have the name of MONK
put upon them. But oh the Modesty of this worthy person is as much as his
Merit, who has learned from valiant, wise, and loyal 2 Samuel 12.25.
Joab, to do nothing prejudicial to David, and delights not so much in having
a great name, as in deserving it.

XVI. The Heir.
I Ever beheld Somersetshire in one Respect as the most ancient and honorable
Shire in England. For Glassen-bury in that County was the Bryttish Antioch,
where the Bryttons were first called Christians, by the Preaching of Joseph of
Arimathea, though the truth of the story be much swollen by the leaven of
Legendarie fictions.

But hereafter Somersetshire in another respect must be allowed the eldest
County in England; As Christianity first grew there, so Charity first sprang
thence, in that their Sober, Serious, and Seasonable Declaration, wherein they
renounce all future animosities in relation to their former sufferings.

Now as the zeal of 2 Cor. 9.2.
Achaia provoked very many, So the example of Somersetshire has been
precedential to other Counties to follow it. Kent and Essex since have done,
and other Shires are daily doing the same; Yea, and I hope that those Counties
which lagg the last in writing, will be as forward, as the first in performing
their solemn promises therein.

XVII. SAD TRANSPOSITION.
IT seems mavelous to me, that many Mechanics (few able to read, and fewer
to write their names) turning Soldiers, and Captains in our Wars, should be
so soon and so much improved. They seem to me to have commenced per saltum in
their understandings. I profess without flouting or flattering, I have much
admired, with what facility and fluentnesse, how pertinently and properly they
have expressed themselves, in language which they were never borne nor bred to,
but have industriously acquired by conversing with their betters.

What a shame would it be, if such who have been of Gentile Extraction, and
have had liberal education, should (as if it were by exchange of Souls)
relapse into Ignorance and Barbarism.

What an ignominy would it be for them, to be buried in idleness, and in the
moderate pursuit of pleasures and vicious courses, till they besot their
understandings, when they see Soldiers arrived at such an improvement, who
were bred Tailors, Shoe-makers, Cobblers, etc.

Not that I write this (God knows my heart) in disgrace of them, because they
were bred in so mean Callings, which are both honest in themselves, and
useful in the Commonwealth; yea, I am so far from thinking ill of them, for
being bred in so poor trades, that I should think better of them for returning
unto them again.

XVIII. Bird IN THE BREAST.
I Saw two men fighting together, till a third casually passing by interposed
himself to part them, The blows of the One fell on his Face, of the Other on
his Back, of Both on his Body, being the Screen betwixt the fiery anger of the
two Fighters. Some of the Beholders laughed at him as well enough served, for
meddling with matters which belonged not to him.

Others pitied him, conceiving every man concerned to prevent bloodshed
betwixt Neighbors, and Christianity it self was Commission enough to interest
him therein.

However, this is the sad Fate which attended all moderate persons, which will
mediate betwixt opposite Parties. They may complain with David, They have
rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my good will. Yet let not such hereby
be disheartened, but know that (besides the reward in Heaven) the very work of
Moderation is the wages of Moderation. For it carries with it a mavelous
Contentment in his Conscience, who has endeavored his utmost in order to
Unity, though unhappy in his success.

XIX. Fair Hopes.
A Traveller, who had been newly robbed, inquired of the first Gentleman he
met, who also was in a melancholy humor (a cause having lately gone against
him) where he might find a Justice of Peace, to whom the Gentleman replied, You
ask for two things together, which singly and severally are not to be had. I
neither know where JUSTICE is, nor yet where PEACE is to be found.

Let us not make the Condition of our Land worse then it was; Westminster Hall
was ever open, though the proceedings of Justice therein were much interrupted
and obstructed with military Impressions. Peace, we confess, has bin a
stranger unto us a long time, Heart-burnings remaining, when House-burnings are
quenched; But now, blessed be God, we are in a fair probability of recovering
both, if our sins and ingratitude blast not our most hopeful expectations.

XX. Riddle unriddled.
WE read [2 Samuel 15.11] that when Absalom aspired to his Fathers Kingdom, with
him went two hundred men out of Jerusalem that were called, and they went in
their simplicity, and they knew not any thing. If any have so little charity,
as to call these persons TRAITORS, I will have so much confidence as to term
them LOYAL TRAITORS, and (God willing) justify the seeming contradiction.

For they lodged not in their hearts the least disloyal thought against the
person and power of King David. But alas when these two hundred were mixed
among two thousand, ten thousand, twenty thousand of active and designing
Traitors; these poor men might in the violent multitude be hurried on, not only
beyond their intentions, but even against their resolutions.

Such as are sensible with sorrow that their well intending simplicity has
been imposed on, abused and deluded by the subtilty of others, may comfort and
content themselves in the sincerity of their own Souls; God, no doubt, has
already forgiven them, and therefore men ought to revoke their uncharitable
censures of them. And yet Divine Justice will have its full tale of intended
stripes, taking so many off from the back of the Deceived, and laying them on
the shoulders of the Deceivers.

XXI. No RECORD to REMAIN.
I Never did read, nor can learn from any, that ever Queen Elizabeth had any
Ship-Royal, which in the Name thereof carried the Memorial of any particular
Conquest she got either by land or by water. Yet was she as victorious as any
Prince in her Age, and (which is mainly material) her conquests were mostly
achieved against foreign Enemies.

The Ships of Her Navy, had only honest and wholesome Names, the Endeavor, the
Boneadventure, the Return, the Unity, etc.

Some of our modern Ships carry a very great Burden in their names, I mean,
the Memorial of some fatal Fights in the Civil Wars in our own Nation, and the
Conquerours ought not to take much joy, as the Conquered must take grief in the
remembrance thereof.

I am utterly against the rebaptizing of Christians, but I am for the redipping
of Ships, that not only some inoffensive, but ingratiating Names may be put
upon them; the Unity, the Reconciliation, the Agreement, the Concord, and
healing Titles. (I speak more like a Book-man, than a Seaman) and others to
that purpose.

XXII. All for the present.
THere is a pernicious humor of a Catching Nature, wherewith the mouths of
many, and hearts of more, are infected. Some there are, that are, so covetous
to see the settlement of Church and State according to their own desires, that,
If it be not done in our days (say they) we care not whether it be done at all
or no.

Such men's souls live in a Lane, having weak heads and narrow hearts, their
Faith being little and charity less, being all for themselves, and nothing for
posterity. These men living in India, would prove ill Common-Wealthsmen, and
would lay no foundation for Porcellana or China-dishes, because despairing to
reap benefit thereby, as not ripened to perfection in a hundred years.

Oh! give me that good man's gracious temper, who earnestly desired the
prosperity of the Church, whatsoever became of himself, whose verses I will
offer to translate.

Seu me terra tegit, seu vastum contegit aequor;
Exoptata piis-saecula fausta precor.
Buried in earth, or drowned in the Maine.
Eat up by Worms or fishes;
I pray the Pious may obtain
For happy times their wishes.
And if we our selves with aged 2 Samuel 19.25.
Barzillai be superannuated to behold the happy establishment of Church and
state, may we ( dying in Heb. 11.13.
Faith, though not having received the promises) bequeath the certain
reversions of our Chimhams, I mean the next generation which shall rise up
after us.

XXIII. Courtesy gains.
I Have heard the Royal Party (would I could say without any cause) complained
of, that they have not Charity enough for Converts, who came off unto them from
the opposite side; Who though they express a sense of and sorrow for their
mistakes, and have given Testimony (though perchance not so plain and public
as others expected) of their sincerity, yet still they are suspected, as
unsound, and such as frown not on, look but asquint at them.

This has done much mischief, and retarded the return of many to their side;
For, had these their Van-Curriers been but kindly entertained, possibly ere now
their whole Army had came over unto us; Which now are disheartened by the cold
welcome of these Converts.

Let this fault be mended for the future, that such Proselytes may meet with
nothing to discourage, all things to comfort and content them.

Let us give them not only the right hand of fellowship, but even the
upperhand of Superiority. One asked a Mother, who had brought up many Children
to a marriageable age, what Arts she used to breed up so numerous an issue;
None other, (said she) save only, I always made the most of the youngest. Let
the Benjamins ever be Darlings, and the last-borne, whose eyes were newest
opened with the sight of their errors, be treated with the greatest affection.

XXIV. Moderation.
ARTHUR PLANTAGENET Viscount Lisle, natural Son to King Edward the Fourth, and
(which is the greatest honor to his Memory) direct Ancestor, in the fifth
Degree, to the Right Honorable, and most Renowned Lord General GEORGE MONK,
was for a fault of his Servants (intending to betray Calis to the King of
France) committed to the Tower by King Henry the eight, where well knowing the
fury and fierceness of that King he daily expected death.

But the innocence of this Lord appearing after much search, the King sent him
a rich Ring off his own Finger, with so comfortable words, that at the hearing
thereof, a sudden joy Speed. Chron. page 692.
overcharged his heart, whereof he dyed that night; so fatal was not only the
anger, but the love of that King.

England for this many years has bin in a languishing condition, whose case
has been so much the sadder, than this Lords was, because conscious of a great
guilt, whereby she has justly incurred Gods displeasure. If God of his
goodness should be pleased to restore her to his favor, may he also give her
moderation safely to digest and concoct her own happiness, that she may not
run from one Extreme to another, and excessive joy prove more destructive
unto her, then grief has been hitherto.

XXV. Preparative.
TWilight, is a great blessing of God to mankind: for, should our eyes be
instantly posted out of darkness into light, out of midnight into morning, so
sudden a surprisal would blind us. God therefore of his goodness has made the
intermediate twilight to prepare our eyes for the reception of the light.

Such is his dealing with our English Nation. We were lately in the midnight
of misery. It was questionable whether the Law should first draw up the Will
and Testament of dying Divinity; or Divinity first make a Funeral Sermon for
expiring Law. Violence stood ready to invade our Property; Heresies, and
Schisms, to oppress Religion.

Blessed be God, we are now brought into a better condition, yea, we are past
the Equilibrium; the Beam beginning to break on the better side, and our hopes
to have the Mastery of our despaires. God grant, this twilight may prove
Crepusculum matutinum fore running the rising of the SUN, and increase of our
happiness.

XXVI. Revenge with a witness.
FRederick Swingers Theat. vol. 7. lib. 5. page 1959. sub titulo ultionis.
the second Emperor of Germany being at Piza in Italy, and distressed for want
of money to pay his Army, sent for Petrus De Vineis an able man, who formerly
had been his Secretary, but whose eyes he had caused to be bored out for some
Misdemeanour.

Being demanded of the Emperor which way he might most speedily and safely (as
to outward danger) recruit his Treasury, his SECRETARY gave him Council to
seize on the Plate of all the Churches and Monasteries of that City, which he
did accordingly, and amongst the rest he took ZONAM AUREAM, or the GOLDEN
GIRDLE, out of one Church, of inestimable value.

This blind Secretary returning home to his wife, told her, Now I am even with
the Emperor for putting out my eyes, having put him on such a Project, which,
I hope, he will pursue, to is own destruction. He has made me a Spectacle to
men, but I have made him a Monster unto God.

Let such who are concerned herein, see what success the Emperor had in this
his Expedition, founded on Sacrilege, and the longer they look thereon, the
worse I am sure they will like it to bar further application.

XXVII. A Gnat, no Gnat.
ONe needlessly precise, took causles exception at a Gent. for using the word IN
TROTH in his Discourse, as if it had been a kind of an Oath. The Gent. pleaded
for himself, that IN TRUTH was a word inoffensive, even in his judgment who
accused him.

Secondly, that he was borne far North, where their broad and Dorick Dialect
pronounced TRUTH, TROTH, and he did humbly conceave the tone of the Tongue was,
no fault of the heart.

Lastly, he alleged the twenty fifth Psalm, as it is translated in Meter.

To them that keep his Testament
The witness of his Troth.
And thus at last, with much ado, his seeming fault was remitted.

I am afraid if one should declare for TROTH and PEACE, and not for Truth and
Peace, it would occasion some offense; however, rather then it should make any
difference, the former will be as acceptable to the North of Trent, as the
latter will please all good people South thereof.

XXVIII. Silence a while.
HAD not mine eyes (as any other man's may) read it in the printed Proclamations
of King Edward the sixth, (when the Pulpitts generally popish, sounded the
Alarm to Ketts rebellion, and the Devonshire Commotion) I would not have
believed what follows.

2 Edw. 6. September. 13. By these presents, We inhibite generally all manner of
Preachers whatsoever they be, to preach in this mean space, This lasted in
full force but for some ^ew weeks.
to the intent that the whole Clergy might apply themselves in prayer to
Almighty God, for the better atchieving of the same most Godly intent, and
purpose of Reformation.

What hurt were it, if in this juncture of Time, all our Preaching were turned
into praying for one Month together, that God would settle a happy Peace in
this Nation.

However if this be offensive to any, and gives cause of distaste, the second
motion may be embraced, That for a year at least, all Pulpits may be silent, as
to any part of Differences relating to our Times, and only deliver what
belongs to Faith and good Works.

XXIX. Send Humility.
I Do not remember, that the word INFINITE is in Scripture attributed to any
Creature, save to the City of Ninive, Naham 3.9. Ethyopia and Egypt were her
strength, and it was INFINITE.

But what is now become of Ninive? it is even buried in its own ruins, and may
have this Epitaph upon it; Hic jacet FINIS INFINITI,
Here lies the END of what was ENDLESS.


He, who beheld the multitude of Actors and Beholders, at the Mustering in HIDE
PARK, on the 24. of April last, will say, that there was an INFINITE number of
people therein. Some would hardly believe, that the whole Nation could afford so
many, as the City of London alone did then produce.

My prayer shall ever be, that this great City may be kept either in the
WHOLESOME IGNORANCE, or HUMBLE KNOWLEDGE of its own STRENGTH, least the people
Numberless prove Masterlesse therein. And let them remember (God forfend the
Parallet) what is become of great Ninive at this day, annihilated for the Pride
thereof.

XXX. Rather fold over, then fall short.
Solomon's Temple was seven years in building, 1 Kings 6.36. And such, who
seriously consider the Magnificence thereof, will more wonder, that it was done
so soon, then doing so long.

Now, had Solomon at the beginning of this building abolished the Tabernacle
made by Moses, (because too mean and little for so mighty, and so numerous a
Nation) God had been seven years without any place of public Service.

But that wise Prince continued the Tabernacle to all uses and purposes, until
the Temple was finished, and then 1 Kings 8.4. They brought up the Ark of the
LORD, and the Tabernacle of the congregation, and all the holy vessels that
were in the Tabernacle, even those did the Priests and the Levites bring up.
And as it follows afterward, verse. 6. They brought in the Ark of the
Covenant of the LORD, unto his place, into the Oracle of the House. And
certainly all the rest of the Tabernacle (consisting of such materials, as
might be taken down, and kept in Chests and Coffers) were deposited in the
Temple, though, it may be, no use was made thereof.

It had been well, if, before the OLD GOVERNMENT of the Church was taken down,
a NEW ONE had first been settled. Yea, rather let God have two Houses together,
then none at all; Least Piety be starved to death with cold, by lying out of
doors in the intervall, betwixt the demolishing of an old, and the erecting of
a new Church Discipline.

XXXI. No man's work.
CHrist, when on Earth, cured many a spot, (especially of leprosy) but never
smoothed any wrinkle; never made any old man young again.

But in Heaven he will do both, Ephesians. 5. 27. when he shall present it to himself
a glorious Church, not having spot or WRINKLE, or any such thing, but that it
should be holy and without blemish.

Triumphant Perfection is not to be hoped for in the Militant Church; there
will be in it many spots and wrinkles, as long as it consists of sinful
mortal men, the members thereof: It is Christ's work, not man's work to make a
perfect Reformation.

Such therefore are no good Politicians, who will make a sore to mend a spot,
cause a wound to plain a wrinkle, do a great and certain mischief, when a small
and uncertain benefit will thereby redound.

XXXII. Three make up one.
YOung King Ioash had only a lease of Piety, and not for his own, but his
Uncles life, 2 Kin. 12.2. He did that which was right in the sight of the LORD
all his days, wherein Iehoiada the Priest instructed him.

Iehu was good in the midst of his life, and a zealous Reformer to the utter
abolishing of Baal out of Israel, but in his old age. 2. Kin. 10.31. He
returned to the Politic sins of Jeroboam, worshipping the Calves in Dan and
Bethel.

Manasseh was bad in the beginning and middle of his life, filling Jerusalem
with idolatry; Only toward the end thereof, when carried into a 2 Chronicles.
33.11.
strange land, he came home to himself, and destroyed the profane Altars, he
had erected.

These Three put together make one perfect Servant of God. Take the Morning and
Rise with Ioash, the Noon and Shine with Iehu, the Night and Set with Manasseh.
Begin with Youth-Ioash, continue with Man-Iehu, conclude with Old-man-Manasse;
and all put together will spel one good Christian, yea, one good perfect
Reformer.

XXXIII. Sero, sed Serio.
NEbuchadnezzar observed three Gradations in plundering the Temple; First, He
mannerly sipped and took but a Taste of the wealth thereof, 2 Chro. 36.7. He
carried of the VESSELS of the House of the Lord to Babylon.

Next, He mended his Draught, and drank very deep, verse. 10. When the year was
expired, Nebuchadnezzar sent and brought Iehoiachin to Babylon, with the GOODLY
VESSELS of the House of the Lord.

Lastly, He emptied the Cup, not leaving one drop behind, verse. 18. And ALL the
VESSELS of the House of the Lord, great and small, brought he to Babylon.

It was the mercy of God, to allow his people space to repent, had they made
their seasonable composition with God, after the first inroad; they had
prevented the second: If after the second, they had prevented the last and
final destruction.

God has suffered our Civil Wars some sixteen years since, first to taste of
the wealth of our Nation; and we met not God with suitable Humiliation. His
Justice then went farther* and the Sword took the Goodly Vessels, the GALLANTRY
and GAIETY of ENGLAND from us; 1. Our Massy plate. 2. Pleasant pictures. 3.
Precious jewels. 4. Rare Libraries. and 5. Magnificent Palaces; [ Holdenby,
Theobalds, Richmond] Carrying Majesty in their structure; 1. Melted down. 2.
Sold. 3. Lost, or drowned. 4. Transported. 5. Levelled to the ground.

God grant, That we may sue out our pardon by serious repentance. before ALL
the VESSELS, great and small, be taken away in a renewed war, that the
Remnant of wealth, which is left in the Land, may be continued therein.

XXXIV. By Degrees.
WE read that the Nails in the Holy of Holies, 2 Chro. 3.8, and 9. were of
fine Gold. Hence arises a question, how such nails could be useful? pure
Gold being so flexible, that a nail made thereof will bow and not drive.

Now I was present at the debate hereof, betwixt the best working-Goldsmiths in
London, where (among many other ingenuous answers) this carried away the
Credit, for the greatest probability thereof, viz. That they were Screw-nailes,
which had holes prepared for their reception, and so were wound in by degrees.

Gods work must not be done lazily, but leisurely: Haste makes wast in this
kind. In Reformations of great importance, the violent driving in of the
Nail, will either break the head, or bow the point thereof, or rive and split
that, which should be fastened therewith.

That may insensibly be screwed, whieh cannot suddenly be knocked into people.
Fair and softly goes far, but alas! we have too many fiery spirits, who with
Iehu drive on so furiously, they will over turn all, in Church and State, if
their fierceness be not seasonably retrenched.

XXXV. Good Augury.
I Was much affected with reading that Distick in Ovid, as having somewhat
extraordinary therein.

Tarpeia quonda^ praedixit ab Ilice Cornix,
Est, been non potuit dicere, dixit, Erit.
The Crow sometimes did sit and To foretell; hence Spelman.
SPEL
On top of Tarpie* Hall;
She could not say ALL IS WELL, ALL IS WELL,
But said IT SHALL, IT SHALL.
But what do I listen to the language of the Crow, whose black color has a
cast of Hell therein in superstitious south-saying. Let us hearken to what the
DOVE of the holy Spirit says, promising Gods servants, though the present
times be bad, the future will be better. Psalm. 38.11. The meek SHALL inherit
the Earth, and SHALL delight themselves in the Abundance of Peace.

XXXVI. Substract not, but Add.
A Covetous Courtier complained to King Edward the sixth of CHRIST COLLEGE in
Cambridge, that it was a Superstitious Foundation, consisting of a Master and
twelve Fellows, in imitation of Christ, and his twelve Apostles. He advised
the King also, to take away one or two Fellowships, so to discompose that
superstitious number.

Oh no, (said the King) I have a better way, then that, to mar their conceit, I
will add a thirteenth Fellowship unto them; which he did accordingly, and so it
remains to this day.

Welfare their hearts, who will not only wear out their shoes, but also
their feet in Gods service, and yet gain not a shoe-latchet thereby.

When our Savior drove the Sheep and Oxen out of the Temple, he did not drive
them into his own Pasture, nor swept the coin into his own Pockets, when he
overturned the Tables of the Mony-changers. But we have in our days many, who
are forward to offer to God such zeal, which not only cost them nothing, but
wherewith they have gained great Estates.

XXXVII. Send such Music.
WE read 1 Kings 8.55. that Solomon, when he had ended his excellent Prayer, he
BLESSED the People, But was not this Invading the Sacerdotal function? seeing
it was not Crown-work, but Numb. 6.23.
Miter work, to do it.

No, surely Solomon's Act therein was lawful, and laudable, there being a
threefold blessing.

I. IMPARATIVE; So God only blessed his People, who commands deliverances for
Israel. II. INDICATIVE; Solemnly to declare Gods blessing to, and put his Name
upon the people, and this was the Priests work. III. OPTATIVE; wishing, and
desiring Gods blessing on the People, and this was done by Solomon.
Yea, it is remarkable, that in the same Chapter, verse. 66. the people blessed
the King. O happy Reciprocation betwixt them! when the King BLESSES HIS PEOPLE
(if his words be rightly understood) ALL MAY BE WELL. But when a People BLESSES
THEIR KING, ALL IS WELL.

XXXVIII. By Hook and by Crook.
Mavelous was the confidence of those Merchants, Iam. 5.13. Go to now, ye
that say, To day, or to morrow we will go into such a City, and continue there
a year, and buy, and sell, and get gain.

What false Herauldry have we here, Presumption on Presumption? What
Insurance-Office had they been at, to secure their lives for a twelve-moneth,

But, this being granted, how could they certainly promise themselves, that
they this year should get GAIN, except they had surely known what would have
been dear the next year. Merchandising is a ticklish matter, seeing many buy
and sell, and live by the loss.

Either, then Trading in those times was quicker and better then in ours, or,
(which is most probable) they were all resolved on the point, to cheat, cozen,
lie, swear and forswear, and to GAIN, by what means soever.

Our Age and Land affords many of their Temper, and of such Saint Paul
speaks, 1 Timothy 6.9. They WILL be rich; will, whether God Will, or Will not;
Will, though it cost them the forfeiture of their Conscience, to compass their
Designs.

XXXIX. Without Care no Cure.
A Woman, when newly delivered of a Child, her pain is ended, her peril is
but new begun; a little distemper in Diet, or a small Cold taken may inflame
her into a Fever, and endanger her life. Wherefore when the welfare of such a
person is enquired after. This Answer-General is returned, She is well for one
in her condition; The third, fifth, and ninth days, [ all Criticall] must be
expected, till which time Bene-male is all the health which the Latin Tongue
will allow her.

ENGLAND is this green Woman, lately brought to bed of a long-expected Child
LIBERTY* Many wise men suspected that she would have died in Travel, and both
Child and Mother miscarrie. But God be thanked for a good MIDWIFE, who would
not prevent, but attend the Date of Nature*

However all, yea, most of the Danger is not yet past. Numerous is the
multitude of Malcontents, and many difficulties must be encountered before our
PEACE can be settled.

God grant the Woman be not wilful in FITTS of her distemper, to be ordered by
the discretion of her NURSES, which now in Parliament most carefully attend her
RECOVERY.

XL. Keep your Castle.
SOon after the Kings death, I preached in a Church near London, and a Person
then in great power, (now levelled with his FELLOWS) was present at my Sermon.
Now I had this passage in my Prayer, GOD in his due time settle our Nation on
the TRVE FOUNDATION thereof.

The [then] Great man demanded of me what I meant by TRUE FOUNDATION. I
answered, that I was no Lawyer, nor Statesman, and therefore skill in such
matters was not to be expected from me.

He pressed me further to express my self, whether thereby I did not intend the
King, Lords, and Commons.

I returned, that it was a part of my prayer to GOD, who had more Knowledge,
then I had Ignorance in all things, that he knew what was the TRUE FOUNDATION,
and I remitted all to his wisdom and goodness.

When men come with netts in their Ears, it is good for the Preacher to have
neither Fish nor Foul in his Tongue. But blessed be God, now we need not lie
at so close a Guard. Let the Gent. now know, that what he suspected I then
intended in my words, and let him make what improvement he pleases thereof.

XLI. Too much beneath.
KING Hen. the seventh was much troubled (as he was wont to say) with IDOLS,
Scenecal Royaletts, poor petty, pitiful Persons, who pretended themselves
PRINCES.

One of these was called LAMBERT SIMNEL, whom the King at last, with much Care
and Cost, some expense of Blood, but more of Money, reduced into his power, and
got his person into his Possession. Then, instead of other puishment, he made
him a TURNE-BROACH, and afterward (on his peaceable Behavior) he was Lord
Bacon in the life of King Hen. 7.
preferred one of the Kings UNDER-FALCONERS, and as one tartly said, a fit
Place for the Buzzard, to keep Hawks, who would have been an Eagle.

The King perceived that this Lambert was no daring, dangerous, and designing
person, and therefore he would not make him (who was contemptible in himself)
considerable for any noble punishment imposed upon him.

Royal Revenge will not stoop to a low object; some Malefactors are too mean to
be made public Examples. Let them live, that the pointing of Peoples fingers
may be so many Arrows to pierce them. See, there goes INGRATITUDE to his
Master: There walks, etc.

Such a Life will smart as Death, and such a Death may be sanctified for Life
unto them, I mean, may occasion their serious sorrow, and cordial repentance,
whereby Gods Pardon, and their eternal salvation may be obtained, which ought to
be the Desire of all good Christians, as well for others as themselves.

XLII. Patience a while.
THE Soldiers asked of John Baptist, Luke. 3.14. etc. and what shall we do.

Every man ought (not curiously to to enquire into the duty of others, but) to
attend his own concernments. The Baptist returned, do violence to no man,
neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your wages.

Good Counsel to the Soldiers of this Age. Do violence to no man, plunder no
man, accuse no man falsely.

Make no men Malignants by wrongful information, and be content with your wages.

But I have heard some of the most moderat of the Soldiers, not without cause,
to complain. He is a Mutineer indeed, who will not be content with his wages.
But alas, we must be content without our wages, having so much of our Arreares
due unto us, this is an hard chapter indeed. And John Baptist himself (though
feeding hardly on Locusts and wild honey) could not live without any food.

Indeed their case is to be pitied, and yet such as are ingenuous amongst them
will be persuaded, to have patience but a while, the Nation, being now in
fermentation, and tending to a consistency. The wisdom of the Parliament is
such, they will find out the most speedy, and easy means to pay them, and such
their Justice, no intent is there to defraud them of a farthing, whatsoever
ill-affected Malcontents may suggest to the contrary.

XLIII. In the Middle.
GOd in his Providence fixed my Nativity in a remarkable place.

I was borne at ALWINCLE in Northamptonshire, where my father was the painful
Preacher of Saint Peter's. This Village was distanced one good mile West from A
CHURCH, where Mr. Brown, Founder of the Brownists did dwell, whom out of
curiosity, when a Youth, I often visited.

It was likewise a mile and half distant East from LIVEDEN, where Francis
Tresham Esquire, so active in the Gunpowder Treason, had a large demeasne, and
ancient habitation.

My Nativity may mind me of Moderation, whose Cradle was rocked betwixt two
Rocks. Now seeing I was never such a Churl as to desire to eat my morsel
alone, let such who like my prayer join with me therein.

God grant we may hit the Golden mean, and endeavor to avoid all Extremes; the
fanatic Anabaptist on the one side, and the fiery zeal of the Jesuit on the
other, that so we may be true Protestants, or, which is a far better name, real
Christians indeed.

XLIII. Amending.
ALL generally hate a Sluttish-House, wherein Nastyness has not only taken
Livery and Seisin, but also has been a long time in the peaceable possession
thereof.

However, reasonable men will be contented with a House belittered with Straw,
and will dispense with Dust it self, whilst the House is sweeping, because it
has uncleanness in order to Cleaness.

Many things in England are out of joint for the present, and a strange
confusion there is in Church and State, but let this comfort us, we trust it is
confusion in tendency to Order. And therefore let us for a time more patiently
comport therewith.

XLIV. Too much Truth.
SOme perchance will smile, though I am sure all should sigh at the following
Story.

A Minister of these times sharply chid one of his Parish, for having a base
Child, and told him he must take order for the keeping thereof.

Why Sir, answered the man, I conceave it more reasonable that you should
maintain it. For I am not Book-learned, and kenne not a letter in the Bible,
Yea, I have been your Parishioner this seven years, present every Lords day at
the Church, yet did I never there hear you read the TEN COMMANDMENTS, I never
heard that Precept read, thou shall not commit Adultery Probably, had you told
me my Duty, I had not committed this folly.

It is an abominable shame, and a crying Sin of this Land, that poor people
hear not in their Churches the sum of what they should pray for, believe, and
practice, many Mock* Ministers having banished out of Divine Service, the use
of the Lords Prayer, Creed, and Ten Commandments.

XLV. As it was.
SOme alive will be deposed for the truth of this strange accident, though I
forbear the naming of place or persons.

A Careless Maid which attended a Gentleman's Child, fell asleep whilst the
rest of the family were at Church; An Ape taking the Child out of the Cradle,
carried it to the Roof of the House, and there (according to his rude manner)
fell a dancing and dandling thereof, down head, up heels, as it happened.

The Father of the Child returning (with his Family) from the Church commented
with his own eyes on his Child's sad condition. Bemone he might, help it, he
could not. Dangerous to shoot the Ape, where the Bullet might hit the Babe;
All fall to their Prayers as their last, and best refuge, that the innocent
Child (whose precipice they suspected) might be preserved.

But when the Ape was well wearied with its own Activity, he fairly went down,
and formally laid the Child where he found it in the Cradle.

Fanatics have pleased their Fancies these late years, with turning and
tossing and tumbling of Religion, upward, and downward, and backward, and
forward, they have cast and contrived it into a hundred Antick-postures, of
their own imagining. However, it is now to be hoped, that after they have tired
themselves out with doing of nothing, but only trying and tampering this, and
that way, to no purpose, they may at last return and leave Religion in the
same Condition wherein they found it.

XLVI. No so, long.
SOlomon was the Ridle of the World, being the richest and poorest of Princes.

Richest, for once in three years the Land of Ophire sailed to Jerusalem, and
caused such plenty of Gold therein.

Poorest, as appears by his imposing so intolerable Taxes on his Subjects,
the Refusal of the mitigation whereof, caused the Defection of the ten Tribes
from the House of David.

But how came Solomon to be so much behind hand? Some I know score it on the
account of his Building of the Temple, as if so magnificent a structure had
impaired, and Exhausted his Estate.

But in very deed, it was his keeping of seven hundred wives, and three hundred
Concubines, and his Concubines in all probability, more expensive then his
Wives, (as the Thief in the Candle wastes more wax, then the wick thereof) All
these had their several Courts, which must needs amount to a vast expense.

How comes the great Treasure of our Land to be low, and the Debts thereof so
high? Surely it is not by building of Churches, all the World will be her
Compurgators therein. It is rather because we maintain (and must for a time
for our safety) such a numerous Army of Soldiers.

Well, It had been both for the profit, credit, and conscience of Solomon, to
have reduced his Wives to a smaller number, as we hope in due time our standing
Army shall be Epitomized to a more moderate proportion.

XLVII. Thank God.
A Nuncio of the Popes, was treated at Sienna, by a Prime Person, with a great
Feast. It happened there was present thereat, a Syndiek of the City ( being a
Magistrate, parallel in his place, to one of our Aldermen) who, as full of
words, as empty of wit, engrossed all the Discourse at the Table to Himself,
who might with as good manners have eaten all the Meat at the Supper.

The Entertainer, sorry to see him discover so much weakness, to the disgrace
of himself, endeavored to stop the Superfluity of his Talk. All in vain. The
Leaks in a rotten Ship might sooner be stanched. At last, to excuse the matter
(as well as he might) he told the Nuncio privately, You I am sure, have some
weak men at Rome, as well as we have at Sienna. We have so ( said the Nuntio)
but we make them no Syndickes.

It cannot be otherwise, but that in so Spacious a Land, so numerous a People
as England is, we must have many weak men, and some of them of great Wealth,
and Estates. Yea, such who are not only guilty of plain and simple Ignorance,
but of Ignorance guarded and embroidered with their own conceitedness. But,
blessed be God, they are not chosen Parliament men; the Diffusive Nation was
never more careful in their Elections of their Representatives.

God grant, that as the several days works in the Creation were singly by God
pronounced GOOD, but the last days work (being the Collection, and
complication of them all) VERY Genesis 1.31.
GOOD, so these Persons, good as single Instruments, may be BEST in a Consort
as met together.

XLIX. Can good come from Ignorance.
KIng James was no less dextrous at, then desirous of the Discovery of such,
who belyed the father of Lies, and falsely pretended themselves possessed with a
Devil.

Now a Maid dissembled such a possession, and for the better color thereof,
when the first verses of the Gospel of Saint John were read in her hearing, she
would fall into strange fits of fuming and foaming, to the amazement of the
Beholders.

But when the King caused one of his Chaplains to read the same in the
Original; the same Maid (possessed, it seems, with an English devil, who
understood not a word of Greek) was tame and quiet* without any Impression upon
her.

I know a factious parish, wherein if he Minister in his Pulpit had but named
the word KINGDOM, the people would have bin ready to have petitioned against
him for a Malignant. But as for REALM, the same in French, he might safely use
it in his Sermons as often as he pleased. Ignorance which generally inflameth,
sometimes by good hap, abateth men's malice.

The best is, that now one may without danger, use either word, seeing England
was a Kingdom a thousand years ago, and may be one (if the world last so
long) a thousand years hereafter.

L. Trusting makes one Trusty.
CHARLES From the mouth of my worthy Friend, now gone to God. D. Clare Chaplain
then to his Highness.
the Second, King of the Scots, when a Child was much troubled with a
weakness in his Legs, and was appointed to wear STEEL-BOOTES, for the
strengthening of them.

The weights of these so clogged the Child, that he enjoyed not himself in any
degree, but moaned himself, fasting at feasts, yea, his very Play being work
unto him, he may be said to be a Prisoner in his own Palace.

It happened that an Aged Rocker which waited on him, took the STEEL-BOOTS from
his legs, and cast them in a place, where it was hard to find them there, and
impossible to fetch them thence, promising the Countess of Dorset, ( Governess
of the Prince) that if any Anger arised thereof, she would take all the blame
on her self.

Not long after, the King coming into the Nursery, and beholding the BOOTS
taken from his legs, was offended thereat, demanding in some anger, Who had
done it.

It was I Sir (said the Rocker) who had the honor (some thirty years since) to
attend on your Highness in your Infancy, when you had the same infirmity
wherewith now the Prince, (your very own Son) is troubled. And then, the Lady
Carry, (afterward Countess of Monmouth) commanded your STEEL BOOTS to be taken
off, who, blessed be God, since have gathered strength, and arrived at a good
stature.

The Nation is too Noble, when his MAJESTY, (who hitherto has had a short
course, but a long Pilgrimage,) shall return from foreign parts, to impose any
other STEEL-BOOTS upon him, then the observing the Laws of the Land, (which
are his own stockings) that so with joy and comfort he may enter on what was
his own inheritance.

But I remember, when Luther began first to mislike so me Errors in the Romish
Church, and complained thereof to Staupitius his Confessor, He used to say unto
him. Abi in Cellam and ora, Get you gone into your Cell and pray. So will I do,
(who have now done) and leave the managing of the rest to those to whom it is
most proper to advance Gods Glory, and their Countries good. Amen.

FINIS.

