THE APPEAL OF Injured Innocence: UNTO The RELIGIOUS LEARNED and INGENUOUS
READER. In a CONTROVERSY betwixt the Animadvertor Dr. PETER HEYLYN AND The
Author THOMAS FULLER.

1 King. 5.7. See how he seeks a Quarrel against me.
Terent. in Eunucho. Responsum non dictum est, quia laesit prior.
LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, and are to be sold by John Williams at the
Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard. M. DC. LIX.

To the Right Honorable GEORGE BERKELEY, L. Berkeley, Moubray, Segrave and
Bruce, my most Bountiful and most Exemplary Patron.
SIR,
MY Church History was so far from prostituting her Self to Mercenary Embraces,
She did not at all Espouse any Particular Interest, but kept her self a Virgin.

However, a Dragon is risen up, with much Fierceness and fury, threatening this
my Virgins destruction.

Your Name is GEORGE, and for you it is as easy as Honorable to protect Her
from violence.

If any Material Falsehood or Forgery be found in my Book, let LIAR be branded
in my face: But oh! suffer not my Injured Innocence to be overborn in such
things, which I have truly, clearly, and warily written.

Thus shall you encourage Me (leaving off such Controversal deviations from my
Calling) to PREACH and to perform in my Ministerial function somewhat worthy of
the Honor to be

Your Lordships most obliged Servant and Chaplain THOMAS FULLER.
Cranford Moat-house March the 21th.
THE APPEAL OF INJURED INNOCENCE.
CHAP. I. That it is impossible for the Pen of any Historians writing in (as
our's) a divided Age, to please all Parties, and how easy it is to Cavil at
any Author.
SUch as lived after the Flood, and before the Confusion of Tongues, were happy
in this particular, that they did Hear to Understand, and Speak to be
Understood with all persons in their Generation. Not such their Felicity who
lived after the Confusion of Languages at the Tower of Babel, when the
Eloquence of the Best was but Barbarism to all, save a few Folk of his own
Family.

Happy those English Historians who wrote some Sixty years since, before our
Civil Distempers were born or conceived; at leastwise, before there were
House-burnings (though some Heart-burnings) amongst us: I mean, before Men's
latent Animosities broke out into open Hostility; seeing then there was a
general right understanding betwixt all of the Nation.

But alas! Such as wrote in or since our Civil Wars, are seldom apprehended
truly and heartily, save of such of their own persuasion, whilst others do
not (or what is worse will not) understand them aright: And no wonder if
Speeches be not rendered according to the true intent of the Speaker,
when Prejudice is the Interpreter thereof.

This I foresaw when I entered upon my Church History, but comforted my self
with the counsel of Erasmus; Si non possis placere Omnibus, place to Optimis;
If thou can not please all, please the best. In order whereunto I took up to
my self this Resolution, to Stere my course betwixt the two Rocks of Adulation
and Irritation; though it seems I have run upon both, if the Animadvertor may
be believed; whereof hereafter.

As it is impossible in distracted Times to please all, so is it easy for any
at any time to Cavil at the best Performance. A Pigmey is Giant enough for this
purpose. Now Cavils may be reduced to these two heads: Cavils
Without Cause. Without Measure.


Causeless Cavils are such as the Caviller himself does create, without any
Ground for the same; such find a Knot in a Bulrush, because they themselves
before had tied it therein; and may be compared to Beggars, who breed Vermin
in their own bodies, and then blow them on the clothes of others.

Cavils without measure, are, when the anger and bitterness of the Caviller
exceeds due proportion, and the demerit of the Fault; as when he makes
Memory to be Iudgement-mistakes; Casual, to be Voluntary Errors; the Printers,
to be the Authors faults: And then brags every Foil to be a Fall, and
Triumphs at the Rout of a small Party, as at the Defeat of the whole Army.
This Distinction is here premised, whereof hereafter we shall make use as we
see just occasion.

CHAP. II. Why the Author desired and hoped never to come under the Pen of the
Animadvertor in a Controversal Difference.
IT was ever my Desire and Care, if it were possible, not to fall under the Pen
of the Animadvertor; having several reasons thereof to my self, which now I
publicly profess: 1. I knew him a Man of able Parts, and Learning; God
sanctify both to his Glory, and the Churches Good. 2. Of an Eager spirit, with
him of whom it was said, Quicquid voluit valde voluit. 3. Of a Tart and Smart
Style, endeavoring to down with all which stood betwixt him and his Opinion. 4.
Not over Dutiful in his Language to the Fathers of the Church, (what then may
Children expect from him?) if contrary in Judgment to him. Lastly and chiefly,
One, the Edge of whose keenness is not taken off by the Death of his Adversary;
witness his writing against the Archbishops of York and Armagh.


The Fable tells us that the Tanner was the Worst of all Masters to his Cattle,
as who would not only load them soundly whilst living, but Tan their Hides
when dead; and none could blame one if unwilling to exasperate such a Pen,
which, if surviving, would prosecute his Adversary into his Grave. The premises
made me, though not servilely fearful, (which I praise God I am not of any
Writer) yet generally cautious not to give him any Personal provocation,
knowing that though Both our Pens were Long, the World was Wide enough for them
without Crossing each other.

As I desired, so I partly hoped that my Church History would escape the
Animadvertor: First, because a Gentleman came to me (sent from him, as I
supposed) informing me, That had not Dr. Heylin been visited with blindness, he
had been upon my bones before. Then I desired him to return this Answer; That,
as I was sorry for the Sad Cause, the Doctors Blindness; I was glad of the
Joyful Effect, my own Quiet. Nor hearing any more for many months after, I
conceived my self secure from any wind in that corner.

It increased my Confidence, because I conceived Dr. Heylin neither out of
Charity or Policy, would write against one who had been his Fellow Servants to*
and Sufferer for, the same Lord and Master, King Charles; for whose Cause I
lost none of the worst Livings, and one of the best Prebends in England: Only
thus happy I was in my very unhappiness, to leave what was taken away from the
rest of my Brethren.

In a word, seeing no Birds or Beasts of Prey (except Sharp-set indeed) will
feed on his own Kind, I concluded Dr. Heylin would not write against me, who
conceived my self to be One of his own Party.

But it seems I reckoned without my Host, and now am called to a Rear-account;
I cannot say with Job, The thing that I feared; but, The thing that I feared
not, is fallen upon me.

Psalm. 34 14.
However, I conceived my self bound in Duty to David's Command, Not only to
seek peace, but to pursue it; though in some sort it fled away from me, being
now informed that the Doctor was writing against me; wherefore, finding him in
Fleetstreet, and following him at his heels to his Chamber, (at a Stationers
house over again St. Dunstan's Church) I sent up my Name to him by a Servant of
the House, desiring to speak a few Words with him; the Messenger went to him,
and returned me this Answer; That the Doctor was very busy, and could not be
spoken with. Thus my Treaty for Peace taking no effect, I armed my self with
Patience, and quietly expected the coming forth of his Book against me.

CHAP. III. That after serious Debate the Author found himself Necessitated to
make this Appeal in his own just Vindication.
HAving perused the Books of the Animadvertor against me, it bare a strong
Debate within me, whether I should pass it over in silence, or return an Answer
unto him, and Arguments on both sides presented themselves unto me.

Silence seemed best, because I lacked leisure solemnly to confute his
Animadversions, having at this time so much and various Employment: The Cow was
well stocked with Milk, thus praised by the Virgill Eg.
Poet; Bis venit ad Mulctrum binos alit Ubere faetus.
She suckles Two, yet does not fail
Twice a day to come to the Pail.


But I justly feared, who twice a Lord's Day do come to the Pulpit, ( God knows
my Heart I speak it not to Ostentation) that I could not suckle my Parish and
the Press, without Starving or Short-feeding of one: Whereas the Animadvertor
in his retired Life gives no other Milk then following his own private Studies.

Secondly, I suggested to my self, that the second blow makes the Frey, and
should I rejoyn, probably it would engage me in an endless Contest, with which
my declining age could ill comport. I remembered the Man who moved in Chancery
for a Gelt Order which should beget no more; but knew not when any such
Eunuch-Answer should pass betwixt us, to put a period to the Controversy.

Lastly, our Saviors counsel came into my mind, Matthew. 5.39. Resist not evil;
but whosoever shall smite thee on the right side, turn to him the other also.
And although some Divines make this Precept but Temporary (as a Swadling-cloath
to the Church, whiles in the Infancy thereof, under Persecution;) yet others
make it always Obligatory, and of perpetual Continuance.

On the other side, the Distinction came seasonably to my Remembrance, of a
Man's RIGHTING and REVENGING himself; the latter belongs to God alone, Romans
12.19.
Vengeance is mine, I will repay it; the former Men may, and in some cases must
do, in their own fair defense, without Breach of our Saviors Precept lately
alleged.

I called also to Mind, how in our Common Law, MUTES at the Bar, who would not
plead to the Indictment are Adjudged guilty, and therefore justly suspected I
should from my Silence be concluded Cast in the Court of Religion and Learning,
for such Faults and Errors as the Animadvertor has charged on me.

But most of all it moved me, that Ministers of Gods Word and Sacraments ought
to Vindicate their Credits, that so they may be the more Effectual Factors for
Gods glory in their Vocation. When our Savior went about to Heal the Man's
withered hand on the Sabbath day, Mar. 3.4. Is it lawful (said he) to save
Life, or to Kill? Where I observed, that our Savior accounted not healing to
be hurting; yea, not curing to be killing, in that person who had Ability and
Opportunity to do it. And by the same Proportion, not plaistering is Killing of
ones wounded Credit, and so consequently I should be FELO DE SE, and by my
sinful Silence be the Wilful murderer of my own Reputation.

These last Reasons did preponderate with me; and I resolved on two things; to
return a Plain, Full and Speedy Answer; and to refrain from all Railing, which
is a Sick Wit (if not the Sickness of Wit;) and though perchance I may have
something tart to Quicken the Appetite of the Reader, yet nothing bitter
against the Credit of the Animadvertor. This my Answer I have here Entitled,
The APPEAL unto the RELIGIOUS, LEARNED and INGENUOUS.

But before I close with the Animadvertor, Comminus, Hand to hand; let us
first, Eminus, try it at Distance, and entertain the Reader (to his Profit and
Pleasure, I hope) with my General Defenses, before I proceed to Answer each
Particular.

CHAP. IV. The Author's first General Answer taken from his Title Page and
Word ENDEVOVRED.
MEn may be ranked into three Forms, of INTENDERS, ENDEVOURERS and PERFORMERS.

INTENDERS are the first and lowest Form, yet so far favored by some Papists,
that they maintain, That a good Intention though embracing ill Means, makes a
good Action.

PERFORMERS are the third and highest rank, to which my Thoughts dare not
aspire, but leave this upper room empty, to be filled by Men of better parts
and ability.

The middle Form consists of ENDEVOURERS, amongst whom I took my station in the
Title Page of my Book, The Church History of Britain, ENDEAVORED by Thomas
Fuller. And as I did not hope that any Courteous Reader would call me up
higher, so I did not fear that any Caviller thereat could cast me lower, but
that I might still peaceably possess my Place of an ENDEVOURER.

For, what though I fall short of that which I desire, and strive to perform, I
did neither belie my self, nor deceive the Reader, who neither was the first,
nor shall be the last, of whom it may be truly said, Magnis excidit Ausis. The
Fate of many, my Betters, who have undertook to compass high and hard Matters.

But it may be objected against me, that being conscious of my own weakness
with the weight of the burden, I should have left the Work for some stronger
back to bear, and quitted it to those who would not only have endeavored but
performed the same.

I answer; first, I did hope, that what was acceptable to God, would not be
contemptible to good Men; having read, If there be first a willing mind, it is
accepted according to that 1 Cor. 8.12.
a man has, and not according to that he has not. Secondly, seeing this my
willingness was attended with a competencie of Books, Records, Friends,
Intelligence, Strength, Health and Leisure, (be all spoken not to my praise,
but Gods glory) I did hope something worth the Readers acceptance might be
produced. Lastly, though failing in what I undertook, I hoped to perform what
might be useful and advantageous to abler Pens undertaking the same task, and
to use my own (as who should forbid) Expression, my Beams, might be Scaffolds;
my Corner, Filling stones for his more beautiful Building.

The premises encouraged me to undertake my Church History; wherein, if I have
not done what the Reader expected, let him consider with himself, whether he
did not expect what I never promised. Who being unwilling to be Cast by the
Verdict of the Ingenuous, for laying my own Action too high, have not farced
the first page of my Book, like a Mountebanks Bill, pretending no higher but to
ENDEAVOR.

CHAP V. The Second General Answer. That many, especially MEMORY Mistakes and
Pen-slips, must be expected in a great Volume.
IT is the Advantage of a Small Book, that the Authors Eye may in a manner be
Incumbent at once over it all, from the Beginning to the End thereof; a Cause
why they may be more exactly corrected. A Garden hard by ones House is easier
Weeded and Trimmed, than a Field lying at some distance; Books which swell to a
great Volume, cannot be spun with so even a Thread, but will run courser here
and there; yea, and have Knots in them sometimes, whereof the Author is not so
sensible as the Reader; as the Faults in Children are not so soon found in them
by their own Fathers, as by Strangers. Thus the Poet; Verum opere in Longo Fas
est obrepere somnum.

As for MEMORY-MISTAKES, which are not the Sleeping bnt Winking of an Author,
they are so far from overthrowing the Credit of any Book, as a speck, (not
paring-deep) in the rind of an apple, is from proving of the same rotten to the
core. Yea, there want not learned Writers* whom I need not name) of the Opinion
that even the Instrumental Penmen of the Scripture might commit (...); though
open that window to profaneness, and it will be in vain to shut any doors; Let
God be true, and every man a liar: However, I mention their judgments to this
purpose, to show that Memory-mistakes have not been counted such heinous
matters, but venial in their own nature, as not only finding but deserving
pardon.

I confess when such mistakes become common and customary in an Author, they
mar the credit of his Book, and intollerably abuse the Reader. Nothing is
lighter in it self than a single crumb of Sand, yet many of them put together
are the heavyest of bodily burdens: Heavier than the Job 6.3.
Sand on the Sea. What is slight in it self, if numerous, will become
ponderous; but I hope that Memory-mistakes and Pen-slips in my Book will not be
found so frequent; and desire the benefit of this Plea to be allowed me but
four times, in my Answer to the Animadvertor. A Number low enough, I hope, for
the Ingenuous Reader to grant, though perchance too high for me to request.

CHAP. VI. The Third General Answer. That in Entire Stories of impregnable
Truth it is facile for one to Cavil with some Color at Dismembered Passages
therein.
IT is an Act as easy as unjust, for one to assault a naked Sentence, as it
stands by it self, disarmed of the Assistance of the coherence before and after
it: all Sentences (except they be entire and independent) have a double
strength in them, one Inherent, the other relative, and the latter sometimes
greater than the former; when what in a Sentence is doubtful, is explained;
difficult, expounded; defective, supplied; yea, seemingly false, rendered really
true by the Connection.

We read in the Life of Cit^d in Came. Romans. page 241.
St. Edward, that Harold Cup Bearer to the King, chanced to stumble with the
one foot, that he almost kissed the Ground; but with the other Leg he recovered
himself: whereat his Father Godwin, Earl of Kent (then dining with the King)
said, Now one Meaning his Brother Alfred whom Godwin had shamefully murdered.
Brother does help another; to whom the King replied, And so might my Brother
have helped me, if it had so pleased you.

Many times when one Sentence in my Book has had a Casual slip, the next to it
out of Fraternal kindness would have held it up (in the apprehension of the
Reader) from falling into any Great Error, had the Animadvertor so pleased, who
uncharitably cutteth it off from such support, so that one Brother cannot help
another; whilst he represents mangled and maimed Passages, to the
Disadvantage of the Sense and Writer thereof. Thus one may prove Atheism out
of Scripture it self; There is no God. But what went before? The fool has said
in his heart.

I have dealt more fairly in this my Appeal with the Animadvertor; and have not
Here and There picked out Parcels, and cut off Shreads where they make most for
my advantage; but have presented the whole Cloth of his Book, (as he will find
so, if pleasing to measure it over again) Length and Breadth, and List and Fag
and all; that so the Reader may see of what Wool it is made, and what Thread it
is spun, and thereby be the better enabled to pass his verdict upon it.

CHAP. VII. The Fourth General Answer. That FAVOR of COURSE is indulged to the
first (as least perfect) Edition of Books.
THe first Edition of a Book, in a difficult Subject, has ever been beheld as
less complete; and a liberty of Correcting and Amending has been allowed to
all Authors of this kind.

I will instance in his Book (whose Books would I was worthy to bear) Mr.
Camden's Britania. His first Edition was a Babe in a little; the second, a
Child in a bigger Octavo; the third, a Youth in a Quarto (but Map-less;) the
last, a Man in a fair Folio; first and last differing more then a Gally and
Galeas, not only in the Greatness but Perfection, every newer Edition amending
the Faults of the former.

Next, we will insist in another Author above all exception, even the
Animadvertor himself, who in his Epistle to the Reader, before the Second and
much altered Edition of his MICROCOSME, thus expresses himself, not unhappily
either for his own or my purpose: I am not the first of whom it was said,
Secundae Cogitationes sunt meliores; neither is it a thing rare for Children of
this nature, to be as often perfected as born; Books have an Immortality above
their Authors. They when they are full of Age and Guiltiness, can be retaken
into the womb which bred them, and with a new Life, receive a greater Portion
of Youth and Glory. Every Impression is to them another being; and that always
may, and often does bring with it, a sweeter Edition of Strength and
Loveliness. Thus with them Age, and each several Death, is but an Usher to a
new Birth; each several Birth the mother of a more vigorous Perfection.

Had the like liberty of a Second Edition been allowed me, which the
Animadvertor assumed, his pains had been prevented, and most of the Faults he
has found in my Book (being either derected by my self, or discovered by my
Friends, communicating the same unto me) had been rectified.

Thus in the Latin Tongue the same word SECUNDUS signifies both Second and
Successful, because Second Undertakings (wherein the failings of the former are
observed and amended) generally prove most Prosperous.

But it will be Objected, Such Second Editions with new Insertions, Additions
and Alterations, are no better than Pick-pockets to the Reader, who having
purchased and perused the first Edition, is by this new one, both in his purse
and pains equally abused, and his Book rendered little better than Waste paper.

I Answer; First, I am no more obnoxious to this Objection than other Authors
who set fort New Editions. Secondly, I hope my Alterations shall not be so many
or great as to disguise the second from the first Edition; Lastly, I will take
order (God willing) for the Printing of a piece of Paper (less then a Leaf) in
my second Impression, being the Index of Alteration, so that the Owners of the
First, may (if so pleased) in less then an Hour, with their Pens, conform their
Books to the new Edition, which though a little less Beautiful to the Eye,
will be no less Beneficial to the Users thereof.

Here let me humbly tender to the Readers Consideration, that my HOLY WAR,
though (for some Design of the Stationer) sticking still in the Title Page, at
the third Edition (as some unmarried Maids will never be more then eighteen)
yet has it oftener passed the Press, as has my HOLY STATE, MEDITATIONS, etc.
and yet never did I alter Line or Word in any new Impression.

I speak not this by way of Attribution to my Self, as if my Books came for
that first with more Perfection then other Men's, but with Insinuation to the
Reader, that ti is but equal that I, who have been no Common Beggar in this
Kind, yea never before made use of a second Edition, may now have the Benefit
thereof allowed me, especially in a Subject of such Length, Latitude,
Difficulty, Variety and Multiplicity of Matter.

CHAP. VIII. The Fifth General Answer. That it is no shame for any Man to
confess (when convinced thereof) and amend an Error in his Judgment.
THe Knowledge of our Savior, as God, may be compared to the Sun, all perfect
and complete at once without any accession or addition thereunto, whilst his
Knowledge, as Man, like the Waxing Moon was capable of Increase, and was
(though not subject to the least Error) receptive of clearer Information; Luke
2.28.
and Jesus increased in Wisdom; yea, it is expressly said, yet learned he
Obedience by the thing which he suffered.

Not such, the Knowledge of the best and wisest Man, which besides a Capability
of more Instruction, is always attended with an obnoxiousnesse to many
mistakes, seeing 1 Cor. 13.9.
here we know in part, and easy it is for any Man to come on the Blind Side
of another, as being better versed and skilled in such particular matters.

When therefore I find my self convinced in my Judgment of an Error in my
Church History, by perusing the Notes of the Animadvertor, I will fairly and
freely confess and amend it.

And I conceive it is no shame at all for a Child to write a few Lines of
Retractation, after so good a St Augustine.
Father has set him so fair a Copy thereof.

In such a case let not the Animadvertor give me any Blows, where I conceive
that my own Blush is a sufficient Penance for the same; and let him not
immoderately insult on such occasions, seeing my Iudgement-Faults will be found
neither in number nor Nature such as He has suggested. Covetous Euclio in the
Aulularia Plauti.
Comedy, complained that his Servant Intromisit Sexentos Coquos, had let in six
hundred Cooks, when they wanted five hundred ninety eight of that number, being
but two [ Anthrax and Congrio] truly told; and though the Animadvertor
frequently complains, that I Page 218, 223, and often elsewhere.
run into many Errors, run into many Errors; yet on examination, many of those
Errors will prove Truths, and such as remain Errors will not prove many.

Besides, the Animadvertor is concerned to be civil to me in this Kind, seeing
in this particular.

Veniam petimus dabimusque vicissim:
A mutual Bargain we may make,
Pardon to give, and Pardon take.
If I were minded to retaliate, and to show that Humanum est errare, I could
instance in many mistakes in the last Edition of his Geography. Some of the
best Birth and Brains in our Nation, and Travalers in foreign parts, as far as
India it self, proferred me on their accord to detect in several Countries
unexcusable Errors, confuted by their ocular discovery.

I heartily thanked them for that which I refused to accept; and did return;
First, that the Book had achieved a general Repute, and not undeservedly.
Secondly, that it was very useful, and I my Self had reaped Benefit thereby.
Thirdly, that it would seem in me like to Revenge in this Juncture of Time,
when the Doctor was disadvantaged by some Infirmity. Lastly, that others might
be detremented thereby. Yea, if we but look into his SHORT VIEW of the Life and
Reign of King CHARLES, some Faults occur therein which God willing I will
calmly discover in our Answer to these Animadversions, not with intent to Cloud
his Credit, but Clear my own.

CHAP. IX. The Sixth General Answer. That Prelial Mistakes in Defiance of all
Care will escape in the best Corrected Book.
THe most accurate Book, that ever came forth into Light, had some Mistakes of
the Press therein. Indeed, I have heard of Robert Stephen, that he offered a
great Sum of Money (equivalent perchance to five Pounds of our English Coin)
to such who would discover any Erratum in his Folio Greek Testament, dedicated
to King Francis the first.

But sure I am, that some of our English Bibles, which may be presumed set
forth with the best Care, printed at London, have their Errats; and therefore
Prelial Faults being a catching Disease, no wonder if my Book as well (or
rather as ill) as others, be subject to the same.

Here it will be objected that there is a known and sure Receipt for the Cure
of this Disease, viz. the Listing of such Faults as have escaped, either in the
Beginning or End of the Book; that so the Reader may, if he please, amend, if
otherwise, avoid them. Such an Index Erratorum, or Catalogue of Mistakes, is,
in some sort a STOOL OF REPENTANCE, wherein Offenders find their lost
Innocence; and such faults thus confessed, are never charged either on the
Author's or Printer's Account.

It is answered, that although such a List of Faults, generally follows as
the Impedimentum or Baggage in the Rere of a Book, yet seldom or never is it
adequate to all the Errata's, which are committed therein.

For first, all committed, are not discovered, neither by the Corrector, nor
the Author himself, who perusing his own Book, in overlooking the faults
therein, Overlooks them indeed, and following the conduct of his own fancy,
(wherein He intended all to be right) reads the words in his Book, rather as
they should be, than as they are printed.

Secondly, all faults which are discovered are not confessed. Such as the
Printer esteems small, He leaves to be amended by the direction of the
Sense, and discretion of the Reader; according to the common Speech, that the
Reader ought to be better than his Book.

In my Book, the Index of Errata's amounts not to above forty, a very small
number in proportion of so voluminous a Work, which with Credit might crave the
allowance of twice as many more thereunto: The Animadvertor in these his Notes,
makes great advantage of some of these un-confessed-Faults, and I sometimes
plead the mistake of the Press for my Answer, though seldom, save when some
similitude of form in the mistaken letter renders it probable for a Prelial
Error.

CHAP. X. The Seventh and last General Answer. That an Author charging his
Margin with his Author is thereby Himself discharged.
HIstorians, who write of things done at distance, many miles from their
dwellings, and more years before their Births, must either feign them in their
own Brains, or fetch them from other credible Authors. I say credible, such as
carry worth and weight with them, Substantial Persons, Subsidy men (as I may
say) in Truths Book; otherwise, for some Pamphlets, and all Pasquils, I behold
them as so many Knights of the Post, even of no Reputation.

Now, for the more credit of what is written, and better assurance of the
Reader, it is very expedient that the Author alleged be fully and fairly
quoted in the Margin, with the Tome, Book; Chapter, Leaf, Page and Column,
sometimes (seldom descending so low as the Line) where the thing quoted is
expressed; and this done, the Author is free from fault which cites it, though
He may be faulty who is cited, if delivering a falsehood.

Indeed, if one become bound as Surety for another, he engages Himself to make
good the Debt in the Default of Principal. But if he only be Bail for his
Appearance, and accordingly produces his Person in Public Court, He ought to
be discharged without farther trouble.

Semblably, if one not only cites, but commends the words of an Author, then
He undertakes for him, adopts his words to be his own, becomes his Pledge, and
consequently is bound to justify and maintain the truth of what he has
quoted. But if he barely alleges his words, without any closing with them in
his Judgment, he is only bound for that Author's appearance. Understand me,
to justify that such words are exactly extant in manner and form in the place
alleged, easy to be found by any who will follow the Marginal direction.

This I reserve for my Eighth and last Answer, when taxed by the Animadvertor
for such things for which I have presented my Author in the Margin. In such
cases I conceive I should be discharged; and, if any Fees at all be to be paid,
I hope the Courteous Reader (on my request) will remit them, and dismiss me,
without more molestation.

CHAP. XI. That many of the Animadvertors Notes are only Additional, not
Opposite to what I have written; And that all things, omitted in an History,
are not Defects.
WHo so beholds the Several places in my Book, noted on by the Animadvertor,
has cause, at the first Blush, to conclude my Church History very Erroneous
and full of Faults; out of which, so bigg a Bundle of Mistakes have been
collected: but upon serious Perusal of these Notes, it will appear that a third
part of them at the least, are merely Additional not opposite to what I have
written; so that they render my Book not for Truth the less, but his for Bulk
the greater.

Herein he seems like unto those Builders; who either wanting Materials to
erect an entire house, or fearing so frail and feeble a Fabric will not stand
by it self, run it along the side-walls of another house, whereby they not
only save Timber, but gain strength to their New Edifice.

The Animadvertor had a Mind to communicate some new Notions he had to the
World, but he found them not many and weighty enough to fill a just Book for
Sale: whereupon, he resolves to range his Notions against my Church History,
that so partly carping thereat, and partly adding thereto, he might betwixt
both make up a Book Competent for Sale.

Hence, it is that sometimes not liking my Language (as not proper and
expressive enough) he substituted his own, with little or no variation of
Matter; and sometimes adds new Passages: some whereof I could formerly have
inserted, but because I perceived my Book (as the Reader is sensible by the
price thereof) grown already to too great a Volume.

When Additional Notes frequently occur, I conceive my self not obliged in the
least degree to return an Answer thereunto, as being rather besides than
against what I have written: However, if I have left out any thing, it would
have been suspected I had omitted that which most had made against me, to
prevent which Jealousy, such Additional Notes are also here verbatim
represented.

To such as object that the Animadvertor's Additions are Suppletory of the
Defects in my Church History; I answer, that a Defect properly is Absentia
debiti adesse, the Absence of what ought to be there, so that a thing is maimed
or lame without it.

But Additions to an History are reducible to these two Heads, viz. either such
as they Must without Imperfection be added.
May without Impertinency be added.


Few, if any, of the former; some of the latter kind are found in the
Animadvertor's Additory Notes. And let me tell Him, that if He writes Books
against all who have written Books, and have not written all which may be said
of their Subject, he may even write against all who have ever written Books,
and then He will have work enough.

Let us go no farther then to his own Geophraphy, being sure he is too
Judicious to be so conceited of his own pains, as to think he has inserted all
that may be said of so large a Subject.

The In Vit. Aesopi.
Story is well known of Aesop's Master, who buying two Servants together in the
Marketplace, demanded of one of them, what he could do; He answered, that he
would do all things, do all things. Then the other [ Aesop himself] being
asked what he could do, answered, He could do nothing. His Master seeming
angry to keep so unprofitable a Servant; How can I (returned Aesop) do any
thing, when my Fellow Servants will do all, and leave me nothing to do?

If Dr. Heylin has done all things in his Geography, he has given a Writ of
Ease for ever to Posterity, who may Despair to merit more of that matter. All
who hereafter shall write a new Book of Geography, must also find out a new
World with Columbus, as anticipated by the Doctor, having formerly completed
all on that Subject.

I presume not to say, that I have in my Church History done all things, having
written many and most material Passages, leaving the rest to others. But this I
say, that all things left out in a History, are not wanting; neither are all
things wanting, Defects, if not essential thereunto. As for some of the
Animadvertors added Notes, they are no more needful or useful than a sixth
finger to a man's Hand, as (God willing) in due time shall appear.

CHAP. XII. That the Author Designed unto himself no Party-pleasing in Writing
his Church History.
PArtiality is constantly charged on me by the Animadvertor, and once, with a
witness, as follows, page 257.

We see by this, as by like Passages, which way our Author's Bowl is BY ASSED,
how constantly he declares himself in Favor of those who have either Separated
from the Church, or appeared against it.

I return, (to prosecute his Metaphor) that I have used as UPRIGHT BOWLS as
ever any that enter the Alley of History, since our Civil Dissentions.

I do freely declare my self, that I in VVriting my Book, am for the Church of
England, as it stood established by Law; the Creed being the Contracted
Articles, and the 39. Articles the Expanded Creed of her Doctrine, as the
Canons of her Discipline. And still I prise her Favor highest, though for the
present it be least worth, as little able to protect, and less to prefer any
that are faithful to her Interest.

As for pleasing of Parties, I never Designed or Endeavored it. There were a
kind of Philosophers, called ELECTICI, which were of none, yet of all Sects,
and who would not engage in gross in the Opinions of any Philosophers, but did
pick and choose here and there, what they found Consonant to Truth, either
amongst the Stoics, Peripateticks, Academicks, or (misinterpreted Epicures,)
receiving that, and rejecting the rest; such my Project to commend in all
Parties what I find praiseworthy, and condemn the rest; on which Account,
some Fleer, some Frown, none Smile upon me.

First, for the Papists, though I malice not their Persons, and have a Pity (as
God I hope has a Mercy) for many amongst them, yet I do, as occasion is
offered, dislike their Errors, whereby I have incurred (and according to their
principles) deserved their Displeasure.

The old Non-conformists being the same with the modern Presbuterians, but
depressed and under, as the modern Presbuterians are the old Non-conformists,
but vertical and in Authority, do (though the Animadvertor twi^teth me
constantly to Advocate for them) take great and general exception at me; and it
is not long since, in a Meeting of the most Eminent amongst them, I was told,
that I put too much Gall into my Inck against them.

The Independent, being the Genesis 43.44.
Benjamin of Parties, (and his Mess I assure you is none of the least) taxes
me for too much fieriness, as the Animadvertor (in his Expression lately cited)
charge me for too much Favor unto them.

Thomas Lord Coventry, when coming from the Chancery to sit down at Dinner, was
wont to say, Surely, to day I have dealt equally, for I have displeased both
sides. I hope that I have his Happiness, for I am sure I have his Unhappiness,
that having disobliged all Parties, I have written the very Truth. Thus I can
only privately comfort my self in my own Innocence, and hope that when my
Head is laid low, what seems too sweet, too bitter, too salt, too fresh to the
present divided Age, will be adjudged well tasted and seasoned to the Palate of
Unpartial Posterity.

CHAP. XIII. What Good the Animadvertor might, but would not do; and, what
Good, by Gods goodness he Herein has done unto the Author.
WHen the Animadvertor had perused my Book, marking some (but making more)
faults therein, it was in his Power to have done me a Pleasure, the greatest he
could give, or I receive, viz. not to paradigmatize me, but by Letter in an
amicable way to impart my Mistakes unto me, that I might amend them in my next
Edition. Say not, He owed me no such thing, who would have beheld it not as a
Debt paid unto, but Alms bestowed upon me.

I was not wholly without hope hereof, having found such favor from some
worthy Friends. Had the Animadvertor done the like, How had he obliged me? As
the Society of Peter-house do preserve the Pictures of their Benefactors in
their Parlour, so would I have erected unto him a Monument of Gratitude in my
Heart, besides my public acknowledgement of the courtesy.

But it seems He intended not my Information, but Defamation. However, he has
done to me a great good turn, for which (because not intended) I will thank
God, viz. He by his causeless Carping has allayed in me the delight in Writing
of Histories; seeing nothing can be so unpartially and inoffensively written,
but some will carp thereat.

Mothers minding to wean their Children, use to put Soot, Wormwood or Mustard
on the Nibbles of their Breasts. God foresaw I might Suck to a Surfeit in
Writing Histories, which has been a Thief in the Lamp of my Life, wasting much
Oil thereof. My Head and Hand had robbed my Heart in such delightful Studdies.
Wherefore he raised the bitter Pen of the Animadvertor to wean me from such
Digressions from my Vocation.

I now experimentally find the Truth of * Solomon's words, of making many Books
there is no End. Not, but that all perfect Books (I mean perfect in sheets,
otherwise none save Scripture perfect) have Finis in the Close thereof; or that
any Author is so irrational, but He propounds an End to himself before he
begins it; but that in making of many Books there is no end; that is, the
Writers of them seldom or never do attain that End which they propound to
themselves, especially if Squinting at sinister Ends, as who is not flesh and
blood? Such as project wealth to themselves, are commonly by unwise managing,
or casual miscarriage, impaired thereby in their Estates. Others who designed
to themselves, (with the builders of Babel) to get them a Name, commonly meet
with shame and disgrace. Or else, when their Books are ended, yet they are not
ended, because though never so cautiously written, some Antagonists will take
up the Bucklers against them, so that they must begin again after they have
ended, (or sink in their credits) to write in their own vindication, which is
my case, enough to take off my edge, formerly too keen in making multiplicity
of Books.

I confess, I have yet one History ready for the Press, which I hope will be
for Gods Glory and Honor of our Nation. This new-built Ship is now on the
Stocks, ready to be lanched; and being a Vessel of great Burden, God send me
some good Adventurers to bear part of the Expense. This done, I will never
meddle more with making any Books of this Nature. It is a provident way, before
Writing leave us, to leave of Writing; and the rather, because Scribbling is the
Frequentative thereof.

If therefore my Petitioning and Optative Amen, shall meet with Gods
Commissioning and Imperative Amen, I will hereafter totally attend the
Concernments of my Calling, and what directly and immediately shall tend to the
advance of Devotion in my Self and in Others, as preparatory to my Dissolution
out of this state of Mortality.

CHAP. XIV. That the Author is unjustly charged by the Animadvertor for being
agreeable to the Times; And how far forth such Agreeableness is consistent with
Christian Prudence.
Page. 268. toward the bottom thereof
THe Animadvertor is pleased to Charge me to be a great Temporizer, and
agreeable to the Times. In Order to my Defense herein, let me premise this
Distinction; that there is a Sinful and Sinless Agreeableness with the Times,
be they never so bad.

It is a Sinful Agreeableness, when People for their private profit, or safety,
or both, are resolved in Belief and Life; Faith, and Fact; Doctrine and
Manners, to be the same with the Times; how contrary soever they be unto the
Will and Word of God. Be it BIBLE, or THALMUD, or ALCORAN, or MASSE-BOOK, or
COMMON PRAYER BOOK, or DIRECTORY; any, many, all, or no Manner of God's public
Service; to them, all is alike, and equally embraced.

But there is also a Sinless, yea lawful and necessary agreeableness to the
Times, insomuch that no meaner Father than St. Ambrose, or worse Critic than
Erasmus, read the Text Romans 12.11. (...), Serving the Time. A Reading
countenanced by the Context, Rejoicing in Hope, patient in Tribulation,
continuing in Prayer; all being Directions of our demeanor in dangerous times.
And even those who dislike the Reading as false, defend the Doctrine as true;
that though we must not be Slaves and Vassals, we may be Servants to the Times,
so far forth as not to Dis-serve God thereby.

This Sinless and lawful Agreeableness with the Times, is partly Passive,
partly Active. Passive chiefly consists in Bearing and Forbearing: Bearing,
in paying all Pecuniary burdens imposed; it being but equal (in my opinion)
there to return Tribute where we receive Protection. I doubt not but in this
point even the Animadvertor himself is agreeable to the Times, going along with
the rest of his Neighbors in their paying of all public Taxes.

Forbearing expresses it self, first in Silence. The Spanish Proverb, true at
all, is necessary in dangerous, Times, Where the mouth is shut no Fly does
enter: Yea, the Spirit of God gives his Servants this counsel, Amos 5.13.
Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that Time, for it is an evil Time.
Thus, Holding of ones peace, that is, using no Provoking Language against the
Present Power, procures Holding of ones Peace, that is, retaining and
possessing of one's Safety and Quiet.

Secondly, Forbearing consists in Refraining (though not without secret
sorrow) from some Laudable Act which he heartily desires, but dares not do,
as visibly destructive to his Person and Estate, being prohibited by the
Predominant Powers: In such a Case a man may, to use the 1 Cor. 7 26.
Apostle's phrase, (...), for the present necessity, omit many things Pleasing
to, but not Commanded by that God, who prefers Mercy before Sacrifice.

For instance; If any Earthly Prince or Power should enjoin a Christian (as
Darius did Dan. 6.7.
Daniel) not to pray to God for the space of Thirty days together; his Command
is not to be obeyed, as contrary to Gods positive Precept, 1 Tehss. 5.17.
Pray continually. But if he should only enjoin him to forbear such a Form of
Prayer, allowing him liberty to use any other; I conceive that such an
omission, Lawful; dictated unto him by the Principles of Prudence, for his
self- Preservation.

The Active Part of Lawful Agreeableness with the times, is in doing what they
enjoin, as being Indifferent; and sometimes so good, that our own Conscience
does or should enjoin the same. In such a case, where there is a Concurrence of
Both together, it is neither Dishonesty, nor Indiscretion, for one in himself
to conceal his own Inclinations, and publicly to put his Actions (as Fasting,
Thanksgiving, Preaching, etc.) on the Account of Conformity to the Times; it
being (as flattery to court, so no less) folly to contemn and reject the
favor of the Times, when it may be had without the least violation, yet
possibly with an Improvement of our own Conscience.

I have Endeavored to steer my Carriage by the Compass aforesaid; and my main
Motive thereunto was, that I might enjoy the Benefit of my Ministry, the bare
using whereof, is the greatest Advancement I am capable of in this Life. I know
all Stars, are not of the same Bigness and Brightness; some shine, some only
twinkle; and allowing my Self of the latter Size and Sort, I would not
willingly put out my own (though dim) light in total Darkness, nor would bury
my halfe-Talent, hoping by putting it forth to gain an other half-Talent
thereby to the Glory of God, and the good of others.

But it will be Objected against me, that it is suspicious (at the least) that
I have Bribed the Times, with some base Compliance with them, because they have
reflected so favorably upon me. Otherwise, how comes it to pass, that my
fleece, like Gideons, is dry, when the rest of my Brethren of the same party,
are wet with their own Tears; I being permitted Preaching, and peaceable
Enjoying of a Parsonage.

I answer first, I impute this Peaceableness I enjoy, to Gods undeserved
Goodness on my Unworthiness. He has not dealt thus with all my Brethren, above
me in all respects. God makes People sometimes, potius reperire quam invenire
Gratiam, to find the Favors they sought not for. If I am one of them, whom God
Psalm. 106.46.
has made to be pitied of those who carried me away captive, I hope, I shall
be thankful unto Him; and Others, I hope, will not be Envious at me for so
great a Mercy.

Next to the Fountain of Gods Goodness, I ascribe my Liberty of Preaching, to
the Favor of some Great Friends, God has raised up for me. It was not a
Childish answer, though the answer of a Child to his Father taxing him for
being Proud of his New Coat, I am glad (said he,) but not proud of it. Give me
leave to be glad, and joyful in my self, for my Good Friends; and to desire,
and endeavor their Continuance and increase. A Friend in the Court has always
been accounted as Good as a Penny, in the Council; as a Pound, in the Purse.
Nor will any rational man Condemn me, for making my Addresses to, and
improvement of them, seeing the Animadvertor himself (as I am informed) has
his Friend in the Council; and it is not long since, he had Occasion to make
use of his Favor.

I must not forget the Articles of Exeter, whereof I had the Benefit, living,
and waiting there on the Kings Daughter at the Rendition thereof. Articles,
which both as Penned, and Performed were the best in England, thanks to their
Wisdom, who so Warily made; and Honesty, who so well observed them. Nor was it
(though last named) least causal of my Quiet, that (Happy Criticism to my self
as I may call it) I never was formally sequestered, but went, before driven away
from my Living, which took of the Edge off the Ordinance against me, that the
Weight thereof fell but slentingly upon me. Thus when God will fasten a favor
on any Person, (though never so unworthy) he orders the Concurrences of all
things contributive thereunto.

All I will add is this, that hitherto (and I hope, Who has, will keep me I
speak it in the presence of God) I have not by my Pen, or Practice to my
knowledge done any thing Unworthily to the betraying of the Interest of the
Church of England; and if it can be proved, Let my Mother Church not only spit
in my face (the expression it seems of Numb. 12.14.
Parents amongst the Jews when they were offended with their Children for some
misdemeanor) but also spew me out of her mouth. Some will say, such a Vaunt
savoreth of a Pharisaical Pride. I utterly deny it. For even the Publican after
he came from his Confession he had made in the Temple Luke 18.13.
God be merciful to me a Sinner, had he met one in the outward Court, accusing
and taxing him with such particular Sins, whereof he was guiltless, would no
doubt have replied in his own just defense. And seeing I am on my Purgation, in
what the Schools term Iustitia Causae (though not Personae) I cannot say less,
(as I will no more) in my Justification.

Thus have I represented the Reader with the True Complexion of my Cause, and
though I have not painted the ^ace thereof with false Colors, I hope I have
washed from it the foul Aspersion of Temporizing or sinful Agreeableness with
the Times, which the Animadvertor causlesly casts upon it.

So much for my Outward Carriage in reference to the Times; Mean time what the
Thoughts of my Heart have been thereof. I am not bound to make a Discovery to
my Own Danger. Sure I am, such who are 2 Samuel 20.19.
Peaceable and Faithful in Israel, may nevertheless be Esaiah 61.3.
Mourners in Zion, and greive at what they cannot mend, but must endure. This
also I know that, That Spoak in the Wheel which Creeketh most, does not bear
the Greatest burden in the Cart. The Greatest complainers are not always the
Greatest Sufferers, whilst as much yea more sincere sorrow may be managed in
Secret Silence, than with Querulous, and Clamorous Obstreporousness; and such,
who will neither print nor preach Satyrs on the Times, may make Elegies on them
in their own Souls.

Dr. Heilyn's TITLE PAGE. Examen Historicum: OR A DISCOVERY and EXAMINATION OF
THE Mistakes, Falsities, and Defects in some Modern History. Part. I.
CONTAINING Necessary ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Church History of BRITAIN: AND The
History of CAMBRIDGE, Published by Thomas Fuller: For Vindication of the Truth,
the Church, and the Injured Clergy.
2 CORINTHIANS. 13.8. Non possumus aliquid adversus veritatem: sed pro veritate.
Minut. Foel. in Octavio. Et Veritas quidem obvia est, sed requirentibus.
Fuller. THe Challenge, is no part of the Combat; nor the Mountebanks Bill of
the Cure. It is answer enough to a Title Page, to return, It is but a
Title Page. Whereas the Doctor intituleth his Notes on my Books Animadversions,
know, Animadvertere in Latin signifies, to mark, and observe; but rather, by
the way of reproof, than approbation. And in a Secundary Sense, it imports to
correct, chastise, and severely to punish a [reputed] Malefactor, as the Doctor
in a Judicatory, of his own Erecting, (without any Commission for the same,)
has herein passed many most heavy Censures on Me, before He heard what I could
say in my own just defense.

Whereas the Animadvertor proceeds, as follows, ANIMADVERSIONS ON The
Church History of BRITAIN: AND The History of CAMBRIDGE, Published by Thomas
Fuller: For Vindication of the Truth, the Church, and the Injured Clergy.

He has done me more -- right, than he was aware of, or was willing to do: for
those indeed were the three principal Motives of my weak Endeavors in my
Church History. However, because he intended those words to relate not to my
History, but his own Animadversions thereon, let the Reader Judge, to which of
our two Works they bear the best and most proper reference.

The words of St. Paul 2. Cor. 13.8. Non possumus aliquid adversus veritatem
sed pro veritate, We can do nothing against the Truth but for the Truth; well
fitted the mouth of the Apostle, divinely inspired in his writings, only to be
a Champion for the Truth. In one sense I allow them also applicable to the
Animadvertor, according to the received Rule Illud possumus, quod jure
possumus, We can do that which we can lawfully do --. But otherwise, I humbly
conceive that St. Paul could not, and the Animadvertor should not, do any thing
against the Truth.

All that I will add is this, that although the Doctor be pleased to call his
notes Necessary Animadversions, (who can blame the loving Father for giving his
own dear Babe a good name) yet upon serious examination it will appear that
some of these Animadversions, ought to have been omitted, for the promoting of
Piety; and many of them might have been omitted, without any prejudice to the
Truth: as in due time and place, God willing, shall be observed.


Dr. Heylyn. A General PREFACE TO THE WHOLE.

It is affirmed of History by the famous Orator, that it is Testis Temporum,
the Witness and Record of Time, by which the Actions of it are transmitted from
one Age to another. And therefore it concerns all those who apply themselves to
the writing of Histories to take special care, that all things be laid down
exactly, faithfully, and without Deviation from the Truth in the least
particular; For if the Witnesses be suborned, the Record falsified, or the
Evidence wrested, neither posterity can Judge rightly of the Actions of this
present time; or this time, give a certain Judgment of the Ages past.


Fuller. Allthough Mr. Sanderson is equally concerned with my Self in this
General Preface, yet because I am beheld as the principal malefactor, I have
here presented it entire. I look on it thus far as but the flourish or
Illumining of a Text and Initial-Letter, signifying nothing in it self: and
therefore let him proceed, to something more material.


Dr. Heylyn. It is therefore a good direction which Josephus the Historian
gives us, and which he followed as it seems in his Jewish Antiquities, not only
to be careful that the Style be pleasing, but that the whole work be framed by
the level and line of Truth, Nam qui Historiam and rerum propter Antiquitatem
obscurarum expositionem, etc. They (says he) who make profession to write
Histories, and to recite such things as are obscured by Antiquity, ought not
only studiously to conform their style, but also to beautyfie the same with
ornaments of Eloq^ence, to the intent the Reader may converse in their Writings
with the more delectation. But above all things they must have an especial care
so exactly to set down the truth, that they who know not how those things came
to pass, may be the more duly and fitly informed.


Fuller. I acknowledge that this is the Character of a Complete Historian, to
which all in their Writings ought to aspire with their best endeavors; though
I believe none ever attained to the height thereof.

But first I would fain know, (seeing these are Necessary Animadversions) what
need there was of that long- Latine-Line (staved off at last with an etc.)
seeing Josephus did write in Greek. And if the Doctor would have presented us
with the Original, it should have been in Greek; if but with a Translation, it
might only have been in English.

I behold Josephus as a worthy Historian, whose memory I deservedly honor; yet
herein he might say with the Poet, Monitis sum minor ipse meis. He in his
Practice fell far short of his Precepts, witness his inserting of this false
passage, opposite to the very Letter of the Old Testament, speaking of
Iehojakaim King of Judah, 2 King. 24.9. And he did what was evil in the sight
of the Lord, according to all that his Father had done.

Josephus Ant. Iud. lib. 10. cap. 9. (...).
This man being merciful and just by his nature. etc.


But because it is not my Work to accuse Josephus (whom I cannot praise and
prize enough) but to defend my self against the Animadvertor, let us proceed.


Dr. Heylyn. There is another rule which he bound himself to, that is to say,
Neither to omit any thing through ignorance, nor to bury any thing in
forgetfullness: And all these cautions well observed make a perfect History.


Fuller. Here is the Elixir indeed of Historical perfection. Let a Glorified
Saint write such an History of the Church-Triumphant, that so there may be a
just proportion betwixt the Author and his Subject, both being Perfect.

I have met with this Distick made by reverend in his Life Page, 103.
Bernard Gilpin, upon such Sectaries as require exactness in our Church of
England. Optant ut careat maculis Ecclesia cunctis;
Praesens vita negat, vita futura dabit.


Thus Englished by Bishop Carleton. Men wish our Church no blemish had at all;
It cannot be so here, in Heaven it shall.


This is true both of our Church, and all Church-Histories; whereof none
without faults, and they the best which have the fewest.


Dr. Heylyn. But on the contrary, there are some who do spend themselves on the
style and dress, as if their business rather were to delight the ear then
inform the judgment; Others so biased by self ends and private interesse,
that they seem rather Advocates to plead for some growing party, then true
Reporters of affairs as they be before them. Some who endeavoring to be
copious, clap all together in a huddle which is offered to them, without
relation to the Ornaments and Attire of Language; and others with like
carelessness as unto themselves, but greater inconvenience as unto the Reader,
examine not the truth and certainty of what they write, so they write somewhat
which they think may inform the Reader. Betwixt these, Truth is oftentimes
irrecoverably lost, the Reader led aside from the ways of Verity into the
crooked lanes of Error; and many times conducted to such dangerous precipices
as may prove destructive to himself, and of ill consequence to all those which
are guided by him. The Errors of the Understanding, in matters which may
possibly be reduced to Practice, are far more mischievous then those which do
consist in the niceties of Speculation, and advance no farther; which moved the
Orator, not only to honor History with the Attribute of Testis Temporum, but
to style it also by the name of Magistra Vitae.


Fuller. I remember when the reverend Vice-master of Trinity College in
Cambridge was told that one of the Scholars had abused him in an Oration. Did
he (said he) name me? Did he name Thomas Harrison? And when it was returned,
that he named him not; then said he, I do not believe that he meant me.
Although it is very suspicious that I am the mark aimed at in this discourse;
yet being not conscious of such faults to my self, and because I am not named
by him, I will not understand my self intended, till he touches me with more
personal particularities.


Dr. Heylyn. These things considered as they ought, has made me wonder many
times at the unadvisedness of some late Writers in this kind, whose Histories
are composed with so much partiality on the one Side, and so much inadvertency
on the Other; that they stand more in need of a Commentator to expound the
Truth, and lay it clear and open to the view of the Reader, than either the
dark words of Aristotle, or any other obscure Piece of the ancient Writers. I
speak of Histories, not Libels; of which last sort, I reckon Weldon's Pamphlet,
called The Court of King James; and Wilson's most infamous Pasquil of the Reign
of that King: in which it is not easy to judge, whether the Matter be more
false, or the Style more reproachful in all parts thereof. Certain I am, we may
affirm of them as Cremutius Cordus does of the Epistles of Antonius, and the
Orations of Brutus, Falsa quidem in Augustum probra, sed multa cum acerbitate
habent; that is to say, that they contained not only false and disgraceful
passages against the honor of Augustus, but were apparelled also in the habit
of scurrilous language. With such as these I shall not meddle at the present,
leaving their crimes unto the punishment not of an Index, but an Ignis
Expurgatorius, as most proper for them.


Fuller. I am not concerned at all in this Paragraph; Only let me add this in
the honor of the deceased Robert Earl of Warwick, who told me at Beddington,
that when Wilson's Book in Manuscript was brought unto him, he expunged out of
it more than an hundred offensive passages. My Lord, said I) you have done
well, and you had done better if you had put out one hundred more.


Dr. Heylyn. But as for those whom either the want of true intelligence or
inadvertency in not weighing seriously what they were to do, or the too much
indulgence to their own affections have made more capable of being bettered by
correction, I have thought it more agreeable to the Rules of justice, to
rectify their mistakes, and reform their Errors, than absolutely to condemn
and decry their Writings.


Fuller. REFORMING of Errors is a specious and glorious Design, especially
when proportionable means are used in order thereunto. But of late the word
REFORMATION is grown so thredbare, it has no nap left it, thereunder to cover
foul acts to attain a fair end. I much suspect the Animadvertor will prove such
a Deforming-Reformer, as our Age has produced too many of them.


Dr. Heylyn. At this time I have Two before me whom I conceive to stand in need
of such Observations, by which the truth may be preserved, and the clear face
of things presented to the Readers eye; the one of them an Author of
Ecclesiastical, the other of some Civil Histories.


Fuller. I commend the valor of the Animadvertor, to combat with Two at once;
odds, on which Hercules himself durst not adventure. I also am to deal with
two, the Animadvertor and Dr. Cosins, but not as a Challenger, but in the
notion of a poor Defendant; and if one be assaulted by two hundred, he may and
must guard himself against them as well as he can.


Dr. Heylyn. In both I find the Truth much injured, and in one the Church. The
Errors of the one tend not to the subversion of any public interesse, but,
being Errors, may misguide the Reader in the way of his knowledge and
discourse; and therefore I have rectified him with some Advertisements (not
taking notice of such passages as have been made the subject of some
Observations from another hand) that so he may be read with the greatest profit.


Fuller. This is meant of Mr. Sanderson. I am not so divellishly minded as to
desire all men might be equally faulty with my self, that so being involved
with others in a joynt-Guiltiness of the same degree, I might on that account
pretend to a mock-Innocence. If Mr. Sanderson's Pen be less peccant than mine,
I congratulate his condition, and provide to answer to my own Charge, which
follows.


Dr: Heylyn. The other (besides Errors of this kind too many) has intermingled
his Discourse with some Positions of a dangerous nature; which being reduced
into practice, as they easily may, not only overthrow the whole power of the
Church, as it stands constituted and established by the Laws of the Land, but
lay a probable foundation for the like disturbances in the Civil State.


Fuller. Si satis sit accusasse, quis Innocens? says Tertullian. To this
double Indictment I plead, not guilty, and put my self on the Trial of God and
Goodmen, requesting the Reader's patience till the proofs on both sides be
produced.


Dr. Heylyn. And therefore I have fitted him with some Animadversions in the
way of an Antidote, that so he may be read if possible without any danger.


Fuller. Common custom has oversway'd the word Antidote to signify a
Defensative against, or expulsative of, Poison; However, the bare notation of
the word advances no further than to import something given against: in which
sense none of our Nation has been so free of his Antidotes as the
Animadvertor; having given them against Mr. Calvin, Archbishop Williams,
Archbishop Usher, Dr. Hackwell, Dr. Prideaux, Dr. Barnard, Mr. Le-strange, Mr.
Sanderson, and my unworthy Self, no shame to follow in the Reere after such a
Van and Main-battel.

Sure I am, his pretended Antidote on my Book, has more of Poison than Cordial
therein, envenoming many plain and true passages, sound and solid sentences,,
with his false Glosses, forced Inferences, and pestilent Applications.


Dr. Heylyn. I know well, how Invidious a Task I have undertaken and that it
will be charged upon me at the first apprehensions of it, that I have rather
chosen to find fault with the writings of others, than to write any things of
this kind, which may be subject to the like partialities, and mistakings.
Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua, might come in seasonably here, if I had
not somewhat to allege for my Justification; But when the Reasons which
induced me to the first Adventure (mentioned in the Introduction following) be
seriously considered, as they ought to be, I hope I shall be capable of excuse,
if not of pardon.


Fuller. The Animadvertor has here raised up (I assure you) a Strong Spirit
against himself, and whether the Spells, here used by him, be able to conjure
it down again, others must decide it; mean time, fight Animadvertor, fight
Objection of his own making, seeing I have neither Skill, nor Will, to
interpose to part them.


Dr. Heylyn. And for my venturing on the other, I shall say nothing more at the
present, but that as well my love to Truth, as to do right unto the Author
(whom I would willingly look on as a man well principled, and of no ill
affectioons to Church or State) has invited me to it.


Fuller. Here my credit is more deeply wounded by the glance of a bullet, than
if it were directly shot against me; For whereas he says, that he would
willingly look on Mr. Sanderson as a man well principled, and of no ill
affections to Church, or State, he concludes me by plain intimation disaffected
to both; But I hope that those who are cleer-sighted, look on me under a better
notion.


Dr. Heylyn. Truth is the Mistress which I serve.


Fuller. Rough though I am, I have a Mistress too, and her the Self-same, with
the Animadvertor's. Be it referred to Her, to Judge betwixt us, which of us
has, does, or shall do her the better Service; and let him be received, the
other rejected.


Dr. Heylyn. And I presume that none will be offended with me, because I tell
them of their Errors in a modest way, and bear witness for them to that Truth,
of which they do profess themselves such especial lovers. In that great
Disputation betwixt the Esquires of the Body of King Esdr. 4.41.
Darius, whether the King, Women, or the Truth, were of greatest Power, the
whole Assembly cried out in the behalf of Truth, Magna est veritas and
praevalet, that is to say, Great is Truth, and mighty above all things.


Fuller. I acknowledge this a Canonical Truth, though written in the Apocrypha.
It will soon be seen, who will shout most at the Triumphs of Truth, I or the
Animadvertor, corrivall with me to the same Mistress.


Dr. Heylyn. So that in standing for the Truth, without Consideration of the
RECOMPENSE of REWARD, I hope though I meet some Adversaries, I shall find more
Friends.


Fuller. Here he soareth so high a flight I cannot follow him; yea, I suspect,
that in reaching so high a Note he has strained (if not broken) his voice.
What, no reflection on a Reward? He might have had an Intuition at it, as the
Encouragement though not the Cause of his pains; he might look at, in, through,
and beyond the Reward, without the least mixture of any Mercenar inesse: Sure I
am, that one of as much Meekness, as some are of Morosness, even upright Moses
himself, in his Service of the Essential, and Increated Truth (of higher
consequence than the Historical Truth controverted betwixt us) had
notwithstanding a Heb. 11.26.
respect to the recompense of Reward.


Dr. Heylyn. If not (for I am at a reasonable pass for that) it shall be no
small comfort to me, that the weak Candle of my Studyes has given light to
others, whereby they may discern some Historical Truths even in the darkest
mists of Error, which either Partiality or Incogitance has cast before the
eyes of many Readers.


Fuller. The Reader in due time will Judge, whether his Candle has by the
light thereof discovered more Truths; or by the Smoke thereof darkened more, or
given more just offense by the unsavory Snuff thereof.


Dr. Heylyn. Which said, I shall now add no more, but that having two Patients
under cure of different tempers, it is not to be thought, that I should
administer unto both the same kind of Physic, an ordinary purge being
sufficient for the one, whereas the foul body of the other does require a
Fluxing; as some wounds may be healed with Balm, when others more corrupt and
putrified do exact a Lancing.


Fuller. Which said, I shall now add no more but that having two Adversaries,
Dr. Heylyn, and Dr. Cosens to encounter, it is not to be thought, that I should
proceed against both alike; Dr. Cosens has merited much of the Protestant
Cause in France, and thereby commands my Pen to pay the Homage of due reverence
to the Crown of his old Age, especially when found in the way of Truth. But I
am not under any such Obligation of particular respect to Dr Heylyn on the same
account.

I could wish he had used a more cleanly Metaphor, and forborne the phrase of
Fluxing. Such a cure appears not in Hippocrates, as being a modern remedy, for
a modern malady. However, would I were but half so holy as he was, of whom it
was said, An evil disease Psalm. 41.8.
say they (and they did but say it) cleaves fast unto him.

I will use no harsher Metaphor in relation of my answers to my two
Antagonists, than only, That men may meddle with a Mallow with naked hands, but
need to put on their Hedging-gloves when to deal with a Thorn or Nettle.

Only here I shall presume to request the Reader, to take especial notice of
those remarkable words of the Animadvertor [ tell them of their Errors in a
MODEST WAY] and keep them against a rainy-day, I mean such a seasonable Time as
we may make use thereof.


Dr. Heylyn. But so it happens many times, that some men are more impatient
of the Cure, then sensible of their Diseases; and that, in stead of giving
thanks to to the Physician, for the great pains he took about them, they pay
him with nothing but displeasures. Which being the worst that can befall me, I
am armed against it.


Fuller. But so it happens many times, that (as in this case) there may be
plus periculi a Medico quam a Morbo, More danger of the Physician than of the
Disease; A good belief and conceit of the Physician, is more than half a Cure:
and I confess I have none of the Animadvertor, whom I behold but as an
adventurous Emperick, having seen and marked his practice on other Patients,
rather disgraceing their Persons than amending their Errors: Give me a
Physician of my own Election, not of his Intrusion; especially when he usually
wrappeth up his best Receipts in Poisoned Papers.


Dr. Heylyn. If by the hazard of my Peace I shall procure this benefit to the
present and succeeding times, that men may prove more careful of what they
write, and not obtrude upon the Reader (either through Ignorance, inadvertency,
or somewhat worse) such and so many falsities, mistakes, and errors, as have
been lately put upon him in some modern Histories; It is that I aimed at, and
having gained that point, I have gained my purpose.


Fuller. But what if on the contrary (which is more probable) it comes to
pass, that some having commendable Inclinations, and proportionable
Qualifications to write Histories, perceiving their Books, Damnatos antequam
natos, baned before born, by the prejudice which this Animadvertor bears their
Parents; who is ready as soon as their Books shall peep out of the Press, to
assault them with causless cavills: What I say if such persons on the tender
resentment of the premises shall quit all their Intentions to write; the
Animadvertor can little comfort himself, and others will less commend him, for
this his over-activity, so destructive to the public Good. But there are some,
who when they can no longer bewitch with their Beauty, endeavor to do it with
their Malice, thereby to render themselves in any sort considerable; to be
feared, when they are no more loved. All I will add is this, He who already
having one of his feet in the Grave, will spurn his brother with the other;
will find few to pity him, if falling all along for his pains.


Dr. Heylyn. Non Partis Studiis agimur, sed Sumpsimus Arma
Consiliis Inimica tuis, Ignavia fallax.

Peter Heylyn. Fuller. This Distick, whereof the Animadvertor, (by the
immediate subscription of his name thereunto* may to some seem the Author, is
frequently cited by Mr. Seldom, and may thus be Englished, We serve no Sides,
nor Parties seek to please,
But do defy, Sloth, thy deceiving Ease.


However I humbly conceive, that (what faults soever I am guilty of) the sin of
Sloth cannot justly, especially in my Church History, be laid to my charge.

1. All passages of Church-concernment from the Reign of Henry the third,
until King Henry the sixth, I got exactly written and attested out of the
Records in the Tower.

2. The most material transactions in all Convocations since the Reformation
till the time of Queen Elizabeth (save that sometimes the Journals be very
defective, which was no fault of mine,) I transcribed out of the Registers of
Canterbury.

3. I have by much labor procured many Letters and other Rarities (which
formerly never did see the light) out of the Library of Sir Thomas Cotton and
others.

4. The learned Mr. Seldom (on his own desire) honored my first four Centuries
with reading, and returned them unto me some weeks after; without any
considerable alterations.

5. The best Antiquaries of England (amongst whom the Archbishop of Armagh, it
being not then my happiness to be known to the Learned and religious Sir R.
Twisden,) I consulted with; These now I forbear to name, lest I remove and
derive the Animadvertors anger on them from my self, who am (though not the
most able) the best prepared to endure his displeasure.

Give me leave to add, that a greater volume of general Church-Historie might
be made with less time, pains, and cost: for in the making thereof, I had Straw
provided me to burn my Brick; I mean, could find what I needed, in printed
Books. Whereas in this British Church History, I must (as well as I could)
provide my own Straw, and my pains have been scattered all over the Land, by
riding, writing, going, sending, chiding, begging, praying, and sometimes
paying too, to procure manuscript materials.

These particulars seriously considered, I hope it will appear, that the
Animadvertor unjustly charge Sloth on my account, and Tyrannically cries out
with Pharaoh, Exodus 5.17.
Ye are idle, Idle are you. Yea I hope, I may alter the property of the
Animadvertors Distick, and turn his Sword into my Shield after this manner. Non
Partis Studiis agimur, sed sumpsimus arma
Consiliis peramica tuis, Industria Doctrix.



Thomas Fuller.

An ANSWER TO Dr. Heylyn's Necessary INTRODUCTION etc.
Dr. Heylyn. INtending some short Animadversions on the Church History of
Britain, for Vindication of the Truth, the Church, and the injured Clergy, I
have thought good to prepare the way unto them by a plain, but necessary
Introduction, touching the Quality and Nature of the Book which I have in hand.


Fuller. Intending, God willing, to return a true, clear, and short Answer to
the Introduction, I conceived it requisite to premise these few lines following.

The Animadvertor like a Cunning Market-man, has put his best Corn in the top
of his Sack to invite Chapmen to buy it. His Preface has a Decoction of his
whole Book, which was advisedly done by him, hoping that those might read his
Preface whom he suspected would never peruse his Book.

Reader, As I am loath, any thing in his Book should not be once Answered, so
be not offended, if to avoid repetition, I am loath it should be twice
answered. Each particular in the Preface will recurre in the body of the Book,
where (by Gods assistance) no emphatical word nor syllable shall pass without
its respective reply.

Nor has the Reader any cause to suspect, that by such shifting I intend any
Evasion, by pleading in the Preface, that I will answer objections in the Body
of my Book, and alleging in the Body of my Book, that I have answered them in
the Preface. For I have to do with the Animadvertor, so cunning and so exacting
a Merchant, that it is impossible for one indebted unto him, to escape without
full payment, by changing the place of his habitation.

However the Animadvertor has dealt severely (to say no worse) with me, who,
to render me the more culpable, and my Book of the less credit, has
represented all my faults in a Duplicating Glass; And whereas the Best of
Beings, non bis judicat in id ipsum, does not punish the same faults twice, he
has twice taxed every supposed mistake in my History, once in his Preface, and
again, in the Body of his Book.


Dr. Heylyn. Concerning which, the Reader is to understand that in the Year
1642. Mr. Fuller published his Book called The Holy State; in the Preface
whereof he let^ us know, that he should count it freedom to serve two
Appr^ntiships (God spinning out the (...) thread of his life so long) in
writing the Ecclesiastical History from Christ^ time to our days. And so much
time it seems he had spent upon it (excepting some (...) for recreation in the
Holy Land, before he had finished and exposed it to pub^^ck view; the Book not
coming out until the year 1655. whether agreeable to his promise and such a
tedious expect^tion, we are now to see.


Fuller. My words are by the Animadvertor given-in de^ectively, and (as to me)
disadvantageously; this ^assage (which ought to have been inserted) immediately
preceding my Promise.

If I may be so happy as to see these gloomy days disclouded with the beams of
Gods mercy.

I appeal to the Conscience of the Animadvertor himself, whither in his Soul he
conceives these days disclouded or no. Gloomy they were when I w^ote those
words, before any war rained in the Land; and since such bloody showers have
ended, they continue louring, gloomy, and dark unto this day.

My promise therefore being thus but Conditional, and the condition on which it
was grounded not as yet performed, I have no ne^d Liberare fidem, to free my
Faith, which was never bound, though I had ever since utterly quitted all
thoughts of writing any Church History.

For, the first five years, during our actual Civil Wars, I had little list or
leisure to write; fearing to be made an History, and shifting daily for my
safety. All that time I could not live to study, who did only study to live.

So soon as Gods goodness gave me a fixed habitation, I composed my Land of
Canaan or Pisgah-Sight. This, though I confess it be no part of
Church-Building, yet it is the clearing of the floor or Foundation thereof, by
presenting the performances of Christ and his Apostles in Palestine. I perceive
the Animadvertor has a months mind to give me a Jeere, for my fallying into
the Holy Land, which I can bear the better, seeing (by Gods goodness) that my
Book has met with general reception, likely to live when I am dead; so that
friends of quality solicit me, to teach it the Latine-Language.


Dr. Heylyn. For first, the Reader might expect by the former passage, that he
designed the General History of the Church, from the first preaching of
Christ, and the calling of the twelve Apostles to the times we live in: whereas
he has restrained himself to the Church of Britain, which he conceives to be
so far from being founded in the time of Christ, that he is loath to give it the
Antiquity of being the work of any of the Apostles, of any of the Seventy
Disciples, or finally of any Apostolical Spirit of those eldest times.


Fuller. Charity begins, but does not end, at home. The same Method was
embraced in my Church History. It began with our own Domestic affairs, to
confute that accusation, commonly charged on Englishmen, that they are very
knowing in foreign parts, but ignorant in their own Country. I intended (God
willing) to have proceeded to foreign Churches, but I am discouraged by the
causless caviling at what I have written already.

My Church History begins (for point of Time) Indeterminately before the
Birth of Christ, ( lapping in, or folding over part of Paganism) and
presents the doleful condition of the Britons, whilst yet unconverted, and
grievious Idolaters.

Determinately, my History begins Anno Dom. 37. which is but four years after
Christ's Passion, and that is very early, I assure you: Christianity in this
Island, being a Timely riser, to be up so soon, and dressing it Self, whilst
as yet (and many years after) most Countries were fast asleep in Pugan Impiety,

I deny not but that Apostolical men, were the first founders of Religion in
our Land. But as for such Apostles, (St. Peter, St. Paul, etc.) who without
probability of Truth, and against proportion of Time, are by some Authors
obtruded on us, those I do reject, (I hope, without the least ^ault) rendering
my reasons for the same.


Dr. Heylyn. And secondly, Though he entitle it by the name of the
Church History of Britain, yet he pursues not his Design agreeable to that
Title neither: there being little said of the affairs of the Church of
Scotland, which certainly makes up a considerable part of the Isle of Britain;
and less (if any thing at all) of the Church of Ireland, which anciently past
in the account of a Brittish-Island.


Fuller. I will render the Reader a true account, why I entitled my Book, The
Church History of Britain.

First, the Church History of England I might not call it, the five first
Centuries therein belonging wholly to the Britains before the Name and Notion
of England, was ever heard of in any Author.

Secondly, The Church History of Great-Brittain, I did not call it; for fear of
bringing in Scotland within the Latitude thereof, a compass too large for my
weak Endeavors.

Thirdly, The Church History of Britain, I did, and might call it, in a double
respect, tam a part Majore, quam meliore, both from the bigger and better, the
fairer and fruitfuller part of Britain, the Ecclesiastical affairs whereof
were therein contained.

Yea the Animadvertor knows full well, that the South of this Island, by way of
Eminence is so called: To give one Instance of many, from the Title Page, of a
passage of State. Nobilissima disceptatio super Dignitate and magnitudine
Regnorum Britannici Et Gallici, habita ab utriusque Oratoribus and Legatis, in
Concilio Constantiensi; Lovanii, anno 1517. Typis excusa.

The most noble Dispute, about the Dignity and greatness of the Kingdoms of
Britain and France, betwixt the Ambassadors and Legates of both Sides, in the
Council of Constance; Anno 1517. printed at Lovaine.

Here the contest only was betwixt the Crowns of England [here termed Brittain]
and France, Scotland not at all interesting it self therein.

It will not be long before the Animadvertor (as, God willing, in due time
shall be observed) stickleth with might and main, that Lucius might properly
style himself, and be styled King of Britain, who had not an half of the
Southern-half of this Island: and therefore, by his own Principles, it is no
Solecisme in me, to name the cis-Tweedan Moity thereof, Britain.

Had I given my native Country a narrow and restrictive name, I had deserved
due reproof; but now, measuring the denomination thereof, with all honorable
advantage, I humbly conceive my self not to fall under just reprehension for
the same.


Dr. Heylyn. Nor is it, thirdly, a Church History rightly and properly so
called, but an aggregation of such and so many Heterogeneous bodies, that
Ecclesiastical affairs make the least part of it. Abstracted from the dress
and trimming, and all those outward imbelishments which appear upon it, it has
a very fit resemblance to that Lady of pleasure of which Martial tells us, Pars
minima est ipsa puella sui, that the woman was the least part of her self. The
name of a Church-Rhapsody had been fitter for it, though to say truth (had it
been answerable thereunto in point of learning) it might have past by the old
Title of Fuller's Miscellanies. For such and so many are the impertinencies, as
to matters of Historical nature, more as to matters of the Church, that
without them this great Volume had been brought to a narrower compass, if it
had taken up any room at all. So that we may affirm of the present History, as
one did of the Writings of Chrysippus an old Philosopher, Diog. Laert. in vita
Chrysippi.
viz. Si quis tollat^e Chrysippi Libris quae aliena sunt, facile illi vacua
relinquerentur Pergamena, that is to say, that if they were well purged of all
such passages as were not pertinent to the business which he had in hand, there
would be nothing left in them to fill up his Parchments.


Fuller. The Animadvertor has a free liberty to name His own Books; and I
crave the same leave my self, to denominate My own.

Before he had fallen so fiercely on my extravagancies in the Church-Historie,
he had done well to have defended his own, in his Geographie; sixteen parts of
twenty therein being merely Historical, and aliene from his Subject in the
strictness thereof. Sure I am, Ptolomey, Strabo, Pliny etc. in their several
descriptions of the world, have nothing to countenance the excursions about the
Pedegrees of Princes, not reductive to Geographie without the great favor of
the Reader so to understand it.

But because Recrimination is no part of Purgation, I provide my self to answer
to all which shall be objected for impertinencies.


Dr. Heylyn. The first of this kind which I am to note, is a mere extrinsecall
and outside unto those impertinencies which are coucht within; consisting of
Title-Pages, Dedicatory-Epistles, and several intermediate Inscriptions unto
every Section. A new way, never traveled before by any, till he found it out;
and such wherein he is not like to find many followers, though the way be
opened. I know it is no unusual thing for works of different Arguments,
published at several times, and dedicated to several persons, to be drawn
together into one Volume; and being so drawn together, to retain still those
particular Titles and Dedications which at first they had. But I dare
confidently say, that our Historian is the first, who writing a Book of the
same Argument, not published by peece-meal, as it came from his hand, but in a
full and entire Volume, has filled his Sheets with so many Title-leaves and
Dedications, as we have before us.


Fuller. I answer first, Although it be unlawful even for the owner himself
abuti re sua, to abuse what is his own, because the Public has an interest
therein; Yet, Math. 5.10.
Is it not lawful for me to Do, what I will with my Own?

Secondly, seeing the Animadvertor pretends in his notes to rectify
Mistakes, Falsities, and Defects, this comes not under any of these notions.
And whereas he writes (as he says) for the Vindication of the Truth, Church,
and injured-Clergy; by my dedicating of my Book to many Patrons, the Truth is
not prejudiced, nor the Church wronged, nor any of the Clergy injured.

Thirdly, Of late some useful and costly Books, when past their Parents power
to bring them forth, have been delivered to the Public, by the Midwifery of
such Dedications.

Fourthly, Many (if not most) of my Patrons invited themselves purposely to
encourage my endeavors; And why should any man's eye be evil, because theirs
were good unto me.

Lastly, It is all one in effect, whether one printeth his Dedications to many
Patrons, or whether one presents a printed History of St* George, to each
English Knight of the Garter, with a written As in the (...) which I have seen
under the hand of the Animadve^^o^.
letter prefixed to every one of them: save that the former way is better, as
which rendereth the Authors gratitude the more public and conspicuous.


Dr. Heylyn. For in this one Book, taking in the History of Cambridge, which is
but an Appendix to it, there are no fewer than twelve particular Titles,
besides the general; as many particular Dedications; and no fewer then fifty
eight or sixty of those By-Inscriptions, which are addressed to his particular
Friends and Be^ef^ctors, which make it bigger by forty Sheets at the least,
then it had been otherwise. Nay, so ambitious he is of increasing the Number of
his Patrons, that having but four Leaves to come to the end of his History, he
finds out a particular Benefactress to inscribe it to: Which brings to my mind
the vanity of Vitellius in bestowing, and of Roscius, Regulus for accepting the
Consular Dignity, for that part of the day on which Cecinna, by Order and
Decree of the Senate, was degraded from it: Of which the Historian gives this
Note, that it was, Magno cum irrisu accipientis tribuentisque, a matter of no
mean disport amongst the People for a long time after.


Fuller. Ordinary Dedications exceed not a dozen lines, and therefore I believe
the Animadvertor is much mistaken in his proportions.

If I did Dedicate four leaves to a distinct Patroness, no such fault therein;
seeing, I am confident, those four leaves contain in them so remarkable an
Accident, as the Animadvertor never read the like in four thousand leaves of
any Historian.


Dr. Heylyn. But of this Argument our Author heard so much at the late Act at
Oxford, that I shall say no more of it at this present time.


Fuller. I heard nothing thereof at Oxford, being then sixty miles distanced
thence. Sure I am, I did not there Male audire deservedly; and if undeservedly,
mala fama been parta delectat.

Secondly, I have heard since, that one in the Act, was bold to play on my own
name and Church History. But for the seventeen years I lived in Cambridge, I
never heard any Prevaricator mention his Senior by name: We count such
particularizing beneath an University.

Thirdly, I hope it will not be accounted Pride, but Prudence in me, to believe
my self above such Trifles, who have written a Book to Eternity.

Fourthly, I regreat not to be Anvile, for any ingenious Hammer to make
pleasant music on; but it seems my Traducer was not so happy.

Lastly, I remember a speech o^ Sir Walter Rawleighs, If any (says he)
speaks against me to my face, my Tongue shall give him an Answer; but my
backside is good enough to return to him, who abuses me behind my back.


Dr. Heylyn. In the next rank of Impertinencies, which are more intrinseall,
part of the substance of the work, I account his Heraldry, Blazons of Arms,
Descents of noble Families with their Atchivements intermingled as they come in
his way; not pertinent, I am sure, to a Church-Historian, unless such persons
had been Founders of Episcopal Sees, or Religious-Houses, or that the Arms so
blazoned did belong to either.


Fuller. I answer in general, Those passages of Heraldry are put in for
variety and diversion, to refresh the wearied Reader.

They are never used without asking of leave before, or craving pardon after
the inserting thereof; and such craving is having a request in that kind with
the Ingenious. Grant it ill manners in the Author not to ask, it is ill nature
in the Reader not to grant so small a suit.

Mr. Camden in his description of Oxfordshire, has a prolixe (though not
tedious) poem, of the marriage of Them and Isis, which he ushereth in with Si
placet, vel legas vel negligas, read or reject, either set by it, or set it by;
as the Reader is disposed.

The same, (though not expressed) is implied in all such Digressions, which may
be said to be left unprinted in Effect, to such as like them not: their Ploughs
may make Balks of such deviations, and proceed to more serious matter.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author tells us, lib. 9. fol. 151. that knowledge in the Laws
of this Land, is neither to be expected or required in one of his profession;
and yet, I trow, considering the great influence which the Laws have upon
Church Matters, the knowledge of the Law cannot be so unnecessary in the way of
a Clergyman, as the study of Heraldry: But granting Heraldry to be an Ornament
in all them that have it, yet is it no ingredient requisite to the composition
of an Ecclesiastical History: The Copies of Battle-Abbey Roll fitter for Stow
and Hollinshead, (where before we had them) can, in an History of the Church,
pretend to no place at all, though possibly the names of some may be remembered,
as their Foundations or Endowments of Churches give occasion for it. The Arms
of Knight Errant, billeted in the Isle of Ely, by the Norman Conqueror, is of
like extravagancy. Such also is the Catalogue of those noble Adventurers, (with
their Arms, Issue and Achievements) who did accompany King Richard the first
to the War of Palestine, which might have better served as an Appendix to his
History of the Holy War, then found a place in the main Body of an History of
the Church of England: Which three alone, besides many intercalations of that
kind, in most parts of the Book, make up eight sheets more, inserted only for
the ostentation of his skill in Heraldry, in which notwithstanding he has
fallen on as palpable Errors as he has committed in his History:


Fuller. Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments has done the like, presenting the
names of such who came over at the Norman Conquest. I have only made their
Catalogue more complete. And seeing it was preserved in Battle-Abbey, the very
addition of Abbey does dye it with some Ecclesiastical tincture.

The Arms of the Knights of Ely, might on a threefold title have escaped the
Animadvertor's censure: First, they was never before printed. Secondly, the
Wall whereon they were depicted, is now demolished. Lastly, each Knight being
blended (or, as I may say, empaled) with a Monk, a Moiety of that Mixture may
be construed reducible to Church History.

As for the Arms of some signal persons achieved in the HOLY-WAR; If the
Surname of WAR be secular, the Christian name thereof, HOLY, is Ecclesiastical;
and so rendered all actions therein within the latitude of Church History, to an
ingenuous Reader.


Dr. Heylyn. For, besides those which are observed in the course of this work,
I find two others of that kind in his History of Cambridge, to be noted there.

For fol. 146. he tells us, That Alice Countess of Oxford was Daughter and
sole Heir of Gilbert Lord Samford, which Gilbert was Hereditary Lord
Chamberlain of England]. But, by his leave, Gilbert Lord Samford was never the
hereditary Chamberlain of the Realm of England, but only Chamberlain in Fee to
the Queens of England; betwixt which Offices how vast a difference there is,
let our Author judge.


Fuller. I plead in my own defense (according to my last general Answer) that I
have charged my Margin with my Autho^. Mr. Parker In his S^^^e^on Cantab. M. Sc.
(Fellow of Caius College in Cambridge,) one known for a most ab^^ Antiquary,
but especially in Heraldry; and I thought that he had lighten on some rare
Evidence, out of the ordinary road: but, seeing he was mistaken, I will amend
it (God willing) in my next Edition.


Dr. Heylyn. And secondly, The Honor of Lord Chamberlain of England, came not
unto the Earls of Oxford by that Marriage, or by any other, but was invested in
that Family, before they had attained the Title and Degree of Earls: Conferred
by King Henry the first on Aubrey de Vere, a right puissant Person, and
afterward on Aubrey de Vere his Son, together with the Earldome of Oxford, by
King Henry the second; continuing Hereditary in that House, till the death of
Robert Duke of Ireland, the ninth Earl thereof, and then bestowed for a time at
the Kings discretion, and at last settled by King Charles in the House of Lindsey.


Fuller. This is nothing Confutatory of Me, who never affirmed that the
High-Chamberlainship accrued to the House of Oxford by any such match.


Dr. Heylyn. But because being a Cambridge Man, he may be better skilled in the
Earls of that County, let us see what he says of them; and we shall find, fol.
162. That Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, was the eighth Earl of Cambridge.

Whereas first, Richard Duke of York was not Earl of Cambridge.


Fuller. He was, he was, he was; as presently (God willing) will appear, beyond
all doubt and contradiction.


Dr. Heylyn. And secondly, If he had been such, he must have been the seventh
Earl, and not the eighth: For thus those Earls are marshalled in our Catalogues
of Honor, and Books of Heraldry, viz. 1. William de Meschines. 2. John de
Hainalt. 3. William Marquess of Iuliers. 4. Edmond of Langley, D. of York. 5.
Edward D. of York. 6. Richard de Conisburgh, younger Brother of Edward. 7.
James Marquess Hamilton, etc.


Fuller. Indeed they are thus reckoned up in a late little (and useful) Book,
entitled, The Help of History, made (as I am credibly informed) by the
Animadvertor himself, and therefore by him well styled OUR Catalogues of Honor.
But more exact Heralds, whom it concerns to be skilful in their own Profession,
do otherwise account them.


Dr. Heylyn. No Richard Duke of York to be found amongst them; his Father,
Richard of Konisburgh, having lost that Title by Attainder, which never was
restored to Richard his Son (though most improvidently advanced to the Dukedom
of York) nor unto any other of that Line and Family.


Fuller. I admire at the Animadvertor's peremptoriness in this point, when the
no less learned (but more modest) Mr. Camden, speaking of these Earls in the
Description of Cambridge-shire, says, that after the death of Richard of
Conisburgh, The Title of the Earl of Cambridge, either wholly vanished with
him, or else lay hid amongst the Titles of Richard his Son, who was restored
Duke of York as Kinsman and Heir to his Uncle Edward Duke of York.

What he warily said laid hid, is found out by such as since wrote on that
Subject, Mr. Brook, York Herald, and Mr. Augustine Vincent (in effect Mr.
Camden revised;) who writing Corrections on Brook, Page 94, 95.
concurreth with him in this particular. for Richard of Conisburgh, Edward's
Brother, was after created Earl of that place, [Cambridge] and after him
another Richard, who was Richard of Conisburgh's Son. See Reader what an
Adversary I have gotten, who cares not to write against the most evident and
avowed Truths, so be it, he may write something against Me.


Dr. Heylyn. 4. Proceed we in the next place to Verses, and old ends of Poetry,
scattered and dispersed in all parts of the History, from one end to the other;
for which he has no precedent in any Historian, Greek or Latin, or any of the
National Histories of these latter times: The Histories of Herodotus, Xenophon,
Thucidides and Plutarch, amongst the Greeks; of Caesar, Livy, Salust, Tacitus,
and Suetonius, amongst the Latins; afford him neither warrant nor example for
it: The like may be affirmed of Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret, Ruffin
and Evagrius, Church-Historians all; though they had all the best choice, and
the most excellent Poets of the world to befriend them in it: And he that shall
consult the Historyes of succeeding times, through all the Ages of the Church,
to this present day, will find them all as barren of any encouragements in this
kind, as the ancients were.


Fuller. Never had Herodotus given his Nine Books the names of the Nine Muses,
if such was his Abstemiousness from Poetry. Not one of them, which is (...) in
this kind; and there are found in Clio the first, no fewer than thirty Verses
of the Oracles of Pythia. As those his Books are fruitful, so his Book of the
Life of Homer has a superfetation of them, so that if Paose be the Warp,
Verses are the Woof thereof. Whereas the Animadvertor instances in Plutarch;
open at the life of Theseus, and we are presented with Poetry therein.

But grant no precedent in this nature in these Authors. A more free Genius
acts in modern than in ancient Historians, manumissed from the Servilities
they were tied (or tied themselves) unto. The Animadvertor, like another
Empson, endeavors to revive the Penal Statutes of History against me, (so to
subject me to fine for the breach thereof) which Time in effect has cancelled.

Qui Scribit Historice, scribit misere, if enslaved to all puntillo's thereof.
Let the Animadvertor keep those Steel-bodys for his own wearing, and not force
them on me. What, not a Plait or a Ruffle more or less but all must be done in
Number, Weight, and Measure! according to Historical criticisme! This is not
putting the Book, but the Author himself, into the Press.

Tacitus himself, (here instanced in) would be Tacitus indeed, if all Politic
Sentences and prudential results were deleted in him, being trespasses on the
preciseness of History, confined to matter of Fact: But welfare that
Historian, who will go out of his own way, to direct his Reader.

We know Pliny, Solinus, etc. in their Topographical description of Countries,
are barren of verses. Let the Animadvertor on the same account therefore charge
Mr. Camden for surcharging his Britannia with Poetry, having but three
verseless Shires, viz. ( Dorset, Bucks, and Westmerland) in all England, and
more than fourscore verses apeece, in the three several Counties of Berks,
Oxford, and Somerset.


Dr. Heylyn. Nay, whereas Bishop Godwin in his Annals, gives us an Epitaph of
two Verses only made on Queen Jane Seymour, and afterward a Copy of eighteen
verses on the Martyrdom of Archbishop Cranmer; he ushers in the last with
this short Apology, Contra morem Historiae liceat quaeso inserere, etc. Let me,
(says he, I beseech you) insert these following verses, though otherwise
against the Rule and Laws of History.


Fuller. What if that worthy Prelate was pleased to pass a Complement on his
Reader, it follows not that they do want Civility, who have less Courtship in
this Point than he has. Let us look on his Catalogue of Bishops, which has
more vicinity with my Subject, and there we shall find (the Bulk of the Book
considered) more verses in proportion, than in my Church History, on the token
that where I cite but four, he quoteth fourteen, out of Martial, to prove
Claudia Ruffina a Britan, and a Christian.


Dr. Heylyn. But what alas were eighteen or twenty verses compared with those
many hundred (six or seven hundred at the least) which we find in our Author,
whether to show the universality of his reading in all kind of Writers, or his
faculty in Translating (which when he meets with hard Copies, he knows how to
spare) I shall not determine at the present.


Fuller. If pieces of verses be counted whole ones, which in this point is no
Charitable Synecdoche, and if Translations be reckoned distinct Verses, though
it is hard that a Man and his Shadow should be accounted two different persons:

And if the verses in the History of Cambridge be adjected, though he who
banisheth Poetry out of an University, will find Iambicks enough to pay him for
his pains:

And if the verses in the History of Waltham-Abby be cast in, though who shall
hinder but I will describe my own Parish in Prose or Poetry as I think fit; all
put together will not amount to the number.

Besides many of my verses may be said to be Prose in Effect, as containing the
Religion of that Age, and therefore alleged as Evidence thereof, before the
Norman Conquest; and no authority can in Prose be produced which does so fully
and clearly represent the same.

Other Verses are generally Epitaphs on some eminent Churchmen, which could
not well be omitted.


Dr. Heylyn. Certain I am, that by the interlarding of his Prose with so many
Verses, he makes his Book look rather like a Church-Romance, (our late
Romancers being much given to such kind of mixtures) than a well built
Ecclesiastical History. And if it be a matter so inconvenient to put a new
piece of cloth on an old garment; the putting of so many old patches on a new
piece of cloth, must be more unfashionable. Besides that, many of these old
ends are so light and ludicrous, so little pertinent to the business which he
has in hand, that they serve only to make sport for Children, (ut pueris
placeas and Declamatio fias) and for nothing else.


Fuller. Had the Animadvertor come with a good stomach, such larding had been
no bad Cookery. Certain I am, that a Comment admits less latitude in this
kind than a Church History. Certain I am also, that a Comment on the Creed, is
allowed less Liberty then other Comments. Now the Animadvertor has be
scattered his, every where with Verses, and Translations. It consists not
with my Charity to miscall it a Creed-Romance, accounting it a sin so to decry
or disparage his useful endeavors. The best way to discover the deformity of
my Fabric, is for the Animadvertor to erect a more beautiful Building hard by
it, that so his rare and regular, may shame my rude piece of Architecture.

What if such mixtures make the Garment (which also I utterly deny) to be less
in the fashion (the fondling of Fancy;) I made it not for Sight but Service,
that it might be strong and warm to the Wearers thereof.

I stand on my justification, that no such light or ludicrous Verses are to be
found in my Book, which render it to just exception. But no wonder if the Bell
clinketh even as the prejudiced Hearer thinks thereof.


Dr. Heylyn. This leads me to the next impertinency, his raking into the Chanel
of old Popish Legends, writ in the darker times of Superstition, but written
with an honest zeal, and a good intention, as well to raise the Reader to the
admiration of the person of whom they write, as to the emulation of his
virtues: But being mixed with some Monkish dotages, the most learned and
ingenious men in the Church of Rome have now laid them by; and it had been very
well if our Author had done so to, but that there must be something of
entertainment for the gentle Reader, and to inflame the reckoning which he pays
not for.


Fuller. I have not raked into the Kennel of old Popish Legends, who took the
clearest water, in this kind, out of those Rivers which run, at this day, in
highest Reputation with the Romanists. I never cited any Legend but either out
of Harpsfield, who wrote in the last Generation, and was as Ingenuous as any of
his Persuasion; or else out of Hierom Porter his Flores Sanctorum, who wrote
some forty years, and in high esteem with the Papists at this day, as appears
by the dear price thereof.

I confess I have instanced (taking ten perchance out of ten thousand) in the
grossest of them, (that is the fairest Monster, which is most Deformed) partly
to show what a Spirit of Delusion acted in that Age, partly to raise our
Gratitude to God, seeing such Lying vanities, are now ridiculous even to
children.

I believe not the Animadvertor, when saying, that the most learned and
Ingenious of Rome have laid them aside, seeing Cornelius a lapide weaveth them
in, all along his comments, and K. James did justly complain, that Bellarmine
himself, did mar his pretty Books of Devotion, with such Legendary mixtures.


Dr. Heylyn. But above all things, recommend me to his Merry Tales, and scraps
of Trencherjests, frequently interlaced in all parts of the History; which if
abstracted from the rest, and put into a Book by themselves, might very well be
served up for a second course to the Banquet of Jests, a Supplement to the old
Book, entitled, Wits, Fits, and Fancies; or an additional Century to the old
Hundred Merry Tales, so long since extant. But standing as they do, they
neither do become the gravity of a Church-Historian, nor are consistent with
the nature of a sober argument.


Fuller. The Animadvertor should have rendered me liable to just Reproof, by
instancing in One of those Tales so inconsistent with the gravity of a
Church-Historian: which no doubt he had done, but because he knew himself
unable to produce it.

He, who is often seen to snap hastily at, and feed hungerly on an hard crust,
will not be believed if bragging that he can eat Pheasants and Partridges at
his Pleasure. And seeing the Animadvertor, does commonly carp and cavil at the
silly shadows of seeming mistakes, in my Book; it is utterly improbable he can,
yet will not, charge me with a fault, which cannot be defended.

But let him at leisure produce the most light and ludicrous Story in all my
Book, and here I stand ready to Parallel it with as light, (I say not in the
Animadvertor,) but in as Grave Authors as ever put Pen to Paper.


Dr. Heylyn. But as it seems, our Author came with the same thoughts to the
writing of this present History, as Poets anciently address themselves to the
writing of Comedies, of which thus my Terence. Poeta cum primum animum ad
scribendum appulit.
Id sibi negotii credidit solum dari,
Populo ut placerent quas fecisset fabulas.


That is to say, Thus Poets, when their mind they first apply
In looser verse to frame a Comedy,
Think there is nothing more for them to do,
Then please the people, whom they speak unto.



Fuller. I admire that the Animadvertor, who so lately had taxed me for writing
and translating of Verses, will now do the same himself. There is a double
people-pleasing. One sordid and servile, made of falsehood and flattery, which I
defy and detest. The other lawful, when men deliver and dress Truth in the
most plausible expression. I have a precedent above Exception to warrant it,
even Solomon himself, Eccles. 12.10. The Preacher sought out Acceptable words.
This I did, and will, aim at in all my writings, and I doubt not but that the
Animadvertor's Stationer does hope and desire, that he has thus pleased people
in his Book, for the advancing of the price, and quickening the Sale thereof.


Dr. Heylyn. In the last place proceed we to the manifold excursions about the
Antiquity of Cambridge, built on as weak Authority as the Monkish Legends, and
so impertinent to the matter which he has in hand, that the most Reverend Mat.
Parker (though a Cambridge man) in his Antiquitates Britannicae, makes no
business of it.

The more impertinent, in regard that at the fag-end of his Book there follows
a distinct History of that University, to which all former passages might have
been reduced.

But, as it seems, he was resolved to insert nothing in that History but what
he had some probable ground for; leaving the Legendary part thereof to the
Church-Romance, as most proper for it. And certainly he is wondrous wise in his
generation.

For fearing lest he might be asked for those Bulls and Chartularies which
frequently he relates unto in the former Books, he tells us in the History of
Cambridge, fol 53. That they were burnt by some of the seditious Townsmen in
the open Market place, Anno 1380. or thereabouts: So that for want of other
ancient evidence, we must take his word; which whether those of Cambridge will
depend upon, they can best resolve.

For my part I forbear all intermedling in a controversy so clearly stated,
and which has lain so long asleep, till now awakened by our Author to beget
new quarrels: Such passages in that History as come under any Animadversion,
have been reduced unto the other, as occasion served, which the Reader may be
pleased to take notice of as they come before him.


Fuller. Because omitted by Archbishop Parker, I have the more Cause and
Reason to insert it: Otherwise, had he handled the Subject before, the
Animadvertor would have cried out Crambe, that there was nothing novel therein.

Call it (I pray) The FRINGE of my Book, be it but for the Subjects sake,
whereof it treats, my dear Mother, the University of Cambridge.

I live in the same generation with the Animadvertor, and I hope shall acquit
my self as honest, which truly is as wise as himself. CHURCH-ROMANCE parcius
ista.

As I tell the Reader of the burning of those Original Charters, so in the same
place I charge my Margin with my Author, [Dr. Caius] and thereby discharge my
self.

Does the Animadvertor now forbear all intermedling therein, in this
Controversy? Why did he not forbear before, when setting forth his last
Geography some five years since? And is it not as lawful for me to defend, as
for him to oppose my Mother? When, where, and by whom, was this Controversy so
clearly stated? Was it by the Animadvertor himself? Such a Party is unfit for a
Judge. Or, was it stated by the Parliament mentioned by him 1mo. Iacobi, when,
as he tells us, the Clerk was commanded to place Oxford first. But it plainly
appears it was not then so clearly decided; but that the question was ever
started again, in the late long Parliament, with Arguments on both Sides.
Witness the printed Speech of Sir Simonds D'EWES on that occasion.


Dr. Heylyn. All these extravagancies and impertinencies (which make up a fifth
part of the whole Volume) being thus discharged, it is to be presumed that
nothing should remain but a mere Church History, as the Title promises. But
let us not be too presumptuous on no better grounds.


Fuller. The Animadvertor's Words, mind me of a Memorable passage, which
hereafter he has in his Animadversions on my Sixth Book, or History of Abbeys.
The Intruder pays to the Sequestered Minister but a NINETEENTH part in stead
of a FIFTH. But if the FIFTH-PART, in relation to my Book, be here stated to
the same proportion, for the NINETEENTH, yet will not the Animadvertor's
measure be reconciled to the Standard of Truth.


Dr. Heylyn. For on a Melius inquirendum into the whole course of the Book
which we have before us, we shall find too little of the Church, and too much
of the State, I mean too little of the Ecclesiastical, and too much of the
Civil History: It might be reasonably expected, that in a History of the Church
of England, we should have heard somewhat of the foundation and enlargement of
Cathedral Churches, if not of the more eminent Monasteries and Religious
Houses; and that we should have heard somewhat more of the succession of
Bishops in their several and respective Sees, their personal Endowments,
learned Writings, and other Acts of Piety, Magnificence, and public Interess,
especially when the times afforded any whose names in some of those respects
deserved to be retained in everlasting remembrance.


Fuller. I doubt not, but the Reader, who has perused my Church History, will
bear me witness, that therein there is a competent Representation of all these
particulars, so far forth as the Proportion of the Book will bear.


Dr. Heylyn. It might have been expected also, that we should have found more
frequent mention of the calling of National and Provincial Synods, with the
result of their proceedings, and the great influence which they had on the
Civil State, sparingly spoken of at the best, and totally discontinued in a
manner, from the death of King Henry the fourth, until the Conv^^^tion of the
year, 1552. of which no notice had been taken, but that he had a mind to
question the Authority of the Book of Articles which came out that year, though
published as the issue and product of it, by the express Warrant and Command of
King Edward the sixth.


Fuller. All Councels before the Conquest, with their Canons are completely
(and the most remarkable, after it) represented in my History. With what face
can the Animadvertor say that I have discontinued the Acts of the Convocation
till the year 1552? The Acts of one [critical] Convocation in the 27 of Henry
the eighth, 1535. taking up no less than eight sheets in my Book, and another
in the same Kings Reign employing more than a sheet.


Dr. Heylyn. No mention of that memorable Convocation in the fourth and fifth
years of Philip and Mary, in which the Clergy taking notice of an Act of
Parliament then newly passed, by which the Subjects of the Temporality, having
Lands to the yearly value of five pounds, and upwards, were charged with
finding Horse and Armor, according to the proportion of their yearly Revenues
and Possessions, did by their sole authority, as a Convocation, impose upon
themselves and the rest of the Clergy of this Land, the finding of a like
number of Horses, Armor, and other Necessaries for the War, according to their
yearly income, proportion for proportion, and rate for rate, as by that Statute
had been laid on the Temporal Subjects.


Fuller. I am confident that this is the self-same Convocation which is thus
entered in my Church History, Book 8. p. 39. Anno 1557. quinto Mariae. The
Clergy gave the Queen a Subsidy of eight shillings in the pound ( confirmed by
Act of Parliament) to be paid in four years: In requital whereof, by Poole 's
procurement, the Queen Privileged them from showing their horses with the
Laily; yet so, that they should muster them up for the defense of the Land,
under Captains of their own own choosing.

I cannot therefore be justly charged with no mention of the Acts of this
Convocation.


Dr. Heylyn. And this they did by their own sole Authority, as before was said,
Ordering the same to be levied on all such as were refractory, by
Sequestration, Deprivation, Suspension, Excommunication, Ecclesiastical
Censures all; without relating to any subsequent confirmation by Act of
Parliament, which they conceived they had no need of.


Fuller. I took the less notice of, and gave the less heed to the transactions
of the Clergy therein, because then they were in their Hufte and Height,
furious with Fire and Faggot, so that all done by them de facto, cannot be
justified for Legal; who sometimes borrowed a point of Law (even with intent
never to repay it) in their proceedings. It may be proved out of Mr. Fox, that
some at that time (by a cruel Prolepsis) antedated the burning of some
Martyrs, before the Writ de Haeretico Comburendo came unto them. Wherefore all
their actions in that time are not Precedential to warrant Posterity, and the
Air of that Torrid Zone will not fit the Bodies in our Temperate Climate.


Dr. Heylyn. Nor find we any thing of the Convocations of Queen Elizabeth's
time, except that of the year 1562. (and that not fairly dealt with neither, as
is elsewhere showed) though there passed many Canons in the Convocation of the
year 1571. and of the year 1585. and the year 1597. all Printed, and still
publicly extant; besides the memorable Convocation of the year 1555. in which
the Clergy gave the Queen a Benevolence of 2 s. in the pound, to be levied by
Ecclesiastical Censures, without relating to any subsequent confirmation by Act
of Parliament, as had accustomably been used in the Grant of Subsidies.


Fuller. Bernardus non vidit omnia; I could not come to the knowledge of every
particular. But I confess I cannot conjecture the cause of the Animadvertor's
retrograd^ motion, who after so many years in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
goes back again to the year 1555. Which was four years before she came to the
Crown.


Dr. Heylyn. It might have been expected also that we should have found in a
Church History of Britain, the several degrees and steps by which the
Heterodoxies and Superstitions of the Church of Rome did creep in amongst us;
and the degrees by which they were ejected and cast out again, and the whole
Reformation settled upon the Doctrine of the Apostles, attended by the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Primitive times.


Fuller. I hope the peruser of my Book will be sensible of no defect, but that
the same in a good degree is performed by me on several occasions.


Dr. Heylyn. As also that some honorable mention should be found of those
gallant Defenses which were made by Dr. Bancroft, Dr. Bilson, Dr. Bridges, Dr.
Cosins, and diverse others, against the violent Batteries and Assaults of the
Puritan Faction in Queen Elizabeth's time; and of the learned Writings of B.
Buckeridge, B. Morton, Dr. Sutcliff, Dr. Burges, etc. in justification of the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, against the remnants of that
scattered (and then broken) Faction in the time of King James; of which we have
Ne gry quidem, not a word delivered: Nor could it stand with his design (which
will discover it self in part in this Introduction, and shall more fully be
discovered in the Animadversions) that it should be otherwise.


Fuller. I answer: First, no Drag-net can be so comprehensive as to catch all
Fish and Fry in the River; I mean, no Historian can descend to every particular.

Secondly, What if I left that piece in the Dish, for manners sake? I must not
ingross all History to my self, but leave some to such as shall succeed me in
the same Subject.

Thirdly, the Reader in perusing my Book will bear me witness that most of
these have their true Encomiums on the same account; and especially Dr.
Bancroft, Dr. Bilson, Dr. Cosins.

Fourthly, if my omission of his Book has offended B. Morton, my asking will
be having the pardon of so vivacious a piety; who being past the age of a man,
now leads the life of an Angel.

Lastly, I have a Book of the Lives of all English Worthies, (God send it good
success) which had been in print, if not obstructed by the intervening of this
Contest; And, coming forth, will be suppletory of all such defects.


Dr. Heylyn. All which together, make it clear and evident that there is too
little of the Church or Ecclesiastical History in our Authors Book: And that
there is too much of the State or Civil History, will be easily seen, by that
unnecessary intermixture of State-Concernments, not pertinent to the business
which he has in hand.


Fuller. I answer first in general; Such the sympathy betwixt the embracing
Twins, Church and State, that sometimes it is both painful and pity to part
them. More particularly, such passages have at the least a cast or eye of
Church-colour in them, or else they are inserted for necessity, Ne detur
vacuum, for mere lack of Church-matter. All the Ecclesiastical History in Mr.
Fox, during the Reign of Edward the fourth, will not fill his hollow Pen, the
cause why he makes it up with History of the State; and I sometimes do the
like. Lastly, it is done for Variety, (and then, commonly, I crave the Readers
leave) which I hope is no offense. Must I turn Schoolboy again, and the
Animadvertor be my Schoolmaster, to give me a Theme, that I must write on no
other Subject, but what he appoints me?


Dr. Heylyn. Of this sort to look no further, is the long Will and Testament of
King Henry the eighth, with his Gloss or Comment on the same, taking up three
whole sheets at least, in which there is not any thing which concerns Religion,
or which relates unto the Church, or Church Affairs; although to have the
better color to bring it in, he tells us that he has transcribed it, not
only for the rarity thereof, but because it contained many passages which
might reflect much light upon Church History.


Fuller. I answer first, All ancient Wills have something of Sacredness in
them, beginning In the name of God Amen. Secondly, they are proved in the
Court-Christian, which evidenceth something of Ecclesiasticalness in them.
Thirdly, Kings have ever been beheld as mixed Persons, wherein Church and State,
are blended together. Fourthly, the Will of King Henry the eighth, in that
Active-juncture of times, is more than the Will of an ordinary King. Fifthly, it
is most remarkable even in Church History, if only on this Account, to show
that he who had violated the Testaments of so many Founders and Benefactors,
had hardly any one Particular of his own Will performed. Sixthly, it never was,
and perchance (had I not done it) never had been Printed Seventhly, false and
imperfect Copies thereof pass about in Manuscript. Lastly, I have received so
much thanks from the Animadvertor's Betters for printing of it, that I will
freely pardon and pass by his causless cavil against me for the same.


Dr. Heylyn. Lib. 5. fol. 243. Of this sort also is his description of the pomp
and order of the Coronation of King Charles, which though he does acknowledge
not to be within Pale and Park of Ecclesiastical History, yet he resolves to
bring it in, because it comes within the Purlews of it, as his own words are:
But for this he has a better reason than we are aware of, that is to say, That
if hereafter Divine Providence shall assign England another King, though the
transactions herein be not wholly precedential, something of State may be
chosen out grateful for imitation.

Lib. 11. fol. 124. As if the Pomp and order of a Coronation were not more
punctually preserved in the Heralds Office who have the ordering of all things
done without the Church, (and are Eyewitnesses of all which is done within)
than in our Authors second-hand and imperfect Collections.


Fuller. I answer first, a Coronation is Church-work, performed therein by an
Archbishop, attended with prayers and a Sermon.

2. I never expected that a Chaplain to K. Charles, should find fault with any
thing tending to the honor of his Lord; How can any good Disciple grudge at
what is expended (...), on the burial of the Memory of his Master being the
last in this kind.

3. My Collections, I mean printed by me, but observed by my most worthy
Friend, are (abating only the uncertain place of the Lord Mayor) most
critically exact.

Lastly, though the Heralds Office does carefully preserve all such Ceremonies,
yet cannot all persons living at great distance, and desiring information
herein, have on all occasions so facill and convenient access to their Office,
as to my Printed Book.


Dr. Heylyn. The like may be said also of the quick and active Raigns of Edward
the the sixth, and Queen Mary, in which the w^ole Body of the reformed Religion
was digested, settled, and destroyed; sufficient of it self to make a competent
Volume, but contracted by our Author (like Homer's Iliads, in the Nutshell)
into less than 25. sheets: And yet in that small Abstract we find many
Impertinences, as to the work he has in hand, that is to say, the great
proficiency of King Edward, in his Grammar Learning, exemplified in three
pieces of Latin of his making, when he was but eight or nine yerrs old.


Fuller. Just reason of such contraction because of Mr. Fox his dilatation on
the same: Where he found my fault, he (if so pleased) might have found my
defense, viz. If Papists preserve the Nails and Hairs of their supposed
Saints, give me leave to Record the first Essays of this Pious Prince,
especially they being unprinted rarieties, with which no Divine or Scholar,
save the Animadvertor alone, would, or could have found any fault.


Dr. Heylyn. The long Narrative of Sir Edward Montague, Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, to vindicate himself from being a voluntary Agent in the business
of the Lady Jane Gray needlessly inserted.


Fuller. King Edward the sixth, his passing the Crown (over the heads of his
two Sisters) to his Cousin the Lady Jane, is a piece of Church History; because
the continuing of the Protestant Religion, is all the plausible Plea for the
same, and the fair varnish of so foul a Groundwork. This passage of
Consequence is defectively delivered by our Historians, some Circumstances
thereof being hitherto locked from the world: Some have endeavored to force the
lock by their bold Conjectures. I am the first that have brought the true key
and opened it, from Judge Montague's own hand, truly Passive, (though charged
to be most Active therein) driven with the Tempest of Duke Dudley's anger,
against the Tide of his own Inclinations. I prize a Dram of acceptance from the
Ingenuous Reader, above a Pound of the Animadvertor's Cavilling; which is
offended with my inserting of so authentic and informative a Manuscript.


Dr. Heylyn. Needless the full and punctual relation of Wyats Rebellion, and
the Issue of it, though acted upon some false grounds of Civil Interess,
without relating to Religion or to Church Affairs: Infinitum esset ire per
singula, etc.


Fuller. This Rebellion was grounded on Erroneous Principles of Religion, and
therefore Goodman (Il-man) did in his Book of that Subject entitle it
GODS-CAUSE; and, though souly mistaken therein, it is enough to reduce this
Design to Church-concernment. Had I omitted it, the Animadvertor would have
charged me with Puritanical (pardon the Prolepsis) compliance* so hard it is to
please him, either full, or fasting.


Dr. Heylyn. But well it were, if only Aberrations from Historical truth were
to be met with in our Author: In whom we find such a continual vein of
Puritanism, such dangerous grounds for Inconformity and Sedition to be raised
upon, as easily may pervert the unwary Reader, whom the facetiousness of the
style (like a Hook baited with a painted Fly) may be apt to work on. Murdering
of Kings avowed for a necessary prudence, as often as they shall fall into the
power of their Subjects, Lib. 4. fol. 109.


Fuller. The Page cited by him happily happens to be the Initial One of a
Section, and has no more therein then as follows. Church History, Book 4.
Page. 109. Soon after his Death, K. Edward was much lamented by those of whom
in his li^e time he was never beloved. Whether this proceeded from the mere
muta^ility ^f men's minds, (weary to loiter long in the lazy posture of the
same affection.) Or whether it proceeded from the Pride of Mortimer, whose
insolence grew intolerable. Or whether, because his punishment was generally
apprehended too heavy for his fault; so that Deposition without Death, or (at
the worst) Death without such unhumane cruelty, had been sufficient.

One of our English-Poet-Historians accquainteth us with a passage which to my
knowledge appears not in any other Author.



This all in that page.

Reader I request thee do Me, thy Self, and Truth right: Whether can my
avowance of King-murdering be collected from any thing here written by me?

But because, some will say, the Quotation possibly may be mistaken: If any
thing sounding to that sense, there, or elsewhere, be found in my Book, may the
Ravens of the Valleys (whom I behold as loyal Subjects) in Vindication of the
Eagle their Sovereign pick out my eyes, for delivering such rebellious Doctrine.


Dr. Heylyn. The Coronation of Kings, (and consequently their succession to the
Crown of England made to depend upon the suffrage and consent of the People,
Lib. 11. fol. 122.

The Sword extorted from the Supreme Magistrate, and put into the hands of the
common People, whenever the Reforming humor shall grow strong amongst them,
Lib. 9. fol. 51.

The Church deprived of her Authority in determining controversies of the
Faith, and a dispute raised against that clause of the Article, (in which that
Authority is declared) whether forged or not, Lib. 9. fol. 73.


Fuller. Stylus Equabilis! Here is a continued Champian, large Level, and fair
Flat, of fourteen untruths at least, without any Elevation of Truth interposed.
No such matter in that place, as hereafter shall appear.

False as the former as in due time and place (cited now, afterward by him
eagerly improved) will appear.

I am depraved unjustly, who never deprived' the Church of her Authority. I
raised no such Dispute, but would have quel'd it, if in my power. All which I
refer to my Answer to these respective Quotations.


Dr. Heylyn. Her power in making Canons every where prostituted to the lust of
the Parliament, contrary both to Law and constant practice.


Fuller. Every where, is No where. And seeing no particular place is instanced;
to a General Charge, a General Denial shall suffice. Let me add, that whereas
the Animadvertor Vide, infra. part. 3. page 70.
hereafter taxes me for calling the two Houses, the Parliament; we therefore
may presume that he (not running on the same rock) by Parliament means the
King, Lords, and Commons: which granted, how much of loyalty and Discretion
there is in these his words prostituted to the LUST let others judge.


Dr. Heylyn. The Heterodoxies of Wickcliff Canonized for Gospel, and Calvin's
Opinions whatsoever they were, declared for Orthodox.


Fuller. The Animadvertor's words are more than Apocrypha, even a very untruth.


Dr. Heylyn. The Sabbatarian Rigors, published for Divine and Ancient Truths,
though there be no antiquity nor divinity in them.

The Hierarchy of Bishops so coldly pleaded for, as shows he had a mind to
betray the cause, etc.


Fuller. Most false, as in due time and place shall abundantly appear.

Weakly, it may be, for lack of Ability, not coldly for want of affection: But
rather than the Cause I so cordially wish well to, should miscarrie by my
well-intended weakness, hence-forward I will stand by, and resign my place at
the Bar, to better Pleaders in its behalf.


Dr. Heylyn. Whilst all things pass on smoothly for the Presbyterians, whom he
chiefly acts for: And this is that which we must look for, par my and par tout,
as the Frnchmen say. Nor deals he otherwise with the Persons which are brought
before him, than he does with the Causes which they bring. No professed Puritan,
no cunning Nonconformist, or open Separatist, comes upon the Stage, whom he
follows not with Plaudite's and some fair Commends.


Fuller. He means Mr. Carlwright, Travers, Stone, Udal, Greenham, Hildersham,
Dod; all, (though dissenting from the Church in Ceremonies) eminent in their
Generations. I commend them not for their Nonconformity, but other qualities
of Piety, Painfullness, Learning, Patience, etc. Does not Anno 1586.
Mr. Camden give Babington (who suffered as a Traitor to Q. Eliz.) the
commendation of Wealth, Wit, Learning, and Handsomness? Yea, does not the holy
Spirit praise Absalom for his blamless Beauty? and Achitophel for his oraculous
wisdom? The worst of moral men may be commended for their Naturals, and the
worst of Spiritual men for their Morals.


Dr. Heylyn. When as the Fathers of the Chuch, and conformable Children of it,
are sent off commonly in silence, and sometimes with censure.


Fuller. The Reader by perusing my Book will find, I have embalmed their
memoryes with my best spices.


Dr. Heylyn. The late Archbishop of Canterbury, so eminently deserving of the
Church of England, must be raked out of his Grave, arraigned for many
misdemeanors, of which none could accuse him when he was alive; all his
infirmities and weaknesses mustered up together, make him hateful to the
present and succeeding Ages; when Mr. Love's Treasonable practices and
seditious Speeches, must needs (forsooth) be buried in the same Earth with him.


Fuller. I have in this my Appeal collected twenty two commendations of the
Archbishop out of my Church History, and had made them up forty, save that the
Press prevented me: The best is, what is lost in the Hundred, is found in the
Shire; I mean may be (though not in this my Defense) found in my Book at large.


Dr. Heylyn. The University of Oxford frequently quarrelled and exasperated,
upon slight occasions.

The late King's party, branded by the odious Title of Malignants, not bettered
by some froth of pretended Wit in the Etymology.


Fuller. When, and Where, being now left at large, without any direction to the
place; I am more troubled what my Offense is, than what my Defense shall be. I
am sure the Animadvertor, (as a dutiful Son to his Mother) will in due time
and place discover it, and (unwilling to antedate my own molestation,) my
answer is deferred (or rather referred) thereunto.

As for my using the term Malignant, in due time I shall make a satisfactory
Answer.


Dr. Heylyn. The regular Clergy shamefully reproached by the Name of covetous
Conformists. Lib. 9. fol. 98.


Fuller. Who would not think, but that (as the Charge stands against me) I
had branded all Conformists with the Note of Covetous, which had been an
Abominable Scandal indeed. Whereas my words only relate to some particular
persons: whom, if the Animadvertor will say, they were Conformists, (as indeed
they were;) I dare swear, (if called thereunto) that they were Covetous, as
who, by Unreasonable Leases, (as the Statute calls them) wasted the Lands of
the Church, till they were seasonably retrenched by that wholesome Law made the
13.th. of Q. Elizabeth.

Regular Clergy they might be, (as the Animadvertor terms them) in other
things, but in this particular, Regular, only to the Rules of Avarice: making
such Leases against Reason, and common Equity, though, in the Rigor of the
[then] Law, justifiable; I wonder that the Animadvertor will advocate for their
Actions so detrimental to the Church.

Nor does this dash the least disgrace on Conformity it self, they not doing it
qua Conformists. It was not their Conformity made them Covetous, (though
perchance their Covetousness might make them conformable) but their own
Corruption.

But if the Epithet of Covetous be so offensive, I will in my next Edition, to
mend the Matter, change it into Sa^rilegious Conformity, and justify my
Expression, according to the Principle of the Animadvertor's own Judgment,
because they enriched themselves with impayring the goods of the Church.


Dr. Heylyn. And those poor men who were ejected by this late long-Parliament,
despitefully called Baal's Priests, unsavory salt, not fit to be thrown upon
the Dunghill; though he be doubtful of the Proofs which were brought against
them. Lib. 11. fol. 207.


Fuller. I have, at large, defended my self against this foul and false
accusation, when the place cited does occur.


Dr. Heylyn. So many of all sorts wronged and injured him, that, should they
all study their personal and particular Revenges, he were not able to abide it:
And therefore we may justly say, in the Poet's Language, Si de tot laesis sua
Numina quisque Deorum.
Vindicet, in poenas non satis unus erit.
Which may be Englisht in these words.
Should all wronged parties seek t'avenge their fame,
One man were not enough to bear the shame.



Fuller. If I stand endebted to so many for wronging of them, the fairest way
is for them jointly, to seize on what I have, that so my small Estate may be
shared amongst them all, so far as it will go, and every one have his
Proportion thereof: Whereas now the Animadvertor taking all (and more then all)
his Penny-worths out of Me, he has injuriously dealt with the rest of the
Creditors thereby. However, I hope to appear responsible, (seeing no debt is
soon satisfied) and the Animadvertor himself in due time, will be found in my
debt, if all accounts be equally audited betwixt us.

This I dare boldly say (though I confess his faults excuse not mine, if
guilty) that he has wronged more, and Persons of higher quality, in his late
Books. Bishop James Montague, a known eminent Scholar, vilified by an odious
and indiscreet comparing him with another of his Surname.

Judge Hutton and Crook scandalously abused by him for consenting privately to
the SHIP-MONY, who as well privately (in the King's presence) as publicly
opposed it, though they subscribed their hands, in Conformity to the greater
number: as the Animadvertor (more knowing in Law, than my self) will
acknowledge the common and constant custom in such cases. I could instance in
many more, it being no discretion to play out all I have at once, but to keep a
Reserve in my hand, in case, (which God forefend) I should be provoked to
another Answer.


Dr. Heylyn. But nothing does more evidently discover his unfaithful dealing,
then his report of the proceedings in the Isle of Wight, between his Majesty,
and the long-Parliament Divines; of which he tells us, Lib. 11. fol. 235. That
his Majesty, in the last Paper which he sent them, acknowledged their great
pains to inform his Judgment, according to their persuasions, and also took
especial notice of their Civilities of the Application both in the beginning
and body of their Reply; and having cleared himself from some misunderstanding
about the Writ of Partition which they speak of, puts an end to the business.
The man who reads this passage, cannot choose but think that his Majesty, being
vanquished by the Arguments of the Presbyterians, had given over the cause; and
therefore, as convicted in his Conscience, renders them thanks for the
Instruction which he had received, and the Civilities they used toward him in
the way thereof. But he that looks upon his Majesty's last Paper, will find
that he had Learnedly and Divinely refel'd all their Arguments: And having so
done, puts them in mind of three questions which are proposed in his former
Paper, acknowledged by themselves, to be of great importance in the present
controversy; without an Answer whereunto, his Majesty declared that he would
put an end to that conference: It not being probable (as he told them) that
they should work much upon his Judgment, whilst they are fearful to declare
their own, nor possible to relieve his conscience, but by a free declaring of
theirs. But they not able, or not daring, (for fear of displeasing their great
Masters) to return an Answer to those Questions, his Majesty remained sole
Master of the field, a most absolute Conqueror: For though the first blow
commonly does begin the Quarrel, it is the last blow always that gets the
Victory: But Regium est cum benefeceris male audire: It has been commonly the
fortune of the greatest Princes, when they deserve best, to be worst reported.


Fuller. Here I will truly acquaint the Reader with the State of this Matter.
The posting Press, which with the Time and Tide will stay for no man, mistaking
my Copy complete, and not attending my coming to London, that morning from
Waltham, clapped it up imperfect. I must therefore deservedly take all the blame
and shame thereof on my self, and here in this Sheet do publick-pennance for
the same, promising amendment to the full, God willing, in the next Edition.


Dr. Heylyn. Nor deals he better with the Church, then he does with the King;
concealing such things as might make for her justification, and advocating for
such things as disturb her order. In the last Book we find him speaking of some
heats which were raised in the Church, about placing the Communion Table
Altar-wise, and great fault found for the want of Moderation in those Men, who
had the managing of that business. But he conceals his Majesty's Determination
in the Case of St. Gregory's, November. 3. 1633. By which all Bishops and other
Ordinaries, were encouraged to proceed, therein, and consequently those of
inferior rank to defend their actings.


Fuller. I have not full twenty Lines on the whole Subject, being loath to
enlarge on so odious a difference, sopited in good measure: and as I durst not
totally omit, so I passed it over, with all possible brevity.


Dr. Heylyn. The Chapel of Emanuel College in Cambridge is built North and
South, contrary to the usage of the primitive times; and the Church of England,
with which King James being made acquainted, he answered (as our Author tells
us) That it was no matter how the Chapel stood, so the heart stood aright:
Which Tale being told by him, and believed by others ( and populum, qui sibi
credit, habet, Ovid. in Ep. Hysiphil.) as he is like enough to find many
Believers, farewell to all external Reverence in the Service of God: What need
we trouble our selves or others with standing, kneeling, bowing in the acts of
Worship; it is no matter in what posture the Body be, so the Heart be right.


Fuller. The Speech of K. James was no Tale but a Truth; when he did not
exclude bodily reverence, but prefer Soul sincerity in divine Service. Parallel
unto those Scripture-Instances, Psalm. 51.26. for thou desire no Sacrifice,
that is, thou would them not, comparatively to cordial Contrition. 1 Pet. 4,
3. speaking of good women, whose adorning let it not be that outward of
playting the hair, viz. not chiefly therein, to the neglecting of inward
holiness. Nor is the Speech inductive of corporal Irreverence, if believed;
seeing a Man's body may, and ought easily, quickly, and cheaply, be contrived;
into standing, bowing, kneeling; when it requires time, and expense to take
down, and re-build a Chapel, which would cost the College five hundred Pounds
at the least.


Dr. Heylyn. What need we put our selves or others to the charge of Surplices
and Hoods, of Gowns and Cassacks, in the officiating of Gods Service; It is no
matter in what habit the Body be, so the heart be right. There is another
Chapel in Cambridge which was never consecrated, (whether a Stable or a
Dormitory, is all one to me.) At which time when some found themselves grieved,
our Author tells them, This others of us great Learning and Religion (himself
especially for one) dare defend, that the continued Series of Divine Duties,
publicly practiced for more then thirty years (without the least check or
control of those in authority) in a place set apart to that purpose, does
sufficiently consecrate the same: Stables and Barns by this Argument, shall in
some tract of time become as sacred as our Churches.


Fuller. Had I lived in Sidney College, when that Dormitory was first used for
a Chapel, I would have advised, and (in my Sphere) advanced its consecration;
accounting the Omission to fall under just reproof. But seeing it has been so
long omitted, I now conceive it has no need of Consecration, seeing though
never solemnly and formally dedicated to Divine Service by the Ordinary, (or
one deputed by him) yet has it had a tacit, and interpretative Consecration,
and thereby has contracted a relative Sacredness. By the same Proportion, it
is, that Utensils, long used in a Family, to most civil and generous
employment, by degrees acquire to themselves, the Reputation (in the Apostle's
language) of vessels of honor; as being opposed to such vessels employed in
sordid (though necessary) Service, and of the same metal and matter.

I doubt not but if this place used for a Chapel (now about a Jubilee of
years) should be turned to a Stable, the Animadvertor would behold it (and
justly too) as a piece of Profanation, and this intimates a Sacredness
therein.

It is mainly material, that Bishop Andrews, of Ely, a Reverend Prelate, and as
knowing as any of his Order in this point of Antiquity; knew this to be in his
Diocese, yet never manifested the least Regreet at the Chappelizing of this
Place.

As for consecration of Churches and Chapels, I say; first, is no Sacramental
action.

Secondly, It is not of Evangelical Institution, as Bellarmine himself does
freely confess, no Express for it in the New Testament. De cultu Sanctorum.
lib. 3. cap. 5. In statu Evangelii non habemus tam expressa testimonia
Scripturae.


Thirdly, It is charitably to be presumed, that when Dr. Montague, and the
fellows first entered the Dormitory, sequestring that place for a Chapel, they
by Prayers and a Sermon, did solemnly consign it, to the Service of God: seeing
no man of common Principles of Piety, will offer to eat meat, before he has
said Grace.

Fourthly, Such Prayers did in some sort Dedicate the place, wanting no
formality, save, because not done by a Bishop; and if this be all the fault can
be found therein, let the Animadvertor prove, ( probatio incumbit affirmanti)
that in the primitive Times, consecrating of Churches was only an Episcopal Act.

Fifthly, What was wanting in the consecration at the first, has since
sufficiently been supplied and corroborated by usance thereof to Gods Service
only.

If factious people, should, in peaceable times, against lawful Authority
conventicle in a Barn or Stable; their Meetings, (sinful in themselves) could
not derive any Sacredness to the place, whilst the World lasts.

But if Persecution, which God of his goodness avert (though we by our
wickedness deserve it) should invade our Land; I conceive, Stables are, by
Prayers, and presence of God's suffering Servants, and chiefly by God's
presence with them, at the minute of their entrance thither, elevated into Holy
places.


Dr. Heylyn. And if the Brethren think it not enough for their ease to be pent
up in so narrow a Room, it is but repairing to the next Grove or Coppise, and
that in a like traet of time shall become as holy as Solomon's Temple, or any
consecrated place whatsoever it be.


Fuller. Not the solemnest Consecration, can advance our Churches into the same
degree of Sacredness with Solomon's Temple, which was (yea might be) but one,
dignified (when dedicated) with God his Glorious Presence, 2 Chro. 7.12. Who
chose that place to himself for an house of Sacrifice. It was the Type of our
blessed Savior, perfect in all Points, as made by inspired Architects; and the
utensils in the Holy of Holiest, the self same which Moses made according to
the pattern in the Mount.

But I hold English Churches may amount to the Holiness of the Jewish
Synagogues.


Dr. Heylyn. Churches may well be spared, pulled down, and their Materials sold
for the use of the Saints.


Fuller. God forbid! The clean contrary follows from my Position, wherein I
do offer an Argument for the Sacredness of Places, the Register of whose
Consecration is lost, as Time out of Mind, so that now they can no otherwise
prove it, (no Record being extant thereof) save by pious Prescription. Enough
in my Judgment to give Sacrilege, a Rap over the fingers, if offering to lay
hold on such places and buildings, and turn them to her private Profit.

Were it in my power, I would have built a Church, where I only made my
Church History. But the worst is, the Animadvertor would then have quarrelled
the contriving and adorning of my Church, as much as now he does the matter and
making of my Book; and therefore I leave it to others, of more ability, first
to do, and then to defend their good Actions, from his Morosity.


Dr. Heylyn. A Tub by this our Author's Logic, will be as useful as the Pulpit
unto Edification.


Fuller. This is a Tale (for I am sure it is no Truth) of a Tub indeed. I ever
beheld a Pulpit, as in some sort jure divino, ever since I read Nehem. 8.4.
that Ezrah stood upon a Pulpit of Wood. However, if called thereunto, I pray
God I may make but as good a practical Sermon, as John Badby effectually
preached in a Tub, of Constancy and Christian Patience, when put into such a
Fox, Acts and Monuments.
Vessel, and burnt therein for the testimony of the Truth, in the Reign of K.
Henry the fourth.


Dr. Heylyn. And that we may perceive that nothing is more precious with him
then an irregular, unconsecrated, and unfurnished Chapel, etc.


Fuller. Next to an Heart, such as David had, made (the best Copy of the best
Original) after Gods own heart, I most highly prize a regular and consecrated
Chapel, furnished with Matron-like, not Meritricious Ornaments.


Dr. Heylyn. Melvin's infamous Libel against the Furniture of the Altars in the
Chapels Royal, (for which he was censured in the Star Chamber) must be
brought in by head and shoulders, out of time and place, for fear lest such an
excellent piece of Puritanical Zeal should be lost to posterity: These things I
might have noted in their proper places, but that they were reserved for this
as a taste to the rest.


Fuller. I account not those his verses worth the translating, (though easy)
and speak of his censure as well as of his offense. I mis-timed nothing, having
entered this passage near the year wherein he was settled a Professor beyond the
Seas.


Dr. Heylyn. Et jam sinis erat; And here I thought I should have ended this
Anatomy of our Author's Book, but that there is another passage in the Preface
thereof, which requires a little further consideration.

For in that Preface he informs us, by the way of caution, That the three first
Books were for the main written in the Reign of the late King, as appears by
the Passages then proper for the Government: The other nine Books were made
since Monarchy was turned into a State.


Fuller. The Animadvertor has fairly and fully (no constant Practice) cited my
words; I request the Reader to take especial notice of those three FOR THE MAIN

I presume the Reader conceives such a caveat not improper or impertinent, but
safe and seasonable, for my Defense, and his Direction, especially seeing the
like happened not to any English Historian, this thousand The Government of
England, though often translated from one Family, yea Nation to another, yet
has so long continued Monarchical.
years, that his Pen (during the writing of his Book) should pass through
Climates of different Governments.


Dr. Heylyn. By which it seems, that our Author never meant to frame his
History by the line of Truth, but to attemper it to the palate of the present
Government, whatsoever it then was, or should prove to be; which I am sure
agrees not with the Laws of History.

And though I can most easily grant, that the fourth Book and the rest that
follow, were written after the great alteration and change of State, in making
a new Commonwealth out of the ruins of an ancient Monarchy; yet I concur not
with our Author in the time of the former: For it appears by some passages,
that the three first Books either were not all written in the time of the King,
or else he must give himself some disloyal hopes, that the King should never be
restored to his place and Power, by which he might be called to a reckoning for
them.


Fuller. It Seems. [ Multa videntur quae non sunt.] The Inference is false and
forced; Titus Livius lived in Imperial, yet wrote of Regal, Consulatory,
Tribunitial at Rome, without the least imputation of falsehood. I conceive
Monarchical Aristocratical and Democralical truth, to be One and the Same: It
follows not, that two-faced Ianus (as beholding two worlds, one before, the
other after the Flood) had also two Hearts. I did not attemper my History to
the Palate of the Government; so as to sweeten it with any Falsehood; but I made
it Palatable thus far forth as not to give a wilful disgust to those in present
Power, and procure danger to my self, by using any over-salt tart or bitter
Expression, better forborne than inserted, without any prejudice to the Truth.


Dr. Heylyn. For in the second Book he reckons the Cross in Baptism for a
Popish Trinket, by which it appears not, I am sure, to have been written in the
time of Kingly Government, that being no expression suitable unto such a time.


Fuller. Should I simply and absolutely call the Cross in Baptism a Popish
Trinket, my forehead (Signed therewith) would give my Tongue the lie, and
return the Popery in the teeth thereof. I behold it as an Ancient and
Significant Ceremony, but in no degree essential to, or completory of, the
Sacrament* witness the wisdom of the Church of England, which in private
Baptism permits the omitting thereof. But when Ceremonies shall devour their
distance, and intrude themselves necessary and essential, it is high time to
term them Superstititious Trinkets. The rest I referr to what I have written,
when this passage recurreth in the place cited by the Animadvertor.


Dr. Heylyn. Secondly, speaking of the precedence which was fixed in Canterbury,
by removing the Archiepiscopal See from London thither, he tells us that the
matter is not much, which See went first, when living; seeing our Age has laid
them both alike level in their Graves: But certainly the Government was not
changed into a State or Commonwealth, till the death of the King; and till the
death of the King, neither of those Episcopal Sees, nor any of the rest, were
laid so level in their Graves, but that they were in hope of a Resurrection;
the King declaring himself very constantly in the Treaty at the Isle of Wight,
as well against the abolishing of the Episcopal Government, as the alienation
of their Lands.

Thirdly, In the latter end of the same Book, he makes a great dispute against
the high and sacred privilege of the Kings of England, in curing the disease
commonly called the Kings Evil, whether to be imputed to Magic, or Imagination,
or indeed a Miracle; next, brings us in an old Wives Tale about Queen
Elizabeth, as if she had disclaimed that power she daily exercised; and
finally, manageth a Quarrel against the form of Prayer used at the curing of
that Evil, which he arraigns for Superstition and impertinencies, no inferior
Crimes: Are all these passages proper to that Government also?

Finally in the third Book, he derogates from the power of the Church in making
Canons, giving the binding and concluding Power in matters which concern the
civil Rights of the Subjects, not to the King, but to the Lay People of the
Land assembled in Parliament; which game he after follows in the eighth and
last: And though it might be safe enough for him in the eighth and last, to
derogate in this manner from the King's supremacy in Ecclesiastical affairs;
yet certainly it was neither safe for him so to do, nor proper for him so to
write, in the time of the Kingly Government, unless he had some such wretched
hopes as before we spoke of.


Fuller. I desire the Reader, to remember my late words, (as the Animadvertor
recited them) FOR THE MAIN.

I confess, though these Books were written in the Reign of King Charles; yet
after his Death, I interpolated some lines, and amongst others, that of
levelling all Bishoprics.

I raised no dispute against the Kings curing the Evil, it being raised before
I was born, and which I endeavored to allay, referring it to Miracle, as to
the peruser of my History, in that place will appear. I tell no old Wives Tale
of Queen Elizabeth, it being a Masculine Truth, from most authentic Authors.

I derogate not, in the least degree, from the power of the Church; but the
Animadvertor does arrogate unto it more then is due, by the Laws of God and
Man: maintaining that Churchmen may go beyond Ecclesiastical Censures, even to
the Limbs and Lives of such! as are Recusants to their Constitutions.

WRETCHED and what formerly he said DISLOYAL HOPES, I defy and return them in
the Teeth of him that wrote the words.

He had WRETCHED AND DISLOIAL HOPES, who wrote, that King James went to
New Market, as Tiberius to his Capreae; he waved his Loyalty and Discretion
together, who so saucily and un-subject-like counted, how often King Charles
waved his Crown.

Here give me leave to tell the Animadvertor, that such whom he slighteth for
LOW-ROYALISTS, were (whilst they had a King in England) as HIGH in their
Loyalty to him, Prayers and Sufferings for him, as those HIGH-ROIALISTS, who
maintain that all goods of the Subjects are at the King's absolute Dispose, and
yet since those Kings are departed this life, can write of them in so base and
disparaging Language, that any one of the LOW-ROIALISTS, would have his right
hand cut off, rather then write the like. Reader, pardon my too just passion,
when DISLOIALTY is laid to my charge: It is with me Either now speak or else
for ever hereafter hold your Peace.


Dr. Heylyn. I must needs say that on the reading of these Passages, and the
rest that follow, I found my self possessed with much Indignation.

And I long expected when some Champion would appear in the Listes against this
Goliath, who so reproachfully had defied the whole Armies of Israel.

And I must needs confess withal, that I did never enter more unwillingly on
any undertaking.

But being solicited thereunto by Letters, Messages, and several personal
Addresses, by Men of all Orders and Dignityes in the Church, and of all degrees
in the Universities, I was at last overcome by that Importunity, which I found
would not be resisted.


Fuller. The Breaks in my Answer relate respectively to those in the Doctor's
Animadversions.
Indignation, is grief and anger boiled up to the height. What just cause I
have given for so great passion, the Reader will judge.

If I be a Goliath, in this point may I have his Success to be conquered,
killed, and my head cut off even with my own Sword; If I be none, May the
Animadvertor be graciously pardoned.

And it may be, he shall never come off any undertaking more unhappily.

I could mate him, with telling him, that Men of all Sorts and Sizes, their
Equals in Number and Quality, have likewise importuned me, not tamely to sit
down, but to vindicate my own credit and conscience.


Dr. Heylyn. I know that as the Times stand, I am to expect nothing for my
pains and Travel but the displeasure of some, and censure of others.


Fuller. I will take no advantage by the Times; and, if without their help, I
cannot Bwoy up my credit, let it sink for ever. And I humbly desire all, who
have, or may reap benefit by my Books, not to be displeased with the
Animadvertor, in my behalf. It is Punishment enough that he has written, and
too much for his Stationer that he has printed, so impertinent a Book.

When Henry Lord Hunsdon, on the Highway, had in Passion, given a Blow to Sir
Henry Colt, the Lord had it returned him, the Principal with Interest: and when
the Lord his Servants and Followers began to draw their Swords, Away, away,
(said he) cannot I and my Neighbor exchange a Box on the Ear, but you must
interest your selves in the matter.

Let none of my Friends and Favorers, engage their anger in this difference
betwixt Me and the Animadvertor. Let us alone; and although we enter
Adversaries in the Beginning, we shall I hope go out friends at the end of the
Contest, after there has been a Pass or two betwixt our Selves. Thus, Heats
betwixt Lawyers born at the Bar, in Westminster Hall, are commonly buried at
the Board, in the Inns of Court.


Dr. Heylyn. But coming to the work with a single Heart abstracted from all
self ends and Interests, I shall satisfy my Self, with having done this poor
Service to the Church, my once blessed Mother, for whose sake only I have put
my Self upon this Adventure.

The party whom I am to deal with, is so much a stranger to me, that he is
neither beneficio, nec injuria notus; and therefore no particular respects have
moved me to the making of these Animadversions.

Which I have writ (without Relation to his person) for vindication of the
Truth, the Church, and the injured Clergy, as before is said: So that I may
affirm with an honest Conscience;

Non lecta est operi, sed data, causa meo, That this employment was not chosen
by me, but imposed upon me; the unresistable Entreaties of so many friends
having something in them of Commands.

But howsoever, Iacta est alea, as Caesar once said when he passed over the
Rubicon.

I must now take my fortune whatsoever it proves. So God speed me well.


Fuller. How much of this SELF-DENYING ORDINANCE is performed by him, let the
Reader judge in due time.

I am glad to hear this Passage from the Animadvertor, that I never did him any
Injury; the rather because some of my Friends have charged me for provoking his
Pen against me. And though I pleaded that neither in Thought, Word, or Deed, I
ever did him any wrong, I hardly prevailed with them for belief: And now the
Animadvertor has cleared me, that I never did any Injury unto him. Would I
could say the same of him, that he never did me any Injury. However, as a
Christian, I here fully and freely forgive him, and hereafter will endeavor as
a Scholar, so to defend my self against his Injury, that (God willing) it shall
not shake my Contentment.

Without relation to my person, let the Reader be Judge hereof. Indeed Thomas
has been well used by him, but Fuller has soundly felt his displeasure.
However, if Truth, the Church, and Clergy have been abused by me; He has given
Me too fair quarter, who deserved Death downright, for so heinous an Offense.

Amongst all which Persons inciting him to write against me, one Letter sent to
him, from Regina Pecunia was most prevalent with him. Witness this his Book
offered to, and refused by some Stationers, because, on his high terms, they
could not make a saving Bargain to themselves.

Iacta est alea. The English is, you have cast the Dey. And seeing the
Animadvertor, has begun the Metaphor, I hope I may make it an Allegory,
without rendering either of us Scandalous. I appeal to the Reader, whom I make
Groom Porter, (termed by Mr. Camb. Aleatorum Arbiter) and let him judge, who
plays with False, who Coggs, who slurrs a Dey and in a doubtful Case, when we
cannot agree upon the Cast; betwixt our selves, let him decide it.

By Fortune, I presume the Animadvertor intends nothing derogatory to divine
Providence, in which Sense St. Augustine, retracteth his [former] frequent using
of the Word. Only he means uncertainty of Success. In which notion I say an
hearty Amen to his Prayer, when I have enlarged his God speed me into God speed
US well. May he, who manageth this Controversy, with most Sincerity, come off
with best Success. AMEN.


Errata confessed by the Printer of Dr. Heylyns Animadversions.
PAge 10. line 17. for Helkinus r. Telkinus, p. 20. l. 21. for Queen of, r.
Queen of England, p. 27. l. 6. for Wooderpoir r. Woodensdike, p. 42. l. 1. for
inconsiderateness r. the inconsiderateness of Children, p. 121. l. f28. for
ter. r. better, p. 145. l. 2. for statuendo ^ statuendi p. 15 l. 22. Horcon^nar
r. cantuur, p. 154. l. 17. for Dr. Hammond r. Dr. Book, p. 160. l. 1. for his
r. this, p. 163. l. 28. for Jesuits r. Franciscans, p. 189. l. ult. 2 or
contemn r. confession, p. 221. in the Marg. for whether r. with other, p. 228.
l. 2. for Den r. Dean, p. 239. l. 9. for Commons r. Canons, p. 271. l. ult. for
culis r. ocul^s.

Fuller.
THis is a Catalogue of Prelal. Mis^akes, committed and confessed in the
Doctor's Book of Animadversions, and here by me inserted, not to disparage the
pains of c^re of the Printer, but on these Considerations.

First, to prevent all Exceptions, that I have defectively presented in his
Book.

Secondly, to show, that sometimes (as here) there may be an Erratum Erratorum,
to be re-reformed. It thus begins. Page 10. l. 17. for Melkinus r. Tolkinus.
That is, read that which is wrong, instead of tha^ which was right before. For
a M^lkinus Avalonius, appears in Bale, Pits, and others but a Telkinus was
never in Nature. But Take notice also of this confessed Mistake, p. 163. l. 28.
for Jesuits r. Franciscans. There is here no temptation to the Press to Err,
there being betwixt the two Words, no literal Similitude, or Orthographical
Symbolizing, scarce a letter in the one, which is in the other.

I make no other use hereof save only to crave the like Favor, in my own
Defense, when in the Earls of March, Roger is misprinted Edward; and in the
Earls of Bath, Henry is misprinted William, in my Church History.

I confess there be some Press faults in this my Book, as for Prelial,
(wherever occurring) read Prelal; part 1. p. 50. l. 32. for Anno Dom. 580 r.
560. part. 1. p. 52. l. 18. for DEMOL r. DEINOL. and part 2. page 88. betwixt
the 33. and 34 l. insert I pray,

Papists, Non-conformists, and covetous Conformists, the Acts therein appearing
like.

For the rest, I hope they are nothing so many or great, as to discompose the
sense, and therefore I confide in the Reader's Discretion as also in the
Animadvertor's Ingenuity, expecting he will deal as heartily with me, as I have
done with him, when such (though unconfessed) Errata's do occur.

And because my hand is now in, I request such as have my Church History to
delete these words Book 2. p. 129. l. 21. A Title till his Time unknown in
England



For I profess I know not by what casualty these words crept into my Book,
contrary to my intent.

PART I.
Dr. Heylyn. IN order to the first conversion of the British Nation, our Author
takes beginning at the sad condition they were in, before the Christian Faith
was preached unto them.] And in a sad condition they were indeed, as being in
the state of Gentilism, and consequently without the true knowledge of the God
that made them.


Fuller. The Author takes beginning where Dr. Heylyn himself, had he writ the
Church History of Britain, I believe, would, and I am sure should, have begun.
And seeing he concurreth with the Author in the same expression, that the
Britains were in a sad condition, he might have spared himself and his Reader
the trouble, of the following impertinency.


Dr. Heylyn. But yet they were not in a worse condition then the other
Gentiles, etc.


Fuller. Nor did I ever say they were. Had I said so, the Doctor's carping had
had a handle to hold on, whereas now his teeth and nails must bite and
scratch a fastening for themselves.


Dr. Heylyn. But yet not in a worse condition then the other Gentiles, who
were not only darkened in their understanding, but so depraved also in their
affections, as to work all manner of uncleanness even with greediness. Not so
effeminate in their conversation as the Asiaticks, nor so luxurious as the
Greeks, nor branded with those filthy and unnatural lusts which St. Paul
charge on the Romans, and were in ordinary practice with most Eastern Nations.


Fuller. What of all this? It is said of King 2 King. 3.2.
Ioram, He wrought evil in the sight of the Lord, but not like his father and
like his mother. It is said of King 2 King. 17.2.
Hoshea, He did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, but not as the
Kings of Israel that were before him. It does not follow, that these Kings were
good, because less bad then others. So that my words stand an un-shakened
truth, that the Britains before their conversion were (though not so debauched
as other Heathens) Idolaters, in a sad condition.


Dr. Heylyn. And though they were Idolaters, yea, and foul ones, as our Author
has it; yet neither, etc.


Fuller. If they were Idolaters, they must be foul ones, except (as one has
fancied a tale of a fair Ethiopian) any could make a truth of fair Idolaters.


Dr. Heylyn. Yet neither were their gods of so brutish and impure a nature, as
the Priapus, Cloacina, and Stercutia amongst the Romans; or as their Venus,
Flora, Lupa, common Harlots. All of which, and such like other gods, the old
Fathers tell us, that they were not nomina Colendorum, sed crimina Colentium.
Nor were they so immodest and obscene in their rites and ceremonies, as were
the Greeks and Romans, in the Sacrifices to their Cybele or Berecynthia, whom
they call the mother of the gods; described by Arnobius, Lactantius, and others
of the ancient Writers, in such lively colors, as no chaste eye can look upon
them without detestation.


Fuller. Well may the Doctor run apace, drawing an empty Cart after him. What
is all this to confute my position, that the unconverted Britains, foul
Idolaters, were in a sad condition? It seems he had a mind to tell the world of
the foulest Idols amongst the Romans; and, if so, let them thank him for his
intelligence, who knew it not before.


Dr. Heylyn. And for the number of their gods, they fell extremely short of
that infinite multitude, which St. Augustine finds amongst the Romans, our
Author naming only three, (which he calls gods paramount) that is to say,
BELINUS, ANDATE, and DIANA.


Fuller. If they had only three gods, they had two too many, However, it will
appear, that these were only (as the Author phraseth them) Paramount* That
they fell not (to use the Doctor's words) extremely short (a virtuous extreme)
of the Romans in their Idolatry, may thus be proved. They that had Idols
almost exceeding the Egyptians in number, fell not much short of the Romans.

But the ancient Britains almost exceeded the Egyptians in number of Idols.

Therefore they fell not much short of the Romans.



The Major is plain in Scripture, often complaining of the Idols of Egypt; as
also in human Writers, Iuvenal jeering the Egyptians, for being over-stocked
with such kind of cattle, whose gods ( Leeks and Onyons) did commonly grow in
their Gardens.

The Minor are the very words of grave Gildas, the most ancient British
Writer, (flourishing Anno Domini 580.) Portenta pene numero Aegyptiaca
vincentia. Where, in few words, we have the Numerosity and Monstrosity of the
British Idols. Numerosity, almost exceeding the Egyptians; Monstrosity,
called Portents, misshapen Anticks of prodigious deformity.


Dr. Heylyn. When therefore Gildas tells us of the ancient Britains, that in
the number of their gods they had almost exceeded Egypt, ( Portenta pene
numero Aegyptiaca vincentia, in that Author's language) it must be understood
with reference to the Times in which he lived, when all the Roman Rabble had
been thrust upon them, and not as speaking of the time of their first
Conversion.


Fuller. Satis pro Imperio, MUST is for a King; and seeing the Doctor and I are
both Kings alike, I return, He MUST NOT be so understood; as, to any judicious
and indifferent Reader will appear.

For the clearing hereof, I will present and translate the words of Gildas,
with what precedeth and follows them, conducing effectually to the true
understanding of this clause controverted. I use the first and best printed
Edition, set forth by Polydore Virgil 1523. and Dedicated to Cuthbert Tonstall,
then the learned Bishop of London, Only because I suspect, that some Readers
will be out of breath in going along with the long-winded style of Gildas, (the
excusable fault of the Age he lived in) I crave leave to divide his long and
entire Sentence, for the better understanding thereof, into several parcells,
without the least addition thereto, or alteration thereof. Gildas Folio primo.
Igitur omittens priscos illos communesque cum omnibus gentibus, errores,
quibus ante adventum Christi in carne omne humanum genus obligabatur adstrictum.

Nec enumerans PATRIAE PORTENTA ipsa diabolica pene numero Aegyptiaca
vincentia, quorum nonnulla lineamentis adhuc deformibus intra vel extra deserta
moenia solito more rigentia, torvis vultibus intuemur.

Neque nominatim inclamitans Montes ipsos aut Colles, vel Fluvios (olim
exitiabiles, nunc vero humanis usibus utiles) quibus divinus Honor a caeco tunc
populo cumulabatur.

Et tacens vetustos immanium Tyrannorum Annos, qui in aliis long positis
Regionibus vulgati sunt, ita ut Porphyrius, rabidus orientalis adversus
Ecclesiam canis, dementiae suae ac vanitatis stylo hoc etiam adnecteret,
Britannia, inquiens, fertilis Provincia Tyrannorum.

Illa tanium proferre conabor in medium, quae temporibus Romanorum Imperatorum
and passa est, and aliis intulit Civibus and long positis, mala.

Gilda first Leaf.
Omitting therefore those old Errors, and common [to the Brittains] with other
Nations, to which all Mankind was tied and fettered, before the coming of
Christ in the flesh.

Nor reckoning up those very devilish PORTENTS of our own COUNTRY, almost
exceeding those of Egypt in Number; some whereof we, with frowning eyes, do
still behold, drawn with deformed shapes within or without our desert Walls.

Nor calling upon by name the Mountains themselves, or Hills, or Rivers, (in
times past deadly, now profitable to man's use) on which divine honor was then
heaped up by the blind people.

And passing over in silence the ancient years of those vast Tyrants, which are
commonly spoken of in other far-distant Countries; so that Porphyrius (that
raging Dog of the East against the Church) in the style of his madness and
vanity, adds this also, Britain (says he) a fruitful Province of Tyrants.

I will only endeavor publicly to proffer such evils, as she [ Brittain] in
the times of the Roman Emperors both suffered in her self, and impressed on
her People placed far off.



See here this Prolixe sentence of Gildas, built (as I may say) five stories
high; the four first are of Privation, or Preterition, of what he will not
meddle with; the fifth and last, of Position, whereon he would insist. He would
not reckon the British Errors common with others, nor Patriae Portenta, the
Portentive Idols of their Country, which plainly decideth the thing in
controversy, that those their Idols were Indigenae, non Advenae; Natives, not
Forraigners, of British origination, not Roman superinduction. His method
plainly proves, that these Subjects which he declineth to treat of, were all
of them precedaneous to the Romans coming into Britain, whence he begins
his History. I mention not the Marginal Note of Polydore Virgil, (placed over
against the words of Gildas) Veterum Britannorum vana Religio, The vain
Religion of the old Britains. The rest of his Testimony we leave lying in the
Deck, and it will not be long before we shall make use thereof.


Dr. Heylyn. But whether their Idols were more or fewer, our Author is resolved
on DIANA for one though whether this were a British deity may be more then
questioned, whose Temple was built in, or near the place, where St. Paul's now
stands, as our learned Antiquaries do acknowledge.


Fuller. The Animadvertor does confess, that the Brittans did worship Diana:
But whether she was one of the latter brood of Idols, brought in by the Romans
at their Conquest; or hatched long before amongst the Britains, as their own
Country-goddess, is the Question. I am confident in the latter.

The British Stories tell us, that Brutus (some hundred of years before the
Romans arrived here) being upon his Sea-voyage to seek his fortune, repaired to
the Temple of Diana, in an Island called Largeria, and there addressing himself
to her Temple, was in a dream not only instructed in the manner of her
sacrifices, and rituall services; but also directed to an Island in the West,
now Britain, where his Posterity should fix themselves in happiness. And that
this passes for current amongst the Welsh, I report my self to their learned
Gentry, the proper judges thereof.

Let me add this Passage from the Pen of as great an Antiquary, as any Wales
now does enjoy. As for the name of Diana, I do conceive that she was called
Dain in our Language; and I have many Histories of our Nation, that seem to
make no question of it. To this day in Wales, fatt marketable Cattle are called
Guartheg Demol; that is to say, Diana's Cattle, or, Cattle fit to be
sacrificed, etc. And I am more then confident, there is no man living can put
any other interpretation upon this word Demol; it must be an Adjective of Dain,
and Dain has no other signification in our Language, then the name of Diana.


Dr. Heylyn. This Temple of Diana in London (says the Author) renders their
conceit not altogether unlikely, who will have London so called from L^an-Dian,
which signifies in British, the Temple of Diana.] A conceit, whosesoever it
was, not altogether so likely neither as the Author makes it.


Fuller. No cautiousness of proof against captiousness. I called it but a
conceit, I said not that it was true; yea, my words left an insinuation of
unlikeliness to an indifferent Reader. But seeing the Animadvertor is so
hard-hearted to an innocent conceit, I shall ever hereafter love it the better.


Dr. Heylyn. A conceit, LONDON from LLAN-DIAN, whosesoever it was; not
altogether so likely neither as the Author makes it. For though the Britains
being well stored with Wood and Venison, possibly might have a Hunting-goddess
amongst the rest. Yet certainly she was not called by the name of Diana, till
the Roman Conquest and Plantations, before which time this City had the name of
London, (or Londinum) as we read in Tacitus. The name and sacrifices of Diana
were not originally British, but of Roman race, as the great Temple in or near
the place where St. Paul's now stands, was of their foundation. The Britains,
worshipping Apollo by the name of Belinus, as both Cambden and our Author say
they did, must be supposed to have another name for Diana also, and were more
likely to have called her by the name of Artemis, her old Grecian name, or by
some other of as near a resemblance to it, as Belinus was to that of Bell in the
Eastern Countries. Assuredly, if that great City had received its name from
Diana's Temple, the Welsh being so tenacious of their ancient Language, would
have had some remembrance of it, who to this day call it Lundayn, and not
LLAN-DIAN, according to the new conceit which our Author speaks of. But of this
enough.


Fuller. Yea indeed, too much. So may you say, A surfeit is enough. Whosesoever
this conceit was.] I had thought the Animadvertor could not have been ignorant
thereof, being no meaner a man than Mr. Seldom.

This learned Antiquary, after he had alleged some Verses out of Robert of
Gloucester, deriving the name of LONDON, quasi LUD'S TOWN, from LUD, he
proceeds as follows;

In his Notes on the eighth SONG in POLYOLBION, Page 126.

Judicious Reform^rs of fabulous Report, I know, have more serious derivations
of the name; and, seeing conjecture is free, I could imagine, it might be
called at first LHAN-DIEN, 1. the Temple of Diana, as LHAN-DEWI, LHAN-STEPHAN,
LHAN-PADERN VAUR, LHAN-VAIR. i. e. S. Dewys, S. Stephans, S. Pattern the great,
S. Mary ( and Verulam, is by H. Lhuid derived from VER-LHAN, i. e. the Church
upon the River Ver) with diverse more such places in Wales: and so afterward by
strangers turned into Londinium, and the like. For that Diana and her brother
Apollo ( under the name of Belin) were two great deities amongst the Britons.

If the Animadvertor has a mind to enter the List with Mr. Seldom, and have a
vennue with him, to try whose skill is most and weapon best; he may, if he
pleases.


Dr. Heylyn. Now to facilitate this great work of their Conversion, Cambden and
Godwin, two great Antiquaries, have alleged one reason, which is not allowed
of by our Author; and our Author has alleged another reason, which none can
allow of but himself. The reason alleged by the two great Antiquaries, is,
that the Druides did instruct the Britains in the knowledge of One only God,
which questionless was a great step to their Conversion. Druides unum esse
Deum semper inculcarunt, says our Author's Margin. But this he reckons a
mistake, and thus charitably wishes thereupon, viz. May their mistake herein
be as freely forgiven them, as I hope and desire, that the charitable Reader
will with his pardon meet those unvoluntary errors, which in this work by me
shall be committed.

Whether all the errors of our Author be involuntary, or not, (for I grant that
some of them may be such) will be seen hereafter.


Fuller. In good time, Sir. But till this [ hereafter] comes, Judge not, lest
you be judged; and think charitably, that a Christian will not willingly,
wittingly, and wilfully run into errors.


Dr. Heylyn. But whether those two learned Pens were mistaken or not, shall be
now examined. I conceive clearly, that they were not mistaken in it, it being
first improbable, if not impossible, that two Men of such Parts and Learning,
and of such eminent integrity in all their Writings, should vent a Proposition,
or position rather, which they have no ground for.


Fuller. They were learned Pens indeed, as ever our Nation bred, in their kind
of Studies; and great Antiquaries. But only the * ANCIENT OF DAYS is
Omniscient and Infallible. And I am confident, such was their Ingenuity, that
they would rather be thankful to, than angry with any, who, with due respect
to their persons, should discover their mistakes. Amongst which, this was one,
that the DRUIDES instructed the Britains in the knowledge of one God.

The contrary does plainly appear by the testimony of Gildas, lately alleged,
whose words are so walled about (as I may say) on both sides, by what went
before, and after that, as they cannot be evaded, they cannot be perverted to
other reference, than relating unto the Religion of the ancient Britains, long
before the entrance of the Romans into this Island; who, besides a numerous
rabblement of portentous Idols, gave divine honor to Mountains, Hills, and
Rivers. Nothing can be more diametrically opposite to the worship of One God,
than such gross and generally diffused Polytheism.

Add to the authority of Gildas that of Origin, thus writing in his fourth
Homily on Ezekiel. Confitentur and miserabiles Iudaei haec de Christi presentia
praedicari; sed stulte ignorant personam, cum videant impleta quae dicta sunt.
Quando enim terra Britanniae ante adventum Christi in unius Dei consensit
religionem? Quando terra Maurorum, etc.

All judicious Readers easily understand this Interrogation, [ When did the
Land of Britain, before the coming of Christ, consent in the Religion of one
God?] I say, all do understand, that this his question asked, and left
unanswered, amounts unto a very strong Negation; and, that before the coming
of Christ, Britain was divided into the worshipping of many gods.


Dr. Heylyn. And secondly our Author tells of the Druides, that they were
Philosophers, Divines, and Lawyers, to the rest of the Britains; and if
Philosophers, they might by their long study in the book of Nature, and their
Industrious inquiry into natural Causes, attain unto the knowledge of that
one and only Supernatural Cause, (as others of the Heathen Philosophers in
their several Countries,) from which the works of Nature had their first
Original. And of some other the old Philosophers, it is said expressly by
Minutius, that they had spoken so divinely of the things of God; ut quivis
arbitretur aut nunc Christianos Philosophos esse, aut Philosophos fuisse jam
tunc Christianos. So little was the difference in that particular, between
these old Philosophers and the Primitive Christians. For though they did admit
a multitude of Inferior Gods, Topical in respect of Countries, and Tutelar in
respect of particular Persons; yet in the middle of that darkness they
discerned one Supreme God over all the rest, (...), as the Grecians; Hominum
Sator atque Deorum, as the Latins call him. And though they were mistaken in
the name of that Supreme Power, whom generally they entitled by the name of
Jupiter, yet they did well enough agree in giving him the Supreme Power over
all the world. Et qui Iovem principem volunt falluntur in nomine, sed de ea
potestate consentiunt, as my Author has it. Nor did those old Philosophers
keep the great truth unto themselves, like a Candle in a dark-Lanthorn, or hid
under a bushel; but placed it like a great Light on the top of a Mountain,
that all the people might discern it; who thereupon lifting their hands unto
the Heavens, did frequently make their addresses but to one God only, saying
in common SPEECH unto one another, that God was great, and God was true, and,
If God permit. Of which, my Author (the same Christian Advocate) seems to make
a question; Vulgi iste naturalis sermo est, an Christiani confitentis oration?
that is to say, Whether these expressions favored not rather of the Christian,
than the vulgar Heathen. And hereupon I may conclude in the behalf of the
Druides, (or rather of those learned Pens who affirm it of them) that being
Philosophers in Study, and Divines by Office, and very eminent in their times
in both capacities, they might as well instruct the People in the knowledge of
one only God, as any other of the Heathen Sages, either Greeks or Romans. The
reason alleged by these great Antiquaries being thus made good, we next
proceed to the examination of that which is produced by our Author.


Fuller. In this long Harangue, I know not what the Animadvertor aims at; this
I know, he hits not me, nor alleges any thing in opposition to what I have
written. If he desires only to prove, that the refined Heathens worshipped
one God above all the rest, he shall not only have my free consent, but the
adjection of this my Symbol thereunto.

I conceive, that the Pagans adored the Essence of God under the name of
Jupiter: and his Attributes under other Titles; Wisdom, of Apollo;
Omni-presence, Swiftnes of Mercury; Power, of Mars; Beauty, of Venus;
Providence over the Sea, Neptune; Winds, Aeolus; Catile, Pan, etc. Yet can I
not see, how this can excuse them from being foul Idolaters, seeing the moral
Commandment does not say, Thou shall not have other gods in equal degree of
worship with me; but, Exodus 20.3.
Thou shall not have other gods before me: and the Animadvertor knows well,
that the Original imports, Coram me, that is, Thou shall have none other in
my sight or presence.

Now for quietness sake, let the result of this long discourse (so far as I
can understand) be granted him, and it amounts to no more, then to put the
Britains in the same form with the Grecians; instructed by their Druids in the
worship of one God, as well and as far as the Grecians were in the same Lesson
by their Philosophers. Now what the Grecians held and did in this point, will
appear by the practice of the Athenians, whose City was the Mistress of Greece,
Staple of Learning, and Palace of Philosophers; and how well the Athenians
worshipped one God, we have from the infallible witness of St. Act. 17.16.
Paul, whose spirit was stirred within him, whilst he saw the City wholly given
to idolatry. Whence it will follow, that the Britains, form-fellowes with the
Grecians, were wholly given to Idolatry: which is as much, and more then I said
before.

And now the Reader may judge, what progress the Animadvertor has made in
confuting what I have written; yea, less then the Beast Pigritia in Brasil,
which, as he tells us In his Microcosm, p. 800.
elsewhere, goes not so far in fourteen days, as one may throw a stone. Yea,
our Adversary has not gone at all, (save backward) and if he does not mend his
pace, it will be late before he comes to his lodging.

Here let me mind the Animadvertor, that my Church History thus begins; That
we may the more freely and fully pay the tribute of our thanks to Gods
goodness, for the Gospel which we now enjoy; let us recount the sad condition
of the Britains, our Predecessors, before the Christian faith was preached
unto them. If therefore the Animadvertor by his tedious discourse, endeavoring
to UN-IDOLATRIZE the Britains as much as he could; I say, if hereby he has
hindered or lessened any man's paying of his thanks to God, he has done a
thankless office both to God and Man therein.


Dr Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, fol. 3. It facilitated the entrance of the
Gospel hither, that lately the Roman Conquest had in part civilized the South
of this Island, by transporting Colonies, and erecting of Cities there.] Than
which, there could not any thing be said more different from the truth of
story, or from the time of that Conversion, which we have in hand; performed,
as all our latter Writers (and amongst them our Author himself) have affirmed
from Gildas, who lived in the fourth Century of the Christian Church) Tempore
summo Tiberii Caesaris, toward the latter end of the Reign of Tiberius Caesar,
that is to say, about thirty seven years after Christ's Nativity, at what time
the Romans had neither erected any one City, nor planted any one Colony in the
South parts of the Island. For though Julius Caesar, in pursuance of his Gallick
Conquest, had attempted this Island, crossed the Thames, and pierced as far as
Verulamium, in the County of the Cattieuchlani, (now Hartfordshire) yet either
finding how difficult a work it was like to prove, or having business of more
moment, he gave over the enterprise, resting contented with the honor of the
first discovery. Et ostendisse potius quam trad disse, as we read in Tacitus.
Nothing done after this in order to the Conquest of Britain, until the time
of Claudius. Augustus would by no means be persuaded to the undertaking, and
much less Tiberius, in whose last years the Gospel was first preached in
Britain, as before was said. (...)cit. in vita (...)ola.
Concilium id Divus Augustus vocabat, Tiberius praecipue. And though Caligula,
leaving the honor of this Conquest to his Uncle Claudius, who next succeeded
in the Empire; and being invited into Britain by a discontented party amongst
the Natives, reduced some part thereof into the form of a Roman Province. Of
this, see Tacitus at large, in the life of Agricola. By which it will appear
most clearly, that there was neither City of the Romans erection, nor Colony of
their plantation, till the time of Claudius, and consequently no such
facilitating of the work, by either of those means which our Author dreams of.
But from the Time, proceed we to the Author of this first Conversion, of which
thus our Author.


Fuller. In the first place, know, Reader, that Mr. Burton, in his late learned
Notes on Antoninus, justifies, that Julius Caesar did Colonize (what ever the
Animadvertor says to the contrary) some part of this Land; otherwise, his
whole Conquest would have unraveled after his departure, and his Successors had
had their work to begin afresh.

2ly. I say not, the first entrance, but, the Entrance of the Gospel was
facilitated by the Roman Conquest. The entrance of the Gospel into this Island
was so far from being done in an instant, or, simul and semel, that it was not,
res unius seculi, the product of one age; but was successively done, (...), at
sundry times, and in diverse manners. So that this extensive entrance of the
Christian Religion, gradually insinuating it self, took up a century of years,
from the latter end of Tiberius, and so forwards.

Christianity entered not into this Island like Lightning, but like light. None
can behold this Essay thereof in the time of Tiberius, otherwise then a
Morning Star; some forty years after the day dawned; and lastly, under King
Lucius, (that Leuer-Maure, or the great light) the Sun of Religion may be siad
to arise; before which time, the South of this Island was sufficiently
Colonized by the Romans, whereby Commerce and Civility ushered Christianity
into Britain. Yet to clear my words, not from untruth in themselves, but
mistakes in others, and to avoid all appearance of falsehood, it shall be
altered (God-willing) in the next Edition. It facilitated the entrance and
propagation of the Gospel here, etc.


Dr. Heylyn. Parsons the Jesuit mainly stickleth for the Apostle Peter to have
first preached the Gospel here. And our Author does as mainly stickle against
it. The Reason which induced Parsons so to stickle in it, was, as our Author
thinks and tells us, fol. 4. to infer an Obligation of this Island to the Sea
of Rome. And to exempt this Island from that Obligation, our Author has
endeavored to disprove the Tradition.


Fuller. That the Jesuit furiously drives on that design* appears to any
that peruse his Works, and your Author conceives his own Endeavors lawful
and useful in stopping his full Carrere, and disobliging the Church of England
from a Debt as uniustly pretended, as vehemently prosecuted. Et veniam pro
laud petit; laudatus abun^e,
Non fastiditus, si tuus Author erit.
Your Author for his praise does pardon crave;
If not despised, his praise enough shall have.


It is therefore but hard measure, for you to require his good intentions, (if
failing in success) with contempt and reproach.


Dr. Heylyn. Whereas indeed St. Peter's preaching in this Island, (if he were
the first that preached here) in the Time of Tiberius, must be before his
Preaching in the City of Rome, to which he came not till the Reign of the
Emperor Claudius. And thereupon it follows by the Iesuit's Logic, that the
Britains by sparing their Apostle to preach at Rome, did lay an Obligation
upon that City, but received none from it.


Fuller. Yea but if Simeon S. Metaphrastes, Comment. de Petro et Paulo ad diem
29. Junij.
Metaphrastes be to be believed (on whose testimony Parsons Principally
relieth) being the self same Author, whom the Animadvertor within few lines
hereafter does so highly commend and extol, St. Peter preached here, not
before, but long after his being at Rome; and but a little before his Death,
namely in the twelfth year of Nero Caesar.


Dr. Heylyn. Or granting that St. Peter did first preach at Rome, yet would
this draw upon us no such engagement to the Pope, and the Church of Rome, as
our Author fears; and other German Nations by Boniface, Willibade, Willibad,
Willibidd, and Swibert, English Saxons all, might or did draw the like
Dependence of those Churches, upon this of England.


Fuller. The proportion, I confess, is Good and well-grounded: but I answer,
great the difference betwixt the Natures of England and Rome. England never
pretended Superiority over other Churches, which Rome does, prosecuting even
Shadowy pretenses with all violence. What the Talent-hiding servant said of his
Master, may be justly said of modern Rome, She reapeth where she has not
strowed; demanding Officium, where she never bestowed Beneficium, and requiring
duty where she never conferred Courtesy. Rome therefore being no fair
Creditor, but so cruel an Extortioner, I conceive my pains well employed, to
quit England from a Debt of Obligation, unjustly exacted of her by Parsons the
Jesuit, on the pretense of St. Peter's preaching here.


Dr. Heylyn. So that this fear being overblown, we will consider somewhat
further of St. Peter's first Preaching in this Island, not as delivered by
Tradition from the Church of Rome, which is suspected to have pleaded their own
Interest in it; but as affirmed positively by the Greek Menologies, and in the
works of Simeon Metaphrastes an approved Greek Author. Of the Menologies
(though vouched by Camden to this purpose) our Author takes no notice at all,
but lets the weight of his displeasure fall on Metaphrastes.


Fuller. The best way to over-blow this fear is to confute the five Arguments
alleged by Parsons, for St. Peter's Preaching here, which I hope is done
effectually by me in my Church History, where I follow the Jesuit verbatim, in
answering to his Reasons. And this is the Reason that I took no notice of the
Greek Menologies, because not mentioned by Parsons: whence I collect that
either he had never seen them, (which is very improbable,) or else he
conceived, that no great belief was to be given unto them, or advantage
thereby to be gotten for his Cause.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author says, Metaphrastes is an Au^hor of no Credit, as
Baronius himself does confess. But first, Baronius himself makes no such
Confession, that which our Author tells us from him being only this, In alijs
multis ibi ab ipso positis errare eum certum est; that is to say, that he has
erred in many things by him delivered. Assuredly if to err in many things
delivered in so great a Work, as that of Simon Metaphrastes, may forthwith be
conceived sufficient to make an Author of no Credit, God bless not only our
Historian, but Baronius himself from being held Authors of no Credit, in both
whom there are many Errors not possible to be reconciled to the Truth of Story.


Fuller. THREE is a perfect Number, let therefore the Animadvertor be put in
also, partly to make up a Complete company; partly that he may have the
Benefit of his own JEAR-PRAYERS to himself.

Baronius being Dead, to pray for him, is Popery; and to take God's Name in
vain (to Jear us both) is Profaneness. The Animadvertor who now inserts,
GOD-BLESSE, when it might have been omitted, will omit it when it should be
inserted; as God willing I shall take notice of in due time and place hereafter.


Dr. Heylyn. But secondly, as Baronius did not, so he could not say, that
Metaphrastes was an Author of no credit: the Man being not only pious, but
Learned also, for the times wherein he lived; honored as a Saint in the Greek
Menologies, on the 27. day of November, and graced with a Funeral Oration by
Michael Psellus a Renouned Scholar, highly extolled by Balsamon for his pains
and industry in this present work, and no less magnified by the Fathers in the
Council of Florence, Anno. 1436. All which had never set such an Estimate upon
him in their several Times, had he been an Author of no Credit as our Author
makes him.


Fuller. I shall hereafter have an higher esteem for Metaphrastes. However, to
return to the words of Baronius, which (in the last Note) gave the occasion of
this contest.

In aliis multis IBI ab ipso positis errare eum certum est: It is certain that
he has erred in many things THERE delivered by him. The Animadvertor in his
Translation omitteth THERE, the most emphaticall word in the whole Sentence,
seeing, granting Metaphrastes a good Author in other things, he is erroneous in
this particular.


Dr. Heylyn. I had now ended with St. Peter, but that I find him appear in a
vision to King Edward the Confessor, and telling him, That he had preached the
Gospel in Britain, (occasioning thereby the foundation of the Abbey of St.
Peter in Westminster.) To which our Author makes this answer, To this vision
pretended of Peter, we oppose the certain words of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 4.1.
Neither give heed to fables.

What a pity is it, that this apparition was not made, and the same tale told
over again, to Thomas Fuller of Hammersmith, that so it might have found some
credit with our Author, though with no body else.


Fuller. Nay rather, what a pity was it, that this Apparition of St. Peter was
not made unto his namesake Peter, (here the Animadvertor) and then all had
been authentic indeed.


Dr. Heylyn. For of this, Thomas Fuller our Author tells us, (and tells it
in confirmation of some Miracles done by King Henry the sixth after his
decease) that being a very honest man, he happened into the company of some who
had stolen some Cattle, for which he was condemned and executed; and being on
the top of the Ladder, King Henry the sixth appeared unto him, and so ordered
the matter, that he was not strangled with the Rope, but preserved alive: And
finally, that in gratitude of so great a benefit, he repaired to that Kings
Tomb in Chertsey Abbey, and there presented his humble thanks for that great
deliverance. There being as good Authors for that Apparition of St. Peter, as
of this of St. Henry. Vel neutrum flammis ure, vel ure duos: Either let both be
believed for truths, or for falsehoods burn both.


Fuller. Let the Echo both in Latin and English answer for me, Ure duos, Burn
both, for a brace of notorious falsehoods, and see who will shed a tear to
quench the fire. As for the Apparition to Thomas Fuller of Hammersmith, seeing
afterward the Animadvertor twitteth me therewith, we will till then defer our
Answer thereunto.


Dr. Heylyn. Less opposition meets the preaching of St. Joseph of Arimathea,
though it meets some. For notwithstanding that this Tradition be as general,
as universally received, as almost any other in the Christian Church; yet our
Author, being resolved to let fly at all, declares it for a piece of Novel
superstition, disguised with pretended Antiquity. Better provided (as it seems)
to dispute this point than the Ambassadors of Castile, when they contended for
precedence with those of England in the Council of Basil; who had not any thing
to object against this Tradition of Joseph's preaching to the Britains,
although the English had provoked them, by confuting their absurd pretenses for
St. James his preaching to the Spaniards.


Fuller. I never denied the Historical groundwork, but the Fabulous varnish
of Arimathean Joseph here preaching. My words run thus. Church History, Page 6.
Part 12. Yet because the Norman Charters of Glassenbury refer to a Succession
of many ancient Charters, bestowed on that Church by several Saxon Kings, as
the Saxon Charters relate to British Grants in Intuition to Joseph's being
there; We dare not wholly deny the substance of the Story, though the Leaven of
Monkery has much swollen and puffed up the circumstance thereof.



And to the impartial peruser of the connection of my words, Novell
Superstition, disguised with pretended Antiquity, relate not to the substance
of the Story, but as it is presented unto us with fictitious embellishments.

And here I foretell the Reader, what he shall see within few pages performed,
namely, that after the Animadvertor has flung, and flounced, and fluttered
about, to show his own activity and opposition, against what I (though never so
well and warily) have written, at last he will calmly come up, and in this
controversy close with my sense, though not words, using ( for the more
credit) his own expressions.


Dr. Heylyn. For first, our Author does object in the way of scorn, that, fol.
6. The relation is as ill accoutred with tacklings, as the Ship, in which it is
affirmed that St. Phillip, St. Joseph, and the rest, were put by the Jews, into
a Vessel without Sails or Oars, with intent to drown them; and being tossed
with tempests in the midland Sea, at last safely landed at Marcelles in France,
and thence afterward made for England.] No such strange piece of Errantry (if
we mark it well) as to render the whole truth suspected.


Fuller. Not by way of scorn, Sir, but by way of dislike and distrust. The more
I mark it, the more strange piece of Errantry it seems, so that I cannot meet
with a stranger.


Dr. Heylyn. For first, we find it in the Monuments of elder times, that
Acrisius King of Argos exposed his daughter Danae, with her young son Perseus,
in such a vessel as this was, and as ill provided of all necessaries, to the
open Seas; who, notwithstanding, by divine providence, were safely wafted to
those parts of Italy, which we now call Puglia.


Fuller. Monuments of elder times! What be your Acts, if these be your
Monuments? Ask my fellow if I be a thief; ask a Poetical Fable, if a Monkish
Legend be a liar. And what if Danae (the self-same forsooth which had a golden
shoure rained into her lap) crossed from Argos in Peloponesus, to Apulia, now
Puglia, almost in a straight line, and the narrowest part of the Adriatic.
This does not parallel the improbability of Joseph his voyage, in an
un-accoutred Ship, from some Port in Palestine, to Marselles, the way being ten
times as far, full of flexures, and making of several points; which costs our
Seamen some months in sailing, (though better accommodated). I confess, Gods
power can bring any, a greater distance, with cordage of cobweb in a nut-shell,
but no wise man will make his belief so cheap, to credit such a miracle, except
it be better attested.


Dr. Heylyn. And secondly, for the middle times, we have the LIKE story in an
Author above all exception, even our Author himself, who tells us, lib. 6.
fol. 265. of our present History, that King Athelstane put his brother Edwin
into a little Wherry or Cock-boat, without any tackling or furniture thereunto,
to the end, that if the poor Prince perished, his wickedness might be imputed
to the waves.


Fuller. Thanks for the jeer premised. I am not the Author, but bare Relater of
that story, obvious in all our English Chronicles. Nor is the story LIKE to
that of Ioseph's, except he had been drowned in his Waftage to Marelles, as
this exposed Prince Edwin was in our Narrow Seas, (whether wilfully or
casually, not so certain) his corpse being taken up in Flanders. The resemblance
betwixt stories chiefly consists in similitude of success; And what likeness
betwixt a miserable death, and a miraculous deliverance?


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author objecteth in the next place, that no writer of credit
can be produced before the Conquest, who mentions Joseph 's coming hither.]
For answer whereunto, it may first be said, that where there is a constant
uncontrolled Tradition, there is most commonly the less care taken to commit it
to Writing.


Fuller. Less care implies some care, whereas here no care, but a pannick
silence of all Authors, British, Saxon, and Christian, for a thousand years
together. Secondly, the Animadvertor might have done well, to have instanced in
any one Tradition, (seeing he says it is most commonly done) which is constant
and uncontrolled, yet attested by no creditable Author; and then let him carry
the cause.


Dr. Heylyn. Secondly, that the Charters of Glassenbury, relating from the
Norman to the Sax^n Kings, and from the Saxons to the Britains, being all
built upon St. Ioseph's coming hither, and preaching here, may serve instead
of many Authors bearing witness to it.

And thirdly, that Friar Bale, as great an enemy to the unwarrantable
Traditions of the Church of Rome, as our Author can desire to have him, has
vouched two witnesses hereunto, that is to say, Melkinus Avalonius, and Gildas
Albanus; whose Writings, or some fragments of them, he may be believed to have
seen, though our Author has not.


Fuller. Nor the Animadvertor neither. Bale does not intimate that he ever saw
any part of them; and he uses to Cackle, when lighting on such Eggs. But we
collect from him and other Authors, that no credit is to be given to such
supposititious fragments.


Dr. Heylyn. As for some circumstances in the story, that is to say, the
dedicating of Joseph's first Church to the Virgin Mary, the burying of his body
in it, and the enclosing of the same with a large Churchyard; I look upon them
as the products of Munkish ignorance, accommodated unto the fashion of those
times which the writers lived in. There is scarce any Saint in all the
Calendar, whose History would not be subject to the like misconstructions, if
the additaments of the middle and darker times should be produced to the
disparagement of the whole Narration.


Fuller. Now the Reader sees my Prediction performed, viz. that after the
Animadvertor had flounced about, he would close with my sense in his own
words. Is no^ this the very same in effect with what I said, approving the
Substance, but rejecting the Fabulous circumstances of the story of Joseph? In
all this he has done just nothing, save only swelled his Book, (though hollow
within) to make it amount to a Saleable bigness.


Dr. Heylyn. But such an Enemy Our Author is to all old Traditions, that he
must needs have a blow at Glassen-bury Thorn, though before ^ut down by some
Soldiers, as himself confesses; like Sir John Falstaff in the Play, who to
show his Valor, must thrust his sword into the Bodies of those men which were
dead before.


Fuller. Not to all old Traditions, good Animadvertor. Saint Paul Of Thessal.
2.15.
says, Hold the Traditions which you have been taught whether by Word, or our
Epistle: such Traditions as these, whether in Doctrine or Practice, I desire to
retain. As for unwitnessed Traditions, my Emnity is not such, but in the heat
thereof I can smile at them. The Animadvertor has wronged me, and, The
Comedian has wronged Sir John Falstaff. He was a valiant Knight, famous for
his Atcheivements in France, made (as the History Page 329.
of St. George testifies,) Knight of the Garter by King Henry the Sixth, and
one who disdained to violate the Concerments of the Dead. Nor have I been
injurious to the Thorn of Glassenbury living or Dead, as will appear.


Dr. Heylyn. The budding or blossoming of which Thorn, he accounts untrue (
which, were it true, etc. Fol. 8.) affirming, from I know not whom, that it
does not punctually and critically bud on Christmas Day, but on the days near
it and about it. And were it no otherwise then so, the Miracle were not much
the less, then if it budded critically on Christmas Day, as I have heard from
persons of great Worth and credit dwelling near the place, that indeed it did:
though unto such, as had a mind to decry the Festival, it was no very hard
matter to belie the Miracle.


Fuller. My words amount not to an absolute Denial, but to some
Dissatisfaction. Parcel-Diffidelity in matters of such nature, I am sure is no
sin. Mr. Tailor, burges for Bristol in the long Parliament, was He who told me,
that going thither purposely with his Kinsman it did not that year exactly bud
on Christmas Day. A Person as improbable to de^ry the Festival, being a Colonel
on the Kings side, (who refusing quarter was killed under the walls of
Bristol); so unlikely, if living, to have taken the LIE from the Pen of the
Animadvertor.

And now Reader, (seeing some mirth will not be amiss) know that, As I do not
believe his report, who on a Christmas day, stroaking his Hand down his Doublet
before, found there a great green Quick-Set suddenly grown, and Wondered
thereat, until he remembered, that the moulds of his Bald-worne buttens were
made of Glassen-bury Thorn: so am I not of so sullen and Morose a Nature, as
not to Credit what is generally and Credibly reported. Nor do my words
Positively and Peremptorily conclude against the budding of this Thorn, but
against the necessary relating thereof, to Arimathean Joseph, which I rather
leave at large to some occult Quality in nature, paralleling it with the like,
(never as yet fathered on any Saint the causer thereof,) the Oak in Hamshire.
But enough, lest we occasion the altering of the Proverb from de Lana Caprina,
into de Corno Glastoniensi.


Dr. Heylyn. In fine, our Author either is unwilling to have the Gospel as
soon preached here as in other places, or else we must have preachers for it
from he knows not whence. Such preachers we must have, as either drop down
immediately from the Heavens, as Diana's Image is said to have done by the
Towne-Clark of Ephesus; or else must suddenly rise out of the earth, as Tages
the first Sooth-sayer amongst Thuscans, is reported to have done by some
ancient Writers. And yet we cannot say of our Author neither, as Lactantius did
of one Acesilas (if my memory fail not,) Recte hic aliorum sustulit
disciplinas, sed non recte fundavit suam; that is to say, that though he had
laid no good grounds for his own opinion, yet he had solidly confuted the
opinions of others. Our Author has a way by himself, neither well skilled in
pulling down, or in building up.


Fuller. I have plucked nothing down but what would have fallen of it self,
and thereby perchance hurt others, (I mean mis-inform them) as grounded on a
foundred foundation. In place whereof I have erected, if not so fair, a more
firm Fabric, acknovvledging, That Apostolical men did at first found the
Gospel here, though (to use my 1 Cent. p. 4.
words) the British Church has forgotten her own infancy, and who were her
first Godfathers. Adding hereto that as God concealed the Body of Deu. 34.6.
Moses to prevent Idolatry; So, to cut off from posterity all occasion of
superstition, He suffered the memories of our Pri^itive planters to be buried
in Obscurity.

This is enough to satisfy any ingenuous person, who ^^eferreth a modest truth
before adventurous assertions, having in them much of fals-ho^d and more of
uncertainty.


Dr. Heylyn. From the first conversion of the Britains, proceed we now unto
the second, as Parsons calls it, or rather from the first Preaching to the
Propagation. The Christian Faith here planted by St. Peter or St. Joseph (or
perhaps planted by the one, and watered by the other, in their several times)
had still a being in this Island till the time of Lucius. So that there was no
need of a new Conversion, but only of some able Laborers to take in the
Harvest. The Miracles done by some pious Christians induced King Lucius to send
Elvanus and Meduinus (two of that profession) to the Pope of Rome, requesting
principally, that some Preachers might be sent to instruct him in the says of
Christ. Which the Pope did according to the Kings desire, sending Faganus and
Derwianus, two right godly men, by whom much people were converted, the Temples
of the gods converted into Christian Churches, the Hierarchy of Bishops settled,
and the whole building raised on so good a foundation, that it continued
undemolisht till the time of the Saxons.


Fuller. This is the Sum and Substance of the Story of K. Lucius, which the
Animadvertor has breviated, and with whom I concur therein. It never came
into my thoughts to doubt the substance, but deny some circumstances thereof.
My own Church Hist. v. 1. page 10.
expression is, that the whole Bulk thereof is not to be Refused, but Refined,
and to this I adhere.


Dr. Heylyn. And in the summing up of this story, our Author having refuted
some petit Arguments which had been answered to his hand (though much mistaken
by the way in taking Diotarus King of Galatia, for a King of Sicilie, fol. 10.)
gives us some other in their stead, which he thinks unanswerable.


Fuller. I deny not that P. Eleutherius might or did send a Letter to K.
Lucius, but I justly suspect the Letter now extant to be but-pretended and
forged. I never thought (by the way, how came the Animadvertor to know my
thoughts,) my Arguments unanswerable, but now I say they are unanswered;
standing in full force, notvvithstanding any alleged by the Animadvertor to
the contrary. I confess a Memory-mistake of Sicilia for Galatia: and as it is
the first fault he has detected in my Book; so shall it be the first by me
(God Willing) amended in the next Edition.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author First objects against the Popes answer to the King, that

Fol. 11. It relates to a former letter of King Lucius wherein he requested of
the Pope to send him a Copy or Collection of the Roman Laws, which being at
that time in force in the I Will of Britain, was but actum agere.] But certainly
though those parts of Britain in which Lucius reigned, were governed in part
(and but in part) by the Laws of Rome, yet were the Laws of Rome, at that
time more in number, and of a far more general practice, then to be limited to
so narrow a part of their Dominions. Two thousand Volumes we find of them in
Justinians time, out of which, by the help of Theophilus, Trebonianus, and many
other learned men of that noble faculty, the Emperor composed that Book or
body of Law which from the universality of its comprehension, we still call the
Pandects.


Fuller. One who has taken but two Turns in Trinity hall Court in Cambridge,
knows full well what PANDECTS are, and why so called. All this is but
praefatory: I wait for the answer to the Objection still to come.


Dr. Heylyn. In the next place it is objected, that

This letter mounts King Lucius to too high a Throne, making him the Monarch or
King of Britain, who neither was the Supreme nor sole King here, but partial
and subordinate to the Romans.] This we acknowledge to be true, but no way
prejudicial to the cause in hand. Lucius both was and might be called the King
of Britain, though Tributary and Vassal to the Roman Emperors, as the two
Baliols John and Edward were both Kings of Scotland, though Homagers and
Vassals to Edward the first, and third, of England, the Kings of Naples to the
Pope, and those of Austria and Bohemia to the German Emperors.


Fuller. A Blank is better then such writing to no purpose. For first, both the
Baliols in their several times were (though not SUPREME) SOLE Kings of
Scotland. So were the Kings of Naples, and the King of Austria, (there never
being but one, the first, and Last, viz. Seb. Munsterus de Germania.
Fredoritus Leopoldus) and the Kings of Bohemia in their respective Dominions.
Not so Lucius, who was neither Supreme nor Sole King of Britain.

Besides the Baliols being Kings of Scotland, did never Style themselves, (or
were Styled by other) Kings of Britain. The Kings of Naples never entitled
themselves Kings of Italy: Nor the Kings of Austria and Bohemia ever wrote
themselves, (or were written to,) as Kings of Germany.

Whereas Lucius, ( Ruler only in the South West-part of this Isle,) is in this
Letter made King of Britain, more then came to his share; an Argument that the
Forger thereof was unacquainted with the Constitution of his Kingdom. And this
just Exception stands firm against the Letter, what ever the Animadvertor has
alleged in the excuse thereof.


Dr. Heylyn. Nor does the next objection give us any trouble at all, that is to
say, that

The Scripture quoted in that Letter is out of St. Hieroms Translation, which
came more then a hundred years after:] Unless it can be proved withal (as I
think it cannot) that Hierom followed not, in those Texts, those old
Translations, which were before received and used in the Western Churches.


Fuller. See the different tempers of men, how some in point of Truth, are of a
tenderer constitution than others. The De prim Ec. Brit.
Primate Armach was so sensible of the strength of this reason, that it made
him conclude against the authenticallnesse of the Letter.


Dr. Heylyn. Lesle am I moved with that which follows, viz.

That this letter not appearing till a thousand years after the death of Pope
Eleutherius, might probably creep out of some Monks Cell, some four hundred
years since.] Which allegation being admitted, (the Monks Cell excepted,) it
makes no more to the discredit of the letter which we have before us, then to
the undervaluing of those excellent Monuments of Piety and Learning, which have
been recovered of late times from the dust and moths of ancient Libraries. Such
Treasures like money long locked up, is never thought less profitable when it
comes abroad. And from what place soever it first came abroad, I am confident
it came not out of any Monks Cell; that generation being then wholly at the
Popes devotion, by consequence not likely to divulge an Evidence, so manifestly
tending to the overthrow of his pretensions. The Popes about four hundred years
since were mounted to the height of that power and Tyranny which they claimed
as Vicars unto Christ. To which there could not any thing be more plainly
contrary then that passage in the Pope's letter, whereto he tells the King,
That he was Gods Vicar in his own Kingdom (vos estis Vicarius Dei in Regno
vestro, as the Latin has it.) Too great a secret to proceed from the Cell of a
Monk, who would have rather forged ten Decretals to uphold the Popish
usurpations over Sovereign Princes, then published one only (whether true or
false) to subvert the same. Nor does this Letter only give the King an empty
Title, but such a Title as imports the exercise of the chief Ecclesiastical
Power within his Dominions. For thus it follows in the same; The people and
the folk of the Realm of Britain be yours, whom if they be divided, ye ought to
gather in concord and peace, to call them to the faith and law of Christ, to
cherish and maintain them, to rule and govern them, so as you may reign
everlastingly with him whose Vicar you are. So far the very words of the
letter, as our Author rendereth them, which savor far more of the honest
simplicity of the Primitive Popes, then the impostures and supposititious
issues of the latter times.


Fuller. I confess some precious pieces of Antiquity, long Latent in
Obscurity, have at last broke forth into the Light, with no little advantage to
Learning. But then such were entire Books, and we know, how, when, where, and
by whom, they were found out, and brought forth. Whereas this loose Letter
secretly and slily slid into the World, unattended with any such Cicumstances
to attest the Genuinesse thereof. Children casually lost, are no whit the less
Legitimate; and beloved the more, when found and owned of their Parents. But
give me leave to suspect that Babe a Bastard, which is left on a bulk, or under
a Stall; no Father being found, or Mother, to maintain it. A Presumption that
this Letter of Elutherius is supposititious.

I confess, this pretended Letter of Lucius has something in it, which does
act and personate primitive simplicity, (as that passage of Regal power in
Church Matters,) but more which does practice the Monkish ignorance, of later
times. There were lately false twenty Shilling pieces, (commonly called
Morgans) coined by a cunning and cheating Chemist, whose part without the Rind
was good Gold, and would endure the touch, whilst that within was base as but
double gilded Brass. Such, this Letter of Lucius; some part whereof will
endure the Test, the other not: the Monk, who made it, pretending something of
antiquity, (so to palliate the deceit); but having more of the Novelty of the
middle age. He lived in some six hundred years since.

May the Reader be pleased to take notice, that the Animadvertor has silently
passed by, the strongest Argument to shatter the credit of this Letter alleged
by me, and taken from a phrase unknown in that Age, yet used in the Letter,
even MANU TENERE, to Maintain, or defend. This the Animadvertor slips over in
silence, and that I believe for nineteen reasons, whereof this was one, because
He himself was unable to answer it, and knew Critics would laugh at him, if
affirming those words, in that sense, contemporary with Pope Eleutherius.
Herein, He appears like a Dunkerker, who delights to prey on poor Merchants
Ships passing on in their Calling, but meeting an English Man of War, He can
look Big, and fairly give him the goe-By. He finds it more facile to carpe an
easy inoffensive passage, then to confute what has difficulty, and strength
of reason therein.

I resume what I said before, and what the Animadvertor has gainsaid to no
purpose, viz. that this Story of K. Lucius is not to be Refused but Refined,
and the dross is to be put from the good Metal; or (as my own words also
are,) the good Corn therein sifted from the Chafe; and, amongst the Chafe, I
have cast away this Letter. But if the Animadvertor loves to eat both Corn and
Chafe, much good may his Diet do him, and let Him and Horse feed on their
Loaf together.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author tells us, fol. 9. that he had ventured on this story
with much averseness; and we dare believe him. He had not else labored to
discredit it in so many particulars, and wilfully (that I say no worse)
suppressed, etc.


Fuller. Can he say worse than wilfully, except it be Maliciously? Seeing, in
my conscience, I believe the Story of the conversion of K. Lucius: though this
Letter, and some other circumstances seem to me improbable.

I entered on this story with this much averseness, as finding much
difficulty, and fearing not to give satisfaction therein to my self, and others.

I see not how it can be inferred from such my averseness, that I therefore
labored to discredit the story in so many particulars.

If this be a good consequence, I desire the Reader to remember, what the
Animadvertor has written in the latter end of the introduction to his
Animadversions on my Book, viz.

I must needs confess withal, that I did never enter more unwillingly upon
any undertaking, then I did on this.

May I not then, by the same Logic, conclude his endeavoring to disparage my
Book: because he entered thereon so unwillingly?


Dr. Heylyn. The best part of the Evidence in the words of Beda; who being no
friend unto the Britains, has notwithstanding done them right in this great
business. And from him take the story in these following words; Anno ab
Incarnatione Domini, 156. etc. In the 156. year after Christ's Nativity, Marcus
Antonius Verus together with Aurelius Commodus his Brother, did in the
fourteenth place from Augustus Ceasar, undertake the government of the Empire.
In whose times when as Eleutherius a godly man was Bishop of the Church of
Rome, Lucius King of the Britains sent unto him, Obsecrans u^ per eius
mandatum Christianus efficeretur, entreating by his means to be made a
Christian. Whose virtuous desire herein was granted; and the faith of Christ
being thus received by the Britains, was by them kept inviolate and undefiled
until the time of Diocle^ian. This is the substance of the story, as by him
delivered, true in the main, though possibly there may be some mistake in his
Chronology, as in a matter not so canvassed as it has been lately.


Fuller. I entered a grand Jury of Authors, which mentioned the Conversion of
Lucius, amongst whom Bid is one. I expressed none of them, (as I had no cause)
in their words at length; neither can I properly be said to suppress any of
them, solemnly giving in their names, and their several Dates, which they
assign to that memorable action.


Dr. Heylyn. Now to proceed unto our Author, he tells us. Fol. 10. out of
Ieffery of Monmouth, That at this time there were in England twenty eight
Cities, each of them having a Flamen or Pagan Priest; and three of them, namely
London, York, and Caer-lion in Wales, had Arch-flamens, to which the Rest were
subjected: and Lucius placed Bishops in the Rome of the Flamens, and
Archbishops, Metropolitans in the places of Arch-flamens; concluding in the
way of Scorn, that his Flamines, and Arch-flamines seem to be Flams and
Arch-flams, even notorious False-hoods.


Fuller. I would not willingly sit in the seat of the Psalm. 1.
Scorner, and if the Animadvertor by his force will thrust me down into it, I
will (God willing) rise up again, and leave the place empty to himself to
stand or sit therein, Pro libero suo Arbitrio.

I say no more, nor so much, as that Worthy Knight Sr. Henry Spelman (so great
an Antiquary, that it is Questionable, whether his Industry, Judgment, or
Humility were the Greatest) has said on the same Subject. Who having learnedly
confuted this Report of Geffery of Monmouth, concludes with the cause of his
Mistake, relying on some supposititious Epistles. Sr. H. Spelman de Concilijs
Page 13. Gaufrido autem atque alijs, qui Flaminum. Archiflaminum, et
Protoflaminum Commento capiuntur, imposuisse videtur Gratiani authoritas,
Epistolis munita S Lucij, etc.



See! He calls that Commentum, which our Dictionaries English a Flat. Lie,
which I have mitigated into a Flamme, as importing in common Discourse a
Falsehood, which has more of vanity, then Mischief therein.


Dr. Heylyn. And it is well they do but seem so, it being possible enough that
they may seem Falsehoods to our Author, even notorious Falsehoods; though they
seem true enough to others, even apparent Truths.


Fuller. They seem so also to learned Sr. Henry Spelman, lately alleged; and
to the Reverend Archbishop of Armagh, and many others.


Dr. Heylyn. And first though Ieffery of Monmouth, seem to deserve no credit in
this particular, where he speaks against our Author's sense; yet in another
place where he comes up to his Desires, he is otherwise thought of, and
therefore made the Foreman of the Grand-inquest against Augustine the Monk,
whom he enditeth for the Murder of the Monks of Bangor. And certainly, if
Ieffery may be believed when he speaks in Passion, when his Welch-Blood was up,
as our Author words it, as one that was concerned in the Cause of his
Countrymen; he may more easily be believed in a Cause of so remote Antiquity,
where neither Love nor Hatred, or any other prevalent Affection had any power
or reason to divert him from the Way of Truth.


Fuller. It is usual with all Authors, sometimes to close with the Judgments
of the same Person, from whom they afterward on just Cause may dissent; and
should not this Liberty be allowed me, to like or leave, in Ieffery Monmouth,
what I think fitting? The Animadvertor concurreth with Bishop God-win, that the
DRUIDES instructed the Britons in the worship of one God; yet will not be
concluded with his Judgment, when averring the Letter fathered on Eleutherius
not to savor of the Style of that Age. Yea, when I make for him, he can
allege twenty Lines together, out of my Book, against H. le Strange; though at
other times, when he has served his Turn of me, I am the Object of his
sleighting and Contempt.

Now when as the IN-ANIMADVERTOR (for now I must so call him for his
Carelessness,) cites a place in my Book, viz. [ Lib. 2. Fol. 63.] that I make
J. Monmouth the Foreman of the great inquest against Augustine the Monk, he is
much mistaken therein. For in the place by him cited, I Impannell a Grand Jury,
(amongst whom J. Monmouth is neither Foreman, nor any Man) of Judicious
Readers consisting of twenty four. As false is it what he adds, as if in that
Trial I attributed much to the judgment of J. Monmouth, who therein is only
produced as a Witness, and a Verdict brought in, Point Blank against his
Evidence, acquitting Augustine the Monk of the Murder, whereof Monmouth did
accuse him.


Dr. Heylyn. And secondly, though Ieffery of Monmouth be a Writer of no great
credit with me, when he stands single by himself; yet when I find him seconded
and confirmed by others, I shall not brand a truth by the name of falsehood,
because he reports it. Now that in Britain at that time there were no fewer
then eight and twenty Cities, is affirmed by Beda. Henry of Huntington not only
agrees with him in the number, but gives us also the names of them, though
where to find many of them it is hard to say. That in each of these Cities was
some Temple dedicated to the Pagan Gods, that those Temples afterward were
employed to the use of Christians, and the Revenues of them assigned over to
the maintenance of the Bishops and other Ministers of the Gospel, has the
concurrent testimony of approved Authors; that is to say, Matthew of
Westminster out of Gildas, Anno 187. Rodolph de Diceto, cited by the learned
Primat of Armach in his Book De Primordiis Eccles. Brit. cap. 4. Gervase of
Tilbury, ibid. cap. 6. And for the Flamines, and Arch-flamines, they stand not
only on the credit of Ieffery of Monmouth, but of all our own Writers, who
speak of the foundation of the ancient Bishoprics, even to Polydor Virgil.


Fuller. I concur with the Animadvertor in the number of the Cities in
Britain.

Also I do not deny but that K. Lucius might place Bishops in some (perchance
half) of them, which I believe is all which the Animadvertor does desire. Only
as to Bishops and Archbishops exactly substituted in the Individual places of
Flamens and Arch-flamens, my belief cannot come up to the height thereof. I
find that Giraldus Cambrensis and other Authors of that age, (though concurring
with J. Monmouth in Lucius his Episcopating of Cities,) make not any mention
of these Arch-flamens.


Dr. Heylyn. Nor want there many foreign Writers who affirm the same, beginning
with Martinus Polonus, who being esteemed no friend to the Popedom (because of
the Story of Pope Ione which occurs in his Writings) may the rather be believed
in the story of Lucius. And he agrees with Ieffery of Monmouth in all parts of
the story, as to the Flamines and Arch-flamines, as do also many other of the
Roman Writers which came after him.


Fuller. Nothing more usual then for foreign Writers, with implicit faith, to
take things on the credit of such who have wrote the History of their own
Country. But on the Confutation of the Leading Author, the rest sink of course
of themselves.


Dr. Heylyn. But where both our Author and some others have raised some
objections against this part of the History, for Answer thereunto I refer the
Reader to the learned and laborious Work of Francis Mason late Archdeacon of
Norfolk, De Ministerio Anglicano, the sum whereof in brief is this, Licet in
una urbe multi Flamines, that though there were many Flamines in one City, yet
was there only one which was called Pontifex or Primus Flaminum; the Pope or
principal of the Flamines; of which kind one for every City, were those whom
our Historians speak of. And for the Archi-Flamines or Proto-Flamines, though
the name occur not in old Roman Writers, yet were there some in power and
Authority above the rest, who were entitled Primi Pontificum (as indeed Coifi
by that name is called in Beda) which is the same in sense with Arch-flamines
although not in sound. All I shall further add is this, that if these 28 Cities
were not all furnished with Bishops in the time of Lucius, for whom it was
impossible to spread his arms and express his power over all the South parts
of the Island; yet may the honor of the work be ascribed to him, because
begun by his encouragement, and perfected by his example; as Romulus is
generally esteemed for the Founder of Rome, although the least part of that
great City was of his Foundation.


Fuller. But, whereas both the Animadvertor and some others conceive their
Answers satisfactory to such Objections raised against this part of the
History; I refer the Reader unto Sr. Henry In his Councels.
Spelman, and to the Archbishop of In his Primord. Eccl. Angl.
Armagh; both as learned and Judicious Antiquaries as ever our Land enjoyed.

These it seems were not satisfied, with such Solutions, as Mr. Mason
produces against those Objections, because (writing later than Mr. Mason) they
in their judgments declare themselves against J. Monmouth herein.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author has not yet done with Lucius. For admitting the story
to be true, he disallowes the turning of the Pagan Temples into Christian
Churches, which he censureth as the putting of new Wine into old Vessels,
which afterward savored of the Cask, Christianity hereby getting a smack of
Heathen ceremonies. But in this point the Primitive Christians were as wise as
our Author, though they were not so nice. Who without fearing any such smack,
accommodated themselves in many ceremonies to the Gentiles, and in some to the
Jews; that being all things to all men, they might gain the more, as in fine
they did: which notwithstanding our Author hereupon infers.


Fuller. I only humbly tendered my weak Opinion herein, that Religion was a
loser by such mixtures. If it finds no welcome in the breast of the
Animadvertor and others, no hurt is done; let it fairly return into his Bosom,
who (it seems) first gave it a being, though I could cite most Pious and
Learned Authors of the same Judgment. But for the present let all the weight
of the guilt light on my self alone.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 13. They had better built new Nests for
the holy Dove, and not have lodged it where Schriech-owls and unclean Birds had
formerly been harbored.] A pretty piece of new Divinity, and such as savours
strongly of the Modern Anabaptist; such as not only does reproach the practice
of most pious Antiquity, but lays a sure ground for the pulling down of all
our Churches (as having been abused to Popish Superstitions in the former
times) if ever that increasing faction should become predominant. What pity is
it that our Author had not lived and preached this Doctrine in King Edwards
time, that the Parochial Churches and Cathedrals being sent after the Abbeys,
new Nests might have been built for the Dove in some tree or other, under the
shade whereof the people might assemble to their devotions: and not new Nests
provided only, bur new feathers also, the vestments prescribed to the Ministers
by the Church of England, being condemned and disallowed by the Puritan party,
because in use formerly with the Priests of the Church of Rome. More of this
stuff, but of a more dangerous consequence to the public peace, we shall see
hereafter.


Fuller. I do not quarrel with the posture of my Nativity, knowing God has
Act. 17.23.
determined the times fore-appointed and the bounds of their Habitation. Nor
would I have my being antedated in the days of K. Edward the sixth, whereby my
Soul should be degraded into a dimmer Light, then what now I live in.

Had I lived in His Reign, I know not what I would have done, seeing one may
be lost in the Labyrinth of his own Heart. But though I know not what I would
have done, I know what I should have done, viz. persuaded, to my power, all
people to be sensible of the vast difference betwixt Heathen-Temples and
Christian-Churches.

The former were the Styes of swine, yea the Dens of Devils, profaned to the
foul Idols of Pagans.

The latter were dedicated to the true God, and the memory of his glorious
Saints, out of zeal, and wel-intended Devotion. And though the same were abused
by superstition, yet the substantial use of them might remain, when their
accidential abuse was removed, and might be continued for God's service without
any Sin; not to say, could not be aliened from it, without some sacrilege.


Dr. Heylyn. We have now done at last with the story of Lucius, and must next
follow our Author unto that of Amphibalus, in prosecution whereof he tells us
of a great slaughter of Christians in or near the City of Litchfield, from
thence so denominated, of which thus says he;

Fol. 19. This relation is favored by the name of Litchfield, which in the
British tongue signifies a Golgotha, or a place bestrewed with skuls.] It Is
true indeed that Litchfield, or Licidfield, as Bedae calls it, is made by
John Rosse to signify Cadaverum Campus, or the field of dead bodies. But that
it does so signify in the British language, I do more then doubt, the
termination of the word being merely Saxon, as in Hefensield, Cock-field,
Camps-field, and many others. As little am I satisfied in the Etymon of the
name of Maidenhead, which he ascribes unto the worshipping of the head of one
of those many Maidens which were martyred with Ursula at Colen, fol. 36. For
which though he cite Camden for his Author (following therein, but not
approving the old Tradition) yet when I find in the same Camden, that this
Town was formerly called Maiden-hith, that anciently there was a ferry near
the place where the Town now stands, and that Hith in the old Saxon tongue,
did signify a Wharf, Haven, or landing place, I have some reason to believe,
that the Town took this name from the Wharf or Ferry belonging at that time to
some neighboring Nunnery, or to some private Maidens dwelling thereabout, who
then received the profits of it. Just so, Queen-Hith in London took that
appellation, because the profits of that Wharf were anciently accounted for,
to the Queens of England; and Maiden-bradly in Wilshire, was so denominated
because belonging to one of the inheretrices of Manasses Basset, a most noble
personage in his time, who founded a House here for Maiden Lepers.


Fuller. As for Litchfield, thereof hereafter. But whether it be Maidenhead,
or Maiden-hith, is not a straw matter to me, who cited the words out of
Cambdens Latin Brittannia: which is more properly Cambden, than the English
translation thereof.


Dr. Heylyn. But to return again to Leitch-field, It must needs seem as strange
to my judicious Reader, that one part of it should be borrowed from the
Britains, and the other from the Saxons; as it seems strange unto our Author,
and that justly too, that Cern in Dorcetshire should anciently be called
Cernel, from the Latin word Cerno, which signifies to see, and the Hebrew
word El signifying God, fol. 67.


Fuller. Nothing more usual, than for the same word to bear parley par pale,
two languages. But such mixtures only are made in such places, where those
two Languages have entered common together.

And this is the reason that disapproveth the probability of Cern-el, because
Hebrew and Latin never incorporated together, Greek, as I may say, being
interposed betwixt them.

But such Conjunctions of two Languages, which, in some sort, indented one
another, are frequent and familiar.

Our Author lately presented us with two half-Greek, half-Latine
Archi-flamens, and Proto-flamens.

He also just now mentioned a word half^French, half Saxon, Camps-field.

Many towns names in England are half Saxons, half British; Up-Avon,
Neather-Avon, two villages in Wilt-shire. Avon being a river in the British
tongue.

To put all out of doubt, the Reader may rely on the judgment of this my
worthy friend, whose Letter I have here caused to be inserted, Mr. Fuller.

As touching the Elymology of the City of Litchfield, I can give you no
satisfactory account; being not well skilled in the Saxon Tongue. But if Mr.
John Rosse has ground for his Campus Cadaverum, I conceive he deduced it from
the British Tongues and Saxon. For in our British language, Llaith signifies
death, as may be seen in several ancient British Authors, as Taliefin and
others. Lleithfa may well bear a place of slaughter as well as lladdfa; the word
lladd in the British is the same with occidere in the Latin, ma and Man,
denotes a place: and ma, being joined with lleith or lladd, the m by the rules
of the British language turns into f as lladdfa lleithfa lladdfaes. Maes is
the ordinary name for a field in our Language, and so the old Saxons, which
were not ignorant of our language might well make use of their own word field
and join it with the British lleith: which in process and corruption of time
came to be Litchfield. You must note that when the Saxons met with our ll, they
wrote and pronounced it always as one single l.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 20. I fear that learned pen has gone
too far, who makes him founder of a Bishopric at York, and styleth him an
Emperor surpassing in all virtue and Christian piety.] The learned pen here
spoken of, is that of judicious Camden, whose character of Constantius Chlorus
our Author in this place will not let pass without some censure. That he did
found (or rather re-found) a Bishopric in the City of ^ork, I am confident
Cambden had not said without very good grounds, though on what grounds he said
it, I am yet to seek. A Bishopric and a Bishop of York we find on good Record
within few years after; Eborius the Bishop of that City subscribing to the
Council of Arles in the time of Constantine, the Son and next successor of
Constantius Chlorus. And that he was a Prince of surpassing virtue, is
generally agreed upon by all Historians, both Pagans and Christians. The
Question then will be only this, Whether he did surpass also in Christian
piety, which our Author will not otherwise grant, but by our Saviors Argument
only, concluding those to be on our part who are not against us; Constantius
doing no other good unto Christianity, but that he did not do it harm. A
censure not agreeable to so good an Emperor, who though he were no
through-paced Christian, yet did he both favor their Religion, and protect
their persons, as Eusebius testifies de vita Constantini, lib. 1. cap. 12. And
not so only, but as our Author himself confesses, he both permitted and
preserved them who would rebuild the decayed Christian Churches. If to preserve
the persons of Christians in the exercise of their Religion, to have them near
unto him in places of greatest trust and eminence, to suffer them to rebuild
their Churches and defend them in it, be not the doing of some good unto
Christianity, more then the doing it no harm, let our Author carry it, and
Cambden bear the blame of his needless Courtship.


Fuller. If at the end of this long Note, the Animadvertor at Last had
demonstrated that Constantius Chlorus was a thorow-paced Christian; the Reader,
and I my self, would not have grudged our attention unto it.

But what is the Total sum of what he says? It amounts to just nothing, only
to show that (which I confessed) he did some good (besides no hurt) to
Christianity. What is this to prove the words of Learned, (but here mistaken)
Mr. Camden. An Emperor surpassing in all Virtues and Christian Piety.

The Animadvertor should first have proved that this Constantius had passed
into Christianity before he was surpassing therein; a thing which He, and all
his Friends, are never able to evidence by any authentic Author.

In a word, As Chlorus or YELLOW (so his Name in Greek) is a Middle color
betwixt White and Black, below the former, and above the latter in Brightness;
So this Emperor, (well answering his name,) was indeed much better than most
Pagans, and yet far short (so far as by any humane Author can be collected) of
a true Christian.


Dr. Heylyn. But this is not the first time, in which our Author has clasht
with Camden, and I see it will not be the last, by that which follows. For
speaking on the by how. Wolves first entered into England, considering that
Merchants would not bring them, and that they could not swim over themselves,
he adds these words, viz.

Fol. 25. Which has prevailed so far with some, as to conceive this now an
Island, originally annexed to the Continent.] It seems that though some so
conceive it, yet our Author does not. And yet he cannot choose but know that
those whom he does pass so slightly over by the name of some (as if not worthy
to be notified by their proper names) are the most eminent and renowned
Antiquaries of these latter times. Amongst which if I reckon Camden for one,
and a chief one too, I should but do him right, and not wrong the rest. Whose
arguments to prove the point; he that lists to see, may find them at large laid
down in his description of Kent; which when our Author can confute (as I doubt
he cannot) he may then slight it over as a thing conceived, and conceived only
by some men not worth the naming. Till then, I shall behold it as a matter not
conceived but proved, and so must he.


Fuller. It seems] multa videntur quae no^ sunt. I am ashamed to return an
answer to this needless and impertinent Note. S. Hierom honored not Cicero
more then I reverence Mr. Camden.


Dr. Heylyn. I should here end this Chapter and this Book together, but that I
find a trifling error not worth our notice, but that I would set all things
right as they come before me; which is the placing of the Emperor Constantine
in the Catalogue of those who commonly pass under the name of the 9 Worthies,
and this says he.


Fuller. Not so. He should have ended this Chapter and Book before, and not
have inserted his last impertinent note. Number Aquila capit muscas?


Dr. Heylyn. Fol. 39. Is more then comes to the proportion of Britain; that
amongst but nine in the whole World, two should prove Natives of this Island,
Constantine and Arthur.] That Arthur goes for one of the Worthies, I shall
easily grant, and I shall grant too, that in the opinion of some writers this
Island gave birth unto another of them, namely Guy of Warwick. His Knight Sir
Guy one of the nine, we touch but by the way, says Warner in his Albions
England.


Fuller. Perchance Guy of Warwick may be made one of the nine English worthies.
But I believe none ever made him one of the NINE GENERAL WORTHYES little known
beyond the Seas, no General [not to say Prince] as the rest of his
Form-fellowes, and famed only for his personal performances.


Dr. Heylyn. But in the common estimate they are reckoned thus; that is to say,
three Jews, 1. Joshua, 2. David, 3. Judas Maccabeus; three Gentiles, 4. Hector
of Troy, 5. Alexander the great, and 6. Julius Caesar; three Christians, 7.
Arthur of Britain, 8. Charlemain of France, and 9. Godfry of Bovillon. But I
condemn my self for mingling this poor piece of Errantry with such serious
matters, though the necessity of following my Leader as he goes may excuse me
in it.


Fuller. The words of the Animadvertor in common estimate intimate, that they
are not constantly so accounted. The seven wise men of Greece are variously
reckoned up, as several Authors fancied them. So also are the nine Worthyes;
and if worth makes a worthy, Constantine deserved a place amongst them, being
in time before any, in valor behind none of the three Christians. Yea as Sapho
is adjected by Le^bia pieriis Sapho soror addita Mu^is, Ausonius.
some to the nine Muses, and made a Tenth; so let there be ten worthyes, rather
than Constantine should be excluded. But enough hereof, Poets and Painters
being the most staple Authors in this point.


THE SECOND BOOK. Of the Conversion of the Saxons, and that which followed
thereupon till the Norman Conquest.
Dr. Heylin. IN order to the Conversion of the Saxons, our Author begins (as he
had done before in that of the Britans) with the unhappy condition of that
People in the state of Gentilism.


Fuller. Here is an intimation, as If I had mistook my Epoches in my Church
History of Britans or Saxons, or both; beginning them too soon or too late. I
avouch it done in due time: and so pass from the Animadvertors snarling to his
biting.


Dr. Heylin. In the description whereof, he omitteth that which was indeed
their greatest unhappiness, that is to say, their barbarous and inhumane
sacrifices of men and women unto two of their Idols. For Camden tells us of
their god called Wooden, Camd. in Brit. fol. 135.
that they used to procure his favor by sacrificing unto him men alive: And I
have read in Verstegan (if my memory fail not) a man inferior to none, in the
Antiquities of this Nation, that at their return from any conquest, they used
to sacrifice the noblest of their Captives to their Idol Thur. In this not much
inferior to the Palestinians, in their sacrifices to Moloch; or to the
Carthaginians, in the like abominable sacrifices to Saturn; or to the
Scythians, in the like to Diana Taurica; Lactant. lib. 16 cap. 21.
or finally, to the Galls, in theirs to Haesus and Teutate^ their own National
Deities. But not to lay at our Authors charge these small sins of Omission, we
must next see whether he be not guilty of some sin of Commission also.


Fuller. See here the signal Charity of the Animadvertor! After he had laid
the charge as heavy as he could, (and heavier than he should) he heartily comes
off, he will not lay to my charge such small faults of Omission.

I was not bound to particularize in all the Saxon prodigious impieties, all
being included in that my general expression, Lib. 2. page 5^
ABOMINABLE (the proper Scripture-word in this case) in the Rites and
Ceremonies of their Adoration.


Dr. Heylin. For making a general muster of the Saxon Gods, and showing how
they were disposed of in relation to the days of the week, he concludes it
thus: Fol. 55. And thus we see the whole week bescattered with Saxon Idols,
whose Pagan gods were the Godfathers of the days, and gave them their names.]
Not the whole week, though the greatest part thereof was thus bescattered.
Sunday and Monday being so called in reference to the Sun and Moon, or else in
correspondence to the names of Dies Solis and Dies Lunae, which they found
given by the Romans at their entrance here. For either the Sun and Moon were
worshipped by the ancient Saxons, and then might think themselves neglected in
having no place assigned them amongst the rest; or else the Saxon Pagan Gods
were not the Godfathers to all the days of the week, as our Author tells us.


Fuller. It is harsh, that I must be indicted to justify every metaphorical
expression; but know, That the word [bescattered] properly imports some empty
intervalls; or naked distances betwixt the things scattered; which otherwise,
would be covered all over, and not be scattered. If therefore two days in the
seven have escaped nomination from Saxon Idols, the week notwithstanding may be
said, bescattered by them.


Dr. Heylin. As much he seems to be mistaken in their god called Woden; of whom
thus he tells us. Fol. 54. Woden, that is wood, fierce, or furious, giving
the denomination to Wednesday, In Brit. fol. 135
or Wodens-day, armed cap a pe with military Coronet on his head, he was the
god of Battle, by whose aid and furtherance, they hoped to obtain Victory;
correspondent to Mars.] But Camden sings another song, telling us that Wooden
was not worshipped for Mars, but Mercury. Above all other gods, says he; they
worshipped Mercury, whom they called Wooden, whose favor they procured by
sacrificing unto him men alive, and to him they consecrated the fourth day of
the week, whereupon we call it at this day Wednesday. Thus also in another
place, Id. in Wiltsh. fol. 241.
Wansdike, in the Saxon tongue called Wodenepoic, that is to say, the Ditch of
Wooden or Mercury, and as it should seem of Woden, that false imagined god and
father of the English Saxons. And herein I shall rather subscribe to Camdens,
than our Authors judgment. For certainly had the Saxons worshipped Wooden as
the god of Battle, or correspondent to Mars, they would have given him the
third day of the week, or the day of Mars, and not the fourth day of the week
or the day of Mercury; as they gave Sunday and Monday unto Sol and Luna, and
Thursday unto Thur, whom they worshipped in the place of Jupiter, ascribing
unto him (as the Greeks and Romans did to Jupiter) the power of bearing rule in
the Air, governing Thunder, Lightnings, Winds, Showers, fair weather, etc. as
Adam Bremensis, a good Writer, does inform us of them. And though it may be
true, which our Author tells us, that by his aid and furtherance they hoped
to obtain Victory, yet this entitleth him not to the place of Mars; as many
victories being gotten by wit and stratagem (the known arts of Mercury) as by
strength and valor.


Fuller. In describing the Saxon Idolatries I followed Verstegan, as the best
in this kind, as who ( Data opera) had written on that subject, and who lately
by the In the last page.
Animadvertor was styled (and that very deservedly) a man inferior to none in
the Antiquities of this Nation.

However, finding a difference betwixt him and Mr. Camden in this particular, I
fairly entered this plain note in the Page ut prius.
margin of my book, So Verstegan page 72. but Camden Brit. page 135. makes him
to be Mercury.

Now either the Animadvertor did not, or did take notice of this marginal note.
If he did not, being there tendered so conspicuously to the Reader, it is high
time for him to leave off writing of books, and turn his pen into prayers;
otherwise, such omissions by those who read unto him, will every day more and
more inevitably betray him to, and involve him in more inconveniences.

If he did take notice of this note (which is most probable, always consulting
my margin, when making for his advantage) he discovered much superfluity; (not
to say of James 1.21.
naughtiness,) Actum agere, that what I had done before, he must do again;
and also find fault with me, who had done it before, in this his unnecessary
Animadversion.

I will only add, that the fierce and furious aspect of Woden, the evidence of
his wild and wood nature (whence He had his Name) better countenanceth his
correspondency with Mars, than Mercury; the latter being concerned to carry a
more meek and mild countenance, as who being of a tamer kind, and acting all by
craft and cunning, did not fright, but flatter deluded people into his
plausible Designs.


Dr. Heylin. But from our Authors failers, in recounting the superstitions of
our Saxon Ancestors, let us next see how he behaves himself in laying down the
story of their conversion. In which, though he ascribe something unto Austin
the Monk, yet he will by no means allow him to be their Apostle: For, fol. 54.
The Papists (says he) commonly call Augustine the English Apostle, how
properly we shall see hereafter. And after, fol. 68. The Papists brag that he
was the Apostle of the English.] In these few words there are two things to be
considered, whether he is called the Apostle of the English by the Papists
only; and secondly, whether he were not so, both in fact and title. Not called
so by the Papists only, I am sure of that; but called so commonly by as good
Protestants as our Author himself. Thus Camden, Camd. Brit. fol. 136.
a right English Protestant, After this Augustine, whom commonly they call the
Apostle of the English men, being sent hither by Gregory the Great, having
abolished these monstrous abominations of Heathenish impiety, with most happy
success, planting Christ in their hearts, converted them to the Christian
faith. Nor does he speak this only in the voice of the common people, Id. in
Worcest. fol. 578.
but in another place more plainly, as his own opinion. A place there is about
this shire called Austins Oak, at which Augustine the Apostle of the English
men, and the Bishops of Britain met, etc.

Dr. Philemon Holland of Coventry, a good Protestant also, making an Index unto
Camden, speaks the self same language; Augustine the Apostle of the English;
which is short, but full. Gabriel Richardson of Brazen-Nose, Richardsons State
of Europe lib. 3.
an honest Protestant, in his laborious piece called the State of Europe,
tells us of Canterbury, that the Archbishops See was founded by King
Ethelbert in the person of St. Austin the Apostle of the English. More of this
kind might be produced, were it not given us for a Rule in the holy Scripture,
Ex ore duorum testium vel trium, that two or three witnesses were sufficient to
confirm a truth.

The next thing here to be considered is, whether Austin were not the Apostle
of the English, both in fact and title. In order whereunto, we must first take
notice, that the word being merely Greek, does signify in its natural and
original sense a Messenger, a Legate, an Ambassador, from whom, to whomsoever
sent; and though appropriated to twelve as by way of excellence, yet not
improperly communicated unto others in succeeding times, with reference to the
Nations whom they had converted. So Boniface an English man the first
Archbishop of Ments, is called by Dr. Holland, (as by many others) the Apostle
of Germany; Palladius styled by Camden, Camd in Scotland, fol. 45.
the Apostle of the Scottish Nation; and the Irish would not think themselves
to be fairly dealt with, if their St. Patrick should not be honored with that
Title also. In this sense Austin may be called, and that not improperly, the
Apostle of the English Nation; though a derivative Apostle, an Apostle (as our
Author calls him in the way of scorn, fol. 68.) at the second hand, though
others propagated the Gospel further than he lived to do. It was enough to
entitle him to this Apostleship, that be first publicly preached the Gospel,
and brought the glad Tiding of Salvation amongst the English, though he neither
converted all the Nation, nor traveled into all parts of the Land to attempt
the same. Neither St. Paul could be entitled the Apostle of the Gentiles, St.
Thomas of the Indians, nor St. Matthew of the Ethiopians; if it were
necessarily required to their Apostleships, that all the Nations of the Indians
must be converted by the one, or the vast Countries of the Ethiopians must be
converted by the other; of finally, if St. Paul, to save them a labor, must
have reduced all the Gentiles to the faith of Christ. And this the Ambassadors
for the King of England at the council of Basil, understood right well, when
they contended for precedence with those of Castile. For when the Castilians
had objected, that although Joseph of Arimathea had preached in England, it was
but in a corner thereof, the grand body of Britain remaining Pagan many hundred
years after: the English Ambassadors wisely answered, that the Allegation was
impertinent to the present purpose, it being not the Universality, but the
first Preaching of the Christian Faith which gained the name of an Apostle;
there being no Disciple (as they truly urged it) that ever converted a Kingdom
totally and entirely to Christianity, for which consult our very Author, Lib.
4.181.

And yet ^he pains in preaching of Austin were not so limited and restrained to
one Kingdom only, but that he travailed into most parts of the Saxon
Heptarchy, preaching the Gospel in all places to which the spirit did conduct
him, or his b^sinesse lead him. Our Author grants him to have converted the
Kingdom of Kent, fol. 7. and to have taken care for planting the Gospel in the
Kingdom of the East Saxons, and for that end ordaining Mellitus the first
Bishop of London fol. 67. From hence he carries him to a conference with the
British Bishops in the Country of the Wiccians (now Worcestershire) then part
of the Kingdom of Mercia, fol. 60. From thence to Richmondshire in the Kingdom
of Northumberland, where he is said to have baptized above ten thousand in one
day, fol. 66. And finally, to Cern in Dorsetshire, part of the Kingdom of the
West Saxons, where he destroyed the Idol of Heal of Aesculapius. By which we
see, that he visited no fewer than five of the seven Kingdoms in the Saxon
Heptarchie, not only doing in each of them that particular work which he went
about, but preaching in all fit places as he passed along. And this considered
as it ought, with reference to the distance of those several places to which
our very Author brings him, gives him just title to that honor which our
Author would so willingly deprive him of, when telling us how the Papists
called him the English Apostle, he adds these words, how properly (so called)
we shall see hereafter.


Fuller. The Animadvertor engages deeper in this Controversy, than in my mind
it deserves. To sta^e the difference truly, whether Augustine properly is
called the Apostle of the English? we must explain two Terms, Apostle and
English.

Waving the general notation of Apostle for no more than a Messenger; In the
new Testament it imports a person immediately sent by Christ, to preach
people into salvation: It was essential to their constitution, either to have
accompanied Christ in the flesh, a qualification required by St. Acts 1.21.
Peter in such Elects, who should supply the vacancy of Judas, or at the least
that they should see Christ incarnate, either humbled or glorified; the latter
favor being peculiarly afford^d to St. Paul: 1 Corinthians. 9.1.
Am I not an Apostle, Am I not free, have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord?
These I may call primitive Apostles; and none will entitle Augustine the Monk,
to be one of their order. A second sort I call derivative Apostles, a Term,
which though the Animadvertor says is used by me in the way of scorn, I
protest it in sober seriousness, God has not endowed me to make a more proper
Expression, signifying such as mediatly, and (as I say) at the second hand, and
sent by some eminent servants of God to convert Pagans to Christianity.

English may be taken in a threefold sense. First, for all the Nation, (an
Indefinite, tantamounting to an universal) and this is the most proper sense of
the word. Secondly, for the greater part of the Nation, which in common
discourse denominates the whole. Thirdly, for some part of the nation, which
may be made good by a Synecdoche, especially justified, when it is a chief and
first (though least) part thereof, which ((...) or) per eminentiam, takes the
name of the whole.


My clear sense is, Augustine the Monk may be called a derivative Apostle of
the English in the last acception of the word, and so Mr. Camden, Mr.
Richardson, Mr. Holland, and I doubt not but many more have and may entitle him.

The Animadvertor measures the progress of Augustine with too extensive
dimensions, making him a greater English Travailer than ever he was; Kent was
generally the Sphere he moved in, and from thence he was Itinerant to Cerne in
Dorsetshire, the boundary of his Western travail: No personal atchievments by
him North of Thames, seeing that grave baptization (if in Yorkshire) was surely
done by Paulinus. As for the interview and conference betwixt him and the
British Bishops in Worcestershire (though some probably might be converted in
his passage thither, and return thence) no great advantage, but detriment to
Christianity was thereby occasioned, those parts generally remaining in
Paganism.

And here I will tender the Reader another distinction of Apostles, submitting
it to his judgment, They were either of God alone, Man alone, God and Man
together.

Of God alone, Gal. 1.5.
as St. Paul (and the other twelve) an Apostle not of Man, neither by man, but
by Jesus Christ and God the Father, who raised him from the dead.

Secondly, of Man alone, being such as the false Apostles amongst the
Corinthians, and else where, whose Commission was made and drawn up by
themselves, sealed and attested by some of their Factious admirers.

Thirdly, of God and Man, and such an Apostle was Augustine sent, as I may say,
by God and Gregory to the English Nation. But let him not ingrosse the name to
himself, but admit also as his partners therein, 1 Mellitus, 2 Paulinus, and
Aidan, 3 Felix, 4 Birinus, 5 Chad, 6 Wilfrid, Apostles also, because sent to,
and convertors of the, 1 East Saxons, 2 Northumbrians, 3 East Angles, 4 West, 5
Mercians, 6 South Saxons.


Dr. Heylin. I have spent more time than I intended in defense of this Title,
and therefore think it seasonable to proceed from the Person to his Acts. Of
which the first we meet with is, the fixing of the Archiepiscopal See at
Canterbury, for which our Author, amongst many other Reasons, gives us this for
one, viz. That London, by reason of the receipt thereof was likely to prove the
residing place for the English Monarch, and it was probable that the
Archiepiscopal dignity would there be eclipst, and outshined by the Regal
Diadem.] But here I must needs ask our Author, whether he thinks, that this was
really one of those many motives which occasioned Austin to resolve of
Canterbury for his Seat of Residence? If yea, then must our Author grant him to
be endued with the Spirit of Prophecy, which I think he will not; if not, then
a contingency so remote could not be taken by him into consideration, as indeed
it was not. For first, London at that time, was the chief City of the Kingdom
of East-sex, one of the weakest of the seven, and so not likely to prevail over
all the rest. Secondly, if any of the greater Kingdoms of Mercia, West-sex, or
Northumberland, should in fine prevail, it was not probable that the Conquerors
would remove the Seat Royal from their own Dominions into any of the conquered
Countries. And thirdly, though the Kings of the West Saxons, who prevailed at
last, and became Monarchs of the whole, settled the Royal Seat in London, yet
was it not till Winchester, their own Regal City, was destroyed by fire, and
made unable to receive them.


Fuller. Other Reasons are alleged by me, why Austin chose Canterbury rather
than London for his Archiepiscopal See. These Arguments Iuncta juvant, and will
hold in the Sheaff, though a single Arrow should be broken, I mean, though this
one Reason (alleged by me) were disproved.

Austin needed no prophetical Inspiration, whilst prudential prevision could
sufficiently suggest unto him, that if ever the Saxon-Heptarchy terminated
(which was most probable) in a Monarchy, London might be presumed the principal
place of the Royal Residence, as most convenient for Trading, and commodious
for situation: I say London, an Infant in the time of Tacitus, a Stripling in
the time of Austin, a Man before the Conquest, and grown a Giant in our days.


Dr Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 60. The first cast of his Office was to
call a Council for the Saxon and British Bishops to come together in the
consines of the Wiccians and West Saxons.] Our Author places this meeting
within few lines after, in the confines of Worcester and Herefordshire, and
more rightly there; Worcestershire, or the Country of the Wiccii confining on
the County of Hereford, but bordering in no place on the Kingdom of West-sex,
the whole County of Gloucester being interposed. So that our Author being
mistaken in the place of the meeting, it is no wonder if he stumble at the
Monuments and Records thereof. Of one of which he tells us.


Fuller Here is more than an Insinuation, as if I in designing the Place of
this Meeting, had written something contrary to Truth, and also to my Self, who
indeed have exactly followed the best Authors in the Position thereof. Bid
fixes it [Book 2. Chap. 2.] in confinio Wicciorum and Occidentalium-Saxonum in
the confines of Worcestershire Men and West Saxons; and H. Huntington has the
same words, lib. 3. page 323.

Mr. Camden makes the Oak under which they met, in the borders of Worcester
and Herefordshire; and Sir Henry Spelman does concur with him therein.



If therefore the Interposition of Glocestershire distanceth Worcestershire
from confining on the West Saxons, the Animadvertor ought to have vented his
displeasure not on Me, but on Bid, and Huntington, whose words I exactly
translated.

May the Reader be pleased to take notice, that Glocestershire, a limitary
County, did in that Age belong to three Dominions: That West of Severn (now the
Forest of Dean) to the Britans or Welsh; the East part thereof, (chiefly
consisting of Cotswold) to the Kingdom of Mercia; and the middle of that
County, (along the East of Severn) to the West Saxons, as I have seen in an
exquisite Map of the Heptarchy; and this I tender as the most probable
Expedient to reconcile learned Authors amongst themselves, and all to the
Truth, in bringing Worcestershire and West Saxons together. Thus being critical
in stating the Place, and laying the Scene, I hope I shall be the better
believed in relating the Acts of this Conference.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 61. That we can part with it without any
loss to our selves, and therefore bids it to make shift for its own
Authenticalnesse, fol. 60. The Record slighted thus, is a Memorial of the
Answer of the Abbot of Bancor, to Archbishop Austins proposition, communicated
by Peter Moston a Welsh Gentleman, to that learned and industrious Antiquary
Sir Henry Spelman, and by him placed in his collection of the British and Saxon
Councels: Which honor he had never given it, had he not conceived it worthy to
deserve that place* nor had the Papists used such violence to wrest it from us,
without the hope of gaining some what to themselves.


Fuller. Had I slighted that Record, I would not have took the pains to have
exemplyfied it in British and English, and procured a Prime Antiquary of the
Welsh to correct it; I have given the true Valuation thereunto, esteeming it as
highly, as Doctor Hammond has done, thus writing thereof in his Account of H.
T. his Appendix to the Manual of Controversy concerning the Abbot of Bangors
Answer to Augustine, Page 168.

In case this one Testimony should be demonstrated to be a Simple Imposture, we
can unconcernedly and easily part with it, standing in no need of this
Auxiliary: And not long after, The acquisitions of this Author [ H.T.] hereby,
and proportionably out losses must be so unconsiderable.

For the rest I refer my self to my Church History in this particular passage,
and stand ready to justify the same, as truly and cautiously written:


Dr. Heylin. But to proceed, this conference being ended without success, there
followed not long after the great slaughter of the Monks of Bancor, for which
our Author in a merrier humor than becomes the sadness of the matter, or the
gravity of an Ecclesiastical History, has caused Austin to be indicted,
impanelling a Jury, and producing his evidence.


Fuller. I am sensible of no mis-becoming mirth or levity therein. The
impanelling of a Jury is one of the most solemn and serious of all the
proceedings in our Law; I preferred this method as the clearest to present all
passages to the fancy, and fittest to fix the same in the memory of the Reader.


Dr. Heylin. Amongst which Matthew Parker, the learned Archbishop of
Canterbury, and John Jewel, the renowned Bishop of Salisbury, must be rejected
by the Jury as incompetent witnesses; partly because of their known opposition
to the Romish Church; and partly because of their modern writing, almost a
thousand years after the matter in fact, fol. 64. And all this done to add the
greater honor to Mr. Fox, as Modern as either of the two, and as averse as
either of them from the Church of Rome. But Mr. Fox was Mr. Fox, no friend unto
the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, whereas the other two were
Bishops and great sticklers for them. This makes our Author magnify Fox for
his moderation, whose moderate testimony (says he) much moved the whole Court;
and as much to condemn the others for the sharpness of their expressions
against Austin, (whom our Author himself reproacheth often for his pride and
haughtiness, fol. 62.) which made them of less credit amongst the Jury. A
thread of which fine spinning we shall find frequently interwoven in the whole
web of this History; and toward the latter end thereof, not a few whole pieces
made of no better yarn. And let the Reader take this with him for a taste of
our Authors good affections to the several parties, that it is bare M. Parker
and plain Bishop Jewel, without welt or guard, but reverent Mr. Fox by all
means; and so let him pass. And let us pass also to the residue of the Acts
of Austin.


Fuller. 1. I did not expect that the Animadvertor, being of Magdalens in
Oxford, would have been offended to have heard his Collegiate (Mr. Fox) to be
commended.

2. The testimonies of Archbishop Parker and Bishop Jewel are (to hold the
Balance indifferently) the less valued, Because in some sort they were
parties, as who (in their Writings) had engaged themselves in this present
Controversy, whilst Mr. Fox stands Neu^er as to this particular Controversy.

3. Though the Animadvertor be pleased to entitle him noe friend to the Rites
and Ceremonies of the Church of England, give me leave to add, and he was no
fierce foe against them; But Mr. Fox was Mr. Fox, and Dr. Heylin is Dr. Heylin.

4. As Mr. Fox has now the casual favor of my Pen to be epithited Reverent,
so afterward without welt or guard, he is plainly called Church Hist. Book 9.
page 187. parag. 63
John Fox. The Animadvertor in this his slight Note, reaping what was not
purposely sown, will find little food in what He reaps.

Lastly, Bishop Jewel has his large and due character of commendation (with
all honorable Additions with advantage) in due Lib 9 page 101 and often before.
place: So also has Archbishop Parker, on the same token, that in my History
of Page 14.
Cambridge, I clear him from the scandalous insinuation of Bryan Twine; Si
illis standum sit, etc. suggesting some unworthy suspicions, as if he had
falsified Matthew Paris in his Edition thereof.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 66. Who all this while was very
industrious, and no less successful in converting the Saxons to the Christian
faith: Insomuch that a certain Author reports, how in the River Swale near
Richmond in Yorkshire, he in one day baptized above ten thousand.] The certain
Author whom he means, is an old fragment of a namelesse Author, cited by
Camden, fol. 136. who tells the story otherwise than our Anthor does: For
though the Fragment tell us, that the River was called Swale, yet that it was
the River Swale near Richmond in Yorkshire, is the addition of our Author. That
there is a River of that name near Richmond is affirmed by Camden, Camden in
Richmondshire, fol. 720.
who withal tells us, That it was reputed very sacred amongst the ancient
English, for that in it, when the English-Saxons first embraced Christianity,
there were in one day baptized with festival joy by Paulinus the Archbishop of
York, above ten thousand Men besides Women and little Children. Of Austins
baptizing in this River, not one word says he. Neither does Beda touch upon
it, as certainly he would have done, had there been ground for it. And
therefore if I may have leave to venture my opinion, I shall concur with the
old fragment as to the name of the River, and yet not carry Austin out of Kent,
and much less into Richmondshire to perform that office. For when we find in
Camden that the Medway falling into the Thames, Camden in Kent, fol. 333.
is divided by the Isle of Sheppey into two great branches, of which the one is
called East Swale, the other West-Swale, I see no reason why we should look any
where else for that River Swale mentioned in the old fragment, which before we
spoke of. But herein I must submit my self to more able judgments. The place
agreed on, we should next inquire into the numbers, but that our Author seems
to grant as much as the fragment craveth.


Fuller. I could heartily wish that all the Animadvertors Book had consisted of
such matter, then had it been greater though less, I mean bigger in benefit,
though smaller in Bulk, and more instructive to the Reader thereof. I did not
before take notice of either East or West-Swale in Kent, and now prosesse my
self the Animadvertors Convert in this point, agreeing with him, that this
grand-Baptizing (if done by St. Austin) was done in the place by him specified.

But this still does more and more confirm me in my judgment, that Austin
advanced never into Yorkshire, and that the conversion of the Northumbrians was
the work of Paulinus and others.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 66. If so many were baptized in one day,
it appears plainly, that in that age the Administration of that Sacrament was
not loaded with those superstitious Ceremonies, as essential thereunto, of
crossing, spittle, Oil, Cream, Salt, and such like Trinkets.] Our Author here
reckons the sign of the Cross in Baptism amongst the vain trinkets, and
superstitious Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, and thereby utterly condemns
the Church of England, which does not only require it in her Rubricks, but
also pleads for it in her Canons. Not as essential to that Sacrament (the
Papists not making Spittle, Oil, Cream, Salt, etc. to be essential thereunto,
as our Author says) but only for a sign significative, in token that the
party signed shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified,
Form of Baptism.
and manfully to fight under his Banner, against sin, the world, and the Devil,
and to continue Christ's faithful soldier and servant unto his lives end. A
Ceremony not so new as to be brought within the compass of Popish Trinkets,
though by them abused, For when the point was agitated in the Conference at
Hampton Court, Conference page 7.
and that it was affirmed by some of the Bishops, that the Cross in Baptism
was used in the time of Constantine; Dr. Reynolds, the most able man of the
opposite party, who had before acknowledged it to have been in use in other
cases, from the very times of the Apostles, had not one word to say against it.
And to say truth, no man of modesty and learning, could have spoke against it,
when it was proved so clearly by Dr. Andrews then Dean of Westminster out of
Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin, (each of which died long time before Constantines
birth) to have been used in immortali Lavacro, in that blessed Sacrament. That
good old saying of Tertullian, Caro signetur, ut anima muniatur, may serve once
for all. And therefore when our Author tells us in the following words, that
in that age nothing was used with Baptism, but Baptism, it must be considered
as a smack of that old leaven which more and more will sour the lump of his
whole discourse. We have already had a taste of it in the very first Book, we
find a continuance of it here, and we shall see more of it hereafter; our
Author not being coy in showing his good affections not only to the persons of
the Non-conformists, but their inconformity; not to the men only, but their
Doctrines and Opinions also. And this is that which we must trust to in the
whole course of this History.


Fuller. This Objection has been answered at large in the Introduction, and
here I intend no repetition, only desiring the Reader to take notice of those
my words, as ESSENTIAL thereunto.

Let me add that a Deuteronomy. 27.17.
Curse is pronounced on those who remove the Landmarks, and it falls most
heavy on them who remove the limits in Gods worship, (as being Boundaries of
highest Consequence,) turn MAY into MUST, convenient into necessary, Ornamental
into Essential.

I have as high an Esteem for the Cross in Baptism as the Animadvertor
Himself, so long as it observes the due distance of an Ancient and Significant
Ceremony, and intrudes not it self as Essential. A Chain of Gold is an eminent
Ornament about the Neck, but it may be drawn so close, as to choke and strangle
the wearer thereof. And in like manner Ceremonies, though decent and useful,
when pretending to Essentiality, become (as Luther says) Carnificinae
Conscientiae, and therefore justly may we beware thereof.


Dr. Heylin. Having now done with the Acts of Austin, we shall not keep our
selves to so continued a discourse as before we did, but take our Authors Text
by piecemeal, as it comes before us, and making such Animadversions on the
same, as may best serve to rectify the story and maintain the truth, as
namely, Fol. 65. Thus the Italian, Spanish, and French, Daughters or Neeces to
the Latin, are generated from the corruption thereof.] This is (I grant) the
common and received opinion; but yet, me thinks, our Author who loves
singularities, should not vouchsafe to travel on the public Road.


Fuller. In my passage to heaven, I desire to go in the narrow path, and
decline the broad way which leads to destruction: Matthew 7.14.
But on earth I love to travel the common and beaten road, as easiest to find,
and wherein (if wrong, or at a loss,) one may soonest find company to guide
and direct him.

If I should travel over the Animadvertors several at Laceys-Court, I have
cause to suspect he would sue me for pedibus ambulando; And it is hard, if also
he will not let me go (without carping at me) in the highway or public road.

I build nothing on the highway (so to trespass upon the Lord of the Soil)
but only peaceably pass along it: I mean, I make no inferences or deductions
from this received opinion, I derive no consequence thence. All that I do, is
to gain just advantage thereby to honor the Welsh tongue, by showing that it
is no Daughter or Niece (like the Italians, Spanish, and French) but a Mother
and original Language, and might justly have expected thanks rather than
censure, from the Animadvertor for my pains, seeing he delights to derive
himself from British extraction.


Dr. Heylin. For in my mind it is affirmed with better reason by our learned
Brerewood, That those tongues have not sprung from the corruption of the
Latin, ^^^^^wood (...). cap V.
by the inundation and mixture of barbarous people in those Provinces, but from
the first imperfect impression and receiving of it in those foreign Countries.
For the Latin tongue was never so generally received in any of the conquered
Provinces out of Italy, as to be spoken ordinarily by the common people; the
Gentry and Nobility might be perfect in it, for the better dispatch of their
Affairs with the Roman Magistrates, who had the Government and Lieutenancy in
their several Countries. And some taste of it might be found with the Vulgar
also, who having continual intercourse with the Roman Soldiers, and some
recourse for Trade to the Roman Colonies, could not but get a smattering of the
Latin tongue. Just so the Gentry and Nobility both in Wales and Ireland, are
trained up for the same reasons in the English tongue; which notwithstanding
could never get the mastery of the natural Languages, or gain much ground on
those of inferior quality. Secondly, had these National Languages proceeded
from the depravation of the Latin tongue, by the mixture of the barbarous
Nations, it must needs follow, that the Italian had not now been the language
of all people in Italy, nor the French of all the Nations which inhabit France:
and sic de caeteris. My reason is, because the Heruli, being settled in those
parts, which we now call Piedmont, the Longobards more toward the East, the
Goths about the middle parts, the Saracens and Greeks in the Realm of Naples,
there must needs be as many distinct Languages in that one Continent, as there
were barbarous Nations planted in it, or at the least such different Dialects,
as could be scarce intelligible unto one another. Whereas it is certainly and
most plainly known, that there is only one Language spoken in all that
Country, equally understood by all, without so much as any sensible difference
in pronunciation; more than is usual in all places between the Country
Villages and the neighboring Citizens. The like may be affirmed of the ancient
Gallia, planted on the East Side of the Loyre by the Burgundians; on the
West Side of that River, and toward the Mediterranean, the Pyrenies and the
Aquitan Ocean by the Gothish Nations, in most other parts of it by the Franks;
and yet all speaking (with very little difference) the same one Language, which
from the most predominant People we now call the French. More to this purpose
might be said, were not this sufficient.


Fuller. In this my Expression, that the Italian, Spanish, and French, are I
request the Reader to consult my words, as rendered by the Animadvertor, in the
formar paragraph.
Generated from the Corruption of the Latin, the Animadvertor lays not so
much weight on the term GENERATED, as on the word CORRUPTION; whereas indeed
whatsoever is Generated, must be by the Corruption [in some kinde] of that
whereof it is begotten.

Corruption imports (as current in common discourse) the abasing of a thing
from the purity thereof: Now it is all one in Effect, and equally does my work,
to dignifie the British as an Original, above those three Languages, if they
came from the imperfect Impression or Reception of the Latin, which may be
reduced to the Corruption thereof. Thus the Siboleth of the Judges 12.6.
Ephraimites, may in proprieiy of phrase, be said to have had its rise and
being from the Corruption [ viz. natural mispronunciation] of the Hebrew word
Shiboleth. As for the Animadvertors long discourse of the irruption of
Barbarous, I will return an answer when at better leisure, beholding my self as
utterly unconcerned therein.

Let me ad a passage from the mouth of a person present thereat: Bishop
Williams Lord Keeper could speak the Spanish very well; but knowing how much it
concerned a Minister of State to be perfect Master of his Tongue, declined it
in all Negotiations, Now Gondomar in a State-passage, desired Him to speak
Spanish, and on the Bishops refusal thereof, My Lord (said the Don) do but
spoil your good, turning it into scurvy Latin, and it will make as good Spanish
as any in the World. It seems he was of my Mind in this present Controversy.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Ibid. The Hebrew the common Tongue of the
whole world, before it was enclosed (that is to say, divided) into several
Languages.] An Opinion as common as the other, and as weakly grounded, such as
I marvel at in our Author, who having traveld over all the Holy Land, should
have been better studied in the true nature and original of the Holy-Tongue.


Fuller. It is strongly grounded on convincing arguments, as God willing shall
soon appear.

The Animadvertors marvelling why I am no better studied in the nature and
original of the Hebrew Tongue, who (as he says) have traveled over the
Holy Land, moves me more to admire, that he himself should be so utterly
ignorant in the Brasilian, Mexican, Ethiopian, Persian, Indian, and Tartarian
Tongues; but especially in the China language, one letter whereof he did never
understand, although he has written a general Geographie of the whole world.


Dr. Heylin. Nor is it the opinion only, that this Tongue was spoken
universally before the Flood, and even in Paradise it self in the state of
Innocence, but that it shall be spoken in the Celestial Paradise, the language
of the Saints in glory.


Fuller. I will not engage my self in such a point of mere curiosity; yet is it
not improbable, that it might be spoken in Paradise, seeing the word Paradise,
and (...) in Greek, is borrowed, as Critics confess, from (...) the Hebrew
word. Besides, it is not probable that Adam lost his Language with his
Innocence; and that he sp^ke Hebrew after his fall, shall immediately be proved.

Less will I trouble my self what Language the glorified Saints shall speak in
Heaven, though I am sure that Halaluijah, praise ye the Lord, is pure Hebrew.
When people report unto us improbable passages from forain far distant
Countries, we commonly return, That it is better to believe them, than to go
thither to confute them. But if any have over confidently affirmed, that the
Saints in glory shall speak Hebrew, let us rather labor to go thither to
confute them, than here to believe them. Mean time let us here take heed of the
malicious language of Detraction against our Brethren, and of scurrilous and
profane Language, whereby Piety may be dishonored.


Dr. Heylin. Insomuch that some good women of my old acquaintance, were once
very eagerly bent to learn this Language, for fear (as I conceive) they should
not chat in handsomely when they came to heaven.


Fuller. The Doctors Book bears the title of NECESSARY Animadversions; But if
this be one, let it even serve the Reader for his NECESSARY use.

Indeed I have read of Cato, who having heard some Philosophers maintain that
the Heathen gods spoke Greek in Heaven, being past sixty years old, he began
to learn the Greek, that after death he might the better converse with them; a
project and practice proportionable enough to Pagan principles: The analogy
whereof is too applyable to some profane mouths of our age, who by execrable
oaths and Curses practice aforehand to blaspheme, rendering themselves (without
their serious and seasonable repentance) in a nearer capacity to discourse with
the Devils and Damned in Hell. But of chatting of Hebrew in Heaven, this is the
first, and I hope it shall be the last time I shall meet with the expression.


Dr. Heylin. Now for the ground thereof, it is no other than an old Jewish
Tradition, importing, that this being the common Language of all people before
the Flood, was afterward appropriated unto Phaleg (the son of Heber) and to
his Posterity, because not present with the rest at the bullding of Babel, and
consequently not within the curse of confounded Languages. Heylins Cosmog. page
17.
But against this it is disputed; first that it is but a Tradition, and
therefore of no sure foundation to build upon.


Fuller. Before we come to the serious examination of the point in hand, I
would sain be satisfied what means this marginal note, ( Heylins Cosmographie,
page 19.) What? Does he allege himself to prove his own opinion; my bad
Heraldry was never guilty of such a fault, metal upon metal.

Now that the Hebrew was the common Tongue of the world, before the Confusion
at Babel, is more than a mere Tradition, being back^ with many Authorities and
unanswerable Arguments.

Of Authorities, we begin with St. Hierom, one who is many Authors in this
Point (because of his great and general skill in Languages) and who in his
Comment on Zephany, chapt. 3.18. affirms, Linguam Hebraicam omnium Linguarum
esse Matricem, that the Hebrew is the Mother of all Languages. St. Augustine,
lib. 10. cap. 1 de Civitate Dei, Quae prius humano generi non immerito creditur
esse communis, ideo deinceps Hebreae est nuncupata.

To these I will add a Jury of public Professors, all of Eminent note, since
the reviving of Languages in the Western world. 1. Mercerus, Professor
Parisiensis Regis, in Genesis 11. 1. 2. D. Pareus, Prof. Heidelberg. in eundum
locum. 3. Rivetus, Prof. Leiden. Isay c. 4. 4. Crinesius, Prof. Aldorphini
Noricor. de confusione Linguarum, page 4.17. 5. Ioh. Buxtorfius senior, in
Epist. ded. Thesauri Grammat. 6. Ioh. Buxtorfius junior, Prof. Basil. de
origin Primigeniae Lingua, in 410. 7. Glassius, Prof. Ienae, lib. 4. tract. 3.
de nomine proprio, page 775. 8. Polyander, Prof. Leid. Orat. 18. in laudem
linguae Hebraae, page 296, 297. 9. Tremellius, Profess. Heb. Linguae,
Cantabrigia. 10. Fr. Iunius, Prof. Heidelberg. in Genesis 11.1. Urbis iisdem, etc.
11. Whitakerus, Prof. Cantab. Controv. 1. quaest: 2. de script. 12. Christ. For
the elder Buckstors and Beckman, I am as certain they were, as uncertain were,
public Professors.
Beckman, de prop. voc. significatione, page 30.


These Authorities are seconded with convincing Arguments. Not to insist on
some Ruins and Relics of Hebrew, scattered in all ancient Languages (and
therefore Io. Scaliger has his last (as surest) recourse to it in his Quest
after the originaiion of Words) Names imposed on Persons before the Confusion
of Tongues, are by the Spirit in Scripture (the best Interpreter) made to speak
pure Hebrew.

Not to instance in Adam, notoriously known for red Earth, we take notice of,
1. Eve Gen 3.20.
or Chavah, so called by her husband, Because she was the Mother of all living,
and there is life enough in her Name to justify it. 2. Cain Genesis 4.1.
, so called by his Mother, rejoicing that she had gotten a Man, and the word
signifies a Possession, though therein She (with many other parents, abused by
their own over-affection) promised her self more happiness than was performed.
3. SETH Genesis 4 25.
, so named by his mother, for God (said she) has APPOINTED me another seed,
etc. and signifies one put, placed, or constituted. 4. Noah Genesis 5.24.
, so named by his Father, because this son (said he) shall comfort us, etc. as
the word does import. 5. Peleg Genesis 10 25.
, the son of Heber, may be presumed born at or immediately after the divisions
of the World into Languages, and Colonies, and brooks division in his name.


It is not to be expected that all the whole sentence (spoken by their parents)
should be completely contained in their name, but only that the most
operative, emphatical, and expressive word, should appear therein.

I am not ignorant that Goropius Becanus in his Book, which is rather smiled at
for the wit, than approved for the judgment therein, deriveth all words from
the German or Dutch Tongue. An handsome and pretty Essay, but I believe that the
Animadvertor is not of his opinion.

It is one thing here and there to take a name, and to make it countenance such
a sense; and another thing to charge through and through, so as all names may
be demonstrated Hebrew in persons born before the confusion of Babel.

How vain would He prove himself, who from the name of AHIMAN Numb. 13 22.
(one of the giant sons of Anak) and from some correspondency of height in our
Language, would thence infer, that English was the ancient Tongue spoken in the
Land of Canaan.

But I have stayed too long on this discourse, and refer the rest unto Doctor
Brian Walton, who in his Preface unto the last and very laborious and judicious
Edition of the Hebrew and many-languag'd Bible, has no less learnedly than
copiously handled this Subject.


Dr. Heylin. And secondly, that it is such a Tradition, as holds no good
coherence with the truth of Story, it being a most clear and demonstrative
truth, that the Hebrew tongue was not the Language which Abraham brought with
him out of Chaldea and Mesopotamia, but that which he found spoken in the Land
of Canaan at his coming thither, to which both he and his posterity did conform
themselves. Or had it been the Language of Heber, as they say it was, (but most
undoubtedly was not) yet, thirdly, had this been a privilege conferred on
Heber, that he and his posterity should speak the Original Language without
alteration or corruption, it must have been extended to all those of the house
of Iocktan, which descend from him; as also to the house of Laban in
Padan-Aram, and to the Moabites, and the Ammonites, as the seed of Lot; and
finally to the Madianites, Ishmaelites, and Idumaeans, descended of Abraham and
Esau; and not be limited and confined only to the House of Jacob. Now that the
language which afterward was and still is called by the name of the Hebrew,
was spoken vulgarly in the Land of Canaan before the coming of Abraham thither,
is not affirmed by Brerewood only, but by Scaliger, Grotius, Vossius,
Bochartus, (all of them men of great renown for their learned studies) and by
many others of this age. By most of which it is affirmed also, that the name of
Hebrews was given unto them by the people of Canaan, not in regard of their
descent from Heber the father of Phaleg, but from Abraham's passing over the
River Euphrates, when he came out of Chaldaea with his Family to dwell amongst
them; that name in the Canaanitish language signifying as much as trajiciens or
transfluvialis; and therefore not unfitly given by them to Abraham at his first
coming thi^her. And if the Hebrew (as we now call it) was that Holy Language
which was spoken in Paradise, continued by the Patriarchs before the Flood, and
after to the building of Babel; it must needs seem infinitely strange, that it
should be reserved only amongst the Canaanites, accursed in the person of
Canaan (their common Parent) by his Grandfather Noah, and so abominated by God
for their filthy wickednesses, that he resolved to spew them out of their
Native Country, as in fine he did. Or if Abraham brought it with him also, when
he came into the Land of Canaan, he must needs leave it behind him also
amongst the Chaldees, where he was born, and where his Ancestors had dwelt
before their removal unto Haran. And yet we know that the Hebrew Tongue was so
different from the Chaldean, that when the Jews returned from the Captivity of
Babylon, where they had been accustomed to, and bred up for the most part in
the Chaldean Language, they could not understand the very words of the Hebrew
Text without an Interpreter, as is apparent in the eighth chapter of Nehemiah,
verse. 7.8. But of this Argument enough, let us now go forward.


Fuller. There be Three distinct Questions, which the Animadvertor does
purposely huddle together for his own advantage. 1. Whether the Hebrew was the
common Tongue of the old World. 2. Whether the Hebrew was so preserved in the
posterity of Heber, and so confined to his Family, that no other communicated
therein. 3. Whether Abraham did bring the Hebrew Tongue into the Land of
Canaan, or rather found it there, as spoken formerly by the Natives thereof.


Such as maintain the first, of the Coevity of the Hebrew with the World and
Mankind, are not necessarily obliged to defend the two latter.

I said and only said, (as neither enforcing it, nor inferring any thing
thence) that the Hebrew was the common Tongue of the world, and have proved it.
The rest I am ready to say, so soon as the affirming thereof shall lie in my
way, or make for my work, and then (God willing) I will defend my positions.
Til then I will gratify the Animadvertor with no other Answer; and that for
these reasons: 1. To show my own liberty, that I am free born, and not bound to
lacquey after his Animadversions when I have no business of my own. 2. To wean
him from morosenesse, by not indulging too much to his humor therein. Lastly,
to spare time, my own, and the Readers pains now, that we may the more
seasonably spend them hereafter, on matter of more importance.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 69. As Pitseus a Catholic Writer would
have it.] A Roman Catholic if you will, but no catholic Writer. And much I
wonder, that an Author so averse from the Church of Rome, should give the Title
of Catholic to a stickler in the Romish Quarrel; though others of less zeal
and prudence do commonly but inconsiderately bestow it on them, A Title which
they take with joy, Parenes. ad Scotos p 99.
and from thence suck unto themselves no small advantage. Adeo probanda est
Ecclesia nostra a nomine Catholici, quod extorquet etiam ab invitis Haereticis,
as is bragged by Barclay. But as Pope Gregory pleading against the Patriarch of
Constantinople, who had then assumed unto himself the name of Ecumenical
Bishop; advertiseth all the rest of that sacred Order; Si ille est Universalis,
restat ut vos non sitis Episcopi: Greg. M. Epist. 70.
so may I say with reference to the present case. By gra^ifying these men with
the name of Catholics, we do unwittingly confess our selves to be no
Christians, or at least but Heretics.


Fuller. Had I called Pits a Roman Catholic, then the Animadvertor would have
charged me with a contradiction, of a particular general. To clear all,
Catholic shall be deleted in the next Edition, and Papist placed in the room
thereof.

It is no great wonder if my Pen, perusing many Authors of the Romish
persuasion, has got a smatch of their language. But the danger is the less,
seeing the Animadvertor will be my compurgator, that my judgment is not
inclined to their erroneous Opinions. However, he might have omitted this Note,
who in his book against Mr. Sanderson, calls the whole Lump of English
Papists, the Catholic Party; as also he terms them so in his View of the
Life of King Charles, Page 27. the two first lines. A necessity lay on Prince
Charles (then in Spain) of keeping at that time a plausible correspondency with
the Catholic PARTY.



Nor can He justly condemn that in Me, which He commits in himself.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 76. Oxford lays claim to the Antiquites
of ^rekelade and Lechlade, two ancient Schools of Greek and Latin, as some
would have it, removed afterward to Oxford, etc.] The like we find fol. 117.
where our Author tells us of two Towns on the banks of the Isis* the one
called Greekelade, in which the Greek, the other Lechlade, or Latinlade, in
which the Latin Tongue was taught by Philosophers. Camden in Wilts. 241.
Most miserably mistaken in both places. For though ^rekelade, or Grekelade may
import a study of Greek Philosophers, as some are ready to believe, yet
certainly Lechlade in no Language will signify the like study of the Latin
Tongue. The Country people (as it seems) do better understand themselves than
our Author does. Amongst whom there is a common Tradition, that ^rekelade was a
University of Greek Philosophers, Lechlade of Leches, or Physicians, as the
name does intimate* and Lat^en, a small Village betwixt both, to be the place
of study for the Latin Tongue. But though the people are mistaken in the Etymon
of the name of Lechlade, yet are they not so far out as our Author is, in
making Lechlade or Latinlade, to be both the same place and of the same
signification; whereas in truth that Town is si^ denominated from the River
Lech, which arising in the Hills Cotswold, passes first by Northlech, from
thence to Eastlech, and finally falls into the Thames near St. Iohns-bridge
in this Parish of Lechlade. As for the University of Oxford, which from hence
took beginning, as our Author has it, and the antiquity thereof, I shall not
meddle at the present, though our Author, forgetting the Subject which he was
to write of, takes all occasions to hook in every old Tradition, (though less
probably grounded) to justify the seniority of the younger Sister.


Fuller. I live and learn, being in this particular beholden to the
Animadvertor. It seems there be three places near one another, 1. ^reeklad,
where Greek, are reported professed. 2. Le^ch-lade, where Physic, are reported
professed. 3. Latten, where Latin, are reported professed.


The last of these I never heard of before, and since have never seen in any
Map [ Shoxtons, Camdens, Speeds;] so that it seems an inconsiderable Village.
However my next Edition, God willing, shall be reformed accordingly. And yet I
might justly discount this my mistake, and make it go for nothing, by setting
another of the Animadvertors over against it, when in the close of his last
Note he informs us, that the River Lech falls into the Thames in the Parish
of Lechlade: Whereas Thames is more than eighteen miles from Lech-lade by Land,
(and thirty by water) not taking the name until the confluence of Tame with
Isis, near to Dorchester in Oxfordshire. This small Error I had passed over in
silence; but because I have to do with an Adversary, who lies at catch for
the least advantage, and therefore he ought not to be offended, if I return him
the same measure I receive from him.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 78. Del^a, whence, some say, Deirham or
Durham, lay betwixt Tues and Humber.] More out of this, than in his Lech-lade
or Latin-lade, which before we had. For first Durham is not so called quasi
Deirham.


Fuller. It seems that the Animadvertor plays always at In and In, and I,
alas, at Out and Out; But herein I am not out one hairs breadth, as soon will
appear.


Dr. Heylin. Our learned Antiquary gives us a better and more certain
derivation of it. The River (says he) as though it purposed to make an Island,
compasses almost on every side, the chief City of this Province, standing on a
Hill, whence the Saxons gave it the name of Dunholm. For as you may gather out
of Bid, they called an Hill Dun, and a River-Island Holme. Hereof the Latin
Writers have made Dunelmum, the Normans, Duresme; but the common people most
corruptly Durham.


Fuller. Our learned Antiquary (though here not named) does name himself even
Mr. Camden. I ever did and do believe, that he gives the true Denomination of
Durham, so called from Dunholm.

But let me ad, that I may lawfully, without the least fault, give in also
another etymology, (though not true, yet probable) which I meet with in
perusing of several Writers.

Mercator, in his Description of Italy, says some will have it so called quasi
Vitalie, from the fairest and fattest Calves bred therein, though I believe
that he himself did not believe it to be true, but only relates it as he found
it in Festus. I may challenge the like liberty of presenting etymologies of
places, as tendered to me by other Authors.


Dr. Heylin. But secondly (which marrsall the matter) the Bishopric of Durham
was not in the Kingdom of Deira, as being wholly situate on the North side of
the Tees, and consequently part of the Realm of Bernicia, which makes our
Authors mistake in another place, fol. 51. the more remarkable, where speaking
of the Kingdom of Deira, he gives us this Comment in the Margin, (viz.) What
this day is the Bishopric of Deirham or Durham.


Fuller. Be it here rather repeated than inserted, that in the Saxon Heptarchy,
limitary Counties, did march and retreat, dilated and contracted by their
Princes success.

As for the Bishopric of Durham, (though sometimes it might belong to
Bernicia) yet generally it was the North-east boundary of the Kingdom of
DEIRA, as in the Archbishop of Armagh does plainly appear, De Brit. Eccles.
primord page 395.

Deiri possessed Lancashire, Yorkshire, Westmorland, Camberland, Bishopric of
Durham.


Let me add, that He is as exact (even to fractions) as any who ever wrote of
the partage of the Saxon Heptarchy.


Dr. Heylin. But as long as some say so, all is well, though who those some are
(except our Author) I can no where find. Only I find, that as it is held
necessary for a No body to be in all great Houses, to bear the blame of such
mischances as by the carelessness of servants and inconsiderateness, do too
often happen; so is it no less necessary, that there should be a somebody
also in all great undertakings to bear the blame of such misfortunes as our
Adventurers at wit do as often meet with.


Fuller. What if He can no where find it, does it therefore follow, that it
is not to be found? Will he presume that his own reading is adequate to things
being?

This Nobody, so much derided by the Animadvertor, will at last appear
somebody, even Mr. John Fox, Acts and Mon. page 149. last Edition. Deira, a
part of North-Saxons, whereof, as it is thought, that which we now call Deirham
takes his name.



Thus, Reader, I have discharged my self from all appearance of fault, by
producing my Author, a learned and able Historian, how meanly soever the
Animadvertor may be pleased to esteem him.


Dr. Heylin. And such a somebody as this, our Author has found out to be the
father of another conceit of his concerning Teyburn (that I may take in this
also whilst it is in my mind) of which he tells us lib. 4. fol. 168. That
some have deduced the etymology of Teyburn from Ty and Burn; because forsooth
the Lord Cobham was there hanged and burnt. Whereas indeed it was so named from
the Tey, or Teybourn, a small Brook passing near unto it in the former times.
Which Brook or Bourn arising nor far from Padington, has since been drawn into
several Conduits for the use of the City.


Fuller. I have heard of the Animadvertors etymology, and believe it probable.
I have also been informed from good Antiquaries, that the true name is
Twey-BORN, from two little Brooks (wherewith it is insulated in the Winter)
running near to it.

The deduction of Tye-BORN, alias I BURN, from burning of Lollards, I protest I
did read in Harpsfield, and it is none of my own invention.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 69. A place so marked, being foretold
fortunate to Aeneas to found Alba ( since Rome) therein.] A passage as well
stored with Errors as the rest before, and such a piece of fine new learning,
as never any Antiquary had found out till now. For first, Aeneas was not the
founder of Alba, though that the place designed unto him for the seat of his
Kingdom. The building of that City was the work of Ascanius, as we find in
Virgil. At puer Ascanius -- Regnumque a sede Lavini
Transferet, and longam multa vi muniet Albam.


That is to say, Ascanius from Lavinum shall translate
To Alba strongly fenced, the Regal State.
And secondly Alba was not built in the place where Rome since stood, but
duedecimo ab Urbe lapide, about twelve miles off. For though the River Tiber in
some ancient Writers has the name of Albula, yet I never found in any Writer
either old or new (till I incounterd it in our Author) that Rome was anciently
called Alba.


Fuller. Rather than any difference shall arise betwixt us about this matter,
the Parenthesis [ since Rome] shall be altered into [ near Rome] and then I
hope all shall be right and strait beyond exception.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 104. It is admirable to consider what
Sholes of People were formely vented out of Cimbrica Chersonesus, take it in
the largest extent, for Denmark, Norway, and Swedeland.] And in the largest
extent it is taken indeed, such as no Author ever gave it before this time. The
Cimbrick Chersonese, truly and properly so called, comprehended only those
parts of the Kingdom of Denmark which we now call Iuitland, divided by the
River Eydore from the Dukedom of Holstein. Ortelius, and some late Geographers
make it to take up all that Languet, or piece of Land on the North of Germany,
extended from the River Albis in the South, and stretching Northward to that
part of the Ocean which leads into the narrow Strait, or passage now called
Sundt. But never any till our Author, extended this name over those great
Kingdoms of Denmark, Norway, and Swedeland, or unto any part of either beyond
the Sundt. And yet he had need stretch it a great deal further before he can
find place in it for his Huns, and Vandals; of which the first inhabited in
Asia, beyond the Fens of Maeotis; the last upon the Coast of the Baltic Sea in
Germany, now the Dukedom of Mecklenburg.


Fuller. That Denmark, Norway, and Swedeland are a Chersonesus, or almost an
Island, the Animadvertor will not deny. But that I called them the Cimbrian
Chersonese, cannot clearly be collected from those my words, take it in the
largest extent; which amount only to a Concession, to such who have a mind so
to accept it, and to extend the bounds thereof.

Here plainly to discover my judgment, I conceive that those Sholes of People,
did not, and yet did, come out of the Cimbrick Chersonese, in the strickt and
true acception thereof.

They did not, that is, they came not thence, as having all their birth
therein. Iuitland, not so big as Yorkshire, and the Languet the Animadvertor
speaks of, not bigger than Wales, being Hives too little to hold such swarms
and Cas^es of People.

Yet I believe they did come out of that Chesonese immediately, it being most
probable, that out of the opposite Continent of Norway and Swedland, they
crossed the Baltick-Sea, being narrowest thereabouts, and so came into
Iuitland, and thence Inunded the most of Europe.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 125. Datum in Grantecestria, Anno ab
incarnatione Domini 915. venerabili Fratri Frithstano, Civitatis Scolarium
Cantabrig. Cancellario, and Doctori per suum, etc.] These words are the
conclusion of an ancient Charter, supposed to have been given to the Scholars
of Cambridge by King Edward the elder; against which our Author fancies one
objection, which he thinks easy to be answered, but utterly leaves out
another, which I think unanswerable. The objection which our Author makes
against it, is the barbarous style and language of it; which if it be a good
objection against this Charter, will be as strong against all the Charters of
this age, as some ages following in which there was but little of the
Elegancies of the Latin tongue. And therefore this objection might have well
been spared, but that our Author would be thought to deal very equally in the
business, by saying all that might be said against himself.


Fuller. I plead my last General Answer, discharging my self, because I did
there charge my Margin with two Authors (besides Clareball in Cambridge, where
this Charter is extant) Thomas Rudburn, and John Rouse of Warwick. I did not
engage with any earnestness for the Charter, per me si non VALEAT, VALEAT. Yet
let me add, that following Arguments of the Animadvertor, are so far from
shattering, they do not shake the credit thereof.


Dr. Heylin. But yet I have another objection which he takes no notice of,
because not so easy to be answered; which is, that Frithstan (whatsoever he
was) is here honored with the degree of Doctor, and the title of Chancellor.
But first I would fain know where Frithstan took the degree of Doctor, and in
what faculty he took it; that title in those early days being so unusual, as
hardly to be found amongst the Attributes of the learned men. Secondly, I
conceive it to be very hard, I had almost said impossible, for him to prove,
that the chief Officer of Cambridge, (admitting it at that time for a place of
learning) had the name of Chancellor. When I shall see some proof of this, and
some satisfaction, I shall give some credit to the Charter, till then, none at
all.


Fuller. The name of Doctor is threefold, first, for a Teacher at large, extant
in Scripture, Art thou a John 3 10.
Doctor in Israel, and knows not these things?

Secondly, as a title of Dignity fixed by a Society of learned men, on some
eminent person amongst them.

Thirdly, for one solemnly and ceremoniously graduated by a Professor in some
particular faculty, and the word in this sense is not of so great seniority.

I take Doctor in this Charter in the second acception thereof.

And here I cannot but commend the wariness of the Animadvertors words, that
the Title of Doctor is hardly to be found in those early days. He has read
the Rule of Grammarians, Quod fere fit, non fit; quod vix fit, fit; what is
almost done, is not done; what is scarcely or hardly done, is done. He knew
that the Title of Doctor began to come into request in that Age.

Thus Bale and Pits (but both of them, as they confess; taking their word from
a better Antiquary, I. Leland) writing of BRIDFERTUS, contemporary with our
Frithstun in the same Generation, dying about the year 980. Monachus and DOCTOR
Anglus in Coenobio Ramsiensi.

As for the name Chancellor, it was (as in Sir H. Spelman his Glossary does
appear) used at and before this time by the Saxons for a prime officer (though
generally the Secretary) and therefore no such improbability that the Chief of
Cambridge might be so denominated.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 139. Cambridgshire men claim an ancient
(now antiquated) privilege to lead the Van in all Battles.] Zealous alike, not
only for the University, but the County of Cambridge, his zeal in both
transporting him beyond his knowledge into dark adventures. Some Authors he
pretends to for the University, for this privilege none, telling us only that
he has read it, though he know not where. But I can tell him when and where I
have read the contrary, that is to say, in learned Camden, who ascribes this
honor to the Kentish. For this he cites not only the authority of a namelesse
Monk, but the words of Johannes Saruburiensis in his Polycraticon, which are
these that follow, For good desert (says he) of that notable valor which Kent
showed so puissantly and patiently against the Danes, Camd. in K^nt, 324.
it retains still unto these days in all Battails the first and foreward,
yea and of the first conflict with the Enemy. And if this privilege was given
the Kentish for their valor showed against the Danes, it could neither be
given to the men of Cambridgshire, as our Author would, nor on the same
occasion as he says it was.


Fuller. I have read, that when at the taking of a City by the Romans, two
soldiers contended for the CROWN-MURAL, (each pleading he first scaled the
walls) that the General caused two Crowns-Mural to be made, affirming that on
serious examination of all circumstances, both appeared to him mounting the
walls in the same moment; and so rewarding them both, prevented a Mutiny of
part-taking in the Army.

This controversy is not capable of the same expedient, seeing one cannot make
two VANS at once in the same Army, yet may we distinguish of several Times, and
accommodate the contest.

King Arthur in his time, gave the conduct of the Front to the Cornish, Nobilis
Carew in Cornwall.
Arthurus nobis dat primitus ictum.


Cambridgeshire might afterward have that honor conferred on them, the words
of Cronicon page 887.
Brimpton, though not cleaving the pin, touch the mark in this point, Unde
Anglis regnantibus laus CANTABRIGIENSIS PROVINCIAE splendide florebat.

Yet the dignity being but tempory, and disposable at the Princes pleasure, in
reward of new Services, the Kentish had it afterward bestowed on them, and for
a long time enjoyed it.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 141. It did not afterward embolden him
to the anticipation of the Crown, attending till it descended upon him.] He
speaks this of King Edward the Confessor, who had he tarryed till the Crown had
descended on him, might possibly have found a place amongst the Confessors, but
not amongst the Kings of England. For the truth is, the right title to the
Crown was at that time in Edward surnamed the Outlaw, the eldest son of Edmund
Ironside, who flying into Hungary to avoid the fury of the Danes, married the
Kings sister of that Country, and was by her the Father of Edgar Atheling, and
of Margaret wife to Malcolm Conmor King of the Scots. But these being absent at
that time, Emma the Mother of Prince Edward, and Widow to Canutus the Dane,
took the opportunity to set her son upon the Throne, as being not only
half-brother to King Edmund Ironside, but also half-brother, and consequently
nearest Kinsman to Canutus the second; which if it were a good descent, will
plead almost as strongly for King Harald as it did for him.


Fuller. My words are true, and not subject to just exception, which I confined
only to King Edward his relation to his own brethren. The legend of his life
reports him to be crowned, when unborn, in his Mothers Belly, and having six
elder Brethren by the same father King Ethelred: 1. Ethelstan, 2. Egbert, 3.
Edmond, 4. Edred, 5. Edwy, 6. Edgar.
(Some of which came to the Crown, others died in their minority.) King Edward
(though thus pre-crowned) did not endeavor to ante-date his possession of the
Throne, before his elder Brethren, but waited till the title (as it was derived
unto him from his father) descended on him. Otherwise I advocate not for Him,
if He took it from any other, who had more right to it than himself.


Dr. Heylin. But by what means soever he got the Crown, he deserved to wear it.


Fuller. I cannot cordially close with the Animadvertors expression herein,
being sensible of no Desert, which in this Case is not attended with a true
Title: For who shall judge of the desert of Competitors? If the person himself,
then every usurper will cry up his own worthiness. If his party, they will
make him most meriting whom they favor most in their fancies. This will
unsettle all States, cassat all Titles, and cause much distraction. But
believing no Il at all intended in these his words, let us proceed.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author tells us, ibid. That whereas formerly there were
manifold Laws in the Land, made, some by the Britains, others by the Danes,
others by the English, etc. He caused some few of the best to be selected, and
the rest as captious and unnecessary, to be rejected; from whence they had the
name of the Common Laws.] That the Common Law was so called, because compounded
of the Saxon, British, and Danish Laws, which were before of force only in
such places where the Danes, Britans and Saxons had the greatest sway; though
it be easy to be said, will be hard to be proved. The Britains at that time
lived under their own Princes, and were governed by their own Laws, and so
they were for a long time after; so that King Edward, having no dominion over
them, could not impose a Law upon them. Nor was it propable that he should
borrow any of their Laws, or impose them on his natural Subjects, considering
the antipathy and disaffection betwixt the Nations. There were at that time
indeed in England three kinds of Laws: The first called Dane-lage, or the
Danish Laws, prevailing for the most part in the Kingdom of the East Angles,
and that of Northumberland: Secondly, Saxon-lage, used generally in the
Kingdoms of the West Saxons, East Saxons, South Saxons, and that of Kent: And
thirdly, Mercen-lage, extending over all the Provinces of the Kingdom of
Mercia. As for the Britans of Cornwall and Cumberland, they had no distinct Law
for themselves (as had those of Wales) but were governed by the Laws of that
Nation unto which they were Subject. By these three sorts of Laws were these
Nations governed in their several and respective limits, which being afterward
reduced into one body, and made common equally to all the subjects, did
worthily deserve the name of the Common Law. But secondly I dare not give the
honor of this Action to King Edward the Confessor. The great Justinian in this
work was another Edward, called, for distinctions sake, King Edward the elder,
who began his Reign Anno 900. almost 150 years before this Confessor, to whom
our Author has ascribed it. But the truth is, that these Laws being suppressed
by the Danish Kings, who governed either in an arbitrary way, or by Laws of
their own Country, they were revived and reinforced in the time of this
Edward, from whence they had the name of Edward the Confessors Laws, and by
that name were sued and fought for in the time succeeding, of which more
hereafter. Now as this work may be ascribed to his love to Justice; so from his
piety, his successors derive as great a benefit of curing the disease which
from thence is called the Kings-Evill, which some impute (as our Author tells
us) to secret and hidden causes.


Fuller. This long Note might well have been boiled down from a Gallon to a
Gil, to make it more cordial. If the Reader can pick any information out of it,
much good may it do him. Let the honor of so good a Deed, with all my heart,
be parted betwixt the two Edwards, one the Beginner, the other the finisher
thereof.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 145. Others ascribe it to the power of
fancy and an exalted imagination.] Amongst which others, I may reckon our
Author for one. He had not else so strongly pleaded in defense thereof. But
certainly what effect soever the strength of fancy and an exalted imagination,
as our Author calls it, may produce in those of riper years, it can contribute
nothing to the cure of children. And I have seen some children brought before
the King by the hanging sleeves, some hanging at their Mothers breasts, and
others in the arms of their Nurses, all touched and cured without the help of
any such fancies or imaginations as our Author speaks of.


Fuller. If I be reckoned amongst them, I am mis-reckoned; for though I
conceive fancy may much conduce, in Adultis, thereunto, yet I believe it partly
Miraculous, as may appear by my last and largest insisting thereon. I say
partly, because a complete Miracle is done presently and perfectly, whereas
this cure is generally advanced by Degrees, and some Days interposed.


Dr. Heylin. Others less charitably condemn this cure as guilty of
superstition, quarrelling at the Circumstances and Ceremonies which are used.
And this they do (says he ibid.) either displeased at the Collect, consisting
of the first nine verses of the Gospel of St. John, as wholly improper, and
nothing relating to the occasion, etc.] Our Author tells us more than once, lib.
11.167. of his being a Clerk of the Convocation, but I find by this, that he
never came so high as to be Clerk of the Closet.


Fuller. I never was (nor the Animadvertor neither) Clerk of the Closet, Non
tanto me dignor honor. But I have had the honor to see the King solemnly Heal
in the Quire of the Cathedral of Sarisbury, though, being so long since, I
cannot recover all particulars.


Dr. Heylin. Which had he been, he would not have mistaken the Gospel for a
Collect; or touched upon that Gospel which is less material, without insisting
on the other, which is more pertinent and proper to the work in hand; or
suffered the displeased party to remain unsatisfied about the sign of the
Cross made by the Royal Hands on the place infected (as it after followed)
when there is no such crossing used in that sacred Ceremony, the King only
gently drawing both his hands over the sore at the reading of the first Gospel.


Fuller. I fully satisfy the displeased party, (if he be not through weakness
nor wilfulness incapable thereof) about the Sign of the Cross, in those my
words immediately following.

All which exceptions fall to the ground when it shall be avowed, That the
Kings bare Hands, notwithstanding the omission of such Ceremonies have effected
the Healing.

Take it pray as since it is set down in more ample manner in a late Book,
which I know not whither it be more learned in it self or useful to others.

H. le Strange Alliances of Divine Offices, page 250.
All along K. Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth her reign, when the
Strumosi, such as had the King's Evil came to be touched, the manner was then,
for Her to apply the Sign of the As appears in Dr. Tuckers Charisma p. 109.
Cross to the Tumor, which raising a cause of Jealousies, as if some
mysterious Operation were imputed to it. That wise and learned King, not only
(with his Son the late King) practically discontinued it; but ordered it to be
expunged out of the prayers relating to the Cure, which has proceeded as
effectually, that omission notwithstanding, as ever before.


Dr. Heylin. But that both he and others may be satisfied in these particulars,
I have thought fit to lay down the whole form of prayers and readings used in
the healing of that malady in this manner following.

The form of the Service at the healing of the King's Evil.
THe first Gospel is exactly the same with that on Ascension day* At the
touching of every infirm person, these words are repeated, They shall lay their
hands on the sick, and they shall recover.

The second Gospel begins the first of St. John, and ends at these words, Full
of grace and truth. At the putting the Angel about their necks were repeated,
That Light was the true Light, which lights every man that comes into the
world.

Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, etc. Min. O Lord, save
thy servants.
Answ. Which put their trust in thee.
Min. Send unto them help from above.
Answ. And evermore mightily defend them.
Min. Help us, O God our Savior.
Answ. And for the glory of thy Names sake deliver us, be merciful unto us
sinners for thy Names sake.
Min. O Lord, hear our prayer.
Answ. And let our cry come unto thee.


The Collect.
Almighty God, the eternal health of all such as put their trust in thee, Hear
us, we beseech thee, on the behalf of these thy servants, for whom we call for
thy merciful help, that they receiving health may give thanks unto thee in thy
holy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The peace of God, etc.



This is the whole form, against which nothing is objected, but the using of
the words before mentioned at the putting on of the Angel; the pertinency
whereof may appear to any who consider that the Light which was the true Light,
and lights every man which comes into the world, did not shine more visibly,
at the least more comfortably upon the people, than in the healing of so many
sick, infirm and leprous persons, as did from time to time receive the benefit
of it. But it is time I should proceed.


Fuller. I perceive by this office, that I have mistaken the Gospel for the the
Collect; which in the next Edition (God willing) shall be rectified.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 148. These chose Harald to be King,
whose title to the Crown is not worth our deriving of it, much less his
relying on it.] A Title not so despicable as our Author makes it, nor much
inferior unto that, by which his predecessor obtained the Kingdom. Harald
being son to Earl Godwin, (the most potent man of all the Saxons) by Theyra the
natural daughter of Canutus the first, was consequently Brother by the whole
blood to Harald Harfagar, and Brother by the half blood to Canutus the second,
the two last Danish Kings of England. In which respect being of Saxon Ancestry
by his Father, and of the Danish Royal blood by his Mother, he might be Looked
on as the fittest person in that conjuncture, to content both Nations: But
whatsoever his Title was, it was undoubtedly better than that of the Norman,
had either his success been answerable, or his sword as good.


Fuller. It was a despicable Tit^le, even after the Animadvertor has
befriended it with his most advantageous representing thereof,

1. From his Father, Earl Godwin, the most potent man of Saxon Ancestry. 2.
From his Mother, Theyra, the natural Daughter of Canutus the first.


As to his Paternal Title, if his Fathers potencie was all can be alleged for
it, any Oppressor has the same right.

His Maternal Title, if from Canutus his natural [understand base] Daughter
opens a Door (as I may say) for all who come in by the window.

Besides, the Animadvertor is much mistaken in the name of his Mother, seeing
Mr. Britar. Lat. page 104.
Camden says, E Githa Suenonis Regis Danici Sorore natu^ fuit: He was born of
Githa Sister to Sweno King of Denmark.


Dr. Heylin. Upon occasion of which Conquest, our Author tells us that, Ibid.
This was the fifth time wherein the South of this Island was conquered; first
by Romans, secondly by Picts and Scots, thirdly by Saxons, fourthly by the
Danes, and fifthly by the Norman.] But this I can by no means yield to, the
Scots and Picts not being to be named amongst those Nations who subdued the
South part of this Island. That they did many times harrass and depopulate the
South part of it, I shall easily grant; but to the subduing of a Country,
there is more required than to waste and spoil it; that is to say, to fix their
dwelling and abode (for some time at least) in the Country conquered; to
change the Laws, alter the Language, or new mould the Government; or finally,
to translate the Scepter from the old Royal Family to some one of their own.
None of which things being done in the Invasions of the Scots and Picts, they
cannot properly be said to have subdued the South parts of the Island, as our
Author (out of love perhaps to the Scots) would persuade the Reader.


Fuller. I confess of all Five, the Picts and Scots had the most short and
uncertain abode in the South. The distinction is very nice, betwixt harrassing
or depopulating of a Country and subduing it. If I could but harrasse and
depopulate (that is but deargumenta^e) the Animamadvertors Book against me, I
doubt not but I should be accounted to subdue it.

Why is not my Pen charged with a love to the Picts (whom I also equally with
the Scots entitle to this subduing) and is a Nation now no where extant, to be
the object of my affection.

But this five-times subduing of the South of this Island, is in all Authors as
generally known and received, as that a man has five fingers on his hand.
Wherefore no more in Answer to just nothing.


THE THIRD BOOK From the time of the Norman Conquest, to the first preaching of
Wickliffe.
Dr. Heylin. WE are now come unto the times of the Norman Government, when the
Church began to settle on a surer bottom, both for power and polity; the
Bishops less obnoxious to the Kings than formerly, because elected by the
Monks and Canons of their own Cathedrals; their Consistories free from the
intermixture of Lay-assistance, and their Synods managed by themselves. Wherein
though they had power of making such Synodicall Constitutions as did ipso facto
bind all parties, yet our Author is resolved to have it otherwise.


Fuller. All this is but perfatary, and therefore my Answer not necessary
thereunto. The Animadvertor seems to congratulate the Condition of the
English Church, as better hereafter in the following, than in foregoing Ages.

He instanceth in two particulars POWER and POLITY, omitting a third worth
Both, Piety (to which Purity in Doctrine may be reduced) which now began more
and more to be impaired.

Let me add, that after the Kings of England had parted (which indeed was
wrested from them) with the Investing of Bishops, Bishops became less
managable by, and dutiful to their Prince, and more insulting over the People:
and being less OBNOXIOUS (to use the Animadvertors word) to the Sovereign,
were more NOXIOUS to the Subjects.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 19. The Proceedings (says he) of the
Canon Law were never wholly received into practice in the Land; but so as made
subject in whatsoever touched temporals, to Secular Laws, and National
Customs. And the Laity as pleasure limited Canons in this behalf.] How false
this is, how contrary to the power and practice of the Church before the
submission of the Clergy to King Henry the eight; and finally how dangerous a
ground is hereby laid to weaken the Authority of Convocations, will best appear
by laying down the sum of a Petition presented by the House of Commons to the
same King Henry, together with the Answer of the Prelates and inferior Clergy,
then being Synodically assembled, to the said Petition.

The substance of the Petition was as follows, viz. THat the Clergy of this
your Realm, being your Highness Subjects, in their Convocation by them holden
within this your Realm, have made, and daily make diverse Sanctions or Laws
concerning Temporal things, and some of them be repugnant to the Laws and
Statutes of your Realm, Acts of Convoc. Anno 1532.
not having ne requiring your most Royal assent to the same Laws so by them
made, another any assent or knowledge of your Lay Subjects, is had to the same,
another to them published and known in their Mother tongue, albeit diverse and
sundry of the said Laws extend in certain causes to your excellent Person, your
Liberty and Prerogative Royal, and to the interdiction of your Laws and
Possessions, and so likewise to the Goods and Possessions of your Lay Subjects,
declaring the infringers of the same Laws so by them made, not only to incur
the terrible censure of Excommunication, but also to the detestable crime and
sin of Heresy, by the which diverse of your humble and obedient Lay Subjects be
brought into this Ambiguity, whether they may do and execute your Laws
according to your jurisdiction Royal of this Realm, for dread of the same
Censures and pains comprised in the same Laws so by them made in their
Convocations, to the great trouble and inquietation of your said humble and
obedient Lay Subjects, etc. the impeachment of your Jurisdiction and
Prerogative Royal. The Answer thereunto was this. TO this we say, that
forasmuch as we repute and take our Authority of making Laws to be grounded
upon the Scripture of God, and the determination of holy Church, which must
also be a rule and squier to try the justice and righteousness of all Laws, as
well Spiritual as Temporal; we verily trust, that considering the Laws of this
Realm be such as have been made by most Christian, religious, and devout
Princes and People, how both these Laws proceeding from one fountain, the same
being sincerely interpretrd, and after the good meaning of the makers, there
shall be found no repugnancy, nor contrariety, but that the one shall be found
as aiding, maintaining, and supporting the other. And if it shall otherwise
appear, as it is our duty (whereunto we shall always most diligently apply our
selves) to reform our Ordinances to Gods Commission, and to conform our
Statutes and Laws, and those of our predecessors, to the determination of
Scripture and holy Church; so we hope in God, and shall daily pray for the
same, that your Highness will, if there appear cause why, with the assent of
your People, temper your Graces Laws accordingly. Whereby shall ensue a most
happy and perfect conjunction and agreement, as God being Lapis angularis, to
agree and conjoyn the same. And as concerning the requiring of your Highness
Royal assent to the authority of such Laws as have been by our Predecessors, or
shall be made by us in such points and Articles as we have by Gods authority to
rule and order by such Provisions and Laws; we knowing your Highness wisdom,
and virtue, and learning, nothing doubt but the same perceives how the
granting hereunto depends not upon our will and liberty. And that we your
most humble Subjects may not submit the execution of our charge and duty
certainly prescribed by God, to your Highness assent, although in very deed
the same is most worthy for your most Noble, Princely, and excellent virtues,
not only to give your Royal assent, but also to devise and command what we
should for good order and manners by Statutes and Laws provide in the Church,
nevertheless considering we may not so, ne in such sort refrain the doing of
our office in the feeding and ruling of Christ's people your Graces Subjects; we
most humbly desiring your Grace as the same has heretofore, so from henceforth
to show your Graces mind and opinion unto us, what your high Wisdom shall
think convenient, which we shall most gladly hear and follow, if it shall
please God to inspire us so to do, with all submission and humility beseech
the same, following the steps of of your most Noble Progenitors, and
conformably to your our own Acts do maintain and defend such Laws, and
Ordinances, as we according to our calling and by Authority of God, shall for
his honor make, to the edification of virtue, and maintaining Christ's faith,
of which your Highness is named Defender, and has been hitherto indeed a
special Protector.

Furthermore whereas your said Lay Subjects say, that sundry of the said Laws
extend in certain causes to your excellent Person, your Liberty and Prerogative
Royal, and to the interdiction of your Land and Possessions: To this your said
Orators say, that having submitted the trial and examining of the Laws made in
the Church by us and our Predecessors, to the just and straight Rule of Gods
Laws, which gives measure of Power, Prerogative, and Authority to all
Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Potentates, and all other; we have conceived such
opinion, and have such estimation of your Majesty's goodness and virtue, that
whatsoever any persons not so well learned as your Grace is, would pretend unto
the same, whereby we your most humble Subjects may be brought in your Graces
displeasure and indignation, surmising that we should by usurpation and
presumption, extend our Laws to your most noble Person, Prerogative and Realm,
yet the same your Highness being so highly learned, will of your own most
bounteous goodness facilly discharge and deliver us from that envy, when it
shall appear that the said Laws are made by us, or out Predecessors,
conformable and maintainable by the Scripture of God, and determination of the
Church, against which no Laws can stand or take effect.

Somewhat to this purpose had been before endeavored by the Commons in the
last Parliament of King Edw. 3. of which, because they got nothing by it, but
only the showing of their teeth without hurting any body; I shall lay nothing
in this place, reserving it to the time of the long Parliament, in the Reign of
King Charles, when this point was more hotly followed, and more powerfully
prosecuted than ever formerly.

What says our Author unto this? Finds he here any such matter, as that the
Laity at their pleasure could limit the Canons of the Church? Or that such
Canons in whatsoever touched temporals were subject unto secular Laws and
National Customs? And here of I desire the Reader to take special notice, as
that which is to serve for a Catholicon, or general Antidote against those many
venomous insinuations, which he shall meet with up and down in the course of
this History. As for the case in which our Author grounds this pestilent
Position, it was the Canon made in a Synod at Westminster, in the time of
Anselm, Anno 1102. prohibiting the sale of men and women like brute beasts in
the open Market. Which Canon not finding presently an universal obedience over
all the Kingdom (as certainly ill customs are not easily left, when they are
countenanced by profit) occasioned our Author to adventure upon this bold
assertion.


Fuller. I conceived it uncivil to interrupt the Animadvertor in his long
discourse until he had ended it, and now profess, I know not how it makes in
opposition to what I said, and heartily wish that the Reader may understand it
better than I do.

It cannot be denied, but that the Clergy did claim and challenge a power, and
sometimes de facto executed it, over the temporal Estates of the La^ty (for I
behold the Clergy, more bound, (because binding themselves by their
representatives) unto their Canons) yet they never peaceably enjoyed their
Power, as constantly checked and controled by the Laws of the Land, in such
things, wherein the Temporal Estate, Life and Limb of Persons were concerned.

We have an eminent instance hereof, in the Canon, occasioning this discourse.
Anselme makes a Constitution (and that indeed charitable and Christian) against
the sale of men and women like brute beasts in the open market place. Now such
persons sold (slaves and Vassals as I understand it) being the Goods and
Chattels of their Masters, the proprietaries and owners of their Bodies, they
would not part with their right in obedience to the Canon.

Suppose a Convocation some thirty years ago should have made a Canon, without
any confirmation from Parliament, That no Merchant living in England should by
his Factors sell any Negroes or Blacks in the Barbados, which formerly he had
bought in Guinnie, it would not oblige to the observation thereof; because in
such matters wherein property was concerned, the Canon must say to the
Common Law, By your leave Sir.

I have written nothing in this point, bu^ what I have a good Author for. And
seeing the Animadvertor in his Geography has been pleased to tell a passage
betwixt him and his fathers man, let me relate another, wherein my self was
concerned, knowing it to be as true, and hoping it to be as well applied.

Some three years since, walking on the Lords day into the Park at Copthall,
the third son (a child in coats) of the Earl of Dorset, desired to go with me,
whereof I was unwilling, fearing he should straggle from me whilst I meditated
on my Sermon: And when I told him, that if he went with me, he would lose
himself, he returned, Then you must lose your self first, for I will go with
you.

This rule I always observe, when meddling with matters of Law, because I my
self am a child therein, I will ever go with a man in that faculty, such as is
most eminent in his profession, a cujus latere non discedam; so that if he lose
me, he shall first lose himself, as hereafter when we grapple together in this
Controversy, will appear.

As for this particular case (for I will engage no further for the present)
this Canon did not dispossess Masters of their property in their Vassals, and
no meaner than Mr. Seldom, is my conductor herein, styled hereafter by, the
Animadvertor In his Animadversion on my 8. Lib. or reign of Q Mary.
, (...), that renowned Humanitian and Philologer.

Yea I entered my Author in the Margin, had the Animadvertor been pleased to
take notice thereof) Spiceleg ad Edmerium, page two hundred and eight.

Neque sane Canon* hic, aut alia apud nos lata Lex id juris hactenus adeo
refixit; quin in Iurisconsultorum nostratium Commentariis passim Legibus quibus
utimur consonum agnoscatur. Neither truly this Canon, or any other Law made
amongst us, has hitherto unfastened this right; but that in the Comments (or
Reports), of our Common Lawyers, it is acknowledged consonant to those Laws
which we use. And though in process of Time, first conscientious, then all
Masters laudibly submitted themselves to this Canon (forbearing such sales;)
yet were they not by the Canon divested of the power of Doing it, such
vendition and emption being by the Common Law preserved unto them, though now,
very commendably, long disused.

And whereas the Clergy in their Answer, pretend all their Canons grounded on
the Word of God, I would fain be informed where they find in the New Testament
(which ought to regulate their proceedings) that the power of the Church
extends to life, limb, or estate. Sure I am her censures appear spiritual on
the soul, by those expressions, Bind Matthew. 16, 19
on Earth, Cast 1 John 9.34.
out, Deliver 1 Cor. 5.5.
to Satan, etc. But because the Reader reserveth a lager prosecution of this
point for another time, we will also respit our larger answer hereunto.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 24. Indeed 1. David's had been Christian
some hundred of years, whilst Canterbury was yet Pagan.] Not many hundred
years I am sure of that nor yet so many as to make a plural number by the Latin
Grammar; Kent being conquered by the Saxons, who brought in Paganism, Anno 455.
Converted unto Christianity by the preaching of Austin, Anno 569. Not much more
than 140. years betwixt the one and the other.


Fuller. The Christian Antiquity of St. David bare a double Date, one native or
inherent, the other adopted and Reputative. 1. The Inherent from the time that
St. David fixed there, on which account I believe it was no more than 140.
years senior to Canterbury. 2. The Reputative from the first founding of a
Bishopric at Carleon by King Lucius, which ( indifferently stated) was about
the year of our Lord 169* which was four hundred years before Canterbury.


Now it is notoriously known, that the antiquity of Carleon (whence the Sea was
removed) in computation of the seniority is adjected to St. David's, (her
adopted Daughter.)

Hence was it that the Abbot of Bancar in his (A Record lately so priced by the
Animadv)
Answer unto Austin, acknowledged himself and his Convent under the Government
of the Bishop of Carleon upon Uske, (though then no Bishop therein) meaning St.
David's thereby, as Dr. In his account H S. his Appendix.
Hammond and others do unanimously allow.

Thus grafting St. David's (as it ought) on the Stock of Carleon, it is senior
in Christianity to Canterbury four hundred years, and FOUR, may be termed Some,
in the stricktest propriety of Language.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 29. To whose honor he (viz. King
Stephen) erected St. Stephens Chapel in Westminster, near the place where
lately the Court of Requests was kept.] Our Author is here mealy mouthed, and
will not parler le tout, as the French men say. For otherwise he might have
told us that this Chapel is still standing, and since the surrendry of it to
King Edward the sixth, has been used for a Parliament House, Stowe Survey, p
893.
employed to that purpose by the Commons, as it still continues. What might
induce our Author to be thus reserved, I can hardly tell; unless it be to
prevent such inferences and observations, which by some wanton wits might be
made upon it.


Fuller. I hope rather some gracious hearts will make pious improvement
thereupon, praying to God, that seeing so many signal persons are now assembled
therein, the very place once dedicated as a Chapel to St. Stephen, may be
their more effectual Remembrancer, to imitate the purity and piety of that
renowned Saint: That so God may be invited graciously to be present amongst
them, to overruled all their consultations to his Glory, the Good of the Church
and State, and the true honor of the Nation: And to this let every good man
say, Amen.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 40. By the same title from his Father
Jeffery Plantagenet, be possessed fair lands in Anjou and Maine.] I had thought
he had possessed somewhat more in Anjou and Maine, than some fair Lands only,
his Father Ieffrey Plantagenet being the Proprietary Earl of Anjou, Maine, and
Toureine, not a titular only, succeeded in the same by this King Henry and his
two sons, Richard and John, till lost unhappily by the last, with the rest of
our Estates on that side of the Sea. From this Ieffery descended fourteen Kings
of the name of Plantagenet, the name not yet extinguished, though it be
improverished: Our Author speaking of one of them, who was found not long since
at the Plow, Lib. 2. p. 170. Another of that name publishing a Book about the
Plantation of New-Albion, Anno 1646. or not long before.


Fuller. The frequent and familiar figure of MOISIS will rectify all, whereby
less is said than meant, and therefore more must be understood than is said.
Besides, it made me mince my expression, (being loath to exceed) because this
Ieffery did not to me appear (though the Earl,) so entire in those Dominions,
but that the Kings of France and England had Cities and Castles interposed
therein.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 53. King John sent a base, degenerous,
and unchristian Embassage to Admitalius Mutmelius a Mohammedan King of Morocco,
then very puissant, and possessing a great part of Spain.] This Admiralius
Murmelius, as our Author and the old Monks call him, was by his own name called
Mahomet Enaser, the Miramomoline of Morocco; to whom if King John sent any such
Message, it was as base, unchristian* and degenerate as our Author makes it.


Fuller. I will ingenuously confess, that the first time I found this Story,
was in the Doctors Mi^ro-cosm (the novelty making me take the more notice
thereof.) Though since I have met with it in M. Paris (the fountain) and other
Authors, the channels thereof, I conceive it was as lawful for me to relate
it, as for the Animadvertor, who epitheis this Embassy BASE His description of
Barbary.
, DEGENEROUS, and UNCHRISTIAN, the words which in me he reproves.


Dr. Heylin. But being the credit of the Tale depends upon the credit of the
Monkish Authors, to which brood of men that King was known to be a prosessed
Enemy (hating and hated by one another) it is not to be esteemed so highly as a
piece of Apocrypha, and much less to be held for Gospel.


Fuller. Here he rather speaks aliter than alia, from what I had written on the
same Subject, who thus concluded the Character of King John. Church-Hist. Book
3. page 54. We only behold him Him thorough such a Light as the Friars his
foes show him in; who so hold the candle, that with the Shadow thereof they
darken his virtues, and present only his Vices; yea, and as if they had also
poisoned his memory, they cause his faults to swell to a prodigious greatness,
making him with their pens more black in conditions, than the Morocco King
(whose aid he requested) could be in complexion.



Here I desire to give the Reader a ^aste of what does frequently occur in this
Book, and of what I justly did complain, viz. the Animadvertor Vide supra,
part. 1 chap. 11
sometimes not liking my language, (as not proper and expressive enough)
substituteth his own, with little or no variation of matter.

I confess he is not bound to use my words, and such variations simply in it
self, is no wrong unto me; but it becomes an Injury when they must pass for
necessary Animadversions on my Book, to the defaming thereof, as if it were
defective without them, which were there (though perchance not so finely) as
fully and clearly before.


Dr. Heylin. Possible it is, that being overlaid by his own Subjects, and
distressed by the French, he might send unto that King for aid in his great
extremities. And doing this (if this were all) he did no more than Nature, and
indignation, and the necessity of his affairs did provoke him to; not half so
much as was done afterward upon far weaker grounds by King Francis the first,
employing the Turks Forces both by Sea and Land against Charles the fifth. But
the Monks coming to the knowledge of this secret practice, and construing his
actions to the worst, improved the Molehill to a Mountain, rendering him thereby
as odious to posterity, as he was to themselves.


Fuller. How much is this different from what I have written before, but that
the Animadvertor will not wear words at the second hand of my using, but will
have them spick and span new of his own making.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 63. I question whether the Bishop of
Rochester ( whose Country house at Bromley is so nigh) had ever a House in the
City.] There is no question but he had, Stow finding it in Southwark by the
name of Rochester house, adjoining on the South side to the Bishop of
Winchesters, ruinous and out of reparation in his time (as possibly not much
frequented since the building of Bromley House) and since converted into
Tenements for private persons.


Fuller. It was a Question to me, though none to the Animadvertor; now it is a
question neither to him nor to me, who by him am informed. I see that men may
learn by what boys learn in their Qui mihi, Sed qui nil dubitat, nil capit
inde boni.


Had I not questioned this once publicly, probably I had questioned it ever
privately, and gone in my self without satisfaction.


Dr. Heylin. But since our Author has desired others to recover the rest from
oblivion, I shall help him to the knowledge of two more, and shall thank any
man to find out the third. The first of these two is the Bishop of Lincolns
House, situate near the old Temple in Holborn, first built by Robert de
Chesney, Bishop of Lincoln, Anno 1147. since alien'd from that See to the Earls
of Southampton, and passing by the name of Southampton House. The second is the
Bishop of Bangors, a fair House situate in Shoe-lane near St. Andrews Church,
of late time leased out by the Bishops, and not since, the dwelling of Dr.
Smith Doctor in Physic, a right honest and ingenuous person, and my very good
friend. Of all the old Bishops which were founded before King Harry the eight,
there is none whose House we have not found, but the Bishop of Asaph; to the
finding whereof, if our Author, or any other will hold forth the Candle, I
shall follow the light the best I can, and be thankful for it.


Fuller. I faithfully promise so to do, as soon as I arrive at any good
intelligence thereof.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 67. And though some high Royalists look
on it as the product of Subjects animosities improving themselves on their
Princes extremities, etc.] Our Author tells us in his Epistle to the Reader,
that the three first Books of this Volume were for the main written in the
reign of the late King, and that it would appear so by some passages which were
then proper for the Government. But certainly if these words were written in
the time of the late King, they were written in the time of his distress, when
his affairs were desperate, and his Party ruined; the name of Royalists had not
else been used here in the way of reproach, nor any new matter charged upon
them, which might render them more obnoxious to fine and ransom than the crime
of Loyalty.


Fuller. My Loyalty did rise and fall with his Majesty's success, as a Rock
in the Sea does with the ebbing and flowing of the Tide. I had more pity but
not less honor for him in his deepest distress.

God knows my heart, I use not the word High-Royalist here as by way of
reproach, and the unpartial Reader niether will nor can so understand it.

Some there are who maintain, that a King is no way confined with his own Laws,
but that without any fault, he may by his own l^st limit his Demands on his
Subjects, taking from them, without any wrong, what they refuse to pay unto
him. There the Animadvertor will call Royalists, and I dare call them
High-Royalists, beholding (as I have said) the Grand-Charter as the product of
Subjects animosities improving themselves on their Princes extremities.


Dr. Heylin. But whatsoever our Author thinks, it cannot but appear to any who
consults the story of former times, that the original of this Charter, was
first writ in blood, obtained by working on the necessities of some Princes,
extorted in the minority of another, and finally confirmed by him who had not
power to justify his denial of it.


Fuller. I could heartily have wished, that the Animadvertor had expressed the
names of these Kings. Who now only hope that I conjecture them aright. 1. King
John, on the working of whose necessities it was first obtainned. 2. Henry the
third, whose consent thereto was extorted in his minority. 3. Edward the
first, confirming it when not in power to justify his denial, during his
durance as a Prisoner taken in Battle.


Here I confess, are three sad conditions, necessity of the first, minority of
the second, captivity of the third. But know, that the last of these when at
liberty, and not only endued with freedom, but empowered with force, and
being as wise and successful a Prince, as ever sat on the English Throne;
found it advantageous for his Interest, to observe what formerly when a
Prisoner he had confirmed.

Otherwise his Sword was so long, reaching as far as Palastine it self, and
so sharp, hewing his conquering way through Wales and Scotland; that therewith
(enforced with his arm) he might have rescinded the Seals of the Grand-Charter,
and put himself into the condition of an absolute command.

But he preferred the strict observation thereof, partly out of Piety, because
solemnly sworn thereunto; partly out of Policy, as sensible that therein the
Rights of Sovereigns and Subjects, were indifferently contempered to their
mutual happiness, it being Fetters to neither, but Girdles to both to be
strengthened by such restraints.


Dr. Heylin. And if our Author be so certain, that those Kings flourihed most
both at home and abroad, who tied themselves most conscientiously to the
observation thereof: I would fain know how some of our Kings, who have most
conscientiously tied themselves to that observation, became so unprosperous; or
how some others came to flourish both at home and abroad, who have made it
their great work to infringe the same in almost all the principal Articles and
main branches of it.


Fuller. It is an hard question, and yet perchance more dangerous than
difficult to answer, but the reason I dare allege is this, Even so Father,
because it pleased thee.

Let me add, that such conscientious observers thereof, which have proved
unsuccessefull, may esteem their losses as Sweet-Bryar and Holy-Thistle, and
more cordially comfort themselves in such sanctified afflictions, than the
Infringers of their Charter could content themselves in their successful
oppression.

I cannot part from this point, till I have inserted that Sir Robert Cotton,
(one who had in him as much of the Gentleman, Antiquarie, Lawyer, good Subject,
and good Patriot, as any in England) was the Author, [ in his short view of the
long reign of King Henry the third] who made the observation of those most
successful Kings, by whom the Grand-Charter was most conscienciously observed.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 88. The poor Jews durst not go into
France (whence lately they had been solemnly banished) but generally disposed
themselves in Germany and Italy.] The poor Jews are more beholding to our
Author for his commiseration than the high Royalists, (as he calls them) in the
former passage. But poor or rich, they might have passed safely into France,
had they been so minded. For though he tell us, that they had been solemnly
banished out of France before this time; yet either such banishment was
repealed, or temporary only, or (as I rather think) not so much as sentenced.
Certain I am, our learned Brerewood upon a diligent enquiry has found it
otherwise than our Author does; letting us know, Brerewoods Enq. cap. 13.
That the first Country in Christendom, whence the Jews were expelled without
hope of return, was our Country of England, whence they were banished, Anno
1290. by King Edward the first; and not long after out of France, Anno 1307. by
Philippus Pulcher. Not out of France first, out of England afterward, as our
Author would have it.


Fuller. I wonder any good Christians would be offended with me, for pitying
them by the name poor Jews. If any High royalist, (as I fear there is too many)
be in low Estate, would it were as well in my power to relieve as to pity
them. Till when they shall have my prayers, that God would give them patience,
and support them in their deepest distress.

The Author will find, that though the Great, General, and Final banishment of
the Jews out of France, was Anno 1307. under Philip the Fair, yet formely there
had been Edicts for their Exile thence.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 100. Thus men of yesterday have pride
too much to remember what they were the day before.] An observation true
enough, but not well applied. The two Spencers whom he speaks this off, were
not men of yesterday, or raised out of the dirt or dunghill to so great an
height; but of as old and known Nobility as the best in England: Camden in
Monmout^^h.
insomuch that when a question grew in Parliament, whether the Baroness de
Spencer, or the Lord of Aburgaveny were to have precedence, it was adjudg'd
unto de Spencer, thereby declared the ancientest Barony of the Kingdom at that
time then being. These two Spencers, Hugh ^he Father was created Earl of
Winchester for term of life; and Hugh the Son by marrying one of the Daughters
and coheirs of Gilbert de Clare, became Earl of Gloucester. Men more to be
commended for their Loyalty, than accused for their pride, but that the King
was now declining, and therefore it was held fit by the prevalent faction to
take his two supporters from him, as they after did.


Fuller. The two Spencers fall under a double consideration, and are beheld in
History for their extraction, either, as Absolutely in themselves.
Comparatively with others.


Absolutely they were of honorable parentage, and I believe the Elder might be
born a Baron, whose Baronry (by the Heir general is still extant in Mildmay
Fane, Earl of Westmorland, and from the younger House of a Male Heir, the Lord
Spencer of Wormelayton (now Earl of Sunderland) does, as I have seen in his
Pedigree, derive himself.

Comparatively, So were they far inferior to most of those great persons over
whom they insulted, being originally Earls, and some of them of Royal
extraction.

Again, the Two Spencers may and ought by an Historian to be considered, as to
be 1. Commended for their Loyalty, 2. Condemned for their Insolency.


On the first account, they deserve just praise; and it is probable enough,
that they find the less Favor from some Pens, for being so Faithful to so
unfortunate a Sovereign.

The latter cannot be excused, appearing too plain in all our Histories.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 113. The Lord Chancellor was ever a
Bishop.] If our Author by this word ever understands (...), most commonly, or
for the most part, he is right enough; but then it will not stand with the
following words viz. as if it had been against equity to employ any other
therein. And on the other side, if he take the word ever in its proper and more
natural sense, as if none but Bishops had ever been advanced unto that office,
he does not only misinform the Reader, but confute himself, he having told us
fol. 31. of this present book, that Thomas Becket being then but Archdeacon of
Canterbury, was made Lord Chancellor, and that as soon as he was made
Archbishop, he resigned that office. But the truth is, that not only men in
holy Orders, but many of the Laity also had attained that dignity, as will
appear to any who will take the pains to consult the Catalogue of the
Chancellors and Keepers of the Great Seal, in the Glossary of Sir Henry
Spelman: in which appear not only some of inferior dignity, as Deans,
Archdeacons, Household Chaplains; but many also not dignified with any
Ecclesiastical Title, or Notification, and therefore in all probability to be
looked on as mere Laymen, Counselors, and Servants to the Kings in whose
times they lived, or otherwise studied in the Laws, and of good affections, and
consequently capable of the place of such trust and power.


Fuller. May the Reader take notice, that this complaint was made by the
Commons in the 11th of Edward the 3d Anno 1336. Now Ever I here restrain to the
oldest man alive, then present in Parliament, who could not distinctly remember
the contrary, from the first of King Edward the first, who began his Reign
1272. so that for full 64. years, an uninterrupted series of Bishops (except
possibly one put in pro tempore, for a month or two) possessed the place of
Chancellors.

This complaint of the Commons occasioned that the King some three years after.
viz. in the fifteenth year of his reign, conferred the Chancellors place on a
Layman. But it was not long before things returned to the old channel of
Clergymen, and so generally for many years continued, with some few and short
interpositions of Laymen.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 116. This year, viz. 1350. as Authors
generally agree, King Edward instituted the Order of the Garter.] Right enough
as unto the time, but much mistaken in some things which relate unto that
ancient and most noble Order; our Author taking up his Commodities at the
second hand, neither consulting the Records, nor dealing in this business with
men of credit.


Fuller. I am now come under the Roof of the Animadvertor, who (by the Laws of
Hospitality) is bound to treat me the more courteously; I mean, I am entered
into a Subject, wherein he is well seen, and therefore might favorably connive
at my small slips, being therein best studied.

It is severely said, that in this business I dealt with no men of credit. The
highest person (next the Son of the King) wearing a blew Ribbon was pleased so
far to favor me, as that from his own mouth I wrote the last sheet of my
History, his Grace endeavoring to be very exact in all particulars.


Dr. Heylin. For first there are not fourteen Canons resident in the Church of
Windsor, but thirteen only with the Dean; it being King Edwards purpose when
he founded that Order, consisting of twenty six Knights, himself being one, to
institute as many greater and lesser Canons, and as many old Soldiers (commonly
called poor Knights) to be pensioned there: Though in this last, the number was
not made up to his first intention.


Fuller. The mistake (such an one as it is) shall be amended in my next Edition.


Dr. Heylin. He tells us secondly, that if he be not mistaken (as indeed he is)
Sir Thomas Row was the last Chanoellor of the Order. Whereas Sir James Palmer
one of the Gentlemen Huishers of the Privy Chamber succeeded him in the place
of Chancellor after his decease, Anno 1644.


Fuller. The Animadvertor is very discourteous to deny me the benefit of the
Parenthesis, If I be not mistaken. The best Authors have their Ni fallor, Si
quid video, Si been intelligo, and the like: These are Grains allowed to all
Pieces current in payment.

Sir Thomas Roe was the last Chancellor who effectually officiated in his
place. Winsor before the year 1644. being a chief Garrison of the Parliament.

Tully calls a Consul, chosen in the morning and put out before night, a
Vigilant Consul, who never slept in all his Co^sulship. But (on another
occasion) one may say of Sir James Palmer (otherwise a worthy Gentleman, well
deserving that and a better place) that He was a very watchful Chancellor, who
never slept in Winsor whilst invested in his Office.


Dr. Heylin. He tells us thirdly, That there belongs unto it one Register, being
always the Dean of Winsor: which is nothing so. For though the Deans of late
times have been Registers also, yet ab initio non fuit sic, it was not so from
the beginning; The first Dean was also Register, being John Boxul, Anno 1557.
Before which time, beginning at the year 1414. there had been nine Registers
which were not Deans; but how many more before that time, I am not able to say,
their names not being on Record.


Fuller. I say not that the Register always Was the Dean, but being always
the Dean; which relating to our and our fathers memories, is right enough: but
it shall be reformed.


Dr. Heylin. And fourthly he tells us, That the Garter is one of the
extraordinary Habiliments of the Knights of this Order, their ordinary being
only the blew Ribbon about their necks, with the Picture of St. George
appendant, and the Sun in his glory on the left shoulder of their Cloak;
whereas indeed the Garter is of common wearing, and of such necessary use, that
the Knights are not to be seen abroad without it, upon pain of paying two
Crowns to any Officer of the Order, who shall first claim it, unless they be
to take a journey; Hist. of St. George lib. 3. cap. 3.8.
in which case it is sufficient to wear a blew Ribbon under their Boots to
denote the Garter. Lastly, whereas our Author tells us, that the Knights hereof
do wear on the left shoulder of their Cloaks a Sun in his glory, and
attributes this wearing, as some say, to King Charles. I will first put him out
of doubt, that this addition was King Charles his; then show him his mistake in
the matter it self. And first, in the first year of that King, Apr. 26. 1626.
it was thus enacted at a public Chapter of the Order, viz. That all Knights
and Companions of the Order, shall wear upon the left part of their Cloaks,
Coats, and riding Cassocks at all times when they shall not wear their Roabs,
and in all places of Assembly, an Escocheon of the Arms of St. George, id est,
a Cross within a Garter, not enriched with Pearls or Stones: in token of the
honor which they hold from the said most noble Order, instituted and ordained
for persons of the highest worth and honor. Our Author, secondly, may perceive
by this Act of the Kings, that St. Georges Cross within the Garter, is the
main device enjoined to be worn by all the Knights of that noble Order; to
which the adding of the Sun in his glory served but for ornament and
imbellishing, and might be either used or not used (but only for conformities
sake) as they would themselves.


Fuller. This Sun in Glory affords me small light, so that I can see but very
little (if any thing at all) which I have to alter.


Dr. Heylin. So many Errors in so few lines one shall hardly meet with.


Fuller. Yea, with more in fewer lines, even in the Animadvertor himself, in
laying down the Root and Branches of the noble family of the Montagues:
Mistakes the more remarkable, because done in correction of Mr. Sanderson, and
making more faults that He mendeth; Or rather all is but one mistake, resulting
from a continued complication of omissions, confusions, and transpositions.


Advertisements on the History of the Reign of King James, page 21, 22.
Fol. 490. Sir Edward Montague had three sons, Edward the eldest Knight of
the Bath, etc.] The Author here is much mistaken in the House of the Montagues.

For first, that Edward Montague who was Knight of the Bath, etc. was not
Brother to James Bishop of Winchester, and Henry Earl of Manchester, but their
Brothers Son, that is to say, the Son of another Edward their eldest Brother.

Secondly, besides that, Edward, James, and Henry, there was another Brother
whom the Author names not, though he could not choose but know the man, viz. Sir
Sidney Montague, one of the Masters of the Requests to the late King Charles.
Therefore to set this matter right, I am to let both him and his Readers know,
that Sir Edward Montague chief Justice in the time of King Edward the sixth,
was father of another Edward who lived peaceably and nobly in his own Country.
To whom succeeded a third Edward, who sought for honor in the Wars, and gained
the reputation of a good Commander* the elder Brother of James, Henry, and
Sidney before mentioned, and the father of a fourth Edward who was made Knight
of the Bath, at the Coronation of King James, Anno 1603. and afterward created
Lord Montague of Boughton in the nineteenth year of that King, Anno 1621. which
honorable Title is now enjoyed by his Son (another Edward) Anno 1658.

And thirdly, though I grant that Dr. James Montague Bishop of Winchester (the
second Brother of the four) was of great power and favor in the time of King
James.

Thus far Dr. Heylin, out of his Advertisements, written in correction of Mr.
Sandersons History of the Reign of King James.

To rectify this heap of Errors, not to be paralleled in any Author
(pretending to the emendation of another) I have here plainly set down the
Male-pedegree of this Noble, Numerous, and successful Family.

1 Sir Edward Montague, Lord Chief Justice in the Reign of King Henry the
eighth. 2 Sir Edward Montague, a worthy Patriot, in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth. Sir Walter Montague Knight, second Son, died without Issue. Sir
Henry Montague third Son, Earl of Manchester, Lord Chief Justice, Lord
Treasurer, etc. Edw. Montague now Earl of Manchester, besides other Sons.

3 Sir Edward Montague, made Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of King James
(never a Martialist,) and created by Him Baron Montague of Boughton, dying in
the beginning of the Civil Wars. William Mountague Esquire of the Middle Temple,
second Son. 4 Edward now Lord Montague of Boughton. Ralfe Montague Esquire second
Son. Edward Montague Esquire eldest Son.
Christopher Montague third Son, died before his Father, being a most hopeful
Gentleman.
Sir Charles Montague fourth Son, who did good service in Ireland; and left
three Daughters and Coheirs. James Montague fifth Son, Bishop of Winchester,
died unmarried. Sir Sidney Montague sixth Son, Master of the Requests. Edward
Montague now Admiral, and one of the Lords of the Council.




I presume the Animadvertor will allow me exact in this Family, which has
reflected so favorably upon me, that I desire (and indeed deserve) to live no
longer, than whilst I acknowledge the same.

THE FOURTH BOOK. From the first preaching of Wickliffe, to the beginning of
the Reign of King Henry the eighth.
Dr. Heylin. OUR Author begins this Book with the Story of Wickliffe, and
continues it in relating the successes of him and his followers, to which he
seems so much addicted, as to Christen their Opinions by the name of the
Gospel: For, speaking of such encouragements and helps as were given to
Wickliffe by the Duke of Lancaster, with other advantages, which the conditions
of those times did afford unto him, he adds, That,

Fol. 129. We must attribute the main to Divine Providence blessing the
Gospel.] A name too high to be bestowed upon the Fancies of a private man, many
of whose Opinions were so far from truth, so contrary to peace and civil Order,
so inconsistent with the Government of the Church of Christ, as make them
utterly unworthy to be looked on as a part of the Gospel. Or if the Doctrines
of Wickliffe must be called the Gospel, what shall become of the Religion then
established in the Realm of England, and in most other parts of the Western
World? Were all but Wickliffes Followers relapsed to Heathenism; were they
turned Jews, or had embraced the Law of Mahomet? If none of these, and that
they still continued in the faith of Christ, delivered to them in the Gospels
of the four Evangelists and other Apostolical Writers, Wickliffes new
Doctrines could not challenge the name of Gospel, no^ ought it to be given to
him by the Pen of any. But such is the humor of some men, as to call every
separation from the Church of Rome, by the name of Gospel, the greater the
separation is, the more pure the Gospel. No name but that of Evangelici would
content the Germans when they first separated from that Church, and reformed
their own: And Harry Nichols, when he separated from the German Churches, and
became the Father of Familists, bestows the name of Evangelium Regni on his
Dreams and Dotages. Gospels of this kind we have had, and may have too many,
quot Capita t^t Fides, as many Gospels, in a manner, as Sects and Sectaries, if
this world go on.

Now as Wickliffes Doctrines are advanced to the name of Gospel, so his
Followers whatsoever they were) must be called Gods servants, the Bishops being
said fol. 151. to be busy in persecuting Gods servants; and for what crime
soever, they were brought to punishment, it must be thought they suffered only
for the Gospel and the service of God. A pregnant evidence whereof we have in
the story of Sir John Oldcastle, accused in the time of King Harry the fifth
for a design to kill the King and his Brethren, actually in Arms against that
King in the head of 20000 men, Stow in Hen 5.
attainted for the same in open Parliament, and condemned to die, and executed
in St. Giles his Fields accordingly, as both Sir Roger Acton his principal
Counselor, and 37 of his Accomplices had been before. For this we have not
only the Authority of our common Chronicles, Walsingham, Stow, and many
others; but the Records of the Tower, and Acts of Parliament, as is confessed
by our Author, fol. 168. Yet coming out of Wickliffes Schools, and the chief
Scholar questionless which was trained up in them, he must be Registered for a
Martyr in Fox his Calendar. And though our Author dares not quit him, (as he
says himself) yet such is his tenderness and respect to Wickliffes Gospel,
that he is loath to load his Memory with causlesse Crimes; fol. 167. taxes the
Clergy of that time for their hatred to him, discrediteth the relation of T.
Walsingham, and all later Authors, who are affirmed to follow him, as the Flock
their Belweather; and finally leaves it as a special verdict to the last day of
the Revelation of the righteous Judgments of God.


Fuller. First, I fain would know, whether the Animadvertor would be contented
with the Condition of the Church of England, as Wickliffe found it, for
Opinions and Practice, and does not earnestly desire a Reformation thereof.

I am charitably confident, that He does desire such an Emendation, and
therefore being both of us agreed in this Point of the convenience, yea
necessity thereof; in the second place I would as fain be satisfied from the
Animadvertor, whether He conceived it possible, that such Reformation could be
advanced (without Miracle) all on a sudden, so that many gross Errors would
not continue, and some new one be superadded.

The man in the Gospel first saw men walking as trees, before he saw perfectly.
Nature has appointed the Twilight as a Bridge to pass us out of Night into
Day. Such false and wild opinions (like the Acts 9.18.
Scales, which fell down from the Eyes of St. Paul, when perfectly restored to
his sight) have either vanished or been banished, out of all Protestant
Confession.

Far be it from me to account the rest of England relapsed into Atheism, or
lapsed in Judaism, Turcism, etc. whom I behold as Erroneous Christians in
Doctrine and Practice, and yet still in such a condition, that though so living
and dying, if they lead a good life, and being weak, ignorant, and seduced,
seriously repented of all their sins of ignorance, they might be saved; closing
fully with the moderate Judgment of learned Hooker herein.

I know that the very worst of Heretics, have assumed to themselves the very
best of Names, gilding themselves over with the Title of Gospellers, and the
like; but because Thieves often pretend themselves honest men, may not honest
men avow themselves to be so, and also be so termed by others?

The words of the Animadvertor of Wickliffs Gospel, might well have been
spared, seeing indeed it was Christ's Gospel ( dawning is part of day) preached
by Wickliffe, in a purer manner than in that Age, (thanks to God it was then so
good;) impurer than in our Age, thanks be to God it now is better.

As for Sir John Oldcastle L. Cobham, his Case is so perplexed with contrary
relations much may be said against him, and little less in his behalf; and I
have cause to believe indeed, that his Innocence wanted not clearness but
clearing.

Whereas the Animadvertor takes exception at my referring the Decision hereof
to the revelation of the righteous judgment of God, it must be Either because
1. That Time will come too soon to decide the Controversy. 2. Or else come too
late to decide the Controversy. 3. Or else be insufficient to decide the
Controversy.
And having no just cause to suspect any of these, it had been better if my (or
rather St. Romans 2.5.
Paul's words) had passed without his reprehension.


Dr. Heylin. From the Scholar pass we to the Master, of whom it is reported in
a late Popish Pamphlet, that he made a recantation of his Errors, and lived and
dyed conformable to the Church of Rome. This I will behold as a notorious
falsehood, an imposture of the Romish party, though the argument used by our
Author, be not of strength sufficient to enforce me to it. If, says he,
Wickliffe was sufficiently reconciled to the Roman faith, why was not Rome
sufficiently reconciled to him? Using such cruelty to him many years after his
death, fol. 171. But this, say I, is no reason, of no force at all. Wickliffe
might possibly be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and yet the Ministers of
that Church, to strike a terror into others, might execute that veng^ance on
him after his decease, which they had neither power nor opportunity to do when
he was alive. Quam vivo iracundiam debuerant, in corpus mortui contulerunt. And
hereof we have a fair example in Marcus Antonius de Dominis Archbishop of
Spalato, who coming into England 1616. did manifestly oppose the Doctrines of
the Church of Rome in some learned Volumes. But being cunningly wrought on by
some Emissaries of the Romish party in the year 1622. he went back to Rome, was
reconciled to that Church, and writ there most reproachfully of the Church of
England; which notwithstanding, he was kept prisoner all the rest of his life,
and his body burnt to ashes after his decease. So then it is no such new matter
for a dissenting Christian, such as Wickliff and de Dominis were, though
branded by the name of Heretics, to be admitted to a reconciliation with the
Church of Rome, and yet that Church to carry a revengefull mind toward them
when occasion serves.


Fuller. I answer first, I am not the first who have discovered strong
affections, with a weak Judgment, endeavoring to prove a Truth with a
non-cogent, and un-concluding Argument, in case my reason should be disproved.

Secondly, Spalato is no proper parallel of Wickliffe, in this point. Spalato
contracted a new Out of exact intelligence sent from his near Kindred, to
Venice, and thence to Mr. Calendrine, now Minister of the Dutch Church.
Guilt, by bragging at the Table of a Cardinal in Rome, that his Book de Repub.
Eccles. could be answered by none but himself; and dum calebat, whilst the
scent hereof was hot, they burnt his Body when but lately dead: Whereas their
despite followed Wickliffe at a distance more than forty years after his
Death, on no pretended new misdemeanor.

Lastly, the Animadvertor comes up unto me, in allowing Wickliffe his
Reconciliation to Rome, a notorious untruth; and therefore we may proceed to
what is more material, wherein we two shall apppear two, being, it seems, but
one in this difference.


Dr. Heylin. And all this while we have expected that our Author would have
given us a brief Summary of Wickliffes Doctrines, that by seeing the Piety and
Orthodoxie of his Opinions, we might have thought more reverently both of him
and his Followers. But the^ein our expectation must remain unsatisfied, our
Author thinking it more agreeable to his Design to hold the Reader in suspense,
and conceal this from him: dealing herein as the old Germans did with those of
other Nations, who came to wait upon Valeda a great Queen amongst them; not
suffering any to have a sight of her, to keep them in a greater admiration of
her Parts and Person. Hist. lib. ^.
Arcebantur aspectu quo plus venerationis inesset, as it is in Tacitus. The
wheat of Wickliffe was so foul, so full of chaff, and intermingled with so many
and such dangerous Tares, that to expose it to the view, were to mar the
market. And therefore our Author having formerly honored his Opinions by the
name of Gospel, and his followers with the Title of Gods servants, as before
was noted; had reason not to show them all at once, in a lump together, that we
might think them better and more Orthodox than indeed they were. But the best
is (to save us the trouble of consulting Harpsfield, and others who have
written of them) our Author has given them us at last on another occasion,
Lib. 5. fol. 208. many of which the Reader may peruse in these Animadversions,
Numb. 113. Thus having laid together so much of this present Book as relates to
Wickliffe and his followers, I must behold the rest in fragments, as they lie
before me.


Fuller. Wickliffes Doctrines, so called, fall under a double notion, being
either such as were 1. Charged on Him. 2. Maintained by Him.
For the former, no Fault of Omission can be found in me, having given in (in a
full Sheet Church. Hist. 4. Book, p. 131.
) a Catalogue of them, digested under several Heads, as concerning the Pope,
Prelates, Priests, Saints, King, Christ, God, with the Tome, Book, Article,
Chapter, where they are to be found in T. Waldensis.

Sure I am, they were not so bad in all particulars as he there represents
them. If the Animadvertor a Protestant, living with me in the same suffering
Age, In his Introduction.
accuse me for accounting Murdering of Kings for necessary Prudence, as often as
they shall fall into the power of their Subjects, which I abhor in my heart,
and no such thing appears in the place cited; no wonder if Waldensis charged on
Wickliffe abominable Errors, which he cordially detested.

As for the Doctrines which Wickliffe did maintain, we have some, but want an
exact List of them; and I believe it is past the power of any Author alive to
present it entire (defecated from the calumniations of his Adversaries;) and
therefore impossibilities are not to be expected from me.

Yet am I not such an Admirer of Wickliffe, but that I believe he did defend
some gross Errors; and it had been no wonder if it were, but had been a
miracle if it had not been so, considering the frailty of flesh, darkness of
the Age he lived in, and difficulty of the Subject he undertook. But because
the Animadvertor referres to something following in my fifth Book; I will also
reserve my self for his Encounter in time and place appointed.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 152. He lies buried in the South Isle of
St. Peter's Westminster, and since has got the company of Spencer and Drayton.]
Not Draytons company I am sure, whose body was not buried in the South-Isle of
that Church, but under the North wall thereof in the main body of it, not far
from a little door which opens into one of the Prebends houses. This I can
say on certain knowledge, being casually invited to his Funeral, when I thought
not of it; though since his Statua has been set up in the other place which
our Author speaks of.


Fuller. I follow the Information in his Epitaph on his Tomb, near the South
door in Westminster Abbey. Do Pious Marble, let the Readers know
What they, and what their Children owe
To DRAITONS name, whose sacred Dust
We recommend unto thy trust.
Preserve his Memory, and protect his Story,
Remain a lasting Monument of his Glory.
And When thy Ruin shall disclaim
To be the Treasurer of his name,
His name, which cannot dye, shall be
An Everlasting Monument to thee.


Have Stones learnt to Lie, and abuse posterity? Must there needs be a Fiction
in the Epitaph of a Poet? If this be a mere Cenotaph, that Marble has nothing
to do with Draitons Dust: but let us proceed.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 153. The right to the Crown lay not in
this Henry, but in Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, descended by his Mother
Philippa, from Lionel Duke of Clarence, elder son to Edward the third.] I shall
not now dispute the Title of the House of Lancaster, though I think it no hard
matter to defend it.


Fuller. I think it is not only difficult, but impossible, except the
Animadvertor can challenge the Privilege of the Patriarch Genesis 48.14.
Jacob, to cross his Hands, and prefer the younger before the Elder Child, in
succession.

Again, the Title of Lancaster may be considered, either 1. As it was when
Henry the fourth first found it. 2. As it was when Henry the sixth last left it.


The latter of these was countenanced with many Laws, corroborated with three
descents, and almost threescore years possession.

Know Reader, my words are of the right, where it was when Henry the fourth
first seized the Crown, and then he had not a Rag of Right to cover his
Usurpation. Instead of justifying whereof, let us admire Gods free Pleasure, in
permitting the House of Lancaster to last so long; his Justice, in assisting
York afterward to recover their Right; and his Mercy at last, in uniting them
both, for the happiness of our Nation.


Dr. Heylin. And much less shall I venture on the other controversy, viz.
whether a King may Legally be deposed? as is insinuated by our Author in the
words foregoing.


Fuller. If seems the Animadvertor finds little in my Book above ground for his
purpose to cavil at, because fain to Mine for my insinuations. But let the
Reader judge, whether any man alive can from those my words, the right lay not
in this Henry, but in Mortimer Earl of March, infer an INSINUATION, that Kings
may legally be deposed. This Insinuation must be in Sinu, in the Bosom of the
Animadvertor, which never was in the breast of the Author. More perspicacitie
must be in the Organ, than perspicuity in the Object, to perceive such an
Insinuation.


Dr. Heylin. But I dare grapple with him in a point of Heraldry, though I find
him better studied in it, than in matter of History. And certainly our Author
is here out, in his own dear Element: Camden in Radnor 624*
Edmund Mortimer Earl of March not being the Son, but Husband of the Lady
Philippa Daughter of Lionel Duke of Clarence, and Mother of Roger Mortimer Earl
of March, whom Richard the second (to despite the house of Lancaster) declared
Heir apparent to the Kingdom of England. It Is true, this Edmund was the Son of
another Philippa, that is to say, of Philip Montacute, wife of a former Roger
Earl of March, one of the founders of the Garter. So that in whomsoever the
best Title lay, it lay not in this Edmond Mortimer as our Author makes it.


Fuller. It is a mere casual slip of my Pen, Edmund for Roger, and this is the
first time I crave the Benefit of this Plea in my defense.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 154. This is one of the clearest
distinguishing Characters betwixt the Temporal and Spiritual Lords; that the
former are to be tried per Pares, by their Peers, being Barons of the Realm.]
Not shall I here dispute the point, whether a Bishop may not challenge to be
tried by his Peers, but whether the Bishops were not Barons and Peers of the
Realm. Our Author intimates that they were not, but I think they were.


Fuller. From a late Insinuation, the Animadvertor now proceeds to a new
Intimation of mine, utterly unextractable from my words. But know, it never
came into my mind to think that Bishops were not Peers, who to my power will
defend it against any who shall oppose it.


Dr. Heylin. Seldom. Tit. Hon. part. 2. c. 5.
And this I think on the authority of the learned Seldom, in whom we find, that
at a Parliament at Northampton under Henry the second the Bishops thus
challenge their own Peerage, viz. Non sedemus hic Episcopi, sed Barons; Nos
Barons, vos Barons; Pares hic sumus: that is to say, We sit not here as
Bishops only, but as Barons; We are Barons, and you are Barons; here we sit as
Peers. Which last is also verified in terminis, Stat. 25. Edw. Antiquit.
Britan. in Stratf.
by the words of a Statute or Act of Parliament, wherein the Bishops are
acknowledged to be Peers of the Land. And for further proof hereof, John
Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury (if I remember it aright) being fallen into
the displeasure of King Edward the third, and denied entrance into the House of
Peers, made his Protest, that he was Primus par Regni, the first Peer of the
Realm, and therefore not to be excluded from his place and Suffrage.


Fuller. This indeed is one of the most ancient and pregnant Evidence of our
Bishops sitting as Peers in Parliament. But I suspect it may be mis-improved by
the Back-friends to Bishops, that they sat there only in the Capacity of
Peers, and not a THIRD ESTATE.


Dr. Heylin. But of this Argument enough, if not too much, as the case now
stands; it being an unhappy thing, to consider what they have been formerly,
and what they are at this present.


Fuller. It is a sad Truth which the Animadvertor says. And here I cannot but
remember David 2 Samuel 15.25.
his expression, when flying from Absalom, If I shall find favor in the Eyes
of the Lord, he will bring me again: But if he say, I have no delight in thee,
behold, here I am, etc. If it be co^sistent with the good will and pleasure of
God, in due time he will Boy up again the sunk credit of the Clergy; if not,
all must submit to him, whose ways are often above reason, never against right.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 156. Yea this very Statute which gave
power to a Bishop in his Diocese to condemn an Heretic, plainly proves that
the King by consent of Parliament, directed the proceedings of the
Ecclesiastical Court in Cases of Heresy.] The Bishops and Clergy in their
Convocations had anciently the power of declaring Heresy, the Bishops singly
in their Consistories to proceed against them, by injoyning penance and
recantation, or otherwise to subject them to Excommunication. The Statute which
our Author speaks of, being 2 H. 4. c. 15. proceeds further, and ordained in
favor of the Church, that the Ordinary might not only convent, but imprison
the party suspected of Heresy, and that the party so convented and convicted
of Heresy, and continuing obstinate in the same, should upon a certificate
thereof made and delivered to the Secular Judge, be publicly burned before the
People. In order whereunto, as in a matter which concerned the life of a
Subject, the King with the advice of his Parliament, might lay down some rules
for the regulating the proceedings of the Bishops and other Ordinaries.


Fuller. There be two distinct things which in this Point must be severally
considered, 1. To declare and define, what shall be accounted Heresy. 2. To
condemn to Death a declared Heretic.


The Power of the former was in this Age fixed in the Bishops (without any
competition) and is so clear none can question it. Yea by the same Power, they
might proceed against a declared Heretic (without any leave or liceence from
King or Parliament,) so far as Church Censures, Suspensions, Excommunications,
etc. could extend.

But as for the latter, to condemn them to Death, herein the Common Law began,
where the Cannon Law ended, and regulated their proceedings accordingly.


Dr. Heylin. But certainly it is a sorry piece of Logic to conclude from
hence, that generally in all cases of Heresy, the King with advice of his
Parliament directed the proceedings of the Ecclesiastical Courts. A piece of
Logic shall I call it, or a Fallacy rather, a Fallacy a d^cto secundum quid ad
dictum simpliciter, committed commonly, when from a proposition which is true
only in some respect, with reference to time, place, and other circumstances,
the Sophister infers something, as if simply true, though in it self it be
most absolutely false. As for example, The Pope even in matters of spiritual
cognizance (for so it follows in our Author) had no power over the life's of
the English Subjects; and therefore had then no power to proceed against them
in point of Heresy.


Fuller. I intended not, nor have I abused the Reader with any fallacious
argumentation. It is true (...), the King and Parliament directed the
proceedings of the Ecclesiastical Court in cases of Heresy: I mean not to
decide which were Heresies, but to order the Power of the Bishop over declared
Heretics, without the direction of the Statute, not to proceed to Limb and
Life: And I believe my words will be found transcribed out of Sir Edward Coke
his most elaborate Report of the Kings power in Ecclesiastical matters.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 161. Henry the seventh ( born in the
Bowels of Wales at Pembroke, etc.) some years after plucked down the Partition
Wall betwixt them.] Neither so, nor so. For first Pembroke does not stand in
the Bowels of Wales, but almost on the outside of it; as being situate on one
of the Creeks of Milford-Haven.


Fuller. Pembroke (though verging to the Sea) may properly be called in the
Bowels of Wales, beholding the Marches [next England] as the outward Skin
thereof. Bowels are known to the Latins by the name of Penetralia, a
penetrando; one must pierce and pass so far from the outward skin, before
one can come at them. So is Pembroke placed in the very Penetrals of Wales,
seeing the Travailer must go six-score miles from England, before he can come
thither.


Dr. Heylin. And secondly King Henry the seventh did not break down the
Partition Wall between Wales and England. That was a work reserved for King
Harry the eighth, in the 27. of whose Reign there past an Act of Parliament, by
which it was enacted, That the Country of Wales should be, stand, and continue
for ever, from thenceforth incorporated, united, and annexed to, and with this
Realm of England. And that all and singular person and persons born and to be
born in the said Principality, Country, or Dominion of Wales shall have, enjoy,
and inherit all and singular Freedoms, 27 H. 8 c. 26.
Liberties, Rights, Privileges, and Laws within this Realm and other the Kings
Dominions, as other the Kings Subjects naturally born within the same, have,
and enjoy, and inherit. And thirdly, between the time which our Author speaks
of, being the 14 year of King Henry the fourth, and the making of this Act by
King Henry the eighth, there passed above an hundred and twenty years, which
intimates a longer time than some years after, as our Author words it.


Fuller. Far be it from me to set variance betwixt Father and Son, and to make
a Partition Wall betwixt them, which of them first did break down the Partition
Wall betwixt Wales and England. The intentions of King Henry the seventh, were
executed by King Henry the eighth; and all shall be reformed in my Book
accordingly.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 168. I will not complain of the
dearnesse of this Universitie, where seventeen weeks cost me more than
seventeen years in Cambridge, even all that I had.] The ordinary and unwary
Reader might collect from hence, that Oxford is a chargeable place, and that
all commodities there are exceeding dear, but that our Author lets him know,
that it was on some occasion of disturbance.


Fuller. He must be a very Ordinary and unwary Reader indeed; or an
Extraordinary one (if you please) of no common weakness or willfulness so to
understand my words, which plainly expound themselves.


Dr. Heylin. By which it seems our Author does relate to the time of the War,
when men from all parts did repair to Oxford, not as a University, but a place
of safety, and the seat Royal of the King; at which time notwithstanding all
provisions were so plentiful and at such cheap rates, as no man had reason to
complain of the dearnesse of them. No better argument of the fertility of the
soil and richness of the Country in which Oxford stands, than that the
Markets were not raised on the accession of such infinite multitudes as
resorted to it at that time, and on that occasion. Our Author therefore must be
thought to relate unto somewhat else than is here expressed, and possibly may
be, that his being at Oxford at that time, brought him within the compass of
Delinquency, and consequently of Sequestration.


Fuller. I commend the carfulness of the Animadvertor, tender of the honor
of Oxford and Oxfordshire his native Country, as I have heard from his own
mouth. But herein his jealousy had no^ just cause, nothing derogatory
thereunto being by me intended herein. Oxfordshire has in it as much of Rachel
and Leah, fairness and fruitfulness, as in any County in England, and so God
willing in my description of the English Worthies I shall make to appear.


Dr. Heylin. And were it so, he has no reason to complain of the University,
or the dearnesse of it; but rather of himself, for coming to a place so
chargeable and destructive to him. He might have tarried where he was (for I
never heard that he was sent for) and then this great complaint against the
dearness of that University would have found no place.


Fuller. I was once sent up thither from London, being one of the Six, who was
chosen to carry a Petition for Peace to his Majesty, from the City of
Westminster and the Liberties thereof, though in the way remanded by the
Parliament.

As for my being sent for to Oxford, the Animadvertor I see has not heard of
all that was done. I thought that as St. Acts 26.29.
Paul wished all altogether such as he was, except these bonds; so the
Animadvertor would have wished all Englishmen like himself, save in his
sequestration, and rather welcomed than jeered such as went to Oxford. But let
him say and do as he pleases.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 175. Surely what Charles the fifth is
said to have said of the City of Florence, that it is pity it should be seen
save only on holidays, etc.] Our Author is somewhat out in this, in fathering
that saying on Charles the fifth, Emperor and King of Spain, which Boterus and
all other Authors ascribe to Charles Archduke of Austria; that is to say, to
Charles of Inspruch, one of the younger Sons of the Emperor Ferdinand the
first, and consequently Nephew to Charles the fifth.


Fuller. Nihil dictum, quod non dictum prius: And it is very probable that the
one first made, the other used the same expression.


Dr. Heylin. Nor is our Author very right in taking Aquensis for Aix in
Provence: Fol. 178. Especially (says he) if, as I take it, by Provensis Aix be
meant, sited in the farthermost parts of Provence, though even now the English
power in France was waning.] For first, the English never had any power in
Provence, no interest at all therein, nor pretentions to it; as neither had the
French Kings in the times our Author speaks of. Provence in those days was
independent of that Crown, an absolute Estate, and held immediately of the
Empire, as being a part and member of the Realm of Burgundy, and in the actual
possession of the Dukes of Anjou; on the expiring of which House, by the last
Will and Testament of Duke Rene the second, it was bequeathed to Lewis the
eleventh of France, by him and his Successors to be enjoyed upon the death of
Charles Earl of Maine, as it was accordingly. And secondly, that Bernard, whom
the Latin calls Episcopus Aquensis is very ill taken by our Author to be
Bishop of Aix. He was indeed Bishop of Acqus or Aux in Guinne called anciently
Aquae Augustae from whence those parts of France had the name of Aquitain; and
not of Aix (which the ancient Writers called Aquae Sextiae) in the Country of
Provence. Now Guinne was at that time in the power of the Kings of England,
which was the reason why this Bernard was sent with the rest of the
Commissioners to the Council of Basil; and being there, amongst the rest,
maintained the rights and preheminences of the English Kings.


Fuller. There is nothing more destructive to Truth, than when Writers are
peremptory in affirming what seems doubtful unto them. Errant Hypocrisy for
the Hand to be positive in a Point, when the Head is (as I may say) but
suppositive, as not sufficiently satisfied therein. Such men, because they
scorn to doubt, lead others quite out of the way.

To prevent this mischief, I only said, if, as I take it by Aquensis, Aix be
meant* for it seemed to me too long a stride, (or straddle rather) for the legs
of our English Armies to have any power in Provence. And now seeing it was but
hal^ a fault in me, it does not deserve the Animadvertors whole reproof.


Dr. Heylin. In agitating of which controversy, as it stands in our Author, I
find mention of one Johannes de Voragine, a worthless Author, fol. 181.
Mistook both in the name of the man, and his quality also. For first the Author
of the Book called Legenda aurea related to in their former passage, was not
Johannes, but Iacobus de Voragine. In which book, though there are many idle
and unwarrantable ^ictions; yet secondly was the man of more esteem, than to
pass under the Character of a worthless Author, as being learned for the
times in which he lived, Archbishop of Genoa a chief City of Italy, and moribus
and dignitate magno precio, as Philippus Bergomensis tells us of him, Anno
1290. at what time he lived; most eminent for his translation of the Bible into
the Italian tongue (as we read Vossius) a work of great both difficulty and
danger, Vossig. de Lat. Hist.
as the times then were, sufficient (were there nothing else) to free him from
the ignominious name of a worthless Author


Fuller. I here enter my public thanks to the Animadvertor, Iacobus de
Voragine (so it seems was his name) was a better Author than I took him for,
indeed having read that Melchior Canus called the author of some Legends, a man
ferrei oris et plumbei cordis, one of an Iron face and leaden heart, I
conceived him incended therein.

But if he did translate the Bible into Italian, (as I have cause to believe,
knowing nothing to the contrary,) it was, as the Animadvertor says well, a
work of great both difficulty, and danger, as the times then were.

I confess I have formerly in the Table of my Esteem, placed this Voragine as
the very lag at the lowest end thereof; But hereafter I shall say to him, come
up hither, and provide a higher place for him in my Reputation.


Dr. Heylin. A greater mistake than this, as to the person of the man, is that
which follows viz. Fol. 185. Humphry Duke of Gloucester son to King Henry the
fifth.] This though I cannot look on as a fault of the Press, yet I can easily
consider it as a slip of the Pen; it being impossible that our Author should be
so far mistaken in Duke Humphry of Gloucester, who was not son but brother to
King Henry the fifth.


Fuller. This being allowed (as indeed it is) but a Pen-slip, who is more
faulty, the Author in the cursorily committing, or the Animadvertor in the
deliberate censuring thereof?


Dr. Heylin. But I cannot think so charitably of some other errors of this kind,
which I find in his History of Cambridge, fol. 67. Where amongst the English
Dukes which carried the title of Earl of Cambridge, he reckons Edmond of
Langly fifth son to Edward the third, Edward his son, Richard Duke of York his
brother, father to King Edward the fourth. But first this Richard whom he
speaks of, though he were Earl of Cambridge by the consent of Edward his elder
brother, yet was he never Duke o^ York; Richard being executed at South-hampton
for treason against King Harry the fifth, before that Kings going into France,
and Edward his elder brother slain not long after in the Battle of Agincourt.
And secondly, this Richard was not the Father, but Grandfather of King Edward
the fourth. For being married unto Anne, sister and heir unto Edmond Mortimer
Earl of March, he had by her a son called Richard, improvidently restored in
blood, and advanced unto the Title of Duke of York, by King Henry the sixth,
Anno 1426. Who by the Lady Cecely his wife, one of the many D^ughters of Ralph
Earl of Westmerland, was father of King Edward the fourth, George Duke of
Clarence, and King Richard the third. Thirdly, as Richard E^rl of Cambridge was
not Duke of York, so Richard Duke of York was not Earl of Cambridge; though by
our Author made the last Earl thereof ( Hist. of Came. 162.) before the
restoring of that title on the House of the Hamiltons.


Fuller. This has formerly been answered at large in the Introduction, wherein
it plainly appears, that the last Richard was Duke of York and Earl of
Cambridge: though I confess it is questionable, whether his Father were Duke
of York.

However it does my work, viz. That the Earldome of Cambridge was always (the
first alone excepted) conferred on either a foreign Prince, or an English Peer
of the Blood-royall, an honor not communicated to any other Peer in England.


Dr. Heylin. If our Author be no better at a pedigree in private Families, then
he is in those of Kings and Princes, I shall not give him much for his Art of
memory, for his History less, and for his Heraldry just nothing.


Fuller. When I intend to expose them to sale, I know where to meet with a
francker Chapman. None alive ever heard me pretend to the Art of memory, who in
my book have decried it as a Trick, Holy State, title Memory.
no Art; and indeed is more of fancy than memory. I confess some ten years
since, when I came out of the Pulpit of St. Dunstons-East; One (who since wrote
a book thereof,) told me in the Vestry, before credible people* That he in
Sydney College, had taught me the Art of memory. I returned unto him, that it
was not so; for I could not remember that I had ever seen his face; which I
conceive, was a real Refutation. However, seeing that a natural memory is the
best flower in mine, and not the worst in the Animadvertors garden, Let us turn
our competitions herein, unto mutual thinkfulnesse to the God of heaven.


Dr. Heylin. But I see our Author is as good at the succession of Bishops, as
in that of Princes. For says he, speaking of Cardinal Beaufort, Fol. 185. He
built the fair Hospital of St. Cross near Winchester; and although Chancellor
of the Univesity of Oxford, was no grand benefactor thereunto, as were his
Predecessors Wickam and Wainfleet.] Wickham and Wainfleet are here made the
Predecessors of Cardinal Beaufort in the Sea of Winchester; whereas in very
deed, though he succeeded Wickham in that Bishopric, he preceded Wainfleet.
For in the Catalogue of the Bishops of Winchester they are marshulled thus,
viz. 1365. 50. William of Wickham, 1405. 51. Henry Beaufort, 1447. 52. William
de Wainfleet, which last continued Bishop till the year 1485 the Sea being kept
by these three Bishops above 120. years, and thereby giving them great
Advantages of doing those excellent works, and founding those famous Colleges,
which our Author rightly has ascribed to the first and last. But whereas our
Author ^elleth us also of this Cardinal Beaufort, that he built the Hospital of
St. Cross, he is as much out in that, Camb. in Ham. fol 267.
as he was in the other; that Hospital being first built by Henry of Blais,
Brother of King Stephen and Bishop of Winchester, Auno 1129. augmented only,
and perhaps more liberally endowed by this Potent Cardinal. From these
Foundations made and enlarged by these three great Bishops of Winchester
successively, proceed we to two others raised by King Henry the sixth, of which
our Author tells us.


Fuller. What a piece of DON QUIXOTISME is this, for the Animadvertor to fight
in confutation of that which was formerly confessed? These words being thus
fairly entered in the Table of Errataes.

Book page line 4. 185. 22. read it thus, of his Predecessor Wickham, or
Successor Wainfleet.

Faults thus fairly confessed, are presumed fully forgiven; and faults thus
fully forgiven, have their guilt returning no more. In the Court Christian,
such might have been sued, who upbraided their Neighbors for incontinence,
after they formerly had performed public penance for the same. And I hope the
Reader will allow me Reparation from the Animadvertor, for a fault so causlesly
taxed, after it was so clearly acknowledged, and amended.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 183. This good precedent of the
Archbishops bounty (that is to say, the foundation of All Souls College by
Archbishop Chicheley) may be presumed a spur to the speed of the Kings
liberality; who soon after founded Eaton College, etc. to be a Nursery to
Kings College in Cambridge, fol. 184.] Of Eaton College, and the condition of
the same, our Author has spoken here at large, but we must look for the
foundation of Kings College, in the History of Cambridge, fol. 77. where I
find something which requires an Animadversion. Our Author there charge Dr.
Heylin for avowing something which he cannot justify, that is to say, for
saying, That when William of Wainfleet Bishop of Winchester (afterward founder
of Magdalen College) persuaded King Henry the Sixth, to erect some Monument
for Learning in Oxford, the King returned, Imo potius Cantabrigiae, ut duas (si
fieri possit) in Anglia Academias habeam. Yea rather (said he) at Cambridge,
that (if it be possible) I may have two Universities in England. As if
Cambridge were not reputed one before the founding of Kings College therein.
But here the premises only are the Doctors, the inference or conclusion is
our Authors own. The Doctor infers not thereupon, that Cambridge was not
reputed an University till the founding of Kings College by King Henry the
sixth; and indeed he could not: for he acknowledged before out of Robert de
Renington, that it was made an University in the time of King Edward the
second. All that the Doctor says, is this, that as the University of Cambridge
was of a later foundation then Oxford was, so it was long before it grew into
esteem, that is to say, to such a measure of esteem at home or abroad (before
the building of Kings College, and the rest that followed) but that the King
might use those words in his discourse with the Bishop of Winchester. And for
the Narrative, the Doctor (whom I have talked with in this business) does not
shame to say, that he borrowed it, from that great Treasury of Academical
Antiquities Mr. Brian Twine, whose learned Works stand good against all
Opponents; and that he found the passage justified by Sir Isaac Wake in his
Rex Platonicus. Two Persons of too great wit and judgment, to relate a matter
of this nature on no better ground than common Table-talk, and that too spoke
in merriment by Sir Henry Savil. Assuredly Sir Henry Savil was too great a
Zealot for that University, and too much a friend to Mr. Wake, who was Fellow
of the same College with him, to have his Table-talk and discourses of
merriment to be put upon Record as grounds and arguments for such men to build
on in that weighty Controversy. And therefore when our Author tells us, what
he was told by Mr. Hubbard, Mr. Hubbard by Mr. Barlow, Mr. Barlow by Mr. Bust,
and Mr. Bust by Sir Henry Savil. It brings into my mind the like Pedigree of
as true a Story, even that of Mother Miso in Sir Philip Sidney, telling the
young Ladies an old Tale, which a good old woman told her, which an old wise
man told her, which a great learned Clerk told him, and gave it him in writing;
and there she had it in her Prayer Book; as here our Author has found this on
the end of his Creed. Not much unlike to which, is that which I find in the
Poet; Quae Phaebo Pater omnipotens, mihi Phoebus Apollo
Praedix^t, vobis Furiarum ego maxima pando.


That is so say, What Jove told Phoebus, Phoebus told to me,
And I the chief of Furies tell to thee.



Fuller. The controversy betwixt us consists about a pretended Speech of King
Henry the sixth, to Bishop Wainfleet, persuading him to found a College at
Oxford. To whom the King is said to return, Yea rather at Cambridge, that (if
it be possible) I may have two Universities in England.

A passage pregnant with an Inference, which delivers it self without any
Midwifry to help it, viz. that till the time of King Henry the sixth, Cambridge
was no, or but an obs^ure University, both being equally untrue.

The Animadvertor will have the speech grounded on good Authority, whilst I
more than suspect to have been the frolic of the fancy of S. Isaac Wake,
citing my Author for my belief, which because removed four descents, is, I
confess, of the less validity: Yet is it better to take a Truth from the
tenth, than a Falsehood from the first hand.

Both our Relations ultimately terminate in Sir Isaac Wake, by the
Animadvertor confessed the first printed Reporter thereof. I confess S. I. Wake
needed none but Sr. Isaac Wake, to attest the truth of such thing, which he
had heard or seen himself. In such Case his bare Name commands credit with
Posterity. But relating a passage done at distance, some years before his great
Grandfather was rockt in his Cradle, we may and must do that right to our own
Judgment, as civily to require of him security for what he affirms,
especially seeing it is so clogged with such palpable improbabilitie. Wherefore,
till this Knights invisible Author be brought forth into light, I shall remain
the more confirmed in my former Opinion, Rex Platonicus alone sounding to me in
this point no more than Plato's Commonwealth; I mean, a mere Wit work, or
Brain-Being, without any other real existence in Nature.


Dr. Heylin. But to proceed, Fol. 190. This was that Nevil, who for Extraction,
Estate, Alliance, Dependents, Wisdom, Valor, Success, and Popularity, was
superior to any English Subject since the Conquest.] Our Author speaks this of
that Richard Nevil who was first Earl of Warwick, in right of Anne his Wife,
Sister and Heir of Henry Beauchamp, the last of that Family, and after Earl of
Salisbury by descent from his Father; a potent and popular man indeed, but yet
not in all or in any of those respects to be matched with Henry of Bullenbrook,
son to John of Gaunt, whom our Author must needs grant to have lived since the
time of the Conquest. Which Henry after the death of his Father was Duke of
Lancaster and Hereford, Earl of Leicester, Lincoln, and Darby, etc. and Lord
High Steward of England: Possessed by the donation of King Henry the third, of
the County Palatine of Lancaster, the forfeited Estates of Simon de Montfort
Earl of Leicester, Robert de Ferrars Earl of Darby, and John Lord of Monmouth;
By the compact made between Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and Alice his Wife, of
the Honor of Pomfret, the whole Estate of the Earl of Lincoln, and a great part
of the Estates of the Earl of Salisbury; of the goodly Territories of Ogmore
and Kidwelly in Wales, in right of his descent from the Chaworths; of the Honor
and Castle of Hartford by the grant of King Edward the third; and of the Honor
of Tickhill in Yorkshire, by the donation of King Richard the second; and
finally of a Moity of the vast Estate of Humphry de Bohun Earl of Hereford,
Essex, and Northampton in right of his Wife. So royal in his Extraction, that
he was Grandchilde unto one King, Cousin-german to another, Father and
Grandfather to two more. So popular when a private person, and that too in the
life of his Father, that he was able to raise and head an Army against Richard
the Second, with which he discomfited the Kings Forces, under the command of
the Duke of Ireland. So fortunate in his Successes, that he not only had the
better in the Battle mentioned, but came off with Honor and Renown in the War
of Africa, and finally obtained the Crown of England. And this I trow, renders
him much Superior to our Authors Nevil, whom he exceeded also in this
particular, that he dyed in his bed, and left his Estates unto his Son. But
having got the Crown by the murder of his Predecessor, it stayed but two
descents in his Line, being unfortunately lost by King Henry the sixth: of
whom, being taken and imprisoned by those of the Yorkish Faction, our Author
tells us.


Fuller. It never came into my thoughts, to extend the Parallel beyond the line
of Subjection, confining it to such as moved only in that Sphere, living and
dying in the Station of a Subject; and thus far I am sure I am ^ight, that this
our Nevil was not equaled, much less exceeded, by any Englishman since the
Conquest.

As for Henry Duke of Lancaster, his Coronet was afterward turned into a
Crown, and I never intended comparison with one who became a Sovereign, having
learnt, primum in unoquoque Genere, est excipiendum.

The Animadvertor has here taken occasion to write much, but thereof nothing
to confute me, and little to inform others. He deserved to be this King
Henry's Chaplain (if living in that Age) for his exactness in the distinct
enumeration of all his Dignities and Estate, before he came to the Crown.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds Fol. 190. That Statesmen do admire how blind
the Policy of that Age was, in keeping King Henry alive, there being no such
sure Prison as a Grave for a Cap^ive King, whose life (though in restraint) is
a fair mark for the full Aim of mal-contents to practice his enlargement.] Our
Author might have spared this Doctrine so frequently in practice amongst the
worldly Politicians of all times and ages, Ovid Met. Lib. 2.
that there is more need of a Bridle to hold them in, than a Spur to quicken
them. Parce precor stimulis, and fortius utere loris, had been a wholesome
caveat there, had any friend of his been by to have advised him of it. The
murdering of deposed and Captive Princes, though too often practiced, never
found Advocates to plead for it, and much less Preachers to preach for it,
History of Florence.
until these latter times. First made a Maxim of State in the School of
Machiavel, who lays it down for an Aphorism in point of policy, viz. that
great Persons must not at all be touched, or if they be, must be made sure from
taking Revenge; inculcated afterward by the Lord Gray, who being sent by King
James to intercede for the life of his Mother, did underhand solicit her
death, and whispered nothing so much in Queen Elizabeth's ears, Camdens Annals.
An. 1656.
as Mortua non mordet, if the Scots Queen were once dead, she would never bite.
But never pressed so home, never so punctually applied to the case of Kings, as
here I find it by our Author; of whom it cannot be affirmed, that he speaks in
this case the sense of others, but positively and plainly does declare his own.
No such divinity preached in the Schools of Ignatius, though fitter for the Pen
of a Mariana, than of a Divine or Minister of the Church of England. Which
whether it passed from him, before or since the last sad accident of this
nature, it comes all to one; this being like a two-hand-sword made to strike on
both sides, and if it come too late for instruction, will serve abundantly
howsoever for the justification. Another note we have within two leaves after
as derogatory to the Honor of the late Archbishop, as this is dangerous to the
Estate of all Sovereign Princes, if once they chance to happen into the hands
of their Enemies. But of this our Author will give me an occasion to speak
more in another place, and then he shall hear further from me.


Fuller. My words, as by me laid down, are so far from being a two-handed sword
they have neither hilt nor blade in them, only they hold out an Handle for me,
thereby to defend my self; I say, Statesmen did admire at the preserving King
Henry alive, and render their reason, If the Animadvertor takes me for a
Statesman (whose general Judgment in this point I did barely relate) he is
much mistaken in me.

Reason of State and Reason of Religion, are Stars of so different an Horison,
that the elevation of the One, is the depression of the other. Not that God
has placed Religion and Right Reason diametrically opposite in themselves, (so
that wherever they meet, they must fall out and fight,) but Reason bowed by
Politicians, o their present Interest (that is Achitophelesme) is Enmity to
Religion. But the less we touch this harsh string the better music.


Dr. Heylin. Now to go on. Fol. 197. The Duke requested of King Richard the
Earldome of Hereford, and Hereditary Constableship of England.] Not so, it was
not the Earldom, that is to say, the Title of Earl of Hereford, which the Duke
requested; but so much of the Lands of those Earls, as had been formerly
enjoyed by the House of Lancaster. Concerning which we are to know, that
Humphry de Bohun the last Earl of Hereford, left behind him two Daughters
only, of which the eldest called Eleanor was married to Thomas of Woods^ock,
Duke of Gloucester; Mary, the other, married unto Henry of Bullenbrook, Earl of
Darby. Betwixt these two the Estate was parted; the one moity, which drew after
it the Title of Hereford, falling to Henry Earl of Darby; the other, which drew
after it the Office o^ Constable, to the Duke of Glo^ester. But the Duke of
Gloucester being dead, and his estate coming in fine unto his Daughter, who was
not able to contend, Henry the fifth forced her unto a sub-division, laying one
half of her just partage to the other moity. But the issue of Henry of
Bullenbrook being quite extinct in the Person of Edward Prince of Wales Son of
Henry the sixth, these three parts of the Lands of the Earls of Hereford having
been formerly incorporated into the Duchy of Lancaster, remained in possession
of the Crown, but were conceived by this Duke to belong to him, as being the
direct Heir of Anne Daughter of Thomas Duke of Gloucester, and consequently the
direct Heir also of the House of Hereford. This was the sum of his demand. Nor
do I find that he made any suit for the Office of Constable, or that he
needed so to do, he being then Constable of England, as his Son Edward the
last Duke of Buckingham of that Family, was after him.


Fuller. The cause of their variance is given in differently by several
Authors. Some say, that at once this Duke requested three things of King
Richard, 1. Power. 2. Honor, 3. Wealth: First, Power, to be Hereditary
Constable of England, not to hold it as he did pro arbitrio Regis, but in the
right of his descent. Secondly, Honor, the Earldome of Hereford. Thirdly,
Wealth, that partage of Land mentioned by the Animadvertor. I instanced only
in the first, the pride of this Duke, being notoriously known to be more than
his covetousness, not d^nying but that the Kings denial of the Land he
requested, had an effectual influence on his discontent.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 169. At last the coming in of the Lord
Stanley with three thousand fresh men decided the controversy on the Earls
side.] Our Author is out in this also. It was not the Lord Stanley, but his
Brother Sir William Stanley, who came in so seasonably, and thereby turned the
Scale, and changed the fortune of the day. For which service he was afterward
made Lord Chamberlain of the new Kings Household, and advanced to great Riches
and Estates, but finally beheaded by that very King for whom, and to whom he
had done the same. But the King looked upon this action with another eye. And
therefore when the merit of his service was interposed to mitigate the Kings
displeasure, and preserve the man, the King remembered very shrewdly, that as he
came soon enough to win the Victory, so he staid long enough to have lost it.


Fuller. Though a courteous Prolepsis might salve all the matter, yet (to
prevent exceptions) in my next Edition, the Lord shall be degraded into Sir
William Stanley.


THE FIFTH BOOK. Relating to the time of King Henry the Eight.
Dr. Heylin. WE are now come to the busy times of King Henry the Eight, in
which the power of the Church was much diminisht, though not reduced to such
ill terms as our Author makes it We have him here laying his foundations to
overthrow that little which is left of the Churches Rights. His
super-structures we shall see in the times ensuing more seasonable for the
practice of that Authority which in this fifth Book he hammereth only in the
speculation.


Fuller. I deny, and defy any such Design, to overthrow the foundations of
the Churches right. If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous
do? I^ my Back could butterresse them up, it should not be wanting. However, I
am not sensible that any such invasion was made on the true property of the
Church, but that the King resumed what by God was invested in him, and what by
the Pope was unjustly taken from him; though none can justify every particular
in the managery of the Reformation.


Dr. Heylin. But first we will begin with such Animadversions as relate unto
this time and story, as they come in our way; leaving such principles and
positions as concern the Church, to the close of all; where we shall draw them
all together, that our discourse and observations thereupon may come before the
Reader without interruption.

And the first thing I meet with, is a fault of Omission; Dr. Newlen who
succeeded Dr. Iackson in the Presidentship of Corpus Christi College in
Oxford, Anno 1640 by a free election, and in a statutable way, being left out
of our Authors Catlogue of the Presidents of C. C. C. in Oxford, fol. 166. and
Dr. Stanton who came in by the power of the Visitors above eight years after
being placed therein. Which I thought fit (though otherwise of no great moment)
to take notice of, that I might do the honest man that right which our Author
does not.


Fuller. Would the Animadvertor had given me the Christian, as well as the
Sir^name of the Doctor, that I may enter it in my next Edition. But I will
endeavor some other ways to recover it.

Such, and greater Omisions, often attend the Pens of the most exact Authors.
Witness the Lord Stanhop, created Baron of Harington in Narthampton-shire,
^ertio Iacobi, left out in all the Editions [ Latin and English] of the
Industrious and Judicious Mr. Camden though his junior Baron (the Lord Arundel
of Wardour) be there inserted. This his omission proceeded not from the least
neglect, as I protest my Innocence in the casual preterition of Dr. Newlen.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 168. King Henry endeavored an
uni^ormity of Grammar all over his Dominions; that so youths, though changing
their Schoolmasters, might keep their learning.] That this was endeavored by
King Henry, and at last enjoined, I shall easily grant. But then our Author
should have told us (if at least he knew it) that the first hint thereof
proceeded from the Convocation in the year 1530* in which, complaint being
made, Quod multiplex and varius in Scholis Grammaticalibus modus esset docendi,
etc. That the multiplicitie of Grammers did much hurt to learning; it was
thought meet by the Prelates and Clergy then assembled, Acta Convoca^ionis 1530.
Ut una eadem edatur formula auctoritate hujus sacrae Synodi, in qualibet and
singula Schola Grammaticali per Cantuariensem Provinciam usitanda and edocenda:
that is to say, that one only form of teaching Grammar should be enjoined from
thenceforth by the Authority of the Convocation, to be used in all the Grammar
Schools of the Province of Canterbury. Which being so agreed upon, Lilly then
Schoolmaster of St. Paul's School, was thought the fittest man for that
undertaking; and he performed his part so well, that within few years after, it
was enjoined by the Kings Proclamation to be used in all the Schools throughout
the Kingdom. But here we are to note withal, that our Author anticipates this
business, placing it in the eleventh year of this King, Anno 1519. whereas the
Convocation took not this into consideration till the eighth of March, Anno
1530. and certainly would not have meddled in it then, if the King had settled
and enjoined it so long before.


Fuller. The Animadvertor discovers much indiscretion, in cavelling at a
well-timed truth in my Book, and substituting a falsehood in the room thereof.

The endeavor of Henry the eight, for uniformity of Grammar throughout all his
Dominions, begun (as I have placed it) one thousand five hundred and nineteen,
William Lilly being the prime person employed for the composure thereof.

Indeed it met not with universal Reception for some years ( babits not being
easily deposed:) and therefore the Convocation concurring with the Kings
pleasure therein, added their assistance in the year 1530. as the Animadvertor
observes; and soon after by the Kings Proclamation, the matter was generally
effected.

But whereas he says, That after that time 1530. William Lillye was thought
the fittest man for that undertaking, Let me tell him, That a man dead five, if
not eight years before, was not fit to make a Grammar.

I appeal to Bale and Pitts, both which render William Lillye to dye in the
year 1525. but mistaken herein; For indeed he dyed three years before, if the
Epitaph on his Monument, made by his son George Lillye, may be believed, in a
brass plate near the great North door of St. Paul's. Gulielmo Lilio Paulinae
Scholae olim, Preceptori Primario, and Agneti Conjugi, in Sacratissimo hujus
Templi coemiterio hinc a tergo nunc destructo consepultis, Georgius Lillius
hujus Ecclesiae Canonicus, parentum memoriae piae consulens, Tabellam hanc ab
amicis conservatam, hic reponendam curavit. Obiit ille G. L. Anno Dom. 1522.
Calend. Mart. Vixit annos 54.

Wherefore this unnecessary Animadversion, to correct what was right before,
might very well have been spared.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 168. Howsoever it is probable, some
other Gardener gathered the Flowers (made the Collections) though King Henry
had the honor to wear the Posie.] I am not ignorant that the making of the
Kings Book against Martin Luther* is by some Popish Writers ascribed to Dr.
John Fisher, then Bishop of Rochester. But this Cavil was not made till after
this King had rejected the Popes Supremacy, and consequently the less credit
to be given unto it. It is well known, that his Father King Henry the seventh
designed him for the Archbishopric of Canterbury, and to that end caused him
to be trained up in all parts of learning which might enable him for that
place. But his eldest brother Prince Arthur dying, and himself succeeding in
the Crown, though he had laid aside the thoughts of being a Priest, he could
not but retain that Learning which he had acquired, and reckon it amongst the
fairest Flowers which adorned his Diadem. Too great a Clerk he was to be called
Beauclerk junior, as i^ he were as short in learning of King Henry the first
(whom commonly they called Beauclerk) as he was in time* though so our Author
would fain have it, Hist. Came. p. 2.3. A little Learning went a great way in
those early days, which in this King would have made no show, in whose time
both the Arts and Languages began to flourish. And if our Author does not
suspect this Kings lack of learning, he has no reason to suspect his lack of
time, the work being small, the glory great, and helps enough at hand if he
wanted any. But of this enough.


Fuller. No considerable variation from what I have written, so that my Answer
thereunto is not required. Let him be another Beauclerk instead of Beauclerk
junior.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 196. Which when finished ( as
White Hall, Hampton Court, etc.) he either freely gave to the King* or
exchanged them on very reasonable considerations.] That Hampton Court was
either freely given by Wolsey, or otherwise exchanged on very reasonable
terms, I shall grant as easily; but Whitehall was none of his to give, as
belonging to the Archbishop in the right of the Sea o^ York, and then called
York place. But the Kings Palace at Westminster being lately burnt, and this
house much beautified by the Cardinal, the King cast a longing eye upon it; and
having attainted the Cardinal in a Praemunire, he seized upon this house with
all the furniture thereof, as a part of the spoil. Which when he found he could
not hold, as being the Archbishops and not the Cardinals, he sent an Instrument
unto him, to be signed and sealed for the surrendry of his title and estate
therein; and not content to have forced it from him (the Cardinal honestly
declaring his inability to make good the grant) he caused the Dean and Chapter
of York to confirm the same unto him under their Common Seal, in due form of
Law; which being obtained, and much cost bestowed upon the House, he caused it
to be called Whitehall; gratifying the Archbishops of York with another House,
belonging then to the Sea of Norwich, and now called York-house.


Fuller. My words are, he either freely gave to the King, or exchanged them,
[but I say not FREELY] on very reasonable terms. Now though he did not freely
give Whitehall to the King, he exchanged it, (though unwillingly) on very
reasonable considerations; seeing for bigness, building, and circuit of
ground, it then was worth Ten of York-house, given to his See, in lieu thereof.
However, the Animadvertor is exact in some circumstances of this Exchange,
which I knew not before.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 170. So that lately there were
maintained therein one Dean, eight Canons, three public Professors of
Divinity, Hebrew and Greek, sixty Students, etc.] Our Author tells us, Lib. 4.
that he spent seventeen weeks in this University, but he that looks on this and
some other passages, would think he had not tarryed there above seventeen hours.


Fuller. Yea, the Animadvertor would persuade his Reader, That I never spent
seaventeen weeks in Oxford or in any other University, if all the errors be so
many and great as he accuses me of. But I prepare my self to hear his Charge.


Dr. Heylin. For besides his omitting of Dr. Newlin spoken of before, and his
giving of the name of Censors to the Deans of Magdalen, which I find
afterward, Lib. 8. fol. 7. he is very much mistaken in the matters of Christ
Church.


Fuller. What Dr. Newlen again? What if I called the Dean of Magdalen College,
the Censor. Grande piaculum!

Do I not confess it possible, That my Cambridge Sibboleth may make me lisp,
and mispronounce the topicall offices in Oxford, and publicly desired pardon,
when such mistakes are committed? Where has the Animadvertor left or lost his
ingenuity, that so another may look after, and make use of it, if so pleased?

Hereafter I shall remember that there is, though not a Censor now living in
Magdalen College, yet there was therein a Censurer [the Animadvertor] when no
just cause is given him.

I expected rather, that he would have thanked, than censured me; Who being a
Cambridge man, and finding their printed Catalogue of the presidents of
Magdalen College imperfect, as set forth by their own Antiquary Bryan Twyne,
did amend the same, by inserting (in his due time) no meaner man than Dr.
Walter Haddon, that famous and learned Civilian formerly omitted.


Dr. Heylin. For first the three Professors, of Divinity, Hebrew, and Greek,
are no necessary parts of that foundation, nor can be properly said to be
founded in it. Till of late times they were and might be of other Colleges, as
they are at this present, this College being only bound to pay them for their
annual Pensions forty pounds a piece. In after times, King James annexed a
Prebends place in this Church, to the Professor of Divinity, as King Charles
did another to the Hebrew Reader. But for the Greek Reader he has only his
bare pension from it, and has no other relation to it, but by accident only;
the last Greek Reader of this House being Dr. John Perin who dyed in the year
1615


Fuller. I say not, that those three professors were founded in that College,
but that they are maintained therein. And seeing the College (as the
Animadvertor confesses pays them their salaries, my words are subject to no
just Exceptions.


Dr. Heylin. And secondly, he is very far short in the number of Students,
diminishing them from an hundred to sixty, there being an Hundred and one of
that foundation by the name of Students, equivalent to the Fellows of most
other Colleges in the Revenues of their place and all advantages and
encouragements in the way of learning. But this perhaps has somewhat in it of
design, that by making the foundations of Oxford to seem less than they are,
those in the other University, might appear the fairer.


Fuller. It Is a mere pen-slip, and shall be amended accordingly. God knows I
hatch no such envious design, who could wish, that not only sixty, but six
score six hundred, were founded, etc. therein. Always provided, That the
Nursery exceed not the Orchard: And that the Universities by too large a
Plantation breed not more Scholars, than the Kingdom is able to prefer and
employ.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 171. And here Wolsey had provided him a
second Wife (viz.) Margaret Countess of Alanzon, sister to Francis King of
France.] As much out in his French as his English Heraldry. For first the Lady
Margaret here spoken of, was never Countess, though sometimes Duchess of
Alanzon, as being once wife to Charles the fourth Duke thereof. And secondly,
at the time when King Henry's Divorce from Queen Katherine was first agitated,
this Lady was not in a capacity of being projected for a Wife to King Henry the
eighth, being then actually in the bed of another Henry, etc.


Fuller. Margaret (who shall be amended Duchess) of Alanzon was Here, (I mean
not just in this year, but in this business, afterward designed by Wolsy for
a Wife to King Henry.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 178. Yet had he the whole Revenues of
York Archbishopric (worth then little less than four thousand pounds yearly)
besides a large Pension paid him out of the Bishopric of Winchester.] And a
large Pension it was indeed (if it were a Pension) which amounted to the whole
Revenue, etc.


Fuller. For quietness sake, he shall have the whole Bishopric, though I have
read, that after Wolsey fell in the Kings displeasure, his revenue in
Winchester (which he kept in Commendam) was reduced to a Pension.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 184. The Clergy of the Province of
Canterbury alone bestowed on the King One hundred thousand pounds, to be paid
by equal portions in the same year, say some; in four years say others, and
that in my opinion with more probabily.] Here have we three Authors for one
thing, some, others, and our Author himself, more knowing than all the rest in
his own opinion. But all out alike. This great sum was not to be paid in one
year, nor in four years neither, but to be paid by equal portions (that is to
say, by twenty thousand pound per annum) in the five years following, etc.


Fuller. Not reckoning the first sum, which was paid down on the Nail, that
had just four years assigned them for the payment of the remainder.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 186. But he might have remembered, which
also produced the peerlesse Queen Elizabeth, who perfected the Reformation.]
Either our Author speaks not this for his own opinion, as in that before, or if
he do, it is an opinion of his own, in which he is not like to find many
followers. The Puritan party whom he acts for in all this work, will by no
means grant it; comparing that most excellent Lady in their frequent Pasquils,
to an idle Huswife, who sweeps the middle of the house to make a show, but
leaves all the dirt and rubbish behind the door. The grand Composers of the
Directory do persuade themselves, that if the first Reformers had been then
alive, Pres. to the Directory.
they would have joined with them in the work, and labored for a further
Reformation. And what else has been clamoured for during all her Reign, and
the Ring leaders of the Faction endeavored ever since her death, but to carry
on the work of Reformation from one step to another, till they had brought it
unto such a perfection as they vainly dreamt of, and of which now we feel and
see the most bitter consequences? And as for the Prelatical party, the high
Royallists, as our Author calls them, they conceive the Reformation was not so
perfected in the time of that prudent Queen, but that there was somewhat left
to do for her two Successors; that is to ^ay, the altering of some Rubricks in
the Book of Common Prayer, the adding of some Collects at the end of the
Letany, the enlargement of the common Catechism, a more exact translation of
the Bible than had been before, the settling of the Church upon the Canons of
603. and finally, a stricter and more hopeful course for suppressing Popery,
and for the maintenance both of conformity and uniformity by the Canons of 640.


Fuller. I have the company of many honest and learned men going before, with,
or after me, in the same opinion.

Perfection, in relation to the Church, is twofold, Absolute or Exact, Gradual
or Comparative.

The former is only Christ's work to perform for whom alone the honor is
reserved, to present the Church without spot or wrinkle to his father.

The latter, viz. Gradual and Comparative Perfection, may be attributed to
particular militant Churches.

Queen Elizabeth did gradually perfect the Reformation, leaving it in a far
better condition than she found it in, in the reign of King Edward the sixth.
Yet do I not deny but that her Successors made commendable additions
thereunto, notwithstanding all whose endeavors, I doubt not but still something
did remain, to be amended; So that it will be perfectio perficienda as long as
the Church is militant.

The Animadvertor must not strain up perfection (when appliable to any Church
on Earth) too high to the Pin, with which the spirits Heb. 11.23.
of just men are made perfect. For as long as the Church has a FORM on Earth,
it will be subject to deformities, and consequently will need reformation.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 187. And now I cannot call King Henry a
Bachelor, because once married; nor a married man, because having no wife; nor
properly a Widower, because his wife was not dead.] Our Author speaks this of
Henry the eighth immediately after his divorce, but is much mistaken in the
matter. King Henry was so averse from living without a Wife, that he thought it
more agreeable to his constitution to have two Wives together, than none at
all. To that end while the business of the Divorce remained undecided,
Hollinsh p. 129
he was married privately to the Lady Anne Bullen, on the 14 of November, etc.


Fuller. It will rectify all if I change those words having no wife, into as
yet publicly owning no wife, which shall be done accordingly.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 208. Though many wild and distempered
Expressions be found therein, yet they contain the Protestant Religion in Oar,
which since by Gods blessing is happily refined.] Our Author speaks this of a
Paper containing many erroneous Doctrines presented by the Prolocutor to the
Convocation: some few of which, as being part of Wickliffs Gospel and chief
ingredients in the Composition of the new Protestant Religion lately taken up,
I shall here subjoyn. 1. That the Sacrament of the Altar, is nothing else but a
piece of bread, or a little predie Round-Robin. 2. That Priests have no more
Authority to minister Sacraments than the Laymen have. 3. That all Ceremonies
accus^omed in the Church, which are not clearly expressed in Scripture, must be
taken away, because they are Men's inventions. 4. That the Church commonly so
called is the old Synagogue; and that the Church, is the Congregation of good
men only. 5. That God never gave grace nor knowledge of holy Scripture to any
great Estate or rich man, and that they in no wise follow the same. 6. That all
things ought to be common. 7. That it is as lawful to Christen a child in a
Tub of water at home, or in a Ditch by the way, as in a Font-stone in the
Church. 8. That it is no sin or offense to eat White-meats, Eggs, Butter,
Cheese, or Flesh in Lent, or other Fasting days commanded by the Church, and
received by consent of Christian people. 9. That it is as lawful to eat flesh
on Good Friday, as upon Easter Day, or other times in the year. 10. That the
Ghostly Father cannot give or enjoin any penance at all. 11. That it is
sufficient for a Man or Woman to make their confession to God alone. 12. That
it is as lawful at all times to confess to a Layman as to a Priest. 13. That
it is sufficient that the sinner do say, I know my self a sinner. 14. That
Bishops, Ordinaries, and Eccelesiastical Judges, have no Authority to give any
sentence of Excommunication or censure, ne yet to absolve or loose any man from
the same. 15. That it is not necessary or profitable to have any Church or
Chapel to pray in, or to do any divine service in. 16. That buryings in
Churches and Churchyards be unprofitable and vain. 17. That the rich and
costly Ornaments in the Church are rather high displeasure than pleasure or
honor to God. 18. That our Lady was no better than another Woman, and like a
bag of Pepper or Saffron when the spice is out. 19. That Prayers, Suffrages,
Fasting, or Alms-deeds, do not help to take away sin. 20. That Holy Days
ordained and instituted by the Church, are not to be observed and kept in
reverence, in as much as all days and times be alike. 21. That Plowing and
Carting, and such servile work, may be done in the same, without any offense at
all, as on other days. 22. That it is sufficient and enough to believe, though
a man do no good works at all. 23. That seeing Christ has shed his blood for
us, and Redeemed us, we need not to do any thing at all, but to believe and
repent if we have offended. 24. That no humane Constitutions or Laws do bind
any Christian man, but such as be in the Go^pels, Paul's Epistles, or the New
Testament: and that a man may break them without any offense at all. 25. That
the singing or saying of Mass, Mattens, or Even song, is but a roaring, howling,
whistling, mumming, tom^ing, and juggling, and the playing on the Organs a
foolish vanity.


This is our Authors golden Oar, out of which his new Protestant Religion was
to be extracted. So happily refined, that there is nothing of the Old Christian
Religion to be found therein. Which though our Author does defend as
Expressions rather than Opinions, the Careers of the Soul, and Extravagancies
of humane infirmity, as he does the rest; yet he that looks upon these points,
and sees not in them the rude draught and lineaments of the Puritan Platform,
which they have been hammering since the time of Cartwright and his Associates,
must either have better eyes than mine, or no eyes at all. I see our Author
looks for thanks for this discovery for publishing the paper which contained
these new Protestant truths, and I give him mine.


Fuller. I have many things to return in this Contest. First, had I garbled the
Opinions of my own Head, and not presented them to the Reader, as I found them
presented in the Records of the Convocation, then the Animadvertor had had just
advantage against me.

Secondly, He takes exception at me in his Introduction, for not giving in the
Degrees by which Heterodoxies in Religion were ejected and cast out: Yet not he
is offended at me, because I go about to do it, showing how bad Religion was
before the Reformation, even in the best Professors thereof.

Thirdly, It is more than probable, that these Opinions, presented by such as
were disaffected to the Reformation, were not over favorably stated, but
rather worded to the disadvantage.

Fourthly, Some of these Opinions, thus condemned by the Animadvertor, are
^ound in themselves. I instance in that which in this his List is the eleventh
in number, viz That it is sufficient for a man or woman to make confession to
God alone. This at this day is defended by the Protestan^ Church, which though
commending Confession as expedient in some cases, especially when the afflicted
Conscience cannot otherwi^e get any ea^e, yet does it not command it on any as
necessary, necessitate precepti, so that the omission thereof should amount to
a sin. I am confident that the Animadvertor himself never solemnly confessed
his sins to any but to God alo^e. And it is injurious in him, to demand of
another to do that which was never done by himself.

Lastly, How unjust were it to put all Ier. 24.2.
Ieremies bud figs by themselves, and thence to conclude all the rest (which
indeed were very good) to be like unto them? Such the dealing of the
Animadvertor herein, who has called out the very Refuse and Dross of the Dross
in these Opinions, and left out the rest, then maintained by Gods People in
opposition to the Errors and Superstition of that Age, some whereof are here
inserted. 1. They deny Extreme Unction to be any Sacrament. 2. That all those
are Antichrists, who deny the Laity the Sacrament under both kinds. 3. That it
is plain Idolatry, to set up any Lights before any Images, or in any place of
the Church in time of Divine Service, as long as the Sun gives light. 4. That
Au^icular Confession is invented to know the secrets of men's hearts, and to
pull money out of their purse. 5. That Sain^s are not to be invocated, and that
they understand not, nor know nothing of our Petitions, nor can be Mediators or
Intercessors betwixt us and God. 6. That Diriges, Mass^s, etc. done for the
Souls of those which are departed out of this World, are bu^ vain, and of no
profit. 7. That Souls departed go strait to Heaven, others to Hell. 8. That
there is no mean place betwixt Heaven and Hell, where Souls departed may be
aff^cted. 9. That there is no distinction of Sin, to be Venial and Mortal. 10.
That hallowed Water, Bread, Candles, Ashes, Palms, are of none effect, and are
only used to seduce people.


The rest I refer to my Church History.

Had that all been like these, I would have called them the Gold, but (because
of many Errors mixed amongst them) I resume my Metaphor, and term them the
Golden Oar, out of which the Reformed Christian Religion was extracted. And
let the Author and Reader join in their thanks to Gods Goodness, by whose
blessing on the pious endeavors of the Reformers, the bad Figs, I mean those
false, indiscreet, scandalous, and dangerous Doctrines are cashired and
condemned, and the good ones, understand me, the Positions which were pious and
orthodox, retained, defended and practiced at this day in the Church of England.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 239. At this time also were the Stews
suppressed by the Kings command.] And I could wish that some command had been
laid upon our Author by the Parliament to suppress them also, and not to have
given them any place in the present History, especially not to have produced
those arguments by which some shameless persons endeavored to maintain both
the convenience and necessity of such common Brothel-houses. Defense of the
Apolog.
Had Bishop Jewel been alive, and seen but half so much from Dr. Harding
pleading in behalf of the common women permitted by the Pope in Rome, he would
have thought, that to call him an Advocate for the Stews had not been enough.
But that Doctor was not half so wise as our Author is, and does not fit each
Argument with a several Antidote as our Author does, hoping thereby, but vainly
hoping, that the arguments alleged will be washed away. Some of our late
Critics had a like Design in marking all the wanton and obscene Epigrams in
Martial with a Hand or Asterism, to the intent that young Scholars, when they
read that Author, might be fore-warned to pass them over: Whereas on the
contrary, it was found, that too many young fellows, or wonton wits, ^s our
Author calls them, did ordinarily skip over the rest, and pitch on those which
were so marked and set out unto them. And much I fear that it will so fall out
with our Author also, whose Arguments will be studied and made use of, when his
Answers will not.


Fuller. The commendable Act of King Henry the eighth, in suppressing the
Stews, may well be reported in Church History, it being recorded in 1 King.
15.12
Scripture to the eternal praise of King Asa, that he took away the Sodomites
out of the Land. I hope my collection of arguments in confutation of such Styes
of Lust, will appear to any rational Reader of sufficient validity.

Indeed it is reported of Zeuxes, that famous Painter, that he so lively
pictured a Boy with a Rod in his hand, carrying a Basket of Grapes, that Birds
(mistaking them for real ones) peckt at them; and whilst others commended his
Art, he was angry with his own work-manship, confessing, that if he had made
the Boy but as well as the Grapes, the Birds durst not adventure at them.

I have the same just cause to be offended with my own endeavors, if the
Arguments against those Schools of Wantonness should prove insufficient,
though I am confident that if seriously considered, they do in their own true
weight preponderate those produced in favor of them. However, if my
well-intended pains be abused by such who only will feed on the poisons, wholly
neglecting the Antidotes, their destruction is of themselves, and I can wash my
hands of any fault therein.

But me thinks the Animadvertor might well have passed this over in silence,
for fear of awaking sleeping wontonnesse, jogged by this his Note; so that if
my Arguments, only presented in my Book, be singly, this his Animadversion is
doubly guilty on the same account, occasioning loose eyes to reflect on that
which otherwise would not be observed.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 253. Otherwise some suspect, had he
survived King Edward the sixth, we might presently have heard of a King Henry
the ninth.] Our Author speaks this of Henry Fitz Roy, the Kings natural Son by
Elizabeth Blunt, and the great disturbance he might have wrought to the Kings
two daughters in their Succession to the Crown. A Prince indeed whom his Father
very highly cherished, creating him Duke of Somerset and Richmond, Earl of
Nottingham, and Earl Marshal of England, and raising him to no small hopes of
the Crown it self, as appears plainly by the Statute 22 H. 8. c. 7. But whereas
our Author speaks it on a supposition of his surviving King Edward the sixth,
he should have done well in the first place to have informed himself, whether
this Henry and Prince Edward were at any time alive together. And if my Books
speak true, they were not; Henry of Somerset and Richmond dying the 22 of July,
Anno 1536. Prince Edward not being born till the 12 of October, Anno 1537. So
that if our Author had been but as good at Law or Grammar, as he is at
Heraldry, he would not have spoke of a Survivor-ship in such a case, when the
one person had been long dead before the other was born.


Fuller. Terms of Law when used not in Law Books, nor in any solemn Court, but
in common Discourse, are weaned from their critical sense, and admit more
latitude. If the word surviving should be tied up to legal strictness,
Survivour is appliable to none save only to such who are Ioint-tenants.
However, because co-viving is properly required in a Survivor, those my words
had he survived, shall be altered into had he lived to survive Prince Edward,
and then all is beyond exception.


Dr. Heylin. These incoherent Animadversions being thus passed over, we now
proceed to the Examination of our Authors Principles, for weakening the
Authority of the Church, and subjecting it in all proceedings to the power of
Parliaments. Concerning which he had before given us two Rules Preparatory to
the great business which we have in hand. First, that the proceedings of the
Canon Law were subject in whatsoever touched temporals, to secular Laws and
National Customs. And the Laity at pleasure limited Canons in this behalf,
Lib. 3. n. 61. And secondly, that the King by consent of Parliament directed
the proceedings of the Ecclesiastical Court in cases of Heresy. Lib. 4. n. 88.
And if the Ecclesiastical power was thus curbed and fettered when it was at the
highest, there is no question to be made, but that it was much more obnoxious
to the secular Courts when it began to sink in reputation, and decline in
strength. How true and justifiable, or rather how unjustifiable and false these
two principles are, we have shown already, and must now look into the rest,
which our Author in pursuance of the main Design has presented to us. But
first we must take notice of another passage concerning the calling of
Convocations or Synodical meetings, formerly called by the two Archbishops in
their several Provinces by their own sole and proper power, as our Author
grants, fol. 190. to which he adds,

Fol. 190. But after the Statute of Praemunire was made (which did much restrain
the Papal power, and subject it to the Laws of the Land) when Arcbishops called
no more Convocations by their sole and absolute command, but at the pleasure of
the King.] In which I must confess my self to be much unsatisfied, though I
find the same position in some other Authors. My reasons two, 1. Because there
is nothing in the Statu^e of Praemunire to restrain the Archbishops from
calling these meetings as before; that Act extending only to such as purchase
or pursue, or cause to be purchased or pursued, in the Court of Rome, or
elsewhere any such Translations, Processes, Sentences of Excommunication,
Bulls, Instruments, or any other things whatsoever which touch the King,
against him, his Crown and his Regality, or his Realm; or to such as bring
within the Realm or them receive, or make thereof notification, or any other
Execution whatsoever within the same Realm, or without, etc. And secondly,
because I find in the Statute of the submission of the Clergy, that it was
recognized and acknowledged by the Clergy in their Convocation, Stat 25 H 8.
c. 19.
that the Convocation of the said Clergy is, always has been, and ought to
be assembled always by the Kings Writ. And if they had been always called by
the Kings Writ, then certainly before the Statute of Praemunire; for that the
whole Clergy in their Convocation should publicly declare and avow a
notorious falsehood, especially in a matter of fact, is not a thing to be
imagined. I must confess my self to be at a loss in this intricate Labyrinth,
unless perhaps there were some critical difference in those elder times between
a Synod and a Convocation: the first being called by the Archbishops in their
several and respective Provinces, as the necessities of the Church; the other
only by the King, as his occasion and affairs did require the same. But whether
this were so or not, is not much material, as the case now stands, the Clergy
not assembling since the 25 of King Henry the eighth, but as they are
convocated and convened by the Kings Writ only. I only add that the time and
year of this submission is mistook by our Author* who places it in 1533.
whereas indeed the Clergy made this acknowledgement and submission in their
Convocation, Anno 1532. though it passed not into an Act or Statute till the
year next following. Well then, suppose the Clergy called by the Kings
Authority, and all their Acts and Constitutions ratified by the Royals assent,
are they of force to bind the Subject to submit and conform unto them? Not, if
our Author may be judge; for he tells us plainly,

Fol. 191. That even such Convocations with the Royal assent, subject not any
(for recusancie to obey their Canons) to a civil penalty in person or property,
until confirmed by Act of Parliament.] I marvel where our Author took up this
opinion, which he neither finds in the Registers of Convocation, or Records of
Parliament. Himself has told us, fol. 190. that such Canons and Constitutions
as were concluded on in Synods or Convocations, before the passing of the
Statute of Praemunire, were without any further Ratification, obligatory to all
subjected to their jurisdiction. And he has told us also of such Convocations
as had been called between the passing of the Statute of Praemunire, and the
Act for Submission, that they made Canons which were binding, although none
other than Synodical Authority did confirm the same. Upon which premises I
shall not fear to raise this Syllogism, viz. That power which the Clergy had in
their Convocations before their submission to the King, to bind the Subject by
their Canons and Constitutions without any further ratification than own
Synodical Authority, the same they had when the Kings power signified in his
Royal assent was added to them; but the Clergy (by our Authors own confession)
had power in their Convocations before their submission to the King, to bind
the Subject by their Canons and Constitutions, without any further ratification
than their own Synodical Authority; Ergo they had the same power to bind the
Subjects, when the Kings power signified by the Royal assent was added to them.
The Minor being granted by our Author, as before is showed, the Major is only
to be proved. And for the proof hereof, I am to put the Reader in mind of a
Petition or Remonstrance exhibited to the King by the House of Commons, Anno
1532. in which they showed themselves agrieved, that the Clergy of this Realm
should act Authori^atively and Supremely in the Convocations, and they in
Parliament do nothing, but as it was confirmed and ratified by Royal assent. By
which it seems that there was nothing then desired by the House of Commons, but
that the Convocation should be brought down to the same level with the Houses
of Parliament; and that their Acts and Constitutions should not bind the
Subject as before, in their Goods and Possessions, until they were confirmed
and ratified by the Regal Power. The Answer unto which Remonstrance being drawn
up by Dr. Gardener then newly made Bishop of Winchester, and allowed of by both
Houses of Convocation, was by them presented to the King. But the King not
satisfied with this Answer, resolves to bring them to his bent, lest else
perhaps they might have acted something to the hindrance of his divorce, which
was at that time in agitation; and therefore on the tenth of May he sends a
Paper to them by Dr. Fox, (after Bishop of Hereford) in which it was
peremptorily required, That no Constitution or Ordinance shall be hereafter by
the Clergy Enacted, Promulged, or put in Execution, unless the Kings Highness
do approve the same by his high Authority and Royal assent; and his advice and
favor be also interponed for the execution of every such Constitution among
his Highness Subjects. And though the Clergy on the receipt of this paper
removed first to the Chapel of St. Katherines, and after unto that of St.
Dunstan to consult about it, yet found they no Saint able to inspire them with
a resolution contrary to the Kings desires; and therefore upon the Wednesday
following, being the fifteenth of the same Month, they made their absolute
submission, binding themselves in Verbo Sacerdotii, not to make or execute any
Canons or other Synodical Constitutions, but as they were from time to time
enabled by the Kings Authority. But this submission being made unto the King in
his single person, and not as in conjunction with his Houses of Parliament,
could neither bring the Convocation under the command of Parliaments, nor
render them obnoxi^us to the power thereof, as indeed it did not. But to the
contrary hereof it is said by our Author, that

Fol. 194. He ( viz. the King) by the advice and consent of his Clergy in
Convocation and great Council in Parliament, resolved to reform the Church
under his inspection from gross abuses crept into it.] To this I need no other
Answer than our Author himself, who though in this place he makes the
Parliament to be joined in Commission with Convocation, as if a joint Agent in
that great business of Reforming the Church; yet in another place he tells us
another tale. For fol. 188. It will appear, says he (and I can tell from whom
he says it) upon serious examination, that there was nothing done in the
Reformation of Religion, save what was acted by the Clergy in their
Convocations, or grounded on some Act of theirs precedent to it, with the
Advice, Counsel, and Consent of the Bishops and most eminent Churchmen;
confirmed upon the Postfact, and not otherwise by the Civil Sanction, according
to the usage of the best and happiest times of Christianity. So then the
Reformation of the Church was acted chiefly by the King with the advice of the
Clergy in their Convocation; the confirmation on the post-fact by the King in
Parliament: and that (by his leave) not in all the Acts and Particulars of it,
but in some few only, for which consult the Tract entitled, The Way and
Manner of the Reformation of the Church of England. Now as our Author makes the
Parliament a joint Assistant with the King in the Reformation, so he conferreth
on Parliaments the Supreme Power of ratifying and confirming all Synodical Acts.

Fol. 199. The Parliament (says he) did notify and declare that
Ecclesiastical Power to be in the King, which the Pope had formerly unjustly
invaded: Yet so, that they reserved to themselves the confirming power of all
Canons Ecclesiastical; so that the person or property of Refusers should not be
subjected to temporal penalty without consent of Parliament.] But certainly
there is no such matter in that Act of Parliament, in which the submission of
the Clergy and the Authority of the King grounded thereupon is notified and
recorded to succeeding times; nor any such reservation to themselves of a
confirming power, as our Author speaks of, in any Act of Parliament (I can
knowingly and boldly say it) from that time to this. Had there been any such
Privilege, any such Reservation as is here declared, their Power in confirming
Ecclesiastical Canons had been Lord Paramount to the Kings; who could have
acted nothing in it, but as he was enabled by his Houses of Parliament. Nor is
this only a new and unheard of Paradox an Heterodoxie (as I may call it) in
point of Law, but plainly contrary to the practice of the Kings of England from
that time to this; there being no Synodical Canons or Constitutions (I dare as
boldly say this too) confirmed in Parliament, or any otherwise ratified, than
by the superadding of the Royal assent. For proof whereof look we no further
than the Canons of 603 and 640 confirmed by the two Kings respectively, and
without any other Authority concurring with them in these following words (
viz.) We have therefore for Us, our Heirs, and lawful Successors, of our
especial Grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, given, and by these
presents do give our Royal assent according to the form of the said Statute or
Act of Parliament aforesaid, to all and every of the said Canons, Orders,
Ordinances, and Constitutions, and to all and every thing in them contained.
And furthermore, we do not only by our said Prerogative Royal, and Supreme
Authority, in causes Ecclesiastical, ratify, confirm, and establish by these
our Letters Patents, the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions,
and all and every thing in them contained, as is aforesaid: But do likewise
propound, publish, and straightly enjoin and command by our said Authority, and
by these our Letters Patents, the same to be diligently observed, executed, and
equally kept by all our loving Subjects of this our Kingdom, both within the
Province of Canterbury and York, in all points wherein they do or may concern
every or any o^ them according to this our Will and Pleasure hereby signified
and expressed. No other Power required to confirm these Canons, or to impose
them on the People but the Kings alone. And yet I trow there are not a few
particulars, in which those Canons do extend, to the property and persons of
such Refusers as are concerned in the same; which our Author may soon find in
them if he list to look. And having so done, let him give us the like Precedent
for his Houses of Parliament (either abstractedly in themselves, or in
cooperation with the King) in confirming Canons; and we shall gladly quit the
cause, willingly submit to his I bilieve this should be better, as may appear
in the Errata. But because the page is mistaken, 121, for 101, I dare not alter
it.
ter judgment.

But if it be objected, as perhaps it may, That the Subsidies granted by the
Clergy in the Convocation, are ratified and confirmed by Act of Parliament,
before they can be levied either on the Granters themselves, or the rest of the
Clergy.

I answer, that this makes nothing to our Authors purpose, that is to say, that
the person or property of Refusers should not be subjected to temporal penalty,
without consent of Parliament. For first, before the submission of the Clergy
to King Henry the 8. they granted Subsidies and other aids unto the King in
their Convocations, and levied them upon the persons concerned therein, by no
other way than the usual Censures of the Church, especially by Suspension and
deprivation, if any Refuser prove so refractary as to dispute the payment of
the sum imposed. And by this way they gave and levied that great sum of an
Hundred thousand pounds in the Province of Canterbury only; by which they
bought their peace of the said King Henry, at such time as he had caused them
to be attainted in the Praemunire. And secondly, there is a like Precedent for
it since the said Submission. For whereas the Clergy in their Convocation in
the year 1585. being the 27 year of Queen Elizabeth, had given that Queen a
Subsidy of four sh^llings in the pound, confirmed by Act of Parliament in the
usual way; they gave her at the same time (finding their former gift too short
for her present occasions) a Benevolence of two shillings in the pound to be
raised upon all the Clergy, by virtue of their own Synodical Act only, under
the penalty of such Ecclesiastical Censures as before were mentioned. Which
precedent was after followed by the Clergy in their Convocation, An 1640. the
Instrument of the Grant being the same verbatim with that before; though so it
happened (such influence have the times on the Actions of men) that they were
quarreld and condemned for it by the following Parliament in the time of the
King, and not so much as checked at, or thought to have gone beyond their bounds
in the time of the Queen. And for the ratifying of their Bill by Act of
Parliament, it came up first at such times (after the Submission before
mentioned) as the Kings of England being in distrust of their Clergy, did not
think fit to empower them by their Letters Patents for the making of any
Synodical Acts, Canons or Constitutions whatsoever, by which their Subsidies
have been levied in former times, but put them off to be confirmed and made
Obligatory by Act of Parliament. Which being afterward found to be the more
expedite way, and not considered as derogatory to the Churches Rights, was
followed in succeeding times without doubt or scruple; the Church proceeding in
all other Cases by her native power, even in Cases where both the persons and
property of the Subject were alike concerned, as by the Canons 1603, 1640, and
many of those past in Queen Elizabeth's time (though not so easy to be seen)
does at full appear. Which said, we may have leisure to consider of another
passage relating not unto the Power of the Church, but the wealth of the
Churchmen. Of which thus our Author.


Fuller. I conceived it Civil to suffer the Animadvertor (to use his own
phrase) parler le tout, to speak all out in this long Discourse; which,
although it consists of several Notes, yet because all treat of the same
subject, and because a Relative strength might result thereby to the whole, I
have presented it entire: Yet when all is said, I find very little I have
learnt thereby, and less (if any thing) which I am to alter.

These my two preparatory Rules (as the Animadvertor terms them) I have
formerly stated, and proved, and here intend no repetition.

It is no Beam, and but a Moat-fault at most, if I have dated the submission
of the Clergy to the King, not from the first private performance, but the
passing thereof into Print and public cognizance. Thus the Age of Children
are by their Parents reckoned from their birth, but by others from their
entrance in the Register.

But the main fault (and that a foul one, if true) laid to my charge is, for
weakening the Authority of Church, and subjecting it to the power of
Parliaments. But know it is past the might and spite of the most malicious man
finally to weaken the just Authority of the Church, God having solemnly
promised That the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Yet Princes (as
King Henry the eighth did) might retrence the Power of the Church (or ambitious
Churchmen rather) when they invaded the just privileges of others.

I shall only return a few plain and general answers to what is objected.
First, before I entered on the difficult Subject of Synods and Convocations
(before and since the Clergies Submission) with their respective powers, I
placed, as follows, Church History, Book 1. page 191. This I humbly conceive
to be the difference betwixt the three kinds of Convocations, submitting what
I have written, to the censure and correction of the learned in the Law,
conscious of my own ignorance therein, as indeed such skill neither is to be
expected or required in one of my profession, who am ready with willingness,
yea with cheerfulness, yea with thankfulness to God and man publicly to
recall and retract what any such convince me to have mistaken herein; hoping
that my stumbling in so dark a subject, may prevent the failing of others.



Having thus humbly desired (I say not deserved) favor, I hope it will be
indulged unto me.

Secondly, I presume to tender this (I hope reasonable) motion to the Reader,
that seeing the Animadvertor not only freely confesses this Subject to be an
intricate Labyrinth, but also fairly acknowledges, that he finds the
Positions I maintain in SOME OTHER AUTHORS, that I may be discharged, and that
the guilt (if any) may be derived on such Authors as have misguided me.

Thirdly, When I use the word Parliament, it expounds it self what was meant
thereby (capable in that age of no other comment) viz. The aggregation of the
King, Lords, and Commons.

Fourthly, I distinguish betwixt a consultive, conclusive, and punitive power
in matters of Religion. The consultive power God has entrusted his Church
with, and the Clergy as the Representative thereof. The conclusive power also
is invested in them, so far forth as to declare what is Orthodox, and what
Heretical. But the punitive power (especially when exceeding Church Censors)
and extending to Life, Limb, and Estate, is in the Parliament; that so neither
Royal Prerogative nor Subjects Right may be injured.

Fifthly, I distinguish betwixt the power which the Convocation had over the
Clergy, and what they have over the Laity. Over the Estates of the latter, they
have no power.

As for the Clergy, they are all represented, by their voluntary elections, in
their Clerks or Proctors: Volenti non fit injuria, A man that is willing is not
wronged. What sums therefore they give away of the Clergy, they may be
presumed empowered therein, with the consent of the Clergy. However, to clear
all doubts, the consent of Parliament has [since the Submission of the Clergy]
been required unto it.

As for the black Swan in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, I mean that single and
signal instance of tha^ Unparliament-impowred-Convocation, which gave that
supplimental Subsidy to Queen Elizabeth; I humbly conceive that the popularity
of so peerlesse a Princess, the necessity of her occasions, and the
tranquillity of those times (a happiness denied in our Age) made that
unquestioned, which might be questionable if any turbulent Clergyman had
proved recusant in payment.

As to the Convocation 1640. let me request the Reader, that I may without
danger humbly tender my opinion therein. That Convocation (as all others)
consisted of Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and Clerks. Of these, the three
former acted only in their personal capacities, and carrying their own Purses
in their own pockets, might give Subsidies to the King to what proportion they
pleased, and justify the doing thereof.

Not so the fourth and last Members, being Clerks chosen for their respective
Cathedrals and Diocesses, legally to sit as long as the Parliament lasted.
After the dissolution whereof they desisted to be public Persons, lost the
notion of Representatives, and returned to their private condition. In which
capacity they might have given for themselves what sums they pleased, but could
not vote away the estates of other Clergymen, except the respective Cathedrals
and Diocesses had re-Elected them; which had it been done, they might no doubt
have justified the giving away of Subsidies, as authorized thereunto, though
the Parliament had been dissolved, seeing every man may do with his own as he
pleases, and the diffusive Clergy were justly interpreted to do what was done
by their Proctors. Truth may be blamed, but cannot be shamed, and I have
unbosomed my thoughts and judgment herein. But this outswelleth the proportion
of my book, and let me make a fair motion to the Animadvertor. I resume my
two former Propositions, ( viz.) 1 The proceedings of the Canon Law in what
touched temporals of Life, Limb, and Estate, was always limited with the
secular Laws and National Customs of England. 2 That the King, by consent of
Parliament, directed the proceedings of Ecclesiastical Courts, against
declared Heretics, so that they could not punish them in Life or Limb, but as
limited by the Statute.


If the Animadvertor, who has leisure and ability, be pleased in confutation
of these my Propositions, to write a few sheets (it being richly worth his and
the Readers pains) clearly, briefly, fully and fairly, without the least dash
of ill language, subscribing his name thereunto, I will God willing return him
my answer qualified accordingly; and, though I confess the Animadvertor has
the advantage of me at the weapon of Law, yet my confidence of a good Cause
will make me undertake the Challenge; always provided, That no advantage be
taken against us by any for delivering our Judgments and Consciences in so
nice a Controversy: For the present I forbear, because this dispute is
substantive enough to stand by it self, and too large to be adjected to this
book.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 253. I have heard (says he) that Queen
Elizabeth being informed that Dr. Pilkington Bishop of Durham had given ten
thousand pounds in marriage with his Daughter; and being offended that a
Prelates daughter should equal a Princess in Portion, took away one thousand
pounds a year from that Bishopric, and assigned it for the better maintenance
of the Garrison of Barwick.] In telling of which story our Author commits many
mistakes, as in most things else. For first to justify the Queens displeasure
(if she were displeased) he makes the Bishop richer, and the Portion greater
than indeed they were. The ten thousand pounds Lib 9 fol. 109. being shrunk to
eight; and that eight thousand pound not given to one Daughter (as is here
affirmed) but divided equally between two: whereof the one was married to Sir
James Harrington, the other unto Dunch of Berkshire. Secondly, this could be no
cause of the Queens displeasure, and much less of the Countries envy; that
Bishop having sat in the Sea of Durham above seventeen years. And certainly he
must needs have been a very ill Husband if out of such a great Revenue he had
not saved five hundred pounds per annum to prefer his Children; the income
being as great, and the charges of Hospility less than they have been since.
Thirdly, the Queen did not take away a thousand pound a year from that
Bishopric, as is here affirmed. The Lands were left to it as before, but in
regard the Garrison of Barwick preserved the Bishops Lands and Tenants from the
spoil of the Scots; the Queen thought fit, that the Bishops should contribute
toward their own defense, imposing on them an annual pension of a thousand
pound for the better maintaining of that Garrison. Fourthly, Bishop Pilkington
was no Doctor, but a Bachelor of Divinity only; and possibly had not been
raised by our Author to an higher title and Degree than the University had
given him, but that he was a Conniver at Nonconformity, as our Author tells
us Lib. 9. fol. 109. Lastly, I shall here add, that I conceived the Pension
above mentioned, not to have been laid upon that See after Pilkingtons death,
but on his first preferment to it, the French having then newly landed some
forces in Scotland, which put the Queen upon a necessity of doubling her Guards
and increasing her Garrisons. But whatsoever was the cause of imposing this
great yearly payment upon that Bishopric, certain I am, that it continued, and
the money was duly paid into the Exchequer for many years, after the true cause
thereof was taken away; the Queens displeasure against Pilkington ending either
with his life or hers, and all the Garrisons and forces upon the Borders being
taken away in the beginning of the Reign of King James. So true is that old
saying, Quod Christus non capit, fiscus rapit; never more fully verified than
in this particular.


Fuller. I have given in a double account of Bishop Pilkingtons Issue and
Estate. 1. As same reported, and as envio^s Courtiers represented it to Queen
Elizabeth, that he gave ten thousand with his only Daughter, Lib. 5. fol. 253.
2. As it was in truth, giving but four thousand a piece with Two daughters,
lib. 8. fol. 109.


The Animadvertor may allow me knowing in his family, my wife being Grandchild
to his Eldest Daughter, married to Sir So is his name in my corrected Books.
Henry Harrington.

Yet no relation to him, or favor for him as a semi-non conformist, but mere
love to the Truth, made me entitle him Doctor, though I confess Bishop Godwin
makes him but Batchelour in Divinity. For Dr. Caius, Master of Gonvil Hall,
whilst Pilkington was of St. John's in Cambridge, gives him the style of In
his List of the Masters of St. John's.
Doctor, who must be presumed most exact in the Titles of his own Contemporary.

The difference is not great, betwixt taking away 1000 l. yearly from the
Bishopric, and charging it with an annual Pension of 1000 l. to maintain the
Garrison of Barwick. However if the Reader can gain any information from what
is additory in the Animadvertor, I shall be light glad thereof.


THE SIXTH BOOK. Containing the History of Abbeys.
Dr. Heylin. THis Book, containing the History of Abbeys seems but a Supplement
to the former, but being made a distinct book by our Author, we must do so
likewise. In which the first thing capable of an Animadversion, is but merely
verbal, viz.

Fol. 266. Cistercians so called from one Robert living in Cistercium in
Burgundy.] The place in Burgundy from whence these Monks took denomination,
though called Cirstercium by the Latins, is better known to the French and
English by the name Cisteaux; the Monks thereof, the Monks of Cisteaux by the
English, and Lesmoines de Cisteaux by the French; and yet our Author has hit
it better in his Cistercians, than Ralph Brook York Herald did in his
Sister-senses, for which sufficiently derided by Augustine Vincent, as our
Author, being so well studied in Heraldry, cannot choose but know.


Fuller. It was equally in my power and pleasure (without the least prejudice
to the Truth) whether I would render the place in the French [ Cisteaux,] or
retain the Latin name Cistercium. I preferred the latter because our English
word Cistercians has most conformity therewith.

What is R. Brook his Sister-senses, Brother-senses, or Non-senses to me? This
spends time in writing, money in buying, pains in reading, makes some more
angry, none more knowing.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 268. But be he who he himself or any
other pleases, brother if they will to St. George on Horseback.] Our Author
not satisfying himself in that Equitius, who is supposed to be the first
Founder of Monks in England, makes him in scorn to be the Brother of St. George
on Horse back; that is to say, a mere Chimera, a Legendary Saint, a thing of
nothing. The Knights of that most noble Order are beholding to him for putting
their Patron in the same Rank with St. Equitius; of whose existence on the
Earth he can find no Constat.


Fuller. I honor the Knights of that noble Order, as much as the Animadvertor
himself. Their Ribbands though (now wearing out apace) seem in my eyes as fair
and fresh as when first put on. I do not deny, but much doubt of St. George,
as he is presented with his improbable Achievements; Yet grant the whole
History, only Emblematical, and Allegorical of Christ, rescuing his Church
from the might and malice of Satan, no Diminution of Honor at all is thereby
to the Fellows of that noble Order.


Dr. Heylin. But I would have him know, how poorly soever he thinks of St.
George on Horseback, that there has more been said of him, his Noble birth,
Achievements, with his death and Martyrdom, than all the Friends our Author
has, will or can justly say in defense of our present History.


Fuller. The Animadvertor might have done well, to instanced in that Author
which has been the Champion for this Champion, and has so substantially
asserted him. If in this passage he reflecteth on his own Book on that Subject,
he has looked so long on St. George, he has forgot Solomon: Let another praise
thee, and not thy own mouth; a stranger, and not thine own lips. For my part I
am yet to seek what service he has done to the Church of God, so busy to make
DOWN SABBATH, and UP St. GEORGE.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 270 -- So they deserve some commendation
for their Orthodox Judgment in maintaining some Controversies in Divinity of
importance against the Jesuits.] Our Author speaks this of the Dominicans or
preaching Friars, who though they be the sole active managers of the
Inquisition, deserve notwithstanding to be commended for their Orthodox
judgment. How so? Because forsooth in some Controversies of importance, that
is to say, Predestination, Grace, Free Will, and the rest of that link, they
hold the same opinions against the Jesuits and Fraenciscans, as the Rigid
Lutherans do against the Melanchthonians, and the Rigid or peremptory
Calvinists against the Remonstrants. etc.


Fuller. Two things are considerable in the Dominicans, First their Cruelty in
managing the inquisition, which all must justly condemn. And I doubt not, but
God, when he makes Inquisition for blood, will remember the bloody Inquisition.

Secondly, their Orthodoxnesse in many points, here reckoned up by the
Animadvertor, which in the Judgment of many pious and learned Divines, deserve
just commendation. And if the Animadvertor dissent from them herein, sure I am,
He will close with them in another controversy against the Franciscans, in
maintaining that the Virgin Mary was conceived in sin: For although all
generations shall call her BLESSED, yet it follows not thence, that she was
without sin, Seeing BLESSED is he to whom God imputes no sin. In a word the
Dominicans are the least erroneous of all the Monks and Friars.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 300. We will conclude with their
observation (as an ominous presage of Abbeys ruin) that there was scarce a
great Abbey in England, which once at least, was not burnt down with lightning
from Heaven.] Our Author may be as well our in this, as he has been in many
things else; it being an ordinary thing to adscribe that to Lightning or fire
from Heaven, which happened by the malice or carelesenesse of Knaves on Earth,
of which I shall speak more hereafter, on occasion of the firing of St. Paul's
steeple in London, lib. 9.


Fuller. If your Author be out, he told you who were out with your Author, yea,
who led him out; viz. the following Authors being all of them authentical, and
of the Romish persuasion, cited in the margent. 1. Historia Gervasii. 2.
Historia Ingulphi. 3. Cronicon Petroburg. 4. Cronicon Sti Edmundi. 5. Malmsbury
6. Hoveden. 7. Walter Covenir. 8. Fabian.


These may be presumed utterly unlikely to be-libell heaven for the Actions of
Earth, or to entitle that an accident of Lightning, which was voluntary from
knavish incendiaries.


Dr. Heylin. Now only noting by the way, that scarce any, and but thirteen (for
our Author names no more which were so consumed) hang not well together. If
only thirteen were so burnt (and sure our Author would have named them if they
had been more) he should have rather changed his style, and said that of so
many Religious Houses as suffered by the decays of time and the fury of the
Danish Wars, or the rage of accidental fires, scarf any of them had been
stricken by the hand of Heaven.


Fuller. He might as well have said, that the Husbandman, who only shows a
Sample, has no more corn in his Barn. Or the Draper who presents but a
Pattern, has no more cloth in his Shop.

I was unwilling to burden my book with the enumeration of them all, and the
Reader may take notice of the thirteen named, nine Mitred Abbeys, each (...),
eminently worth many meaner Monasteries, whose names follow. 1. Canterbury. 2.
Croyland. 3. Peterburrough. 4. St. Mary's, York. 5. Edmondsbury. 6. Gloucester.
7. Cicester. 8. Glassenbury. 9. Evesham.


If it were worth the while, I could add many more; mean time, it is enough to
say, Mr. Fox is the Author wherein this is to be found.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 313. Hence presently arose the Northern
Rebellion, wherein all the open undertakers were North of Trent, etc.] Not all
the open undertakers* I am sure of that, our Author telling us in the words
next following, that this commotion began first in Lincolnshire, no part
whereof, except the River- Isle of Axholm, lies beyond the Trent, etc.


Fuller. Almost all Lincolnshire lies North (though not of the fall) of the
foundation of Trent. However, these words North of Trent shall be altered into,
in the North of England.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 316. Where there be many people, there
will be many Offenders, there being a Cham amongst the eight in the Ark, yea a
Cain amongst the four Primitive Persons in the beginning of the world.] In
this, our Authors rule is better than his Exemplification. For though there
were but eight persons in the Ark. whereof Cham was one, yet in all probability
there were more than four persons in the world at the birth of Abel, reckoning
him for one. etc.


Fuller. I pass not whether there were, or were not; I build nothing of
consequence thereon, and the matter being no more, I may take it by content
without telling it, on the reputation of the general Opinion.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 340. It was in those days conceived
highly injurious, to thrust Monks and Nuns out of House and Home, without
assigning them any allowance for their subsistence.] Our Author says very well
in this, there being few Religious persons thrust out of their Houses, (except
those that suffered by the first act of dissolution) who either were not
preferred in the Church, (as Wakeman the last Abbot of Tewksbery, was by the
King made the first Bishop of Gloucester) or otherwise provided of some liberal
pension, etc.


Fuller. The Animadvertor going along with me in this long Note, needs no
answer of mine. Hereupon he takes occasion to show how injuriously many
sequestered Clergymen are dealt with in their fifth part, that instead thereof
but a nineteenth part is but paid in some places; and I am sorry I must
concur with him in so sad a Truth.

But whereas, after his too just complaint, he concludes with this passage:
Our Author might have saved me the greatest part of this Application, had he
been minded to do the poor Clergy any right, as he seldom does. Let me add,
The Animadvertor might have saved me all the pains of this Answer, had he not
been minded causlesly to cavil, as he often does. For when I handled the
Subject of the fifth part, first I got the Order for it, (hard to come by) to
be inserted. Secondly, I solemnly answered seven subterfuges, pretended by such
as either wholly refuse, or defectively pay the fifth part to the sequestered
Minister, and then thus conclude. Church-Hist. Book 11. page 230: I am sorry to
see the pitiful and pious intentions of the Parliament so abused and deluded
by the indirect dealings of others, so that they cannot attain their intended
ends, for the relief of so many poor people, seeing no doubt, therein they
desired to be like the best of Beings, who as closely applies his lenitive as
corrasive plasters, and that his Mercy may take as true effect as his Justice.
Sure if the present Authority (when at leisure from higher employment) shall be
pleased to take the groans of these poor souls into its consideration, the
voice of their hungry Bowels will quickly be turned to a more pleasant tune,
from barking for food, to the blessing of those who procured it. Now let any
censure this a digression from my History; for though my Estate will not suffer
me with Job. 29.15.
Job; to be eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, I will endeavor what I can
to be a tongue for the Dumb.



Let the Reader judge betwixt me and the Animadvertor, whether in this
particular matter controverted, I have not done the poor Clergy as much right,
as lay in my power, and more than consisted with my safety.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 357. But this was done without any great
cost to the Crown, only by altering the Property of the place from a late made
Cathedral to an Abbey.] Our Author speaks this of the Church of Westminster;
which though it suffered many changes, yet had it no such change as our Author
speaks of; that is to say, from a Cathedral to an Abbey, without any other
alteration which came in between. etc.


Fuller. I said not, that it was immediately changed from a Cathedral to an
Abbey; but that it was changed, and that without any great cost to the Crown;
so my words want nothing but a candid Reader of them.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 359. Nor can I find in the first year
of Queen Elizabeth any particular Statute wherein ( as in the reign of King
Henry the eight) these Orders are nominatim suppressed, etc.] But first, the
several Orders of Religious Persons were not suppressed nominatim, except that
of St. John's, by a Statute in the time of King Henry the eighth. Secondly, if
there were no such Statute, yet was it not because those Houses had no legal
settlement, as it after follows; Queen Mary being vested with a power of
granting Mortmains, and consequently of founding these Religious Houses in a
legal way. Thirdly, there might be such a Statute, though our Author never had
the good luck to see it; and yet for want of such good luck, I find him apt
enough to think there was no such Statute; Et quod non invenit usquam, esse
putat nusquam, in the Poets language etc.


Fuller. I could not then find the Statute, and I am not ashamed to confess
it. Let those be censured who pretend to have found what they have no^, and so
by their confidence (or impudence rather) abuse Posterity. Since, I have found
a Copy thereof in Sr. Thomas Cottons Library, with many Commissions granted
thereupon, for the dissolution of such Marian foundations.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 369. Jesuits, the last and newest of all
Orders.] The newest if the last, there is doubt of that: But the last they were
not, the Oratorians (as they call them) being of a later brood. The Jesuits,
founded by Ignatius Loyola, a Spaniard, and confirmed by Pope Paul the third,
Anno 1540. The Oratorians founded by Philip Merio a Florentine, and confirmed
by Pope Pius the fourth, Anno 1564. By which account these Oratorians are
younger Brethren to the Jesuits, by the space of four and twenty years; and
consequently the Jesuits not the last and newest of Religious Orders.


Fuller. Writing the Church History of Britain, I herein confined my expression
thereunto. The Jesuits are the last and newest Order, whose over-activity in
our Land commends (or condemns them rather) to public notice.

Idem est non esse, and non apparere. The Oratorians never appeared in England,
save an handful of them, who (at Queen Mary's first arrival from France) only
came Hither, to go hence a few months after.


THE SEVENTH BOOK. Containing the Reign of King Edward the sixth.
Dr. Heylin. WE are now come unto the Reign of King Edward the sixth, which our
Author passes lightly over, though very full of action and great alterations.
And here the first thing which I meet with, is an unnecessary Quaere which he
makes about the Injunctions of this King. Amongst which we find one concerning
the religious keeping of the Holy Days, in the close whereof it is declared,
That it shall be lawful for all people in time of Harvest, to labor upon Holy
and Festival days, and save that thing which God has sent, and that
scrupulosity to abstain from working on those days does grievously offend God.
Our Author hereupon makes this Quaere, that is to say, fol. 375. Whether in the
24 Inju^ction, laboring in time of Harvest upon Holy Days and Festivals,
relates not only to those of Ecclesiastical Constitution ( as dedicated to
Saints) or be inclusive of the Lord's Day also.]. Were not our Author a great
Zelot for the Lords-day-Sabbath, and studious to entitle it to some antiquity,
we had not met with such a Quaere. The Law and practice of those times make
this plain enough. etc.


Fuller. It is better to be over doubtful, than over confident. It had been
much for the credit, and nothing against the Conscience of the Animadvertor, if
he had made quaeries, where he so positively and falsely has concluded against
me. Now my Quaere is answered: And I believe that the Lords Day was included
within the numb^r of holy days, and common work permitted thereon.

This makes me bespeak my own and the Readers (justly suspecting that the
Animadvertor will not join with us herein on this account) thankfulness to
God. That the Reformation since the time of King Edward the sixth, has been
progressive, and more perfected in this point amongst the Rest, in securing the
Lord's Day from servile employments.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 386. In the first year of King Edward
the sixth, it was recommended to the care of the most grave Bishops and others
( assembled by the King at his Castle at Windsor) and when by them completed,
set forth in Print 1548. with a Proclamation in the Kings name, to give
Authority thereunto, being also recommended unto every Bishop by especial
Letters from the Lords of the Council to see the same put in execution. And in
the next year a penalty was imposed by Act of Parliament on such who should
deprave or neglect the use thereof.] Our Author here mistakes himself, and
confounds the business; making no difference between the whole first Liturgy
of King Edward the sixth, and a particular form of Administration. etc.


Fuller. I^ the Reader, by perusing this Note of the Animadvertor, can
methodize the Confusion charged on me, I shall be right glad thereof. And I
wish that the nice distinction of the Liturgy, and the form of Administration
may be informative unto him more than it is to me.

The close of this Animadversion, whether this Book brought under a Review,
much altered in all the parts and offices of it, be unto the better or unto the
worse, Leaves it under a strong suspicion of the negative in the Judgment of
the Animadvertor.

And now I shall wonder no more at the Animadvertors falling foul on my Book,
who (as he In his Introduction.
confesses) am not known unto him by any injury. Seeing such distance in our
judgments, that he conceives the Reformation in the Reign of King Edward more
perfect than what was afterward, Numb. 14 4.
Let us make us a Captain and return unto Egypt. I have too much advantage in
my own hand, and a principle in my bosom will not give me leave to make use
thereof to the utmost.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 404. At last the great Earl of Warwick
deserted his Chaplain in open field to shift for himself. Indeed he had higher
things in his head, than to attend such trifles.] A man may easily discern a
Cat by her Claw, and we may find as easily by be scratches of our Authors Pen,
to what party in the Church he stands most inclined. He had before declared for
the Dominicans and Rigid Calvinists in some points of Doctrine, and now
declares himself for the Non-Conformists in point of Ceremony. He had not else
called the Episcopal Ornaments, particularly the Rochet, Chimere, and
Square-cap, by the name of trifles; such trifles as were not worth the
contending for, if Resolute Ridley had been pleased to dispense therein. etc.


Fuller. I say not that they were trifles, but that John Dudley Earl of Warwick
(afterward) Duke of Northumberland) counted them so, in respect to his high
designs to the Crown yea it is more than suspicious, that his ambition
esteemed greater matters than Ceremonies, mere trifles, even Religion it self,
which he so often changed.

If the Cat has put in her claw, let her put in her whole foot. I conceive
such vestments comparatively trifles, as to things necessary to salvation. And
thus I prove it.

I dare wager with the Animadvertor. That take the Clergy of England, as
constituted 1640, that three parts of four did not know what a CHIMERE was. Nor
is this any diminution to their Learning and Religion; seeing they were not
bound to take cognizance thereof. And therefore I believe one may safely call
it a trifle, without the knowledge of which word, and what was meant thereby,
so many flocks of pious and learned Shepherds have gone to Heaven.

As for the Animadvertors additory Note which follows, concerning the singing
of Psalms in Churches, I am not concerned therein.

Nor will I here insert his Instances of some fortunate Subjects, who married
Queens, seeing I say not always, but often, such matches prove unprosperous.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 421. This barren Convocation is
entitled the Parent of those Articles of Religion (forty two in number) which
are printed with this Preface, Articuli de quibus in Synodo Londinensi, etc.]
Our Author here is guilty of a greater crime than that of Scandalum Magnatum,
making King Edward the sixth of pious memory, no better than an impious and
lewd Impostor. For if the Convocation of this year were barren (as he says it
was) it could neither be the Parent of those Articles, nor of the short
Catechism which was printed with them, countenanced by the Kings Letters
Patents prefixed before it, etc.


Fuller. Here is an high charge indeed. I believe that I am generally believed
to have as high a reverence for the Memory of King Edward as the Animadvertor
himself.

The Journals of the Convocation in this Kings Reign I have carefully perused,
which a^e no better than blanck paper, containing only the names of the
Members therein daily meeting, without any matter of moment (yea any matte^ at
all) Registered to be performed by them. But I wholly refer my self to what I
have written in my Church History of this hard Subject, making it there as
plain as I could, which the Animadvertor has a mind again to involve and
perplex.


THE EIGHTH BOOK. The Reign of Queen Mary.
Dr. Heylin. WE next proceed unto the short, but troublesome Reign of Queen
Mary; in which the first thing that occurs, is Fol. 1. But the Commons of
England who for many years together had conn'd Loyalty by-heart, out of the
Statute of the succession, were so perfect in their Lesson, that they would not
be put out of it by this new started design] In which I am to note these
things; first that he makes the Loyaly of the Commons of England not to depend
upon the primogeniture of their Princes, but on the Statute of Succession, and
then the object of that Loyalty must not be the King, but the Act of
Parliament, by which they were directed to the knowledge of the next successor:
and then it must needs be in the power of Parliaments to dispose of the
Kingdom as they pleased; the Peoples Loyalty being tied to such dispositions.
etc.


Fuller. I make not the loyalty of the Commons to depend on, but to be directed
by the Statute of Succession.

In such Intricacies, it was good to have such a Guide to lead men's Judgments
in the right. And though some malcontents started from their Loyalty, the
Generality of the Commons of England kept constant unto it.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 11. Afterward Philpot was troubled by
Gardener for his words spoken in the Convocation. In vain did he plead the
privilege of the place, commonly reputed a part of Parliament.] I cannot find
that the Convocation at this time, nor many years before this time, was
commonly reputed as a part of the Parliament. etc.


Fuller. I only say that Mr. Philpot pleaded it, (and that in vain) that it
was so reputed, as may plainly appear in Mr. Fox; so that my words are liable
to no just exception.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 27. The Letany, Surplice, and other
Ceremonies in Service and Sacraments they omitted, both as superfluous and
superstitious.] Our Author speaks this of the Schismatic Congregation at
Franckford, who turned the Public Church Liturgy quite out of their Church,
fashioning to themselves a new form of Worship, which had no warrant and
foundation by the Laws of this Realm. And first (says he) the Letany,
Surplice, and other Ceremonies they omitted both as superfluous and
supersticious. Superfluous, and supersticious, in whose opinion? In that of the
Schismatics at Franckford, our Authors, or in both alike? Most probable in our
Authors, as well as theirs; for otherwise he would have added some note of
qualifications, etc.


Fuller. This note might well have been spared, I appeal to such as knew my
conformity in the College Chapel, Country Parishes, and Cathedral of Sarum,
to be my Cumpurgators in this unjust accusation.


Dr. Heylin. Thirdly, having laid down an abstract of the form of worship
contrived by the Schismatics at Franckford, he honors them with no lower
Title than that of Saints; and counts this liberty of deviating from the Rules
of the Church for a part of their happiness. For so it follows, fol. 28.
This, faith he, is the Communion of Saints, who never account themselves
peaceably possessed of any happiness, until (if it be in their power) they have
also made their fellow sufferers partakers thereof. If those be Saints, who
separate themselves schismatically from their Mother Church; and if it be a
happiness to them to be permitted so to do; our Author has all the reason in
the world to desire to be admitted into their Communion, and be made partaker
of that happiness which such Saints enjoy. etc.


Fuller. If God were not more merciful unto us, than we are charitable one to
another, what would become of us all?

I humbly conceive that these Exiles, (though I will not advocate for their
carriage in all particulars) had more liberty in modeling their own Church,
than such as live in England, under a settled Government, commanded by Authority.

Schismatic in my mind is too harsh for such who fled and suffered for their
conscience; However, I conceive a Saint-ship not inconsistent with such
Schismaticalnesse; God graciously, on their general repentance, forgiving them
their fault herein.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 39. Trinity College built by Sir Thomas
Pope.] I shall not derogate so much from Sir Thomas Pope, as our Author does
from Trinity College, naming no Bishop of this House, as he does of others. He
tells us that he lived in this University about 17 weeks, and all that time Dr.
Skinner the Bishop of Oxford lived there too. Dr. Wright the Bishop of
Liechfield, probably was then living also, (for he deceased not till after the
beginning of the year 1643.) but he living at that time in his own House of
Ecclesal Castle. Both of them Members of this College, and therefore worthily
deserving to have found some place in our Authors History. And because our
Author can find no learned Writers of this College neither, I will supply him
with two others ^n that kind also. The first whereof shall be John Seldom, of
the Inner Temple, (...)* that renowned Humanitian and Philologer, sometimes a
Commoner of this House, and here initiated in those Studies, in which he
afterward attained to so high an eminence. The second William Chillingworth,
an able and accute Divine, and once a Fellow of this College; whose Book
entitled, The Religion of Protestants a safe way to Salvation, written in
defense of Dr. Potters Book called Charity mistaken, commended by our Author,
Lib 3. fol. 115. remains unanswered by the Jesuits, notwithstanding all their
brags beforehand, to this very day. Which Book though most ridiculously buried
with the Author at Arundel ( get thee gone thou accursed Book etc.) by Mr.
Francis Cheynel, the usu fructuary of the rich Parsonage of Petworth, shall
still survive unto the world in its own value, when the poor three-penny
commodities of such a sorry Haberdasher of Small-weares shall be out of
credit. Of this Pageant, see the Pamphlet called Chillingworthi Novissima,
printed at London, Anno 1644.


Fuller. If the Animavertor had written an History of Cambridge, perchance he
would have made as many and great Omissions. I have craved solemn pardon of the
Reader when such failings should occur. Church History Book 3. page 67. I
humbly request the Antiquaries of their respective foundations (best skilled in
their own worthy Natives) to insert their own observations, which if they would
restore unto me against the next Edition of this work, if it be thought worthy
thereof; God shall have the Glory, they the public thanks, and the world the
benefit of their contributions to my endeavors.



Bishop Wright is entered in (where he ought) a Warden of Wadham; the rest shall
be inserted in the next Edition, with my worthy friend Mr. Gilbert Ironside of
the same foundation.

Mr. Cheynel is now rather the object of the Animadvertors prayer and pity,
than of his Anger.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 41. But now it is gone, let it go; it
was but a beggarly Town, and cost England ten times yearly more than it was
worth in keeping thereof.] Admit it be so, yet certainly it was worth the
keeping, had it cost much more. The English while they kept that Town, had a
door open into France upon all occasions, and therefore it was commonly said
that they carried the Keys of France at their Girdles. etc.


Fuller. The Animadvertor might understand my meaning, even to make the best of
a bad matter, when it cannot be helped.

A KEY falls under a double valuation, one for the intrinsicall works from
the weight thereof in Metal, which is very inconsiderable. The other from the
use thereof, and thus it is price rises or falls, as it opens to more or
less treasure.

Calis I confess, in the second consideration, was a place of main importance;
yet indeed it cost a vast expense in keeping it, as by a Book in the Exchequer
(which some months since In particulars, their total Sum, to my remembrance,
not being cast up.
I perused) does appear, the charge amounting to an innumerable Sum, at the
rate of Money in that Age.


THE NINTH BOOK. Containing the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
Dr. Heylin. THe short Reigns of King Edward the sixth, and Queen Mary being
briefly past over by our Author, he spends the more time in setting out the
affairs of the Church under Queen Elizabeth; not so much because her Reign was
long, but because it was a busy Age, and full of Faction. To which Faction how
he stands aff^cted, he is not coy to let us see on all occasions, giving us in
the very first entrance this brief, but notable Essay, viz.

Fol. 51. Idolaty is not to be permitted a moment; the first minute is the
fittest to abolish it: all that have power, have right to destroy it by that
grand Charter of Religion, whereby every one is bound to advance Gods glory.
And if Sovereigns forget, no reason but Subjects should remember their duty.]
Our Author speaks this in behalf of some forward Spirits, who not enduring the
laziness of Authority in order to the great work of Reformation, fell before
hand to the beating down of superstitious Pictures and Images. And though some
others condemned their indiscretion herein, yet our Author will not, but rather
gives these reasons for their justification; 1. That the Popish Religion is
Idolatry. 2. That Idolatry is to be destroyed by all that have power to do it.
3. (Which is indeed the main) that if the Sovereigns do forget, there is no
reason but Subjects should remember their duty. This being our Authors
Masterpiece, and a fair groundwork for Seditious and Rebellious for the times
ensuing, I shall spend a little the more time in the examination of the
propositions, as before we had them, etc.


Fuller. The Animadvertor has dealt most unfairly with me in citing by the
halfs what I have written, and leaving out what immediately followed, and what
he ought to have inserted, viz.

For after I had presented the Judgment of these rigid and violent Hotspurs, I
subjoyned as follows, in confutation of their Extravagancies:

But others condemned their indiscretion herein; for though they might reform
the private persons and families, and refrain to communicate in any outward Act
contrary to Gods word; yet public reformation belonged to the Magistrate, and
a good deed was by them ill done, for want of a calling to do it.

I appeal to such who knew me in the Universitie, to those that have heard my
many Sermons on this Subject in London, and else where, but especially to my
Book called TRUTH MAINTAINED, made against Mr. Saltmarsh, wherein I have
heartily, (to place that first) largely, and to my power strongly vindicated.
Non licet Populo renuente Magistratu, Reformationem moliri.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 54. This Parliament being very active in
matters of Religion, the Convocation (younger Brother thereunto) was little
employed, and less regarded.] Our Author follows this Design of putting matters
of Religion into the power of Parliaments, though he has chosen a very ill
Medium to conclude the point. This Parliament as active as he seems to make it,
troubled it self so little with matters of Religion, that had it done less, it
had done just nothing. All that it did, was the Repealing of some Acts made in
the time of Queen Mary, and settling matters in the same State in which she
found them at her first coming to the Crown. The Common Prayer Book being
reviewed and fitted to the use of the Church by some godly men, appointed by
the Queen alone, received no other confirmation in this present Parliament,
than what it had before in the last years of King Edward. The Supremacy was
again restored, as it had been formerly; the Title of Supreme head, which
seemed offensive unto many of both Religions, being changed into that of
Supreme Governor, nothing in all this done de novo, which could entitle this
Parliament to such activity in matters of Religion, but that our Author had a
mind to undervalue the Convocation, as being little employed, and less
regarded. I grant indeed, that the Convocation of that year did only meet for
forms sake, without acting any thing, etc.


Fuller. Yea God has done great things for us already, whereof we rejoice. And
although the Animadvector is pleased to say, That if this Parliament had done
less, it had done just nothing, these truly were MAGNALIA, so far as the
word is applyable to humane performances.


Dr. Heylin. In the mean time I would fain know our Authors Reason, why
speaking of the Convocation and the Parliament in the notion of Twins, the
Convocation must be made the younger Brother. Assuredly there had been
Convocations in the Church of England some hundreds of years before the name of
Parliament had been ever heard of; which he that lists to read the collection
of Councels published by that learned and industrious Gentleman Sir Henry
Spelman, cannot but perceive.


Fuller. I confess Convocations in their general notion more ancient, and
regular, and completely constituted than Parliaments: Yet of these Twins, I
called the Convocation the younger Brother properly enough.

First, Because modern Convocations, as modelled since the submission of the
Clergy to Henry the eighth, are many years junior to Parliaments.

Secondly, The Convocations always began the day after the Parliament, the
Archbishops and Bishops always attending the King the first day in Parliament.

Lastly, The Parliament has made a younger Brother of the Convocation: And
there being a priority in Power, he in effect is the Heir and elder Brother,
who confineth the other to a poor pittance and small portion as our Age can
well remember.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 71. This year the spire of Poles-
steeple, covered with lead, strangely fell on fire.] More modestly in this than
when he formerly ascribes the burning of some great Abbeys to Lightning from
Heaven. And so this steeple was both reported and believed to be fired also, it
being an ordinary thing in our common Almanacks, till these latter times, to
count the time (among the other Epoches of Computation) from the year that St.
Paul-steeple was fired with Lightning. But afterward it was acknowledged (as
our Author truly notes) to be done by the negligence of a Plummer, carelessly
leaving his Coals therein: since which acknowledgement we find no mention of
this accident in our yearly Almanacks. But whereas our Author finds no other
Benefactors for the repairing of this great Ruin, but the Queens bounty, and
the Clergies benevolence, I must needs tell him that these were only
accessories to the principal charge. The greatest part hereof, or to say
better, the whole work was by the Queen imposed on the City of London, Stows
Survey of Land. p 623.
it being affirmed by John Stow, that after this mischance the Queens Majesty
directed her Letters to the Major, willing him to take order for the speedy
repairing of the same, etc.


Fuller. Non est tanti all this Note. The Queen and Clergy are only mentioned
by way of eminence not exclusion of others.

The Animadvertor commonly lays it to my charge, that in my writing I am
injurious to the Church and Clergy; and now he is offended with me for giving
them too much honor.

Sure I am, Mr. In his Eliz. Anno 1561.
Camden, speaking of the repairing of S. Paul's on this occasion, ascribes it to
the great bounty of the Queen, and money gathered of the Churchmen and others,
where his particular nomination only of the Queen and Churchmen making them
paramount Benefactors.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 72. In the Convocation now sitting, the
nine and thirty Articles were composed, agreeing for the main with those set
forth in the Reign of King Edward the sixth, though in some particulars
allowing more liberty to dissenting judgments.] This is the active Convocation
which before I spoke of, not set^ing matters of Religion in the same estate in
which they were left by King Edward; but altering some Articles, expunging
others, adding some de novo, and fitting the whole body of them unto
edification; Not leaving any liberty to dissenting judgments, as our Author
would have it, but binding men unto the literal and Grammatical sense.


Fuller. But the literal and Grammatical sense is worded in so favorable and
receptive terms, that two opposite parties (both well^skilled in Grammar) have
with great assurance of success, pleaded them in their defense.

In such Cases, when the Controversy is admissive of a latitude, as not
necessary to salvation, the pious and learned Penners of the Articles, though
they did not purposely use Cheverel expressions (to afford shelter to
equivocation;) yet prudently seeing that all things in the Articles were not of
equal concernment, and politickly ^ore-seeing men would be divided and differ
in their judgments about them, selected phrases Grammatically admissive of
several senses, all consistent with Salvation; and would draw their words no
closer, for fear of strangling tender Consciences. Hence is it that in the
Question, Whether Concupiscence be properly a sin in the Regenerate? both
parties appeal unto the Article, equally persuaded there so find favor in
their several Opinions; as indeed (like a well drawn Picture) it seems to Eye
them both, and yet frown on neither.

And one may read in the works of King James, that on this account he highly
commends the discretion and moderation of the Composers of our Articles.


Dr. Heylin. They had not otherwise attained to the end they aimed at, which
was ad tollendam opinionum dissensionem, and consensum in vera Religione
firmandum; that is to say, to take away diversity of Opinions, and to
establish an agreement in the true Religion. Which end could never be effected,
if men were left unto the liberty of dissenting, or might have leave to put
their own sense upon the Articles. But whereas our instances in the Article of
Christ's descent into Hell, telling us that Christ's preaching unto the Spirits
there (on which the Article seemed to be grounded in King Edwards Book) was
left out in this; and thereupon infers, that men are left unto a latitude
concerning the cause, time, manner of his descent; I must needs say, that he is
very much mistaken. For first the Church of England has always constantly
maintained a local Descent, though many which would be thought her Children,
the better to comply with Calvin and some other Divines of forain Nations, have
deviated in this point from the sense of the Church. And secondly, the reason
why this Convocation left out that passage of Christ preaching to the spirits
in hell; was not, that men might be left unto a latitude concerning the cause,
time, and manner of his Descent, as our Author dreams; but because that
passaage of St. Peter being capable of some other interpretations, was not
conceived to be a clear and sufficient evidence to prove the Article. For which
see Bishop Bilsons Survey, p. 388.389.


Fuller. I cannot fully concur with the Animadvertor, That the Church of
England has constantly maintained a LOCAL DESCENT, though no man has an
higher esteem for those worthy Writers who are of that persuasion.

I will confess this hitherto has staggered me, viz. St. Peter his application
of David's words to Christ, Acts 2.27.
thou shall not leave my soul in hell.

I appeal whether these words import not a favor to all unprejudiced hearers,
which God did to his Son, bearing this natural and unviolated sense, That had
God left Christ's soul in hell, his soul had been in a bad condition, as being
there in a suffering capacity, but Gods Paternal affection to his dear Son,
would not leave his soul in hell, but did rescue it thence.

Now all our Protestant, and especially English Writers, who maintain a LOCAL
DESCENT, do very worthily (in opposition to the Romish Error) defend, that
Christ was then in a good estate, yea in a triumphing condition.

Now then, it had been no favor not to leave his soul in Hell, but a less love
unto him, to contract his happiness in his triumph.

I protest, that in this or any other point, I am not possessed with a spirit of
opposition; and when I am herein satisfied in any good degree, I shall become
the Animadvertors thankful Convert in this particular.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 74. In a word, concerning this clause
whether the Bishops were faulty in their addition, or their opposites in their
substraction, I leave to more cunning Arithmeticians to decide.] The Clause
here spoken of by our Author, is the first Sentence in the twentieth Article,
entitled De Ecclesiae Authoritate, where it is said that the Church has power
to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of the Faith,
etc.


Fuller. To this and to what ensues in two leaves following I return no
answer; not because I am pinched therein with any matter of moment, but for
these reasons following.

First, I understand, That the Animadvertors Stationer takes exception, that I
have printed all his book, which may tend to his detriment. Now I protest, when
I first took up this resolution to present the Animadvertors whole Cloth, List,
Fagg and all, I aimed not at his damage, but my own defense: no^ can I see how
I could do otherwise, seeing the plaster must be as broad as the sore, the
tent as deep as the wound; yea, I have been in^ormed by prime Stationers, the
like has formerly been done without exception taken on either side, in the
Replies and Rejoynders betwixt Dr. Whitgift and Mr. Cartwright, and many
others. However, being willing to avoid all appearance of injury, I have left
out some observations which I conceived might well be spared, as containing no
pungent matter against me.

Secondly, I am confident, That there needs no other answer to these notes,
then the distinct and serious perusal of my Church History, with the due
alteration of favor indulged to all writings.

L^stly, What of moment in these notes is omitted by me, relates to those two
Church Questions in Law, Vid. sup. part. 2. p. 62.
which I have formerly desired may fairly be ventilated betwixt the
Animadvertor and me: and if he be sensible, That any thing herein tends to
his advantage, he may, and no doubt will reassume and enforce the same.


Dr. Heylin. From the Articles our Author proceeds unto the Homilies approved
in those Articles, and of them he tells us, Fol. 75. That if they did little
good, they did little harm.] With scorn and insolence enough. Those Homilies
were so composed, as to instruct the people in all positive Doctrines necessary
for Christian men to know, with reference both to Faith and Manners; and being
penned in a plain style, as our Author has it, were fitter for the edification
of the common people, than either the strong lines of some, or the flashes of
vain wit in others, in these latter times, etc.


Fuller. With scorn and insolence I defy the words. The Animadvertor might
have added my words immediately following, viz. They preached not strange
Doctrines to People, as too many vent, DARKNESSES now a days, entitled New
Lig^ts.

And well had it been for the peace and happiness of the Church, if the
Animadvertor (and all of his Party) had had as high an esteem as the Author
has, for the Homilies, If none of them had called them HOMELY HOMILIES, (as
one did,) And if they had conformed their practice to the second Homily in the
second Book, and not appeared so forward in countenancing Images of God and his
Saints in Churches.


Dr. Heylin. The Author proceeds. Fol. 76. The English Bishops conceiving
themselves empowered by their Canons, began to show their authority, in urging
the Clergy of their Diocese to subscribe to the Liturgy, Ceremonies and
Discipline of the Church, and such as refused the same, were branded with the
odious name of Puritans.] Our Author having given the Parliament a power of
confirming no Canons, as before was showed, he brings the Bishops acting by as
weak Authority in the years 1563. and 1564. there being at that time no Canons
for them to proceed upon for requiring their Clergy to subscribe to the
Liturgies, Ceremonies, and Discipline of the Church: And therefore if they did
any such thing, it was not as they were empowered by their Canons, but as they
were enabled by that Authority which was inherent naturally in their Episcopal
Office.


Fuller. I profess my self not to understand the sense of the Animadvertor, and
what he drives at herein. And as soon as I shall understand him, I will either
fully concur with him, or fairly dissent from him, rendering my reason for the
same.


Dr. Heylin. But whereas he tells us in the following words, that the name of
Puritan in that notion began this year, viz. 1564. I fear he has anticipated
the time a little, Genebrard a right good Chronologer placing it (ortos in
Anglia Puritanos) about two years after, Anno 1566, etc.


Fuller. I answer, First, Let the Animadvertor keep his fears for me to
himself, and not be solicitous in my beha^f.

Secondly, If the time be anticipated but a little, these necessary
Animadversions needed not to take notice thereof.

Thirdly, Genebrards placing the beginning of the Name Puritan, about two years
after, intimates a latitude in his Computation.

Fourthly, Genebrard Anno 1566. calls them ortos [but not orientes] in Anglia
Puritanos: And when I speak of the beginning of the name, I relate to it
rising, not risen.

Fifthly, Genebrard is so disaffected to our Religion, he is not to be
credited, taking all implicitly out of railing Saunders: Witness this eminent
Note amongst the rest, Anno 1570. UNCTI in Surria Comitatu Angliae, e Calvinii
Schola o^iuntur; qui docent peccare neminem nisi qui veritatem ab ipsis
praedicatam non rec^pit. The ANOINTED Scholars of Calvin did rise this year in
Surry, an English County; who teach, that every man must sin that will not
embrace their Doctrine: all which is a notorious untruth.

Lastly, The Animadvertor cannot justly be angry with me if I antedated the
Puritans by two years, seeing he finds the Lineaments of the Vid. sup^^a c.
2. ^ag ^^
Puritan Platform in the Reign of King Henry the eighth, twenty years at least
before my mention of them.


Dr. Heylin. But why our Author should call the Bishop of Londons House by the
name of the Popes Palace, I do very much wonder; unless it were to hold
conformity with the style of Martin Mar-Prelate, and the rest of that Faction.
Amongst whom nothing was more common than to call all Bishops Petty-Popes, and
more particularly to call the Archbishop of Canterbury the Pope of Lambeth, and
the Bishop of London, Pope o^ London. But I hope more charitably than so, being
more willing to impute it to the fault of the Printers, than the Pen of our
Author, etc.


Fuller. It falls out happily for me that Grindal was then Bishop o^ London,
one so far from Popery, that he is beheld under an opposite notion. I wonder
the Animadvertor will lay so much weight on a plain mistake of the Press.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 98. Against covetous Conformists it was
provided, that no spiritual Person, College, or Hospital, shall let Lease,
other than for twenty one years, or three lives, etc.] No mention in the
Statute of Covetous Conformists, I am sure of that; and therefore no provision
to be made against them, the Covetous Conformist is our Authors own, etc.]


Fuller. I say in the same place, that in this Parliament Laws were enacted
against Poiniards with three Edges. Conformists they must needs be, who enjoyed
so great Church-preferment; and Covetous I may call them, who made so
unreasonable Leases. But of this I have largely spoken in my Answer to the
Introduction.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 121. These Prophecyings were founded on
the Apostles Precept; For ye may all Prophecy one by one, that all may learn
and all be comforted; but so as to make it out, they were fain to make use of
humane prudential additions.] Not grounded, but pretended to be grounded on
those words of St. Paul, etc.


Fuller. Grounded shall be altered, God willing, into pretended to be grounded,
and then I hope no shadow of offense.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 135. A loud Parliament is always
attended with a silent Convocation, as here it came to pass. The Activity of
the former in Church matters, l^st the latter nothing to do.] A man would
think by this, that the Parliament of this year, being the 23 of the Qu^en, had
done great ^eats in matters of Religion, as making new Articles of Faith, or
confirming Canons, or something else of like importance, etc.


Fuller. It lies not in the Power of Parliament to make new ARTICLES of FAITH,
nor did they ever pretend unto it. Nor lies it in the Power of the Church to
make any new ARTICLES; Canons they may make, for the Descipline; and may
declare and publish Articles of faith. But God alone in Scripture has made
them; to which man, under an heavy curse, may make no Addition.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 187. That since the High Commission, and
this Oath (it is that ex officio which he means) were taken away by the Act
of Parliament, it is to be hoped, that (if such swearing were so great a
grievance) nihil analogum, nothing like unto it (which may amount to as much)
shall hereafter be substituted in the room thereof.] What could be said more
plain to testify his disaffections one way, and his z^al another? The
High Commission and the Oath reproached as Grievances, because the greatest
^urbs of the Puritan party, and the strongest Bulwarks of the Church, a
congratulation to the times for abolishing both, though as yet I find no Act
of Parliament against the Oath, except it be by consequence and illation only;
and finally a hope expressed that the Church never shall revert to her former
power in substituting any like thing in the place thereof, by which the good
people of the Land may be stopped in their way to the fifth Monarchy so much
sought after. And yet this does not speak so plain as the following passage.


Fuller. God restore the Church in his good time to her just rights, and give
her wisdom mo^e ra^ely to use it.

I am ^o^ no fifth Monarchy or first Anarchy ^he^ but desire from my heart, that
no such analogical Oath may be offered to me; and let the Animadvertor, if
desirous thereof, have it to himself, and much good may it do him.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 193. Wits will be working, and such as
have a Satirical vein, cannot better vent it than in lashing of sin.] This
spoken in defense of those scurrilous Libels which Job Throgmorton, Penry,
Fenner, and the rest of the Puritan Rabble published in print against the
Bishops, Anno 1588. thereby to render them ridiculous both abroad and at home.


Fuller. I am most disingeniously dealt with by the Animadvertor, obtruding on
me such words. In defense, I defy it, these me words immediately following. But
(...) and devou^ sort of men, even of such as were no great friends to the
(...) upon solemn deba^e then resolved (I speak on certain knowledge from the
mouths of such whom I must believe) that for many foul falsehoods therein
suggest^d, altogether ^^^eseeming a pious spirit to print, publish, or with
pleasure peruse* which ^^posed true both in matter and measure, rather conceal
than discover: The best of men being so conscious of their own badnesse, that
they are more careful to wash their own faces, than busy to throw dirt on
others. Any man may be witty in a biting way; and those who have the dullest
brains, have commonly the sharpest teeth to that purpose* But such ca^nal
mirth, whilst it tickleth the flesh does wound the soul. And which was the
(...), these ba^^ Books would give a great advantage to the General foe; and
Papists would make too much u^e thereof against Protestant Religion; especially
seeing an Archangel thought himself too good to bring, and Jude 9.
Satan not bad enough to have railing speeches brought against him. Reader,
what could I have written more fully and freely in the cordial detestation of
such abhominal Libels.


Dr. Heylin. For if our Authors rule be good, fol. 193. That the fault is not
in the Writer, if he truly cite what is false on the credit of another, they
had no reason to examine punctually the truth of that which tended so
apparently to the great advantage of their cause and party, etc.


Fuller. I say again the Writer is faultless, who truly cites what is false on
the CREDIT of another; always provided that the other, who is quoted, has
Credit, and be not a lying Libeller like these Pasauls.

If this Rule be not true, the Animadvertor will have an hard task of it, to
make good all in his Geography on his own knowledge, who therein has traded on
trust as much as another.


Dr. Heylin. But I am weary and ashamed of raking in so impure a kennel, and
for that cause also shall willingly pass over his apology for Hacket that
blasphemous wretch, and most execrable Miscreant, justly condemned and executed
for a double Treason, against the King of Kings in Heaven, and the Queen on
earth.


Fuller. I appeal to the Reader, whether I have not in my Church History wrote
most bitterly and deservedly against Him; only I took occasion by Hackets
badness to raise our thankfulness to God. If my meat herein please not the
Animadvertors pallat, let him leave it in the Dish; none shall eat thereof
against their own stomachs, for fear of a surfeit.


Dr. Heylin. Of whom he would not have us think, fol. 204. that he and his two
Companions (his two Prophets, for so they called themselves) were not worse by
nature than all others of the English Nation* the natural corruption in the
hearts of others being not less headstrong, but more bridled: And finally, that
if Gods restraining grace be taken from us, we shall all run unto the same
excess of Riot. Which Plea, if it be good for Hacket, will hold good for Judas;
and pity it is, that some of our fine wits did never study an apology for him,
etc.


Fuller. ^


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 214. At Antwerp he was ordained Minister
by the Presbytery there, and not long after that, he was put in Orders by the
Presbytery of a forain Nation.] Here have we Ordination, and putting into
Orders ascribed to the Presbytery of Antwerp, a Mongrel company, consisting of
two blew Aprons to each Cruel night cap: and that too in such positive terms,
and without any the least qualification, that no Presbyterian in the pack could
have spoke more plainly, etc.


Fuller. It is better to wear a Cruel Nightcap than a cruel heart, causelessly
cavilling at every man.

Mr. Travers was ordained Minister or Priest by the Presbytery of Antwerp, and
never had other Ordination. I only relate that it was so de facto, and appeal
to the Reader, whether my words import the least countenance and approbation
thereof, though the sin had not been so heinous if I had so done.


Dr. Heylin. Only I shall make bold to quit my Author with a merry tale (though
but one for an hundred) and it is a tale of an old jolly popish Priest, who
having no entertainment for a friend, who came to him on a Fasting day, but a
piece of Pork, and making conscience of observing the appointed Fast, dipped it
into a tub of water, saying down Pork, up Pike. Satisfied with which device (as
being accustomed to transubstantiate, he well might be) he caused it to be put
into the pot and made ready for dinner. But as the Pork, for all this sudden
piece of wit, was no other than Pork; so these good fellows of the Presbytery
by laying hands upon one another, act as little as he. The parties so imposed
upon ( imposed upon indeed in the proper notion) are but as they were,
Lay-bretheren of the better stamp, Ministers, if you will, but not Priests nor
Deacons, nor any ways Canonically enabled for divine performances.


Fuller. It is not a fortnight since I heard proclamation against the selling
of Porke, because about London fatted with the flesh of diseased horses.

I suspect some unwholsomness in the Animadvertors Pork-story, especially as
applied, and therefore will not meddle therewith.


Dr. Heylin. But fearing to be chidden for his levity, I knock off again,
following my Author as he lea^s me; who being over shoes, will be over boots
also. He is so lost to the High Royalist and covetous Conformist, that he
cannot be in a worse case (with them) than he is already.


Fuller. If I be lost with the high Royalists and covetous Conformists, I hope
I shall be found by the low Royalists and liberal Conformists: However may God
be pleased to find my soul, and I pass not with whom I be lost.

There are a sort of men who with Dr. Manwaring maintain that Kings may impose
without Parliaments what taxes they please, and the Subjects bound to payment
under pain of Damnation, a principle introductory to tyranny and slavery: These
I term high Royalists, and I protest my self as to dissent in judgment from
them, so not to be at all ambitious of their favor.


Dr. Heylin. And therefore having declared himself for a Presbyterian in point
of Government, he will go thorough with his work, etc.


Fuller. Where have I declared my self for a Presbyterian in point of
Government? who never scattered sylable, (and if I did, I would snatch it up
again) to countenance such presumption.

I confess I said, That Mr. Travers was made Minister or Priest by the
Presbytery at Antwerp; that is, made Minister so far forth as they could give,
and he receive the Ministerial Character, who never had it otherwise impressed
upon him.

Suppose a disputable power should dub a Knight ^ Might not a Historian say
such a man was made a Knight by such a power of person, not engaging himself to
justify his Authority that made him? And by the same proportion, I relating
Mr. Travers made Minister at Antwerp, am not concerned to justify, nor by my
expression do I any way approve their Minister-making, if they have no
Commission thereunto.

I cannot close with the Animadvertor in his uncharitable censure of the
Ministry of forain Protestant Churches, rendering them utterly invalid, because
ordained by no Bishops. Cain (as commonly believed) is conceived to have killed
a fourth part of mankind by murdering Abel; but the Animadvertors cruelty to
Protestants has exceeded this proportion, in spiritually killing more than a
fourth part of Protestants, according to his own principles: For if no Priests
in France, Low Countries, Swisserland, etc. then no Sacraments; then no Church;
then no Salvation.

Far more Charity in those of the former Age. Bishop Andrews when he concurred
with others of his own order, in ordaining a Scotishman Bishop, who (as by
proportion of time may be demonstrated) received his Deaconship and Pristhood
from the Presbytery, conceived such ordination of validity when done; though I
believe in his judgment, not so well approving the doing thereof: Otherwise he
would never have consented to make a mere Lay man, per saltum, a Bishop.


Dr. Heylin. First for the Sabbath, (for the better day the better deed) having
repeated the chief heads of Dr. Bounds Book published Anno 1595. in which the
Sabbatarian Doctrines were first set on foot, he adds, that learned men were
much divided in their judgments about the same.

Fol. 228. Some (says he) embraced them as ancient truths consonant to
Scripture, long disused and neglected, now seasonably revived for the increase
of piety.] Amongst which some, he that shall take our Author for one, will not
be much mistaken either in the man, or in the matter. For that he does approve
Bounds Doctrines in this particular, etc.


Fuller. The Animadvertor imposes on me that which is contrary to my Judgemens.

I am not of Dr. Bounds Opinion, who straineth the Sabbath too high; yea the
Animadvertor when writing against Mr. Le strange, makes use of above twenty
lines out of my Book against him.

I am of the judgment of moderate men, as I have clearly and largely stated it
in my Church History, and will live, and desire to dye in the maintenance
thereof. And I hope the Animadvertor will allow me to know my own judgment
better than he does.

I am not of the Animadvertors mind, That the Lords day is alterable and of
mere Ecclesiastical constitution; much less dare I concur with him in his
scandalous expression, That the late In his Advertisemen^s on the History of
King Charles, p. 64.
Parliament has by their Orders and Ordinances laid greater restraints on
People than ever the Scribes and Pharisees did on the Jews.

To what follows in the Animadvertor concerning the Articles at Lambeth, I
return no other answer, save this: As a Historian I have written truly for
matter of Fact; And if as a Divine, I have interposed something of my Judgment
in those points, I believe the Animadvertor, if writing on the same subject,
would not appear more moderate. Mean time, I am sure he differs as much from
me, as I from him in these opinions; and therefore I see no reason of his
animositie on this ^ccount.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 179. Queen Elizabeth coming to the
Crown, sent for Abbot Fecknam to come to her, whom the Messenger found setting
of Elms in the Orchard of Westminster Abbey: But he would not follow the
messenger, till first he had finished his Plantation.] The tale goes otherwise
by Tradition than is here delivered; and well it may. For who did ever hear of
any Elms in Westminster Orchard, or to say truth, of any Elms in any Orchard
wha^soever of a late Plantation? Elms are for Groves, and Fields, and Forests,
too cumbersom and overspreading to be set in Orchards, etc.


Fuller. When a Traveller on the Highway suddenly returns back again, surely
it is to fetch some matter of moment, which he has forgotten and left behind
him. The Animadvertor in this his Note, retreats above 50 pages in my
Church History, viz. from fol. 233. to fol. 179. And what is this Retrograde
motion for? Even to carpe at Elmes, which I say were set by Abbot Feckenham in
the Orchard of the Dean of Westminster, citing my Author Reynerius for the
same; whose words in horto, I translate in the Orchard, as more proper for
Elmes than a Garden. Thus have you my Tale and my Tales maker. So that this
wooden Animadversion might well have been spared.


THE TENTH BOOK. Containing the Reign of King James.
Dr. Heylin. OUr Author proceeeds. Fol. 5. Watson with William Clark (another
of his own profession) having fancied a notional Treason, imparted it to George
Brooks.] To these he after adds the Lord Cobham a Protestant, the Lord Gray of
Wh^ddon a Puritan, and Sir Walter Rawleigh an able Statseman, and some other
Knights.

In the recital of which names our Author has committed a double fault, the
one of omission, and the other of commission. A fault of omission, in leaving
out Sir Griffith Markam, as much concerned as any of the principal actors,
designed to have been Secretary of Estate, had the Plot succeeded, and finally
arraigned and condemned at Winchester, as the others were.


Fuller. I distinguish betwixt total Omission, express Enumeration, and
implicit Inclusion. Sir Griffith Markam cannot be said to be omitted by me,
because included in that clause, and some other Knights. Yea this whole treason
had not at all sound any mention in my History (not being bound to take
cognizance thereof) save for the two Priests, who were engaged therein.


Dr. Heylin. His fault of commission is, his calling the Lord Gray by the name
of the Lord Gray of Whaddon (a fault not easily to be pardoned in so great an
Herald) whereas indeed though Whaddon in Buckinghamshire was part of his
Estate, yet Wilton in Herefordshire was his Barony and ancient Seat; his
Ancestors being called LL. Gray of Wilton, to difference them from the Lord
Gray of Reuthen, the Lord Gray of Codnor, etc.


Fuller. A fault not so great neither in an Herald, seeing I call him not Lord
Gray Baron of Whaddon, but of Whaddon; and a noble Person may be additioned
either from his Honor or his Habitation. Besides Wilton in Herefordshire, long
since being run into ruin, those Lords, some sixscore years ago, removed their
residence to Whaddon in Bucks where some of them lived, died, and are bur^ed.

The Animadvertor made as great an omission in his Short view of K. Charles,
when mentioning his Tutor Mr. Murrey, but quite leaving out Sir James
Fullerton, conjoined with him in the same charge of the Princes education. And
a greater fault of Commission is he guilty of, when taxing Mr. Murrey as
disaffected to the English Church, who when made Provost of Eaton* took his
oath and therein professed his good liking of our Discipline, as in the Cabala
does appear.

To return to Whaddon the Animadvertor might have spared this his Note, who in
the Page 2. li. 14.
Postcript annexed to this Book, makes Edward Lord Montagu created Baron of
Broughton in Northamptonshire. Now though the L. Montagu has the Manor of
Broughton (with the appendant Advowson) and other considerable Lands therein;
yet is he Baron of Boughton in the same County. A mistake so much the greater
in the Animadvertor, because done in his Emendation of his Emendations of the
faults of another, so that he cannot hit it right in this his third endeavor.
This I had passed over in silence, had not his cruelty on my Pen or
Presse-slips occasioned me to take notice thereof.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author proceeds. Fol. 21. This Conference was partially set
forth only by Dr. Barlow Dean of Chester, their professed Adversary, to the
great disadvantage of their Divines.] If so, how did it come to pass, that
none of their Divines then present, nor any other in their behalf did ever
manifest to the world the partialities and falsehoods of it. The Book was
printed not long after the end of the Conference, publicly passing from one
hand to another, and never convicted of any such Crime as it stands charged
with, in any one particular passage to this very day, etc.


Fuller. I only said that some did complain that this Conference was partially
set forth. I avowed not that they complained justly, I believe their complaint
causlesse, (and let it be remediless for me,) seeing I my self profess verbo
Sacerdotis, that I have been accused that I have abridged this Conference to
the disparagement of Dr. Reynolds, though my Conscience be clear herein.


Dr. Heylin. However our Author tells us, that he ( viz. Mr. Nicholas Fuller)
left behind him the reputation of an honest man. No question of it. It is a
thing so incident to the Name, that whatsoever they do or say, they are honest
still.


Fuller. All his jeering on my Name shall not make me go to the Heralds
Office to endeavor the altering thereof. I fetched it from my great-great Grand
father, and hope shall leave it to my great-great Grandchild. A Name which no
doubt originally was taken from that useful trade, without which Mankind can
neither be warm or cleanly.

The like is frequent in many respectfull Families in England, as the Antiquary
has observed. Verstegan of decayed intelligence.
From whence came Smith, al be he Knight or Squire,
But from the Smith that forgeth at the fire.


Yet considering the narrowness of my name, it is inferior to few, having
produced the best of English Pilots T. Fuller, who steered Captain Cavendish
round about the World; the best of English Critics, N. Fuller, so famous in
forain parts for his Miscellany's; and none of the worst of English
Benefactors, I. Fuller, one of the Judges of the Sheriffs Court in London, who
built and Stow his Survey of London, page 97.
endowed an Almeshouse for twelve poor men at Stoken-heath, and another at
Shorditch for as many poor Women. Besides, he gave his Lands and Tenements of
great yearly valuation in the Parishes of S. Bennet, and Peter's Paul's Wharf
London, to Feoffees in Trust, to release Prisoners in the Hole of both
Counters, whose Debts exceeded not twenty shillings eight-pence. Yea it has at
this Day, one Bishop, one Dean, one Doctor, two Batchelour of Divinity, and
many Masters of Arts, of no contemptible condition. Pardon Reader this
digression done se defendendo against one, by whom my Name is too much
undervalued, by Ironical over-valuing thereof.


Dr Heylin. Before we had the story of Thomas Fuller of Hammersmith condemned
for felony, but still so honest and so entirely beloved by King Harry the sixth
after his decease, that he appeard to him on the top of the Gallows, encouraged
him, and so charmed the Rope, that it did not strangle him, lib. 4.154.

Afterward we meet with John Fuller, Doctor of the Laws (a better than he) a
Persecutor in Queen Mary's days, but a pitiful man, as the Index tells us.

Here we have Nicholas Fuller a Counselor (the best of the three) decrying
openly the Authority on the High Commission; and thereby giving a legal
advantage to Archbishop Bancroft, by whom imprisoned, and there dying but
dying, with the reputation of an honest man.

And then another Thomas Fuller a Minister, (the best of all the company) and
an honest man too, so well deserving of the Church* and all good Churchmen
(both alive and dead) by this notable History, as not to doubt of the like
favor at their hands (should there be occasion) as Thomas of Hammersmith
received of King Harry the sixth.


Fuller. Here are four Gradations of Fullers, good, better, best, best of all,
which in the language of jeering (speaking always by the contraries, amounts
unto bad, worse, worst, worst of all. As for the first T. Fuller, I answer;
First, the tale is not made, but related by me, who have charged my Margin with
the Author thereof, Hist. Ecclesiast. seculo decimo quinto, page 646.
Harpsfeild, not inconsiderable for Learning and Religion amongst his own
party. Secondly, not the least credit is given thereunto in my reporting it,
matching it with another miracle, which I call equally true, that is equally
untrue in the interpretation of any unpartial Reader. Thirdly, seeing I
followed Harpsfeild in relating his Miracles in other places; if here I should
have deserted him, probably it would have been by others condemned in me for a
sullen omission, as by the Animadvertor for a light Insertion, because T. F.
was my Namesake.

The good nature and pitiful disposition of Dr. I. Fuller plainly appears in
Mr. Fox; and as for his bounty to Jesus Col. in Cambridge, I leave it to some
of that foundation to give testimony thereof.

As for the third N. Fuller, be it reported to the 1 Samuel 17.12
IESSES of Grayes-Inne, I mean such Benchers as pass amongst them for Old Men,
and can distinctly remember him, whether he has not left a precious and
perfumed memory behind him, of one pious to God, temperate in himself, able in
his Profession, moderate in his Fees, careful for his Client, faithful to his
Friend, hospital to his Neighbor, pitiful to the Poor, and bountiful to
Emanuel College in Cambridge: in a word blamless in all things, save this one
Act of Indiscretion, which could not make him forfeit the reputation of his
honesty, especially seeing he paid dear for it, and died in durance. Thus
though Mr. Stubbs was so obnoxious to the displeasure of Queen Elizabeth, that
h^s Right Hand was cut off, for writing a Libel against Her Match with Monseir;
yet In his Elizab. Anno 1581.
Mr. Camden does call him Virum famae integerrimae.

For the fourth and last, I will make the Animadvertor the self same Answer
which the Servants of Hezekiah returned to Rabsecah; Esaias 36.21.
But they held their peace, and answered him not a word.


Dr. Heylin. The Author says, and as about this time, some perchance
over-valued the Geneva Notes, out of that especial love they bare to the
Authors, and place whence it proceeded: So on the other side, same without
cause did slight, or rather without charity did slander the same.] I trow our
Author will not take upon him to condemn all those who approve not of the
Genevian Notes upon the Bible, or to appear an Advocate for them, though he
tells us not many lines before, that they were printed thirty times over with
the general liking of the people.


Fuller. Had I said two and thirty times, though past the Head Game I had not
been out. And now the Reader shall have my full and free sense of the Genevian
Notes. I remember the Proverb.

Plutarchus.
(...). In Head of Polypus is had What is good, and what is bad.


Such a mixture is in these Notes, wherein the most, pious and proper to
expound their respective places; but some (And those too many, though never so
few) false, factious, dangerous, yea destructive to Religion. I could therefore
wish some godly and discreet persons, empowered and employed to purge forth the
latter, that the rest may remain without danger, for the profit of plain
people. But till this be done, I am (I thank God) old enough to eat fish,
feeding on the flesh thereof, and laying by the bones on my Trencher, or
casting them down to the Dogs.


Dr. Heylin. I hope he will not condemn all those who approve not those Notes,
for K James, who in the Conference at Hampton Court, did first declare that of
all the Translation of the Bible into the English tongue, that of Geneva was
the worst; And secondly, that the Notes upon it were partial, untrue,
seditious, and savouring too much of dangerous and traitorous conceits. For
proof whereof his Majesty instanced in two places, the one on Exodus 1. ver. 19.
where disobediance to the King is allowed of: The other in 2 Chronicles. 8.15, 16.
where Asa is taxed for deposing his Mother only, and not killing Her: A note,
whereof the Scottish Presbyterians made special use, not only deposing Mary
their lawful Queen from the Regal Throne, but prosecuting Her openly, and
under hand, till they had took away her life. These instances our Author in his
Summary of that Confererence, has passed over in silence, as loath to have
such blemishes appear in the Genevians, or their Annotations: And I hope also
that he will not advocate for the rest.


Fuller. Down with these Bones to the Dogs indeed, which alone are proper for
their palate. The Scots are old enough (being reputed by Historians one of the
most ancient Nations of Europe;) let them answer for themselves, though (I
believe) they cannot answer this foul fact, but by penitent confession thereof.
But whereas the Animadvertor taxes me for wilfully omitting those Instances of
K. James in favor to the Genevians; I protest my integrity therein. It was
only because I would have my Summary a Summary, no Abridgement being adequate
to the Narration abridged therein.


Dr. Heylin. For let him tell me what he thinks of that on the second of St.
Matthews Gosspel, ver. 12. viz. Promise ought, etc.


Fuller. Let him show me what commission he has to enquire into my thoughts;
However, to do him a pleasure, I will tell him what I think in the point.


Dr. Heylin. Promise (say the Genevians) in their Note, Matthew 5.12. ought not
to be kept where Gods Honor and preaching of his Truth is hindered, or else it
ought not to be broken. What a wide gap, think we, does this open to the breach
of all Promises, Oaths, Covenants, Contracts, and Agreements, not only betwixt
man and man, but between Kings and their Subjects? What Rebel ever took up Arms
without some pretenses of that nature? What Tumults and Rebellions have been
raised in all parts of Christendom, in England, Scotland, Ireland, France, the
Netherlands, Germany, and indeed where not? under color that Gods honor, and
the preaching of the truth is hindered? If this once pass for good sound
Doctrine, Neither the King nor any of his Good Subjects, in what Realm soever,
can live in safety. Gods Honor and the preaching of his Truth are two such
pretenses, as will make void all Laws, elude all Oaths, and thrust out all
Covenants and agreements, be they what they will.


Fuller. I behold this Note as impertinent to that place, seeing it appears not
in the Text, that those wise men made Herod any promise to return unto him.
Secondly, Had they made him any promise, yea bound it with an Oath by the
living God, such an Oath had not been obligatory, because God (to whom the
forfeiture was due) released the Band in an extraordinary Vision, unto them
such, that our Age does not produce.

As the Note is impertinent in that place, so it is dangerous at all times; and
man's corruption may take thence too much mischievous advantage, which is partly
given, because so perilous a pit is left open (contrary to the Judicial Exodus
21.33.
Law) and not covered over with due caution requisite thereunto. I concur
therefore with the Animadvertor in the just dislike thereof.


Dr. Heylin. Next I would have our Author tell me, what he thinks on this Note,
on the ninth of the Revelation, verse. 3. where the Locusts which came out of
the smoke are said to be false Teachers, Heretics, and wouldly subtle Prelates,
with Monks, Friars, Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Doctors,
Batchelours, and Masters. Does not this Note apparently fasten the Name of
Locusts on all the Clergy of this Realm, that is to say, Archbishops, Bishops,
and all such as are graduated in the University by the name of Doctors;
Batchelours, and Masters? And does it not as plainly yoke them with Friars,
Monks, and Cardinals, etc.


Fuller. It was in my opinion both indiscretly and uncharitably done, to jumble
them together, being of so different (not to say contrary) originations. Sure I
am, though they are pleased to match them by force, yet the Parties were never
agreed.

They might as well have added Superintendents, Lecturers, Assistants, and
whole Classesses; seeing all such, it victous in Life, or Heretical in
Doctrine, (notwithstanding their reformed Names) are Locusts* as well (that is,
as ill) as any of the other.

But let us return to those my words which first gave the first occasion to
these four last Animadversions. Church History, 10 Book, Page 59. And as about
this time, some perchance over-valued the Geneva Notes, out of the especial
love they bare to the Authors and Place whence they proceeded; soon the other
side, In the Margin this Note Dr H in Oxfo^d causlesly inveyeth against the
Geneva Notes.
some without cause, did slight, or rather without charity, did slander the
same: For in this or the next year a Doctor in solemn assembly in the
University of Oxford publicly in his Sermon at St. Mary's, accused them as
guilty of mis-interpretation touching the Divinity of Christ; and his
Messiah-ship, as if symbolizing with Arrians and Jews against them both. For
which he was afterward suspended by Dr. Robert Abbot propter conciones
publicas minus Orthodoxas and offensionis plenas.



Fain would I know first, whether these my words import my inclination to
defend all in the Geneva Notes.

Secondly, though I neither can nor will (as by the premises does appear)
excuse all passages in them, I am confident that neither the Animadvertor, nor
all those of all degrees and qualities in both Universities urging him to write
against me, are able to find out any Arianisme or Anti-Mess^anisme in those
Notes. And therefore as an Historian I was bound to take notice of the fault
and censure of that Doctor, only expressed in the Margin by the initial letter
of his surname.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author goes on. Fol. 77. At this time began the troubles in
the Low Countries about matters of Religion heightened between two opposite
parties, Remonstrants, and Contra-Remonstrants; their Controversies being
chiefly reducible to five points, etc.] Not at this time, viz. 1618. which our
Author speaks of, but some years before.


Fuller. A causlesse Cavil. I said not absolutely they now began, but now they
began heightened. The Animadvertor knows full well that such participles
equivale Infinitives. In Greek, Matthew. 1.8. (...).
In Latin, Virg. En. 2. -- Sensit medios delapsus in Hosts, pro delapsum se
esse.


The Troubles in the Low Countries began heightened, that is to heightened. The
distemper was bred some years before, which now came to the Paroxism thereof,
viz. anno 1618.


Dr. Heylin. And first it is to be observed, that though he was then Dean of
Westminster when the custody of the Great Seal was committed to him; yet was he
not then and still Dean of that Church, that is to say, not Dean thereof at
such times as our Author writ this part of the History: For fol. 80. speaking
of Dr. Halls return from the Synod of Dort, Anno 1618. he adds, that he
continued in health till this day, thirty three years after, which falls into
the year 1651. And certainly at that time Dr. Williams (then Archbishop of
York) was not Dean of Westminster, that place being bestowed by his Majesty on
Dr. Steward Clerk of the Closet, Anno 1645. being full six years before the
time our Author speaks of.


Fuller. This I have learnt from the Animadvertor, which I knew not before, and
I thank him for it. The great distance of Exeter (where I lived) from Oxford,
may partly excuse my ignorance therein; who always beheld Archbishop Williams
as the last Dean of Westminster: as indeed he was the last that ever was
instauled therein. And Dr. Steward never lived minute in, or gained farthing
from his Deanship. So umbratile a Dignity is not worth the contending for.


Dr. Heylin. Secondly, Whereas our Author tells us, that the place was proper
not for the plain but guarded Gown; I would fain know how it should be more
proper for the guarded Gown than it was for the plain. There was a time when
the Chancellors (as our Author tells us elsewhere) were always Bishops; and
from that time till the fall of Cardinal Wolsey, that Office continued for the
most part in the hands of the Prelates: at what time, that great Office was
discharged with such a general contentment, that people found more expedition
in their Suits, and more ease to their purses than of later times. By which it
seems that men who are never bred to know the true grounds and reasons of the
Common Law, might and could mitigate the rigor of it in such difficult cases as
were brought before them; the Chancery not having in those days such a mixture
of Law as now it has, nor being so tied up to such intricate Rules as now it
is.


Fuller. I have nothing to return in opposition to the Animadvertor in his
endeavoring to make a Clergyman proper to be Lord Chancellor of England, as,
as well qualified As any Common-Lawyer for the Place. Nor if I could, would I
disprove what tends to the Honor of my Profession. The little toe is
advanced when the Head is Crowned, as a Member of the same Body; and my
meannesse is sensible of some honor, that any of my Calling are put in a
capacity of so high a Preferment. Only I request, that if the Animadvertor be
advanced to the Place, and if I have a cause brought before him, that he would
be pleased to hear it cum omni favore on this consideration, that he put me to
much trouble in answering his causlesse Cavils against my Church History.

Give me leave to add, that I suspect the Common-Lawyers will take advantage
from the last words of the Animadvertor, confessing the Court of Chancery now
more intricated and mingled with Law, than in former Ages. Hence I fear they
will infer, that Clergymen (though they were heretofore) will not hereafter be
so able and fit to discharge that Office. But let us proceed.


Dr. Heylin. But thirdly, whereas our Author in advocating for the Common
Lawyers, prescribes for them a Succession of six Descents, he has therein
confuted himself, and saved me the trouble of an Animadversion, by a Marginal
Note; in which he tells us, that Sir Chapter Hatton was not bred a Lawyer. If so,
then neither was the Title so strong, nor the Proscriptions so well grounded as
our Author makes it; the interposition of Sir Christopher Hatton between Sir
Tho. Bromley and Sir John Puckering, restraining it to three Descents* and but
thirty years; which is too short a time for a Prescription to be built upon.


Fuller. I prescribe not for the Common-Lawyers whose words are, the
Common-Lawyers (and those I assure you knowing enough in this their own Art)
prescribed for six Descents. The Marginal note was entered by me, a little to
check, for (say they) it does not confute their prescription. Alleging that
Sir Christopher Hatton, though not bred so professed a Lawyer, as to be called
to the Bar, was admitted in one of the Inns of Court, and wore no plain but a
guarded Gown in Westminster Hall, as some still alive do remember.


Dr. Heylin. Our Author tells us folio. 93. how Marcus Antonius de Dominis,
He had 14. years been Archbishop of Spalato, etc. Conscience in show, and
Covetousness in deed, caused his coming hither.] This is a very hard saying, a
censure which entrenches too much upon the Privileges of Almighty God, who
alone knows the secrets of the heart of man. Interest tenebris, interest
cogitationibus nostris, quasi alteris tenebris, as Minutius has it.


Fuller. If my saying intrencheth on divine Privileges, I shall crave pardon
from that God, who will more freely forgive me, than the Animadvertor would,
had I offended him: besides, it is no encroachment on the Prerogative of the
Crown of Heaven, to censure the secrets of men's hearts, when made visible to
the World in their actions: And though the thoughts of this Prelate were
written in secret Characters, yet are they easily read, as decyphered by the
Key of his ensuing Deeds, who left the Print of his covetous claws in all
places where he got English preferment.


Dr. Heylin. The man here mentioned had been in the confession of our Author
himself, Archbishop of Spalato in Dalmatia, a dignity of great power and
reputation, and consequently of a fair Revenue in proportion to it.


Fuller. I believe no less; but far short of our English Bishoprics. It may be
said of Italian Dignities, (to which Dalmatian may be reduced, as under the
Venetian Commonwealth) that generally they have high Racks, but bad Mangers,
as being set too thick to burnish about in much breadth and wealth. The Intrado
of the Archbishopric of Spalato consists partly in his Jurisdiction, the
exercise whereof is much obstructed, partly in Lands, the Revenues whereof are
more impaired by the vicinity of the Turk, harraging those parts with his daily
Intrusion. A^^a^, p. 334.
Mercator tells us, that the Port of Salona (which is hardly an English mile
from Spalato) nunc quidem parum Colitur ob Turcarum Viciniam.

A Dr. C^^k^n (...) disensione Eccles A^g^^r page 3.
judicious Writer, valuing his Archbishopric (as it seems to advantage)
estimateth it annually at 3000 Crowns, which falls a fourth part short of
1000 pounds sterling, a sum exceeded in most of our middling Bishoprics:
Besides the Archbishopric of Spalato was clogged and encumbered with a Pension
of 500 Crowns (the sixth part of his Revenues) payable (with the arrears) by
the Popes Command, to one Andrutius. The payment of which Sixth part went as
much against Spalato's stomach, as the payment of the Fifts now a days does
from the present Possessors to sequestered Minister.


Dr. Heylin. He could not hope to mend his fortunes by his coming hither, or to
advance himself to a more liberal entertainment in the Church of England, than
what he had attained to in the Church of Rome. Covetousness therefore could not
be the motive for leaving his own Estate, of which he had been possessed 14.
years in our Authors reckoning, to betake himself to a strange Country, where
he could promise himself nothing but protection and the freedom of conscience.
Our Author might have said, with more probability, that covetousness, and not
conscience, was the cause of his going hence, no bait of profit or preferment
being laid before him to invite him hither, as they were both, by those which
had the managing of that design, to allure him hence* etc.


Fuller. Dark men are the best Comment upon themselves, whose precedent are
best expounded by their subsequent actions. Who so considers the rapacity and
tenacity of this Prelate in England, will easily believe that a two-handed
covetousness moved him to leave his native Country and come over hither; One to
save, the other to gain. To save, that is to evade the payment of the aforesaid
Pension, with the arrears thereof: To gain, promising himself, as by the future
will appear, not only protection, but preferment; not only safety, but more
plenty by coming hither. He had Learning enough to deserve, Ambition enough to
desire, Boldness enough to beg, and presumed K. James had bounty enough to give
him the highest and best pr^ferment in England; and he who publicly did beg
York, may be presumed privately to have promised the Archbishopric of
Canterbury to himself.


Dr. Heylin. All men's mouths (says our Author) were now filled with discourse
of Prince Charles his Match with Donna Maria, the Infanta of Spain. The
Protestants grieved thereat, fearing that his Marriage would be the Funerals of
their Religion, etc.] The business of the Match with Spain has already
sufficiently been agitated, between the Author of the History of the Reign of
King Charles and his Observator: And yet I must add something to let our Author
and his Reader to understand thus much, that the Protestants had no cause to
fear such a Funeral.


Fuller. H^d I said that the Protestants justly feared this Marriage, then the
Animadvertor had justly censured; whereas now, grant they feared where no fear
was, he finds fault where no fault is. Historians may and must relate those
great and general impressions which are made on the spirits of people, and are
not bound to justify the causes thereof to be sound and sufficient. Ten
thousand Persons of quality are still alive, who can and will attest, that a
pannick fear for that Match invaded the Nation.


Dr. Heylin. They knew they lived under such a King who loved his Sovereignty
too well, to quit any part thereof to the Pope of Rome; especially to part with
that Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters, which he esteemed the fairest flower
in the Royal Garland. They knew they lived under such a King, whose interest it
was to preserve Religion in the same state in which he found it; and could not
fear but that he would sufficiently provide for the safety of it.


Fuller. Mr. Camden writing of the Match of Q. Elizabeth, with Mounsier,
younger Brother to the King of France, has this presage, that when Mr. Stubs
whose hand was cut off, said, God save the Queen, the multitude standing by
held their peace, rendering this as one reason thereof: Camdens (...), Anno
1^81. page 346.
Ex odio Nuptiarum, quas religione exitiosas futuras praesagierunt.
Out of hatred to that Match, which they presaged would be destructive to
Religion.


Now may not the Animadvertor as well tax Mr. Camden for inserting this
needless Note, and tell the world, that no Princess was more skild in Queen
craft than Q Elizabeth, and that this presage of her People was falsely fo^^de^?
I detract not from the policy or piety, head or heart of K. James; but this I
say, let Sovereigns be never so good, their Subjects under them will have their
own Joys, Griefs, Loves, Hatreds, Hopes, Fears; sometimes caused, sometimes
causless; and Histor^ans have an equal Commission to report both to posterity.


Dr. Heylin. If any Protestants feared the funeral of their Religion, they were
such Protestants as had been frighted out of their wits, as you know who used
to call the Puritans; or such who under the name of Protestants had contrived
themselves into a Faction not only against Episcopacy, but even Monarchy also.


Fuller. I profess I know not who used to call Puritans Protestants frighted
out of their wits: who ever it was, it was not Michael the Archangel, who
would not rail on the Devil.

By Protestants, I mean Protestants indeed, or (if you will rather have it)
Christians sound in their Judgment, uncontriv'd into any Faction; so far from
being Anti-episcopal, that some of them were Members of the Hierarchy; and so
far from destroying Monarchy, that since they endeavored the preservation
thereof, with the destruction of their own Esta^es.

As worthy Doctor Hackwel, Archdeacon of Surrey, was outed his Chaplain^
place, for his opposing the Match when first tendered to Prince Henry; so many
(qualified as aforesaid) concurred with his judgment, in the resumption of the
Match with K. Charles; notwithstanding they were justly and fully possessed of
integrity and ability of K. James. Their seriously considering the Z^^l of the
Spanish to promote Popery; the activity of the Romish Priests to gain
Proselites; their dexterous sinisterity in seducing Souls; the negligence of
two many English Ministers in feeding their Flocks; the pl^usibility o^ Popery
to vulgar Judgments* the lushiousness thereof to the pala^ of flesh and Blood*
the fickleness of our English Nation to embrace Novelties; the wavering of many
unsettled minds; the substilty of Satan to advance any mischievous design; the
justice of God to leave a sinful Nation to the Spirit of delusion; feared
(whether justly or no, let the Reader judge) that the Spanish Match (as
represented, attended with a Tolleration) might prove fatal to the Protestant
Religion.


Dr. Heylin. And to these Puritans, nothing was more terrible than the Match
with Spain, fearing (and perhaps justly fearing) that the Kings alliance with
that Crown, might arm him both with power and counsel to suppress those
Practices which have since proved the funeral of the Church of England.


Fuller. By the Church of England the Animadvertor means (as I believ) the
Hierarchy, the Funerals whereof for the present we do behold: However I hope
there is still a Church in England alive, or else we were all in a sad, yea in
an unsaluable condition. The state of which Church in England I compare to Acts
20.9.
Eutichus. I suspect it has formerly slept too soundly in case and security.
Sure I am, it is since, with him, fallen down from the third Loft; from Honor
into Contempt; from Unity into Faction; from Verity into dangerous Errors^ Yet
I hope (to follow the Allegory) that her life is still left in her; I mean so
much soundness left, that persons born, living, and dying therein are capable
of salvation. Let such who think the Church of England sick, pray for her
wonderful Recovery; and such as think her dead, pray for her miraculous
Resurrection.


Dr. Heylin. But as it seems they feared where no fear was, our Author telling
us, fol. 112. that the Spanish State had no mind or meaning of a Match; and
that this was quickly discovered by Prince Charles at his coming thither. How
so? Because, says he, fol. 112. they demanded such unreasonable liberty in
education of the Loyal Offspring, and other Privileges for English Priests,
etc.] If this be all, it signifies as much as nothing. For thus the argument
seems to stand, viz. The Spaniards were desirous to get as good conditions as
they could for themselves and their Party, ergo they had no mind to the match.
Or thus, The demands of the Spaniards when the business was first in Treaty,
seemed to be unreasonable, ergo they never really intended that it should
proceed. Our Author cannot be so great a stranger in the shops of London, as
not to know that Tradesmen use to ask many times twice as much for a
Commodity, as they mean to take; and therefore may conclude as strongly, that
they do not mean to sell those wares for which they ask such an unreasonable
price at the first demand. Iniquum petere, ut aequum obtineas, has been the
usual practice (especially in driving State-bargains) or all times and ages.
And though the Spaniards at the first spoke big, and stood upon such points, as
the King neither could, nor would in honor or conscience consent unto: yet
things were after brought to such a temperament, that the Marriage was agreed
upon, the Articles by both Kings subscribed, a Proxy made by the Prince of
Wales to espouse the Infanta, and all things on her part prepared for the day
of the Wedding. The breach which followed came not from any aversness in the
Court of Spain, though where the ^ault was, and by what means occasioned, need
not here be said.


Fuller. I expected when the Animadvertor had knocked away my Bowl, he would
have laid a Toucher in the room thereof: but if neither of us have a Bowl in
the Alley, we must both begin the Game again.

May the Reader be pleased to know, that living in Exeter, I had many hours
private Converse with the Right Honorable John Digby Earl of Bristow, who
favored me so far (much above my desert) that at his last going over into
France (where he died) he was earnest with me to go with him, promising me, to
use his own expression, that I should have half a loaf with him, so long as he
had a whole one to himself. This I mention to insinuate a probability, that I
may be as knowing in the Mysteries of the Spanish Match as the Animadvertor.

Double was the Cause of the breach of the Spanish Match; One, such as may with
no less truth than safety be related, as publicly insisted on in the
Parliament, viz. the Spanish Prevarication to restore the Palatinate: The other
secret, not so necessary to be known, nor safe to be reported. And I crave the
liberty to conceal it, seeing the Animadvertor himself has his Politic
Aposiopaesis, breaking off as abruptly as the Spanish Match with this wary
reservation; though where the fault was, and by what Means occasioned, need not
here to be said.


Dr. Heylin. But well fare our Author for all that; who finally has absolved
the Spaniard from this breach, and laid the same upon King James, despairing of
any restitution to be made of the Palatinate by the way of Treaty.

Ibid. Whereupon King James not only broke off all Treaty with Spain, but also
called the great Council of his Kingdom together.] By which it seems, that the
breaking off of the Treaty did precede the Parliament. But multa apparent quae
non sunt, every is not as it seems. The Parliament in this case came before, by
whose continual importunity and solicitation, the breach of the Treaties
followed after. The King loved peace too well to lay aside the Treaties, and
engage in War before he was desparate of success any other way than by that of
the Sword, as was assured both of the hands and hearts of his subjects to
assist him in it. And therefore our Author should have said, that the King not
only called together his great Council, but broke off the Treaty, and not have
given us here such an Hysteron Proteron, as neither does consist with reason,
nor the truth of story.


Fuller. To be (...), a Covenant-breaker, is a foul fault, as the Rom 1.31.
Apostle accounts it: Far be it from me to charge it causlesly on any,
especially on a dead Christian, especially on a King, especially on King James,
generally represented over-fond of Peace, and therefore the more improbable
first to infringe it.

To prevent exception, in the next Edition, calling the Parliament, shall have
the precedence of breaking off the Treaty for the Match.

I suspect that the Animadvertor has committed a greater transposition, when
affirming King In his short view of the reign of King. Charles.
James to have designed the Spanish Match in order to the recovery of the
Palatinate: Whereas it plainly appears, In the Cabala, and in the historical
observations of Mr. Rushworth
that before any suspicion of troubles in the Palatinate (occasioned by P.
Fredericks accepting the Crown of Bohemia,) this Match was projected by K.
James for P. Henry his eldest Son; and after his death, resumed for P. Charles,
without the least relation to the regaining of the (not then lost) Palatinate.

I have passed over some additory notes of the Animadvertor in this Kings
Reign, partly because I perceive my Book swells beyond the expected proportion,
partly that I may have the more scope to answer every particular objected
against me in the Reign of K. Charles, in such things which lie level to our
own eyes, and are within our own remembrance.


THE ELEVENTH BOOK, Containing the Reign of K. Charles.
Dr. Heylyn. THis Book concludes our Author's History, and my Animadversions.
And if the End be suitable unto the Beginning, it is like to find me work
enough; our Author stumbling at the Threshold, which amongst Superstitious
People has been counted for an ill Presage.


Fuller. Who I pray stumbled in the beginning of his Animadversions? when he
said, That the Britains worshipped but one God, and that Diana was none of
their original Deity. What if I stumbled, yea, and should fall too? Has not
the Animadvertor read, Mica. 7.8.
Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall rise again.


Dr. Heylyn. Having placed King Charles on the Throne, our Author says, fol.
117. On the fourteenth day of May following, King James his Funerals were
performed very solemnly, in the Collegiat Church at Westminster.] Not on the
fourteenth, but the fourth, says the Author of the History of the Reign of
King Charles; and both true alike. It neither was on the fourth, nor on the
fourteenth, but the seventh of May, on which those solemn Obsequies were
performed at Westminster. Of which, if he will not take my word, let him
consult the Pamphlet, called, The Observator observed, ( fol. 6.) and he shall
be satisfied. Our Author's Clock must keep time better, or else we shall never
know how the day goes with him.


Fuller. I will take his word without going any further, and this erroneous
Date, in my next Edition shall, God-willing, be mended accordingly. That Clock
which always strikes true, may well be forfeited to the Lord of the Manor;
though mine, I hope, will be found to go false, as seldom as another's.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author says, As for Dr. Preston, etc. His party would
persuade us, that he might have chose his own Mitre.] And some of his party
would persuade us, That he had not only large parts, of sufficient receipt to
manage the Broad Seal it self, but that the Seal was proffered to him, fol.
131.] But we are not bound to believe all which is said by that Party, who
looked upon the Man with such reverence, as came near Idolatry.


Fuller. I do not say, they do persuade, but they would persuade us. And here
the common expression takes place with me, Non persuadebunt, etiamsi
persuaserint. Grant, I do not believe all which is said by his Party, yet I
believe it was my duty, as an Historian, to take notice of so remarkable a
passage, and to report it to Posterity, charging my Margin (as I have done)
with the name and place of the Mr. B^ll in Dr. Prestons life.
Author, wherein I found it related.


Dr. Heylyn. His Principles and Engagements were too well known by those, which
governed affairs, to venture him unto any such great trust in Church or State;
and his activity so suspected, that he would not have been long suffered to
continue Preacher at Lincolns-Inne. As for his intimacy with the Duke, (too
violent to be long-lasting) it proceeded not from any good opinion which the
Duke had of him, but that he found how isntrumental he might be, to manage
that prevailing Party to the King's advantage. But when it was found, that he
had more of the Serpent in him, than of the Dove; and that he was not tractable
in steering the Helm of his own Party by the Court-Compass, he was
discountenanced and laid by, as not worth the keeping. He seemed the
Court-Meteor for a while, raised to a sudden height of expectation; and having
flasht and blazed a little, went out again, and was as suddenly forgotten.


Fuller. This is only Additionall, and no whit Opposite to what I have
written, and therefore I am not obliged to return any answer thereunto.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, fol. 119. Next day the King coming from
Canterbury, met her at Dover, whence with all solemnity she was conducted to
Somerset House in London, where a Chapel was now prepared for her Devotion,
with a Covent adjoining of Capuchin-Fryers, according to the Articles of her
marriage.] In all this nothing true, but that the new Queen was conducted with
all solemnity from Dover to London. For first, although there was a Chapel
prepared, yet was it not prepared, for her; nor, at Somerset House. The Chapel
which was then prepared, was not prepared for her, but the Lady Infanta, built
in the Kings house of St. James, at such time as the Treaty with Spain stood
upon good terms, and then intended for the Devotions of the Princess of Wales,
not the Queen of England. Secondly, the Articles of the Marriage make no
mention of the Capuchin-Friers, nor any Covent to be built for them. The
Priests who came over with the Queen were by agreement to be all of the
Oratorian Order, as less suspected by the English, whom they had never
provoked, as had the Jesuits, (and most other of the Monastic Orders) by their
mischievous practices. But these Oratorians being sent back with the rest of
the French, Anno, 1626. and not willing to expose themselves to the hazard of a
second expulsion, the Capuchins, under Father Joseph, made good the place. The
breach with France, the action at the Isle of Rhee, and the loss of Rochel,
did all occur, before the Capuchins were thought of, or admitted hither. And
thirdly, some years after the making of the Peace between the Crowns, (which
was in the latter end of 1628. and not before) the Queen obtained, that these
Friars might have leave to come over to her, some lodgings being fitted for
them in Somerset House, and a new Chapel then and there built for her Devotion.


Fuller. Here, and in the next Note, the Animadvertor habet confitentem reum.
And, not to take covert of a Latin expression, in plain English, I confess my
mistake, which is no original, but a derivative error in me, who can (if so
pleased) allege the printed Author who has misguided me. Yet, I will
patiently bear my proportion of guilt, and will provide, God-willing, for the
amendment in the next Edition. Thus, being so supple to confess my fault, when
convinced thereof, I therefore may and will be the more stiff, in standing on
the terms of mine own integrity, when causlesly accused.

But if the Animadvertor be too Insulting over me, let him remember his own
short view of the life of King Charles, where he tells us of the three Welsh
Generals, that they submitted to mercy, which they never tasted, naming Compare
his page 140 with his page 144.
Laughern, Powel, and Poyer: whereas two of them did find mercy, a little
male-child being taken up, who did cast Lots at White Hall; and, by Providence
ordering Casualty, Laughern and Powel were pardoned, and lately, if not still,
alive. But I forgive the Doctor for this error, being better then a truth, two
Gentlemen gaining their lives thereby.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, f. 121. The Bishop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper,
was now daily descendant in the Kings favor; who so highly distasted him, that
he would not have him, as Dean of Westminster. to perform any part of his
Coronation.] As little truth in this as in that before. For first, the Bishop
of Lincoln was not Lord Keeper at the time of the Coronation. Secondly, if he
had been so, and that the King was so distasted with him, as not to suffer him
to assist at his Coronation; how came he to be suffered to be present at it in
the capacity of Lord Keeper? For that he did so, is affirmed by our Author,
saying, That the King took a scrowl of parchment out of his bosom, and gave it
to the Lord Keeper Williams, who read it to the Commons four several times,
East, West, North, and South, fol. 123. Thirdly, the Lord Keeper, who read that
Scrole, was not the Lord Keeper Williams, but the Lord Keeper Coventry; the
Seal being taken from the Bishop of Lincoln, and committed to the custody of
Sir Thomas Coventry, in October before. And therefore fourthly, our Author is
much out, in placing both the Coronation, and the following Parliament, before
the change of the Lord Keeper; and sending Sir John Suckling to fetch that
Seal, at the end of a Parliament in the Spring, which he had brought away with
him before Michaelmas Term. But as our Author was willing to keep the Bishop of
Lincoln in the Deanery of Westminster, for no less then five or six years after
it was conferred on another; so is he as desirous to continue him Lord Keeper
for as many months, after the Seal had been entrusted to another hand.


Fuller. This also is an error, I neither can nor will defend the Lord Keeper
Williams, put for the Lord Keeper Coventry, which has betrayed me to some
consequentiall incongruities. I will not plead for my self in such a Suit,
where I foresee the Verdict will go against me. Only I move as to mitigation
of Costs and Damages, that greater slips have fallen from the Pens of good
Historians.

Mr. Speed in his Chronicle, first Edition, page 786. speaking of Henry, eldest
son to King Henry the eighth, makes Archbishop Cranmer (mistaken for Warham)
his Godfather, twenty four years before Cranmer ever sat in that See. I write
not this to accuse him, but in part to excuse my self, by paralleling mine with
as evident a mistake. I hope my free confession of my fault, with promise of
emendation of It (and the Appendants thereof) in my next Edition, will meet
with the Reader's absolution. And let the Animadvertor for the present (if so
pleased) make merry, and feast himself on my mistake, assuring him, that he is
likely to fast a long time hereafter.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, f. 122. The Earl of Arundel, as Earl Marshal
of England; and the Duke of Buckingham, as Lord high Constable of England, for
that day went before his Majesty in that great Solemnity.] In this passage, and
the next that follows, our Author shows himself as bad an Herald in
marshalling a Royal Show, as in stating the true time of the creation of a
noble Peer. Here in this place he places the Earl Marshall before the
Constable; whereas by the Statute 31 H. 8. c. 10. the Constable is to have
precedence before the Marshall. Nor want there precedents to show, that the
Lord High Constable did many times direct his Mandats to the Earl Marshall, as
one of the Ministers of his Court, willing and requiring him to perform such
and such services, as in the said Precepts were expressed.


Fuller. My Heraldry is right both in Place and Time. The Earl of Arundel, as
Earl Marshall, went after the Duke of Buckingham, as Lord High Constable,
though going before him. For Barons went (in this Royal Procession, at the
Kings Coronation) before Bishops, Bishops before Viscounts, Viscounts before
Earls, the meaner before the greater Officers of State. Thus the Lord Constable
(though the last) was the first, because, of all Subjects, nearest to the
person of the Sovereign. It seems the days were very long when the
Animadvertor wrote these causless cavills, which being now grown very short, I
cannot afford so much time in confuting them.

This his cavilling minds me, of what he has mistaken in his Geography. For,
the younger son of an English Earl coming to Geneva, desired a Carp for his
dinner, having read in the Doctor's Geography, that the Lemman Lake had plenty
of the Fish, and the best and biggest of that kind. The people wondered at his
desire of such a dainty, which that place did not afford; but told him, That
they had Trouts as good and great, as any in Europe. Indeed, learned De
Piscibus in ^^ce Trutta.
Gesner does observe, that the Trouts caught in this Lake, sent to, and sold at
Lions, are mistaken for Salmons by strangers, unacquainted with their
proportions. It seems the Animadvertor's Pen is so much given to cavilling,
that he turned Trouts into Carps though none of them so great, as this his CARP
at me, for making the Lord Marshall to go before the Lord Constable, at the
King's Coronation.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Ibid. That the Kings Train being six yards
long of Purple V^lvet, was held up by the Lord Compton, and the Lord Viscount
Dorcester.] That the Lord Compton was one of them which held up the Kings
Train, I shall easily grant; he being then Master of the Robes, and thereby
challenging a right to perform this service. But that the Lord Viscount
Dorcester was the other of them, I shall never grant, there being no such
Viscount at the time of the Coronation. I cannot say, but that Sir Dudley
Carlton might be one of those which held up the Train, though I am not sure of
it. But sure I am, that Sir Dudley Carlton was not made Baron of Imber-court,
till toward the latter end of the following Parliament of Anno 1606. nor
created Viscount Dorcester until some years after.


Fuller. It is a mere mistake of the Printer; for Viscount Doncaster, son of
(and now himself) the Earl of Carlisle, whose Father having a great Office in
the Wardrobe, this place was proper for him to perform. All will presume me
knowing enough in the Orthography of his Title, who was my Patron when I wrote
the Book, and whom I shall ever, whilst I live, deservedly honor, for his
great bounty unto me.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, fol. 122. The Lord Archbishop did present
his Majesty to the Lords and Commons, East, West, North, South; asking their
minds four several times, if they did consent to the Coronation of King Charles
their lawful Sovereign.] This is a piece of new State-doctrine, never known
before, that the Coronation of the King (and consequently his Succession to the
Crown of England) should depend on the consent of the Lords and Commons, who
were then assembled; the Coronation not proceeding (as he after tells us)
till their consent was given four times by Acclamations.


Fuller. I exactly follow the Language of my worthy Intelligencer, a Doctor of
Divinity, still alive, rich in Learning and Piety, present on the place, and an
exact observer of all passages; and see no reason to depart to depart from it.
I am so far from making the Coronation of the Sovereign depend on the consent
of his Subjects, that I make not the Kingly power depend on his Coronation,
who, before it, and without it, is lawful and effectual King to all purposes
and intents. This was not a consent like that of the Bride to the Bridegroom,
the want whereof does null the Marriage; but a mere ceremonial one, in majorem
Pompam; which did not make, but manifest; not constitute, but declare his power
over his people. So that the King got not one single mite of Title more, than
he had before this fourfold Acclamation.


Dr. Heylyn. And this I call piece of new State-Doctrine, never known before,
because I find the contrary in the Coronation of our former Kings. For in the
form and manner of the Coronation of King Edward 6. described in the Catalogue
of Honor, set forth by Thomas Mills of Canterbury, Anno 1610. we find in thus.
The King being carried by certain noble Courtiers in another Chair, unto the
four sides of the Stage, was by the Archbishop of Canterbury declared unto the
people (standing round about) both by Gods and Man's Laws, to be the right and
lawful King of England, France, and Ireland, and proclaimed that day to be
Crowned, Consecrated, and Anointed: unto whom he demanded, Whether they would
obey and serve, or not? By whom it was again with a loud cry answered, God save
the King, and, Ever live his Majesty. The same we have in substance, but in
fewer words, in the Coronation of King James, where it is said, that The King
was showed to the People, and that they were required to make acknowledgement
of their allegiance to his Majesty by the Archbishop; which they did by
acclamations. Assuredly, the difference is exceeding vast betwixt obeying and
consenting; betwixt the Peoples acknowledging their alliegance and promising to
obey and serve their lawful Sovereign, and giving their consent to his
Coronation, as if it could not be performed without such consent.


Fuller. The hinge of the controversy turns on the critical difference
betwixt these two phrases. Acknowledging their allegiance to their Sovereign.

Giving consent to his Coronation.



The Animadvertor endeavors to widen the distance betwixt them, and make the
difference vast, yea, exceeding vast, against the will of the words, which are
well inclined to an agreement, there being a Vicinity, yea, Affinity, betwixt
them, since such who will not acknowledge their Allegiance, will not
give-consent to his Coronation; and such who will consent thereunto, will
acknowledge their allegiance.

I refer my self wholly in this difference to the Arbitration of Mr. Mills, the
same Author and Edition cited by the Animadvertor, who speaking of the ancient
form of the Coronation of the Kings of England, in reference to this passage,
thus expresses himself.

Mills' Catal. of Honor, page 51.
After the King has a little reposed himself in the Chair or Throne, erected
upon the Scaffold, then the Archbishop of Canterbury shall go unto the four
squares of the Scaffold, and with a loud voice, Ask the good liking of the
people, concerning the Coronation of the King.

Small, I am sure, is the difference betwixt consenting and good-liking.
However, the Kings Coronation, though following after, did not depend on such
consent, good-liking, or acknowledging of Allegiance; seeing amongst our
English Kings, an Vsurper's Title was not the better with, nor a lawful
Prince's the worse without, such ceremonies of State.


Dr. Heylyn. page 202. Nor had the late Archbishop been reproacht so generally
by the common people, (and that reproach published in several Pamphlets) for
altering the King's Oath at his Coronation, to the infringing of the Liberties,
and diminution of the Rights of the English Subjects; had he done them such a
notable piece of service, as freeing them from all promises to obey and serve,
and making the Kings Coronation to depend on their consent. For Bishop Laud
being one of that Committee, which was appointed by the King to review the form
and order of the Coronation, to the end it might be fitted to some Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church of England, which had not been observed before; must
bear the greatest blame in this alteration, (if any such alteration had been
made as our Author speaks of) because he was the principal man whom the King
relied on in that business.


Fuller. This proceeds on the former foundation, which being false, and
confuted, the superstructure sinketh therewith.


Dr. Heylyn. But our Author tells us in his Preface, that this last Book, with
diverse of the rest; were written by him, when the Monarchy was turned into a
State.] And I dare believe him. He had not else so punctually conformed his
language to the State-doctrin, by which the making (and, consequently, the
unmaking) of Kings is wholly vested in the People, according to that Maxim of
Buchanan, Populo jus est, imperium cui velit deferat; than which, there is not
a more pestilent and seditious passage in his whole Book, De jure Regni apud
Scotos, though there be nothing else but treason and sedition in it.


Fuller. What I wrote in this point, I wrote in my PREFACE, that it might be
obvious to every Eye; viz. That the first three Books of my Church History were
for the main written in the Reign of the late King; the other nine, since
Monarchy was turned into a State.

My language in the latter Books forbeareth such personal passages, on the
King and his Posterity, which in his lifetime were, as consistent with my
loyalty, as since inconsistent with my safety. I will instance in one of them.
Church History, Book 3. Page 52. Some of whose Offspring [ King John 's] shall
flourish, in free and full power on the English Throne, when the Chair of
Pestilence shall be burnt to ashes; and neither Tripple Crown left at Rome to
be worn, nor any Head there which shall dare to wear it.



But if the Animadvertor, or any by him employed, can in any my nine last Books
discover a syllable, sounding to the disparagement of the Kings person or
power, to any impartial Ear, let me, who so long fed on the King's large diet,
be justly famished for my unthankfulness.

As for Buchanan, as I admire his Poetry, so I dislike his Divinity, especially
in this point; desiring that his Principles may never come South the River
Tweed, and, if offering it, may be drowned in their passage.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, f. 123. Then as many Earls and Barons as
could conveniently stand about the Throne, did lay their hands on the Crown on
his Majesty's head, protesting to spend their bloods to maintain it to him and
his lawful Heirs.] A promise faithfully performed by many of them, some losing
their lives for him in the open field, others exhausting their Estates in the
defense of his, many more venturing their whole fortunes by adhering to him to
a confiscation: A Catalogue of which last we may find subscribed to a Letter,
sent from the Lords and Commons of Parliament assembled in Oxford, to those at
Westminster, Anno 1643. And by that Catalogue we may also see, what and who
they were, who so ignobly brake faith with him: all those whose names we find
not in that subscription, or presently superadded to it, being to be reckoned
amongst those, who instead of spending their blood to maintain the Crown to
Him, and to his lawful Successors, concurred with them either in opere, or in
voto, who despoiled him of it. And to say truth, they were revvarded as they
had deserved, the first thing which was done by the House of Commons (after the
King, by their means, had been brought to the fatal Block) being to turn them
out of power, to dissolve their House, and annul their privileges, reducing
them to the same condition with the rest of the Subjects.


Fuller. I behold all this Paragraph as a Letter sent to me which requires no
Answer, (only I bear the Animadvertor witness, that it is delivered) seeing I
was none of the Lords on either Side. But I am not altogether satisfied in the
Adequation of the Animadvertor's Dichotomy to all the English Nobility, That
all not subscribing the Catalogue at Oxford, must instantly be concluded on the
opsite Party; believing, that upon serious search, some Lords would be found in
their Minority, and not necessarily reducible to either of these heads.


Dr. Heylyn. Footsteps of his moderation, content with the enjoying without the
enjoining their private practices and opinions on others.] This comes in as an
inference only on a former passage, in which it is said of Bishop Andrews,
that in what place soever he came, he never pressed any other Ceremonies upon
them, than such as he found to be used there before his coming. Though
otherwise condemned by some for many superstitious Ceremonies and superfluous
Ornaments used in his private Chapel. How true this is, I am not able to
affirm.


Fuller. The Animadvertor (if so disposed) might soon have satisfied himself in
this point, being Beneficed in Hampshire, the last Diocese of Bishop Andrews.
And though his institution into his Living was since the death of that worthy
Prelate, yet his information in this particular had been easy, from the aged
Clergy of his Vicinage. Sure I am, he ever was inquisitive enough in matters,
vvhi^h might make for his advantage; so that his not denying, tantamounteth to
the affirming of the matter in question.


Dr. Heylyn. I am less able (if it should be true) to commend it in him. It is
not certainly the office of a careful Bishop, only to leave things as he
found them, but to reduce them, if amiss, to those Rules and Canons, from
which, by the forwardness of some to innovate, and the connivance of others at
the innovations, they had been suffered to decline.


Fuller. I comply cordially with the Animadvertor in all this last Sentence.
Only I add, That it is also the office of a good Bishop, not to endeavor the
Alteration of things well settled before. This was the constant practice of
Doctor Andrews, successively Bishop of Chichester, Ely, and Winchester, who
never urged any other Ceremonies, that what which he found there. Now whereas
the Animadvertor says, that i^ this should be true, he is not able to commend
it in him; the matter is not much, seeing the actions of Bishop Andrews are
able to commend themselves.


Dr. Heylyn. And for the Inference it self, it is intended chiefly for the
late Archbishop of Canterbury; against whom he had a fling before in the
fourth Book of this History, not noted there, because reserved to another
place, of which more hereafter. Condemmed here for his want of moderation, in
enjoining his private practices and opinions on other men. But first, our
Author had done well to have spared the man, who has already reckoned for all
his errors, both with God and the world.


Fuller. He has so, and I hope, what he could not satisfy in himself, was
done by his Sav^our. But first, the Animadvertor had done well to have spared
his censure on my intentions, except he had better assurance of them. Here I
must, Reader, appeal to an higher than thy self, Him who can read the secrets
of my heart, before whom I protest, That in this passage I did not reflect in
any degree on the Archbishop of Canterbury. To make this the more probable,
know, the Articles of his Visitation were observed to be as moderate, as any
Bishops in England.

Here let me enter this Memorable, and let the Animadvertor confute it, if he
can. There was a design of the thirty six Dissenters (of whom hereafter) in
the Convoca^ion, to obtain, that these Articles of his Visitation might be
preceden^tall to all the Bishops in England, as being in themselves in
offensive, and containing no Innovations. This was by some communicated to
Archbishop Laud, who at first seemed to approve thereof; and how it came
afterward to miscarry, I am not bound to discover.

I confess, this my expression did eye another person, related to Bishop
Andrews, whom I forbear to name, except by the Animadvertor's reply unto me I
be forced thereunto.


Dr. Heylyn. And secondly, it had been better if he had told us, what those
private practices and opinions were, which the Archbishop, with such want of
moderation, did enjoy^ on others.


Fuller. They are reckoned up in my Church History, Book 11. page 174. parag:
47 and 48. This is direction enough, and there one may find more then a good
many of such opinions and practices. On the self-same token, that it was
discreetly done of the Animadvertor to pass them over in silence, without a
word in their defense or excuse. I will not again here repeat them, partly
because I will not revive what in some sort is dead and buried; and partly,
because I charitably believe, that some engaged therein, and still alive, are
since sorry for their over-activity therein.


Dr. Heylyn. For it is possible enough, that the opinions which he speaks of,
might be the public Doctrines of the Church of England, maintained by him, in
opposition to those private opinions, which the Calvinian party had intended to
obtrude upon her. A thing complained o^ by Spalato, who well observed, that
many of the opinions both of Luther and Calvin, were received amongst us, as
part of the Doctrine and Confession of the Church of England; which otherwise
he acknowledged to be capable of an Orthodox sense. Praeter Anglicanam
Confessionem (quam mi ^ ut mo^estam praedicalant) multa video Lutheri and
Calvini dogmata obtinuisse, as he there objects.


Fuller. I am not bound to stand to the judgment of Spalato, who would not
stand to his own judgment; but first in ^ear^, then in body, went back into
Egypt. Lay not such unsavory salt in my dish, but cast it to the Dunghill.


Dr. Heylyn. He that reads the Gag, and the Appello Caesarem of Bishop
Mon^^gue, cannot but see, that those opinions which our Author condemned for
private, were the true Doctrine of this Church, professed and held forth in the
Book of Articles, the Homilies, and the Common Prayer Book.


Fuller. He that reads the Answers returned by several Divines to the Books of
Bishop Montague, cannot but see, that they were rather private opinions, than
the true and professed Doctrine of the Church of England.

Here, Reader, I cannot but remember a passage betwixt two Messengers, sent to
carry Defiances from several Armies, who, meeting in the midway, (though
naked, and without Swords, yet) to manifest their zeal to their Cause, fought
it out with their Trumpets, till, both being well wearied, they went about
their business, leaving the main success to be tried by their Armies.

Historians are beheld in the notion of Heralds. And, seeing the Animadvertor
and I have now clashed it with our Trumpets, let us leave the rest to be
disputed and decided by those learned and pious persons, who publicly in Print
have engaged therein, and who have (or may in due tim^) meet together in bliss
and happiness. In my Fathers house are (though no wall of partition) many Joh.
14.2^
mansions; several receptacles (as some suppose) for Martyrs, Confessors, etc.
and why not for such, as, dissenting in the superstructures, concur in holy
life, and the fundamentalls of Religion?


Dr. Heylyn. And it is possible enough, that the practices which he speaks of,
were not private neither, but a reviver of those ancient and public usages,
which the Canons of the Church enjoined, and by the remisness of the late
Government had been discontinued. But for a justification of the practices (the
private practices he speaks of) I shall refer him to an Author of more credit
with him. Which Author, first, tells us of the Bishops generally, That being of
late years either careless or indulgent, they had not required, within their
Diocesses, that strict obedience to Ecclesiastical Constitutions, which the
Law expected; upon which, the Liturgy began totally to be laid aside, and
inconformity the uniform practice of the Church. He tells us, secondly, of
Archbishop Abbot in particular, That his extraordinary remisness, in not
exacting a strict conformity to the prescribed orders of the Church, in point
of Ceremony, seemed to dissolve those legal determinations, to their first
principle of indifferency, and led in such an habit of inconformity, as the
future reduction of those tender conscienced men's too-long-discontinued
obedience, was interpreted an innovation. And finally, he tells of Archbishop
Laud, who succeeded Abbot in that See, that, being of another mind and mettle,
he did not like, that the external Worship of God should follow the fashion of
every private fancy; and what he did not like in that subject, as he was in
State, so he thought it was his duty to reform. To which end, in his
Metropoliticall Visitation, he calls upon all, both Clergy and Laity, to
observe the Rules of the Church. And this is that which our Author calls, the
enjoining of his private practices; private perhaps in the private opinion of
some men, who had declared themselves to be professed enemies to all public
Order.


Fuller. I have cause to give credit unto H. Le Strange Esa;
him, who, to the luster of his ancient and noble extraction, has added the
light of Learning, not as his profession, but accomplishment, whereby he has
presented the Public with an hansome History, likely to prove as acceptable to
Posterity, as it has done to the present Age. The Gentleman, in that his
passage, reflecteth only on such Ceremonies, is stood in force by Canon, but
had been disused; with whom I concur. But the controversy in hand is about
additionall Ceremonies, enjoined by no Cannons, (save some men's over-imperious
commanding, and others over-officious complying) justly deserving the censure
of private practices.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, fol. 127. A Commission was granted unto five
Bishops, ( whereof Bishop Laud of the Quorum) to suspend Archbishop Abbot from
exercising his au^hority any longer, because un-canonicall for casual
Homicide.] Had our Author said, that Bishop Laud had been one of the number, he
had hit it right, the Commission being granted to five Bishops, viz. Dr.
Montain, Bishop of London, Dr. Neil Bishop of Durham, Dr. Buckeridge Bishop of
Rochester, Dr. Howson Bishop of Oxford, and Dr. Laud Bishop of Bathe and Wells;
or to any four, three, or two of them, and no more then so. Had Bishop Laud
been of the Quorum, his presence and consent had been so necessary to all their
Consultations, Conclusions, and dispatch of businesses, that nothing could be
done without him; whereas by the words of the Commission, any two of them were
empowered, and consequently all of them must be of the Quorum, as well as he;
which every Iustice's Clerk cannot choose but laugh at.


Fuller. They will soon cease their laughter at the sad story I am about to
relate. But be it premised, that here I use the word Quorum not in the legal
strictness thereof, but in that passeable sense in common discourse; viz. for
one so active in a business, that nothing is (though it may be) done without
him therein.

When the Writing for Archbishop Abbot's suspension was to be subscribed by
the Bishops aforesaid, the four Seniors, viz. London, Durham, Rochester, and
Oxford, all declined to set their hands thereunto, and (seemingly at the least)
showed much reluctance and regrete thereat. Then give me the Pen (said Bishop
Laud) and though last in place, first subscribed his name. Encouraged by whose
words and example, the rest, after some demur, did the like.

This was attested to me by him who had best cause to know it, the aged and
credible Register, still alive, who attended in the place upon them. This I
formerly knew, but concealed it; and had not published it now, if not
necessitated thereunto in my just defense.


Dr. Heylyn. Nor is there any such thing as a casual Homicide mentioned, or so
much as glanced at in that Commission, the Commission only saying, That the
said Archbishop could not at that present in his own person attend those
services, which were otherwise proper for his Cognizance and Jurisdiction; and
which, as Archbishop of Canterbury, he might and ought in his own person to
have performed and executed. I am loath to rub longer on this sore, the point
having been so vexed already betwixt the Historian and the Oservator, that I
shall not trouble it any further.


Fuller. I confess, casual Homicide not expressly mentioned, but employed in the
Commission. Otherwise what did those words import COULD NOT in his person
attend? It was not any indisposition of body, being then, and some years after,
in health; not impotency in his Intellect, (caused from the influence of age)
who afterward, when older, discharged this place, (as the Animadvertor
confeseth). Though therefore the hilt of Homicide was only shown, the blade
was shaked in the sheath. Sure I am, that some, the nearest about the
Archbishop, have informed me, that he interpreted, that UN-COULDING him,
solely to relate to his canonical Irregula^ity on the Accident aforesaid, and
was dejected accordingly.


Dr. Heylyn. Only I must crave leave to rectify our Author in another
passage, relating to that sad accident.


Fuller. To rectify is to make that straight which was crooked before; and it
is an act of no less charity, than skill and cunning well to perform it. Only
fools, can be fond of their own deformity. I do not only desire, but delight,
to have the crookedness of my knowledge straightened, provided always, it be
done in the spirit of meekness. But I understand, such as streighten crooked
persons beyond the Seas, put them to much torture. I likewise fear, that the
Animadvertor will lay so much weight of ill words upon me, that the profit I
shall reap, will not countervail the pain I must endure in my rectification.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author says, Ibid. It would be of dangerous consequence to
condemn him by the Canons of foreign Councils, which were never allowed any
Legislative power in this Land.] Which words are very ignorantly spoken, or
else very improperly.


Fuller. Did I not foretell aright, that my rectification would cost me dear?
even the burden of bad words. Here I have a doleful Dilemma presented unto me,
to confess my self speaking, either very ignorantly, or very improperly. But
might not one of these two VERY's have very well been spared? Well, e malis
minimum, if it must be so, that my choice must be of one of these, let it be
rather but Impropriety, than Ignorance.

But, Reader, I see no necessity of acknowledging either, but that my words are
both knowingly and properly spoken; and now to the trial.


Dr. Heylyn. For if by Legislative power, he means a power of making Laws, as
the word does intimate, then it is true, That the Canons of foreign Counsels
had never any such power within this Land: But if by Legislative power he
means, a Power or Capability of passing for Laws within this Kingdom; then
(though he use the word improperly) it is very falls) that no such Canons were
in force in the Realm of England. The Canons of many foreign Counsels,
General, National, and Provincial, had been received in this Church, and
incorporated into the body of the Canon Law, by which the Church proceeded in
the exercise of her Jurisdiction, till the submission of the Clergy to King
Henry the Eighth. And, in the Act confirmative of that submission, it is said
expressly, That all Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances, and Synodals Provincial,
as were made before the said Submission, which be not contrary or repugnant to
the Laws, Statutes, and Customs of this Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of
the Kings Prerogative Royal, were to be used and executed as in former times,
25 H. 8. c. 19. So that unless it can be proved, that the proceedings in this
case, by the Canons of foreign Councels was either contrary or repugnant to the
Laws and Customs of the Realm, or to the damage of the Kings prerogative
Royal, There is no dangerous consequence at all to be found therein.


Fuller. By Legislative power of the Canons of foreign Councels, I understand
their power to subject the People of our Nation to Guiltiness, and consequently
to Penalties, if found infringing them. Now I say again, such foreign Canons,
though not against, but only besides our Common Law; and containing no
repugnancy, but disparateness to the Laws of our Land; either never had such
power in England since the Reformation, or else disuse long since has
antiquated it, as to the rigid exercise thereof.

For instance, a Bishop I am sure, and I think a Priest too, is, in the old
Canons, rendered irregular, for playing a game at Tables, Dice being forbidden
by the Canons. Yet I conceive, it would be hard measure, and a thing, de facto,
never done, that such irregularity should be charged on him, on that account.

We know it was the project of the Pope and Papal party, to multiply Canons in
Councels, merely to make the more men, and men the more obnoxious unto him,
that they might re-purchase their innocence at the price of the Court of Rome.
I believe, the Animadvertor himself would be loath to have his canonicalness
tried by the Test of all old Canons, made in rigorem disciplinae, yet not
contrariant to our Laws and Customs, seeing they are so nice and numerous, that
Cautiousnesse it self may be found an offender therein. I resume my words, That
it would be of dangerous consequence to condemn the Archbishop by Canons of
foreign Councels, which never obtained power here, either quoad reatum, or
poenam, of such as did not observe them.


Dr. Heylyn. But whereas our Author adds in some following words, That
eversince (he means ever since the unhappy accident) he had executed his
jurisdiction without any interruption:] I must needs add, That he is very much
mistaken in this particular. Dr. Williams, Lord Elect of Lincoln; Dr. Carew,
Lord Elect of Exeter; and Dr. Laud, Lord Elect of St. David's, and, I think,
some others, refusing to receive Episcopal Consecration from him on that
account.


Fuller. Must the Animadvertor needs add this? I humbly conceive no such
necessity, being but just the same which I my self had written before.
Church History, Book 10. Page 88. Though some squemish and nice-conscienced
Elects scrupled to be consecrated by him.



But I beheld this as no effectual interrupting of his Jurisdiction, because
other Bishops, more in number, (no whit their inferior) received Consecration,
Dr. Davenant, Dr. Hall, and King Charles himself his Coronation from him.


Dr. Heylyn. Far more mistaken is our Author in the next, when he tells us,
fol. 128. Though this Archbishop survived some years after, yet hence-forward
he was buried to the world.] No such matter neither: For, though for a while he
stood confined to his house at Ford, yet neither this Confinement, nor that
Commission, were of long continuance; for about Christmas, in the year 1628. he
was restored both to his Liberty and Jurisdiction, sent for to come unto the
Court, received as he came out of his Barge by the Archbishop of York, and the
Earl of Dorset, and by them conducted to the King; who giving him his hand to
kiss, enjoined him not to fail the Councill-Table twice a week. After which
time we find him sitting as Archbishop in Parliament, and in the full exercise
of his Jurisdiction till the day of his death, which happened on Sunday, August
the 4th. 1633. And so much of him.


Fuller. An Historian may make this exception, but not a Divine; my words being
spoken in the language of the Gal. 6.14.
Apostle, The world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. I had said
formerly, that the Keeper's death was this Archbishop's mortification. But
from this his Suspension (from the exercise of his Jurisdiction) he was in his
own thoughts buried, it reviving his obnoxiousness for his former casual
Homicide; so that never he was seen heartily (if at all) to laugh hereafter,
though I deny not, Much Court-savour was afterward (on design) conferred on
him.

Here I hope it will be no offense to insert this innocent story, partly to
show how quickly tender guiltiness is dejected, partly to make folk cautious,
how they cast out gaulling speeches in this kind. This Archbishop returning to
Croidon, (after his late absence thence a long time) many people, most women,
(whereof some of good quality for good will) for novelty and curiosity crowded
about his Coach. The Archbishop being unwilling to be gazed at, and never fond
of Females, said, somewhat churlishly, What make these women here? You had
best, (said one of them) to shoot an arrow at us. I need not tell the Reader
how near this second arrow went to his heart.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author goes on. Fol. 137. My pen passing by them at present,
may safely Salute them with a God-Speed as neither seeing nor suspecting any
danger in the Designe] Our Author speaks this of the Feoffees, appointed by
themselves, for buying^in such Impropriations, as were then in the hands of
Lay-persons. I say, appointed by themselves; because not otherwise authorized,
either by Charter from the King, Decree in Chancery, or by Act of Parliament;
but only by a secret combination of the Brotherhood.

But secondly, this will further appear by their proceedings in the business,
not laying the Impropriations, by them purchased, to the Church or Chappelry to
which they had anciently belonged, nor settling them on the Incumbent of the
place, as many hoped they would. That had been utterly destructive to their
main design, which was not to advantage the Regular and established Clergy, but
to set up a new body of Lecturers in convenient places, for the promoting of
the Cause. And therefore having bought an Impropriation, they parcelled it out
into annual Pensions of 40 or 50 l. per annum, and therewith salared some
Lecturers in such Market Towns, where the people had commonly less to do, and
consequently were more apt to Faction and Innovation, than in other places. Our
Author notes it of their Predecessors, in Cartwrights days, that they preached
most diligently in populous places; it being observed in England, that those
who hold the Helm of the Pulpit, always steer peoples hearts as they please,
Lib. 9. fol. 195. And he notes it also of these Feoffees, that in conformity
hereunto, they set up a Preaching Ministry in places of greatest need; not in
such Parish-Churches, to which the Tithes properly belonged, but where they
thought the Word was most wanting, that is to say, most wanting to advance
their project.

Thirdly, if we behold the men whom they made choice of, and employed in
preaching in such Market Towns as they had an eye on, either because most
populous, or because capable of electing Burgesses to serve in Parliament, they
were for the most part Non-conformists, and sometime such as had been silenced
by their Ordinary, or the High Commission, for their Factious carriage. And
such an one was placed by Geering, one of the Citizen-Feoffees, in a Town of
Glocestershire; a fellow which had been outed of a Lecture near Sandwich by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, out of another in Middlesex by the Bishop of London,
out of a third in Yorkshire by the Archbishop of York, out of a fourth in
Hartfordshire by the Bishop of Lincoln, and finally suspended from his Ministry
by the High Commission; yet thought the fittest man by Geering (as indeed he
was) to begin this Lecture.

Fourthly and finally, these Pensions neither were so settled, nor these
Lecturers so well established in their several places, but that the one might
be withdrawn, and the other removed, at the will and pleasure of their Patrons,
if they grew slack and negligent in the holy cause, or abated any thing at all
of that fire and fury they first brought with them. Examples of which I know
some, and have heard of more. And now I would fain know of our Author, whether
there be no danger to be seen or suspected in this design; whether these
Feoffees in short time would not have had more Chaplains to depend upon them,
than all the Bishops in the Kingdom; and finally, whether such needy fellows
depending on the will and pleasure of their gracious Masters, must not be
forced to Preach such Doctrines only as best please their Humors. And though
I shall say nothing here of their giving underhand private Pensions, not only
unto such as had been silenced or suspended in the Ecclesiastical Courts, but
many times also to their wives and Children after their decease, all issuing
from this common-stock: yet others have beheld it as the greatest piece of Wit
and Artifice both to encourage and increase their Emissaries, which could be
possibly devised. If, as our Author tells us, fol. 143. The Design was generally
approved, and that both discreet and devout men were doleful at the ruin of so
pious a Project; it was because they neither did suspect the danger, nor
foresee the mischiefs, which unavoidably must have followed, if not crushed in
time.


Fuller. The Feoffees being now all Dead, save I am informed C. Offspring is
still alive.
one, I may say that in this Suit all the Council is for the Plantiffe, and
none allowed the De^enda^t. Were any number of them still alive, probably they
might plead something in defense of their Proceedings.

However I believe, this Narrative of the Animadvertor, has very much of Truth
therein, and seeing it is not Opposite but Additional to what I have written,
my Answer is not required thereunto. Only the close thereof treads on the
Toes of my History and that but lightly too; the Animadvertor not denying that,
discreet and Devout men were doleful at the ruin of so pious a Project. And
seeing he went so far with my words, would he had gone a little farther, and
added, that such Good men were desirous of a Regulation of this Design; it
being pity that so fair a Tree, should be rent up Root and Branch, for bearing
bad, which might and would have born better fruit, with a little good digging
about it, and well husbanding thereof.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, fol. 148. However, there was no Express in
this Declaration, that the Ministers of the Parish should be pressed to the
publishing.] Our Author does here change his style. He had before told us, That
on the first publishing of the Declaration about lawful Sports on the Lords
Day, no Minister was, de facto, enjoined to read it in his Parish, lib. 10.
fol. 76. and here he tells us, that there was no express order in the
Declaration, (when revived by King Charles) that the Minister of the Parish
should be pressed to the publishing of it; adding ^ithall, that many thought it a
more proper work for the Constable or Tithing-man, than it was for the
Minister. But if our Author mark it well, he may easily find, that the
Declaration of King James was commanded to be published by order from the
Bishop of the Diocese, through all the Parish-Churches of his Jurisdiction. And
the Declaration of King Charles to be published with like order from the
several Bishops, through all the Parish-Churches of their several Diocesses
respectively. The Bishop of the Diocese in the singular number, in the
Declaration of King James, because it principally related to the County of
Lancaster The Bishops in the plural number, in that of King Charles, because
the benefit of it was to be extended over all the Realm. In both, the Bishops
are commanded to take order for the publishing of them in their several
Parishes; and whom could they require to publish them in the Parish Churches,
but the Ministers only? The Constable is a Lay-Officer, merely bound by his
place to execute the Warrants and Commands of the Justices, but not of the
Bishop. And though the Tithing-man have some relation to Church Matters, and
consequently to the Bishop, in the way of presentiments; yet was he no^ bound to
execute any such Commands, because not tied by an Oath of Canonical Obedience,
as the Ministers were. So that the Bishops did no more than they were
commanded, in laying the Publication of these Declarations on the backs of the
Ministers* and the Ministers by doing less than they were required, infringed
the Oath which they had taken, rendering themselves thereby obnoxious to all
such Ecclesiastical Censures, as the Bishops should inflict upon them.


Fuller. I said, That there was no Express order in the Declaration, that the
Minister of the Parish should be pressed to the publishing of it.

Now the Animadvertor has done me the favor, to prove my words to be true,
acknowledging the Declaration only enjoined, That the Bishop of the Diocese
should order the publishing thereof, through all the Parishes in his
Jurisdiction: And so consequently (as the Animadvertor infers) the Ministers
must do it. Hereby the truth of my words do appear, that there was no express
command, seeing an EXPRESS, and an INFERENCE are two things of a different
nature.

Whereas I said, That many thought it a more proper work for the Constable or
Tithing-man, then for the Minister. There are thousands now alive which will
justify the truth thereof. Yea, their thoughts (which otherwise I confess came
not under my cognizance) expressed themselves in their words, wherewith they
affirmed and professed the same.


Dr. Heylyn. It seems that in our Authors judgment, it was well done by the
Judges for the County of Somerset, to impose upon the Ministers of that County
(over whom they could challenge no authority) to publish their own Declarations
against Wakes and Feasts; and that it was well done of the Ministers to obey
the same, for which see fol. 147.] These Bishops are beholden to him, for
giving greater power to the Judges and Justices over his brethren of the
Clergy, then he yields to them; and as much beholden are the Clergy, for
putting so many Masters over them instead of a Father. The difference of the
case will not serve the turn, the King having a greater power to indulge such
freedom to his Subjects, then the others could pretend unto, to restrain them
from it. If he object, that the Ministers are most unfit to hold the Candle, to
lighten and let in licentiousness, as he seems to do; he must first prove, that
all, or any of the sports allowed of, in those Declarations, may be brought
within the compass of licentiousness, which neither the Word of God, nor the
Canons of the Christian Church, nor any Statutes of the Realm had before
forbidden. Lastly, whereas he tells us, That because the Judges had enjoined
the Ministers to read their Order in the Church, the Kings Declaration was
enforced by the Bishops to be published by them in the same place.] There is no
such matter. The Declaration of King James appointed to be read, and read by
order of the Bishop in the Parish Churches, does evince the contrary.


Fuller. I did not say, The Judges did well, or did ill therein; but I said,
The Judges did order, that the Ministers should publish their Declaration
against Wakes and Feasts. I have not (nor can quickly procure) a copy of their
order, whether it were mandatory or, by way of advice, did desire Ministers to
do that, which might be advantageous to Religion. But I will not judge the
Judges, but leave them (as best skilled in their own faculty) to make good
their own acts.

If such Grandees in the Law exceeded their bounds in this their injunction to
Ministers, (over whom they had no command) how many mistakes should I run into,
if once offering to meddle with this matter, being out of my profession? And
therefore no more thereof.


Dr. Heylyn. Now for our Authors better satisfaction in the present point, I
shall lay down the judgment of one so high in his esteem, (and once in the
esteem of that party too) that I conceive he will not offer to gainsay him. It
is the Author of the Book, called the Holy Table, Name, and Thing, who
resolves it thus: All the commands of the King (says he) that are not upon the
first inference and illation (without any Prosyllogisms) contrary to a clear
passage in the Word of God, or to an evident Sunbeam of the Law of Nature, are
precisely to be obeyed. Nor is it enough to find a remote and possible
inconvenience that may ensue therefrom; (which is the ordinary objection
against the Book of Recreations) for every good subject is bound in conscience
to believe and rest assured, that his Prince (envi^oned with such a Council)
will be more able to discover, and as ready to prevent any ill sequel, that may
come of it, as himself possibly can be. And therefore I must not by disobeying
my Prince commit a certain sin, in preventing a probable but contingent
inconveniency. This if it were good Doctrine then, when both the Author and the
Book were cried up even to admiration, is not to be rejected as false Doctrine
now; truth being constant to it self, not varying nor altering with the change
of times.


Fuller. I want no satisfaction, I thank God, in the point; and therefore the
Animadvertor might have spared his pains. As an Historian, I have truly
related, de facto, what was done; and though the Animadvertor may conjecture
at my judgment in this controversy, he cannot be confident thereof by any
thing I have written.

All I will add is this, Because I may write the more, I will write the less
of this subject. I have good power to back me for the present in this
controversy, and might securely express my self therein.

When my Text shall lead me in my Vocation to treat of the Observation of the
Lords Day, I shall not be sparing to express my opinion therein, and will
endeavor (God-vvilling) to justify it. Mean time, I will not go out of mine
own house, which is my castle; I mean, I will not be drawn out into the open
field of a controversy, but keep my self under this COVER, That matters of
fact in this difference have been truly related by me: and let the Animadvertor
disprove it if he can.


Dr. Heylyn. But our Author will not stop here, he goes on and says,

Ibid. Many moderate men are of opinion, that this abuse of the Lord's Day was a
principal procurer of Gods anger, since poured out on this Land, in a long and
bloody Civil war.] And moderate perhaps they may be in apparel, diet, and the
like civil acts of life and conversation; but sure, immoderate enough in this
Observation: For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has ^een his
Counselor, says the great Apostle? But it is as common with some men of the
newest Religions, to adscribe Gods secret judgments to some special Reasons,
as if they had the Key which opens into his Cabinet at their several Girdles;
as if they were admitted to all Consultations in the Court of Heaven, before
that dreadful Judge could inflict any temporal Punishment upon Men on Earth.
Otherwise they might find the Nation guilty of too many sins, which drew down
this vengeance, to adscribe it unto any one sin, (if a sin it were;) and rather
wonder at Gods mercy, patience, and long-suffering, in deferring his
punishments long, then that he inflicted them at last.


Fuller. I behold them as Moderate men in all Respects. The Animadvertor has
used my words, 2 Samuel 10.4.
as the King of Ammon dealt with the clothes of David's Ambassadors, even
cutting them off at the middle. Otherwise, might they have but hung down to the
ground, no nakedness had appeared in what I have written, proceeding as
follows; Church History, Book 11. page 148. Such Moderate Men observe that
our sights of chief Concernment, [Edge Hill etc.] were often sought on the
Lord's Day, as pointing at the punishing of the Profanation thereof.



See here the Reason assigned of their Opinion, as I received it from their
mouths. Since, they say, It is one thing with the Beth-shemites to pry into the
Ark, and another thing, to look on. God Secrets, in some sort un-secreted, when
by the Proportion of his Judgments, he says Come and see. These also allege
for themselves, that the Patriarks, sensible of their hard usage from the
Governor of Egypt, did not pry into Gods Mystical Pleasure, when concluding
it inflicted on them, for their Cruelty to their Brother Joseph; Therefore is
this distress come upon us. However I wholly concur with the Animadvertor in
his last Sentence, as truly and savourly written. Only I dissent from Him, in
that Passage, (if a Sin it were;)


Surely, He means not, if the Profanation of the Lord's Day were a Sin, which
is above all Iff^s. Rather his sense is, If the using of such Sports were a
Profanation of the Lords Day.

But men's Corruption is more prone to acquit themselves when guilty, than to
suspect themselves when guiltless. Parce precor Stimulis, and fortius utere
Loris.
Spurs I pray refrain;
Rather use the Reine.


I need not mind the Animadvertor, how penal it is by the late Act, for any to
write any thing against the strict Observation of the Lords Day; and believe,
he Intended nothing Prejudicial to the same: yet Profaness probably too soon
(besides his intention) may improve it self on his words, alter his Si into
Non; and by the next Return, turn his note of Dubitation into an absolute
Negation, on which account the Parenthesis had been better forborne, in my
Opinion.


Dr. Heylyn. And though our Author does object against this Opinion of those
Moderate men, that to pick a solemn Providence out of a common Casualty,
savours more of curiosity then conscience, yet he dares not stand to it;
confessing within few lines after, that there may be more in the Observation
than what many are willing to acknowledge.] If so, there may be as much
conscience as curiosity in the Moderate Men.


Fuller. As I stand not wholly to it, so I run not any whit away from it, but
dubiously propound it, hoping the Reader will account me not the less constant
in my Judgment, but the more cautious in my language, in not being positive in
an Observation of this nature.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds Folio 151. If moderate men had had the
managing of these matters about the Posture of the Lords Board (call it Table
or Altar) the Accommodation had been easy with a little Condescension on both
sides.] Why then did not these moderate men interpose themselves for taking off
those needless Animosities, and putting an end unto the Quarrel? The Press
was open on both sides; John, Lincoln, Deane of Westminister, who appeared so
strongly in the Cause, thinking himself as well able and well qualified to
license a Book unto the Press, as either the Archbishop of Canterbury, or the
Bishop of London.


Fuller. I said it, and say it again, and any who have Honesty and Learning
(the Animadvertor only excepted) will say so too; that those differences were
easily capable of Accommodations with a little Condescension on both sides. It
will not belong before the Animadvertor will tell us, that the Controversies
betwixt us and the Church of Rome, (consisting most, as he says, in
Superstructures) may be comprimised: and if (to use his own Words) the
Petulancy of the Puritans on the one side, and the Pragmaticalness of the
Jesuits on the other side were charmed a while, moderate men might possibly
have agreed on equal terms.

Now this seems a strange thing to me, that moderation may make Protestants
agree with Papists in matters Doctrinall; and cannot make Protestants agree
with Protestants in matters Ceremonial. Being the same plaster, why has it
not equal virtue; especially, the latter being the lesser wound? Can the
difference of Transubstantiation be taken up betwixt us and the Papists, and
not the setting of the Communion Table betwixt our selves? Can a crack be
closed in a Jewel, and a rent not mended in the Case? These things I confess
transcend my apprehension.

Now that no moderate man stood up in the gap to make up this breach, I can
assign no other cause, save, That God, justly offended with our Nation, had
not so great a favor for it, but suffered a Pustle to fester into an Ulcer;
not from any insanability in the soar, but want of seasonable Surgery; and let
the guilt thereof (that the burden may be the better born) be equally divided,
betwixt both parties engaged therein.


Dr. Heylyn. If all else failed, why did not our Author undertake, and make
himself the Moderator in that trifling controversy, which seems to have been
so easy to be brought to an accommodation?


Fuller. The jeer shall go for nothing. The reason why the Author undertook not
to be Moderator in the Difference, was, because he was Ephesians. 3.8.
(...), (and if there be a more subter-superlative) the least of the least of
his brethren. However, herein the Author comfort himself, That as it was
above his power to cure, so it was against his will to widen the wound; and
being quiet in his calling, concurred not to the inflaming of the mutual
Animosities.


Dr. Heylyn. Make himself Moderator in that [ trifling controversy.]


Fuller. The Animadvertor his unfair dealing with me, minds me of a passage in
Cambridge. One made a [ pretended] extemporary Confutation, of his Position
against whom he disputed, which indeed was only premeditately made against the
Question, confuting many things which the Answerer never spoke. And when the
Answerer, causlesly charged, pleaded for himself, Nihil tale occurrebat in
Positione mea; the other replied, Debuit occurrere tamen. I never said, that
the controversy about placing of the Communion Table, was a trifling
controversy; but it seems I should have said so, that the Animadvertor might
have had an advantage against me. This I said, That the controversy might
easily have been reconciled with mutual moderation; but trifling, I never
termed it. And therefore the Animadvertor, fighting with his own shadow, it is
all one to me whether he beat or be beaten.

Yet I doubt not, but there are many in this Nation, my betters in all
respects, who will be bold to call it a Trifling controversy, if not
^^solutely, yet comparatively, to many Doctrinall differences of higher
concernment; and, in respect of the great troubles caused thereby, far above
the considerablenesse of the thing which was in contest.


Dr. Heylyn. The question was about the placing of the Communion Table, whether
it ought to stand in the middle of the Church, or Chancel, with one end toward
the East great Window, like a common Table; or close up to the Eastern-wall,
with ends North and South, according as the Altars had been placed in the
former times. They that maintained the last opinion, had Authority for it, that
is to say, the Injunctions of the Queen, Anno 1599. the Orders and
Advertisements of the year 1562. and 1565. the constant practice of the
Chapels in his Majesty's Houses, most of the Cathedral, and some of the
Parochial Churches; and finally, a Declaration of the King, Anno 1633.
commending a conformity in the Parish-Churches to their own Cathedralls. They
on the other side stood chiefly upon discontinuance, but urged withal, that
some Rubricks in the Common Prayer Book seemed to make for them. So that the
question being reduced to a matter of fact, that is to say, The Table must
stand this way, or it must stand that way; I would fain know, how any
Condescension might be made on either side, tending to an accommodation, or
what our Moderator would have done to atone the differences.


Fuller. The Dr. has clearly, briefty, and truly stated the Controversy,
whose pen was formerly conversant therein, and by his own acknowledgment both
sides had much to say for themselves.

Only I wonder that though the Question was reduced to matter of Fact, it
should be made by him of so high Importance; That either no condiscention could
be made on either side, or such Condiscention (if made) must prove ineffectuall
as to an accommodation.

Is there no balm in Gilead? Has not the spirit of God endowed his servants
with such discretion, but they may comprimise a difference of greater Moment?


Dr. Heylyn. Suppose him sitting in the Chair, the Arguments on both sides
urged, and all the Audience full of expectation which side would carry it. The
Moderator Fuller of old merry Tales then ordinary, thus resolves the business,
That he had heard it commended for a great piece of wisdom in Bishop Andrews,
That wheresoever he was a Parson, a Dean, or a Bishop, he never troubled
Parish, College, or Diocese, with pressing of other Ceremonies upon them,
than such which he found used there before his coming thither. That King James
finding the Archbishop of Spalato in a resolution of questioning all such
Leases, as had been made by his Predecessors in the Savoy, gave him this wise
counsel, Relinque res sicut eas invenisti; That he should leave things as he
found them. That the said King being told by a great Person, of the inverted
situation of a Chapel in Cambridge, made answer, That it did not matter how
the Chapel stood, so their hearts who go thither were set aright in Gods
service. But for his part, he liked better of the resolution of Dr. Prideaux,
(his brother in the Chair at Oxford) who being troubled with his neighbors of
Kidlington, about the setting up of a May Pole, some being for it, and some
against it, thus resolved the case; You, says he, that will have a May Pole,
shall have a May Pole; And you that will have none, shall have none. And that
according to that pattern, he thought best to accommodate the present
Controversy to the same effect, viz. You that will have an Altar, shall set up
your Altar; and you that will have a Table, shall have but a Table. Which
sentence, whether it would have pleased all parties, I do somewhat doubt; but
sure I am, it had not tended to the advancement of that uniformity, which was
then designed.


Fuller. The Animadvertor here makes a Professor's Chair; and, having solemnly
set me down therein, puts words into my mouth, and makes an Oration for me, as
Moderator in the present Controversy, with a jeer to boot on the memory of the
Reverend Doctor Prideaux.

Psalm. 1.1.
But know, there is another Chair, which David calls the Chair of the
scornful; and it is to be feared, that the Animadvertor in this point is too
near sitting down therein.

If I should retaliate, and accordingly place the Animadvertor in a Chair, and
fit him with a Speech personating him proportionable to his principles,
possibly I might render him as Ridiculous, but most of all should abuse my self
and my own profession therein.

I thank God I can, though plainly, yet pertinently enough to my purpose, speak
to express the notions of my mind. And when God shall take speech from me, (if
my reason still remain) I shall rather with Zacharias make signs for
writing-tables to write in, than to have words put into my mouth, forced and
seigned on me by the Animadvertor. Let him thank God that he can speak so well
for himself. And I will be content as well as I can, to utter my own
conceptions.

It would never have come into my Mind to have compared the Table of the Lord
to a May Pole; the Wood of the one grew in Paradise, not so the other, being a
light, and Ludicrous, and too often profane, stock of wood. I hope that the
principles of my Education will restrain me from profaneness in such unfitting
parallels.

Whereas the Animadvertor says that an Expedient would not have tended to that
Uniformity, that was designed herein, before God and Man, I will speak out my
thoughts. That multiformity with mutual Charity advances Gods Glory as much
as Uniformity it self in matters merely indifferent; which as the Pipes of an
Organ may be of several length and bigness, yet all tuned into good harmony
together.

I will instance in the Observation of Easter, the great Controversy betwixt
the Eastern and Western Church in the Observation thereof; betwixt that which
I may call Style Oriental, and Style Occidentall for the Date thereof. And I
verily believe that God was equally honored by both, by such as Religiously
observed it.


Dr Heylyn. But from these moderate men, which were so in contemplation only,
let us proceed to one who was such in practice, (the Lord Bishop of London) of
whom he says; fol. 150. He had a perfect command of his passion, an happiness
not granted all Clergymen in that Age, though Privy-Counsellors.] So perfect a
man of his own passion and affections, that he will not think himself honored
with a commendation, which comes accompanied with the disparagement of his
chiefest friend; (for that this lash was made for the Archbishop of
Canterbury, no wise man can doubt.) Our Author might have spared the dead,
without any wrong to the living; but that he thinks no Topic so useful in his
Logic, as the rule of Contraries. Contraria juxta se posi a magis elucescunt.
Upon which ground, the better to set off Bishop Andrews, this poor Archbishop
must be charged with want of moderation, in enjoining his own private practices
and opinions upon other men. And here, that Bishop Iuxon might appear with the
greater luster, the said Archbishop with all his passions and infirmities,
must stand by for a foil. He had indeed no such command upon his passions, as
to be at all times of equal temper, especially when wearied with the business
of the Councill-Table, and the High Commission. But as he was soon hot, so he
was soon cooled; and so much is observed by Sir Edward Dering, though his
greatest adversary, and the first that threw dirt in his face in the late long
Parliament; who tells us of him, that the roughness of his uncourtly nature
sent most men discontented from him; but so, that he would often (of himself)
find ways and means to sweeten ma^y of them again, when they least looked for
it. In this, more modest then our Author; who gives us nothing of this Prelate
but his wants and weaknesses. But of this reverend Prela^^, he will give
cause to speak more hereafter.


Fuller. There were other Clergy men Privy-Counsellors beside Archbishop Laud:
Dr. Abbots, Neil, Harsnet, Williams, etc. And therefore the Animadvertors
Collection of my words cannot be conclusive in Reference to Archbishop Laud:

I confess else where I do reckon Anger amongst his personal imperfections,
which a Historian may do without any wrong at all, (The spirit of God saying,
Jam. 5.17.
Elias was subject to like passions as we are); I am confident as angry as
Archbishop Laud was, He would not have bin angry with me for writing of it, as
sensible of and sorrowful for his own imperfection therein.

I am much of the mind of Sr. Edward Dering, that the roughness of his
un-court-like nature, sweetened many men when they least looked for it,
surprising some of them, (and my self for one) with unexpected Courtesies. But
whereas I am accused for giving in nothing of this Prelate, but his wants and
weaknesses, it will not be long before my innocence herein will appear.


Dr. Heylyn. Let us now on unto another of a different judgment, his professed
enemy, Mr. Prin; of whom, thus our Author, [ fol. 157.] Mr. William Prin was
born about Bath in Glostershire, etc. and began with the writing of some
Orthodox Books.] In this story of Mr. Prin and his sufferings, our Author runs
into many errors, which either his love to the man, or zeal to the good cause,
or carelessness of what he writes, have brought upon him.


Fuller. If I have run into so many errors, it will be charity in the
Animadvertor fairly to lead me back again a foot-pace into the truth, and then
he shall have thanks for his pains: always provided, he does not pinch me by
the arm as he conducteth me, which will turn my thanks into anger. But seeing
the Animadvertor cares for both alike from my hands, let him do as he pleases.

Next we have his tripartite History of my errors, which he will have to
proceed from one of these three causes. 1. Love to the person of Mr. Prin. To
whom I profess I have no fondness, but likeing the Motto of Luther, In quo
aliquid Christi video, illum diligo, I must on that account have a kindness for
him. 2. Zeal to their good cause; which I behold as a jeer, and treading on the
toes of Scripture, Galatians 4.18. It is good to be zealously affected always
in a good thing. 3. Carelessness of what I write.


But seeing now the Animadvertor's hand is in his Arithmetic, in counting of
causes of my mistakes, his charity might have found a ^ourth, (worth all the
other three) and imputed my errors to that infirmity, which always attends
human nature. However, let us proceed.


Dr. Heylyn. Whereas our Author tells us, that Mr. William Prin was born
about Bath in Gloucestershire, Bath is not in Gloucestershire, but a chief City
in the County of Somerse^.


Fuller. These are ANI-MAD-VERSIONS indeed, when a Writer's words are madly
verted, inverted, perverted, against his true intent, and their Grammatical
sense.

My words run thus, Mr. William Prin was born ( about Bath) in Gloucestershire;
where Bath is walled about with a Parenthesis, not essential to the Sentence,
thus perfect without it, Mr. William Prin was born in Gloucestershire. These
walls the Animadvertor has most dis-ingenuously dismantled, to lay Bath open;
and, if possible, to bring it into Gloucestershire, that so he may have
something to cavil at me.

Indeed Bath is not in, but within three miles of Gloucestershire; and the next
eminent place to -- the Village of Mr. Prin's nativity. When Towns stand in the
confines of two Counties, is it not proper enough to say, Such a one was born
(about London) in Surrey, though London be in Middlesex; or (about Windsor) in
Buckingham-shire, though Windsor be in Bark-shire?

Mr. Fox writing in his own defense, against such as traduced him; Some, says
he, do not cavil, because they have found fault; but do find faults, because
they may cavil: And be it reported to the Reader, whether the Animadvertor may
be accounted one of them. And now the Animadvertor having a little refreshed
himself in my Crosse-Bath, and somewhat pleased his spirit of opposition, he
thus proceeds.


Dr. Heylyn. Secondly, whereas he says, that he began with the writing of some
Orthodox Books] Though I look on Mr. Prin, (so far forth as I am able to judge,
by some Books of his not long since published) as a man of a far more moderate
spirit, than I have done formerly; yet can I not think his first Books to have
been so Orthodox as our Author makes them. For not to say any thing of his
Perpetuity, etc.


Fuller. But I must and will say something of his Perpetuity of the Regenerate
Man his Estate, as being that which is particularly named in my Margin, and
chiefly intended by me. A Book, wherein an useful, necessary, and comfortable
Truth is learnedly defended. A Book, which will perpetuate the memory of the
Writer; who, had he proceeded, and continued, as he began, none could have took
just exception at, or got just advantage against him.


Dr. Heylyn. As for the Books of Mr. Prin, entitled, Lame Giles his Haltings,
Cozen's cozening Devotions, and his Appendix to another, they have many things
repugnant to the Rules and Canons of the Church of England. No greater enemy
against howing at the Name of Jesus, nor greater enemy to some Ceremonies, here
by Law established. In which particulars if our Author think him to be
Orthodox, he declares himself to be no true son of the Church of England.


Fuller. I confess, in this his numerous offspring, his younger children were
nor so vigorous as his first born, termed in the Genesis 49.3.
Scripture the might and beginning of their fathers streng^h; they were of a
weaker and sicker constitution, and some passages in them I do not approve. I
hope to acquit my self so dutiful a son to the Church of England, that, when
in a reverent posture I shall crave her blessing, she will give it me in as
full and free a manner and measure, as to the Animadvertor himself.


Dr. Heylyn. Thirdly, the Book called Histrio-Mastix, was not writ by Mr. Prin
about three years before his last sufferings, as our Author tells us, for
then it must be writ or published Anno 1634. whereas indeed that Book was
published in Print about the latter end of 1632. and the Author Censured in
Star Chamber for some passages in it about the latter end of the year 1633.
Otherwise, had it been as our Author tells us, the punishment must have
preceded the offense; and he must suffer for a Book, which was not published at
that time, and perhaps not written. But our Author has a special faculty in
this kind, which few Writers have.


Fuller. The Animadvertor has a special faculty in cavilling without cause.
My Clock of time strikes true enough, but that he is minded not to tell it
aright. My words are, Some three years since; which word SOME, sounds an
interpretative plus minus to all ingenuous Ears. Besides, this is our opposite
marginall Note, (containing the contents of that Paragraph) Mr. Prin accused
for Libelling against Bishops; which accusation was about two years before this
his last Censure, (during which time he was imprisoned). And my SOME three
years are to bear date (in the construction of any impartial Reader) from that
his accusation; and then nothing is mis-timed, but falls out in due season.

And now, Reader, judge, where the many errors be into which I have run, in the
story of Mr. Prin and his sufferings, seeing no one mistake can be produced and
proved against me. And seeing the first Book of Mr. Prin was ^ound in it self,
in my opinion; and his last Books more moderate, even in the judgment of the
Animadvertor; and his midling Books (how faulty soever) such for which he has
severally suffered; let us even take a fair farewell of Mr. Prin and his Books,
and so proceed.


Dr. Heylyn. Now as our Author post-dateth his Histrio-M^stix, by making it
come into the world two years after it did; so he ante-dates a Book of Dr.
White, then Lord Bishop of Ely, which he makes to be published two years sooner
then indeed it was. That Book of his, entitled, A Treatise of the Sabbath,
came not out till Michaelmas, Anno 1635. though placed by our Author as then
written, Anno 1633. for which, see fol. 144.


Fuller. In answer hereunto, May the Reader be pleased to take notice of these
particulars. 1. The revived controversy, Lord's Day, lasted ten years, bandied
with books from 1628. till 1638. 2. I was loath to scatter my Book with it, but
resolved on one entire Narrative thereof. 3. I fixed on the year 1633. therein
to insert the same, because the middle Number, from the rising to the sinking
of the difference, then came to the very heat and height thereof. 4. Hence my
Narrative retreated some years back to 1628. when Bradborn began the
difference. 5. Hence also it sallied forth to the year 1635. (when Bishop
White's book was set forth) and beyond it. 6. The date of the year 1633.
stands still unmovable on my Margin; the whole Relation, being for the reasons
aforesaid entered under it. So that nothing is offered to the Reader unjoynted
in Time, if I be but rightly understood.



Dr. Heylyn. Next unto Mr. Prinne, in the course of his Censure, comes the
Bishop of Li^coln, the cause whereof we have in our Author, who having left a
blank, fol. 156. for somewhat which he thinks not fit to make known to all,
gives some occasion to suspect that the matter was far worse on the Bishops
side than perhaps it was. And therefore to prevent all further misconstructions
in this business, I will lay down the story as I find it thus, viz. The
Bishop's purgation depending chiefly upon the testimony of one Prideon, it
happened, that the February after, one Elizabeth Hodson was delivered of a base
child, and laid to this Prideon. The Bishop finding his great Witness charged
with such a load of filth and infamy, conceived it would invalidate all his
testimony, and, that once rendered invalid, the Bishop could easily
prognosticate his own ruin; therefore he bestirs himself amain. And though by
order of the Justices at the public Sessions at Lincoln, Prideon was charged
as the reputed father, the Bishop by his two Agents, Powel and Owen, procured
that Order to be suppressed; and by subornation and menacing of, and tampering
with, Witnesses; at length in May, 10 Car. procured the child to be fathered
upon one Boon, and Prideon acquit. Which lewd practices, for the supportation
of his favourite's credit, cost the Bishop, as he confessed to Sir John Munson
and others, twelve hundred pounds; so much directly, and by consequence much
more.


Fuller. I have concealed nothing herein of Moment, (the Blank being
insignificant, and the mere mistake of the Before his Time, he was about to
begin a new Section and Dedication as appears by the TO in Text.
Printer) and expect no considerable addition from the Animadvertor, having in
my Book truly and clearly stated the Bishops Cause, from the best Records.

I appeal to the unpartiall Perusers of what I wrote, whether by this Note, any
thing of moment is added to the matter in hand, except the naming of a light
houswife, (which I conceived beneath my History) the rest being truly by me
related before.


Dr. Heylyn. But to proceed: the cause being brought unto a censure, fol. 157.
Secretary Windebank motioned to degrade him; which (says he) was lustily
pronounced by a Knight and a Layman, having no precedent for the same in
former Ages.] But first, it is not very certain that any such thing was moved
by Sir Francis Windebank. A manuscript of that days proceedings I have often
seen, containing the Decree and Sentence, with the substance of every Speech
then made; and amongst others, that of Sir Francis Windebank, in which I find
no motion tending to a Degradation, nor any other punishment inflicted on him,
than Fine, Suspension, and Imprisonment; in which the residue of the Lords
concurred, as we find in our Author.


Fuller. It is very certain, he moved it, and I avow it from honorable Eyes
and Ears. The Animadvertor misguides the reference of those my words, [ having
no precedent for the same in former Ages,] making them relate to the Bishop's
Degradation, (whereof one precedent since the Reformation, Unus homo nobis)
which indeed refer to the Knight's and Lay-man's first mentioning thereof,
which is unprecedented I am sure, that such a person should FIRST make such a
motion against a Bishop.

I confess, at Bp. Midleton's Degradation, some of the Lay-Privy-Counsellors
were present, but acted little therein, (so, far from FIRST mentioning of it)
only concurring with the Court, the matter being chiefly managed by
Archbishop Whitgift, and some other Bishops and Deans the Commissioners, as
most proper persons to pass such a censure on one of their own profession.


Dr. Heylyn. Secondly, it had been more strange if the Knight had not been a
Layman, the Church of England not acknowledging any Order of Spiritual
Knighthood. Knights in Divinity are greater strangers in this Land, then
Lay-Divines; these last being multiplied of late, even ad infinitum; the first,
never heard of.


Fuller. The Pleonasm of the addition of Layman to Knight, is not so culpable
in it self, but that it might have passed without censure; and let not the
Animadvertor be over-confident herein.

I have been credibly informed, that Sir Miles Sandys, (third son to Edwin
Archbishop of York) Fellow of Peter-house in Cambridge, and Proctor of the
University, Anno 1588. was made a Deacon, (and so no mere Layman) and in his
younger years a Prebendary of York. Within this twenty years there was one Mr.
Seaton beneficed in Hartfordshire, a Scotish-man, and at this day a Knight. But
the matter being of no more moment, let us proceed.


Dr. Heylyn. And thirdly, had it been so moved, and so lustily moved, as our
Author makes it, the Knight and Layman might have found a precedent for it in
former ages.

Which last clause is to be understood (as I suppose) with reference to the
times since the Reformation: For in the former times, many precedents of like
nature might be easily found. And being understood of the times since the
Reformation, it is not so infallibly true, but that one precedent of it, at the
least, may be found amongst us. Marmaduke Middleton advanced to the Bishopric
of Sr. David's, Anno 1567. after he had sat in that See three and twenty years,
was finally condemned (for many notable misdemeanors) not only to be deprived
of his Bishopric, but degraded from all holy Orders. Which sentence was
accordingly executed by and before the High-Commissioners at Lambeth-house, not
only by reading of it in Scriptis, but by a formal divesting of him of his
Episcopal Robes, and Priestly Vestments, as I have heard by a person of good
credit, who was present at it. And somewhat there is further in the story of
this Marmaduke Middleton, which concerns the Bishop now before us; of whom our
Author tells us further, That being pressed by two Bishops, and three Doctors,
to answer upon Oath to certain Articles, which were tendered to him in the
Tower, he utterly refused to do it, claiming the privilege of a Peer, fol.
159. Which plea was also made by the said Bishop of St. David's, offering to
give in his Answer to such Articles, as were framed against him, on his Honor
only, but refusing to do it on his Oath. Which case being brought before the
Lords, then sitting in Parliament, was ruled against him; it being ordered,
that he should answer upon Oath, as in fine he did. To this Bishop let us join
his Chaplain, Mr. Osbolstone, who being engaged in the same Bark with his
Patron, suffered shipwreck also, though not at the same time, nor on the same
occasion; Censured in Star Chamber not only to lose his Ecclesiastical
Promotions, but to corporal punishments.


Fuller. In my weak judgment, the Animadvertor had better have omitted this
passage (of this Bishop's Degradation) in this juncture of time, where in the
repute of that Function runs very low, and their adversaries too ready to take
all advantage to disgrace it. The rather, because Bishop Godwin takes no
notice at all thereof, but begins, continues, and concludes the life and
death of this Bishop in less then two lines. Marmaduke Middleton translated
from Ireland, died November. 30th. 1592.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, fol. 166. But this last personal penalty
he escaped, by going beyond Canterbury, conceived seasonably gone beyond the
Seas, whilst he secretly concealed himself in London.] And he had escaped the
last penalty, had he staid at home. For though Mr. Osbolston at that time
conceived the Archbishop to be his greatest enemy, yet the Archbishop was
resolved to show himself his greatest friend, assuring the Author of these
Papers (before any thing was known of Mr. Osbolstons supposed flight) that he
would cast himself at the Kings feet for obtaining a discharge of that
corporal punishment unto which he was sentenced. Which may obtain the greater
credit; First, in regard that no course was taken to stop his flight, no search
made after him, nor any thing done in Order to his apprehension. And secondly,
by Mr. Osbolstons readiness to do the Archbishop all good Offices in the time
of his troubles, upon the knowledge which was given him (at his coming back) of
such good Intentions. But of these private men enough; pass we now to the
public.


Fuller. Whether or no he was sought after, I know not; this I know, he was not
taken: and more do commend his wariness in his flight, than would have praised
his valor for staying, in hope his Punishment should be remitted. It had been
most Mercy to stop the denouncing, but was a good after-game of pity to stay
the inflicting of so cruel a censure on a Clergyman. As the Animadvertor,
then, had the Credit to know; so the Author, now, has the Charity to believe,
the Archbishops good resolution.

However I cannot forget, that when the Sentence in the Star Chamber, passed on
Bishop Williams, (where he concurred with the highest in his Fine) He publicly
professed, that He had fallen five times down on his knees before the King in
the Bishop's behalf, but to no purpose. It might be therefore suspected that
his intention to do it once for Mr. Osbolston might not have taken effect. And
therefore, had the Archbishop's good resolution been known unto him, Mr.
Osbolston might most advisedly conceal himself.


Lib. XI. Part. II. Containing the last 12. Years of the Reign of King Charles.
Dr. Heylyn. ANd now we come to the last and most unfortunate Part of this
King's Reign, which ended in the Loss of his own Life, the Ruin of the
Church, and the Alteration of the Civil Government. Occasioned PRIMARILY, as
my Author says, by sending a new Liturgy to the Kirk of Scotland.


Fuller. I deny such a Word that I said the Liturgy did PRIMARILY occasion the
War with Scotland: Rather the clean contrary may (by Charitable Logic) be
collected from my Words, when having reckoned up a Complication of
Heart-burnings amongst the Scots, I thus Conclude, Church History. Book 11.
Page. 163. Thus was the Scottish Nation full of discontents, when this Book
being brought unto them bare the Blame of their breaking forth into more
dangerous designs: as when the Cup is brim-full before, the LAST (though
LEAST) superadded drop is charged alone to be the Cause of all the running over.



Till then that the Word PRIMARILY can be produced out of my Book, let the
Animadvertor be beheld PRIMARILY, as One departed from the Truth; and
SECONDARILY as a Causeless accuser of his Brother.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Folio. 160. Miseries caused from the sending
of the Book of Service, or new Liturgy thither which may sadly be termed a
Rubric indeed dyed with the blood of so many, of both Nations slain on that
Occasion.] Our Author speaks this in Relation to the Scottish Tumults, Anno
1637. In telling of which Story he runs (as commonly elsewhere) into many
Errors. For first those Miseries, and that bloodshed was not caused by
sending the Liturgy thither etc.


Fuller. Seeing the Animadvertor denies the Liturgy to have had any Causall
influence on the Scots War, I must manifest my dissent from his Judgment; and
here I crave the Reader's leave to be his humble Remembrancer of the Kinds of
Causes, so far as they conduce to the clearing of the present Controversy.

Causes are twofold, Solitary or Total (...); or Joint and fellow Causes
(...). The latter again is twofold, Proegumena [ long leading before] and
inwardly disposing and inclining to Action; or Procatarctica (called also Causa
irritatrix or Primitiva provocans) which is outwardly impulsive to Action.

The former is termed by Physicians, Causa Antecedens; the latter Causa
Evidens of a disease. Thus in a Fever, corrupt humors bred within and without
the Veins, are the Antecedent cause thereof: whilst, being in the hot Sun,
walking in the South Wind etc. stopping the Pores, and stirring the ill Humors
to heat, may be the evident cause of a Fever.

I thus apply it: The inward discontents of the Scots on several accounts
(which follow on the next Paragraph) were the Antecedent causes of their War;
whilst the evident Cause thereof, was the Obtruding the Liturgy upon them. And
so much for my clear sense in this Controversy.


Dr. Heylyn. The Plot had been laid long before upon other grounds, that is to
say, Questioning of some Church Lands, then in the hands of some great Persons,
of which they feared a Rovocation to the Crown. And secondly, the manumitting
of some poor subjects from the tyranny and vassallage which they lived under,
in respect of their Tithes, exacted with all cruelty and injustice by those,
whom they call the Lords of new erection. Which Plot so laid, there wanted
nothing but some popular occasion for raising a Tumult first, a Rebellion
afterward; and this occasion they conceived they had happily gained, by
sending the new Liturgy thither, though ordered by their own Clergy first, as
our Author tells us, at the Assembly of Aberdeen, Anno 1616. and after a^
Perth, Anno 1618. and fashioned for the most part by their own Bishops also.
But of this there has so much been said between the Observator and his
Antagonist, that there is nothing necessary to be added to it. Secondly, there
was no such matter as the passing of an Act of Revocation, for the restoring of
such Lands as had been alienated from the Crown, in the minority of the Kings
Predecessors, of which he tells us, fol. 192. The King indeed did* once intend
the passing of such an Act, but finding what an Insurrection was likely to
ensue upon it, he followed the safer counsel of Sir Archibald Acheson, by whom
he was advised to sue them in his Courts of Justice. Which course succeeding to
his wish, so terrified many of those great persons, who had little else but
such Lands to maintain their Dignities, that they never thought themselves
secure, as long as the King was in a condition to demand his own. Thirdly,
though it be true enough, that some persons of honor had been denied such
higher Titles as they had desired, fol. 163. yet was it not the denying of such
Titles unto Men of Honor, which wrought these terrible effects; but the
denying of an honorary Title to a man of no honor. If Colonel Alexander Lesly,
an obscure fellow, but made rich by the spoils and plunder of Germany, had been
made a Baron when he first desired it, the rest of the malcontents in
Scotland might have had an heart, though they had no head. But the King not
willing to dishonor so high a Title, by conferring it on so low a person,
denied the favor: Which put the man into such a heat, that presently he joined
himself to the faction there, drove on the plot, and finally undertook the
command of their Armies. Rewarded for which notable service with the Title of
Earl of Levin by the King himself, he could not so digest the injury of the
first refusal, but that he afterward headed their Rebellions upon all
occasions.


Fuller. Little opposition against, some variation from, and more addition unto
what I have written, is herein contained: Which if tending to the Reader his
clearer information, I am right glad thereof, and wish him all happiness
therein.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, fol. 163. Generally they excused the King in
their writings, as innocent therein, but charged Archbishop Laud as the
principal, and Dr. Cousins as the isntrumental compiler thereof.] This is no
more then we had reason to expect from a former passage, li^. 4. fol. 193.
where our Author tells us, that the Scottish Bishops withdrew themselves from
their obedience to the Sea of York, in the time when George Nevil was
Archbishop. And then he adds, Hence-forwards no Archbishop of York meddled
more with Church Matters in Scotland; and happy had it been, if no Archbishop
of Canterbury had since interressed himself therein. His stomach is so full of
choler against this poor Prelate, that he must needs bring up some of it above
an hundred years before he was born.


Fuller. What could more calmly be written? Perchance some cold phlegm, but
nothing of choler is in the expression. I say again, It had been happy for
King, Queen, Royal Issue, Church, State, the Archbishop himself,
Animadvertor, Author, Reader, All England.


Dr. Heylyn. Hence is it, that he takes together all reports which makes
against him, and sets them down in rank and file in the course of this History.
If Archbishop Abbot be suspended from his Jurisdiction, the blame thereof was
laid on Archbishop Laud, as if, not content to succeed, he endeavored to
supplant him, fol. 128. The King sets out a Declaration about lawful Sports,
the reviving and enlarging of which must be put upon his account also, some
strong presumptions being urged for the proof thereof, fol. 147. The reduction
of the Church to her ancient Rules, and public Doctrines, must be nothing else
but the enjoining of his own private practices and opinions upon other men,
fol. 127. And if a Liturgy be composed for the use of the Church of Scotland,
Who but he must be charged to be the Compiler of it?


Fuller. If all the places here cited are passed already, they have received
their several Answers; if any of them be to come, they shall receive them,
God-willing, in due time: that so for the present we may be silent, to prevent
repetition.


Dr. Heylyn. But what proofs have we for all this? Only the malice of his
enemies, or our Authors own disaffection to him, or some common fame. And if it
once be made a fame, it shall pass for truth, and as a truth find place in our
Author's History, though the greatest falsehood. Tam facilis in mendaciis fides,
ut, quicquid famae liceat fingere, illi esset libenter audire, in my Author's
language. But for the last he brings some proof, (he would have us think so at
the least) that is to say, the words of one Bailey, a Scot; whom it concerned to
make him as odious as he could, the better to comply with a Pamphlet, called,
The intentions of the Army; in which it was declared, That the Scots entered
England with a purpose, to remove the Archbishop from the King, and execute
their vengeance on him. What hand Dr. Couzens had in assisting of the work, I
am not able to say. But sure I am, that there was nothing was done in it by the
Bishops of England, but with the counsel and cooperation of their brethren in
the Church of Scotland, viz. the Archbishop of St. Andrews, the Archbishop of
Glasco, the Bishops of Murray, Ross, Brechin, and Dunblane, as appears by the
Book, entitled, Hidden works of darkness, etc. fol. 150, 153, 154, etc. And
this our Author must needs know, (but that he has a mind to quarrel the
Archbishop upon every turn) as appears plainly, 1. By his Narrative of the
Design in King James his time, from the first undertaking of it by the
Archbishop of St. Andrews, and the Bishop of Galloway then being; whose Book
corrected by that King, with some additions, expunctions, and accommodations,
was sent back to Scotland. 2. By that unsatisfiedness which he seems to have,
when the project was resumed by King Charles, Whether the Book by him sent into
Scotland, were the same which had passed the hands of King James, or not; which
he expresses in these words, viz. In the Reign of King Charles, the project
was resumed, but whether the same Book, or no, God knows, fol. 160. If so, if
God only know whether it were the same or no, how dares he tell us that it was
not? And if it was the same, (as it may be for ought he knows) with what
conscience can he charge the making of it upon Bishop Laud? Besides, (as
afterward he tells us, fol. 163) The Church of Scotland claimed not only to
be Independent, and free as any Church in Christendom; a Sister, not a Daughter
of England. And consequently the Prelates of that Church had more reason to
decline the receiving of a Liturgy imposed on them, or commended to them by the
Primat of England, for fear of acknowledging any subordination to him; than to
receive the same Liturgy here by Law established, which they might very safely
borrow from their Sister-Church, without any such danger. But, howsoever it
was, the blame must fall on him who did least deserve it.


Fuller. I will return to my words, which gave the Animadvertor the first
occasion of this long discourse.

Generally they excused the King in their writings, but charged Archbishop
Laud.

I do not charge the Archbishop for compiling the Book, but say, The Scots
did. Nor do I say, That what they charged on him is true; but it is true, that
they did charge it on him. Had I denied it, I had been a liar; and seeing I
affirmed no more, the Animadvertor is a caviller.

It is observable, that when our Chroniclers relate, how Queen Anne Bollen was
charged for Incontinency; Margaret Countess of Salisbury, for treasonable
compliance with the Pope; Henry Earl of Surrey, for assuming the Arms of
England; Edward Duke of Somerset, for designing the death of some Privy
Counselors; Thomas Duke of Norfolk, for aspiring, by the match of the Queen of
Scots, to the English Crown; Robert Earl of Essex, for dangerous machinations
against the person of Queen Elizabeth; Thomas Earl of Strafford, for
endeavoring to subject England and Ireland to the King's arbitrary Power: That
the Historians, who barely report these Persons thus charged, are not bound to
make the charge good; it is enough if they name their respective accusers, as
here I have named the Scots.

It is also observable, that some of the Persons aforesaid, though condemned
and executed, have since found such favor (or justice rather) with unpartiall
Posterity, that though they could not revive their persons, they have restored
their memories to their innocence. And if the like shall be the hap of this
Archbishop, I shall rejoice therein; I mean, if the Animadvertor's defense of
him seems so clear, as to outshine the evidence; so weighty, as to out-poize
all allegations, which in printed Books are published against him.

In testimony whereof, I return nothing in contradiction to what the
Animadvertor has written; and it is questionable, whether my desire that he
may, or distrust that he will not, be believed be the greater. Whatever the
success be, I forbear farther rejoinder.

To fight with a shadow, (whether one's own or another's) passes for the
proverbiall expression of a vain and useless act. But seeing the dead are
sometimes termed shaddows, umbrae, to fall foul on them, without absolute
necessity, is an act, not only vain, but wicked; not only useless, but
uncharitable: And therefore no more hereof.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, 167. Thus none, seeing now foul weather in
Scotland, could expect it fair Sunshine in England.] In this I am as little of
our Author's Opinion, as in most things else. The Sun in England might have
shined with a brighter Beam, if the Clouds which had been gathered together,
and threatened such foul Weather in Scotland, had been dispersed and scattered
by the Thunder of our English Ordnance. The opportunity was well given, and
well taken also, had it not been unhappily lost in the Prosecution.


Fuller. Grant the Thunder of our English Ordnance, had scattered the Scottish
Cl^uds; yet, (by the confession of the Animadvertor) there must first be foul
weather in England, before there could be such fair weather to follow it. The
Skies are always dark and lowering, even whilst the Thunder is Engendering
therein. Military preparations, (in order to a Conquest of the Scotts) must
needs give our Nation great troubles, and (for the time) un-Sunshine England,
which is enough to secure my Expression from just exception.


Dr. Heylyn. The Scots, were then weak, unprovided of all Necessaries, not
above three thousand complete Arms to be found amongst them: The English on
the other side making a formidable appearance, gallantly Horst, compleaty
Armed, and intermingled with the Choicest of the Nobility, and Gentry, in all
the Nation.


Fuller. I am much of the mind of the Animadvertor, that there was a visible
Disparity betwixt the two Armies, and the Ods in the eye of flesh, on the side
of the English. They were Gallantly Horst indeed, whether in Reference to their
Horses or Riders, and the King pleasantly said, It would make the Scots fight
against them, were it but to get their brave Clothes. Indeed the strength of
the Scots consisted in their Reputation to be strong, (reported here by such as
Friended them) and the Scotch Lion was not half so fierce, as he was painted
unto us. On the other side, The greatest disadvantage to the English was their
own injurious Modesty, observed always to over-prize strangers above
themselves, being ignorant of their own Strength and Valor in War, because
they had been so long accustomed to Peace. In all this Paragraph the
Animadvertor and the Author may go abrest in their Judgments; and to prevent
Quarrels, the Animadvertor shall have the right Hand, that they do not justle
one the other.


Dr. Heylyn. And had the Scots been once broken, and their Country wasted,
(which had been the easiest thing in the World, for the English Army,) etc.


Fuller. This is consonant to what He has written, of the same Subject in the
page 74.
Short view of the Life and Reign of King Charles, that the King set forth
against the Scots, accompanied with such an Army of Lords and Gentlemen as
might ASSURE him of a cheap and easy VICTORY. His Majesty, I am sure, had, (as
it became a good Christian,) a more modest and moderate apprehension of his
own Army, such as might give him pregnant Hopes but no ASSURANCE of Victory. I
never heard of an ASSURANCE-Office, for the success of Battles.

But all this is written by the Animadvertor like an Historian, but not like a
Doctor in Divinity. This minds me of a Cambden's Remains page 250.
Passage of King Henry the Second, who standing on the Cliffes about St.
David's in Wales, and there viewing Ireland, I with my Ships am able (says
he), to make a Bridge over it, if it be no further: Which speech of his being
related to Murchard King of Lemster in Ireland; he demanded, if he added not to
his speech [with the Grace of God]: When it was answered that he made no
mention of God; Then, said he more cheerfully, I fear him the less, which
trusts more to Himself, then to the Help of GOD.

When the Animadvertor tells us, that it had been the easiest thing in the
world for the English to have broken the Scots Army, I must tell him; here was
one thing in the world easier, namely the inserting of these words, by God's
Ordinary blessing, or something to that purpose. Otherwise we know, who it was
that said, that the race Eccle^.
is not to the Swift, nor the battle to the Strong, neither yet bread to the
Wise, nor yet riches to men of Understanding, nor yet favors to men of Skill:
time and chance happens to them all.

Time was, when the Animadvertor did needlessely Lavish a In these his
Animadversions (as by him set forth page 8.
GOD-BLESSE; God bless not only our Historian, but Baronius himself, from
being held an Author of no * Credit. He that then spent it, when he should have
spared it, spares it now, when he should have spent it.


Dr Heylyn. The Scots had been utterly disabled from creating Trouble to their
King, disturbances in their own Church, and destruction to England. So true is
that of the wise Historian, Conatus subditorum irritos imperia semper
promovere; the Insurrections of the People when they are suppressed, do always
make the King stronger, and the Subjects weaker.


Fuller. All this proceeds (as the former) on the Supposition that the English
had beaten the Scots, which though (in the eye of flesh) probable, was
uncertain. The Latins and English have the same word MOMENTUM, MOMENT, which
signifies, as Time of the least Continuance, so matters of most Concernment,
to show that the Scales of Success, which God alone holds in his Hand, are so
ticklish, that the MOTE of a MOMENT may turn them on either side, which is the
reason, why no man can positively conclude of future Contingencies.


Dr. Heylyn. The Sermon ended, we chose Dr. Stewart Dean of Chicester
Prolocutor, and the next day of Sitting, We met at Westminister in the Chapel
of King Henry the Seventh.] Had it not been for these and some other passages
of this Nature, our Author might have lost the Honor of being took notice of,
for one of the Clerks of the Convocation; and one not of the lowest form, but
passing for some of those wise men, who began to be fearful of themselves, and
to be jealous of that power by which they were enabled to make new Canons. How
so? Because it was feared by the Judicious (himself still for one) lest the
Convocation, whose power of meddling with Church Matters, had been bridled up
for many years before, should now, enabled with such Power, over-act their
Parts, especially in such dangerous and discontented times, as it after
follows. Wisely foreseen. But then why did not WE, that is to say, our
Author, and the rest of those Wise and Judicious Persons, fore-warne their weak
and unadvised Brethren of the present danger; or rather, Why did they go along
with the rest for company, and follow th^se who had before outrun the Canons
by their additionall Conformity?


Fuller. Dear Honor indeed, Honos Onus: for which I was fined with the Rest of
my Brethren two hundred Pounds by the House of Commons, though not put to pay
it, partly because it never passed the House of Lords; partly, because they
thought it needless to shave their Hair, whose Heads they meant to cut off; I
mean, they were so Charitable as not to make them pay a Fine, whose Place in
Cathedralls they intended, not long after, to take away.

I insert the word WE, not to credit my self, but to confirm the Reader;
relations from an eye and ear-witness, meeting with the best belief. Such
insinuations of the Writer, being present at the actions he writes of, want
not precedents in holy and profane Authors. Hence it is collected, that St.
Luke accompanied St. Paul in his dangerous voyage to Rome, Act. 27.37. WE were
all in the ship two hundred threescore and sixteen souls.

Let the Animadvertor lay what load he pleases on me, whose back is broad and
big enough to bear it; but O let him spare my worthy friends, some now glorious
Saints in Heaven, Bishop Westfield, Dr. Holmsworth; and some of the highest
repute still alive, whom I forbear to name. It comfort me not a little, that
God has chosen -- the foolish things of this world to con^ound the wise.


Dr. Heylyn. How wise the rest were, I am not able to say. But certainly our
Author showed himself no wiser than Waltham's Calf, who ran nine mile to suck a
Bull, and came home athirst, as the Proverb says. His running unto Oxford,
which cost him as much in seventeen weeks, as he had spent in Cambridge in
seventeen years, was but a second sally to the first Knight-Errantry.


Fuller. I can patiently comport with the Animadvertor's Ieers, which I behold
as so many Frogs, that it is pretty and pleasing to see them hop and skip
about, having not much harm in them: but I cannot abide his Railings, which are
like to Toads, swelling with venom within them. Any one may rail who is bred
but in BILLINGS-GATE-COLLEDGE: and I am sorry to hear such language from the
Animadvertor, a Doctor in Divinity; seeing railing is as much beneath a Doctor,
as against Divinity.

When Dr. Turner, a Physician sufficiently known, gave the lie (at the Earl of
Pembrokes Table) to the Earl of Carnarvon; I will take the Lie from you,
(replied the Earl) but I will never take Physic from you. If such railing be
consistent with the Doctor's Divinity, this once I will take the Calf, but
never learn Divinity from him.

Two things comfort me under his reviling: First, that no worse man than David
himself complained, that he became a Psalm. 69.11.
PROVERB to his enemies. Secondly, though a Calf be a contemptible creature,
passing for the emblem (not with the Dove of simplicity, but) of plain
silliness; yet is it a clean one, and accepted of Heb. 9.19.
God for sacrifice. Whereas the snarling Dog (though a creature of far more
cunning and sagacity) was so odious and unclean, that by a peculiar Deuteronomy. 23.18.
Law it was provided, that the price of a dog should not be brought into the
house of God.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author thus proceeds, fol. 168. Next day the Convocation
came together, etc. when, contrary to the general expectation, it was
mentioned to improve the present opportunity, in perfecting the new Canons
which they had begun.] I have not heard of any such motion, as our Author
speaks of, from any who were present at that time, though I have diligently
labored to inform my self in it: Nor is it probable, that any such motion
should be made, as the case then stood. The Parliament had been dissolved on
Tuesday the 5th. of May; the Clergy met in Convocation on the morrow after,
expecting then to be dissolved, and licensed to go home again. But, contrary to
that general expectation, in stead of hearing some news of his Majesty's Writ
for their dissolution, there came an Order from the Archbishop to the
Prolocutor, to adjourn till Saturday. And this was all the business which was
done that day; the Clergy generally being in no small amazment, when they were
required not to dissolve, till further Order. Saturday being come, what then? A
new Commission, says he, was brought from his Majesty, by virtue whereof WE
were warranted still to sit, not in the capacity of a Convocation, but of a
Synod. I had thought our Author, with his wise and judicious Friends, had
better harkened to the tenor of that Commission, than to come out with such a
gross and wild absurdity, as this is, so fit for none as Sir Edward Deering,
and for him only, to make sport withal in the House of Commons. At the
beginning of the Convocation, when the Prolocutor was admitted, the Archbishop
produced his Majesty's Commission under the Great Seal; whereby the Clergy was
enabled to consult, treat of, and conclude such Canons, as they conceived most
expedient to the peace of the Church, and his Majesty's service. But this
Commission being to expire with the end of the Parliament, it became void, of
no effect as soon as the Parliament was dissolved. Which being made known unto
the King, who was resolved the Convocation should continue, and that the Clergy
should go on in completing those Canons, which they had so happily begun; He
caused a new Commission to be sent unto them, in the same words, and to the
very same effect, as the other was; but that it was to continue duran^e
beneplacito only, as the other was not.


Fuller. The Reader may take notice, that there is some difference in judgment
betwixt the Animadvertor and me; and no wonder then if some (no great, I hope)
variations betwixt us, in relating the passages of this Convocation, each of us
observing what made most for his own interest. The Reader also may be pleased
to use his own discretion, and to credit him, whom he believes most probable
of the two, exactly to observe, firmly to remember, and faithfully to relate,
what we saw done, (both of us being there) and since borrowing help of our
friends, then present, where we fall short in our intelligence.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author goes on as follows, Ibid. Dr. Brownrig, Dr. Hacket,
Dr. Holdsworth, etc. with others, to the number of thirty six, earnestly
protested against the continuance of the Convocation.] It Is possible enough
that Dr. Brownrig, now Lord Bishop of Excester, Dr. Hacket, and the rest of the
thirty six, our Author being of the Quorum, (in his own understanding of the
word) might be unsatisfied in the continuance of the Convocation, because of
some offense, which, as they conceived, would be taken at it. But if they had
protested, and protested earnestly, as our Author tells us, the noise of so
many Votes concurring, must needs be heard by all the rest which were then
assembled; from none of which I can learn any thing of this protestation.


Fuller. I am nothing moved with his jeer, when he calls me of the Quorum in
this Convocation. Mithridates King of Pontus is commonly reported, so habited
to the eating of poison, that that which was nauseous and noxious at the first,
by custom became harmless unto him. I am so used to the bitter jeers of the
Animadvertor, so frequently laid in my dish, that now they are become food, not
physic, unto me; and the greatest quantity of them will not so much as stir my
constitution, to anger.

It seems strange to me indeed, that the Protest of the Dissentors was not
^eard, by the rest in the Convocation; I cannot be so uncharitable, to think
them in this point like those of whom the 2 P^^. 3.5.
Apostle speaks, (...), this they are willingly ignorant of: I impute it
rather to their forgetfulness, most of them surviving being aged persons, and
this done more then sixteen years since. For though it be true, Omnia quae
curant senes meminerunt; yet were they more prone to oblivion in this
particular, because they cared not for that Protestation, they disliked; and
therefore never charged it on their Memories.

The best is, I may speak (I hope, as yet) of the thirty six Dissentors, in the
same language of the 1 Cor. 15.6.
Apostle, Of whom the greater part remain until this present, but some are
fallen asleep. Bishop Brownrig, Dr. Hacket, Dr. Warmester, etc. are still (and
may they long be) alive, who will be believed in this point, that they
protested against the sitting of the Convocation, after the dissolution of the
Parliament.


Dr. Heylyn. Or if they did protes^ so earnestly, as he said they did, why was
not the Protestation reduced into writing, subscribed with their hands in due
form of Law, and so delivered to the Register to remain upon Record (amongst
the other Act of that House) for their Indemnity: Which not being done,
rendr^^^ this Protest of theirs (if any such Protest there were) to signify
nothing, but their dislike of the continuance.


Fuller. Herein the Animadvertor does speak a sad truth; the Dissentors were
ill advised herein, whereby their Protest ( significant only in their own
consciences) was legally rendered of none effect.

But herein they may partly be excused, because they (though not entering a
written Protest) supposed a verbal one would manifest their dislike, and hoped
it would sufficiently secure them from a danger, which (though suspected) was
not certain to ensue.

This afterward was very eagerly urged against them, by a Committee in
Parliament; and sorry I am, that they could not make their answer as clear as
the objection.


Dr. Heylyn. But whereas our Author tells us, that the whole House consisted
but of six score persons, it may be thought that he diminishes the number of
set purpose, to make his own party seem the greater. For in the lower House of
Convocation for the Province of Canterbury, if all parties summoned do appear,
these are no fewer then two and twenty Deans, four and twenty Preb^ndaries,
fifty four Archdeacons, and forty four Clerks, representing the Dioc^san
Clergy, amounting in the total to an hundred forty four persons; whereof the
thirty six Protestors (if so many there were) make the fourth part only.
Howsoever, all parties being not well satisfied with the lawfulness of their
continuance, his Majesty was advertised of it. Who, upon conference with his
Judges and Counsel learned in the Laws, caused a short Writing to be drawn,
and subscribed by their several hands, in these following words, viz. at
White Hall, May the 10th. 1640. the Convocation being called by the Kings Writ,
is to continue till it be dissolved by the Kings Writ, notwithstanding the
dissolving of the Parliament. Subscribed by Finch Lord Keeper, Manchester Lord
Privy Seal, Littleton chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Banks Attorney
General, whit^ield and Heath, his Majesty's Sergeants.


Fuller. I protest, and now will enter my protestation, in scriptis, (that it
may be valid) I had no design either to substract from the number in the
Convocation, or add to those of the Dissentors.

I believe the Animadvertor is very right in his Arithmetic of Persons, in the
Provincial Convocation of Canterbury.

But concerning the Archdeacons, give me leave once to enlarge my self, in
stating their true number, because it is hard to find either a printed or
written Catalogue of them, which is exact herein: They are generally reckoned
up but FIFTY TWO, as follows.

The two first containing eighteen a piece, the last, sixteen; which are but
fifty two in my Arithmetic. St. Asaph. St. Asaph. Bangor. Bangor. Anglesey.
Merioneth.
Bristol. Dorset. Bath and Wels. Wels. Bath, Taunton.
Canterb. Canterbury. Chichest. Chichester. Jews.
Covent. and Lich. Stafford. Derby. Covent. Salop.
Ely. Ely. Exeter. Exeter. Cornwall.
Exeter. To^nes. Barnstaple.
Gloucester. Hereford. Hereford. Salop.
London. London. Middlesex. Essex. Colchester. St. Albans.
Lincoln. Lincoln. Stow. Bedford. Buckingham. Huntington. Leicester.
Landaff. Landaff. St. David's. St. David's. St. David's. Carmarthen. Cardigan.
Brecknock.
Norwich. Norwich. Norfolk. Suffolk. Sudbury.
Oxford. Oxford. Peterburg. Northampton. Rochester. Rochester. Salisbury.
Wilts. Berks. Sarum.
Winchest. Winchester. Surrey.
Worcest. Worcester.


This is the best printed List I have ever seen, presented in Weaver's page
386. etc.
Funeral Monuments, having the valuation of each Archdeaconry annexed; taken,
as he says, (and I believe him therein) out of Sir Robert Cotton's Library:
and yet I am sure it is not complete.

Wherefore I supply Warwick (in the Diocese of Worcester) as I find it in a
more perfect written Catalogue. And yet still one is wanting, even Westminster,
who^e Church was advanced to the Sea of a Bishop by King Henry the Eighth; and
though since it has been set back from a Cathedral to a Collegiat-Church; yet
it still retains the honor to send one of their Prebendaries (by the Title
of their Archdeacon) to the Convocation. And thus we have our full number of
fifty four.

But whereas the Animadvertor taxes me for saying, The Convocation consisted
of six-score: I confess, when I first read his words, I had not a
Church History by me to confute it. Yet I conceived such positiveness in a
number improbable to fall from my Pen, who had learned this Lesson from the
best of Teachers, the Spirit of God, not to be peremptory, but to leave a
latitude in numbers of this nature.

In Times. In Places. In Persons. Dan. 5.33. Darius being about threescore and
two years (...). Luke 24.13. From Jerusalem about sixty furlongs. Exodus 12.37.
About six hundred thousand men on foot. Luke 3.23. Jesus began to (...) about
thirty years of age. Joh. 6.19. Had rowed about five and twenty furlongs. Act.
2.41. Added to the Church about three thousand souls.

But upon inspection of my Book, my words were, The whole House consisting of
ABOUT six score; where [ about] is receptive of more or less. Besides, the
Convocation, as to the effectual managing of matters, properly consisted not
of the Members belonging thereto, but present therein; and some five score and
ten was the general and constant appearance, the rest being absent for age,
sickness, and other detentions.


Dr. Heylyn. Which Writing (an Instrument our Author calls it) being
communicated to the Clergy by the Lord Archbishop on the morrow after, did so
compose the minds of all men, that they went forwards very cheerfully with the
work in hand. The principal of those whom our Author calls Dissenters,
bringing in the Canon of Preaching for conformity, (being the eighth Canon in
the Book, as now they are placed) which was received and allowed of, as it came
from his hand without alteration.


Fuller. And calls it an Instrument properly enough, both to the original
notation, and modern acception of the word. Instrument is so termed ab
instruendo, from Instructing. This Writing did first instruct Us at the
present, that, by the judgment of those great Statesmen and Lawyers, We might
legally continue, notwithstanding the dissolution of the Parliament. And since,
this Writing has (by the event thereof) instructed us, that seeing the
judgments of the Grandees in the Law were censured erroneous in Parliament, it
is unsafe in matters of this nature, to rely on the opinions of any
[comparatively] private persons.

As for the modern acception of the word, I appeal to the Critics in Language,
whether this Writing (as the Animadvertor is fain to term it) of the Judges,
may not be called by the general name of Instrument, harmoniously enough to
the propriety thereof.


Dr. Heylyn. Howsoever, our Author keeps himself to his former folly, shutting
up his extravagancy with this conclusion, fol. 169. Thus was an old Convocation
converted into a new Synod.] An expression borrowed from the speech of a witty
Gentleman, as he is called by the Author of the History of the Reign of King
Charles, and since by him declared to be the Lord George Digby, now Earl of
Bristow. But he that spent most of his wit upon it, and thereby gave occasion
unto others for the like mistakings, was Sir Edward Deering, in a speech made
against these Canons, Anno 1640. where we find these flourishes: Would you
confute the Convocation? They were a holy Synod. Would you argue against the
Synod? Why, they were Commissioners. Would you dispute the Commission? They
will mingle all powers together, and answer, that they were some fourth thing,
that neither we know nor imagine; that is to say, (as it follows afterward,
page 27.) a Convocationall-Synodicall-Assembly of Commissioners. More of this
fine stuff we may see hereafter. In the mean time we may judge, by this
remnant, of the whole Piece; and find it upon proof to be very slight, and not
worth the wearing. For first, the Gentleman could not, and our Author cannot
choose but know, that a Convocation and a Synod (as used in England of late
times) are but the same one thing under diverse names, the one borrowed from a
Grecian, the other from a Latin Original. The Convocation of the Clergy of the
Province of Canterbury, being nothing but a Provincial Synod; as a National
Synod is nothing else, but the Convocation of the Clergy of both Provinces.
Secondly, our Author knows by this time, that the Commission which seems to
makes this doughty difference, changed not the Convocation into a Synod, (as
some vainly think) but only made that Convocation active in order to the
making of Canons, which otherwise had been able to proceed no further then the
grant of Subsidies. Thirdly, that nothing is more ordinary, then for the
Convocations of all times since the Reformation, to take unto themselves the
name of Synods. For, the Articles of Religion made in the Convocation Anno
1552. are called in the Title of the Book, Articuli de quibus in Synodo
Londinensi convenit, etc. The same name given to those agreed on in the
Convocation, Anno 1562. as appears by the Title of that Book also, in the Latin
Edition. The Canons of the year 1571. are said to be concluded and agreed upon
in Synodo inchoata Land. in aede Divi Pauli, etc. In the year 1575. came out a
Book of Articles, with this Title following, viz. Articles whereupon it was
agreed by the most reverend father in God, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
other the Bishops, and the whole Clergy in the Province of Canterbury, in the
Convocation or synod holden at Westminster. The like we find in the year 1597.
(being the last active Convocation in Queen Elizabeth's time) in which we meet
with a Book entitled, Constitutiones Ecclesiasticae, etc. in Synodo inchoata
Londini vicesimo quinto die mensis Octobris.


Fuller. I request the Reader would be pleased, to call to his remembrance a
passage of the Animadvertors, on my fifth Book, relating to the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth. I must confess my self to be at a loss in this intricate
Labyrinth, unless perhaps there were some critical difference between a SYNOD
and a CONVOCATION; the first being called by the Archbishops, in their
several and respective Provinces, as the necessities of the Church; the other
only by the King, as his occasions and affairs, did require the same.

I find my self now in the like labyrinth, and can meet with no Ariadne's
thread, to extricate my self. I confess; commonly, CONVOCATION and SYNOD pass
for Synonyma's, signifying one and the same thing; yet some make this nice
difference. 1. Convocation, which is, in the beginning and ending, parallel
with the Parliament. 2. Synod, which is called by the King out of Parliament.


I acknowledge my self a Seeker in this point, and will not wilfully bolt mine
eyes against the beams of Truth, by whomsoever delivered: Mean time, I crave
leave to enter this my dissatisfaction herein, seeing the Animadvertor so
lately did confess his, in a thing of the like nature.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author finally is to know, that though the members of the two
Convocations of York and Canterbury did not meet in person, yet they
communicated their counsels, the results of the one being dispatched unto the
other, and there agreed on, or rejected, as they saw cause for it.


Fuller. I am not to know it, for I knew it before, and nothing in my Book
appears to the contrary; that the two Provincial Synods privately did
communicate their transactions, as they were in fieri, in the making; and at
last, publicly, viz. when We at Westminster had completed the Canons, by Our
subscription thereunto.


Dr. Heylyn. Which laid together, shows the vanity of another passage in the
Speech of Sir Edward Deering, where he vapoureth thus, viz. A strange
Commission, wherein no one Commissioner's name is to be found; a strange
Convocation, that lived when the Parliament was dead; a strange holy Synod,
where one part never saw, never conferred with the other. Lastly, Sir Edward
Deering seems to marvel at the Title of the Book of Canons then in question,
expressing, that they were treated upon in Convocation, agreed upon in Synod.
And this, says he, is a new Mould to cast Canons in, never used before. But
had he looked upon the Title of the Book of Canons, Anno 1603. he had found it
otherwise. The Title this, viz. Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical,
treated by the Bishop of London, President of the Convocation for the Province
of Canterbury, etc. and agreed upon with the Kings Majesty's license in their
Synod begun at London, Anno 1603. And so much for the satisfaction of all such
persons, whom either that Gentleman, or this our Author, have misinformed, and
consequently abused in this particular.


Fuller. He has now vapoured out that, which by the Jam 4.^.
Apostle is termed, even a vapor which appears for a little time and then
vanishes away. Being dead, the Animadvertor might have spared this expression
upon him.

I believe neither he nor the Author did wittingly or willingly mis-informe
any, and therefore cannot by any charitable pen be justly condemned for abusing
them.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Ibid. Now because great Bodies move slowly,
etc. it was thought fit to contract the Synod into a select Committee of some
twenty six, beside the Prolocutor.] No such contracting of the Synod as our
Author speaks of. There was indeed a Committee of twenty six, or thereabouts,
appointed to consider of a Canon for uniformity in some Rites and Ceremonies,
of which number were the principal of those whom he calls Dissenters, and our
Author too amongst the rest; who having agreed upon the Canon, it was by them
presented to the rest of the Clergy in Convocation, and by them approved. And
possible it is, that the drawing up o^ some other Canons might be referred also
to that Committee, (as is accustomed in such cases) without contracting the
whole House into that small body, or excluding any man from being present at
their Consultation.


Fuller. I know not what offense the word contracting may give, but my meaning,
obvious to any Reader, is this, that a select Committee was appointed, to
prepare matters of greatest importance. No member being excluded from being
present at, but from giving a Vote in, that Consultation.


Dr Heylyn. But whereas our Author afterward tells us, that nothing should be
accounted the Act of the House till thrice (as he takes it) publicly voted
therein.] It is but as he takes it, or mistakes it rather, and so let it go.


Fuller. He might have allowed me the liberty of that modest Parenthesis,
without carping at it. Some things I confess (having since better informed my
self) passed at the first time; but others which were merely new were Thrice
read, on the same token that it occasioned the contest betwixt the Prolocutor
and Doctor Holdsworth.


Dr. Heylyn. But I needed not to have signified, that our Author was one of the
Committee, he will tell it himself; and he will tell us more then that,
publishing himself for one of the thirty six Dissenters, the better to
ingratiate himself with the rising side. The next day (so he lets us know) We
all subscribed the Canons, suffering our selves (according to the order of such
Meetings) to be all concluded by the majority of Votes, though some of US in
the Committee privately dissented in the passing of many particulars.] So then,
our Author was content to play the goodfellow at the last, and go along hand in
hand with the rest of his company; dissenting privately, but consenting
publicly, which is as much as can be looked for.


Fuller. It is not worth the while for him who is falling into the grave to
endeavor to ingratiate himself with any rising-side. I appeal to the
Animadvertor's own Conscience, if I have not written the plain truth herein.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Ibid. No sooner came these Canons abroad into
a public view, but various were men's censures upon them.] Not possible that in
such a confusion, both of affections and opinions, it should otherwise be. Non
omnibus una voluntas, was a note of old, and will hold true as long as there
are many men to have many minds. And yet, if my information deceive me not,
these Canons found great approbation from the mouths of some, from whom it had
been least expected; particularly from Justice Crook, whose Argument in the
case of Ship-mony, was printed afterward by the Order of the House of Commons.
Of whom I have been told, by a person of great worth and credit, that having
read over the Book of Canons, when it first came out, he lifted up his hands,
and gave hearty thanks to Almighty God, that he had lived to see such good
effects of a Convocation. It was very well that they pleased him; but that they
should please all men was not to be hoped for.


Fuller. This is all additory, nothing at all opposite to what I have written;
so we may proceed.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, fol. 171. Many took exception at the
hollowness of the Oath in the middle thereof, having its bowels puffed up with
a windy etc. a cheveral word, which might be stretched as men would measure
it.] Of this etc. which has made so much noise in the world, I shall now say
nothing. Somewhat is here subjoined by our Author in excuse thereof, the rest
made up by the Observator. Only I shall make bold to ask him, why he observed
not this etc. when the Oath was first under consideration? or why he signified
not his dissent when it came to the Vote, and showed some reasons which might
move him to object against it? It had been fitter for a wise and juditious man
to signify his dislike of any thing when it might be mended, then to join
with others in condemning it, when it was past remedy.


Fuller. I was not sensible of any just cause of exception therein. The
Animadvertor confesses that I have subjoyned some what in the excuse thereof.
And set me add that that somewhat is as much to purpose in the defense of that
Oath (being borrowed from as learned and pious a pen, as England then enjoyed)
as any thing, that the Animadvertor or his party can allege. Wherefore except,
joining with those who do defend it, be the same with, joining with those who
do condemn it, the Animadvertor has unjustly ranked me amongst the latter.


Dr. Heylyn. But, Mala men's, malus animus, as the saying is. The Convocation
had no ill intent in it when they passed it so, though some few, out of their
perverseness and corrupt effections, were willing to put their own sense on it,
and spoil an hones^ meaning Text with a factious Gloss. But let us follow our
Author as he leads the way, and we shall find, that

Ibid. Some Bishops were very forward in pressing this Oath, even before the
time thereof. For, whereas a liberty was allowed to all to deliberate thereon,
until the Feast of Michael the Archangel, some presently pressed the
Ministers of their Diocesses for the taking thereof.] It seems by this, that
our Author was so far from taking notice of any thing done in the Convocation,
when the Canon for the Oath was framed, that he never so much as looked into
the Canon it self, since the Book came out. He had not else dreamt of a liberty
of Deliberation, till the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, which I am sure
the Canon gives not. The Synod did indeed decree, that all Archbishops and
Bishops, and all other Priests and Deacons, in places exempt or not exempt,
should, before the second day of November next ensuing, take the following
Oath, against all innovation of Doctrine or Discipline. By which we see, that
the Oath was to be given and taken before the second of November, but no such
thing as Liberty of Deliberation till the Feast of St. Michael. And therefore
if some Bishops did press the Clergy of their several and respective
Diocesses, as soon as they returned home from the Convocation; they might well
do it by the Canon, without making any such essay of their activity, if
providence (as our Author most wisely words it) had not prevented them*


Fuller. Though there was no Solemn Order entered, or printed; yet am I sure,
(having cause to be assured thereof) such a condescension was agreed on, and I
know who did plead the Benefit of such Deliberation, on the same token it was
denied it him.


Dr. Heylyn. If any of the Bishops did require their Clergy to take the Oath
upon their knees, (as he says they did) though it be more then was directed by
the Canon; yet I conceive, that no wise man would scruple at it, considering
the gravity and greatness of the business which he was about.


Fuller. The Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, being of as high and holy a
nature and concernment, are never urged in that posture. All things are
disposed of by divine Providence; and let the Doctor write against me, what he
pleases; but take heed how he writes corrective Animadversions on the
proceedings of the Greatest and Best of Beeings.


Dr. Heylyn. But then, Ibid. The Exception of Exceptions was, because they were
generally condemned as illegally passed, to the prejudice of the fundamental
liberty of the Subject, whereof we shall hear enough in the next Parliament.]
Not generally condemned, either as illegally passed, or as tending to prejudice
of the Subjects Rights, I am sure of that. Scarce so much as condemned by any
for those respects, but by such whom it concerned, (for carrying on of their
De^ignes) to weaken the authority of the Church, and advance their own. But
because our Author tells us, that we shall find enough of this in the following
Parliament, we are to follow him to that Parliament for our satisfaction: And
there we find, that Mr. Maynard made a Speech in the Committee of Lords against
the Canons, made by the Bishops in the last Convocation, in which he
endeavored to prove, etc.


Fuller. Diogenes being demanded what one should give him to strike on the head
as hard as he could, Give me, (said he) but an Helmet. Well fare my Helmet,
the seasonable interposition of the word ENDEAVORED! which has secured me
from the blows of the Animadvertor, and perchance his hand thereby retunded.
Besides I have a double Helmet, Master [now Serjeant] Mainard, no less
eminently known for his skill in Law, than for his love to the Clergy, by
pleading so effectually (in his success as well as desire) for their Tithes.
Wherefore being weary with this long contest, I resolve for a while even to
take my natural rest, and will quietly sleep, until Iogged by that, which
particularly concerns me.


Dr. Heylyn. Endeavored to prove, that the Clergy had no power to make Canons,
without common consent in Parliament, because in the Saxon's times, Laws and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical had the confirmation of Peers, and sometimes of
the People; to which great Councills our Parliaments do succeed.] Which
Argument, if it be of force to prove, that the Clergy can make no Canons,
without consent of the Peers and People in Parliament; it must prove also, that
the Peers and People can make no Statutes without consent of the Clergy in
their Convocation. My reason is, Because such Councels in the times of the
Saxons were mixed Assemblies, consisting as well of Laics as of Ecclesiastics;
and the matters there concluded on of a mixed nature also, Laws being passed as
commonly in them in order to the good governance of the Commonwealth, as
Canons for the regulating such things as concerned Religion. But these great
Councels of the Saxons being divided into two parts in the times ensuing, the
Clergy did their work by themselves, without any confirmation from the King or
Parliament, till the submission of the Clergy to King Henry the Eighth. And if
the Parliaments did succeed in the place of those great Counsels, (as he says
they did) it was, because that anciently the Procurators of the Clergy, not the
Bishops only, had their place in Parliament, though neither Peers nor People
voted in the Convocations. Which being so, it is not much to be admired, that
there was some checking (as is said in the second Argument) about the disuse of
the general making of such Church-Laws. But checking or repining at the
proceeding of any Superior Court, makes not the Acts thereof illegal; for, if
it did, the Acts of Parliaments themselves would be reputed of no force, or
illegally made, because the Clergy for a long time have checked (and think they
have good cause to check) for their being excluded. Which checking of the
Commons appears not only in those ancient Authors which the Gentleman cited,
but in the Remonstrance tendered by them to King Henry the Eighth, exemplified
at large in these Animadversions, lib. 3. n. 61. But because this, being a
Record of the Convocation, may not come within the walk of a Common Lawyer, I
shall put him in mind of that memorable passage in the Parliament, 51 Edw. 3d.
which in brief was this: The Commons finding themselves aggrieved, as well with
certain Constitutions made by the Clergy in their Synods, as with some Laws or
Ordinances which were lately passed, more to the advantage of the Clergy then
the Common People, put in a Bill to this effect, viz. That no Act nor Ordinance
should from thenceforth be made or granted on the Petition of the said Clergy,
without the consent of the Commons; and that the said Commons should not be
bound in times to come by any Constitutions made by the Clergy of this Realm,
for their own advantage, to which the Commons of this Realm had not given
consent. The reason of which is this, (and it is worth the marking) Car eux ne
veulent estre obligez a null de vos Estatuz ne Ordinances faitz sanz leur
Assent. Because the said Clergy did not think themselves bound (as indeed they
were not in those times) by any Statute, Act, or Ordinance, made without their
assent in the Court of Parliament. But that which could not be obtained by this
checking of the Commons, in the declining and last times of King Edward 3. was
in some part effected by the more vigorous prosecution of King Henry 8. who, to
satisfy the desires of the Commons in this particular, and repress their
checkings, obtained from the Clergy, that they should neither make nor execute
any Canons, without his consent, as before is said; so that the Kings power of
confirming Canons was grounded on the free and voluntary submission of the
Clergy, and was not built, as the third Argument objecteth, on so weak a
foundation as the Pope's making Canons by his sole power: the Pope not making
Canons here, nor putting his Prescripts and Letters decretory in the place of
Canons, but only as a remedy for some present exigency. So that the King's
power in this particular not being built upon the Popes, as he said it was, it
may well stand, That Kings may make Canons without consent of Parliament,
though he says they cannot. But whereas it is argued, in the fourth place,
that the clause in the Statute of Submission, in which it is said, that the
Clergy shall not make Canons without the Kings leave, does not imply, that by
His leave alone they may make them; I cannot think that he delivered this for
Law, and much less for Logic. For, had this been looked on formerly as a piece
of Law, the Parliaments would have checked at it at some time or other, and
been as sensible of the Kings enchroachments, in executing this power without
them, as anciently some of them had been about the disuse of the like general
consent in the making of them.


Fuller. DORMIT SECURUS.


Dr. Heylyn. Fol. 180. In the next place our Author tells us, that Mr. Maynard
endeavored also to prove, that these Canons were against the King's
Prerogative, the Rights, Liberties, and Properties of the Subject.] And he
says well, that it was endeavored to be proved, and endeavored only,
nothing, amounting to a proof, being to be found in that which follows. It had
before been Voted by the House of Commons, that the Canons are against
fundamental Laws of this Realm, against the Kings Prerogative, Property of the
Subject, the Right of Parliament, and do tend to faction and sedition. And it
was fit that some endeavors should be used to make good the Vote. But, this
being but a general charge, requires a general answer only, and it shall be
this: Before the Canons were subscribed, they were imparted to the King by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and by the King communicated to the Lords of the
Council; who calling to them the assistance of the Judges, and some of the
Kings Council learned in the Laws of this Realm, caused the said Canons to be
read and considered of, the King being then present. By all which, upon due and
mature deliberation, the Canons were approved; and being so approved, were sent
back to the Clergy in the Convocation, and by them subscribed. And certainly it
had been strange, that they should pass the approbation of the Judges and
learned Lawyers, had they contained any thing against the fundamental Laws of
the Land, the Property of the Subject, and the Rights of Parliament, or been
approved of by the Lords of his Majesty's Council, had any thing been
contained in them derogatory to the Kings Prerogative, or tending to faction
and sedition. So that the foundation being ill laid, the superstructures and
objections which are built upon it, may be easily shaken and thrown down. To
the first therefore it is ansvvered, that nothing has been more ordinary in
all former times, than for the Canons of the Church to inflict penalties on
such, as shall disobey them; exemplified in the late Canons of 1603. many of
which extend not only unto Excommunication, but even to Degradation and
Irregularity, for which, see Can. 38.113. etc. To the second* that there is
nothing in those Canons which determine^h or limiteth the Kings Authority, but
much that makes for, and defends the Right of the Subject, for which the
Convocation might rather have expected thanks then censure, from ensuing
Parliaments. To the third, That when the Canon did declare the Government of
Kings to be founded on the Law of Nature, it was not to condemn all other
Governments, as being unlawful, but to commend that of the Kings as being the
best. Nor can it Logically be inferred, that because the Kingly Government is
not received in all places, that therefore it ought not so to be: or that the
Government (by this Canon) should be the same in all places, and in all alike;
because some Kings do, and may lawfully part with many of their Rights for the
good of their Subjects, which others do, and may as lawfully retain unto
themselves. To the fourth, That the Doctrine of Non-Resistance is built
expressly on the words of St. Paul, Romans 13. v. 2. and therefore to condemn the
Canon in that behalf, is to condemn the Word of God upon which it is founded.
Finally, to the fifth and last, That the Statute of 5, 6 Edw. 6. declaring,
that the days there mentioned shall be kept for Holy Days, and no other,
relates only to the abolishing of some other Festivalls, which had been
formerly observed in the Realm of England, and not to the disabling of the
Church from ordaining any other Holy Days, (on emergent causes) in the times
to come.


Fuller. DORMIT SECURUS.


Dr. Heylyn. Assuredly that able Lawyer would have spoke more home unto the
point, could the cause have born it. Eloquentem facit causae bonitas, in the
Orator's language. And therefore looking on the heads of the Arguments (as our
Author represents them to us) I must needs think, that they were rather fitted
to the sense of the House, than they were to his own.


Fuller. I now begin to awake, and rub my Eyes, hearing somewhat wherein I am
concerned, as if I had unfaithfully related these Arguments.

I confess it is but a Breviat of them, accommodated to the proportion of my
Book; and had they been at large, much luster must be lost whilst related,
seeing none but Mr. Mainard can repeat the Arguments of Mr. Mainard to equal
advantage. However, I had them from as observant, and judicious a Person as any
in house of Lords; and if I should name Him, the Animadvertor would believe me
herein.


Dr. Heylyn. What influence these Arguments might have on the House of Peers,
when reported by the Bishop of Lincoln, I am not able to affirm: But so far I
concur with our Author, that they lost neither life nor luster, as they came
from his mouth, who (as our Author says) was a back friend to the Canons,
because made during his absence and durance in the Tower.] A piece of ingenuity
which I did not look for.


Fuller. There are some Pens that if a Man do look for Ingenuity from them, he
may look for it.


Dr. Heylyn. The power of Convocation being thus shaken and endangered, that of
the High Commission and the Bishops Courts was not like to hold; the one being
taken away by Act of Parliament, and the other much weakened in the coercive
power thereof, by a clause in that Act, of which our Author tell us, that

Fol. 182. Mr. Pim triumphed at this success, crying out digitus Dei, it is
the finger of God, that the Bishops should so supinely suffer themselves to be
surprised in their power.] And well might Mr. Pim triumph, as having gained the
point he aimed at, in subverting the coercive power, and consequently the whole
exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. But he had no reason to impute it to
the finger of God, or to the carelessness of the Bishops in suffering
themselves to be so supinely surprised. For first the Bishops saw too plainly,
that those general words by which they were disabled from inflicting any pain
or penalty, would be extended to Suspension, Excommunication, and other
Ecclesiastical censures. But secondly, they saw withal that the stream was too
strong for them to strive against, most of the Lords being wrought on by the
popular party in the House of Commons, to pass the Bill. Thirdly, they were
not without hope, that when the Scots Army was disbanded, and that Nation
satisfied, by the Kings condescensions to them, there might be such an
explication made of those general words, as to restrain them unto temporal
pains and civil penalties, by which the censures of the Church might remain as
formerly. And fourthly, in order thereunto they had procured a Proviso to be
entered in the House of Peers, That the general words in this Bill should extend
only to the High Commission Court, and not reach other Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, for which consult our Author, fol. 181. Having thus passed over
such matters as concern the Church, we will now look upon some few things which
relate to the Parliament. And the first is that --.


Fuller. I said not Mr. Pim had just cause to triumph; yea somewhat follows
in my History to the contrary, showing He had no reason to rejoice, and condemn
the Bishops herein, seeing not Supinesse but Prudentiall condescension, for the
time, made them rather sufferers then surprised herein. Only I say, there are
many alive, who heard him sing aloud this his Victoria, and the Echo thereof
it still sounds in their Ears.

The Animadvertor himself, sometimes triumphs over my mistakes, and carries
me away in his own conceit; whilst still I am sensible of my own Liberty, that
I am in a free condition.


Dr. Heylyn. Fol. 174. Dr. Pocklinton, and Dr. Bray, were the two first that
felt the displeasures of it, the former for preaching and printing, the latter
for licensing two Books, one called Sunday no Sabbath, the other the Christian
Altar.] No other way to pacify the high displeasures of the Bishop of Lincoln,
but by such a Sacrifice, who therefore is entrusted to gather such Propositions
out of those two Books as were to be recanted by the one, and for which the
other was to be deprived of all his preferments. And in this the Bishop served
his own turn, and the peoples too: his own turn first, in the great
controversy of the Altar, in which he was so great a stickler, and in which
Pocklington was thought to have provoked him to take that revenge. The Peoples
turn he served next, in the condemning and recanting of some points about the
Sabbath, though therein he ran cross to his former practice. Who had been not
long since so far from those Sabbatarian rigors, (which now he would fain be
thought to countenance) that he caused a Comedy to be acted before him at his
house at Budgen, not only on a Sunday in the afternoon, but upon such a Sunday
also on which he had publicly given sacred Orders both to Priests and Deacons.
And to this Comedy, he invited the Earl of Manchester, and diverse of the
neighboring Gentry.


Fuller. I was neither an Actor in, nor a Spectator of that Comedy. The better
day, the worse deed. I recount it amongst none of those his Good works,
wherewith he abounded.


Dr. Heylyn. Though on this turning of the tide, he did not only cause these
Doctors to be condemned for some Opinions which formerly himself allowed of,
but moved at the Assembly in Ierusalem-Chamber, that all Books should be
publicly burnt, which had disputed the Morality of the Lords-day-Sabbath. Quo
teneam nodo, etc. as the Poet has it.


Fuller. I have been credibly informed, that when in Ierusalem-Chamber, Mr.
Stephen Marshall urged most vehemently for severe punishment, on the Authors of
those Books; Bishop Williams, fell foul on the Books, moving they might be
burned, that their Authors might the better escape. Let every one betine his
share herein.


Dr. Heylyn. But whereas our Author tells us in the following words, that soon
after both the Doctors deceased for grief, I dare with some confidence tell
him, there was no such matter; Dr. Pocklinton living about two years, and Dr.
Bray above four years after, with as great cheerfulness and courage as ever
formerly. How he has dealt with Dr. Cosen, we shall see more at large
hereafter in a place by it self, the discourse thereof being too long and too
full of particulars, to come within the compass of an Animadversion. In the
mean time proceed we unto Bishop Wren, of whom thus as follows.


Fuller. I went to Peterborough on purpose in Quest after Information, and saw
Dr. Pocklinton's Grave; on the same token, it was in the Churchyard, just in
the place, where so many Saxons were murdered, and Martyred by the Danes: and
there I heard that he enjoyed not himself after his censure. Of Dr. Bray
(though I could) I say nothing; and shall return an Answer to Dr. Cosins at the
end of this Book.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 182. A Bill (says our Author) was sent
up by the Commons against Matthew Wren Bishop of Ely, containing 25 Articles,
etc.] That such a Bill was sent up from the House of Commons, is undoubtedly
true. And no less true it is, that many Impeachments of like nature were
hammered, at, and about, the same time against many other Clergy men of good
note, though inferior Order; the Articles whereof were Printed and exposed to
open sail to their great disparagement. And therefore I would feign know the
Reason, why this Man should be singled out amongst all the rest to stand
impeached upon record in our Author's History; especially considering that
there was nothing done by the Lords in pursuance of it, the Impeachment dying
in a manner as soon as born. Was it because he was more Criminal then the
other were, or that the charge was better proved, or for what Cause else?


Fuller. I will give the Reader a true and fair^ account thereof. Many Clergy
men, (as the Animadvertor observes) being then articled against; I thought, to
insert all would clog my Book with needless Numbers, as to omit all, would be
interpreted Partiality, and Unfaithfullnesse in an Historian: I chose therefore
the middle, (as the safest) way, to instance in four; two Doctors, Bray and
Pocklinton; one Dean, I. Cosins; and one Bishop, Matthew Wren, conceiving these
a sufficient Representation of all the rest. Wherefore I cannot see how the
Animadvertor can properly say, that Bishop Wren was by me singled out, except a
QUATERNION be a single Man. It was not because his Charge was better (which for
ought I know was not at all) proved, but for these Reasons: 1. He was one of
the first in Time. Clamoured against. 2. He was one of the highest in Dignity.
Clamoured against. 3. He was one that has longest been a Sufferer for his
un-prosecuted Accusation.


And here had the Animadvertor been pleased, as well to take notice of Flowers
and Herbs in my Church History, as what he counts Weeds therein, he might
have inserted, (yea with Justice could not have omitted) this following Book
11. p. 196.
passage. Bishop Wren his long imprisonment, (being never brought into a
public Answer) has converted many of his Adversaries, into a more Charitable
opinion of him.


Dr. Heylyn. Well, since our Author will not, I will tell you, why (he singled
out M. Wren amongst all the rest) And I will tell it in the words of King
James, in the Conference at Hampton Court, upon occasion of a needless
exception taken by Dr. Reynolds at a passage in Ecclesiasticus, What trow ye,
(said the King,) makes these men so angry with Ecclesiasticus? By my Sal, I
think he was a Bishop, or else they would never use him so. And so much for
that.


Fuller. Whether Ecclesiasticus was a Bishop or no, I know not; this I know
that Ecclesiastes was a Preacher. The words of Kings are most proper for the
Mouths of Kings, and Sovereigns may speak their Pleasure to their Subjects,
which fit nor Fellow Subjects one to another. And so much for that.

My extraction who was Prebendarius Prebendarides, and Relation (as the
Animadvertor knows) to Two no mean Bishops, my Uncles, may clear me from any
Episcopal Antipathy. I honor any who is a Bishop, both Honor and Love him
who is a Religious and Learned Bishop.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 174. About this time was the first
motion of a new Protestation to be taken all over England, which some months
after was generally performed.] What time this was our Author tells us in the
margin, pointing to Feb. 4. about which time there was no mention of the
Protestation, nor occasion for it. The first mention which was made of the
Protestation was upon Monday, May the third, on which day it was mentioned,
framed, and taken by all the Members of the House of Commons, excepting the
Lord George Digby (now Earl of Bristol) and an Uncle of his.


Fuller. I appeal to the surviving Members of the House of Commons, (the most
competent Judges in this point) whether such a Protestation was not hammered
(though not perfected) about the date by me assigned.

Acts of State never ride Post; and it seems to me improbable, that the
Protestation by such unused approperation, to be mentioned, framed, and taken
all in one day. But herein I submit to those who best know it.


Dr. Heylyn. The occasion of it was a Speech made by the King in the House of
Peers in favor of the Earl of Strafford, upon the Saturday before; which moved
them to unite themselves by this Protestation for bringing to condign
punishment, all such as shall either by force, practice, plots, counsels,
conspiracies, or otherwise do any thing to the contrary of any thing in the
same Protestation contained. Which Protestation being carried into the House of
Peers, was after some few days generally taken by that House also. But the
prevalent party in the House of Commons, having further aims then such as our
Author pleases to take notice of, first caused it to be printed by an Order of
the fifth of May, that they might be sent down to the Sheriffs and Justices of
Peace in the several Shires; to whom they intimated, that as they justified
the taking of it in themselves, so they could not but approve it in all such as
should take it. But finding that this did not much edify with the Country
people, they desired the Lords to concur with them in imposing the same.
Failing whereof, by an Order of their own House only, July 30. it was
declared, that the Protestation made by them was fit to be taken by every
Person that was well affected in Religion, and to the good of the
Commonwealth; and therefore what Person soever did not take the same, was
unfit to bear Office in the Church or Commonwealth. Which notwithstanding,
many refused to take it, as our Author tells us, not knowing but that some
sinister use might be made thereof: as afterward appeared by those Pikes and
Protestations, which conducted some of the five Members to the House of Commons.


Fuller. The Animadvertor and the Author have in this Paragraph lovingly shaken
hands together I fear, for meeting and parting at once; and that it will not be
long before we disjoyne them again.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 183. About this time came forth the Lord
Brook his Book against Bishops, accusing them in respect of their Parentage to
be de faece populi, of the dregs of the people; and in respect of their
Studies? no way fit for Government, or to be Barons in Parliament.] A passage
mis-becoming no man's pen so much as his that writ it; whose Father neither was
of a better extraction then ^ome, nor better left, as in the way of his
subsistence, then any of the Bishops (whom he thus upbraideth) had been left by
their fathers.


Fuller. The Animadvertor will, I hope, acknowledge me a fair and ingenuous
Adversary, on a token best known to us alone. However, Christianity obliges me
to take no unworthy advantage of my Brother in the same Profession.


Dr. Heylyn. From the first part of which calumny, the Bishops freed themselves
well enough, as appears by our Author. And from the second, since they were too
modest to speak in their own commendations, our Author might have freed them
with one of the old tales which are in his budget. And the tale is of a
Nobleman in King Harry the eights time, who told Mr. Pace, one of the Kings
Secretaries, in contempt of Learning, that it was enough for Noblemens sons to
wind their Horn, and carry their Hauk fair; and to leave study and learning to
the children of mean men: to whom the aforesaid Mr. Pace replied, Then you and
other Nobl^men must be content, that your children may wind their Horns, and
keep their Hauks, while the children of mean men do manage matters of Estate.
And certainly there can be no reason why men that have been verst in Books,
studied in Histories, and thereby made acquainted with the chief occurrences of
most States and Kingdoms, should not be thought as fit to manage the affairs of
State, as those who spend their time in Hauking and Hunting, if not upon some
worse employments. For that a Superinduction of holy Orders should prove a
Supersedeas to all civil prudence, is such a wild extravagant fancy, as no man
of judgment can allow of*


Fuller. I never said it, nor thought it; I will never write a syllable against
mine own Vocation. The Clergy, I am sure, cannot be impaired, and Lay-Noblemen,
I hope, may be improved, (to make them more industrious to enable themselves)
by the Animadvertor's story, well reported, and better urged and applied.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 188. The next day the 12 Subscribers
were voted to be committed to the Tower, save that Bishop Morton of Durham, and
Hall of Norwich found some favor.] Our Author speaks this of those twelve
Bishops, who had subscribed a Protestation for preserving their Rights and
Votes in the House of Peers, during the time of their involuntary absence, to
which they were compelled by threats, menaces, and some open acts of violence
committed on them. But in the name of one of the Bishops, who found the favor
of not being sent unto the Tower, he is much mistaken; it not being Dr. Hall
Bishop of Norwich, but Dr. Wright Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, who found
that favor at their Hands.


Fuller. Not much, who (if at all) could not be less mistaken. I shall
provide, God willing, the next Edition shall be reformed herein; and mean time
desire the Owner of my former, to rectify it with their Pen, who immediately
can remove Coventry and Lichfield, (though 80 Miles distance) to Norwich, and
thereby he will much wright me, and nothing at all wrong himself.


Dr. Heylyn. The like Misnomer I find after, fol. 193. where he speaks of
William, Earl of Bath;] The Earl of Bath of whom he speaks being named Henry,
and not William, unless he changed his name when he succeeded in that Earldom,
as I think he did not, and I am sure our Author will not say he did.


Fuller. That noble Earl, (questionable whether of more Honor or Learning) so
cordial to the cause of the Church, (far from all new dipped Sectaries,) never
changed his Name, till he changed his Life, and then of a Militant became a
Triumphant Saint. The Reader will believe me knowing enough in his Christian
name, whose Relict (since Countess of Middlesex) was my late Parishoner at
Waltham, where I have seen his name above a thousand times, prefixed with his
own hand writing, before the several Books in the Numerous and choice Library
at Copt-hall. It was indeed a mere mistake of the Printer.


Dr. Heylyn. As much he is mistaken also in point of time, leaving the Bishops
in prison for eighteen weeks, whereas they were scarce detained there for half
that time. For, being committed to the Tower in the end of December, they were
released by an Order of the House of Peers on the fifteenth of February, being
the next day after the Bill for taking away their Votes had passed in
Parliament. But then the Commons looking on them, as divested of their Right of
Peerage, and consequently (as they thought) in the same rank with themselves,
returned them to the Tower again: and having kept them there some few weeks
(long enough to declare their power,) discharged them upon Bail, and so sent
them home.


Fuller. A great cry and a little Wool. 1. From the end of December to the
fifteen of February was seven weeks. 2. They continued afterward there some
few weeks, as the Animadvertor confesses. Weeks imply two at the least; some
few, denote 4 or 5 in proper sense. Lastly some of the Bishops staid there
longer than others, even for lack of Money to pay their fees: If the Reader be
pleased to take all these up, he will find them fall little short of 18 Weeks.
And let not the Animadvertor wilfully persist in an error, who may know from
Bishop Wren, that none of them were released before the sixth of May.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 195. About this time the word
Malignant was first born (as to common use) in England, and fixed as a note of
disgrace on the Kings Party, and (because one had as good he dumb as not speak
with the volge) possibly in that sense it may occur in our ensuing History.]
Nothing more possible then that our Author should make use of any word of
disgrace with which the Kings party was reproached.


Fuller. The Animadvertor in this Point, proves himself a Malignant indeed,
taxing me with so odious and untrue an Aspersion: nothing more improbable, then
that my hand should hurt that Cause, which my Heart did Honor in the Writing
of my Book. Though this Passage be by me premised by way of prevention, if the
Word Malignant casually fell from my Pen; yet such was my Cautiousnesse, that
very rarely, if at all, it is used as mine own word. Besides, the Ingenuous
Reader knows that the Writers of Civil Dissentions are sometimes
necessitated for differencing of Parties, to use those Terms they do not
approve.


Dr. Heylyn. And if he calls them formerly by the name of Royalists and
High-Royalists, as he sometimes does; it was not because he thought them worthy
of no worse a Title, but because the name of Malignant had not then been born.


Fuller. Not so. For then since the Name MALIGNANT was born, I would have used
it on them, which I do not: Those words of the Animadvertor, [ worthy of no
WORSE a TITLE] intimate, as if ROYALIST and HIGH-ROYALIST were BAD TITLES,
which if not Honorable must be Inoffensive. If ROYAL the Primitive be GOOD, [a
Jam. 2.8.
ROYAL Law, 1 Pet. 2 9.
a ROYAL Priest-hood] ROYALIST the Derivative cannot be BAD, much less
HIGH-ROYALIST, except Height makes that BAD being added thereunto, which was
GOOD before.


Dr. Heylyn. He cannot choose but know, that the name of Roundhead was born at
the same time also, and that it was as common in the Kings Party to call the
Parliamentarians by the name of Roundheads, as it was with those of the
Parliament Party, to call the King's adherents by the name of Malignants. And
yet I do confidently say, that the word Roundhead, as it was fixed as a note
of disgrace on the Parliament party, does not occur, on any occasion
whatsoever, in our Authors History. But kissing goes by favor, as the saying
is; and therefore let him favor whom he pleases, and kiss where he favors.


Fuller. I confess the name ROUNDHEAD at the same time Trundled about in the
Mouths of many men; but I conceived it beneath an Historian to make use
thereof, because his Majesty in all his Proclamations, Declarations, and other
Acts of State, never made mention thereof, whilst MALIGNANT was often used in
Acts of Parliament.

But if my bare Mention (not using) of MALIGNANT, be so distasteful; I will Cut
down all the Ill Wood therein, to the last Sprig, quench all the ill fire
therein to the last Spark; I mean, God willing, totally delete that Paragraph
in the next Edition.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 196. By this time ten of the eleven
Bishops formerly subscribing their Protestation to the Parliament, were after
some months durance (upon good Bail given) released, etc.] Of the releasing of
these Bishops we have spoke already. We are now only to observe such mistakes
and errors as relate unto it. And first they were not released at or about the
time which our Author speaks of, that is to say, after such time as the word
plunder had begun to be used amongst us. Plunder both name and thing, was
unknown in England, till the beginning of the War; and the War began not, till
September, An. 1642. which was some months after the releasing of the Bishops.


Fuller. I hope now the Animadvertor is dravving to a Conclusion, because an
Ague commonly is leaving one, when beginning to double its Fits. Formerly he
found fault but once, in four Pages; now four times, in one Paragraph.

Here is nothing Mis-timed in this point; the name PLUNDER beginning in England
some Months, the Practice thereof some Weeks, before our War. Indeed
COMMISSIONED PLUNDER begun with the war, but UNCOMMISSION'D PLUNDER was before
it, committed by those, whose activity only did Authorize (or rather Empower)
them to take away the goods of others. Such were they that PLUNDERED, (for I
am sure they will not say they ROBBED) the House of the Countess, Rivers at
Long-Mellford in Suffolk, before the University of Cambridge sent their Pla^e
to the King to York, and consequently before the War.


Dr. Heylyn. Secondly, he tells us, that ten of the eleven which had
subscribed, were released, whereas there were twelve which had subscribed as
appears fol. 187. whereof ten were sent unto the Tower, and the other two
committed to the custody of the Black-Rod, fol. 188. And if ten only were
releast, the other two must be kept in custody for a longer time: whereas we
find the Bishop of Norwich at home in his Diocese, and the Bishop of Durham at
liberty in London; they being the two whom he makes so far favored by the
Parliament, as they escaped the Tower.


Fuller. The small numerall fault shall be amended, to prevent exceptions, in
my next Edition.


Dr. Heylyn. Thirdly, he tells us, that, when all others were releast, Bishop
Wren was still detained in the Tower, which is nothing so. That Bishop was
releast upon Bail, when the other were returned unto his Diocese, as the
others did, and there continued for a time; when of a sudden he was snatched
from his House at Downham, in the Isle of Ely, carried to the Tower, and there
imprisoned; never being brought unto a Hearing, nor any cause showed for his
imprisonment to this very day.


Fuller. Would it were nothing so indeed, Si mea cum vestris valuissent Vota.

If the Animadvertor's and Author's Joynt-desires might have taken Effect,
there had been no difference about this passage in my Book.

Tuque domo propria, nos (Te Praesul) Poteremur Thou had enjoyed thy house,
and we, Prelate, had enjoyed Thee.


But alas it is so, He is still and still (when all other Bishops are released)
detained in the Tower, where I believe he makes Gods Service, his perfect
freedom. My words, as relating to the time when I wrote them, contain too much
sorrowful truth therein.


Dr. Heylyn. Fourthly, Archbishop Williams after his restoring unto liberty
^ent not into the Kings Quarters, as our Author says, but unto one of his own
houses in Yorkshire, where he continued till the year 1643. and then came to
Oxford: not that he found the North too cold for him, or the War too hot; but
to solicit for ren^wing of his Commendam in the Deanery of Westminster; the time
for which he was to hold it drawing toward an end.


Fuller. Nothing false or faulty. The Archbishop of York, stayed some weeks
after his enlargement at Westminster, thence he went privately to the house of
Sir Thomas Hedley in Huntingon shire, and thence to his Palace at Ca^ood nigh
York, where he gave the King a magnificent Intertainment.

King James settled the Deanery of Westminster under the great Seal on Dr.
Williams, so long as he should continue Bishop of Lincoln. Hinc illa Lacrimae,
hence the great heaving and hussing at Him, because He would not resign it,
which was so signal a Monument of his Master's favor unto him.

Being Archbishop of York, King Charles confirmed his Deanery unto him for three
years, in lieu of the profits of his Archbishopric, which the King had taken
Sede vacant. So that it is probable enough, the renewing that Term might be a
Joynt-Motive of his going to Oxford.

But I see nothing which I have written can be cavilled at, except because I
call Yorkshire the King's Quarters, which as yet was the Kings WHOLE, when the
Archbishop first came thither, (as being a little before the War began) though
few Weeks after, it became the King's Quarters. Such a Prolepsis is familiar
with the best Historians; and, in effect, is little more, then when the
Animadversions, page 205.
Animadvertor calls the Gag and Appello Caesarem, the Books of Bishop
Montague; who, when they were written by him, was no (though soon after a)
Bishop.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, fol. 196. Some of the aged Bishops had their
tongues so used to the language of a third Estate, that more then once they ran
on that (reputed) Rock in their speeches, for which they were publicly shent,
and enjoined an acknowledgment of their mistake.] By whom they were so
publicly shent, and who they were that so ingenuously acknowledged their
mistake, as my Author tells us not, so neither can I say whether it be true
or false.


Fuller. I tell you again, It is true. The Earl of Essex and the Lord Say were
two of the Lords (though this be more then I need discover) who checked them.
And of two of those Bishops, Dr. Hall, late Bishop of Norwich, is gone to God,
and the other is still alive.


Dr. Heylyn. But I must needs say, that there was small ingenuity in
acknowledging a mistake in that, wherein they had not been mistaken; or by
endeavoring to avoid a reputed Rock, to run themselves on a certain Rock, even
the Rock of Scandal.


Fuller. Their brief and general acknowledgment, that they were sorry that
they had spoken in this point, what had incurred the displeasure of the
Temporal Lords, was no trespass on their own ingenuity, nor had shadovv of
scandal to others therein.

I confess, men must not bear fals-witness, either against themselves or
others; nor may they betray their right, especially when they have not only a
personal concernment therein, but also are in some sort Feoffees in trust for
Posterity. However, when a predominant Power plainly appears, which will
certainly overruled their cause against them; without scandal, they may (not
to say in Christian prudence they ought) to wave the vindication of their
privileges for the present, waiting, wishing, and praying, for more moderate
and equal times, wherein they may assert their right, with more advantage to
their cause, and less danger to their persons.


Dr. Heylyn. For that the English Bishops had their vote in Parliament as a
third Estate, and not in the capacity of temporal Barons, will evidently appear
by these reasons following. For first, the Clergy in all other Christian
Kingdoms of these Northwest parts make the third Estate; that is to say, in the
German Empire, as appears by Thuanus the Historian, lib. 2. In France, as is
affirmed by Paulus Aemilius, lib. 9. In Spain, as testifies Bodinus in his De
Repub. lib. 3. For which consult also to the General History of Spain, as in
point of practice, lib. 9, 10, 11, 14. In Hungary, as witnesses Bonfinius,
Dec. 2. l. 1. In Poland, as is verified by Thunus also, lib. 56. In Denmark, as
Pontanus tells us in Historia rerum Danicarum, l. 7. The Swedes observing
anciently the same form and order of Government as was used by the Danes. The
like we find in Camden for the Realm of Scotland, in which anciently the Lords
Spiritual, viz. Bishops, Abbots, Priors, made the third Estate. And certainly
it were very strange, if the Bishops and other Prelates in the Realm of
England, being a great and powerful body, should move in a lower Sphere in
England, then they do elsewhere. But secondly, not to stand only upon probable
inferences, we find first in the History of Titus Livius, touching the Reign
and Acts of King Henry the fifth, that when his Funerals were ended, the three
Estates of the Realm of England did assemble together, and declared his Son
King Henry the sixth, being an Infant of eight months old, to be their
Sovereign Lord as his Heir and Successor. And if the Lords Spiritual did not
then make the third Estate, I would know who did. Secondly, the Petition
tendered to Richard Duke of Gloucester, to accept the Crown, occurring in the
Parliament Rolls, runs in the name of the three Estates of the Realm, that is
to say, The Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and the Commons thereof. Thirdly,
in the first Parliament of the said Richard lately Crowned King, it is said
expressly, that at the request and by the consent of the three Estates of this
Realm, that is to say, the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons of this
Land assembled in this present Parliament, and by Authority of the same it be
pronounced, decreed, and declared, That our said Sovereign Lord the King, was,
and is the very and undoubted King of this Realm of England, etc. Fourthly, it
is acknowledged so in the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 3. where the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons in that Parliament assembled, being said
expressly, and in terminis, to represent the three Estates of this Realm of
England, did recognize the Queens Majesty to be their true, lawful, and
undoubted Sovereign Liege Lady, and Queen. Add unto these the Testimony of Sir
Edward Cook, though a private person, who in his Book of the Jurisdiction of
Courts (published by order of the long Parliament) chap. 1. does expr^sly say;
That the Parliament consists of the Head and Body; that the Head is the King,
that the Body are the three Estates, viz. the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal,
and Commons. In which words we have not only the opinion and testimony of that
learned Lawyer, but the Authority of the long Parliament also, though against
it self. Those aged Bishops had been but little studied in their own
concernments, and betrayed their Rights, if any of them did acknowledge any
such mistake in challenging to themselves the name and privileges of the third
Estate.


Fuller. In this long discourse, the Animadvertor has given in the several
Particulars, whereof I, in my Church History, gave the Total sum; when
saying, that there were passages in the old Statutes, which did countenance the
Bishops sitting in Parliament in the Capacity of a THIRD ESTATE.

I have nothing to return in Opposition, and heartily wish that his Arguments
(to use the Sea-man's phrase) may prove stanche and tight, to hold water, when
some Common-Lawyer shall examine them.

But seeing the Animadvertor has with his commendable pains go^ so far in
this point, I could wish he had gone a little further, even to answer the two
Common Objections against the THIRD-ESTATE SHIP of Bishops.

The First is this: The Bishop not to speak of Bishops Suffragan, of the Isle
of Man, is a Bishop for all purposes, and intents, of Jurisdiction and
ordination, yet has he no place in Parliament, because not holding per In
egram Baroniam, by an Entire Barony. Now if Bishops sat in Parliament as a
THIRD-ESTATE, and not as so many Barons, why has not the Bishop of Man, being
in the Province of York, a place in Parliament as well as the rest?

Secondly, If the Bishops sit as a THIRD-ESTATE, then Statutes made without
them are man^ and defective, which in law will not be allowed, seeing there
were some Sessions of Parliament wherein Statutes did pass, Excluso Clero (at
least wise, Absente Clero) which notwithstanding are acknowledged Obligatory to
our Nation.

I also, request him (when his Hand is in) to satisfy the Objection, taken
from a Alleged by the Animadvertor, formerly in his fourth Book.
passage in the Parliament at Northampton under Henry the Second, when the
Bishops challenged their Peerage, viz. Non sedemus hic Episcopi, sed Barons:
Nos Barons, vos Barons, Pares hic sumus. We sit not here as Bishops, but as
Barons, We are Barons, You are Barons, here we are peers, which is much
enforced by Anti-Episcopists. And whereas the Animadvertor translated it not as
Bishops only, it is more then questionable, that this interpolation ONLY will
not be admitted by such who have a mind curiously to examine the matter.

I protest my integrity herein, that I have not started these Objections of my
self, having had them urged against me; and though I can give a bungling
Answer unto them, I desire that the Animadvertor (being better skilled in Law)
would be pleased (if it ever comes again in his way) to return an Answer as
short and clear as the Objections are; and I, and many more, will be bound to
return him thanks.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 196. The Con^ocation now not sitting,
and matters of Religion being brought under the cognizance of the Parliament,
their Wisdoms adjudged it not only convenient, but necessary, that some prime
Clergy men might be consulted with.] It seems then, that the setting up of the
new Assembly, consisting of certain Lords and Gentlemen, and two or more
Divines out of every County, must be ascribed to the not sitting of the
Convocation. Whereas if that had been the reason, the Convocation should have
been first warned to re-assemble, with liberty and safe conducts given them,
etc.


Fuller. The Animadvertor now enters the list with the WISDOMS in Parliament,
who are most able to justify their own Act. Mean time my folly may stand by
in silence, unconcerned to return any Answer.


Dr. Heylyn. Fol. 198. It savours something o^ a Prelaticall Spirit to be
offended about Precedence.] I see our Author is no Changeling, Primus ad
extremum similis sibi, the very same at last as he was at the first. Certainly,
if it savor of a Prelaticall Spirit to contend about Precedencies, that Spirit
by some ^ythagorean Metempsychosis has passed into the bodies of the
Presbyterians, whose pride had swelled them in conceit above Kings and Princes,
and thus comes home to our Author, etc.


Fuller. If it comes home unto me, I will endeavor God-willing to thrust it
far from me, by avoiding the odious sin of Pride. And I hope the Presbyterians
will herein make a real and practical refutation of this note, in Evidencing
more Humility hereafter; seasonably remembering, they are grafted on the Stock
of the Bishops, and are concerned not to be high-minded but fear; lest if God
spared not Episcopacy, (for what sins I am not to enquire), peaceably
possessed, above a Thousand years, of Power in the Church of England, take heed
that he spare not Presbytery also, which is but a Probationer on its good
behavior, especially if by their insolence they offend God and disoblige our
Nation, the generality whereof is not overfond of their Go^ernment.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 203. We listen not to their fancy who
have reckoned the words in the Covenant, six hundred sixty six, etc.] I must
confess my self not to be so much a Pythagorean, as to find Divinity in
Numbers, nor am taken with such Mysteries as some fancy in them. And yet I
cannot choose but say, that the Number of Six hundred sixty six words, neither
more nor less, which are found in the Covenant, though they conclude nothing,
yet they signify something. Our Author cannot choose but know what pains were
taken even in the times of Irenaeus to find out Antichrist by this number: Some
thinking then, that they had found it in (...) with reference to the
persecuting Roman Emperors. Some Protestants think that they had found it in a
Dedication to Pope Paul the fifth, which was Paulo Vto Vice-Deo; the numerall
letters whereof, that is to say, D.C.L.V.V.V.I. amount exactly unto six hundred
sixty six!, which is the Number of the Beast in Revelation. The Papists on the
other side find it in the name of Luther; but in what language or how speld, I
remember not. And therefore whosoever he was, which made this Observation upon
the Covenant, he deserves more to be commended for his wit, then condemned for
his idleness.


Fuller. The Animadvertor might herein have allowed me the Liberty of
Preterition, a familiar figure in all Authors, managed by them with, Taceo,
praetermitto, transeo, we pass by, listen not, etc. when relating things,

Either Parva, of small moment, Nota, generally known, Ingrata, unwelcome to
many Readers.


Under which of these three notions, the point in hand does fall, I am not
bound to discover.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 207. Now began the great and general
purgation of the Clergy in the Parliaments Quar^ers, etc. Some of whose
offenses were so foul, it is a shame to report them, crying to justice for
punishment.] And it was time that such a purgation should be made, if their
offenses were so ^oul as our Author makes them. But first, our Author might
have done well to have satisfied himself in all particulars, before he raised
so foul a scandal on his Christian Brethren, and not to have taken them up
upon hearsay, or on no better grounds then the credit of the first Century,
which he after mentions. Which modesty he might have learnt, 1. From the Author
of that scandalous and infamous Pamphlet, (whatsoever he was) desisting from
the writing of a second Century, as being sensible, that the Subject was
generally odious. And certainly, if it were odious in that party to write the
same, it must be much more odious in our Author to defend the writing. He might
have learnt it, 2. from the most excellent Master in the Schools of Piety and
Morality which this Age has given us, even the King himself; who as our
Author tells us, fol. 208. would not give way that any such Book should be
written of the vicious lives of some Parliament Ministers, when such an
undertaking was presented to him. But if their Offenses were so foul, the
Writer of the Century had some reason for what he did, and our Author had some
reason for what he says, especially if the putting in of one Herb had not
spoiled all the Pot of Pottage. But first, Qui alterum incusat probri seipsum
intueri oporiet, is a good rule in the Schools of Prudence, and therefore it
concerns our Author to be sure of this, that all things be well at home, both
in his own Person and in his Family, before he throw so much foul dirt in the
face of his Brethren. In which respect Manutius was conceived to be the
unfittest man in Rome (as indeed he was) to perform the Office of a Ce^sor,
though most ambitiously he affected and attained that Dignity; of whom it is
affirmed by Velleius Paterculus, Nec quicquam objicere potuit Adolescentibus
quod non agnosceret Senex, that is to say, that he was able to object no crime
to the younger sort, of which himself being then well in years, was not also
guilty. And secondly, Non temere de fratre malt aliquid credendum esse, was
anciently a Rule in the Schools of Charity; which our Author either has
forgotten; or else never learned. He would otherwise have examined the Proofs,
before he had pronounced the Sentence; and not have positively condemned these
poor men for such foul offenses as cried to justice for punishment; and of such
scandalous enormities, as were not fit to be covered with the Mantle of
Charity. But he takes himself up at last with a doubt, that there might want
sufficient proof to convict them of it. Nothing (says he) can be said in their
excuse, if (what was the main matter) their crimes were sufficiently proved.
And if they were not sufficiently proved, as indeed they were not, (no witness
coming in upon Oath to make good the Charge) our Author has sufficiently
proved himself an unrighteous Judge, an Accusator stratrum, as we know who is,
in accusing and condemning them for scandalous enormities and foul offenses,
branding them by the name of Baal, and calling them unsavory Salt, not fit to
be thrown upon the Dunghill, yet all this while to be unsatisfied in the
sufficiency of the proof. Decedis ab Officio Religiosi Iudicis, is the least
that can be said here; and I say no more. Only I note, what sport was made by
that Century then, and may be made hereafter of this part of the History, in
the Court of Rome; to which the libellous Pamphlets of Martin-Mar-Prelate,
published in Queen Elizabeth's time, served for Authentic Witnesses, and
sufficient evidence to disgrace this Church. Nor have they spared to look upon
this whole business as an act of divine Retaliation, in turning so many of the
Regular and Orthodox Clergy out of their Benefices and Preferments by our new
Re^ormers, under color of some Scandalous Enormities by them committed; under
pretense whereof so many poor Monks and Friars were (as they say) turned out of
their Cells with like humanity by those which had the first hammering of the
Reformation here by law estalisht.


Fuller. First, as to my self, who am most knowing of my own infirmities: I
will confess them to God, and not plead for them before man. If God's
restraining grace has bridled ^e from Scandalous obnoxiousnesse, may he alone
have the honor thereof. As for other pains and spots in my Soul, I hope that
He, (be it spoken without the least verbal reflection) who is the Mal. 3.2.
Fullers soap will scour them forth with his Merit, that I may appear clean by
Gods Mercy.

Rev. 12.13.
I know full well who it is, that is termed the Accuser of his Brethren, even
Satan himself; Hence it is that one observes, he has his name, (...),
Diabolus, Devil, and so also in Italian, French, Spanish, with some small
variation. It being good reason, that he should keep his name in all Countries,
who keeps his nature in all places being a constant delator and traducer of
Gods servants; often, without cause; always, without measure.

But I hope, I may say in this point, Get thee behind me Satan, I mean, I may
justly thrust both Name and Thing far from me, even to light where it
deserves.

Some of my Brethren or Fathers rather, I reverence and admire for their
eminences: others I commend and will endeavor to imitate: others guilty of
humane infirmities, I desire to conceal their faults, and (that not taking
effect) to excuse their persons. Such as are past my pleading for, fall under
my pity and have my Prayers that God would amend them: But willingly, much
less causlessely, I will not accuse any; and my Pen and Tongue has been, and
shall be tender of their Reputations.

Proceed I now to what I have written concerning the Sequestered Clergy of
England; wherein I will freely, God-willing, unbosome my mind, and if I perish
I perish: I appeal to the Searcher of hearts, if I did not desire to do them
all just favor, as I hope to find favor from him when I most need it. But as
Mariners when they have both Wind and Tide against them, cannot make their
desired Port in a straight Line, and therefore are fain to fetch a compass;
Semnably, I desiring to gra^ifie my Brethren, and not destroy my self; was
^aine to go about, that in any measure I might with safety do it. And there was
no compassing of it without compaceing it; No reaching the End without going
out of the Way.

First, therefore, I did acknowledge what indeed could not be concealed, and
what in truth must be confessed, viz. That some of the ejected Clergy were
guilty of foul offenses, to whom, and whom alone* the name of Baal and unsavory
Salt did relate: Nor was it a wonder, if amongst Ten Thousand and more, some
were guilty of Scandalous enormities.

This being laid down, and yielded to the violence of the times; I wrought my
self by degrees, (as much as I durst) to insert what follows in vindication
of many others, rigorously cast out for following in their affections, their
preceding Judgments and Consciences, and no scandal could justly be charged
upon them, pleading for them as ensues. Church History, Book 11. page 207. 1.
The witnesses against them were seldom deposed on Oath, but their bare
complaints believed.

2. Many of the Complainers were factious People, (those most accusing their
Sermons who least heard them), and who since have deserted the Church, as
hating the profession of the Ministry.

3. Many were charged with delivering false Doctrines, whose Posi^io^s were
found at the least disputable. Such, those accused for Preaching that Baptism
washes away Original Sin, which the most learned and honest in the Assembly,
in some sense, will not deny, namely that in the Children of God it cleanses
the condemning and final peaceable commanding power of Original Sin, though
the stain and blemish thereof does still remain.

4. Some were merely outed for their affections to the King's Cause; and what
was Malignity at London, was Loyalty at Oxford.

5. Yea many Moderate men of the opposite party, much be moaned such severity;
that some Clergy men, blameless for life, and Orthodox for Doctrine, were
ejected only on the account of their faithfulness to the King's cause. And,
as much corruption was let out by this Ejection (ma^y scandalous Ministers
deservedly punished); so at the same time the Veins of the English Church were
emptied of Much good blood, (some inoffensive Pastors) which has made her Body
Hydropicall ever since; ill humors succeeding in the room, by reason of too
large and sudden evacuation.



This being written by me, some ten (in the Parox^sm of the Business) and
printed some four years since, was as much as then I durst say for my Brethren,
without running my self into apparent danger.

If the Papists take advantage at what I have written, I can wash my Hands, I
have given them no just occasion; and I hope this my hust defense will prove
satisfactory to the ingenuous, That I did not designedly ^etract ^^om any
(...)) Brethren. But, if this my Plea finds no acceptance, and if I must groan
under so unjust an accusation, I will endeavor to follow the Counsel of the
Mich. 7.9.
Prophet: I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against Him, until He plead my Cause and execute Judgment for me: He will bring
me forth to the Light, and I shall behold his righteousness.


Dr. Heylyn. But to say truth, It is no wonder, if he concur with others in
the Condemnation of particular persons, since he concurrs with others in the
condemnation of the Church it self. For, speaking of the separation made by
Mr. Goodwin, Mr. Nigh, etc. fol. 209. he professes that, he rather does believe
that the sinful corruptions of the worship and Government of this Church,
taking hold on their Consciences, and their inability to comport any longer
therewith, was rather the true cause of their deserting of their Country, then
that it was for Debt or Danger, as Mr. Edwards in his Book, had suggested of
them. What grounds Mr. Edwards had for his suggestion, I enquire not now;
though coming from the Pen of one who was no friend unto the Government and
Liturgy of the Church of England, it might have met with greater credit in our
Author. For if these men be not allowed for witnesses against one another, the
Church would be in worse condition then the ancient Borderers: Amongst whom
though the testimony of an English Man against a Sco^, or of a Sco^ against the
English (in matters of spoil and depredation) could not find admittance; yet a
Scot's evidence against a Sc^t, was beyond exception. Lege inter Limitaneos
cautum, ut nullus nisi Anglus in Anglum, nullus nisi Scotus in Sco^um testis
admit^atur, as we read in Camden. We see by this, as by other passages, which
way our Author's Bowl is biassed, how constantly he declares himself in favor
of those, who have either separated from the Church, or appeared against it.
Rather then such good people shall be thought to forsake the Land for Debt or
Danger, the Church shall be accused for laying the heavy burden of Conformity
upon their Consciences, which neither they, nor their forefathers, (the old
English Puritans) were resolved to bear. For what else were those sinful
Corruptions of this Church in Go^er^ment and Worship, which laid hold of their
Consciences, (as our Author words it) but the Government of the Church by
Bishops, the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church here by law established; which
yet must be allowed of by our Author as the more true and real cause of their
Separation, then that which we find in Mr. Edwards?


Fuller. I knew Mr. Edwards very well, my contemporary in Queens College who
often was transported beyond due bounds with the keenness and eagerness of his
spirit; and therefore I have just cause in some things to suspect him;
especially being informed and assured the contrary from credible persons.

As for the five dissenting Members, Mr. Goodwin, Mr. Nigh, Mr. Sympson, Mr.
Bridge, Mr. Buroughs, (to whom Mr. Archer may be reduced) they owed not
eighteen pence a piece to any in England; and carried over with them no
contemptible sums in their purses.

As for Lay-Gentlemen, and Merchants, that went over with them, such as peruse
their names, will be satisfied in their responsible, yea, plentiful Estates.
Sr. MATTHEW BOINTON. Sr. WILLIAM CONSTABLE. Sr. RICHARD SALTINGSTON. Mr.
LAWRENCE, since Lord President of the Council. Mr. ANDREWS, since Lord Major
of London. Mr. BOWRCHER. Mr. ASK, since a Judge. Mr. JAMES. Mr. WHITE.


And although the last of these failed beyond the Seas, ( a cacching Casually
with great undertakings) yet was he known to have a very great Estate at his
going over.

Yea, I am most credibly informed, by such who (I am confident) will not abuse
me, and posterity therein, that Mr. Herbert Palmer, (an Anti-Independent to the
height) being convinced, that Mr. Edwards, had printed some false-hoods in one
sheet of his Gangrena, proffered to have that sheet reprinted at his own cost,
but some intervening accident obstructed it.


Dr. Heylyn. Nor can our Author save himself by his parenthesis, in which he
tells us, that he uses their language only: For using it without check or
censure, he makes it his own as well as theirs, and justifies them in the
action, which he should have condemned.


Fuller. This is an Hypercriticism which I never heard of before, and now do
not believe. In opposition whereunto I return, that if a Writer does slily
weave another Author's words into his own Cloth, using them without any
quotation, then indeed he adopts them his own.

Secondly, If he cite the words, with Commendation, or explicit approbation of
them, then also he asselfeth them, undertakes for them, and is bound to
justify them.

Thirdly, But if he but barely cite the words, without any Emphasis of praise
or dispraise, (the case now in hand) it amounts to no more, then unto a valeat
quantum valere potest, or a Sit fides penes Authorem, it being left to the
Reader's Liberty, to believe more or less, or nothing thereof; as the Author
he cites, seems to be more, or less, or not at all credible, to his
Discretion.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 216. As appears by his own Diary, which
if evidence against him for his faults, may be used as a witness of his good
works.] The Diary which our Author speaks of, was the Archbishops practical
Commentary on those words of David, viz. Teach me O Lord so to number my days,
that I may apply my heart unto wisdom.


Fuller. I appeal to the Reader of my History, whether I have not given his
Diary, the due commendation thus writing thereof. Book 11. page. 218. He was
conscientious, according to the Principles of his Devotion; witness his care in
keeping a constant Diary of the passages in his Life. Now he can hardly be an
ill Husband, who sums up his receipts and expenses every night; and such a
Soul is, or wo^ld be good, which enters daily into a Scrutiny of his own
Actions. Now an exact Diary is a Window into his Heart who makes it; and
therefore pity it is that any should look therein, but either the friends of
the party, or such Ingenuous foes as will not (especially in things doubtful)
make conjecturall Comments to his disgrace.




Dr. Heylyn. No memorabl^ passage happened in the whole course of his life, till
the end of May, 1633. (when his Papers were seis'^ on by Mr. Prin) which he had
not book'd in a Memorial by the way of a Diary or Journall. Out of which,
though Mr. Prin excerpted nothing but that which he conceived might tend most
visibly to his disgrace and disadvantage, and published it to that end in
print; yet when it came to the perusal of equal and indiffer^nt men, it was
so far from serving as an evidence of his (...) (as our Author words it) that
it showed him to be a Man of Exemplary Piety in himself, unmoved fidelity to
his friend, of most perfect loyalty to his Master* and honest affections to the
Public, etc.


Fuller. If I were delighted in carping at slips of Pen or Press, I here have
advantage enough, the Animad^ertor affirming, that the Archbishop's papers
were seized by Mr. Prin,

1633.

At which time Mr. Prin was in no capacity to make such a seizure, being
himself in trouble (...) ^is Histriomast^^^^* and the dare (though not
confessed in t^^ Errata) is no doubt m^^-printed for 1643. Thus I behold him
who carps at such rifles, like o^ ^^^ing his N^ighbour for Pedi^us ambulando,
when, though the Jury must find for the Pla^niffe, yet he is look^d on but as a
vexatious Person for his pains. I could wish that all caviling at Pr^lal
mistakes might be forborne, and that every one would read his Adversaries Book,
as in his Conscience he conceives it intended by the Writer, that so waving
all Typographicall escapes, they may come the sooner to the Cause controverted
betwixt them.


Dr. Heylyn. He that shall look upon the list of the things projected to be
done, and in part done, by him, fol. 28, 29. will find, that both his heart was
set on, and his hand engaged in, many excellent pieces of work, tending to the
great honor and benefit both of Church and State; not incident to a man of
such narrow comprehensions, a^ some of his professed Enemies were pleased to make
him. Certain I am, that as Mr. Prin lost his end, so he could not get much
thanks for that piece of service.


Fuller. If Mr. Prin lost his end* he shall have no direction from me for the
finding thereof.

I never beheld the Archbishop, as a man of narrow Comprehensions, but as one
who had in his Head and Heart Stowage enough for great undertakings. Only I
could wish that his Apprehensions, had been adequate to his Comprehensions; I
mean, that he had lived to perfect what he projected, and do what he
commendably designed for pious uses, and the public good.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author goes on, Fol. 217. He is generally charged with Popish
inclinations, and the story is commonly told and believed of a Lady, etc.] Here
is a charge of the Archbishops inclination unto Popery, and the proof nothing
but a tale, and the tale of a Lady, Quid vento? Mulier; Quid Muliere? Nihil.


The substance of the tale is this, that a certain Lady (if any Lady may be
certain) who turning Papist, etc.


Fuller. I will take the Boldness to English his Latin Verse, that the weaker
Sex may see the strength of his Charity unto them. What Is more fickle than the
Wind?
Even a Woman in her Mind.
Fickler what is than Woman Kind?
Nothing in the World we find.



Dr. Heylyn. This Lady who turned Papist was asked by the Archbishop the cause
of her changing; to which she answered, that it was because she always hated
to go in a crowd. And being asked the meaning of that expression, she replied
again, that she perceived his Lordship, and many others, making haste to Rome;
and therefore to prevent going in a press, she had gone before them. Whether
this tale be true or false, though he does not know, yet he resolves to set it
down, and to set it down also with this Item, that it was generally believed.
Be it so for once.


Fuller. This Sarcasm was put upon him, by a Lady, now living in London, and a
Countess, whose Husbands father the Archbishop married, and thereby brought
much trouble and molestation to himself. No Oedipus needs to unridle the
Person, easily spel't by putting the Premises together.


Dr. Heylyn. For not being able to disprove it, I shall quit our Author with
one story, and satisfy the equal Reader with another. First for my Author, I
have heard a tale of a Lady too, to whose Table one Mr. Fuller was a welcome
though a frequent guest; and being asked once by her, Whether he would please
to eat the wing of a Woodcock, he would needs put her to the question, how her
Ladyship knew it was a Woodcock, and not a Wood-hen. And this he pressed with
such a troublesome importunity, that at last the Lady answered with some show
of displeasure, that the Woodcock was Fuller headed, Fuller breasted, Fuller
thighed, and in a word, every way Fuller. Whether this tale be true or false, I
am not able to say; but being generally believed, I have set it down also.


Fuller. His Tale does not Quit mine, which was True, and New, never printed
before. Whereas his is Old, (made it seems on one of my Name, printed before I
was born,) and false, never by Man or woman retorted on me.

However if it does Quit mine, He is now but Even with me; and hereafter I
shall be ABOVE him, by forbearing any bitter Return.

I had rather my Name should make many causelessely merry, then any justly sad,
and seeing it lies equally open and obvious to praise and dispraise, I shall
as little be elated when flattered, Fuller of wit and learning, as dejected
when flouted, Fuller of folly and ignorance.

All this, which the Animadvertor has said on my Name, I behold as nothing:
and as the Anagram of his Name, HEYLYN, NE HILI, NOTHING-worth.


Dr. Heylyn. But my other story is more serious, intended for the satisfaction
of our Author, and the Reader both. It was in November, Anno 1639. that I
received a message from the Lord Archbishop, to attend him the next day at two
of the clock in the afternoon. The Key being turned which opened the way into
his Study, I found him sitting in a chair, holding a paper in both hands, and
his eyes so fixed upon that paper, that he observed me not at my coming in.
Finding him in that posture, I thought it fit and manners to retire again. But
the noise I made by my retreat, bringing him back unto himself, he recalled me
again, and told me after some short pawse, that he well remembered that he had
sent for me, but could not tell for his life what it was about. After which he
was pleased to say (not without tears standing in his eyes,) that he had then
newly received a letter acquainting him with a Revolt of a Person of some
Quality in North Wales, to the Church of Rome; that he knew that the increase
of Popery by such frequent Revolts, would be imputed unto him, and his Brethren
the Bishops, who were all least guilty of the same; that for his part he had
done his utmost, so far forth as it might consist with the Rules of Prudence,
and the Preservation of the Church, to suppress that party, and to bring the
chief sticklers in it to condign punishment, to the truth whereof (lifting up
his wet eyes to Heaven) he took God to witness; conjuring me (as I would
answer it to God at the day of Judgment) that if ever I came to any of those
places, which he, and his Brethren, by reason of their great age, were not like
to hold long, I would employ all such abilities as God had given me in
suppressing that party, who by their open undertakings, and secret practices,
were like to be the ruin of this flourishing Church. After some words of mine
upon that occasion, I found some argument to divert him from those sad
remembrances, and having brought him to some reasonable composedness, I took
leave for the present; and some two or three days after waiting on him again,
he then told me the reason of his sending for me the time before. And this I
deliver for a truth on the faith of a Christian; which I hope will
overbalance any Evidence which has been brought to prove such Popish
inclinations, as he stands generally charged with in our Author's History.


Fuller. I verily believe all, and every one of these Passages to be true, and
therefore may proceed.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 217. However most apparent it is by many
passages in his life, that he endeavored to take up many controversies betwixt
us and the Church of Rome.] And this indeed is Novum Crimen that is to say, a
crime of a new stamp, never coined before.


Fuller. I call it not Novum Crimen, which I believe was, in him, (according to
his Principles, Pium Propositum; but, let me also add, was Frustraneus Conatus:
and that not only, ex Eventu, (because it did not,) but ex Natura Rei, because
it could not take Effect; such the real Unreconcileablenesse, betwixt us and
Rome.


Dr. Heylyn. I thought, that when our Savior said Beati Pacifici, it had been
sufficient warrant unto any man to endeavor Peace, to build up the breaches in
the Church, and to make Jerusalem like a City which is at Unity in it self;
especially where it may be done not only salva charitate, without breach of
charity, but sal^^ fide too, without wrong to the faith. The greatest part of
the Controversies betwixt us and the Church of Rome, not being in the
Fundamentalls, or in any Essential Points in the Christian Religion; I cannot
otherwise look upon it, but as a most Christian pious work, to endeavor an
atonement in the Superstructures. But hereof our Author seems to doubt, first
whether such endeavors to agree and compose the differences, be lawful or
not; and secondly, whether they be possible.


Fuller. I confess Scripture pronounces the Peacemakers blessed. Math. 5.
In answer whereunto I will take no notice of Iehu his Tart return to K. 2
King. 9.22.
Ioram, What peace so long as the whoredoms of thy Mother Iezabel, and her
witchcrafts are so many? Rather will I make use of the Calm Counsel of the
Romans 12.18.
Apostle, If it be POSSIBLE, as much as in you lies, live Peaceably with all
Men. Which words, [ if it be possible] intimate an impossibility of Peace, with
some Natures, in some differences, though good men have done what lies
(understand it, Lawfully) in their power to perform: such sometimes the
frowardness of one (though the forwardness of the other) side to Agreement,
which is the true state of the Controversy betwixt us and Rome.


Dr. Heylyn. As for the lawfulness thereof, I could never see any reason
produced against it, nor so much as any question made of it till I found it
here.


Fuller. All such zealous Authors who charge the Papists with Idolatry, (and
the Animadvertor knows well, Who they are) do question the Lawfulness of such
an Agreement.


Dr. Heylyn. Against the possibility thereof, it has been objected, that such,
and so great is the pride of the Church of Rome, that they will condescend to
nothing. And therefore if any such composition or agreement be made, it must
not be by their meeting us, but our going to them.


Fuller. I remember, some (then present,) have told me of a passage at a
disputation in Oxford. When Dr. Prideaux pressed home an Argument, to which the
Mr I. Sb.
Answerer returned Reverende Professor, memini me legisse hoc ipsissimum
Argumentum apud Bellarminum. At, mi fili (returned that Dr.), ubi legisti
Responsum? This Objection the Animadvertor acknowledges he has formerly met
with: but where did he meet with a satisfactory Answer thereunto?

Let me add; It is not only the Pride of the Church of Rome, which will not
let-goe her Power; but also her Covetousness, which will not part with her
Profit, which obstructeth all accommodation betwixt us. And if the Church of
Rome would, the Court of Rome, will not, quit the Premises; and the latter has
an irresistible influence on the former. In this point, the Court of Rome, is
like the Countryman, who willingly put his Cause to Arbitration; but on this
condition, to have all the Land he sued for, with the full profits thereof, to
a minute past, and his own costs and charges to a farthing. Such and no other
agreement, will the court of Rome condescend unto.


Dr. Heylyn. But as our Author says, that many of the Archbishops Equals
adjudged that design of his to be impossible; so I may say (without making any
such odious Comparisons) that many of our Author's betters have thought
otherwise of it.


Fuller. Amongst which many of his Betters, the Animadvertor undoubtedly is one
of the Principal. Be it so, I will endeavor to be as good as I can, and will
not envy but honor my Betters whose number God increase. Sure I am, amongst
these many of my Betters, the difference betwixt us and the Papists is made
never a whit the better, there remaining still (...): and though many may
manifest much good will, to advance, nothing has taken Effect to complete such
a composition.


Dr. Heylyn. It was the Petulancy of the Puritans on the one side, and the
pragmaticalness of (...) Jesuits on the other side, which made the breach wider
than it was at (...) first: and had these hot Spirits on both sides been
charmed a while, moderate Men might possibly have agreed on such equal terms,
as would have laid a sure foundation for the peace of Christendom.


Fuller. Let us behold the Original breach betwixt the Church of Rome and Us.
I name the Church of Rome first, because confident they caused it; so that we
may say unto them, Pharez, The breach be upon them. This breach was made
before either Puritans or Jesuits ever appeared in England. As the Animadvertor
skilled in their dates knovveth full well. It is therefore suspicious that the
Wound which was made before these parties were in being will continue, if
both of them were extinct.

I behold the College of Sorbonists in Paris as far from Jesuitical
pragmaticalness and Dr. I. Cosens, as one free from puritanical petulancy. Yet
though the said Doctor has complied with them so far as he could do with
Christian prudence, sal^a conscientia; And though the Sorbonists are beheld as
the most learned and moderate Papists; yet I cannot hear of any Accommodation
betwixt them, but rather the contrary, even in the point of the Apocrypha (a
controversy so learnedly canvased by the Doctor) they being as unwilling to
allow so few, as he so many Books in the Bible to be Canonical.

And here, let me be the Animadvertor's Remembrancer, (of what perchance he
would willingly forget) how it was not long since he tvvitted me for
saying, that the difference about the posture of the Communion Table, might be
accommodated with mutual moderation; and now he holds, By the same means,
an expedient betwixt us and the Papists may be advanced.


Dr. Heylyn. Moderate Men might possibly have agreed on such equal terms; as
would have laid a sure foundation for the Peace of Christendom.


Fuller. My name is Thomas. It makes me the more distrust thereof, because I
see at this day most cruel Wars, betwixt the Crowns of Spain and France, both
which agree to the height in the same Romish Religion. I am sorry their
differences are paralleled with a sadder instance, of the deadly Wars betwixt
the Swede and Dane, both Lutherans alike. And our Sea Wars betwixt us and the
Hollander, (both well paid for) are not yet forgotten. All I collect is this;
that if the agreement betwixt us and Papists were expedited to morrow; yet so
long as there be several Greatnesses in Christendom, there will be ^^stlings
betwixt them. And although they are pleased to score their differences (for the
greater credit) on the account of Conscience, and Religion; yet what says St.
James, From whence James. 4.
comes Wars and fightings amongst you? Come they not hence, even of your
Lusts, that war in your members? And it is a sad truth, Such the corruption of
the humane Nature, that Men's Lives and Lusts will last and end together.


Dr. Heylyn. Now that all these in the Church of Rome, are not so stiffely
wedded to their own Opinions as our Author makes them, appears first by the
Testimony of the Archbishop of Spa^ato declaring in the high Commission, a
little before his going hence, that He acknowledged the Articles of the Church
of England to be true, or profitable at the least, and none of them Heretical.


Fuller. The Animadvertor has instanced in an ill Person, and in an ill time
of the same Person. It was just when he was a taking his return to his vomit,
and to leave the Land, When knowing himself obnoxious, and justly under the
lash (for his covetous compliance with foreign Invitations) of King James; to
get leave to be gone, he would say any thing here; and unsay it again,
elsewhere. As little heed is to be given to such a Proteus, as hold is to be
taken of Him.


Dr. Heylyn. It appears secondly by a Tractate of Franciscus de Sancta Clara,
(as he calls himself) in which he puts such a Gloss upon the nine and
thirty Articles of the Church of England, as renders them not inconsistent
with the Doctrines of the Church of Rome.


Fuller. By that Parenthesis [ as he calls himselfe] it is left suspicious,
that his true Name was otherwise. And he who would not use his own but a false
Name, might (for ought I know) put a false Gloss upon our Articles; and though
he PUTS such a sense upon them, it is questionable whether our Articles will
accept thereof. To PUT something upon, sometimes answers to the Latin Word
IMPONERE, which is to deceive and delude, and sometimes is Equivalent to our
English Word IMPOSE, which sounds the forceable or fraudulent Obtruding of a
thing, against the Will and Mind of Him, or That, whereon it is imposed.
Lastly, the Animadvertor cannot warrant us, that the rest of the Church of Rome
will consent to the Judgment of Franciscus de Sancta Clara; and if not, then
is the breach betwixt us, left as wide as it was before.


Dr. Heylyn. And if without Prejudice to the Truth, the Controversies might
have been composed, it is most probable that other Protestant Churches would
have sued by their Agents to be included in the Peace.


Fuller. The Animadvertor's Prudent and Politic Probability that other
Protestant Churches would, by their Agents, solicit an Inclusion into such a
peace, minds me of the Distich wrote on the sumptuous Cradle, gorgiously
trimmed for the Child of Queen Mary by Philip King of Spain. Quam Mariae
Sobolem, Deus Optime Sum, dedisti;
Anglis incolumem read, tuere, rege.
O may the Child, to Mary God has given;
For ENGLANDS good be guarded safe by Heaven.


Whereas indeed this Child, pretended at White Hall, may be said born at
Nonsuch, proving nothing but a Mock-mother-Tympany.

I cannot but commend the kindness and care of the Animadvertor, for keeping
this Babe when born; I mean the agreement betwixt Us and the Papists. But let
us behold it born, see it first affected, and then we shall know, whether
foreign Protestant Churches will dandle this Infant, or destroy it; I mean
whether they will declare for, or Protest and remonstrate against it. It will
be time enough, then, for both our Survivor to return an answer.


Dr. Heylyn. If not; the Church of England had lost nothing by it, as being
HATED by the Calvinists, and not loved by the Lutherans.


Fuller. Short and sharp, much matter in few Words, and little Truth in much
Matter. Our Church of England in Relation to foreign Protestant Churches is
here by the Animadvertor represented in a strange posture; like another Genesis
16.22
Ishmael, whose hand was against every one, and every one's against Him.

That our Church is not HATED by the Calvinists appears by many and plain
passages in the Books of those who are (...) seeming Pillars amongst them
Calvin, Beza, Zanchy, Deodat, Mollinaeus, etc. who (notwithstanding some small
differences betwixt us) lovingly give us the Right hand of Fellowship.

The Animadvertor discovers himself as little Statesman as Divine in advising
the Church of England, by making Foes of her Friends, to make Friends of her
Foes; by incurring the Enmity of foreign Protestants, thereby to procure the
Amity of Papists.

The best is, there is no danger to see that day. The poor Woman in the Gospel,
was troubled with a double Issue, the one of Blood, the Life in her Body, and
the other of Money, the Lifeblood of her Estate; but the Luke. 8.43.
latter was quickly stanched having spent all her Living on Physicians to no
purpose. Thus successelesse have their pains proved hitherto, who have
endeavored an accommodation betwixt us and Rome, so that the Wound betwixt us
may justly be beheld as incurable.


Dr. Heylyn. But our Author will not here delist (so soon has he forgotten his
own Rule made in the case of Mr. Love) and therefore mustereth up his faults,
viz. 1. Passion, though an humane frailty, 2. His Severity to his Predecessor,
easing him before his time, and against his Will, of his jurisdiction: 3. His
over-medling in State-matters: 4. His imposing of the Scottish Liturgy. Of all
which we have spoke so much upon other Occasions, that is to say, Numb.
246.251.289.259. and therefore do not count it necessary to add any thing here.


Fuller. I shall, God willing, remember and practice my Rule in the Case of Mr.
Love, when the Animadvertor I sear will be sound to have forgotten it: here are
four faul^s of the Archbishop mustered up by me; and is it not a thin Muster
indeed? When a Gentleman was told, that he would be much ashamed, if all his
faults were written in his forehead; he (in my Mind) modestly, and wittily
replied, that he should be right glad that his Face could hold them all: Happy
is that man whose faults may be reduced to the number of Four.

I have in my Reply to the forecited pages of the Animadvertor, returned my
answer unto them; and therefore, to use his language, account it unnecessary to
add any thing here.

I have done no wrong to the Archbishop's Memory, if I have charged him with
four ^aults, and to overpoize them, have given him many Commendations, in
several places of my Book, which here I will sum up to confute that Loud and
late Untruth of the Animadvertor, when saying, Page. 218. Our Author gives us
nothing of this PRELATE but his WANTS and WEAKNESSES.

The Praise I gave him is reducible to four heads, NATURALLS or Corporalls
about his Body or Person; MORALS or Civills touching his demeanor to others;
INTELLECTUALLS, whether Innate or Acquisite by his own Industry; SPIRITUALLS or
Supernaturalls to which his Benefactions (as the fruit of a Lively Faith) are
reduced.

NATURALLS.
All these Quotations are taken out of the eleventh Book of my Church History.
1. Nephew to a Lord Major of LONDON therefore not basely Born, page two
hundred and sixteen, Paragraph. 71. 2. Cheerful in countenance.

Page. 119. paragraph. 84.

3. A sharp and pierceing eye, Ibidem. 4. Gravity and quickness were well
compounded in his Face, Ibidem. 5. So cheerful his Countenance (when ascending
the Scaffold) as rather to gain a Crown than lose his Head, page. 215. paragr.
68.
MORALLS.
6. He was temperate in his diet, page 218. parag. 78. 7. Chaste in his
Conversation, ibid. 8. Plain in his Apparel, ibid. paragr. 79. 9. Not
preferring his own Kindred without merit, ib. pa. 80. 10. Promoting Men of
Learning and Abilyties, ibid. 11. Covetousness he perfectly hated, ibid.
parag. 81. 12. Had no project to raise a Name or Family, ibid. 13. Abridged
Courtiers Bribes, page 218. paragr. 76. 14. But not their Fees for Church
Preferments, ibid. 15. Not ambitious as appears by his refusing a CARDINALL'S
CA^ once and again offered him, page. 149. paragr. 47.
INTELLECTUALLS.
16. He had a clear Judgment, page 119. paragr. 84. 17. Of a firm Memory,
ibid. 18. One of the greatest Scholars of our Nation, page. 216. par. 71. 19.
Having an Experimental knowledge of all conditions of Clergymen, page. 217.
par. 72.
SPIRITUALLS.
20. A strict Observer of the Lord's Day in his own Person, page 147. para. 38.
21. Moderate in pressing the Book of sports in his own Diocese, ibid. par. 41.
22. A worthy Instrument in moving King Charles to so pious a Work as the
restoring of the Irish Impropriations, page 149. paragr. 45.


Thus I did write in his due praise as much as I durst, and though less then
his Friends expected, more than I am thanked for. All I will add is this,
seeing his Head was cut off by the ^xe, it had been madness in me to run my
Neck into the Halter, in taxing those of cruelty and unjustice, which caused
his Execution.


Dr. Heylyn. And so I leave him to his Rest, in the BOSOM OF ABRAHAM in the
LAND OF THE LIVING.


Fuller. Bosom of Abraham, is a Scripture-Expression, to signify the repose
of the souls of such Saints, who departed this life before the asscention of
our Savior into Heaven. Where ever the bosom of Abraham be, it is good to be
there; and hence it is frequently used by the Fathers, to denote the happy
condition even of such which departed in the Faith since Christ's ascension.
Conf^ssio. lib. 9. cap. 3.
Quicquid illud est, (says St. Augustine) quod illo significatur sinu, ibi
Nebridius meus vivit, dulcis amicus meus. For the main, it is a Synonymon with
Heaven, and probably all the persons therein, are receptive of a higher degree
of Glory after the Day of Judgment.

LAND OF THE LIVING, is an Old Testament-Phrase; which some narrow-breasted
Commentators have confined to Temporal Happiness, but imports much more in
my Opinion even final Felicity, as may appear by Psalm. 27.13.
David his Expression. I had fainted unless I had believed to see the goodness
of the Lord in the LAND OF THE LIVING.

I have stayed the longer in the Stating of these two Expressions, that I may
the more safely and sincerely concur, as I do, with the Animadvertor's
charity in the final Estate of this Prelate: with whose Memory my Pen here
makes no Truce, but a perfect peace, never hereafter to let the least
disgraceful drop of Ink to fall upon it.


Dr. Heylyn. From the Archbishop of Canterbury, I should proceed to Dr.
Williams, Archbishop of York; but that I must first remove a Block which lies
in my Way. Our Author having told us of the making and Printing the Directory,
is not content to let us see the cold entertainment which it found when it came
abroad, but lets us see it in such terms as we did not look for.


Fuller. This Block is no bigger then a Straw, so that a flea may leap over it:
but the Animadvertor is pleased to see all things thorough a Magnifying-Glasse,
as will appear hereafter.


Dr. Heylyn. Fol. 222. Such (says our Author) was, call it constancy, or
obstinacy, love or doting of the generality of the Nation, on the Common
prayer, that the Parliament found it fit, yea necessary, to back their former
Ordinance with a second.] Assuredly, the generality of the people of England is
much beholding to our Author, for making Question, whether their adhering to
the Liturgy, then by Law established, were not to be imputed rather to
Obstinacy and Doting, than to Love and Constancy?


Fuller. It is no Question in my Judgment or Conscience, when it is out of all
Question, as either never started or soon decided therein: but a Question it is
in the practice of our distracted age, which I behold like the City of
Ephesus, Acts. 19.32.
Some cried one thing, some another, for the Assembly was confused. Till this
Tumult be appeased, I desire to stand by in silence, and give every Man his own
Words, Some call Constancy and Love, which side I do seem secretly to favor,
for giving it the upper hand, and naming it in the first place. Others call it
Obstinacy and Doting, as they are severally persuaded. What is my Offense, or
where is the Block the Animadvertor complains of, as if he needed to call for
Leavers to remove it?


Dr. Heylyn. The Liturgy had been looked on as a great Blessing of God upon this
Nation, by the Generality of People, for the space of fourscore years and
upwards; they found it established by the Law, sealed by the Blood of those
that made it, confirmed by many Godly and Religious Princes; and had almost no
other form of making their addresses to Almighty God, but what was taught them
in the Book of Common Prayer. And could any discreet man think, or wise man
hope, that a Form of Prayer, so universally received, and so much esteemed,
could be laid by without Reluctance in those who had been so long accustomed to
it? or called Obstinacy or Doting in them, if they did not presently submit to
every New Nothing, which in the Name of the then disputable Authority should be
laid before them. And though our Author does profess, that in the Agitating of
this Controversy pro and Con, he will reserve his private opinion to himself;
yet he discovers it too plainly in the present passage. Quid verba audiam, cum
facta videam? is a good rule here. He must needs show his private Opinion in
this point, say he what he can; who makes a Question, whether the Adhesion of
the People generally to the public Liturgy, were built on Obstinacy and
Doting, or on Love and Constancy.


Fuller. I concur with the Animadvertor in his Encomiastick Expressions on
the Common Prayer. Otherwise, nothing new, occurs in this, which was not in the
former Paragraph. And therefore, the Blow being the same (only laid on with a
little more eagerness) I conceive the same Guard will serve to defend it,
without any further repetition.


Dr. Heylyn. But, if it must be Obstinacy or Doting in the generality of the
People, to adhere so cordially to the Book of Common Prayer, I marvel what it
must be called in Stephen Marshall of Essex (that great Bell-Weather, for a
time, of the Presbyterians) who having had a Chief hand in compiling the
Directory, did notwithstanding Marry his own Daughter by the form prescribed
in the Common Prayer Book; and ^aving so done, paid down ^ive pounds
immediately to the Churchwardens of the Parish, as the Fine or Forfeiture for
using any other form of Marriage, then that of the Directory. The like to
which (I have credibly been informed) was done by Mr. Knightly of Fawsley, on
the like occasion, and probably by many others of the same Strain also.


Fuller. All this is Nothing to me, who am not bound to answer for the Actions
of other Men. I know there was in England a Juncture of Time, which in this
point may be compared to the Evening TWILIGHT; so called from TWALIGHT or
double Light, the one of the Day not wholly gone down, the other of the Candle,
but newly set up. Such the Crepusculum vespertinum in our Land, when the Day of
the Liturgy yet dimly shined, and the Candle of the Directory was also lighted;
a short Candle, which presently burnt down to the Socket. It is possible that
in this Coincidence, some in Majorem Cautelam, twisted the Liturgy and
Directory together, as since some have joined to both, Marriage by a Justice of
Peace; that so a Threefold Cable might not be broken. Let them, which best can,
given an account of their own Carriage herein.


Dr. Heylyn. With the like Favor he beholds the two Universities, as he does
the Liturgy, and hard it is to say, which he injureth most.


Fuller. I injure neither of them. But in this passage, the Animadvertor only
whets his Sword, and I scour my Shield, preparing against his deadly blow, in
the next Paragraph.


Dr. Heylyn. And first beginning with Oxford, he let us know that, Fol. 231.
Lately certain Delegates from the Univesity of Oxford, pleaded their
privileges before the Committee of Parliament, that they were only visitable
by the King, and such who should be deputed by him. But their Allegations were
not of proof against the Paramount power of Parliament; the rather because a
passage in an Article at the rendition of Oxford, was urged against them,
wherein they were subjected to such a Visitation.] Our Author here subjects the
University of Oxford to the power of the Parliament, and that not only in
regard of that Paramount power, which he ascribes unto the Parliament, that is
to say, the two Houses of Parliament (for so we are to understand him) above
all Estates; but also in regard of an Article concerning the surrendry of
Oxford, by which that University was subjected to such Visitations.


Fuller. When I see a Corslet shot thorough with a Musket bullet, and the
Person wounded that wore it, I may safely say, that Corslet is not of proof
against the Musket. So when I behold the Pleadings of the Delegates neglected
and nulled, I may say that de Facto they were not of proof against
Parliamentary power. A passage possibly written by me, (such my affection to my
Aunt Ox^ord,) with more grief then it is read by the Animadvertor with anger;
but Truth is truth whether it be writ by one Sighing or singing; readd by one
Smiling or Frowning.

The Reader needs no Interpreter to expound the word Parliament, as taken
generally at this time, ( Success having beaten the s^^se thereof into Men's
Heads) for the two Houses. Loqui cum ^ulgo in this case, I hope is no fault;
These two Houses at this time maintained their ENTHYMEM to be a complete
SYLLOGISM concluding all Persons under them; presuming that the King, though
not Personally, was Vertually with them, A position which I have no calling to
examine. As for the Clause in the Article which hooked the University under
Parliamentary Visitation, hear how the Animadvertor reports it.


Dr. Heylyn. I find indeed, that it was agreed on by the Commissioners on both
sides touching the Surrendry of that City; That the Chancellor, Masters, and
Scholars of the University of Oxon, and the Governors and Students of
Christ-Church of King H. 8. his Foundation, and all other Heads and Governors,
Masters, Fellows, and Scholars of the Colleges, Halls, and Bodies Corporate,
and Societies of the same University, and the public Professors and Readers,
and the Orator thereof, and all other persons belonging to the said University,
or to any Colleges or Halls therein, shall and may, according to their
Statutes, Charters and Customs, enjoy their ancient form of government,
subordinate to the immediate Authority and power of Parliament. But I find not,
that any of the Heads or Delegates of that University were present at the
making of this Article, or consented to it, or thought themselves obliged by
any thing contained in it.


Fuller. This last Clause was eagerly urged by the Committee against the
Delegates of the University, and I could wish they could as easily have untied
the Knot, as Answered the hardest Objection of Bellarmine in the
Divinity-Schools; The King when privately departing Oxford left (if not a
Commission) at least Leave with the Lords to make as good ^earmes for
themselves, and all with them in the City besieged, as the Enemy would give
and they could get in that straightened condition. The University therefore was
urged by the Committee to have given an Implicit consent to these Articles,
and enjoying the Benefit, they must share in the Burden thereof. To this, the
Delegates made many fair and Civil Answers, strengthened with Law and Reason:
but alas, great are the Odds, though Learning be the Answerer, where Power is
the Opponent.


Dr. Heylyn. Nor indeed could it stand with reason, that they should wave the
patronage of a gracious Sovereign, who had been a Nursing Father to them, and
put themselves under the arbitrary power of those who they knew minded nothing
but destruction toward them. And that the University did not think it self
obliged by any thing contained in that Article, appears even by our Author
himself, who tells us in this very passage, that the Delegates from the
University pleaded their privileges before the Committee of Parliament, that
they were only visitable by the King, and such as should be deputed by him;
which certainly they had never done (unless our Author will conclude them to
be fools or madmen) had they before submitted to that Paramount power, which he
adscribes unto the Houses. Nor did the Houses of Parliament find themselves
empowered by this clause of the Article, to obtrude any such Visitation on
them. And therefore when the Delegates had pleaded, and proved their
privileges, a Commission for a Visitation was issued by the two Houses of
Parliament in the name of the King, but under the new broad Seal which
themselves had made; which notwithstanding* the University stood still on their
own defense, in regard that though the Kings name was used in that Commission,
yet they knew well, that he had never given his consent unto it. Whereupon
followed that great alteration both in the Heads and Members of most Colleges
which our Author speaks of.


Fuller. The Animadvertor endeavors to run me on one of these dangerous
Rocks, either to condemn the University for Fools and Mad men, whom I Love and
Honor for Wise and Sober Persons, or else to make me incur the Displeasure
of the Parliament. And the Philosopher's Answer to the Emperor is well known,
That it is ill Disputing with them that can command LEGIONS: The best is, I am
not bound to answer to this dangerous Dilemma, keeping my self close to my
Calling, viz. Reporting what was done, but whether Justly or unjustly, let
others decide.

The Animadvertor's Boldness herein is for me to admire, not Imitate. When an
Old Man was demanded the Cause of his Confidence, how he durst so freely tell
a King of his faults, he rendered a double Reason of his Boldness, Orbit^s et
Senectus. One, that he had no Children, and therefore Careless to preserve
Posterity: the other, that he was extremely Old, therefore less curious to
keep that Life that was leaving him.

How it fares with the Animadvertor in these two Particulars, I know not;
sure I am for my self, that I am not so old to be Weary of the World, (as I
hope it is not of me); and God having given me Children, I will not destroy
them, and hazard my self by running into needless Dangers. And let this
suffice for an Answer.


Dr. Heylyn. Nor deals he much more heartily in relating the proceedings of the
Visitation, which was made in Cambridge; the Visitors whereof (as acting by
the Paramount power of Parliament) he more sensibly favors, than the poor
sufferers, or malignant Members, as he calls them, of that University.


Fuller. The Animadvertor sees more in me then I can see in my self; and
because we are both Parties engaged, (the less to be credited in our own
Cause,) be it reported to the Reader, if pleased, to peruse the Conclusion of
my History of Cambridge, whether I cast not my Grains of Favor into the
Scales of the poor Sufferers. These I call not MALIGNANT MEMBERS, but with this
Qualification ( so Hist. of Camb. page 168. parag. 35.
termed). And let not me be condemned for the Ill Language of others.

I say again, As, as an Historian, I have favored no side but told the Truth;
so I could not so far unman my self, but that for Humanity sake (to say no
more,) I did pity the Sufferers; on which Account, I incurred the displeasure
of the Opposite Party: the best is, causeless Anger being an Edglesse Sword, I
fear it the less.


Dr. Heylyn. For whereas the Author of the Book called Querela Cantabrigiensis
has told us of an Oath of Discovery, obtruded by the Visitors upon several
persons, whereby they were sworn to detect one another, even their dearest
friends. Our Author who was out of the storm, seeming not satisfied in the
truth of this relation, must write to Mr. Ash, who was one of those Visitors,
to be informed in that which he knew before.


Fuller. No Person more proper or probable to inform me herein, than Mr. Ash
one of the Visitors, who I believed did both know the Truth and would not tell
a falsehood herein: I was so far from desiring Information in what (as the
Animadvertor says) I KNEW BEFORE, that I protest I know IT NOT YET, being left
in such a Mist about this Oath of Discovery.

On the one side, my Worthy Friend Mr. Peter Gunning, Fellow of Clare Hall,
(eminent for his Learning and Honesty,) has since assured me that such an Oath
was offered and urged upon him by the Committee. On the other side, I am, on
just grounds, daily confirmed in my Confidence, that neither the Earl of
Manchester, nor any under him by his Command or Consent enforced such an Oath,
so that where to lay the Blame, I know not; and have neither List nor Leisure,
further to enquire, who having Blistered my Fingers already, will burn my Hands
no more in so dangerous a subject.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds. And on the reading of Mr. Ash his Answer,
declares expressly, that no such Oath was tendered by him to that University.]
But first, Mr. Ash does not absolutely deny, that there was any such Oath, but
that he was a stranger to it: and possibly he might be so far a stranger to it,
as not to be an Actor in that part of the Tragedy. Secondly, Mr. Ash only
says, that he cannot call to mind, that any such thing was moved by the Earl
of Manchester; and yet I trow, such a thing might be moved by the Earl of
Manchester, though Mr. Ash after so many years was willing not to call it to
mind. Or else if no such Oath was tendered by him, as our Author is assured
there was not, that part of the Tragedy might be acted by Mr. Good the other
Chaplain, without communicating his Instructions to his fellow Visitor.


Fuller. Mr. Ash, on serious and Solemn recollection, has since given me
Assurance, both by his word of Mouth, and Writing, that no such Oath was urged
to his knowledge; and being a Minister of the Gospel, I am in Charity and
Conscience bound to believe Him.


Dr. Heylyn. And therefore thirdly, I would know why Mr. Good was not writ to
also, that having from him the like Certificate, our Author might have had the
better grounds for his unbelief, before he had pronounced so positively against
the Author of that Querela.


Fuller. The reason was because Mr. Good was dead, and (had I known whither) I
did not know by what Carrier to convay my Letter unto him. I pronounced not
positively against Querela in point of the Oath, which I left under very
vehement Suspicions.


Dr. Heylyn. Fourthly, and finally, it is not easy to be thought, that the
Author of that Book should have vented such a manifest falsehood, especially in
a matter so derogatory to all Christian charity, and that neither the Earl of
Manchester, nor either of these two Chaplains, or any friends of theirs, should
in the space of ten years and more, endeavor to wipe off such an odious
imputation, till our Author out of pure zeal to the Paramount-power, played the
Advocate in it.


Fuller. I will freely give all my Fees for my Advocation to the Animadvertor,
and will Thank him too, if he will be pleased to take them from me to himself.
It seems I did not my Work well, who had nothing but displeasure for my Wages.

Possibly the Earl of Manchester might not know, that the urging of such an
Oath was objected against him and his; and probably, if he did know, he
satisfied himself in his own Integrity and Innocence, leaving the Blame and
Shame to fall on such as were guilty thereof.


Dr. Heylyn. But to return again to Oxford, one of the first effects which
followed on the alteration before remembered (though mentioned by our Author in
another place) was the rifling of the Treasury in Magdalen College, of which
he tells us, lib. 9. fol. 234. That a considerable sum of Gold, being by Dr.
Humphry (who had been Master of that College) left in a Chest, not to be
opened, except some great necessity urged thereunto, was lately shared between
Dr. Wilkinson (who then held the place of President by the power of the
Visitors) and the fellows there. But first, Our Author is mistaken in Dr.
Humphry, though he be willing to entitle him (whom he calls a moderate
Non-con^ormis^) to some benefaction. The sum there found amounted to above
twelve hundred double Pistolets, the old Doctor having no fewer than one
hundred for his part of the spoil, and every fellow thirty a piece for theirs;
each Pistolet exchanged at sixteen shillings six pence, and yet the Exchanger
got well by the bargain too. Too great a sum for Dr. Humphry, who had many
Children, and no provident Woman to his Wife, to leave behind him to the
College, had he been so minded. The Money (as the Tradition went in that
College) was left there by the Founder, to remedy and repair such ruins, as
either the casualty of fire, or the ravages of a Civil war might bring upon
it; to which the nature of the Coin being all French pieces (remember that the
English at that time were Masters of a great part of France) gives a further
testimony.


Fuller As I have been mistaken in the Person, Dr. Humphry for Bishop Wainfleet
Donour of this Gold (following common Report therein); so I could heartily have
wished I had also erred in the Thing it self, I mean, that an A motion of such
Devoted Treasure had never been done.

The Animadvertor might well have forborne his Sparring at the precious Memory
of that learned and pious Dr. Humphry. And the new mention of his name, minds
me of an old fault, which the Animadvertor not long since laid to my charge,
viz. my calling of Thomas Bentham [the DEANE, says he, of Magdalens Oxford,]
the CENSOR thereof. Whereas I exactly followed the words of Dr. Humphry, in his
Latin Life of Jewel, page. 73. Tho. Benthamus, quamvis CENSOR, eo Anno, etc.
And I humbly conceive that I having so good a Precedent as Dr. Humphry,
President of that College, I might as well call their Deane, Censor in
English, as He does in Latin.


Dr. Heylyn. Secondly, I would have our Author observe, that those whom he
accuses of this act of Rapine, were neither high Royalists, nor covetous
Conformists, as we know who words it; but men agreeable to the times, and of
the same temper and affections which himself is of: the Conformists never
being so covetous as to cast an eye toward it, nor the high Royalists so
ignoble in their greatest extreamities, as to lay hands on it.


Fuller. If I be one of their Persuasion, who shared this Gold, (and I must be
so because the Animadvertor does say it) I have acquitted my self a faithful
Historian, in not consulting my own partie's Credit: but unpartially reporting
the truth. However I hope God will keep my hands, that my fingers shall not
have the GUILT of the Gold of Toulouse.


Dr. Heylyn. And thirdly, I must needs charge our Author with some partiality
in aggravating this fact (which indeed cannot be excused) with so many
circumstances, and passing over the like at Cambridge, as a thing incredible; I
cannot believe, says he, Hist. Camb. fol. 38. what I have read in the Querela
Cantabrigiensis, That three or four hundred pounds worth of Timber brought to
Clare-hall for the repair of that House, was lately taken away; that is to say,
inverted to the use of some private persons, whom our Author has befriended
with this incredulity.


Fuller. I did not aggravate the fact nor heavily lean on my Pen in relating
this Passage, nor laid more weight thereon than merely to make it cast Ink.
The Animadvertor has more bitterness vvrapped up in this one word RAPINE
than I have stretched out, in all my relation of this accident.


Dr. Heylyn. Nay so extremely favorable he is to his friends in Cambridge, as
to profess, that, had he seen it, he would not have believed his own eyes;
which is the highest point of partiality, and most invincible unbelief that I
ever met with.


Fuller. Herein the Animadvertor is highly-just, (to say no more) unto me. Is
it not cruelty to such as write in distracted times, and are, as desirous to
impart dangerous Truths to posterity, so also to secure themselves, (as who
can blame them?) as well as they may, to hunt them out of the Covert of any
figurative or wary expression: but none so deaf, as He who will not hear, I
mean as to understand, The Animadvertor knevv my Expression pointed at, some
too high for me safely to reach.

Know Reader, that, what Need (as pleaded) in time of War took from
Clarehall, that Conscience in the same person has since restored to the full,
as Dr. Dillingham my worthy friend and Master of the College has informed
me. Now though Oxford challenges antiquity to go before Cambridge, yet herein
let her not disdain to come after her, and to follow so good an Example of
Restitution: for though I have heard, and partly believe, that Dr. Wilkinson
did with might and main oppose the Seizure on that Gold; and though they say it
appeared, when seriously examined by the visitors, that it was not so foul a
fact, as generally it is represented; yet it cannot in all particulars be
excused, and therein concur with the Animadvertor. So that Genesis 43.12.
Jacob's counsel to his Sons may here be seasonably prescribed, Carry the Money
back again, peradventure it was an oversight.


Dr Heylyn. There remains nothing now to conclude these Animadversions, but
some passages relating to Archbishop Williams: in which I must confess my
self not willing to meddle, but that I think it is as much against the Rule of
distributive Justice to give one man too much, as to give another man too
little. Let us see therefore what he says of this Prelate, and how far he
says truth* the whole truth, and nothing but the truth And first, says he,
etc.


Fuller. The Truth hereof will soon appear by the Sequel. For, if the
Animadvertor shall inflame his smoking faults, hollow in the Ears of every
Dormant Suspicion, to awaken it against the memory of this Prelate, yea and
hang the weight of his greatest Guiltiness on the wyers of the slenderest
proof, then notwithstanding this his plausibility to the contrary premised, He
will plainly appear to have a Pike (the sharpness whereof his Death has not
blunted) against Him.

When one was to Preach the Funeral Sermon of a most vicious, and generally
hated Person, all wondered what He would say in his praise, the Preachers
friends searing, his foes hoping, that, for his fee, ^e would force his
Conscience to flattery. For one thing (said the Minister) this man is to be
spoken well o^, by all, and for another thing He is to be spoken ill of, by
none. The first is, because God made Him; the second, because He is dead.

Now seeing besides the premises, common to all Christians, yea to all men many
worthy works have been done by the Bishop; and especially, seeing known
Animisities were betwixt him and the Animadvertor (which with Ingenuity is an
(...)- super-over-commanding motive to silence) the Animadvertor had better
forborne all which follows in my judgment, and in the Judgment of as many
learned and Religious men, of all orders and degrees in both Universityes, as
ever solicited him to write against my Church History.


Dr. Heylyn. Fol. 227. He sueth to the Parliament for favor, and obtained it,
whose General in a manner he becomes in laying siege to the Town and Castle of
Abercon-way, etc.] This is the truth, but whether it be the whole truth, or
not, I do more then doubt. His suing for and obtaining pardon from the
Parliament, precedeth in the order of time, his being their General; and
therefore it is not to be thought, but that he had done some special service to
the Parliament to prepare the way for such a favor. Before his commitment to
the Tower about the Bishops Protestation, he was grown as odious to the
Commons, as before he had been honored by them. He had lived some time with
the King at Oxford, and is said to have done him good services in Wales; and
(which is most) he had a fair temporal Estate, able to yield some thousands of
pounds for Composition in Goldsmiths hall. So that there must be somewhat in
it more then ordinary, which occasioned that he neither came under Fine nor
Ransom, as the rest of the Kings party did. But what that was, whether he
served them with intelligence when he was at Oxford, or by inhibiting his
Tenants and Neighbors to pay their accustomed Taxes to the Kings Forces when
he lived in Wales, I determine not. Certain it is, that before his
redintegration with them, he had been in a manner besieged in his House of
Penrin by the Lord Byron, for the prohibiting of sending in such provisions as
had been required; and that observing with what carel^ssenesse the Kings
Soldiers did attend that service, he caused a sally to be made out of the
House, and slew many of them. Upon the merit of which service, and the promise
of greater, it is no wonder if such Ministers and Sollicitors of his as were
employed in that business, compounded for him without fine, though not without
money. That which our Author tells us of his being their General, seems to have
been fore-signified some five or six years before the siege of Conway Castle.
For I remember that about such time as he was prisoner in the Tower with the
rest of the Bishops, his picture was sold commonly in black and white, in his
Episcopal Roabs, with a squa^e Cap on his head, a Rest in his hand, a Musket on
his shoulder, and a Bandeleir about his neck. For which fancy at that time I
could learn no reason, though he came up to it at the last.


Fuller. This is not Contradictory but Additory to what I have written, an
Additory only of Suggestions, and Suspicions, no Probations; The Animadvertor's
arrow coming off without a Pile, when he says, I DETERMINE NOT. I had thought
when this DOCTOR CATHEDRAE (for Historical Matters) had so solemnly settled
himself in the CHAIR, that we should have heard from him some solid
Determination, which belike he dares not do: and in my Opinion, it had been
more consonant to Christian charity, not to have discussed what he could not
decide; seeing matters of this Nature are to be hunted down, or else it is best
they be never started. Is this He who so lately professed his averseness to
meddle with this Archbishop, and is now so ready to run out against Him on all
occasions when he hardly has half an Errand? and rather would than can produce
any certainty in his Suggestions?


Dr. Heylyn. But our Author goes on, Ibid. He was very chaste in his
Conversation.] And I hope so too, notwithstanding the scandalous reports of
Weldon the namelesse Author aimed at (in the following words) in his Pamphlet
called the Court of King James, and some vulgar fames or hear says too much
credited by a late Historian. But I must needs say, that I am not satisfied in
the arguments which are brought to prove it. Wilson in his unworthy History of
the reign of King James, makes him to be Eunuchus ab utero, an Eunuch from his
Mother's womb. The author of the pamphlet called the Observator observed,
conceives that Wilson went too far in this expression, and rather thinks, that
he contracted some impotency by falling on a stake when he was a Boy, fol, 10.
Our Author here seems to incline unto this last, assuring us from such who knew
the Privacies and casualties of his infancy, that this Archbishop was but one
degree removed from a Misogynist, though to palliate his infirmity to noble
Females he was most complete in his courtly addresses. But first, the falsity
and frivolousnesse of these defenses leave the poor man under a worse suspicion
than they found him in. His manly countenance, together with his masculine
voice, showed plainly that he was no Eunuch; and the agreeableness of his
conversation with the female Sex, did as plainly show, that he was no
Misogynist, or Woman-hater. And secondly, admitting these surmises to be true
and real, they rather serve to evidence his impotency than to prove his
chastity; it being no chastity in that man to abstain from Women, who either by
casualty, or by nature is disabled from such copulations. The virtue of
chastity consists rather in the integrity of the soul, than the mutilation of
the body; and therefore more to be ascribed to those pious men, Qui salvis
oculis foeminam vident, in Tertullian's language, than to the old Philosopher,
who put out his eyes to avoid temptations of that nature. So that if this be
all which they have to say for the Bishop's chastity, these advocates had
showed more wisdom in saying nothing, than speaking so little to the purpose.


Fuller. I am sorry to see the Memory of this Bishop, since his decease, to
fall on a sharper Stake than his Body did in his Infancy, even the Pen of the
Animadvertors. I confess, Chastity cannot necessarily be concluded from
natural debility, or casual impotency; there being a possibility of a frying
heart in a freezing body, And we know who has written, Ecclus. 3^.20.
ut Eunuchus qui amplectitur virginem and gemit.

The casualty of his Infancy was by me mentioned, and cast in as super-pondium
or over-weight, to confirm such as were persuaded before, in his Chastity
which was never called into Question by any person of credit. As for Aulicus e
Coquina, the Courtier cut of the Kitchen, pretending himself such a Master of
Defense in all Court-controversies. Such as have perused his Book, will find
cause to say of Him, Expectavi Lanistam; inveni Scurram, Rabulam, Lnxam.

The conversableness of this Bishop with Women, consisted chiefly, (if not
only) in his Treatments of great Ladies and Persons of Honor, wherein he did
personate the Compleatness of Courtesy to that Sex: otherwise a woman was
seldom to be seen in his House. Hence it was that the Palace of this Prelate,
had more Magnificence than Neatness therein, sometimes Defective in the
Puntillo's and Nicityes of Daintiness, lying lower than Masculine cognizance;
and as level to a woman's Eye, to espy, as easy for her Hand to amend.


Dr. Heylyn. Our author proceeds Ibid. Envy it self cannot deny, but that
whither soever he went, he might be traced by the footsteps of his
benefaction.] Amongst which benefactions it was none of the least, that in both
the Universities he had so many Pensioners; more (as it was commonly given out)
then all the Noblemen and Bishops in the Land together: some of which received
twenty Nobles, some ten pounds, and other twenty Marks per annum. And yet it
may be said without envy, that none of all these Pensions came out of his own
purse, but were laid as Rent-charges upon such Benefices as were in his
disposing, either as Lord Keeper or Bishop of Lincoln, and assigned over to
such Scholars in each University as applied themselves to him. And because I
would not be thought to say this without book, I have both seen and had in my
keeping, till of late, (if I have it not still) an Acquittance made unto a
Minister in discharge of the payment of a Pension of twenty Nobles per annum,
to one who was then a Student in Christ-Church. The name of the parties I
forbear; he that received it, and he for whom it was received, (and perhaps he
that paid it too) being still alive. And possible enough it is, that this
Pensioning of so many Scholars had not been past over in silence by our Author,
if he had not known the whole truth as well as the truth.


Fuller. His Pensioning so many Scholars, foundeth more to his credit, than
the paucity of their Pensioners to the honor of other Lords and Bishops. It
was impossible that so numerous Pensions, could all issue out of his own Purse,
without great Impairing of his Estate. And therefore no wonder if he was not the
Giver, but the bare disposer of some of them to Promising Pregnancyes, where
Worth and Want did meet together in the same person. And though such payments
were not costly to the Bishop, they were no less comfortable to such as
received them; it being all one with the parched ground whether the Water-pot
which be-sprinkleth it, be filled from the Spring, or from the River. This was
don by him without any appearance of evil, with the free and full consent of
such Incumbents as He presented, far from the shadow of Simonia call
compliance, seeing besides the Statute to this purpose, in the reign of King
Henry the eighth, the Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth do countenance a Bishops
assigning five pounds annually out of every hundred pounds of a Benefice to
such uses. As for many of the Pensions he paid, I am since as well assured,
they were expended out of his own Purse as I am confident the causeless
cavills in our Animadvertor's Book, were bred in his own brains, without any
other's Suggesting them unto him.


Dr. Heylyn. Ibid. Much he expended on the Repair of Westminster Abbey-Church,
etc. The Library at Westminster was the effect of his bounty.] This though it
be true in part, yet we cannot say of it, that it is either the whole truth, or
nothing but the truth. For the plain truth is, that neither the charge of
repairing that Church, nor furnishing that Library, came out of his own private
Coffers, but the Churches rents: For at such time as he was made Lord Keeper of
the great Seal; he caused it to be signified unto the Prebendaries of that
Church, how inconvenient it would be both to him and them to keep up the
Commons of the College; and gaind so far upon them that they passed over to
him all the rents of that Church, upon condition that he should pay the annual
pensions of the Prebendaries, Schoolmasters, Quire-men, and inferior
Officers, and maintain the Commons of the Scholars. The rest, amounting to a
great yearly value, was left wholly to him upon his honorable word and promise
to expend the ^ame for the good and honor of that Church. The surplusage of
which expenses received by him for four years and upwards, amounted unto more
than had been laid out by him on the Church and Library; as was offered to be
proved before the Lords Commissioners at the visitation, Anno. 1635. And as for
the Library at St. John's, it might possibly cost him more wit than money; many
books being daily sent in to him (upon the intimation of his purpose of
founding the two Libraries) by such as had either suits in Court, or business
in Chancery, or any ways depended on him, or expected any favors from him,
either as Bishop of Lincoln, or Dean of Westminster.


Fuller. As the worm on a sudden smot the gourd of Jonah, and it withered; so
it is possible, that the most verd^nt and flourishing Charity may be fretted
and blasted, by ill reports.

There is a Chapiter-Act subscribed with the hands of the Prebendaries of
Westminster (the Date whereof I do not at present remember) and the Copy of it
is in the hands of my Worthy friend, wherein they thankfully acknowledge the
great bounty of this Bishop, in expending so much on the repair of their
Church.

If the Library of St. John's cost him more Wit then Money, (as the Animadvertor
phraseth it,) sure I am that in the same sense, The founding of Fellowships and
Scholler-ships in that College, cost him more Money then Wit.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 228. He hated Popery with a perfect
hatred.] But Wilson in his History of great Britain sings another song,
whether in Tune, or out of Tune, they can best tell who lived most near those
times, and had opportunities to observe him.


Fuller. I wonder, That the Animadvertor, who in the Preface to this his Book
had branded Wilsons History with the name of a most Infamous Pasquill, makes
mention of any passage therein to a Bishop's disgrace.


Dr. Heylyn. There is a muttering of some strange offer which he made to King
James, at such time as the Prince was in Spain, and the Court seemed in common
apprehension to warp toward Popery, which declared no such perfect hatred (as
our Author speaks of) unto that Religion.


Fuller. The Esaias. 56.3.
Prophet tells us of Tongues which have MUTTERED perverseness, and such to me
seem they that are Authors of this report.


Dr. Heylyn. Not was he coy of telling such whom he admitted unto privacies
with him, that in the time of his greatness at Court, he was accounted for
the Head of the Catholic Party, not sparing to declare what free and frequent
accesses he gave the principal Sticklers in that cause both Priests and
Jesuits, and the special services which he did them: And it must be somewhat
more than strange if all this be true, that he should hate Popery with a
perfect hatred; yet not more strange then that he should so stickle in the
preferment of Dr. Theodore Price to the Archbishopric of Armagh in Ireland,
who died a professed Catholic, reconciled to the Church of Rome, as our Author
has it, Fol. 226. But if there be no more truth in the Bishop of Lincolns
hating Popery, then in Dr. (...) dying a professed Papist, there is no credit
to be given at all to that part of the Character. Dr. Price, though once a
great Favorite of this Bishop, and by him continued Sub-Dean of Westminster
many years together, was at the last supposed to be better affected to Bishop
Laud, than to Bishop Williams, Bishop Laud having lately appeared a Sui^or for
him for the Bishopric of St. Asaph. And therefore that two Birds might be killed
with the same bol^; no sooner was Dr. Price deceased, but the Bishop of
Lincoln being then at Westminster, calls the Prebends together, tells them that
he had been with Mr. Sub-Deane before his death, that he left him in very
doubtful terms about Religion, and consequently could not tell in what form
to bury him; that if the Dr. had died a professed Papist he would have buried him
himself, but being as it was, he could not see how any of the Prebendaries
could either with safety or with credit perform that office. But the Artifice
and design being soon discovered, took so little effect that Dr. Newel one of
the Senior Prebendaries performed the Obsequies, the rest of the whole Chapter
attending the body to the grave, with all due solemnity.


Fuller. I deny not but as a Statesman, he might do some civil offices to the
Romish party in that Juncture of time, in compliance to King James his
commands, But this amounts not to prove him a Lover of Popery.

As for Dr. Price, I will not rake into his ashes. If he dyed a
protestant,'it was the better for him; but the contrary is generally reported,
printed, believed.


Dr. Heylyn. Our Author proceeds, Fol. 228. He was so great an honourer of the
English Liturgy, that of his own cost he caused the same to be translated into
Spanish, and fairly printed, to confute their false conceit of our Church,
etc.] If this be true, it makes not only to his honor, but also to the honor
of the English Liturgy, translated into more Languages then any Liturgy in the
world, whatsoever it be; translated into Latin by Alexander Alesius, a learned
Scot in King Edwards time; as afterward by Dr. Walter Haddon in the reign of
Queen Elizabeth and his translation mended by Dr. Mocket in the time of King
James: translated into French by the command of that King, for the Isles of
Guernsey and Iersey: into Spanish at the charge of this Bishop (as our Author
tells us): and finally into Greek by one Mr. Petly, by whom it was dedicated
and presented to the late Archbishop of Canterbury, the greatest Patron and
Advancer of the English Liturgy. But secondly, I have some reason to doubt,
that the Liturgy was not translated at the charges of Bishop Williams. That it
was done by his pocurement I shall easily grant: but whosoever made the Bill of
Charges, the Church paid the reckoning; the Dominican Friar who translated it,
being rewarded with a Benefice and a good Prebend, as the Bishop himself did
signify by letter to the Duke of Buckingham.


Fuller. I have been credibly informed by those who have best cause to know it,
That it was done not only by his procurement but at his Cost, Though I deny
not but that a benefice might be conferred on the Friar in reward of his
pains. Thus far I am assured by such as saw it, That the Bishop (who had more
skill in the Spanish then his policy would publicly own), did with his own
hand correct every sheet therein.


Dr. Heylyn. And as for the printing of the book, I cannot think that it was at
his charges neither, but at the charges of the Printer; it not being usual to
give the Printer, money and the copy too.


Fuller. The Animadvertor so well practiced in printing knows full well, That
though i^ be usual to give Money and Copies too for a saleable book, which
being Printed in our own tongue is every man's Money; yet a Spanish Book
printed in England is chargeable, meeting with few buyers, because few
understanders thereof.


Dr. Heylyn. And Thirdly, Taking it for granted, that the Liturgy was
translated and printed at this Bishop's charges; yet does not this prove him to
be so great an honourer of it as our Author makes him. For had he been indeed a
true honourer of the English Liturgy, he would have been a more diligent
attendant on it than he showed himself: never repairing to the Church at
Westminster (whereof he was Dean) from the 18. of February 1635. when the
business of the great Pew was judged against him, till his Commitment to the
Tower in July 1637.


Fuller. One reason why he seldom came to Prayers to Westminster Church, was,
because he was permitted but little to live there, after he fell into the
King's displeasure, being often sent away the day after he came thither. On the
same token, that once Sr. John Cook being sent unto him to command him to avoid
the Deanery; Mr. Secretary, said the Bishop, what Authority have you to command
a Man out of his own House? Which wrought so much on the old Knight, that he
was not quiet till he had gotten his own pardon.


Dr. Heylyn. Nor ever going to the Chapel of the Tower (where he was a
Prisoner) to attend the Divine Service of the Church, or receive the Sacrament,
from July 1637. when he was committed, to November 1640. when he was enlarged.
A very strong Argument that he was no such Honourer of the English Liturgy, as
is here pretended: A Liturgy most highly esteemed in all places wheresoever it
came, and never so much vilified, despised, condemned as amongst our selves;
and those amongst our selves who did so vilify and despise it, by none more
countenanced then by him, who is here said to be so great an Honourer o^ it.


Fuller. Though (for reasons best known to himself) he went not to Prayers in
the Tower Chapel, yet was he his own Chaplain to read them in his own
Chamber. And let me add this memorable passage thereunto.

During his durance in the Tower, there was a Kinsman of Sr. William Balfores
then Lieutenant, a Scottish man (and his name, Mr. Melvin too) who being
mortally sick, sent for Bishop Williams to pray with him. The Bishop read to
him the Visitation of the sick, having fore-acquainted this dying man, That
there was a form of Absolution in this Prayer, if he thought fit to receive it:
Wherewith Mr. Melvin was not only well satisfied, but got himself up as well
as he could on his knees in the bed, and in that posture received Absolution.


Dr Heylyn. But for this Blow our Author has his Buckler ready, telling us,
Ibid. Not out of Sympathy to Non-conformists, but Antipathy to Archbishop
Laud, he was favorable to some select Persons of that Opinion. An Action
somewhat like to that of the Earl of Kildare, who being accused before Henry
the Eighth, for burning the Cathedral Church of Cassiles in Ireland, professed
ingeniously, That he would never have burnt the Church, if some body had not
told him that the Bishop was in it. Hate to that Bishop, an Archbishop of
Ireland, incited that mad Earl to burn his Cathedral Church. And hate to
Bishop Laud, the Primate and Metropolitan of all England, stirred up this Bishop
to raise a more unquenchable Combustion in the Church of England. So that we
may affirm of him as Tertullian (in another case) of the Primitive Christians,
viz. Tanti non est bonum, quanti est odium Christianorum. But are we sure that
he was favorable to the Non-Conformists out of an antipathy to Bishop Laud
only? I believe not so. His antipathy to the King did as strongly bias him
that way, as any thing else. For which I have the Testimony of the Author of
the History of King Charles, published 1656. who tells us of him, That being
malevolently inclined (about the loss of the great Seal), etc.


Fuller. I will not advocate for all the actions of Bishop Williams, and though
the Animadvertor beholds my pen as over-partiall unto him, yet I know who it
was that wrote unto me, Semper es iniquior in Archiepiscopum Eboracensem.

I am a true honourer of his many excellent virtues, and no excuser of his
Faults, who could heartily wish, That the latter part of his Life had been like
the beginning thereof.


Dr. Heylyn. And so I take my leave of this great Prelate, whom I both
reverence for his Place, and honor for his Parts, as much as any. And yet I
cannot choose but say, that I find more reason to condemn, then there is to
commend him; so that we may affirm of him as the Historian does of Cajus
Caesar, Son of Agrippa, and Nephew to the great Augustus, viz. Tam vary se
gessit, ut nec laudaturum magna, nec vituperaturum mediocris materia deficiat,
as my Author has it. And with the same Character, accommodated to our Author,
and this present History, I conclude these Notes; subjoyning only this old
Saying as well for my comfort as defense, viz. Truth, though it may be blamed,
can never be shamed.



Fuller. Here the Animadvertor does Tickle and Pinch me both together, yet
neither will I laugh nor cry, but keep my former composure.

I will take no notice of a piece of MEZENTISM in his joining of the Dead and
Living together, and conceive my self far unworthy, to be paralleled in the
least degree with his Eminences.

However I will endeavor with the Gladiators (...), honest decumbere, that
when I can fight no longer, I may fall handsomely, in the Scene of this Life.

May God, who gave it, have the glory of what is good in me, my self the shame
of what is bad, which I ought to labor to amend.


To the Reverend, and his Worthy Friend, Dr. John Cousin, Dean of Peter-burgh.
SIR,
You may be pleased to remember that some two years since being informed by our
friend Mr. Davenport, that you took some exceptions at what I had written
concerning you, in my Church History, I returned you an Answer to this Effect.

That I would make you just reparation, either in the next Edition of my
History, or in another Book which I was about to set forth Of the Worthies of
England: choosing therein the most proper and conspicuous place, which might
render it most visible to the Reader. This last Book had since been printed,
had not the unhappy difference between Dr. Heylyn, and me, retarded it.

What I wrote concerning your Accusation in the House of Commons, I transcribed
out of the Manuscript journalls of that House. As for your purgation in the
House of Lords, I knew not thereof: which makes such my omssion the more
excusable.

I am now right glad, that you did so clearly vindicate your innocence. In my
next Edition, I will do you all possile right (with improvement) that my Pen
can perform: as also, God Willing, when I come to treat, in my intended Book,
of the Cathedral of Durham.

In the mean time, joining with Hundreds more of my Profession, in thanks to
you for your worthy Work on the Apocrypha, and desiring the Continuation and
increase of Gods blessing on your studies, who do abide the Champion for our
Religion in foreign parts, know that amongst your many honourers, you have
none more affectionate than

Your humble Servant, Thomas Fuller.

To the Religious, Learned and Ingenuous Reader.
EPistles to the Reader by way of Preparation are properly placed in the front
of a Book; but those by way of Recollection follow best in the Rear thereof.
If you have had the Leisure and Patience to peruse this Book, you deserve the
Name of a Reader indeed; and I do as heartily wish, as charitably hope Thee
Qualified with those three Epithets wherewith I have entitled thee. I must now
accost thee, in the Language of the Levite to the Tribes of Israel.

CONSULT, CONSIDER, and GIVE SENTENCE. Deal truly and unpartially betwixt me
and the Animadvertor, please thine own Conscience, though thou displeasest us,
and adjudge in thy self, where neither of Us, where both of Us, where one of
Us, which one of Us, is in the right. Only this I will add, for my Comfort,
and thy better Confidence in reading my Book, that, according to the received
Rule in Law, Exceptio firmat Regulam in non-Exceptis, it follows
proportionably, that, Animadversio firmat Regulam in non-Animadversis. And if
so, by the Tacit Consent of my Adversary himself, all other passages in my
Book, are allowed Sound and True, save these few, which fall under his reproof;
and how justly, I submit my Cause to thy Censure, and thy Person to Gods
keeping, remaining

Thine in Jesus Christ. Thomas Fuller.
Cranford Moate-House.
To my Loving Friend, Doctor Peter Heylyn.
I Hope, Sir, that we are not mutually Un-friended by this Difference which
has happened betwixt us. And now, as Duellers, when they are Both out of
breath, may stand still and Parley, before they have a Second pass, let us in
cold Blood exchange a Word, and, mean time, let us depose, at least suspend,
our Animosities.

Death has crept into both our Clay-Cottages through the Windows; your Eyes
being Bad, mine not Good, God mend them both. And Sanctify unto us these
Monitors of Mortality, and however it fares with our Corporeal sight, send
our Souls that Collyrium, and Heavenly Eye Salve, mentioned in Scripture. But
indeed Sir, I conceive our Time, Pains, and Parts, may be better expended to
Gods Glory, and the Churches Good, than in these needless Contentions. Why
should Peter fall out with Thomas, both being Disciples to the same Lord and
Master. I assure you, Sir, (whatever you conceive to the contrary) I am
Cordial to the cause of the English Church, and my Hoary Ha^res will go down
to the Grave in sorrow for her Sufferings.

You well remember the passage in 54.
Homer, how wise Nestor bemoaned the unhappy difference betwixt Agamemnon and
Achilles.

(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
O gods! how great the grief of Greece the while,
And Priams self, and Sons do sweetly smile,
Yea all the Trojan party swell with Laughter,
That Greeks with Greeks fall out, and fight to Slaughter.
Let me therefore tender unto you an Expedient in Tendency to our mutual
Agreement. You know full well Sir, how in Heraldry, two Lioncells Rampant
endorsed, are said to be the Emblem of two Valiant Men, keeping appointment
and meeting in the Field, but, either forbidden fight by their Prince, or
departing on Terms of Equallity agreed betwixt themselves. Whereupon turning
Back to Back, neither Conquerors nor Conquered, they depart the Field several
ways, (their Stout Stomachs not suffering them both to go the same way) left
it be accounted an I^jury, one to precede the other.

In like manner, I know you disdain to allow me your Equal in this
Controversy betwixt us, and I will not allow you my Superior. To prevent
future Tro^ble, let it be a Drawn Battle, and let both of us abound in our own
sense, severally persuaded in the Truth of what we have written. Thus, parting
and going out Back to Back here, (to cut off all Contest about Precedence), I
hope we shall meet in Heaven, Face to Face, hereafter. In Order whereunto, God
Willing, I will give you a meeting, when, and where, you shall be pleased to
appoint, that we, who have Tilted Pens, may shake Hands together.

St. Paul writing to Philemon concerning Onesimus, says, For perhaps he
therefore departed for a season, that thou might receive him for ever. To
avoid exceptions, you shall be the good Philemon, I the fugitive Onesimus. W^o
knows but that God in his providence permitted, yea ordered this difference
to happen betwixt us, not only to occasion a reconciliation, but to
consolidate a mutual friendship betwixt us, during our Lives; and that the
surviver (in Gods pleasure only to appoint) may make favorable and
respectfull mention of him, who goes first to his grave. The desire of him who
remains.

SIR, A Lover of your Parts, and an Honourer of your Person. THO. FULLER.

FINIS.
To Dr. Cornelius Burges.
SIR,
I could have wished, that in your book entitled, a Case concerning the buying
of Bishops Lands, with the lawfullnesse thereof, etc. you had forborne this
following expression against me.

Part. 1. page 7. As that flashy jeering Author of the late published History
of the Church (upon hearsay only, and out of Resolution calumniari fortiter)
has falsely reported him.

Let us go back to the occasion of these words. When Dr. Hacket, May the 11th.
1641. made a Speech, in behalf of the Deans, and Chapters of England, for the
preventing of the alienation of their Lands and revenues, you returned an
Answer thereunto; and about the conclusive Result thereof, is our present
contest.

Dr. Burges. You say, you only concluded those things unalienable from the
Church, which were settled upon it by Divine Right.


Fuller. I Report, you concluded Deans and Chapters lands alienable without sin
of Sacrilege, from that particular Use; yet so as that they ought still to be
preserved to the Church in general.


I confess, I neither was, (nor might be) present in the Parliament: and
therefore must take it on Hearsay. However I distinguish on hearsay which is
double, Hearsay
Common. Credible.


I conceive mine to be of the latter and better sort. And I have no other way
to defend my self, than by appealing to many members of the House then
present, still alive, and firmly remembering that transaction.

Surely, Sir, the Parliament never brought into question, Whether things might
be alienated from the Church, which by Divine Right were settled thereon. It was
inconsistent with their prudence, amounting in effect to this question, Whether
Gods, or their power were the highest. And, Sir, if you concluded no more than
what you say, you concluded what was never controverted by any Christian.

Whereas you call me a FLASHY WRITER, God forbid that in all my Books such a
flash of folly and falsehood should be found, as falls from your Pen in your own
praise.

Part. 1. page 32. lin. 30, 31. Albeit Dr. Burges performs more service in
that Church, than any Bishop that ever sat there.

I read, Act. 10.2. of a Cornelius praised by God for his Prayers and Alms: but
you are the first of the name, which, publicly in print, commends himself.

And as for the Bishops of that See; Goodwin, in Epi^^. Bath. and Well.
Have you forgotten William Barlow, who in the Marian days, exul in Germania
inopem vitam, ut potuit, toleravit, Preaching a practical Sermon of patience
and contentedness to all posterity, whilst another usurped his habitation?
What shall I speak of S^il^, Montague, etc. What proportion, I pray, does a
pet^y brook bear to a large LAKE?

If I be a flashy Writer, you should have been so careful as not to have
brought fuel in your Book, which I so soon may burn to ashes.

Part. 1. page 20. And that this was the highway, wherein the Popish Clergy of
England long before, (as well as since) the Conquest, constantly traveled;
take one Testimony more of that famous Gildas the Elder, surnamed Sapiens: who
being a Britain Presbyter, within the sixth Century, or hundred of years,
after Christ, thus charge the Popish Clergy of his time, who had sacked their
Principles from Augustine the Monk, sent from Rome on purpose to advance the
State and Pomp of the Clergy, under Color of planting the Christian faith in
England. For thus he says, Britannia habet sacerdotes, etc. Britain (says
he) has Priests, but some of them very dol^s: very many Ministers, but many of
them impudent ones: Clergy men, but very The Latin word being Raptores, might
(by the Doctors favor) be better Englished Plunderers.
Thieves or Cheaters: Pastors, as they are termed; but, in truth Woolves,
standing to slay and flay the souls of the sheep: for that they seek not the
good of the people, but the Grambing of their own bellies. They have Church
houses, but they never repair to them, unless for their own filthy lucre.

But know, Sir, that herein you are much mistaken in your Chronology, for
Gildas died, says Archbishop, Usher in his Index-Chronolog. page 1144. in the
year of our Lord, 570.

Augustine the Monk came not over unto England until the year 596. as ^s
notoriously known to all that open a Book.



I am therefore confident that Gildas his complaint related only to his
Countrymen, the British Clergy without the least reflection on the Saxon,
which as yet were unconverted pagans. And therefore to say, they had sucked in
principles from Augustine the Monk, is an Anti-Chronism, which cannot be
justified.

Respect, Sir, to your age, degree, and profession, charms my Pen into some
reverence unto you; and because, I hear, abler Men are undertaking your
Confutation, I add no more, but remain,

Your Loving Friend Thomas Fuller.

FINIS.
AN INDEX OF THE MOST REMARKABLE PERSONS and Passages in this BOOK.
TO THE READER.
ALthough a Methodicall Book be an Index to it self: yet an Index is not to be
contemned by the most Industrious Reader: Whom we request to take notice of the
following Particulars.

I. C. stands for Century. B. for Book. P. for Page. for Paragraph. II. In the
two first Books, memorables are ranked only according to Centuries and
Paragraphs, but afterward by Books. III. Paragraph without page does for
brevity sake refer to that page which was last named. IV. Page without Book,
on the same reason, relates to the last Book that was named. V. Where no
Paragraph is named, it shows that the page by it self is sufficient
notification. Lastly, know that the discounting of Sheets (to expedite the work
at several Presses) has occasioned in the Fifth book after page 200.
completed, to go back again to page (153). surrounded in this fashion, to
prevent confusion.
AARON, a Citizen of Caerlion, martyred. Cent. 4.. 10. ABBEYS, The prodigious
expense in building and endowing them, Cent. 10.. 40. multitudes of them
causes the Danish invasion,. 51. mischiefs done by them, b. 2. p. 282, 283,
284. prime Officers and Officines, p. 285, 286, 287. the civil benefits by
them, p. 296, 297, 298. presage of their ruin, p. 300. and offers to overthrow
them, p. 301, 302. the lesser (which could not expend 200. pounds a year)
bestowed on the King, p. 310, 311. and the rest (visited with three sorts of
Officers, p. 314, 315.) some appear virtuous, p. 316. others notoriously
vicious, p. 317. all resigned by their Abbots (unwillingly willing) to the
King, p. 319, etc. Rob. ABBOT, Bishop of Salisbury, his death and commendation,
B. 10. P. 70.. 53. George ABBOT, Archbishop of Cant. B. 10. p. 57.. 47.
casually kills a keeper, p. 87.. 12, etc. befriended by Sir Edward Coke,. 15.
and Bishop Andrews,. 16. mortified by this chance,. 17. seven years after
severely suspended from his jurisdiction, b. 11.. 51. his character,. 53. and
vindication,. 54. 55. Tho. ADAMS, Alderman of London, foundeth an Arabic
Professors place in Cambridge. Hist. of Came. p. 166.. 22. ADELME, the first
Bishop of Sherborn, Cent. 8.. 4. and the first Englishman who wrote in Latin,
or made a verse. ibid. AETHELARD, Arch-b^^hop of Cant. calls a Synod, Cent.
9.. 2. with the solemn subscriptions thereunto. ibidem. AGRICOLA, a principal
spreader of Pelagianisme in Britain, Cent. 5.. 3. AIDAN, Bishop of Lindissern
his due Commendation, Cent. 7.. 70. dissenteth from the Romish Church in the
Celebration of Easter,. 71. inciteth Laymen to the Reading of Scripture.. 72.
St. ALBAN, though a Britan, how a Citizen of Rome, Cent. 4. ^. 2. converted to
Christianity by Amphibalus,. 3. his Martyrdom and reported Miracles,. 4.5. his
entire body pretended in three places. Cent. 5.. 11. Enshrined some hundred
years after by King Offa, Cent. 8.. 35. St. ALBANS Abbey founded by King Offa,
Cent. 8.. 38. the Abbot thereof confirmed first in place of all England, by
Pope Adrian the fourth, b. 3. p. 29.. 49. ALL SOULS College in Oxford founded
by Hen. Chichely Archbishop of Cant. b. 4. p. 182. ARROW, a small city in
Switzerland, where a Congregation of English Exiles in the Reign of Q. Mary, b.
8. p. 26.. 41. ALCUINUS, or Albinus, an eminent Scholar and opposer of
Image Worship, Cent. 8.. 40. ALFRED the Saxon Monarch his admirable act, Cent.
9.. 25. etc. foundeth an University at Oxford,. 29. etc. a solemn Council kept
by him,. 42. with the Canons made therein. ibidem. his death,. 44. ALIEN
Priors, b. 6. p. 33.. 1.2. of two natures,. 3. shaken by other Kings,. 4. but
dissolved by King Henry 5.. 5. William ALLEN Cardinal his death and character,
b. 9. p. 229.. 12. William AMESE his bitter Sermon against Cards and Dice,
Hist. of Came. p. 159.. 41.42. leaves Christ's College for his Nonconformity,.
43. AMPHIBALUS, so named first by I. Munmoth, Cent. 4.. 6. Martyred at Redbourn
in Hartfortshire,. 7. The fancies about his stake confuted, ibidem. ANABAPTISTS
their beginning in England, b. 5. p. 249.. 11. discovered in London, b. 9. p.
104.. 12. eleven condemned, and two burnt. 13. Lancelot ANDREWS his death and
character b. 11.. 46, 47, 48, 49. ANNA King of the East Saxons, happy in his
children, Cent. 7.. 82. Q. ANNE (Wife to King James) her signal letter to the
Town of Rippon, b. 10.. 15. ANSELME Archbishop of Cant. b. 3. p. 11.. 30.
refuses to lend King Rufus a 1000. pounds,. 32. Variance betwixt him and King
Rufus, p. 12.. 36. etc. holds a Synod at Westminster, p. 16.. 3. the
constitutions thereof, p. 16, 17, 18, 19. sent to Rome, p. 20.. 5. forbids
Priests marriage,. 7. but dies re infecta, p. 23.. 18. Io. ARGENTINE
challenges all Cambridge to dispute with him, Hist. of Came. p. 64.. 28. etc.
ARIMINUM: British Bishops present at the Council kept therein, Cent. 4.. 20.
And why they refused to receive a Salary from the Emperor, ibidem. ARLES:
British Bishops present at the Council kept therein, Cent. 4.. 20. ARISTOBULUS
fabulously made by Grecian writer^ a Bishop of Britain, Cent. 1.. 8. ARMS, la
noble Families still extant, relating to the Achievements of their Ancestors
in the holy Land, b. 3. p. 40, 41, 42, 43. ARRIANISME infected England, as
appears by Gildas his complaint, Cent. 4.. 21. King ARTHUR a real worthy of
Britain, though his actions be much discredited with Monkish fictions, Cent.
6.. 2. The SIX ARTICLES, contrived by Bishop Gardener, b. 5. p. 203. 17. to the
great trouble of poor Protestants.. 18. The 39. ARTICLES composed, b. 9. p.
72.. 51. why drawn up in general terms,. 52. by those who had been
Confessors, 53. confirmed by Statute, 55. imposed only on the Clergy,. 56.
The 20th ARTICLE (concerning the Authority of the Church) questioned, b. 9. p.
73. inserted in some, omitted in other Editions, p. 74.. 85. defended by Bishop
Laud against Mr. Burton,. 59. ARTICLES of Lambeth: see Lambeth. Thomas ARUNDEL,
when Archbishop of York a cruel persecutour, b. 4. p. 151.. 42. when
Archbishop of Cant. active in deposing King Rich. the second, p. 153.. 54.
visits the University of Cambridge and all the Colleges therein, Hist. of
Came. p. 59, 60, etc. Affronted at Oxford, b. 4. p. 164.. 125. but by the Kings
help too hard for the Students, p. 165.. his woeful death p. 166.. 30. St.
ASAPH his pious Expression, Cent. 6.. 13. John ASCHWELL challenges all Camb.
Hist. of Camb. p. 104.. 44. his bad success,. 45. etc. Anne ASCOUGH, b. 5. p.
242.. 44. Plea for leaving her Husband,. 45. first wracked, then burnt, 46. her
prose, and poetry, 47. Mr. ASHLEY his difference at Frankford with Mr. Home,
book 8. p. 32, 33.. 11. The sad consequences occasioned thereby,. 12.13.
ASSEMBLEY of Divines their first meeting, b. 11.. 1. consists of four English
quarters, p. 198.. 2. besides the Scottish Commissioners, p. 199.. 3. the
reasons of the Royalists why they would not join with them, b. 11. p. 199.. 5.
first petition for a fast, p. 200.. 8. troubled with Mr. Seldom, b. 11. p.
213.. 54. and with the Eras^ians,. 55. etc. shrewdly checked for exceeding their
bounds, p. 214.. 58. their Monuments, p. 215.. 66. rather sinketh then ends,.
67. King ATHELSTAN his principle Laws enacted at Greatlea, Cent.. 9.10.
ATHELWOLPHUS Monarch of the Saxons makes [equivalently] a Parliament act for
the paying of Tithes, Cent. 9.. 8. Objections against the validity thereof
answered.. 9, 10. et sequentibus. Grants Peter Pence to the Pope,. 15. St.
AUDRE her chastity, Cent. 7.. 108. twice a Wife, still a Maid,. 109. etc. her
miraculous monument confuted,. 111. etc. St. AUGUSTINE, the worthy Father
Bishop of Hippo said to be born on the same day with Pelagius the Heretic,
Cent. 5.. 2. AURELIUS AMBROSIUS erecteth a monument in Memory of his Conquest
over the Britans, Cent. 5.. 25. Causelessly slandered by an Italian writer,. 28.
AUGUSTINE the MONK sent by P. Gregory to Convert England, b. 2. Cent. 6.. 2. by
him (shrinking for fear) is encouraged,. 3. mocked by women in his passage,. 4.
landeth in England,. 5. why choosing rather to be Archbishop of Cant. then
London, C. 7.. 1. summons a Synod under his ACHE,. 2. his proud carriage therein
toward the British Clergy,. 3. etc. his prophesy. 8. arraigned as guilty of
murder^ng the Monks of Bangor,. 10. etc. acquitted by the moderation of Mr.
Fox,. 14. baptiseth ten thousand in one day,. 19. his ridiculous miracle,. 22.
death and Epitaph,. 24. without the date of the year,. 25. a farewell to him
with his character,. 26. AUGUSTINEAN Monks, b. 6. p. 268.. 67. Colche^er their
chief seat, ibidem. AUGMENTATION court: the erection, use, cause, name, and
abolishing thereof, b. 6. p. 348, 349. AUGUSTINEAN Friars, b. 6. p. 273.. 1.
The same in Oxford turned into Wadham Coll. b. 10. p. 68.. 30. learned writers
of their Order bred in Cambridge, Hist. of Camb. p. 30.
B.
Gervase BABINGTON, Bishop of Worcester, his death and praise, b. 10. p. 56..
32, 33. Roger BACON, a great School-man and Mathematician, falsely accused for a
Conjurer, C. 14. p. 96.. 17. many of that name confounded into one,. 18. John
BACONTHORP, a little man and great Scholar, p. 97.. 20. BAILIOL COLL. founded
by. J. Bailiol, b. 3. p. 67. and 68. Philip BAKER, Provost of Kings, an honest
Papist, Hist. of Came. p. 142.. 4. John BALE, Bishop of Ossory, his death,
character, and excusable passim, b. 9. p. 67.. 37, 38, 39. Bishop BANCROFT,
causlesly condemned for keeping Popish Priests in his house, b. 10. p. 1. his
behavior in Hampton Court Conference, p. 9. et sequentibus. violently
prosecuteth Mr. Fuller unto his death in Prison, p. 55, 56.. 29, 30. his death,
34. vindicated from cruelty, covetousness and Popish inclinations, 44, 45, 46.
his crossing a Court project, 47. BANGOR: the Monks therein massacred, b. 2..
9. Peter BARO why leaving his Professors place, Hist. of Came. p. 125.. 21.
different judgments about his departure,. 22. William BARRET Fellow of Cajus
Coll. his solemn recantation, Hist. of Came. p. 150. BARDS, their powerful
practices on the Pagan Britans, Cent. 1.. 4. BARNWELL nigh Cambridge, the
Original of Midsummer fair therein, Hist. of Came. p. 3.. 9. a Priory therein
founded by Pain Peverell, p. 7.. 16. BASIL Council: English Ambassadors sent
thither b. 4. p. 178. observations on their Commission, p. 179, 180. John
BASTWICK his accusation, b. 11. p. 151.. 58. his plea, 152.. 64. his speech on
the Pillory, p. 155.. 71. BATTLE ABBEY founded by King Will. the Conqueror, b.
3.. 1. the large Privileges thereof, ibidem, and. 15. Thomas BECKET, b. 3. p.
32.. 57. Archbishop of Canterb. 58. stubborn in defending the Clergy, 59, etc.
slain by 4 Knights in his own Church,. 66 67. the great superstition at his
shrine, p. 36.. 70. Rob. BEALE Clark of the Council, zealous against Bishops,
b. 9. p. 47. Archbishop Whitgift complains of his insolent carriage, ibidem.
BID, though sent for, went not to Rome, C. 8.. 15. yet probably went out of
his Cell,. 16. why sur-named VENERABLE,. 17. the last blaze and going out of
the Candle of his life,. 18. BENNET COLL. in Cambridge the foundation thereof,
Hist. of Came. p 43, 44, etc. Archb. Parker a paramount benefactor thereunto, p.
46.. 11. BENEDICTINE Monks, b. 6. p. 266.. 2. most ancient of all orders in
England, p. 267, 268. BERKLEY Nuns all with child at once, C. 11.. 19. and b.
6. p. 301.. 2. BERKLEYS their Arms relating to their service in the Holy Land,
b. 11. p. 43.. 23. their great Benefaction to Abbeys, Hist. of Abb. p. 326.
sers by their d^ssolution, 327. The L. BERKLEY Patron to John de Trevisa, b. 4.
p. 151.. 43. at whose command be translated the Bible into English,. 44. BERTHA
the Christian Wife of King Ethelbert [as yet] a Pagan, a great Promotresse of
Religion, b. 2. C. 6.. 9. St. John of BEVERLEY his Miracles, C. 8.. 11.
Theodorus BEZA his letter to Mr. Travers to crave contribution for the City of
Geneva, b. 9. p. 136, 137. why coldly resented, ibid. BIBLE, three several
Translations thereof, b. 7. p. 387. a fourth and best by the appointment of
King James, b. 10. p. 45, etc. Vide Translatours. BIRINUS converts the
West Saxons, C. 7.. 65. breaks his promise yet keeps it,. 66. made Bishop
of Dorchester,. 67. BISHOPS their judisdictions first severed from the
Sheriffs, b. 3. p. 5.. 10. BISHOPS in the late long Parliament being charged
with a Praemunire for making the late Canons, b. 11. p. 183.. 6. legally defend
themselves,. 7. acquit themselves from Feculencie of Extraction wherewith a
Lord aspersed them,. 8, 9. symptoms of their dying power in Parliament, p.
184.. 10. being petitioned against, p. 185.. 12. and assaulted,. 13. twelve of
them subscribe and present a protest. p. 186.. 16. for which they are
imr^soned, p. 188. 18. enlarged on bail, p. 196.. 34. BISHOPRICS when and why
removed from small Towns to great Cities, b. 3.. 21. Five (on the destruction
of Abbeys) erected by King Henry the eighth, b. 6. p. 338.. 3. BLACKFRIARS,
the doleful downfall or fatal Vespers thereof, b. 10. p. 102.. 29, 30, etc.
Q. Anna BOLLEN has amatorious Letters written unto her from King Henry the
eighth, b. 5. p. (175). 49. preserved (as some say) in the Vatican, ibidem. her
character, p. 206.. 20. solemnly divorced from King Henry the eighth, p. 207..
2. Robert BOLTON an eminent Divine his death, b. 11. p. 143.. 25. EDMUND
BONNER, Bishop of London, begins to bonner it, b. 5. p. 231.. 19. deprived
under Ed. 6. b. 7. p. 414. his cruel articles, H^st. of Walth. p. 18. whom all
generations shall call Bloody, b. 8. S. 2.. 11. why imprisoned in the
Marshalsey, b. 9.. 17. traverseth a suite with Horn Bishop of Winchester, S.
4.. 1. his Counsels plea in his behalf,. 2, 3. 4. A drawn Batel betwixt them
occasioned by a provisoe in a new Statute,. 7. BONNES HOMMES why so called, b.
6. p. 273. 24. Rich Eremites in pretended poverty,. 25. BOOKS embezeled at the
dissolution of Abbeys b. 6. p. 334. to the great loss of learning, ibidem.
BOOKS preparatory to reformation set forth by King Henry the eighth, b. 7. p.
375. Gilb. BOURN, Bishop of Bath and Wells, why mild in the days of Q. Mary,
b. 8. S. 2.. 3. his death, b. 9. p. 96.. 26. Theoph. BRAD BURN his Sabbatarian
fancies, b. 11. p. 144.. 32. Thomas BRAD WARDINE a great Schoolman, C. 14. p.
98. 23. his just praise, ibidem. afterward Archbishop of Canterbury.
BRANDONS, Brothers, successively Dukes of Suffolk, die of the sweating
sickness, Hist. of Came. p. 128.. 70. Bishop Parkhurst his Epitaph on them,
ibidem. Thomas BRIGHTMAN his birth, breeding, b. 10. p. 49.. 12. preferment,.
13. writings,. 14. good life,. 15. and sudden death,. 16, 17. BRITANS their
doleful case whilst Pagans, C. 1.. 1. their principal Idols,. 2. in vain they
crave help of the Roman Emperor against the invasion of the Picts, C. 4.. 22.
and C. 5.. 14.15. BRITAIN: the causes hastening the Conversion thereof before
other Countries nearer Palestine, C. 1.. 6. why the first Planters of
Christianity therein are unknown,. 8. not beholden to Rome for her first
Preachers,. 18. not divided into five Roman Provinces (as Giraldes Cambrensis
mistakes) until the time of Flavius Theodosi^s, C. 2.. 10. Christianity
continued therein after the death of King Lucius, C. 3.. 2. by the Testimony of
Gildas, Tertullian, and Origin,. 3. in defiance of Dempster a detracting
writer, ibid. Why so little left of the primitive Church History thereof,. 6.
and C. 4.. 11. BRITISH CLERGY refuse submission to the Pope of Rome, C. 7.. 3.
the Dialogue betwixt them and an Anchoret,. 6. BRITISH LANGUAGE the
commendation thereof, C. 7. 17. vindicated from causlesse cavils,. 18. Robert
BROWN his gentile Extraction, b. 9. p. 166.. 2. deserted by his own Father, p.
167. his opinions, p. 168. spared when his Followers were executed,. 45. the
odd occasion of his imprisonment and death,. 46. BRUXELS Benedictine rich
Nunnery for English Gentle-women with good portions, b. 6. p. 363. Martine
BUCER called to Cambridge, History of Camb. p. 128.. 32, 33, 34. the various
dates of his death, p. 130.. 37. belyed by Parsons to die a Jew,. 38. his bones
burnt by Card. Poole, p. 135.. 54. BUCKINGHAMSHIRE paramount for Martyrs, b. 5.
p. 163.. 2. Dr. Cernelius BURGES his speech against Deans and Chapters, b. 11.
p. 179.. 73, 74. Henry BURTON his character, b. 14. p. 152. 59. cause of
disconsent,. 60. degradea, p. 143.. 68. his words on the Pillory,. 69, 70.
brought back from Exile in Triumph, p. 172.. 32.
C.
Jack CADE his rebellion, b. 4. p. 186.. 22. CADOCUS his discreet devotion, C.
6.. 7. CADVVALLADER last K. of VVaks, foundeth at Rome a Hospital for the
Welsh, C. 7.. 104. since injuriously taken from them,. 105. CAIUS College in
Cambridge founded by Dr. Caius, Hist. of Camb. p. 133.. 45. who bestowed good
Lands, building, statutes, Name, and Arms thereon,. 46* 47, etc.fruitful with
famous Physicians,. 52. CAMBRAY: a Nunnery therein founded for English women by
the Spanish Ambassador, b. 6. p. 363. CAMBRIDGE reported to have received
diverse privileges from King Lucius, C. 2.. 12. her Christian Students reported
slain by the Pagan Britans, C. 4. 9. and persecuted (to the dissolution of the
University) by Pelagius, C. 5.. 2. reputed first founded by King S^gebert, C.
7.. 46. Arguments to the contrary answered,.47, etc. called Schola, which was
in that Age the same with an Academy,. 54. restored by King Edward the Elder,
C. 10.. 6, 7. mistaken by John Rou^e for the founder thereof,. 8. renounceth
the Popes supremacy in a public instrument, Hist. of Camb. p. 106.. 50. the
first general visitation thereof, jure Regio, Hist. of Camb. p. 109.. 55. King
Henry his Injunctions thereunto, p. 112.. 56. Edmund CAMPIAN sent over by the
Pope to pervert England, B. 9. p. 114.. 41. his journall letter, p. 115, 116,
117. caught by secretary Walsingham, ibid. falsely pretends to be cruelly
racked, p. 117.. 117.. 2. is at last executed. CANONS made in the last
Convocation, with the etc. Oath therein, b. 11. p. 168, 169. several opinions
about them, p. 171. Mr. Maynard his speech against them, p. 180.. 77. the
Clergy are judged in a Praemunire for making them,. 78. King CANUTUS his
cruelty, C. 11.. 5. conversion and charity, ibidem etc. Jo. CAPON Bishop of
Salisbury, a cruel persecuter under Q. Mary, b. 8. S. 2.. 5. the bane of his
Bishopric, b. 9.. 21. Nic. CARR his Epitaph, Hist. of Camb. p. 141. George
CARLTON Bishop of Landaf, sent by K. James to the Synod of Dort, B. 10. p. 77..
63. dies Bishop of Chichester, b. 11.. 67. CARMELITES their first coming into
England, p. 271.. 18. great privileges,. 19. most careful keepers of the
Records of their order,. 20. a Catalogue of their Provincials, p. 272. their
first coming to Cambridge, Hist. of Camb. p. 20.. 5. where they would not
commence Doctors, and why, ibid. till Humphry Necton first brake the ice,. 6.
learned writers of their order which were Cambridge-men, Hist. Camb. p. 30..
27. CARTHUSIAN Monks, b. 6. p. 269.. 9. Tho. CARTWRIGHT presents his admonition
to the Parliament, b. 9. p. 102.. 5. bandying betwixt him, and Dr. Whitgift,.
6, 7. examined in the high Commission on 29. Articles, b. 9. p. 198, etc. sent
to the Fleet for refusing to answer, p. 203. discharged the Star Chamber by
favor of Archbishop Whitgift p. 204.. 31. grows rich at Warwick, b. 10.. 7.
and very moderate,. 8. The reasons thereof, ibid. His character,. 9. dedicates
a Book to King James,. 18. His strange infirmity and death,. 19. his first
cause of coffeehouse, Hist. of Camb. p. 139.. 2. clasheth with Dr. Whitgift,
p. 140.. 3. by whom he is summoned, p 141. and banished the University, p. 142.
John CASE Dr. of Physic, b. 8. S. 3.. 45. the great favor done by the
University to his Scholars at Oxford, ibidem. CAURSINES what they were, b. 3.
p. 59.. 6. the form of their cruel Obligations, p. 60. with some notes
thereon, ibidem. why they were called Caursines, p. 61.. 8. St. CEDDE his
difference from St. Chad, C. 7.. 84. St. CHAD his difference from St. Cedde, C.
7.. 84. teaches Wulfade the Christian faith,. 86. CHANTEREYES given to the
King, b. 6. p. 250.. 3. what they were,. 5. Forty seven founded in St. Paul's
Church in London, p. 351, 352, etc. vast, though uncertain, their number in
England, p. 354.. 18. Free CHAPELS given to the King, b. 6. p. 354.. 15. King
CHARLES his solemn coronation, b. 11.. 19, etc. restores Impropriations of
Ireland to the Church, p. 149.. 45. unwillingly consents to the taking away
of Bishops votes in Parliament, p. 195.. 29, and 30. his several papers in the
Isle of Wight in defense of Episcopacie, p. 230, 231, etc. his death, which
ends the eleventh Book. CHARLES eldest Son to King Charles, h^s short life,
b. 11. p 135.. 1. an excellent Tetrast^ck on his death*. 2. CHARTER HOUSE
founded by Mr. Sutton, b. 10. p. 65. in some respect exceeding the Annuntiata
at Naples, p. 66.. 21. Thomas CHASE cruelly martyred, b. 5. p. 164.. 3. Geffery
CHAWCER the famous Poet, b. 4. p. 151.. 46. his Parentage, Arms, and praise,
p. 152.. 47, 48. his enmity to Friars,. 49. Student sometimes in Cambridge,
Hist. Camb. p. 52.. 38. as also in Oxford, ibidem. CHEALSEY College: a large
d^scourse of the foundation thereof, b. 10. p. 51, 52, 53, etc. Sr. J. CHEEK
Tutour to King Edward the sixth, b. 7. p. 422.. 12. restored to health by King
Edward's prayers, p. 424.. 13. A prime Exile in the Reign of Q. Mary, b. 8. S.
2.. 24. his sad return into England,. 30. orally recanteth,. 31. and dies for
the grief thereof, ibidem. vindicated from slandring (and mistaking) Pens in
his Parentage, Parts, and Posterity,. 32. Henry CHICHELEY Archbishop of
Canterbury foundeth All Souls College, b. 4. p. 181.. 10. soberly returns a
tart jear, p. 182.. 11. saves Abbeys by sending King Henry the fifth into
France, b. 6. p. 205.. 5. CHRIST-CHURCH in Oxford, b. 5. p. (169.). 28, etc.
confirmed by King Henry the eighth,. 30. the Deans, Bishops, Benefactours, etc.
thereof,. 32. John CHRISTOPHERSON Bishop of Chichester, a learned man, but
great persecuter, under Q. Mary, b. 8. S. 2.. 8. CHRIST'S COLLEGE founded by
Margaret Countess of Darby, Hist. of Camb. p. 90.. 55. endowed it with
richlands,. 56. augmented by King Edward the sixth, p. 91.. 7. Their numerous
worthies of this foundation,. 9. CIRCUMSPECTE AGATIS the form thereof, b. 3. p.
79.. 15. both a statute and a writ grounded thereon, p. 80. a large discourse
of the several branches thereof, p. 81, 82, 83. CISTERTIANS being refined
Benedictines, b. 6. p. 266.. 2. exempted by Pope Adrian the fourth from paying
of Tithes, and why, p. 283.. 4. their freedom somewhat confined by the Lateran
Council,. 5. CLARE HALL founded by Elizabeth Countess of Clare, Hist. of
Camb. p. 37.. 41. The Masters, Benefactours, Bishops, etc. thereof, ibidem.
anciently called Soler Hall, p. 38.. 44. ruinous, and lately re-edified,. 45.
Four hundred pounds worth of timber reported taken from it in these troublesome
times, which the Author of this Book will not believe, ibid. CLAUDIA mentioned
by St. Paul 2. Tim. 4.21. probably a British Convert, C. 1.. 9. notwithstanding
Parsons his Cavils to the contrary,. 10. CLUNIACK Monks being reformed
Benedictines, b. 6. p. 266.. 2. Elianor COBHAM Duchess of Gloucester, accused
for a Sorceress by some, made a Confessor by M. Fox, b. 4. p. 171, etc. COIFY
a Pagan Priest, his remarkable speech, C. 7.. 41. COLCHESTER claims
Constantine to be born therein, C. 4.. 18. Augustinean Monks had there their
prime residence, b. 6. p. 268.. 6. COLLEGES (not in the Universities, but) for
superstitious uses given to the King, b. 6. p. 350.. 3, 4, 5. John COLLET Dean
of St. Paul's, b. 5. p. (167.). 13. sounds Paul's School,. 14. making the
Mercers overseers thereof,. 15. out of provident prescience,. 16. Tho. COMBER
Master of Trinity College in Camb. highly commended by Morinus, History of
Camb. p. 123.. 20. High COMMISSION: arguments for, and against it, b. 9. p.
183. CONSTANTINE the first Christian Emperor proved a Britan by b^rth, C. 4..
15. the objections to the contrary answered,. 16. richly endoweth the Church,.
19. CONSTANTIUS CHLORUS the Roman Emperor, and, though no Christian, a
favourer of them, C. 4.. 12. buried at York, and not in Wales, as Florilegus
will have it,. 13. CONVENTICLE the true meaning thereof, b. 9. p. 102.. 4.
CONVENTS: some general conformities used in them all, b. 6. p. 287, etc.
CONVOCATIONS: three several sorts of them, b. 5. p. (190) (191.) they complain
of erroneous opinions, p. 209, 210, etc. CORPUS CHRISTI COL. in Camb. See
Bennet College. CORPUS CHRISTI COLL. in Oxford founded by Bishop Fox, b. 5. p.
(166.). 11. called the College of three Languages, ibid. the worthies thereof,
ibid. Mass quickly set up therein in the first of Q. Mary, b. 8. p. 8.. 10,
11. Dr. John COSEN charged with superstition: his due praise, b. 11. p. 173..
34, etc. The Scottish COVENANT: the form thereof, b. 11. p. 201.. 13, etc.
exceptions to the Preface and six Articles therein, 203, 204, 205, 206. never
taken by the Author of this Book, p. 206.. 30. Will. COURTNEY Bishop of
London, his contests about Wickliffe with the Duke of Lancaster, b. 4.. 135..
19. Archbishop of Canterbury, p. 142.. 24. COURTS SPIRITUAL began in the
Reign of King William the first: when severed from the Sherifs Courts, b. 3..
10. Their contesting with the Common Law how to be reconciled,. 11. Richard COX
Dean of Christ's Church accused (it is hoped, unjustly) for cancelling Manuscripts
in Oxford Library, b. 7. p. 392.. 19, 20. flies to Frankford in the Reign of
Queen Mary, b. 8. p. 30.. 3. where he headeth a strong party in defense of the
English Liturgy, p. 31, 32. made Bishop of Ely, b. 9. p. 63. his death, and
Epitaph, p. 111.. 34. Thomas CRANMER employed by King Henry to the Pope, b. 5.
p. (179.). 9. to prove the unlawfulness of the Kings marriage,. 18. thence
sent into Germany,. 22. made Archbishop of Canterbury against his will,. 27.
defended against the cavils of Papists and Mr. Prin,. 28, etc. his death, b. 8.
p. 203.. 32. CREKELADE or GREEKLADE, an ancient place where Greek was
professed, C. 9.. 29. CROWLAND Monks massacred by the Danes, C. 9.. 19. Thomas
CROMWELL first known to the World, for defending his Mr. Card. Wolsey, b. 5. p.
(177).. 1. as the Kings Vicar in Spiritualibus presidenteth it in the
Convocation, p. 206.. 21. falls into the Kings d^spleasure, p. 231.. 20.
deservedly envyed,. 11. his adm^rable parts,. 22. with the History of his
death, etc.. 23, etc. Chancellor of Cambridge, Hist. of Cambridge, p. 108..
53. Richard CROMWELL, alias Williams, Kn^ghted for his valor at a solemn
tilting, b. 6. p. 370.. 11. gives a Diamond R^ng in his Crest on an honorable
occasion,. 12. CUTHBERT Archbishop of Canterbury (by the Kings leave) first
brings Bodies to be buried in the Church, b. 2. p. 103.. 27.
D.
DANES their first arrival in England, B. 2. p. 103.. 29. why their countr^
(^ormerly so fruitful) is lately* so barren of people,. 30, 31, 32. the sad
Prognostics of their coming hither,. 33. make an invasion into Lincolnshire,
C. 9.. 18. massacre the Monks of Crowland, C. 9.. 19. and burn the Monastery of
Medeshamsted,. 20, 21. why their fury fell more on Convents then Castles, C.
10.. 48. after sixty years absence re-invade England, ibidem A dear peace
bought with them,. 50. to no purpose,. 52. their Royal line in England
suddenly and strangely extinct, C. 11.. 10. no hostile appearance of them in
England.. 13. Thomas L. DARCY beheaded, B. 6. p. 313.. 5. his Extraction
vindicated from the causeless Aspersion of King Henry the eighth, page 324,
325. John DAVENANT sent by King James to the Synod of Dort, B. 10. p. 77.. 63.
made Bishop of Salisbury, B. 10. p. 91.. 35. questioned for his Sermon at
Court, B. 11. p. 138.. 14, 15. relates all the passages thereof in a Letter to
Dr. Ward,. 16. his opinion about the suspension of Bishop Goodman, p. 170.. 23.
his death, p. 176.. 53. St. DAVID a great advancer of Monastic life, C. 6.. 4.
one of his paramount Miracles,. 5. St. DAVID'S, or Menevia, in Wales, once an
Archbishopric, B. 3. p. 24.. 25. contesteth with Canter^ury, ibidem. but is
overpowered,. 26. DEANES and CHAPTERS defended in the House of Commons by an
excellent speech of Doctor Hackets, B. 11. p. 177, 178, 179. Edward DEERING
his death and praise, B. 9. p. 109.. 22. Sr. Anth. DENNIE his extraction,
issue, death, and Epitaph, Hist. of Walt. p. 12, 13. DERVVIANUS sent by
Eleutherius Bishop of Rome to King Lucius to instruct him in Christianity, C.
2.. 8. DEVONSHIRE commotion begun out of superstition, heightened with cruelty,
suppressed by Gods blessing on the valor of the Lord Russell, B. 7. p. 393, 394,
etc. The DIRECTORY compiled by the Assembly of Divines, B. 11. p. 221.. 1.
commanded by the Parliament,. 6. forbidden by the King to be generally used,.
7. it and the Liturgy compared together, p. 223, 224. DISSENTING BRETHREN, B.
11.. 35 why departing the Land,. 36. kindly entertained in Holland,. 37. their
chief ground-works,. 39, 40. manner of Church Service,. 41. Schism betwixt
them,. 42, etc. Sr. Th. DOCKWRAY Lord Prior of St. Joanes, B. 6. p. 359.. 4.
and p. 361. in the dedication. John DOD his birth, and breeding, b. 11. p. 219.
^. 85. his peaceable disposition,. 86. improving of piety, p. 220.. 87, etc. an
innocent deceiver,. 90. excellent Hebrician,. 91. last of the old Puritans,.
92. DOGS meat given to men, b. 3. p. 29.. 46 DOMINICAN Friars their first
coming over into England, b. 6. p. 270.. 15. after their expulsion set up again
by Q. Mary, p. 357. the learned men of this order who were bred in Cambrid.
Hist. of Came. p. 30. De DOMINIS Marcus Antonius, see SPALATO. John DONE Dean
of St. Paul's prolocutour in the Convocation, b. 10. p. 112.. 15. his life
excellently written by Mr. Isaac Walton,. 16. DOOMES-DAY Book composed by the
command of Will. the Conqueror, b. 3.. 3. DORT Synod, b. 10. p. 77.. 63. four
English Divines sent thither, ibidem. King James his Instructions unto them, p.
77, 78. Oath at their admission into it, p. 78.. 66. liberal allowance from
the State, p. 77.. 77. various censures on the decisions thereof, p. 84.. 5,
etc. The DOVE on King Charles his Scepter ominously broken off, b. 11.. 16.
Thomas DOVE Bishop of Peterborough his death, b. 11. p. 41.. 17. DOWAY COLL. in
Flanders for English fugitives, b. 9. p. 85. A Convent there for Benedictine
Monks, b. 6. p. 365. And another for Franciscan Friars, 366. DRUIDES their
office, and employment amongst the Pagan Britans, C. 1.. 3. The DUTCH
Congregation first set up in London, b. 7. p. 407.. 33. privileges allowed
them by King Edward the sixth, ibidem. under Queen Mary depart with much
difficulty and danger into Denmark, b. 8. p. 8.. 13. DUBLIN University founded
by Queen Elizabeth, b. 9. p. 211.. 44. the several benefactours (whereof Mr.
Luke Chaloner a chief.) p. 212. no rain by day during the building of the
College, ibidem. The Provosts thereof, p. 213.. 47. DUBRITIUS Archbishop of
Caer-lion, a great Champion of the truth against Pelagius, C. 6.. 3. A DUCATE
worth about four shillings, but imprinted eight, b. 5. p. (196). 37. Andrew
DUCKET in effect the founder of Queens College in Cambridge, Hist. of
Cambridge, p. 80.. 33. St. DUNSTAN his story at large, Cent. 10.. 11. etc. his
death and burial in Canterbury,. 44. as appeared (notwithstanding the claim of
Glassenbury) by discovery,. 45, 46. DUNWOLPHUS of a swine-heard made Bishop of
Winchester, C. 9.. 41. DURHAM: the Bishopric dissolved by King Edward the
sixth, b. 7. p. 419.. 2. restored by Queen Mary,. 3. VVil. DYNET the solemn
abjuration enjoined him, wherein he promises to worship Images, b. 4. p. 150.
E.
EASTER DAY, difference betwixt the British and Romish Church in the
observation thereof, Cent. 7.. 5. the Controversy stated betwixt them,. 28.
reconciled by Laurentius,. 30. the antiquity of this difference,. 31. spreads
into private families,. 89. A counsel called to compose it,. 90. settled by
Theodorus according to the Romish Rite,. 96. EATON COLLEGE founded by K. Henry
the sixth, b. 4. EDGAR, King of England. Cent. 10.. 24. disciplined by Dunstan
for viciating a Nun.. 26. The many Canons made by him why in this book
omitted,. 29. A most Triumphant King,. 30. his death,. 34. EDMUND King of the
East Angles cruelly Martyred by the Danes, Cent. 9.. 22. EDWARD the Elder calls
a Council to confirm his Fathers acts, Cent. 10.. 5. gives great Privileges
to Cambridge,. 6. EDWARD the Martyr, Cent. 8.. 34. Barbarously murdered,. 42.
EDWARD the Confessor his life at large, Cent. 11.. 11, etc. King EDWARD the
first, his advantages to the Crown though absent at his Fathers death, b. 3. p.
74.. 3. his achievements against the Turks,. 4. Casts the Jews out of
England, p. 87.. 47. chosen arbitratour betwixt Baliol and Bruce, claiming the
Kingdom of Scotland, p. 88.. 49. which Kingdom he conquereth for himself,.
50. stoutly maintains his right against the Pope, p. 90.. 2. humbled Rob.
Winchelsey, Archbishop of Cant.. 4, 5. the Dialogue betwixt them, 6. his death
and character. p. 92.. 11. his Arm the standard of the English yard, ibid.
King EDWARD the second his character, b. 3. p. 93.. 13. fatally defeated by the
Scots,. 14. his vitiousnesse, p. 100.. 28. accused for betraying his
Privileges to the Pope,. 29. his deposing and death, p. 103. King EDWARD the
third, a most valiant and fortunate King both by Sea and Land foundeth Kings
Hall in Cambridge. Hist. of Camb. p. 39.. 36. his death and Character. b. 4. p.
136.. 12. King EDWARD the fourth gains the Crown by Conquest, b. 4. p. 190..
46. Beaten afterward in Battle, by the Earl of Warwick. p. 191.. 31.
escapes out of prison, flies beyond the Seas, returns and recovereth the
Crown,. 32, 33. A Benefactour to Merton Coll. in Oxford. b. 3. p. 75.. 7. but
Malefactor to Kings Coll. in Cambridge, Hist. of Camb. p. 76.. 19. his death,
b. 4. p. 199.. 42. King EDWARD the fifth barbarously murdered by his Uncle
Richard Duke of York, b. 4. p. 196.. 5. King EDWARD the sixth his Injunctions,
b. 7.. 3. observations thereon, p. 374. his several proclamations, whereof one
inhibiteth all Preachers in England for a time, p. 388, 389. his TEXT ROYAL,
and our observations thereon, p. 397, 398. etc. Gives an account by letter, to
B. Fitz-Patrick, of his progress; p. 412, 413. several letters written by
him, p. 423, 424. his diary, p. 425.. 14. qu^ck wit, and pious prayer,. 17. at
his death, ibid. EDWIN King of Northumberland, and in effect Monarch of
England, after long preparatory promises, Cent. 7.. 39, etc. at last converted
and baptized,. 43. slain by the Pagans in Battle,. 60. EGBERT, Archbishop of
York, famous in several respects, b. 2. p. 101.. 23. his beastly Canons,. 24.
EGBERT, first fixed Monarch of England, Cent. 8.. 41. First gives the name of
England, Cent. 9.. 5, 6. Is disturbed by the Danes,. 7. ELEUTHERIUS Bishop of
Rome his Letter to King Lucius, Cent. 2.. 6. pretends to an an^c^enter date
then what is due thereunto,. 7. sends two Divines into Britain,. 8. ELIE Abbey
made the Sea of a Bishop, b. 3. p. 23.. 23. the feasts therein exceed all in
England, b. 6. p. 299.. 11. Q. ELIZABETH proclaimed, b. 8. p. 43.. 56. assumeth
the title of supreme head of the Church, b. 9. p. 152.. 4. defended therein
against Papists, p. 53.. 5, 6. etc. Excommunicated by Pope Pius quintus. b. 9.
p. 93, 94. Her farewell to Oxford with a Latin Oration, b. 9. p. 223.. 7, 8.
Her well-come to Cambridge with a Latin Oration, Hist. of Cambridge, p. 138.
her death, b. 10. p. 4.. 12. John ELMAR Bishop of London his death and
Character, b. 9. p. 223.. 10. ELVANUS sent by King Lucius to Eleutherius Bishop
of Rome, Cent. 2.. 5. EMDEN: a Congregation of English Exiles therein in the
Reign of Q. Mary under I. Scory their Superintendent, b. 8. Sect. 2.. 41. Q.
EMMA the miraculous purgation of her chastity, Cent. 11.. 14, 15. EAST ANGLES
their Kingdom, when begun, how bounded, Cent. 5.. 27. converted to
Christianity, Cent. 7.. 44. EAST SAXONS, the beginning and bounds of their
Kingdom, Cent. 5.. 17. converted to Christianity by Mellitus, Cent. 7.. 23.
after their apostasy, reconverted under King Sigebert,. 81. ENGLAND when and
why first so called, Cen. 9.. 5, 6. the Kingdom thereof belongs to God
himself, Cent. 11.. 24. ENGLISHMEN drunk when conquered by the Normans, b. 3..
1. EOVES a Swine-heard, hence Eovesham Abbey is so called, Cent. 8.. 8. ERASMUS
( Greek Professor in Camb.) complains of the ill Ale therein. Hist. of Camb.
p. 87. his Censure of Cambridge and Oxford, p. 88. too tart to Townsmen, ibid.
ERASTIANS why so called and what they held, b. 11. p. 21.. 55. and 56.
favorably heard in the assembly of Divines,. 57. ERMENSEWL a Saxon Idol, his
shape, and office, b. 2. Cent. 6.. 6. ETHELBERT King his Character, b. 2. Cent.
6.. 6. etc. converted to Christianity,. 11. his death, and the decay of
Christianity thereon, Cent. 7.. 32. ETHELBERT the VVest-Saxon Monarch his pious
valor, Cent. 9.. 23. King ETHELRED his Fault in the Font, Cent. 10.. 43. why
Surnamed the unready, 49. EXCOMMUNICATING of Q. Elizab. by Pius quintus,
displeasing on many accounts, to moderate Papists, b. 9. p. 59.. 25. EXETER,
the description thereof, b. 7. p. 393.. 4. Loyal and Valiant against the
Rebels though oppressed with faction, p. 394.. 7. and famine, p. 396.. 12.
seasonably relieved p. 397.. 14.
F.
FAGANUS sent by Eleutherius Bishop of Rome to King Lucius to instruct him in
Christianity, Cent. 2.. 8. FAMILY of LOVE, their obscure original, b. 9. p.
112.. 36. worse in practice then opinion, p. 113.. 39. their Abjuration before
the privy Council. Their tedious petition to King James, b. 10.. 18. desire to
separate themselves from the Puritans, (to whom their looseness had no
relation). 19. turned into Ranters in our days,. 22. John FECKNAM Abbot of
Westminster, the Chronicle of his worthy life, his courtesy and bounty, b. 9.
p. 178, 179. FELIX Bishop of Dunwich isntrumental to the Conversion of the
East Angles, Cent. 7.. 45. and to the founding of an University in Cambrid..
48. N^cholas FELTON Bishop of Ely, his death and commendation, b. 11.. 77.
FENNES nigh Cambridge: Arguments pro and con, about the feacibility of their
drayning, Hist. of Camb. p. 70. and 71. The design lately performed to
admiration, ibid. p. 72. FEOFFES to buy in impropr^ations, b. 11. p. 136.. 5.
hopefully proceed, p. 137.. 6. questioned in the Exchequer, and overthrown by
Archbishop Laud, p. 143.. 26, etc. The FIFTH PART ordered by Parliament for
the Widows and children of sequestered Ministers, b. 11. p. 229.. 34. several
shifts to evade the payment thereof, p. 230. John FISHER Bishop of Rochester
tampereth with the holy Maid of Kent, b. 5. p. (187). 47. imprisoned for
refusing the Oath of supremacy,. 47. his pitiful letter out of the Tower for
new Clothes, p. (190). 12. the form of his indictment, p. (191). 19. made
Cardinal, p. 201.. 1. the whole Hist. of his birth, breeding, death and burial,
p. 202, 203, 204, 205. Barnaby FITZ-PATRICK proxy for correction to King Edward
the sixth, b. 7. p. 411.. 47. the said Kings instruction unto him for his
behav^our ^n France, ibidem. FLAMENS in B^itain, mere flammes of J. Monmouths
mak^ng, Cent. 2.. 9. FOCARIAE of Priests who they were, b. 3. p. 27.. 40.
FORMOSUS the Pope interdicteth England for want of Bishops, Cent. 10.. 1. On
good conditions absolveth it again. 3. Richard FOX Bishop of Winchester
foundeth Corpus Christi College, b. 5. p. (166.). 11. John FOX fl^es to
Franckford in the Re^gn of Q. Mary b. 8. Sect. 2. 41. Thence (on a sad
difference) removes to Basi^, Sect. 3.. 10. returning into England refuses to
subscribe the Canons, b. 9.. 68. Is a most moderate Nonconformist, ibidem. his
Latin Letter to Queen Elizabeth that Anabaptists might not be burnt, p. 104..
13. another to a Bishop in the behalf of his own Son, p. 106. 15. his death, p.
187.. 63. FRANCISCAN Friars, b. 6. p. 270.. 16. their frequent Subreformation,
17. admit boys into their order, Hist. of Camb. p. 54.. 46, 47, 48. whereat
the University is much offended, ibid. FRANCKFORD, the Congregation of English
Exiles there in the Reign of Q* Mary, b. 8. Sect. 2.. 41. They set up a new
discipline in their Church, 42, 43. invite (but in vain) all other English
(...) to ioyn with them,. 44* 45. FREEZLAND converted to Christianity by
VVi^h^d a ^axon Bishop, Cent. 7.. 97. FRIDONA the first English Archbishop, C.
7.. 85. FRIARS and Monks how they differ, b. 6. p. 269. FRIGA a Saxon Idol,
her name, shape and office, b. 2. Cent. 6.. 6. John FRITH his Martyrdom, b. 5.
p. (190). 11. Tho. FULLER unjustly hanged, and saved by miracle, b. 4. p. 154..
25. John FULLER Doctor of Law, pitiful when alone, but when with others, a
persecutor, b. 8. p. 22.. 28. see Jesus College, of which he was master. Nich.
FULLER, a Common Lawyer, prosecuted to death by Bishop Bancroft, b. 10. p. 55,
56. 29, 30. leaves a good memory behind him, ibid. Nicholas FULLER, a Divine,
his deserved commendation, b. 11.. 15. Robert FULLER last Abbot of Waltham, a
great preserver of the Antiquities thereof, History of Walt. p. 7. passes
Copt-Hall to King Henry 8. p. 11. his legacy to the Church, p. 14. Thomas
FULLER, Pilot who steered the Ship of Cavendish about the world, b. 11. p. 231.
G.
GANT COLL. in Flanders, for English fugitives, b. 9. p. 91. STEPHAN GARDENER,
Bishop of Winchester, gets the six bloody Articles to be enacted, b. 5. p.
230.. 17, 18. br^ngeth in a List of Latin words in the N. Test. which he would
not have translated, p. 238. for his obstinacy first sequestered, then deposed
from his Bishopric, b. 7. p. 400. and 401. a politic, plotting Persecuter, b.
8. Sect. 2.. 6. yet courteous in sparing Mistress Clerk the Authors great
Grandmother,. 7. his threatening of the English Exiles, Sect. 3.. 22. dies a
Protestant in the point of Justification,. 42. Henry GARNET Jesuit, his
education and vitiousnesse, b. 10. p. 39.. 45. canvased in the Tower by
Protestant Divines,. 46, etc. overwitted with an equivocating room,. 48. his
arraignment and condemnation, p. 40.49. dejected carriage at his death, 50. his
Straw Miracle confuted,. 51. etc. GENEVA: such English, who deserted the Church
at Frankford, settled there, b. 8. p. 52.. 10. their names, ibid. they send a
letter to those at Frankford, about accommodation, which comes too late, b. 9.
p. 52.. 3. the State thereof oppressed by the Savoiard, sues to England for
relief, p. 136. their suite coldly resented, and why, p. 137.. 20. yet some
years after, the necessity thereof bountifully relieved by the English Clergy,
b. 10. p. 4.. 11. GENEVA Translation of the Bible, made by the English Exiles
there, b. 8. p. 36.. 27. the marginal notes thereof disliked by King James, b.
10. p. 14. our Translatours enjoined by him to peruse it, p. 47.. 1. the
Brethren complain for the lack of their notes, p. 58.. 51. which Doctor H
causelessely inveyed against, 52. GERMANUS invited hither by the British
Bishops, Cent. 5.. 4. (assisted with Lupus ibid.) His disputation with the
Pelagians,. 6. in a most remarkable Conference at S. Albans,. 7, 8.
miraculously conquereth the Pagan Picts and Saxons,. 10. is said to exchange
some Relicts for S. Albans,. 11. his return into Britain to suppress
resprouting Pelagianisme in a Synod,. 12, 13. GILBERTINE Monks, b. 6. p 268..
8. Ant. GILBY a ^ierce Nonconformist, b. 9. p. 76.. 70. GILDAS, a British
writer, calls his Countrymen the I^ke of the Age, C. 5.. 14. why he omitteth
the worthies of his Nation, C. 6.. 2. GILDAS surnamed Albanius, struck dumb at
the sight of a Nun with Child, the reported Mother of St. David, C. 5.. 23.
Bernard GILPIN refuses the Bishopric of Carlisle, and why, b. 9. p. 63.. 32.
his Apostolical life and death, ibid. GLASS, the making thereof first brought
into England, C. 7.. 87. GLASSENBURY: the most ancient Church in Christendom
[said to be] erected therein, C. 1.. 13. The plain platform thereof, ibidem.
The story of the Hawthorn thereby, budding on Christmas day examined,. 15, 16,
17. cut down lately by the Soldiers, ibidem. The twelve British Monks with
their hard names dwelling there, C. 5.. 18. though St. Patrick never lived in
that Monastery,. 20. the high praise of the place, ibidem. with profane
flattery, C. 10. p. 136.. 46. Roger GOAD the worthy Provost of Kings College,
Hist. of Camb. p. 143.. 5. Thomas GOAD his Son sent to the Synod of Dort, b.
10. p. 80.. 71. GODFATHERS used to men of mature age, C. 7.. 103. Christopher
GOODMAN, a violent Nonconformist, b. 9. p. 77.. 72. Godfry GOODMAN Bishop of
Gloucester, suspended for his refusing to subscribe to the New Canons, b. 11. p.
170.. 22, 23. John GOODMAN a seminary Priest, bandied betwixt life and death,
b. 11. p. 173.. 39* etc. Earl GODWIN by cheating gets the Nunnery of Berkley,
C. 11.. 19. and the rich Manor of Boseham,. 20. Francis GODWIN Son of a
Bishop, and himself made Bishop of Landaff by Q. Elizabeth, in whose Reign he
was born, b. 9.. 4. Count GONDOMAR jeared by Spalato returns it to purpose, b.
10. p. 95.. 7, and 8. procures the Enlargement of many Jesuits, p. 100.. 22.
a bitten complement passed on him by the Earl of Oxford, p. 101.. 21. King
James (by him willingly deceived, p. 114.. 30.) his smart return unto him,. 31.
GRAVELIN Nunnery founded by the Gages for the English of the poor Order of St.
Clare, b. 6. p. 363. The GREEK-tongue: difference about the pronunciation
thereof, Hist. of Camb. p. 119.. 7, etc. Rich. GREENHAM dies of the Plague, b.
9. p. 219.. 64. humbled in his life time with an obstinate Parish which he left
at last,. 66. but with his own disliking, p. 223.. 68. a great observer of the
Sabbath,. 69. GREGORY the Great ^his discourse with the Merchants at Rome about
the English Slaves, b. 2. C. 6.. 1. would in person, but does by proxy,
endeavor Englands Conversion,. 2. his exhortatory letter to Augustine,. 3. St.
GRIMBALD a prime Professor in Oxford, C. 9.. 30. his contest with the old
Students therein, and departure in discontent,. 39. Edmund GRINDAL made Bishop
of London, b. 9. p. 62.. 31. his discourse with the Nonconformist then
Archbishop of Cant. p. 108.. 18. why he fell into the Queens displeasure, p.
119.. 1. the Latin Petition of the Convocation penned by Toby Matthews to the
Queen in his behalf prevails not, p. 120, 121. his large letter to the Queen
in defending prophecies, from p. 123. to p. 130. offends the Earl of
Leicester by denying Lambeth House, p. 130,. 4. our English Eli, p. 163.. 10.
dies poor in estate, but rich in good works,. 11. Robert Grout-head Bishop of
Lincoln, b. 3. p. 65.. 28. offends the Pope,. 29. Sainted (though not by the
Pope) by the people,. 31. GUNPOWDER TREASON the story at large, b. 10. p. 34,
35, 36, etc. St. GUTHLAKE the first Saxon Eremite, C. 8.. 7.
H.
William HACKET a blasphemous Heretic his story, b. 9. p. 204.. 32, etc. Dr.
John HACKET his excellent speech in the behalf of Deans and Chapters, b. 11. p.
177, 178, 179. Alexander HALES the first of all Schoolmen, C. 14. p. 96.. 16.
Sr. Robert HALES Prior of St. Joanes slain in Jack Straws rebellion, b. 4. p.
140.. 20. Sr. James Hales a Judge refuses to underwrite the disinheriting of
Queen Mary and Q. Elizabeth, b. 8.. 4. Joseph HALL (since Bishop of Norwich)
sent by K. James to the Synod of Dort, b. 10. p. 77.. 63. his speech at his
departure thence for want of health, p. 79.. 70. his letter to the Author, in
just vindication of that Synod against Master Goodwin, p. 85.. 7. King HAROLD
usurpeth the Crown, C. 11.. 39. killed, and buried (with much a do) in Waltham,
Hist. of Walth. p. 7.. 2. Samuel HARSNET Archbishop of York his charging of
Bishop Davenant, b. 11. p. 138.. 15. his death,. 31. HEAFENFIELD near Hexham in
Northumberland why so called, C. 7.. 63. HEILE a Saxon Idol, their
Aesculapius, b. 2. C. 6.. 6. destroyed by Augustine the Monk, C. 7.. 21. King
HENRY the first, surnamed Beauclark, his Coronation, b. 3. p. 13.. 41. married
Maud a professed Votary, p. 15.. 1, 2, etc. clasheth with Anselm, p. 19.. 4, 5,
etc. his death on a surfeit, p. 24.. 27. bred in Camb. Hist. of Camb. p. 2.. 3.
King HENRY the second comes to the Crown, b. 3. p. 30.. 52. his character, 53.
refineth the Common Law, and divides England into Circuits, p. 31.. 54.
politickly demolisheth many Castles,. 56. contesteth with Thomas Becket, p. 32,
33, etc. heavy penance for consenting to his death, p. 35.. 68. afflicted with
his undutifull Son Henry, p. 37.. 1. the far extent of the English Monarchy,
p. 39.. 6. dies unfortunate in his Family, p. 40.. 7. King HENRY the third
under Tutours, and Governers, b. 3. p. 54.. 24. by what he so quickly recovered
his Kingdom,. 25. forbids an appeal to the Pope for the trial of Bastardy,
b. 3. p. 58, 59. troubled a long time with the animosityes of his Subjects, p.
66.. 33, etc. reformeth his faults,. 38. his quiet death, p. 73.. 1, 2. King
HENRY the fourth gains the Crown by deposing King Richard, b. 4. p. 152.. 52,
53. bloody against poor Innocents, p. 155.. 1. subjecteth Oxford
(notwithstanding many Papal exemptions thereof) to the visitation of the
Arch-bish. of Cant. p. 164, 165. his death, p. 166.. 28. King HENRY the fifth,
whilst Prince, engaged himself in a bitter Petition, (with the Bishops)
against the poor Lollards, b. 4. p. 162, 163. when king, the prelates (afraid
of him, p. 166.. 31.) divert his activity on the French,. 32. his death. King
HENRY the sixth his piety, b. 4.. 1. foundeth Eaton College, p. 183. loses
all in France, p. 184.. 15, 16. foundeth Kings Coll. in Camb. Hist. of C. p. 73
conquered by K. Edward the 4. p. 190.. 26. returns out of Scotl. fights and
is routed,. 29. afterward enlarged out of prison and made King, p. 191.. 31.
re^mprisoned and murdered, p. 3. works many miracles after his death, p.
(154.). 25. yet could be made a Saint by the Pope, and why.. 27. King HENRY the
seventh his sixfold title to the Crown, b. 4. p. 194.. 15. his extraction, p.
200.. 18. retrencheth the exorbitances of sanctuaries,. 19. endeavors in
vain to get King Henry the sixth Sainted, p. (153.). 23. and converteth a
lollard and then burns him, p. (155.). 31. foundeth the Savoy, b. 5. p.
(165.). 4. his death, ibidem. King HENRY the eighth marries the relict of his
Brother Arthur, b. 5. p. (165.). 6. writes against Luther, p. (168.). 21.
therefore styled Defender of the Faith,. 22. embraces the Motion to be
divorced, p. (171.). 38. troubles before it could be effected, p. (172.) etc.
owned supreme Head of the Church, p. 187. 48. justified in abolishing the Papal
power in England, p. (194,) and (195.) his large Will, from p. 243. to 253.
observations thereon, p. 252, 253. his disease and death, p. 254.. 61. vices
and virtues, 64. imperfect Monuments, 65. Prince HENRY his death, and excellent
Epitaph, b. 10. p. 67.. 22. HERBERT the simoniacal Bishop of Norwich, b. 3. p.
11.. 33. Charles HERLE prolocutour in the Assembly, b. 11. p. 213.. 53. HILDA
the worthy Abbess, C. 7.. 90, 93. a Miracle imputed unto her,. 94. Arthur
HILDERSHAM his remarkable life and death, b. 11. p. 142.. 22, etc. John HILTON
Priest solemnly abjureth his blasphemous heresies before Archbishop Whitgift
in the Convocation, b. 9. p. 175.. 27. Robert HOLCOT a great School-man his
sudden death, C. 14. p. 98.. 21. John HOLYMAN, Bishop of Bristol, no
persecutour in the Reign of Q. Mary, b. 8. S. 2.. 4. HOMILIES of two sorts, b.
9. p. 74.. 60. their use,. 62. authenticalnesse unjustly questioned,. 63. Rich.
HOOKER his character, b. 9. p. 214.. 15. and p. 216.. 53. clasheth with Mr.
Travers about a point of Doct. and overpowreth him,. 55, 56, etc. commended by
his Adversaries for his holiness, p. 217.. 59. his death, p. 235.. 40. John
HOOPER, Bishop of Gloucester, the first founder of nonconformity in England, b.
7. p. 42, 43, 44. etc. much opposed by Bp. Ridley, ibid. till fire and fagots
made them friends, p. 405.. 29. Robert HORN chosen Reader of Hebrew to the
English Exiles at Frankford, b. 8. p. 31.. 6. His contest with M. Ashley,. 11,
12, 13. stickleth there for the Old discipline,. 14, etc. chose a Disputant in
the conference at Westminster, b. 9.. 10. consecrated Bishop of Winchester,.
31. his Suit against Bonner, p. 77.. 1, 2, etc. superseded by a provisoe in
Parliament,. 7. his death, p. 111.. 32. Ancient HOSTLES in Cambridge before any
Colleges therein were built or endowed, Hist. of Camb. p. 26, 27. though
fewer, greater then those in Oxford, p. 27.. 21, 22. Richard HUN martyr
barbarously murdered, b. 5. p. (166.). 9. Matthew HUTTON Archbishop of York,
by his letter concurreth with Lambeth Articles, b. 9. page 230. his death, b.
10. p. 38. 42. and meniorie rectified from a foul mistake,. 43.
I.
St. JAMES how mistaken to have preached in Britain, Cent. 1.. 8. KING JAMES,
b. 9. p. 5.. 13. his speech at Hampton Court, p. 8. and discreet carriage
therein, p. 9.10, etc. writes against the Pope, p. 45.. 58 and against
Vorstius, p. 27.. 5. his discourse with the legate,. 7. happy in discovery of
Impostors, p. 73.. 56.57. his Sickness, p. 113.. 21. increased with a
plaster,. 23. his faith and Charity at his death. 25. his peaceableness,
Eloquence, piercing wit, Judgment, bounty and Mercy, p. 114.. 27.28. etc. His
funeral Sermon preached by Bp. Williams, b. 11. page 117.. 3. Doctor JAMES his
good motion in the convocation at Oxford, b. 11. and. 12. Queen JANE SEYMOUR
married to King Henry the eighth, b. 5. p. 208.. 25. her letter on her
delivery, to the Lords of the Council, b. 6. p. 421.. 11. her death, p. 422.
ibidem. JESUATES how differing from JESUITS, b. 6. p. 278.. 45. JESUITS their
beginning just when other orders in England were dissolved, b. 6. p. 278.. 43.
best Butteresses in the Romish Church, p. 279.. 56. their policy,. 57. how in
Engl. like the Astrologers in Rome,. 58. their bitter contentions with Secular
Priests, b. 9. p. 225, 226. JESUITESSES, a Viraginous Order, and (I think)
extinct, b. 6. p. 364. JESUS COLL. IN CAMBRIDGE founded by Bp. Alcock, Hist.
Camb. p. 84.. 42, etc. called the Bp. of Ely'es house, p. 84.. 46. The Masters,
Benefactors, Bishops, etc. thereof, p. 86. JESUS COLL. IN OXFORD founded by
Hugh Price, b. 9. p. 96.. 28. the Principalls, Bps. Benefactors, etc. thereof,
ibidem. IMPROPRIATIONS endeavored to be bought in by Feoffees, b. 11. p. 136..
5, 6. crushed by Archbishop Laud, p. 143.. 26. etc. those in Ireland restored
to the Clergy by the bounty of King Charles, b. 11. p. 149.. 45. INNES of
Bishops, or their several Lodging-houses in London, b. 3. p. 63. INNOVATIONS
in doctrine and discipline complained of, b. 11. p. 174, 175. JOHN JEWEL
draws up the Gratulatory letter of Oxford to Queen Mary, b. 8.. 6. driven out
of Corpus Christi College,. 11. his great fall,. 15. seasonable and sincere
recovery,. 17. Vice-Master of P. Martyrs College at Strasbourg, Sect. 3.. 24.
one of the disputants against the Papists at Westminster, b. 9.. 10. his
reasons against the Council of Trent,. 42. his death, and deserved praise, p.
101.. 1.2. JEWS first came over into England under William the Conqueror, b.
3. p. 9.. 44. highly favored by W. Rufus, ibid. had a chief Justicer over
them, p. 84.. 33. and a High priest or Presbyter,. 35. their griping usurie, p.
85.. 36, etc. unfortunate at Feast and Frayes, p. 86,. 40. cruelly used by K.
Henry the 3d.. 43. Misdemeanors charged on them. p. 87.. 46, cast out of the
land by K. Edward the first, 47. though others say they craved leave to depart,
ibid. etc. ILTUTUS abused by Monkish forgeries, C. 6.. 8. IMAGE WORSHIP first
settled by Synod in England, C. 8.. 9, 10. enjoined point blank to poor people
to practice it, b. 4. p. 150.. 40. IN A King of the West Saxons, h^s
Ecclesiastical Laws, C. 7.. 106. he gives Peter Pence to the Pope, C. 8.. 13.
INDEPENDENTS: vide dissenting Brethren. Sr. Fra. INGLEFIELD a Benefactour to
the English Coll. at Valladol^t, b. 9. p. 87. yea to all English Papists, p.
108.. 20. St. JOHN'S COLLEGE in Cambridge founded by the Lady Margaret, Hist.
of Came. p. 94.. 11. the Masters, Bishops* etc. thereof, p. 94* 95. St. JOHN'S
COLL. Oxford founded by Sr. Tho. White, b. 8. S. 3.. 44. The Presidents,
Bishops, Benefactours, etc. thereof*. 45. King JOHN receives a present from the
Pope, b. 3. p. 48.. 4. returns him a stout answer, 5. for which the whole
Kingdom is interdicted, p. 49.. 6, 7, etc. his Innocence to the Popes
injustice,. 9. by whom he is excommunicated by name,. 10. yet is blessed under
his curse,. 11. his submission to the Pope, p. 51.. 13. resigning his Crown,
ibid* his unworthy Embassey to the King of Morocco, p. 53.. 21. lamentable
death,. 22. and character,. 23. JOSEPH of ARIMATHEA said to be sent into
Britain, C. 1.. 11. his drossy History brought to the Touch,. 12. several
places assigned for his burial,. 14. the Orators of Spain in the council of
Basel, endeavor to disprove the whole story, b. 4. p. 180.. 8. whose
objections are easily answered, p. 181.. 9. IRELAND excludes their own
Articles, and receives the 39 Articles of England, b. 11. p. 149.. 46.
ITALIANS had in England seventy thousand Marks a year of Ecclesiastical
revenues, b. 3. p. 65.. 29. held the best livings and kept no Hospitality, b.
4. p. 138.. 17. William JUXON Bishop of London, made Lord Treasurer, b. 11. p.
150.. 48. his commendable carriage,. 49.
K.
Q. KATHARINE de Valois disobeyeth her Husband, b. 4. p. 170.. 46. therefore
never buried,. 47, 48. Q. KATHARINE Dowager for politic ends married to King
Henry the eighth, b. 5. p. (165.). 6. on what score the match was first
scrupled by the King, p. (171.). 36, 37, etc. her Speech, p. (173.) her
character and death, b. 5. p. 206.. 19. KATHARINE HALL founded by Robert
Woodlark, Hist. of Camb. p. 83.. 40. in strictness of Criticisme, may be
termed Aula bolla,. 41. KEBY a British Saint fixed in Anglesey, C. 4.. 25.
KENT: the Saxons Kingdom therein when beginning, how bounded, C. 5.. 17. first
converted to Christianity by Augustine the Monk, b. 2. C. 6.. 11. the Petition
of the Ministers of Kent against subscription, b. 9. p. 144. KENULPHUS King of
the West Saxons his Charter granted to the Abbey of Abbington, proving the
power of Kings in that Age in Church matters, b. 2. p. 101.. 25.
notwithstanding Persons his objections to the contrary,. 26. puts down the
Archbishopric of Lichfield. KETTS Robert and William their Rebellion* b. 7.
p. 339.. 2. their execution, p. 397.. 15. The KINGS EVIL: a large discourse of
the cause and cure thereof, C. 11. p. 145, 146, 147. John KING Dean of
Christ-Church, b. 5. p. (170.) present at Hampton Court conference, b. 10. p.
7. when Bishop of London graveleth Legate the Arrian, p. 62.. 8. condemns him
for a Heretic, p. 63.. 10. his clear carriage in a cause of great
consequence, p. 67.. 24, 25. his death, p. 90.. 31. and eminencies in defiance
of Popish falsehood,. 32.33. Henry KING made Bishop of Chichester, b. 11. p.
194. KINGS HALL built by King Edward the third, Hist of Camb. p. 39.. 46. three
eminences thereof,. 47. KINGS COLLEGE founded by K. Henry the sixth, Hist. of
Camb. p. 73. John KNEWSTUBS minister of Cockfield in Suffolk, b. 9. p. 135..
16. a meeting of Presbyterians at his house, ibidem. against conformities at
Hampton Court conference, b. 10. p. 7. his exceptions propounded, p. 16, and
17. shrewdly checked by King James, p. 20. a Benefactour to Saint John's
College, Hist. of Camb. p. 95.. 15. KNIGHTS of the Garter their Institution,
qualifications, habilliments, Oath, and orders by them observed, how their
places become vacant, b. 3. p. 116. KNIGHTS anciently made by Abbots, b. 3. p.
17, 18. until it was forbidden by Canon, ibidem. Mr. KNOT the Jesuit, his
causeless Cavills at Mr. Sutton confuted, b. 10. p. 65.. 17, etc. John KNOX
chosen their minister by the English Exiles at Frankford, b. 8. S. 3.. 1.
opposed in his discipline by Dr. Cox,. 3, 4. accused for treacherous speeches
against the Emperor,. 5. forced to depart Frankford to the great grief of his
party, ibidem.
L.
Arthur LAKE Bishop of Bath and Wells, his death and character, b. 11.. 45.
LAMBETH Articles by whom made, b. 9. p. 229.. 23. nine in number, p. 230.
various judgments of them, p. 231.. 24, etc. LANCASTER and York houses the
Battles betwixt them for the Crown; Place, Time, number slain, and Conqueror,
b. 4. p. 1^6, and 187. LANCK-FRANCK made Archbishop of Canterbury, b. 3.. 4.
most kindly treated by the Pope,. 17. to whom he acouseth Thomas elect of York,
and Remigius elect of Lincoln,. 18, 19. his return and employment,. 20. Hugh
LATIMER a violent Papist, History of Cambridge, p. 102.. 33. converted by
Bilney,. 34. his Sermon of Cards, p. 103.. 38. preaches before the
Convocation, b. 5. p. 207.. 23. deprived of his Bishopric of Worcester, p.
231.. 18. why he assumed it not again in the Reign of King Edward the sixth, b.
7. p. 405.. 28. his judgment of the contemners of common prayer, p. 426.. 17.
William LAUD made Bishop of St. David's, b. 9. p. 90.. 30. a great Benefactour
to St. John's in Oxford, b. 8. p. 40.. 45. accused by the Scotch for making
their Liturgy, b. 11. p. 163. prepares for his death, b. 11. p. 215.. 68. his
Funeral speech and burial, p. 216.. 69, 70. his birth, breeding and character,
p. 216, 217, 218, 219. LAURENTIUS Archbishop of Cant. reconcileth the British
to the Romish Church in the Celebration of Easter, C. 7.. 27. intending to
depart England is rebuked in a vision,. 34, 35. LECHLADE or LATINELADE, a place
where Latin was anciently taught, Cent. 9.. 30. Thomas LEE or LEAH a prime
Officer employed in the dissolution of Abbeys, Hist. of Ab. 314. visits the
University of Camb. Hist. Came. of p. 109.. 55. his injunctions to the
University, ibidem. Barthol. LEGATE burnt for an Arrian, b. 10. p. 62.. 6, 7,
8. etc. Dr. LEIGHTON his railing book severely censured, b. 11. p. 1-36.. 3.
recovered after his escape and punished, 4. The first LENT kept in England, C.
7.. 74. Jo. LEYLAND an excellent Antiquary follow of Christ's Coll. Hist. of
Came. p. 90.. 7. wronged in his works by Polydore Virgil and another namelesse
Plagiary, b. 5. p. (198). 54. employed by King Henry 8. to collect and preserve
Rarityes at the dissolution of Abbeys, b. 6. p. 339.. 8. died distracted,. 9.
LICHFIELD bestrewed with the dead bodies of Martyrs, C. 4.. 8. made the Sea of
an Archbishop by King Offa, b. 2. p. 104.. 34* the builders of the present
(almost past) Cathedral, b. 4. p. 174. the praise, and picture thereof, p. 175.
LIEGE Coll. in Lukeland for English fugitives, b. 9. p. 91. William LILLY the
first schoolmaster of Paul's, b. 5. p. (167). 17. the many Editions of his
Grammar, p. (168.). 18. LISBON a rich Nunnery for Engl. Bridgitines, b. 6. p.
262.. 5, 6, etc. LITURGY an: uniformity thereof when prescribed all over
England, b. 7. p. 386. three several editions thereof with the persons
employed therein, ibid. Bishop Latimer his judgment against the contemners
thereof, p. 426. LONDON, why so called, C. 1.. 2. lays claim to the birth of
Constantine the Emperor, C. 4.. 18. the walls thereof built with Jewish
stones, b. 3. p. 86.. 42. the honorable occasion of an Augmentation in their
Arms, b. 4. p. 141.. 21. William LONGCAMPE Bp. of Ely, his pride, b. 3. p.
43.. 24. his parallel with Cardinal Wolsey,. 28, etc. LOVAINE College in
Brabant, for English fugitives, b. 9. p. 90. a nunnery (or rather but half a
one) therein for Engl. women, b. 6. p. 364. * 2. LINCOLN Coll. in Oxford
founded by Richard Fleming, b. 4. p. 168. The Rectors, Bps. etc. thereof, p.
169. William LINWOOD writes his Provincial constitutions, his due praise, b.
4. page 175.. 71. etc. LUCIUS, the different dates of his conversion, C. 2.. 1.
do not disprove the substance of his story,. 3. might be a British King under
the Romans,. 4. several Churches in Britain said to be erected by him,. 13.
confounded by unwary writers with Lucius a German preacher in Suevia,. 14. said
to be buried in Gloucester, with his Dunsticall Epitaph, C. 3.. 1. LUPUS
assisteth Germanus in his voyage into Britain to suppress Pelagianisme, C. 3..
4.
M.
MADRID Coll. in Spain for English fugitives, b. 9. p. 90. MAGDALEN Coll. in
Ox. founded by William Wainsleet, b. 4. p. 188.. 24. Scarce a Bp. in England to
which it has not afforded one prelate,. 25. sad alterations therein by the
Visitors in the first of Q. Mary, b. 8.. 8. the character of this Coll. with
the violence of rigid non-conformists therein presented in a latin letter of
Mr. Fox, b. 9. p. 106.. 14, 15. MAGDALEN College in Cambridge founded by
Thomas Lord Audley, History of Cambridge, p. 120.. 8, etc. MALIGNANT whence
derived, and first fixed as a name of disgrace on the Royal party, b. 11. p.
195.. 32. Roger MANWARING charged by Mr. Pym in Parliament, b. 11.. 61. for two
Sermons preached, ibidem. his censure,. 62. and submission,. 63. MARRIAGE of
the Priests proved lawful, b. 3. p. 20, 21, 22, 23. MARRIAGE of a Brothers
Wife is against Gods Word, and above Papal dispensation, b. 5. p. (179,) (180,)
(181.) Tho. MARKANT Proctor of Cambridge made and gave a rare Book of her
privileges to the university which was lost, found, lost, found, lost, Hist.
of Camb. p. 65.. 33, 34. Q. MARY quickly recovereth the Crown in right of
succession, b. 8.. 1. in her first Parliament restores Popery to the height,.
20, 21. makes a speech in Guild Hall,. 30. her character, S. 2.. 34. valiant
against the Pope in one particular, S. 3.. 41. very Melancholy with the causes
thereof,. 46, 47. dies of a Dropsey,. 48. two Sermons preached at her
funeral,. 52. her deserved praise,. 53. for refounding the Savoy,. 54. her
burial,. 55. MARY Queen of Scots flies into England and is there imprisoned,
b. 9. S. 2.. 13. her humble letter to Pope Pius the fifth, ibidem. her second
letter unto him, b. 9. p. 99. her death, Poetry, burial, removal to
Westminster, and [wel-Latined] Epitaph, p. 181. Queen MARY, Wife to King,
Charles, her first landing at Dover, b. 11.. 9. delivered of a Son by a fright
before her time, b. 11. p. 135.. 1. Toby MATTHEW Archbishop of York dying
yearly dies at last, b. 11.. 74. is gratitude to God,. 75. MAUD for four
descents the name of the Queens of England, b. 7. p. 25.. 28. MAXIMUS usurpeth
the Empire and expels the Scots out of Britain, C. 4.. 22. draineth the
Flower of the British Nation into France,. 23. slain in Italy,. 24. his memory
why inveighed against, ibidem. Mr. MAYNARD his learned speech against the late
Canons, b. 11. p. 180.. 77. MEDUINUS sent by King Lucius to Eleutherius Bishop
of Rome, C. 2.. 5. MEDESHAMSTED Monastery burnt by the Danes, C. 9.. 20.
MELLITUS Bishop of London converteth the Kingdom of Essex, C. 7.. 23.
departs England, and why,. 33. returns,. 35. and is rejected at London, 36.
his character, 37. MERCIA a Saxon Kingdom when begun, how bounded, C. 5.. 17.
converted to Christianity under Prince Peada, C. 7.. 83. Thomes MERKES Bishop
of Carlisle his bold speech in the behalf of King Richard the second, b. 4. p.
153.. 55. tried for Treason not by his Peers, but a Common lury, p. 154.. 57,
58. his life spared and he mad: Bishop of Samos in Greece,. 59. MERLIN two of
the name, C. 5.. 20. his magical Pranks,. 26. questionable whether ever such a
man,. 32. fitted with two other fowls of the same Feather, ibidem. MERTON
Coll. in Oxford founded by Walter Merton, b. 9. p. 75.. 7, etc. Wardons,
Bishops, Benefactours, and thereof,. 8. a by-foundation of Post-masters
therein, p. 76. happy in breeding Schoolmen, p. 99.. 27. a petty rebellion
therein suppressed by Archbishop Parker, b. 9. p. 71.. 47, 48. not founded
before Peter-house in Cambridge, Hist. of Camb. p. 32.. 33, etc. Sr. Walter
MILD MAY foundeth Emanuel College, Hist. of Came. p. 146.. 11, 12. etc. The
MILLENARIE petition, b. 10. p. 22. the issue thereof, p. 23.. 25, 26. the
Millenarie is equivocall, p. 24. MINSHULLS their honorable Arms achieved in
the Holy War, b. 3. p. 42.. 19. MIRACLES their Description, b. 6. p. 329.. 1.
long since ceased, p. 330.. 2. and why,. 5. yet counterfeited by the Papists,.
7. etc. The Lord MOHUN his memorable patent, made therein by the Pope a Count
Apostolical, b. 3. p. 64. John MOLLE his birth, and breeding, b. 10. p. 48.. 7.
his sad dilemma,. 8. constancy and death in the Inquisition,. 9, 10. MONKS,
their primitive piety and painfullness, b. 6. p. 263.. 1, 2. etc. afterward
voluntary, not for necessity but convenience, p. 264.. 1, 2. MONUMENTS in
Churches, Q Elizab. proclamations (each Copy signed with her own hand) against
the defacers of them, b. 9. p. 65.. 36. Sr. Thonas MOORE his praise and
dispraise, b. 5. p. 205.. 16, 17. etc. Sr. Ed. MONTAGUE, threatened by the Duke
of Northumberland, draws up the Testament of King Edward the sixth to
disinherit his Sisters, b. 8.. 2. his great sufferings for the same, ibidem.
James MONTAGUE Bp. of Winchester his death, b. 10. p. 86.. 8. a memorable
accident thereat, * 9. see Sidney College. Richard MONTAGUE his character, b.
11.. 7, 8. rescued by the King from the house of commons,. 10. written against
by several Authors,. 14. left to defend himself,. 15. made Bishop of
Chichester,. 67. his confirmation opposed,. 68, 69. his death, p, 194.. 22.
MORRIS Bishop of Rochester a great persecutour, b. 8. S. 2.. 10. MORTMAIN
statute, b. 3. p. 77.. 9. the cause thereof,. 10. not a new, but renewed Law,.
11. St. Hierom and Ambrose angry thereat,. 12. the form of the statute,. 13.
John MORTON Bishop of Ely the Make-peace betwixt Lancaster and York, b. 4. p.
198.. 11. defended against Mr. Prin,. 12. made Archbishop of Canter. p. 194..
17. his death, p. [165.] Thomas MORTON, since Bp. of Durham Fellow of Chelsey
Coll. b. 10. p. 52. erecteth a Tomb to Casaubon, p. 70.. 38. detecteth the
Imposture of the Boy of Bilson, p. 73.. 55. MORTUARY, when, by whom, and to
whom to be paid, b. 3. p. 83.. 27.
N.
The NAGGS-head consecration of Matthew Parker largely confuted, b. 9. p. 61..
27, etc. The small reason of so great report, p. 62.. 30. Humphrey NECTON (not
absolutely the first Doctor who commenced in Cambridge, but) first Carmelite
who commenced Dr. therein, Hist. of Camb. p. 20.. 5.6, etc. Hugh NEVIL slew a
Lion in the holy Land, b. 3. p. 41.. 10. Benefactour to Waltham Abbey,. 11.
buried therein, Hist. of Waltham. Ralph NEVIL most triumphant in his issue of
any English subject, b. 6. p. 297.. 3. made three of his daughters Nuns,
ibidem. George NEVIL Archbishop of York, b. 4. p. 191.. 31. his prodigious
Feast, p. 193.. 38. afterward starved to death,. 39. Rich. NEVIL the
make-King, Earl of Warwick, b. 4. p. 190.. 6. on distaste given him,. 30.
conquereth and imprisoneth King Edward the fourth, by whom at last he is
overcome and slain, p. 191.. 33. Charles NEVIL Earl of Westmerland, routed in
his rebellion against Queen Elizabeth, b. 9.. 15, 16, etc. Tho. NEVIL the most
magnificent master, and Benefactour of Trinity College, Hist. of Cambridge, p.
122.. 19. NICE: some British Bishops present at the general Council kept
therein, C. 4.. 20. Henry NICHOLAS the founder of the Familists, b. 9. p. 112..
37. his Mock-Apostolick-stile,. 38. NON-CONFORMISTS their beginning in the
Reign of King Edward the sixth, b. 7. p. 402.. 24. Mr. Hooper and Mr. Rogers
their first Champions, ibidem. their arguments since not so much increased as
more enforced, p. 404. their practice fomented by the English Exiles at
Frankford, b. 8. S. 2.. 33. especially after the coming of Mr. Knox thither, S.
3.. 1. and Mr. Calvin's letter,. 2. William Whittingham head of that party,. 7.
which in discontent depart to Geneva,. 10. their Persons and opinions return
into England, b. 9.. 3. divided into moderate and fierce Nonconformists,. 68.
when their first Set was expired a worse succeeded, p. 81.. 9, etc. The
NORTHERN rebellion, b. 6. p. 313.. 1. the Northern Gentry routed therein,. 6.
NORTHUMBERLAND a Saxon Kingdom when begun, how bounded, C. 5.. 17. afterward
subdivided into two Kingdoms of Bernicia and Deira, C. 7.. 61. NORWICH
described, b. 7. p. 393.. 4. yields to the rebels, p. 294.. 6. seasonably
relieved, p. 396.. 14. unjustly taxed with disloyalty, ibid. Alex. NOWEL saved
from Bonners cruelty by Mr. Francis Bowyer, b. 8. p. 16. dedicat. Epist.
prolocutour in the convocation, 1563. when the Articles were made, b. 9.. 51.
consisting of Holy Riddles, b. 9.. 10. his death, ibidem.
O.
OATH taken by English fugitives, when admitted in foreign Colleges, b. 9. p.
92. of obedience imposed on all Papi^^s, b. 10. p. 42. another taken by the
Divines at the Synod of Dort at their admission, p. 78.. 66. another made in
the late Canons with an etc. in the midst thereof, b. 11. p. 169.. 20. OATH ex
officio, arguments against and for it, b. 9. p. 183, 184, etc. a fourfold
behavior of Nonconformists in refusing it, p. 186. OBITS what they were, and
how performed: six kept in Waltham Church, this charge -- 2. shillings 6. pence
a piece, Hist. of Waltham, p. 14. William OCCAM Luther his School man, C. 17.
p. 98.. 21. OFFA King of Mercia makes Lichfield the sea of an Archbishop, C.
8.. 34. inshrineth the body of St. Alban,. 35. goes to Rome, and gives
Peter Pence to the Pope, C. 8.. 36, 37. buried at Bedford,. 38. Sr. John
OLDCASTLE h^s opinions, b 4. p. 167. his guiltiness examined, p. 168. left
doubtful to Divine decision, ibid. Barnabas OLY a worthy instrument in
re-edifying Clare Hall ejected for refusing the Covenant, Hist. of Camb. p.
38.. 45. St. OMERS Coll. in Artois, for English fugitives, b. 9. p. 89.
OBSERVANT Friars being Franciscans, refined, b. 6. p. 271.. 17. the first order
totally and ^inally suppressed by King Henry 8. p. 308.. 1, 2. set up for a
short time by Q. Mary, p. 357. ORDALL, or the trial by fire of suspected
persons, the manner thereof, C. 11.. 14. ORIAL COLL. in Oxford, b. 3. p. 103,
104. Lambert OSBASTON his riddling letter to Bishop Williams, b. 11. p. 165..
1. censured in the Star Chamber, p. 166.. 9. restored by Parliament, p. 172..
33. OSWALD the Christian King of Northumberland, his miraculous Victory in
Heafenfield, C. 7.. 63. sends for preachers out of Scotland,. 69. is
interpreter to Bishop Aidan,. 73. slain in fight by Penda the Pagan,. 75. his
hands said never to putrify,. 76. in what sense it is true,. 77. presently
possessed of happiness,. 78. yet his soul prayed for by the superstition of
that Age, ibidem. OSWY the most Christian King of Northumberland, C. 7.. 80.
OTHO the Popes Legate lodges in Oxford, b. 3. p. 61.. 12. his brother killed,.
13, and 14. himself pursued by the Scholars, p. 62.. 15. whereupon he
interdicteth the university,. 17. but at the Bishops intercession,. 19. and the
Scholars solemn pen^^nce,. 20. he is reconciled, ibidem. John OVERALL carries
the Kings Professors place from Mr. Wotton, Hist. of Camb. p. 125.. 20. Dean
of St. Paul's, b. 10. p. 7. gives King James an account of Lambeth Articles, p.
13. his death, p. 86.. 10. OXFORD University (if not founded) restored by King
Alfred, C. 9.. 30. the Arms of the University,. 40. the Scholars there of
harshly used by King William the Conqueror, b. 3. p. 6.. 16. killed the
brother of Otho the Popes Legate, p. 61.. 13. for which he interdicteth the
University, p. 62.. 17. till the Scholars make their solemn submission,. 20.
the great and sudden alterations therein in the Reign of Q. Mary, b. 8. p. 7,
8, 9. a strange Mortality Anno 1577. at the Assizes, b. 9. p. 109.. 22. counted
by aunders a great miracle,. 24. though a natural cause be assigned thereof,.
25. discontents therein about innovations, b. 11. p. 141.. 18, etc.
P.
A PALL what it is, with the mysteries thereof, C. 7.. 38. PANDULPHUS his proud
carriage, b. 3. p. 53.. 22. Katharine PAR married to King Henry the eighth, b.
3. p. 243.. 48. her enemies conspiracy against her, defeated by Gods
providence, 49, 50. the form of public prayer for her, b. 7. p. 374. a letter
of Edward the sixth (while Prince) unto her, p. 423, 424. PARISHES in England
first divided by Pope Honorius, c. 7.. 68. Matthew PARKER almost loses his
own life to convert the Rebels, b. 7. p. 394.. 7. made Archb. of Cant. b. 9.
p. 60.. 23. most legally consecrated,. 25, etc. in defiance of all Popish
Calumnies, ibidem. his death, p. 108.. 17. and defense against Mr. Prin,. 18.
see Bennet Coll. Margaret PARKER the Archbishop his exemplary Wife, b. 9. p.
108.. 19. St. PATTERN a pattern for all Bishops, C. 6.. 10. St. PATRICK falsely
reported living and dying at Glassenbury, C. 5.. 18, 19, 20. a distinct person
from Sen Patrick,. 20. St. PAUL by a Poetical Hyperbole only, made to preach
in Britain, C. 1.. 8. PAULINUS his death, C. 7.. 79. The PAX what it was and
the original thereof, Hist. of Walt. p. 17. in the third Item. PEADA first
Christian Prince of Mercia, C. 7.. 83. PELAGIUS a Britan by birth, C. 5.. 1.
his principal Errors,. 3. condemned by many Councels under the name of his
Scholar Caelestius, ibid. PEMBROOK HALL in Cambridge founded by Mary de St.
Paul, Hist. of Camb. p. 41. PEMBROOK College in Oxford founded, b. 11.. 41,
42. John PENRY with others executed for libelling against the Bishops, b. 9. p.
223.. 6. Rob. PERSONS Jesuit comes over into England, b. 9. p. 114.. 41. his
three strange escapes, p. 118.. 44, 45. returns to Rome,. 46. Master of the
English College there, p. 86. the Secular priests bitterly complain of him, p.
233.. 30. St. PETER: he never preached in Britain (notwithstanding Persons his
arguments to the contrary,) C. 1.. 7. Peter Pence first granted to the Pope by
King Ina, C. 8.. 13. amounting at least to seven thousand five hundred pounds
per ann. b. 5. p. (197.). 46, 47. PETER-HOUSE founded by Hugo Balsham Subprior
of Ely, Hist. of Camb. p. 12.. 44. endowed many years after, by the same Hugo
when Bishop of Ely, p. 30, 31, 32, 33. St. PETROCK captain of the Cornish
Saints, C. 6.. 11. J. PHILPOT stoutly defends the truth in the convocation,
b. 8.. 22. against railing Weston,. 23. seals it with his blood,. 24. John
PIERCE Archbishop of York his death, and commendation for exemplary
temperance, b. 9. p. 223.. 9. Thomas PIERCY Earl of Northumberland, his
Rebellion against Q. Elizabeth, b. 9. p. 83.. 15. in maintenance of Popery,.
16. routed by the Queens forces,. 17. beheaded at York,. 19. James PILKINTON:
the false report of ten thousand pound given with his daughter, b. 5. p. 253..
55. the truth thereof, b. 9. p. 109.. 21. his death, ibidem. Pope PIUS the
fourth his letter and proposalls to Q. Elizabeth, b. 9. p. 68.. 40. Pope PIUS
the fifth his sentence declaratory against Q. Elizabeth, b. 9. p. 93. PLAYERS
prohibited by proclamation of King Edward the sixth, b. 7. p. 391. Thomas
PLAYFER his ranting Epitaph, Hist. of Camb. p. 158.. 40. PLEGMUND of an eminent
Eremite made Archbishop of Canterbury, C. 9.. 43. consecrateth seven Bishops
in one day, C. 10.. 4. PLUNDER whence derived, and when first used in England,
b. 11. p. 196.. 33. Reg. POOLE Cardinal, why so much favored by Q. Mary, b.
8.. 39. Godfather to E. Tremelius,. 40. consecrated Archb. of Cant.. 41. his
dry Sermon of the Pall, ibid. reconcileth England unto Rome,. 42. his death, b.
8. S. 3.. 49. well inclined to be a Protestant,. 50. leaves all his estate to
Italians, 51. Chancellor both of Cambridge and Oxford, Hist. of Camb. p. 135..
53. Sr. Tho. POPE. vide Trinity College Oxford. The POPE in England in his
Rising, improveth his power on five sorts of Princes, C. 10.. 2. The POPE in
England in his Reigning: a conjectural estimate of his yearly revenues in
England, b. 5. p. (197.) The POPE in England in his Ruin: how his usurped
power, at the abolition thereof, was restored to several persons to whom it did
belong, b. 5.. 199. All PREACHERS (for a time) inhibited by a Proclamation of
King Edward the sixth, b. 7. p. 388, 389. PREMUNIRE-statute why made, b. 4. p.
145. the form thereof, p. 146, etc. why so named, p. 148.. 35. Thomas PRESTON
(Master of Trinity Hall) Queen Elizabeth her Scholar, History of Camb. p. 139..
2. John PRESTON his great favor at Court, b. 11*. 6. employed in a double
conference,. 35, 36. temporizeth with the Duke of Buckingham,. 43, 44. his
death and burial,. 66. William PRIN, b. 11. p. 152.. 56. accused for libelling
against Bishops,. 57. his plea rejected, p. 152.. 62. and answer refused,. 63.
his speech on the Pillory,. 73. and behavior therein,. 74. good employment in
his exile, 75. brought back with triumph, p. 172.. 32. False PROPHECYES a great
trade driven with them in Abbeys, Hist. of Abb. p. 333.. 11. PROPHECYINGS in
England how ordered, b. 9. p. 121.. 2. their inconveniences, p. 122.. 3.
Archbishop Grindal his large letter to Q. Elizab. in their defense, p. 123,
etc. PROVISIONS of the Pope their nature, b. 3. p. 8. and b. 4. p. 115.. 25.
redressed by a statute,. 26. yet complained of many years after, p. 147.. 43.
PSALMS of David by whom translated into English meeter, b. 7. p. 406.. 31. the
mean doing thereof endeavored to be defended,. 32. PURGATORY not held in the
Popish notion before the Conquest, b. 2. p. ^. how maintained in the Mungrell
Religion under King Henry the eighth, b. 5. p. 223. a merry Vision thereof, b.
4. p. 107. PURITANS: when the word first began in that odious sense, b. 9.. 67.
vide Non-conformists. The Archbishop of Spalato, the first who abused the word
to signify the Defenders of matters Doctrinall. Conformable Puritans by whom
complained of, b. 11. p. 144.. 31.
Q.
QUEENS COLL. in Oxford founded by R. Eglesfield, b. 3. p. 114, 115. QUEENS
COLL. in Cambridge founded by Q. Margaret, History of Cambridge, p. 80.. 31.
finished by Q. Elizabeth wife to King Edward the fourth,. 33. The Masters,
Benefactours, Bishops, ibidem.
R.
READING, a pleasant story between the Abbot thereof, and King Henry the
eighth, b. 6. p. 299.. 12, 13. RECUSANTS for Papists when the name in England
first began, b. 9. p. 98.. 29. Our REFORMATION under King Henry the eighth
cleared from the aspersion of Schism, b. 5. p. (194,) and (195.) William
REGINALD, or Reinolds, a zealous Papist, his death and character, b. 9. p.
224.. 12. John REINOLDS against Conformity in Hampton Court conference, b. 10.
p. 7, 8, 9, etc. his death, p. 47.. 3. admirable parts and piety, p 48.. 5.
desires absolution at his death,. 6. RELICTS their abominable superstition,
and Forgery, b. 6. p. 331.. 10, 11, etc. RENT-CORN by statute reserved to
Colleges, History of Cambridge, p. 144.. 6. procured by Sr. Tho. Smith,. 7. to
the great profit of both Universities,. 8. R. Lord RICH his servants sad
mistake, b. 7. p. 408.. 40. which cost his master the loss of his Chancellours
place,. 41. King RICHARD the first endeavors to expiate his undutifulnesse
by superstition, b, 3. p. 40.. 8. dearly ransomed, p. 44.. 28, 29. made better
by affliction, p. 45.. 30. his death, burial, and Epitaph,. 32, etc. King
RICHARD the second, b. 4. p. 137.. 12. his loose life, p. 152.. 51. conspired
against by Duke Henry,. 52. forced to depose himself or be deposed, p. 153..
53. his death, ibid. King RICHARD the third his pompous double Coronation, b.
4. p. (196.). 4. barbarously murdered his brothers Sons,. 5. endeavors in
vain to be Popular, p. (197.). 6, and 7. unjustly commended by a Modern
Writer,. 8. beaten and killed in the Battle of Bosworth, p. 194.. 14. RIPPON
Collegiat Church endowed by King James, b. 10. p. 29.. 16. their Land since
twice sold,. 17. John ROGERS prime Patron of Nonconformity, b. 7. p. 402.
martyred, b. 8. p. 23.. 32. Thomas ROGERS writes on the Articles of the Church
of England, b. 9. p. 172.. 22. first opposes the opinion of the Sabbatarians
bitterly enough, p. 228.. 22. ROME COLLEGE for English fugitives, b. 9. p. 86.
The ROODE what is was, and why placed betwixt the Church and Chancell. History
of Walt. p. 16. in the first item.
S.
The SABBATH: the strict keeping thereof revived by Doctor Bound, b. 9. p.
227.. 20. learned men divided therein, p. 228.. 21, etc. liberty given thereon
by King James his Proclamation in Lancashire, b. 10. p. 74.. 58, 59. reasons
pro and con whether the same might lawfully be read, p. 74.. 56. ministers more
frighted then hurt therein, p. 76.. 62. no reading of it enforced on them,
ibidem. controversy revived in the Reign of King Charles, b. 11. p. 144.. 13,
etc. SAINTS Numerous and noble amongst the Saxons C. 8.. 6. ridi^uously
assigned by Papists to the Curing of sundry diseases, and patronage of sundry
professions, b. 6. p. 33.. 13. SAMPSON, an ancient British Bishop, made fine
Ti^ulo, C. 6.. 9. Thomas SAMPSON Dean of Christ-Church in Oxford, the first
that I find outed his place for Puritanisme, b. 9. p. 77.. 72. Edwin SANDYS
Bishop of Worcester, b. 9. p. 63.. 31. Archbishop of York: his death, p. 197..
25. his Sermon before the Duke of Northumberland at Cambridge, Hist. of Cam^.
p. 131.. 40. his ill usage for the same,. 43. SARDIS: some representation of
the British at the General Council kept therein, C. 4.. 20. SARUM, secundum
usum thereof its original and occasion, b. 3.. 23. William SAWTREE, b. 4, p.
156. Articles against him, ibidem. degraded, p. 157.. 5. and the first man
burnt for his Religion, p. 158. SAXONS, the first mention of them in Brit. C.
5.. 9. unadvisedly invited over by King Vortiger,. 16. erect seven Kingdoms in
Britain,. 17. The rabble of their Idols, C. 6.. 6. wilfully accessorie to
their own ruin by the Danes, C. 9.. 17. SCHISM unjustly charged on the
English Church in their Reformation, and returned on Rome, b. 5. p. (194.) and
(195*) SCHOOLMEN: nine eminent, all of England, most of Merton College, C.
14. p. 94, 95. their needless difficulties, p. 98.. 24. barbarous Latin,. 25.
divisions in judgment,. 26. why their Learning less used in after ages,. 28.
SCOTLAND challenged by the Pope, as his peculiar, C. 14.. 1. stoutly denied by
the English,. 2. SCOTCH Liturgy, the whole story thereof, b. 11. p. 160.. 95,
etc. John SCOTUS Erigena his birthplace, C. 9.. 32, 33, 34. miserably
murdered by his Scholars,. 35. unmartyred by Baronius,. 36. causlesly
confounded with Duns Scotus,. 37. John DUNS SCOTUS why so called, C. 14. p.
96.. 19. his birth claimed by three Kingdoms, ibidem. SEATER a Saxon Idol, his
shape and Office, b. 2. C. 6.. 6. SECULAR Priests their contesting with Monks,
C. 8. p. 133, 134. John SELDOM sets forth his Book against Tithes, b. 10. p.
70.. 39, 40. puzleth the Assembly of Divines with his queries, b. 11. p. 213..
54. Richard SENHOUSE preaches King Charles his Coronation, and his own
funeral, b. 11.. 18. Edward SEIMOUR Duke of Somerset Lord Protector, b. 7. p.
372.. 3. his tripartite accusation, p. 407.. 36. imprisoned, yet restored, p.
408.. 38. afterward impeached of Treason,. 42. and executed, p. 409.. 43.
unjustly, says a good Author,. 44. (though King Edward was possessed of his
guiltiness as appears by his letter, ibidem.) his character and commendation,
p. 410.. 45. SIDNEY SUSSEX College founded* Hist. of Camb. p. 153.. 23, etc.
SIGEBERT King of the East Angles, his Religion, and Learning, C. 7.. 45.
reputed founder of the University of Camb.. 46. the Cavils to the contrary
answered, * 49, etc. SIGEBERT the pious King of the East Saxons, C. 7.. 81.
SIMON ZELOTES made by Dorotheus to preach in Britain, C. 1.. 8. SIVIL COLLEGE
in Spain for English fugitives, b. 9. p. 88. Mr. SMART ^ernted proto-Martyr of
England, b. 11. p. 173*. 35, etc. Sr. Tho. SMITH Benefactour general to all
Scholars, Hist. of Camb. p. 81.. 37, 38. and also, p. 144.. 6, 7, 8. Henry
SMITH commonly called the Silver-tongu'd, b. 9. p. 142.. 3, 4. Rich. SMITH
titularie Bishop of Chalcedon, b. 11.. 72. some write for, others against him:
Episcopizeth in England, b. 11. p. 137.. 7. opposed by Nicholas Smith, and
defended by Dr. Kelison, both zealous Papists,. 8, 9, etc. SOBRIQUETS what they
were, b. 3. p. 30.. 52 fifteen principal of them, ibid. SODOMITRY the
beginning* thereof in England, b. 3. p. 19.. 29. with too gentle a Canon
against it, ibid. SOUTH SAXONS their Kingdom, when begun, how bounded, C. 5..
17. converted to Christianity by Wilfride, C. 7.. 98, etc. taught by him first
to fish,. 101. SPALATO his coming over into England, with the whole story of
his stay here, departure hence, and burning at Rome for a Heretic after his
death, b. 10. p. 93. unto the 100. King STEPHEN usurpeth the Crown, b. 3. p.
24.. 28. by the perjury of the Clergy, p. 25.. 29. variety of opinions and
arguments pro and con about him,. 30, 31, etc. the Clergy revolt from him, p.
27.. 39. appears (as some say) in person, summoned to a Synod in Winchester,
p. 28.. 43. a founder of Religious houses, p. 29. 46. his death, p. 30.. 51.
STEWS suppressed by statute, b. 5. p. 239.. 38. their Original,. 39. and
Constitution, p. 140.. 40. arguments pro and con for their lawfulness,. 41, 42.
STIGANDUS Archbishop of Cant. his Simony, b. 3.. 2. and covetousness,. 4.
Simon STOCK living in a trunk of a tree esteemed a Saint, b. 6. p. 272.. 21.
STONEHENGE, the description and conceived occasion thereof* C. 5.. 26. Tho.
STONE a conscientious Nonconformist discovers the Anatomy of the
disciplinarian meetings, p. 207, etc. his sixteen Reasons in his own defense
against his accusers herein, p. 209, etc. J. STORY a most bloody persecutor, b.
8. S. 2.. 12. with a fine design trained into England, b. 9. p. 84.. 20.
executed his revenge on the executioner, ibid. STRASBURGH: the congregation of
English Exiles therein in the Reign of Q. Mary, b. 8. S. 2.. 41. Jack STRAW his
rebellion, b. 4. p. 138.. 18. his rabble of Rebels in Rhythme, p. 139.. 19.
their barbarous outrages, p. 140.. 20. and ruin,. 21. See Wat Tyler. STURBRIDGE
FAIR the Original thereof, Hist. of Camb. p. 66.. 36. SUBSCRIPTION first
pressed by the Bishops, b. 9. p. 76.. 66. and more rigorously, p. 102.. 3.
Simon SUDBURY Archbishop of Canterbury why silent in the conference at St.
Paul's, b. 4. p. 136.. 10. slain by the rebels under Jack Straw,. 20. being
one hundred thousand,. 21. founded (whilst living) Canterbury College in
Oxford, b. 5. p. (169.). 28. Matthew SUTCLIFFE Dean of Exeter his bounty to
Chealsey College, b. 10. p. 51.. 22. the Lands of that College restored to
his heirs general, p. 55.. 27. Richard SUTTON his death, b. 10. p. 75.. 15.
the several mannours bestowed by him on Charter House,. 16. the Cavils of Mr.
Knot.. 17. his constant prayer, p. 66.. 20. SWEATING sickness in Cambridge,
the cause and cure thereof, Hist. of Camb. p. 128. Edward SYMPSON an excellent
Critic, Hist. of Camb. p. 123.. 20. enjoined a recantation before King James,
p. 160.. 44. SYON nuns their notorious wantonness, b. 6. p. 318.. 8.
T.
Adam TARLETON Bishop of Hereford his life and death letter, b. 3. p. 107.. 28.
thrice arraigned for his life, yet escapes, p. 108. Mr. TAVERNOUR high Sher^ff
of Oxford, part of his Sermon preached at St. Mary's, b. 9. p. 65.. 35.
TAVISTOCK in Devon, the last mitred Abbot, made by King Henry the eighth, few
years before the dissolution, b. 6. p. 293.. 5. TAURINUS how by mistake made
the first Bishop of York, C. 2.. 1. TAXERS in Cambridge their original, Hist.
of Camb. p. 10.. 36, 37, etc. St. TELIAU his high commendation, C. 6.. 12.
TEMPLES of heathen Idols, converted into Christian Churches, C. 2.. 11. our
Churches succeed not to the holiness of Solomon's Temple, but of the Jewish
Synagogues, b. 11. p. 150.. 51. TENTHS their Original, why paid to the Pope, b.
5. p. 226.. 1. commissioners (being unquestioned Gentlemen) employed by King
Henry the eighth to rate them,. 2. their Instructions,. 3. Tenths remitted by
Q. Mary, p. 228.. 6. resumed by Q. Elizabeth,. 7. in vain heaved at, at the
present in our state,. 8. A TERRIER made of all Glebe Lands, b. 3. p. 113. New
TESTAMENT: several Bishops assigned to peruse the translation of the several
Books thereof, b. 5. p. 233. Gardener gives in a List of Latin words which he
would not have translated, p. 238. why, p. 239.. 35. TEUXBURY Abbot in
Glocestershire controverted whether or no a Baron in Parliament, b. 6. p. 294..
12. THEODORUS Archbishop of Cant. C. 7.. 95. settleth Easter according to the
Romish Rite,. 96. the Canons of a Council kept by him at Hartford, ibidem.
Tho. THIRLEBY Bishop of Ely sent to Rome to reconcile England to the Pope, b.
8.. 42. no great persecuter in his Diocese in the days of Q. Mary, S. 2.. 14.
found favor under Q. Elizabeth, b. 9.. 18. being a Prisoner to be envied,
ibidem. though reputed a good man, wasted the lands of Westminster Church,
whereof he the first and last Bishop, b. 9.. 43. Thomas TISDALE founder of
Pembrook College in Oxford, b. 11.. 41. TITHES first given to the Clergy, C.
9.. 8, etc. by King Athelwolphus. The objections against his grant answered,
etc. ibidem, confirmed by the Charter of King William the Conqueror, b. 3..
12. three orders exempted from payment of them, b. 6. p. 283.. 3. THOR, a Saxon
Idol, his name, shape, and office, b. 2. C. 6.. 6. John THRASK censured for his
Judicial opinions, b. 10. p. 76.. 64. George THROGMORTON an Oxford man
challenges all Cambridge to d^spute on two questions, Hist. of Cambridge, p.
104.. 44. the ill success thereof,. 45, etc. TOLERATION of Papists set a-foot
in the Reign of King James, with the arguments pro and con, ^. 10. p. 106, and
107. resumed and rejected in the Reign of K. Charles, b. 11.. 56, 57, 58. Rob.
TOUNSON Bishop of Salisbury his death, b. 10. p. 91.. 35. TRANSLATOURS of the
Bible their names, and number, b. 10. p. 45, 46. instructions given by King
James, p. 47. their work finished, p. 58. and defended against causeless
Cavils, ibidem. TRINITY COLL. in Oxford founded by Sir Tho. Pope, b. 8. S. 3..
43. being the first that ga^ned by Abbey lands, and made a public
acknowledgement in charitable uses, ibidem. The Presidents, Bishops,
Benefactours, etc. of that College. TRINITY COLL. in Cambridge founded by King
Henry the eighth, Hist. of Cambridge, p. 121.. 17. enriched by Queen Mary, p.
122.. 18. and enlarged by Dr. Nevile,. 19. the Masters, Bishops, Benefactours,
etc. thereof, ibidem. Statesmen, Divines, Critics, p. 123.. 20. James TURBER
VILL Bishop of Exeter no active persecutor, b. 8. S. 2.. 2. finds fair usage
after his deprivation, b. 9.. 19. TOURNAMENTS their ill effects, History of
Camb. p. 11.. 39. forbidden within five mile of Camb.. 40, etc. Wat TYLER his
rebellion, b. 4. p. 138.. 18, etc. parallelled with Judas of Galilee, p. 140..
21. the Wicklivites defended from having any hand in causing his Rebellion, p.
141.. 23. see Jack Straw. William TYNDAL his story at large, b. 5. p. 224, 225.
TUYSC a Saxon Idol his shape and office, b. 2. C. 6.. 6. William TWISSE
prolocutor in the Assembly, b. 11. p. 199.. 4. his death, p. 213.. 53.
V.
VALLADOLIT COLL. in Spain for English fugitives, b. 9. p. 87. Richard VAUGHAN
Bishop of London his death, b. 10. p. 49.. 11. Master UDAL: King James his
letter for him, b. 9. p. 203.. 30. arraigned and condemned, p. 221.. 1. Richard
VINES his argument at Vxbridge treaty to prove the sufficiency of ordination by
Presbyters, b. 11. p. 215.. 65. Polydore VIRGIL Collector of Peter Pence in
England, b. 5. p. (198.). 51. Benefactour to the Church of Wells, malefactor
to the Church of England,. 52, 53. Eight foreign UNIVERSITIES conclude it
unlawful to marry a Brothers Wife, b. 5. p (183.). 19. UNIVERSITY COLL. in
Oxon, founded by King Alfred, C. 9.. 30. the maintenance paid out of the Kings
Exchequer,. 38. exhibitions allowed to the Scholars thereof why detained by
William the Conqueror, b. 3.. 16. re-founded and endowed, p. UNIVERSITY Hall in
Cambridge founded by Richard Badew, Hist. of Came. p. 37.. 40. burnt down,
ibidem. see Clare Hall. Conradus VORSTIUS his dangerous opinions, b. 10. p. 60.
opposed by King James, p. 61. in his letter to the States,. 3, etc. K. VORTIGER
his incestuous match condemned by Germanus, C. 5.. 13. calls in the Saxons,.
16. burning in lust is burnt to Ashes,. 27. URSULA her fabulous Martyrdom at
Colen, (with 11000. Virgins attending her) confuted. C. 5.. 21. USURPERS how
far they are to be obeyed, in the case of King Stephen, b. 3. p. 25, 26, 27.
UXBRIDGE treaty, the fruitless fruits thereof, b. 11. p. 214.. 61. Conference
about Church Matters therein,, 63. etc.
W.
WADHAM COLLEGE in Oxford founded by Nicholas Wadham, b. 10. p. 68.. 29, 30.
Peter of WAKEFIELD prophesied against K. John, b. 3. p. 50.. 12. hanged, p.
52.. 16. whether justly or unjustly, disputed, ibidem. WALTHAM ABBEY why so
named, Hist. of Walt. p. 5.. 2. the situation thereof,. 3. excused for its bad
air p. 6.. 1. the Town first founded by one Tovy,. 2. but Abbey, by Earl
Harold,. 4. refounded by King Henry the second, p. 7. Nicholas abbot of WALTHAM
most eminent, Hist. of Wall. p. 20. toward the end. John de WALTHAM keeper of
the privy seal to K. Richard the second, Hist. of Wall. p. 30. near the end.
Roger de WALTHAM a great Scholar, Hist. of Wall. p. 20. at the bottom. William
WARHAM Archbishop of Canterbury his death, and character, b. 5. p. (184). 26.
John WARNER, Bishop of Rochester, chosen to solicit the Bps. cause when
charged with a praemunire, b. 11. p. 183.. 7. pleads stoutly for their votes
in Parliament, p. 194.. 25. William WATSON, a Secular Priest, his notorious
railing against the Jesuits, b. 10.. 5, 6. his Treason against K. James,. 14.
and silly plea at his Execution,. 17. WEASEL, the English Exiles under Q. Mary
why quickly removing thence, b. 8. S. 2.. 41. WELSH, two grand mistakes
therein, b. 11. p. 170.. 21. committed to Welsh Bps. to amend it, ibidem.
WESTMINSTER pretends to a Massacre of primitive Monks therein, Cent. 4.. 9. a
Church therein built by Edward the Confessor, said to be consecrated by St.
Peter himself, C. 11.. 22. five alterations in St. Peter's therein within 30.
years, b. 9. p. 70.. 43. Herbert WESTPHALING, Bishop of Hereford, s^^dome seen
to laugh, b. 10.. 10. WEST SAXONS, their Kingdom when begun, how bounded, C.
5. 17. William WHITACRE Master of St. John's in Camb. kindly resents are proof
from one of the fellows, Hist of Camb. p. 97.. 18. his sickness and death, p.
151.. 18. his sad and solemn funeral,. 19. John WHITE swalloweth Simony to get
the Bishopric of Winchester, b. 8. S. 3.. 42. preaches a satyricall (yet
flattering) Sermon at the Funerals of Q. Mary,. 52. stirred against Q. Eliz.
b. 9.. 17. Sr. THO. WHITE, Lord Mayor of London, foundeth St. Ionns College in
Ox. b. 8. S. 3.. 44. John WHITGIFT, Dr. of D. after much clashing with Mr.
Cartwright, Hist. of Camb. p. 140. expels him, ibid. his Letters when Archb.
of Cant. to the L. Burleigh and other Lords, in defense of Conformity, ^. 9. p.
145. etc. his death, b. 10. p 25.. 2. just defense against the exceptions of Mr
P^in,. 2, 3, 4, etc. William WHITTINGHAM head of the English non-conformists at
Frankford, b. 8. S. 2.. 7. with whom he departs to Geneva,. 10. a fierce
Nonconformist (though Dean of Durham) in the beginning of Q. Eliz. b. 9.. 71.
John WICKLIFF his parentage, learning, and opinions, b. 4. p. 130.. 3. etc.
marvelously spread and why, p. 142.. 25. his quiet death,. 26. Richard
WIGHTWICK an eminem Benefactor to Pembrook College in Oxford, b. 11.. 41.
Edward WIGHTMAN burnt for a Heretic, b. 10. p. 64.. 13. WILFRIDE a Champion
for the Romish Easter, C. 7.. 90. his prevailing argument,. 91. envyed by
Theodorus Archbishop,. 97. converteth the South Saxons,. 98, etc. persecuted
by King Alfride, C. 8.. 1. appealeth to Rome,. 2. dies,. 3. WILLIAM the first
conquereth King Harold in sight, C. 11.. 40. rebateth his conquering sword with
composition,. 41. calls a Synod of his Bishops at Winchester, b. 3.. 4. is
civil to the Pope,. 5. yet so as he is true to his own interest,. 6. refuses
to do fealty to Pope Gregory the seventh,. 7, 8. suffers none of his Barons to
be excommunicated without his consent,. 9. divides the jurisdiction of the
Bishops from the Sheriffs,. 10, 11. quits the Crown by Conquest, but kept it by
composition,. 13. his death and burial,. 25. WILLIAM Rufus crowned, b. 11. p.
10.. 27. his covetuousness,. 28, 29. contests with Anselme, p. 11.. 3. John
WILLIAMS, Bishop of Lincoln, made Lord keeper, b. 10. p. 89.. 24, 25, etc.
preaches King James his funeral Sermon, b. 11.. 3. exceptions thereat,. 4.
excluded attendance at the Coronation,. 17. loses the Keepers place,. 37,
etc. is sued in the Star Chamber, from p. 153, to 158. severely censured there,
ibidem. fined the second time in the same Court, p. 165, 166. vindicateth his
extraction, p. 183. 9. the first and most active in the Bishops protestation,
p. 187. the brief account of his life and death, p. 225, 226. WINCHESTER
pretends to a Massacre of Primitive Monks therein, C. 4.. 9. King Stephen
summoned, said to be present at a Synod there, b. 3. p. 28.. 43, 44. a famous
School therein founded by William Wickham, b. 4. p. 133.. 30. R. WINCELSEY
Archbishop of Cant. humbled by King Edward the first, C. 1. p. 90.. 4, etc.
why finding no favor from the Pope, p. 91.. 7. restored to his Archbishopric,
p. 91.. 12. WINE, when first permitted to English Monks to drink, b. 2. p.
103.. 28. Dr. Thomas WINNIFF preaches in the convocation, b. 11.. 65. WODEN a
Saxon Idol his name, shape and office, b. 2. C. 6.. 6. WOMEN present at a
Church-councill, C. 7.. 107. WOMEN'S brawles, men's Thralls, b. 7. p. 407.. 34.
35. English WOOLS improvement in manufactures, B. third, (but misprinted
fourth,) p. 111.. 6. when the Dutch workmen invited into England,. 7, 8, etc.
WOOLFRED Archbishop of Cant. kept a Council at Celichyth, C. 9.. 4. the acts
thereof, ibid. WOLPHERE King of Mercia his cruel murdering of his Sons, C. 7..
86. Thomas WOLSEY Cardinal foundeth Cardinals College in Oxford, b. 5. p.
(169.). 27, etc. would have his servants serve none but the King, p. (171). 35.
falls into the Kings displeasure, and dies, b. 5. p. (178.). 2. etc. WOLSTAN
Bishop of Worcester, the English Janus, keeps his Bishopric by resigning it,
b. 3.. 22. his death, 34. Nich. WOOTTON, Dean of Cant. and York, his death and
character, b. 9. p. 81.. 11. Dr. WRIGHT a moderate Visitor in Oxford, b. 8.. 9.
recanteth and dies a Protestant in his perfect senses, notwithstanding Sanders
Slanders to the contrary, ibidem. St. Tho. WYAT his rising to hinder the
Spanish match, b. 8.. 25. how his fool abused the Queens Herald,. 26, 27, 28.
his insolent demands,. 30. enters Southwark and quitteth it,. 31, 32. retarded
in his March,. 34. stopped at Ludgate and taken in Fleetstreet,. 37. penitent
at his execution,. 38.
Y.
A YEAR ill lost, and well found in the Saxon Chronology, C. 7.. 62. Ed. YEAR,
if his name was not Anne, his dear Poetry against the Mass, wherein every
verse cost him a lash, b. 8.. 14. YORK: Constantius Chlorus buried there, C.
4.. 13. lays claim to the birth of Constantine the Emperor,. 18. an
Archbishops Pall bestowed thereon by Pope Gregory, C. 7.. 1. claims
precedence of Canterbury, b. 3. p. 38.. 3. on what Title, ibid. the
Archbishops thereof not satisfied with the Popes nice distinction, p. 39.. 45.
YORK and Lancaster houses the Battles betwixt them for the Crown; Place, time,
number slain, and Conqueror, b. 4. p. 186, and 187. YORK Clergy, though late,
at last acknowledged the Kings Supremacy, b. 5. p. (188.). 49, 50, etc. Thomas
YOUNG Archbishop of York, lost by gaining, b. 9. p. 83.. 14. his death,
ibidem. John YOUNG Bishop of Rochester his death, b. 10. p. 39.. 44.
Z.
Baltazer ZANCHES a Spanish protestant builds an Almes-house for the Eng. poor
at Totnam, b. 9. p. 234.. 35. he the first (his family since the best)
confectioners in England, ibidem. Eudo de ZOUCH, the first person of honor
Chancellor of Cambridge, Hist. of Camb. p. 57.. 62. therefore not exacted
obedience of the Bishop of Ely. ZURICH: the Congregation of English [most
learned] Exiles therein in the days of Q. Mary, b. 8. S. 2.. 41. who refuse to
join with those at Frankford and why,. 46.
ERRATA.
Book. page lin. 2 105 12 For Sarisbury, read Sherborn. 3 25 2 after, since the
Conquest, add, which left any issue. 4 141 11 12 in these two* lines transpose
Harpsfield, for Alanus Copus. 185 22 read it thus, of his Predecess^ur Wickham,
or Successor Wainfleet. 5 ( 156) 15 for Dr. Greenhil, read Dr. Daniel
Greenwood. ( 187) 31 for But He, read Be He therefore. ( 196) 39 for 8.
shillings, read, four shillings. (279 30 for Impunity, read Impurity. 6 344 15
for Briston, read Bruiton. 369 21 for St. John's, read St. Maryes. 7 388 15 for
the second, read the sixth. 8 14 39 for Grandchild to Edward the fourth, read
great Grandchild to Edward the fourth his Father. 40 40 for Faithful, read
Thankful Owen. 9 70 43 for roasted, read wasted. 109 21 for Sr. James (in some
coppies not corrected) read Sr. Henry. 145 32 for Mr. Yeale, read Master Beale.
167 4 for Anthony, read Christopher. 8 for Anthony, read Christopher. 185 22
for Detestation, read Detection. 10 21 21 for (...), read (...). 93 12 for can
thereof, read thereof can. 11 119 39 for he left, read fell. 40 for Sisters,
read Brothers Son. 182 16 for greater, read lesser. 216 53 Prebendarie of
Stanford, dele Prebendarie. 217 1 for Colchester, read Gloucester. 235 28 for
Truth is to be, read belief is to be. Hist. of Camb. 158 41 for Sciarum, read
Scientiarum. 160 30 for Majestic, read Majoraltie.

Courteous Reader,
I Am sensible of a mistake in the Catalogue of Vice-Chancellours and Proctours
of Cambridge, (besides a needless repetition of two, twice) betwixt the years
1617, and 1620. inclusively. It arose from some difference betwixt the written
Coppies I used, and such (I believe, the truer) as are since printed.

I see what, not whither, to sly, who can discover, do confess, but [for the
present] cannot rectify the Error, craving the charitable assistance of my
Mothers Sons herein.

The best is, all the mistake lies within the compass of three years, (all
officers being right before and after) and the Fortunes of Greece, the Truth I
mean of our Church History, is not concerned therein.

FINIS.

