ABEL REDEVIVUS or The dead yet speaking

By T. Fuller and other Eminent Divines.

Mors vltima linea rerum est

Nunc levior cippus non imprimit ossat

Laudat yosteritas, nunc non e manibus illis

Nunc non e tumulo fortunague favilla

Nascuntur viola? Pers: Sam 37



Sold by John Stafford at the George at Fleet bridge 1652 To: Vaughan Sculp:

THE EPISTLE To the READER.
SVch honor (says the Psalm 149 9.
Psalmist) have all his Saints. His Saints emphatically; Divine Providence
foreseeing that in after ages some would usurp the title of Sain^ship to whom
it did not belong. His Saints exclusiuely, casting out Saints traitors as
Becket and Garnet, Saint hy^ocrites, and many others; who in the same sense, as
Auri sacra fames, may be termed Sacri or Sancti, Saints.

2. But, what honor have all his Saints? Mark what went before, as it is
written, bu^ by whom and where? Though Chapters and Verses be of later date,
the holy Spirit might have cited the Book. O no! He, to quicken our Industry
referres us to the Word at large. However, Search the Scriptures, and therein
we shall meet with many honors afforded to the Saints; both whilst they were
living, and when they were dead; on which alone we shall insist.

3 This honor also is twofold, either what God or what Man bestows upon
them; the latter only is proper for our present purpose, and brancheth it
self into Honor done to their Bodies or to their Memories.

4 Of the former, is their Decent Interment, according to their quality: Thus
Iehojadah was promoted to a Sepulcre amongst the Kings of Judah; 2 Cron. 24.16.
Hezechiah (whose signal holiness was Paramount whilst he was living) had his
Tomb advanced the 2 Cron. 32.33
highest of all other Kings. However, this Honor has not been universal to
all Saints; many have missed thereof, especially in time of Persecution; as
appears by the complaint of the Psalmist.

5 Honor to their Memories is more certain, being sometimes paid them very
abundantly, even from those who formerly were so niggardly and covetous, as not
to afford them a good word in their life time: -- Defunctus amabitur idem.


Many are made Converts by the godly ends of good men; as the Matthew. 27.54.
Centurian himself, who attended and ordered the crucifying of Christ, after
his expiring, brake forth into that testimony of him, Verily this was the Son
of God. So, such as rail at, revile, curse, condemn, persecute, execute pious
People, speak other language of them, when such men have passed the Purgation
of Death, and confess them faithful and sincere servants of God.

6 The last Honor, is Imi^ation of their virtuous examples. The Papists b^ag
that Stapleton, their great controversiall Divine, was borne on that very day,
whereon Sir Thomas More was put to death; but Providence so orders it, that
out of the ashes of dead Saints, many living one^ do spring and sprout, by
following the pious precedents of such godly persons deceased. This was a maine
motive of publishing the ensuing Treatise, to furnish our present Age with a
Magazeen of religious Patterns for their Imitation.

7 There is a Monument in Palestine, which at Adricomius de terra sancta.
Modinum was erected for the Maccabees, consisting of seven Pedestals, and on
them as many Pyramids, under the bottoms whereof their Bodies lie buried,
whilst their tops serve (even at this day) for Seamarkes to direct Marr^ners,
sailing in the Mediterranean, toward the Haven of Ioppa in the H^ly Land. Not
unlike whereunto, for the use and service thereof, is this following Discourse,
m^de partly, to do right to the memory of these Heroes deceased, and partly to
guide and conduct us to arrive at the sam^ h^ppinesse, by steering our course
according to the purity of their lives, and constancy of their deaths.

8 Here may we find many excellent Preachers, who first reformed themselves,
that their Doctrine might take the better effect in others. For as one who
would most mannerly intim^te to another any spot or foulness in his face,
does wipe hi^ own face in the same place, that so the other beholding him, may
collect where and how, to amend any thing that is amiss: So these worthy
Ministers gave others to understand how to rectify their faults, by exemplary
clensing and clearing their own lives and Conversations.

9 But, Most remarkable are many Confessors (here briefly described) for their
constancy in persecution; It was as Hegesippus reports, an observation of
Antonius the Emperor, that the Christians were most courageous and confident
always in Earthquakes whilst his own heathen Soldiers, were at such
accidents most fearful and disspirited; The same holds true here in many
worthy Saints, in such concussions and commotions of Church and State, wherein
all was almost turned upside-downe, they acquitted themselves most fearless and
valiant, still preferring a good conscience; a grace very worthy of our
Imitation, especially in this Age, when the very Foundations are shaken, and
most at a loss, how to behave themselves. God grant when men are at their wits
end, they may be at the beginning of their faith, valiantly to hold out in the
Truth.

10 But the valor of some Martyrs showed most exalted Patience. The Roman
Gladiators, set ^orth and designed to Death, when despairing to come off alive,
took all their care; honest decumbere, to fall down in a decent posture; so
contriving their Bodies into a modest Method, that no uncomlinesse might
therein be discovered. So was it in these Martyrs (and ought to be in us, if
called into their condition) all their sollicituousnesse was, taking leave of
life to entertain Death with so sweet a deportment, that they might ^etray no
unworthiness or meannesse in mind, in their latter end.

11 So much for the occasion and matter of this work. As for the Makers
thereof, they are many; some done by Doctor Featly, now at rest with God, viz.
The lives of Jewel, Reynolds, Abbot and diverse others. Some by that reverend
and learned Divine Master Gataker, viz. The Lives of Peter Martyr, Bale,
Whitgi^t, Ridley, Whitaker, That, pa 523. and not that page 328. which was
printed before a mor exact Copy was procured.
Parker and others. Doctor Wille^s life by Doctor Smith, his Son in Law.
Erasmus his life by the reverend Bishop of Kilmore. The life of Bishop
Andrews, by the judicious and industrious, my worthy friend Master Isaackson:
and my meannesse wrote all the lives of Berengarius, Hus, Hierom of Prague,
Archbishop Cranmer, Master Fox, Perkins, Iunius, etc. Save the most part of the
Poetry was done by Master Quarles, Father and Son, sufficiently known for their
abilities therein. The rest the Stationer got transcribed out of Mr. Holland
and other Authors.

What remains but to condole the sad condition of our days, coming short of
the former Age, and daily wayning? thinness in Eminent Divines, caused from
our present distractions. We read Ioshuah 3.16. that the waters of Jordan which
came down from above (namely from the two Springs of Ior and Dan) stood still,
and the rest failed and were cut off, running into the the Sea of the Plain
(otherwise called the DEAD SEA) so that betwixt both, the river of Jordan was
dried up into a fair passage over it. I fear whilst the stream of a new
supply from the two Fountains of Learning and Religion in this Kingdom is
much disturbed and partly obstructed in these tumultuous times, and whilst the
present Generation of eminent Divines, makes haste to their graves, able
Ministers will almost be drayned dry in the Kingdom: The rather, because as
the arrow mortally wounded Ahab betwixt the joints of his Armor, so in the
interstitium betwixt two Disciplines (and give me leave to term Discipline
the Armor of the Church) Episcopacy put off, and another Government not as yet
close buckled on, Profaneness and Licenciousnesse have given a great and
grievous wound to the Church of God; for the speedy cure whereof join thy
Prayers with his, who is

Thy servont in any Christian office, THO. FULLER.
Walth. Abbey.
THE TABLE.
A
page Amsdorsius. 246 Andreas. 387. Andrews. 440. Abbat. 538.
B
Berengarius. 1. Bilney. 121. Bu^re. 153. Bradford. 179. Bugenhagius. 280.
Brentius. 292. Bullenger. 329. Boquine. 347. Bucolizer. 364. Babington. 455.
Beza. 465. Bale. 502. Benedictus. 520. Bolton. 586.
C
Colet. 97. Caralostadius. 113. Capito. 135. Cruciger. 144. Cranmer. 223.
Calvin. 266. C^emnisius. 307. Chytraeus. 417. Cowper. 558.
D
Diazeus. 142. Deering. 341. Danaeus. 408. Drusius. 533.
E
Erasmus. 57. Erpenius. 582.
F
Frith. 118. Farellus. 286. Fox. 377. Fagius. 146.
G
George Prince of Anhalt. 164. Grindall. 350. Gilpin. 352. Gulterus. 372.
Gerardus. 511. Grynaeus. 535.
H
Husse. ^2. Hooper. 172. Hesperius. 264. Humfried. 386. Hemingius. 413.
Heerbrand. 415. Holland. 500. Hedio. 163.
I
Ierom of Prague. 21. Iustas Jonas. 165. John a Lasco. 243. Jewel 301.
Illiricus. 343. Iunius. 441.
K
Knox. 319.
L
Luther. 31. Leo Iudae. 136. Latimer. 217.
M
Myconius. 138. Melancthon. 234. Marlorat. 245. Musculus. 248.
N
Nowell. 422.
O
Oecolampadius. 109. Olevian. 373.
P
Peter Martyr. 205. Philpot. 221. Pelican. 229. Parker. 328 and 523. Perkins.
431. Polanus. 499. Piscator. 564. Pareus. 577.
R
Rogers. 167. Ridley. 191. Ram^^. 325. Roll^^k. 410. Reynolds. 477.
S
Saunders. 169. Strigelius 290. Simlerus. 344. Sohinus. 384. Sadeel. 397.
Sands. 452. Scaliger. 498. Scultetus. 584.
T
Tindall. 126. Tailor. 176. Tremelius. 346. Tossanus. 424. Trelca^ius. 464.
V
Vrbanius Regius. 130. Vergerius. 288. Viretus. 299. Vrsin. 361.
W
Wicklief. 8. Wigandus. 367. Whitaker. 401. Whitgift. 457. Willet. 565.
Whatley. 592.
Z
Zuinglius. 85 Zegedine. 314. Zanchius. 390.
BERENGARIVS.
The Life and Death of Berengarius.
WE read Acts 27.20. when Saint Paul was tossed with the Tempest, that neither
Sun nor Stars for many days appeared: This may pass for the doleful
Emblem of the dismal darkness in the depth of Popery, wherein Berengarius
lived, the subject of our ensuing discourse, and before whom, from the expiring
of the Primative Age till his entrance into the Church, little considerable
light of knowledge shined amongst many Errors and much ignorance.

2 We have not been idle in seeking, but unsuccesfull in the finding the date
of Berengarius birth; and can likewise give no account of his Parentage and
extraction. Herein he was not unlike the River Nilus, unknown and obscure for
its Fountain, but famous and renowned for his Streams; and his birth may
seem to be eclips^d, by the resplendant luster of his life. And Towers in
France seated on the river Loyer, was his native City, wherein he was borne
about the ye^r of our Lord 1020. as by proportion of Cronologie may probably be
collected. And it is observable, that as the City of Towers gave the first
being to Berengarius, so ^ Gate of that City called Saint Hues gate (in, at,
and near which, they used to meet) gave the denomination to the Hu^anites, or
modern French Protestants, which in the point of Transubstantiation s^cceed to
the opinion of Berengarius or rather to the truth of the doctrine it self.

3 Here we must not omit, that some have m^intained that this Berengarius came
over with William the Conqueror into England, and by his bounty received the
Castle of Camb. Brittan in Northhampton.
Barnewell in Northamptonshire for his possession. But the mistake arises, by
confounding him with another Berengarius his namesake, surnamed Le M^igne, or
the Monk, (which also added countenance to their first error) though indeed he
was a Martial man, and no Ecclesiastical person, on whom the King conferred
that Castle. Thus, though we should have ^eene right glad to have had this
worthy Scholar our Country^man, though not by birth yet by habitation,
accounting it Englands honor that he was infeofted with fair demeynes
therein; yet because all is grounded upon an Error, no counterfeit credit, nor
false favors shall be assumed by us on others mistakes.

4 Having profited in the School above his equals under Fulbertus his Master,
the World began to take notice of his abilities, and at last he was preferred
to be Archdeacon of A^giers; a man of a bold spirit, and daring resolution, as
God always suits men for the work they undertake. We may observe in B^ttels,
that they set those who are best armed ^o charge in the first rank, and order
them to follow who are not so completely weaponed: God in like manner, in his
wisdom appointed that suc^ Confessors of the Truth, who were to make the
first Breach into the Armies of Antichrist, should be accoutred Cappa^pae with
undaunted courages (such as this Berengarius and Luther were) though men of
meeker minds and milder dispositions may afterward be well used in the same
service.

5 For his life and conversation, it was so blameless that therein he starved
the malice of all his adversaries, the long teeth of whose spite could find
nothing to feed upon. He is reported not to have suffered any woman to come in
his sight; not because he was a hater of their sex, but because he was to deal
with dangerous adversaries, he would warily cut off all occasions of suspicion;
and in some cases we may say, that overmuch wari^nesse is but even measure and
caution, if it be not too much, will be too little.

6 The maine matter wherein he dissented from the current of the Roman Church,
and is honored for a Champion of the Truth, was, in the point of
Transubstantiation; an Error which crept one of the last into the Church, and
was the first that was most vigorously opposed. It took the rise from some
extravagant expressions of Damascene and Theophilact, who endeavoring to show
the reality of Christ's presence in the Sacrament, scattered such flourishing
language to that purpose (flowers, though they cannot feed, may sometimes
infect) that though well intending, yet ill interpreted, gave occasion to their
unskilful R^^ders, who more minded the words then the matter, from such
Rhetorical premises to conclude a Dogmaticall point of the Elements being
corporally transubstantiated, against the very being and nature of a Sacrament.

7 The first that effect^ally opposed this Error was Leuthericus (remark^ble
for his name, confining on Lactherus) Archbishop of Senes in France. But the
French King ^o kept him under with his heavy weight upon him, that he never
grew up to any general notice in the world. More active was the undertaking of
our Belengarius (who is challenged by Baronius for reviving the opinions of
Leuthericus) and would not be taken off by the smiles or frowns of any who
endeavored by all means possible to persuade him to desist in his opposition.

8 There was one Adelmanus Bishop of Brixia schoolefellow with Berengarius, who
by most loving letters persuaded him to be reconciled to the Romish Church; he
often in his Epistolary addresses entitled Berengarius (even when little
better than under the Popes curse) sancte Frater, holy Brother; and addulced
his discourse with all luscious expressions unto him. Moreover, he minded him
of the counsel which Fulbertus their Master often gave him in horto, in the
Garden; who suspecting the activity (nicknamed by him turbulency) of
Berengarius, often forwarned him with teare^, not to innovate any thing in
matters of Religion, and humbly to submit his judgment to the censure of the
Church. Nor were promises of preferment wanting, on condition he would comply
with the Court of Rome; who, on the revocation of his opinion, might easily
have turned his Arch-deaconry into a Bishopric. But all was in vain, he
still persisted loyal to his first principles, and no golden promises could
bribe his judgment against his conscience.

9 Here it is no part of our employment, much less of our purpose to be
advocate for all the fauls of Berengarius. It being madness in any man, who is
unable to pay the score of his own faults, utterly to break himself by being
surety for the offenses of others. Only we submit the ensuing particulars to
the judgment of the impartial Reader; that when he meets with the manifold
charges drawn up against this party accused, he would be pleased to take what
follows into his serious consideration.

10 First, that he was a man, and so subject to error: And therefore he is no
man who will not afford him a pardon of course, for those failings proceeding
from human infirmity. Secondly, that he lived in a dark age; and therefore was
more obnoxious to stumble. So that we need not condemn him that his errors
were ^o many; but rather praise Gods goodness, that they were no more; yea,
this I dare bouldly affirm, that if the morning grow so proud as to scorn the
dawning of the day, because mixed with darkness, Midde day will revenge her
Quarrel, and may justly take occasion to conteme the Morning, a^ in luster
infiriour to her self. Thirdly, Berengarius was vexed with oposition, which
makes men reele into violence, and no reason it is, that the constant temper of
his soul, should be guessed from some ague-fits (as I may term them) of his
passion, and that his positive opinion should be stated from his polemicall
heat, when he was chafed in disputation. Lastly, to render him whilst living,
and his memory when dead more odious, his Adversaries have fastened many false
accusations upon him.

11 We that live in this distracted age, know too well how ready men are to
cast aspersions on thos^ who differ from them in point of opinion: which should
make us more charitable in passing our verdicts on those in former ages, which
dissented from the received opionions. Wherefore, when we read Baronius calling
him hominem mendacissimum, impudentissimum, with other epithets to the same
sense, we know how to defalce our credit accordingly. True it is, one fault he
was guilty of, which we are so far from excusing or extenuating, that we would
throw the first stone against him our selves, but that consciousnesse to our
own frailtyes commands us to hold our hands, lest hitting of him we wound our
selves, as subject without heavens especial support to the same infirmiti^s.
However seeing God is gloryfied in his servants weakness, and every stumble of
man is a step to Gods throne, we will plainly and simply set down the
unexcusable inconstancy of Berengarius.

12 Being summoned to appear before Pope Leo the ninth, at first he refused to
obey his command, therein following the Council of Peter de waldez (from whom
the Waldenses received their names) but afterward being otherwise advised, and
wearied with the importunity of his adversaries, he not only made his
personal appearance before the Pope, but also solemnly in the presence of the
Council at Rome retracted and abjured his opinions. Indeed formerly he had set
forth a work in the nature of an Expedient, wherein he did much qualify and
mitigate his expressions, abating much of their edge and sharpness, if
possibly he might have made them comply with the Sense of Rome. But this
proving ineffectuall and not giving expected satisfaction to the Conclave, he
was last feign in terminis to renounce and recant his opinion in the presence
of 113. Bishops.

13 But having got out of the reach of his enemies paws he reassumed his
Tenants again, remitting nothing of his former zeal, but rather asserting them
with more ardour and vehemence then before. But alas, no sooner was he seized
on the second time, but that he again abjured his opinions in the Lateran
Council under Pope Gregory the seventh, to the indeleblest stain of his name
for his inconstancy.

14 After his second Recantation, we find little of the manner of his demeanor
unto the day of his death. And we easily conceive, that clouded with shame for
his former fact, he affected obscurity, and lived as invisible as might be in
the World. We find not that he excepted of any preferment in the Church, or
that any was offered him. A presumption that he was not re-estated in the
favor of the Popish party, not confiding in him as through paced in their
Religion. Charity commands us to hope that at the crowing of the Cock of his
Conscience, he might awake out of his former sleep, and weep bitterly with
him, who on his repentance was received into Christ's favor.

15 Two especial adversaries Berengarius had, Guitmundus, and Lanke Frank a
Lumbard, the latter of more learning than Piety, more parts then learni^g, more
pride then both, was well rewa^ded for his pains for disputing and wri^eing
against Berengarius with the rich Arch bishopric of Canterbu^y. But
B^rengarius never mounted higher then his Arch Deaconry of Angiers where he
died on Epiphanie or Twelfe day, Anno 1088. D^fferent is the judgment of
learned men concerning his final estate. Heildebert bishop of Maine and our
William of Malmesbury, say that he died homo novus, a reclaimed man, and dandle
him in the lap of the Romish Church as a true child thereof. But Cardinal
Baronius looks upon him under the notion of a Heretic, accounting his
Recantation but superficial indicted rather from his Cowardice then Conscience.
O^r Illyricus, in His catalogue of the witnesses of the Truth, affords him a
principal place therein. We leave him to stand or fall to his own master,
according to that concluding Disticke, which we find in an Aauthor: Cum nihil
ipse vides propria ^uin labe laboret,
Tu tua fac cures, caetera mitte Deo.
Seeing naught thou see but faults are in the best,
Look Thou unto thy self, leave God the rest.


16 Remarkable are his words wherewith he breathed out his last gasp, which
Illyricus reports to this Effect: now am I to go, and appear before God,
either to be acquitted by him as I hope, or condemned by him as I fear. Which
words, as they savor not of that full assurance of Salvation which God
vouchsafes to many of his servants, so they carry not with them any offensive
Breath of Despair. And it is no contradiction in Christianity, to rejoice
before God with trembling. And in this Twilight we leave Berengarius to that
merciful God, who knows whereof we are made and remembereth we are but dust.

Most worthily may this Divine
Old Berengarius, fairly shine
Within this Sky of lustrious Stars,
Who, against Romes errors fought Truths wars;
Confuting, with high approbation,
Romes sigment, Transubstantiation;
Which did that Hierarchy so vex,
And with such passion so perplex,
That they would never give him rest,
But did his Soul so much molest,
That at the last, by fraud and force,
They made him (with most sad remorse)
Two several times his Cause recant.
Him of his Crown, thus, to supplant.
Thus, O, thus, often, Sols raye most rare,
With duskie clouds ecclipsed are.
IOH^N WICKLI^^^.
The Life and Death of John Wicklief.
AMongst many famous Writers in this Nation, as Beda, Alckvine, John
Carnotenesis, Nigellus, Neckam, Sevall, Bacanthorpe, Ockam, Hampoole of Armach,
this Wicklief is not the least of worth, he was famous both for Life, and
Learning; he was brought up in the famous University of Oxford, in Merton
Coll^dge; he gave himself, after he was Master of Arts, to the study of
School Divinity, wherein having an ^xcellent acute wit, he became excellently
well qualified, and was admired of all for his singular Learning, and
swe^tn^sse of behavior, in King Edward the thirds time: who protested that his
chief end and purpose was to call back the Church from her Idolatry,
especially in the matter of the Sacrament. He was much favored by John of
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, and the Lord Henry Percy, who defended and protected
him from his raging adversaries and Bishops.

And when Pope Gregory the eleveeth sent his Bull to Oxford to require them to
root out Wickl^ef's Tares (as he called them) the Proctors, and Masters were in
long debate whether they should receive it, or reject it. In the time of King
Richard the second, this Wicklief was brought before the Bishops at Lambeth,
and had many Articles put in against him, but what by the means of some
Courtiers, and Citizens of London, he was again released. After this William
Barton Vice Chancellor of Oxford, wi^h some other Doctors, set forth an Edict
against him, and his followers: whereupon he published a confession of his
Doctrine. Anno Christi 1382. the Archbishop of Canterbury held a Convocation
at London, and condemned the Articles of Wicklief as Heretical: and when the
said Archbishop with many of his adherents were gathered together about this
business, just as they were ready to begin their debate, there fell out a
great and general Earthquake, which so affrighted many of them, that they
desisted from their business: yet all means were used for the suppressing of
his opinions; but through God's mercy they could never be exstirpated to this
day. He was a great enemy to the swarms of begging Friars, with whom it was
harder to make war, then with the Pope himself. He denied the Pope to be the
Head of the Church, and pronounced him to be Antichrist: he confuted, and
condemned his Doctrine about Bulls, Indulgences, etc. The Bishop of Rome lost
by his Doctrine the power of making and ordaining Bishops in England, and the
Tenths of spiritual promotions, and also the gains of his Peter Pence.
Whereupon Polidore Virgil calls him an infamous Heretic. He affi^med the
Scripture to be the supreme Judge of Controversies, condemned
Transubstantiation, etc. He was a painful, and faithful preacher of the
Gospel under that famous King Edward the thi^d, who always favored and
protected him against the rage of his adversaries. In the reign of Richard the
second, he was by the power of his adversaries banished, yet in all his
affliction he showed an undanted spirit. At last returning from Exile, he died
in the year of our Savior Jesus Christ, (whom he had Preached) 1387. and was
buried the last day of December at his Parsonage of Lutterworth in
Leichestershire. But in the year 1428. which was 41. years from the time of
his death, his dead body was by the Decree of Pope Martin the fifth, and
Counsel of Seen, dig'd up, and burned with the Execreations of that fiery
Pope; thus he found the cruelty of them being dead, whom he had, being living,
taught to be so. He writ (as Pius Aenaeas testifies) more then two hundred
fair volumnes, most of which were burned by Subinck Archbishop of Prague in
Bohemia: The Catalogue of his Works you may read in the Centuries of Io^n
Bale, somes of them, I have here set down.

1 Of Christ and antichrist. 2. Of Antichrist and his members. 3. Of the truth
of the Scriptures. 4. Of the fountain of E^rors. 5. A book of Conclusions. 6.
7. Of Ecclesiastical and Civil government. 8 Of the Impostures of Hipocrites.
9. Of Blasphemy. 10. Lectures on Daniel. 11. On the Apocalypse. 12. Of the
marriage of Priests. 13. The Devils craft against Religion. 14. His policy to
overthrow faith. 15. Of Apostasy.

16. Two books of Metaphysickes, one containing 12. Books. 17. Glosses upon
the Scripture. 18. Of falling away from Christ. 19. Of truth and lying.

Besides these, he writ many of Philosophy, and translated the Bible into the
English tongue, making Prefaces and Arguments to every Book: he also
translated the twelve Books of Clement, the Parson of Lanthon, containing the
harmony of the Evangelists: And thus went out this Lamp of England: of whom
one thus has said: With our old English writers rare,
John Wicklief, justly might Compare;
For Learning, Life, and solid Wit,
And many Works he rarely Writ;
Contending stoutly, against Romes Errors,
Nere daunted by their threats or terrors;
But, to his death, still, fought faiths fight,
And thus went out this Lamp of Light.
But, being dead, Rome did so rave,
Against this Faiths Champion, that from's grave,
They digged-up his Bones, with ire,
And burnt (as Heretics) in fire.
Thus was Romes Folly, Rage, expressed,
To burn dead Bones, of Souls, at rest.


JOHANNES HVS.
The Life and Death of John Huss.
THE fair fruit of effects, is vertually couched in the small seeds of their
causes.

1 John Huss is a pregnant instance thereof, whose inconsiderable, yea
contemptable beginning, improved it self to give a blow under the fifth rib in
Scripture always observed mortal to the man of sin.

2 It would have given much satisfaction to the reader, and more to our selves,
could we present him with exact Particulars of Huss his birth and extraction.
But alas we are so far from having a star going before us to direct us to the
place of his nativitie, that we find not the least candlelight to guide us to
the notice thereof. In or near Prague we conceive him to be borne, in which
University he had his education.

3. Now the learning of that age moved in a very narrow circle, in Case and
Controversiall Divinity. The Schoolmen wanting the wings of the learned
tongues, therewith to mount into the meaning of the Scriptures in their
original, only employed themselves in running round in the beaten path of
common questions: whilst such amonst them as were of extraordinary parts,
impatient to be confined within, yet unable to exceed the foresaid compass,
let out their souls, and made room for the activitie of their minds, by
digging deep into curious inquiries, where their best results are either
unnecessarie, or certain, or both. Wherefore John Huss declining such
intricate labyrinthes, betook himself to find out the right way to heaven
described in Gods word.

4 It happened about this time, that Richard the second of England married Anne
sister to Wencelaus King of Bohemia; and although he had no children by her,
yet the conversion of Bohemia may fitly be styled the issue of this their
marriage. Indeed this Queen Anne, taught our English women modesty in riding
on Side-saddles; in exchange whereof the English taught the Bohemians true
religion; first discov^ring the Romish superstitions unto them. For her
Courtiers here did light on the books of John Wicklief, and carried them into
their own Country, where Huss had the happiness to read, approve, and
disperse the same. See here the pedigree of the Reformation, wherein Germany
may be counted the Son, Bohemia the Father, and England the Grandfather.

5. Huss hereupon began zealously to preach and propagate the truth, which for
the soundness thereof was welcome to many, for the novelty to more. But as the
Jews Acts 22.22. heard Saint Paul pati^ntly, until that passage, That he was
sent to the Gentiles, which enraged them beyond all modesty and measure, crying
out, away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not fit that he should
live; so even some Friars lent attentive ears to Huss his Sermons, till their
profit began to be concerned in his confuting the gainefull errors of Rome,
and their malice mustred all opposition against him. First, by order from his
holiness, the Archbishop of Suinco was commanded to suppress him; but all in
vain, his commands prevailing no more with Huss, than the peoples prohibitions
to Bartimeus comm^nding him silence, Mark 10.48. which only made him cry out
the more a great deal. In so much that the Pope himself was feign to take the
matter in hand.

6 Here happined a most remarkable Accident, very advantageous for the
propagating of Husses doctrine. A Scisme happened in the Church of Rome betwext
three Popes at the same time, so that Peter's chair was like to be broken
betwixt so many sitting down together. This conduced much to the benefit of
Huss, who hereupon took advantage to decline (so good a wit having an useful
Theme, would loose nothing, in handling it) against the Chuch of Rome:
Pleading that having three, it had no leagall head: That this monstrous
apparition of the Man of ^in, presaged his life was ^hort; that these three
Anti-Popes made up one Antichrist. In a word, there was opened unto ^im a great
door of utterance, made out of that crack or cleft, which now happened in
this seasonable schism at Rome.

7 It was now high time a general Council should be called. The Church was
grown foul with long want of scowring: however the vicious Court of Rome
declined it (wonder not if thieves be unwilling to hear of an Assizes)
expecting that there their faults would be discovered and censured. All the
world stood on the Tiptoes of Expectation, what the Council would produce.
Where for a while we leave them with the three Popes tugging one against the
other; where all Three at last were deposed and Pope Martin substituted in the
room of them.

8 Huss during the beginning of this Counsel remained at Pargue, constantly
preaching in his Church of Bethlehem. Where his adversaries chose out of his
books and preaching several Articles, which they charged against him for
Heretical. And it may seem wonderful, how variously the number of them is
rekoned up, some times eight errors, sometimes nine, sometimes one and twenty,
sometimes five and forty, which numbers the doctors and Masters of the
University of Prague, collected and objected against him. Yet none need justly
admire at this difference, as if Huss his opinions were like the stones on
Salsbury plain, falsely reported that no two can count them alike. The variety
arises, first because some count only his primitive Tenets, which were
breeders; whilst others count all the young Frye of Consequences derived from
them. Secondly, some were more industrous to seek, capatious to expound,
malicious to deduce far distant Consequences. Excellent at the inflaming of a
Reckoning, and to discover an infant or Embryo, errors which others over
looked. Thirdly, It is possible that in process of time, Huss might delate
himself in additionall and supplementall opinions, more than what he
maintained at first. His principal accusations were, that he maintained, the
Sacrament was to be ministered to the people under both Kings. Secondly, That
Priests in a mortal sin might not minister the Sacrament. Thirdly, That the
Popes power above other Priests, was only invented for covetousness.
Fourthly, That Priests once ordained are not to be forbidden preaching etc.

9 For these Tenets Huss was excommunicated by Cardinal Del^hunna, a sure prop
of the Romish Church. But all in vain, seeing the Gentry and Nobility of
Bohemia did highly favor him. Whereupon he was brought to the Counsel of
Constance under the Safeguard of the whole Empire, and a solemn Conduct of the
Emperor Sig^smun^'s double written, both in Latin and Almane, (that whether
learned or unlearned might pretend ignorance thereof) drawn in a most
favorable Latitude for him, and strongest legal form, given at Spire the
eighteenth of October Anno Dom. 1414. Yea when the Pope wa^ informed by a
Bohemian Gentleman, what liberty Huss had granted him to remain in Constance,
without any trouble, vexation, or interruption: his Holiness replied, that if
Huss had killed his brother, no violence should be offered unto him during his
abode in this City.

10 But as the man possessed with a Devil, Mark 5.3. None could bind him, no
not with chains: So strong was the unclean Spirit of Cruelty in the Romish
Court, that no duplicates or double cords of safe Conducts in Dutch and Latin,
granted and accepted, could protect the innocence of this godly man: but that
contrary to the solemn faith formerly pledged, he was persecuted and
imprisoned.

11 And now, what can be sacred, what armor of proof against the Artillery of
malice, when such Conducts are shot through? In vain do men make Contracts, and
stipulations when faith publicly given, the best wax of all Inden^ures, and
fairest seal of wax, shall thus be prostituted to private designs. Had these
great pretended Scholars read and seriously consider David's Psalms 15.4. He
that swears to his own hurt and changes not, (and did not the Emperor
pass on his honor, and Popes word speaking alwais in verbo sacerdatis amount
to an oath:) yet had they but wayed the answer of Festus a Pagan, Acts 25, 16.
It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to dye before he that is
accused have his Accusers face to face, etc. They could never had adventured on
so unexcusable a Marter.

12 Here we conceive we shall not unprofitably bestow our pains, if we tender
a catalogue of the principal friends and Enemies of Huss, that Posterity may
know who added the part of helpful Onesiphorus to this Paul in bonds, and who
were like Demetrius the Copper-smith, the active persecntors of him.

His Friends.
1. John de Glum a Bohemian Nobleman. 2. Nicholas Titular Bishop of Nazareth,
who gave him an especial testimony, though by his place the Apostolical
I^quis^^or of H^r^se for the University of Prague. 3. Conrade Archbishop of
Swinco, who openly cleared him. 4. Henry Latzembog, well extracted a great
Advocate for Huss. 5. Wencelaus de Duba, a Gentleman and especial pleader, for
the validity of his safe conduct, when Huss was imprisoned. 6. A considerable
part of the Nobility and Gentry both of Bohemia and Poland.
His Foes.
1. Stephen Paletz, principal of the Doctors of Prague. 2. Andreas de Broda, a
Doctor who writ a Book against him. 3. A nam^lesse charterhouse M^ncurate of
St. Sebauld in the City of Norenberge. 4. Stanisl^us Znoma a Bohemian Doctor,
who coming to Constan^z, dyed by the way of an Impostume. 5. Michael de Causis,
a great disputant against Huss, whose very surname may seem to speak
Philosophy. 6. Didacus a Lumbart, esteemed a great Scholar. 7. Stok^s, an
Englishman then present at the Council, his serene Antagonist. 8. The Pope,
Cour^, and Cardinals of Rome, but chiefly the Cardinal of Cambray.
Thus though Huss had many friends, yet the number, power and activity of his
Foes did preponderate; so that notwithstanding his many appeals and
protestations, he was cast into a stinking Prison, laden with chains of Iron,
kept with hungry and bad Fare. But as Men thrown flat on their backs, always
have their faces looking up to heaven; so this godly Man, being over-thrown
with the fury of his Enemies, made the more ferven^ly his address unto God, by
a lively faith, having all his dependence on dame Providence, even in the depth
of cruel Sickness, which in the Prison seized upon him.

13 The sentence of condemnation being at last solemnly passed upon him, Huss
falling down on his knees, Lord Jesus Christ (said he) forgive mine enemies,
by whom thou know that I am falsely accused. How did his charity triumph
over his persecutors malice? an action which will find more commenders, than
followers in our age. Whereas indeed he that revengeth himself of his
adversary, is but even with him, and in his own expression cries quits with
him: whiles such as forgive him, are above him; it being the Prerogative of
Princes to pardon.

14 Then the seven Bishops, who were appointed for that purpose, began to
degrade Huss of his seven Orders, and such Vestments as were the badges
thereof. The best was, though they uncased him out of his other garments, they
could not strip him of the white robe of his innocence. Yea, so cruelly did
they act their part therein, that they resolved instead of a rasor, with
sheares to pare a way a part of his crown, left (forsooth) any relic of
their holy oil should remain upon it. However Huss was no looser thereby, for
God no doubt made good to him his promise, Revel. 2.10. I will give unto thee a
crown of life. Which did cover his deformity, and plentifully compensate the
loss of his Skin.

15 Here I confess it was once my design, to contract and insert the last
speech of John Huss to the people, but my revised thoughts dissuaded me from
it. For it is all so excellent, that compendium would be dispendium thereof. In
it self the only fault thereof is the shortness of it, and pity it should be
more abri^ged; for he that undertakes the same, will leave out as good as he
chooses in. Wherefore we remit the Reader to the entire narration of Master
Fox, where his speech is recorded; which left an echo in the ears and hearts
of all that heard him.

16. Hence Huss was hurried to the stake, where the Emperor, Duke of Bavaria
chanced to be present, profering him pardon but on such unworthy conditions, as
Huss his conscience could not accept. He did love, but did not dote on life; as
he shall never grow rich by the barga^ne, who purchases it with the prise of
his soul; no doubt he called to mind what was written, Heb. 11.35. And others
were tortured not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better
resurrection. And now the fire was kindled, with which Huss must grapple, being
in this kind as I take it, the first that suffered in this manner. For as for
Wicklief, only his corpse were burnt after his death, more to his enemies
shame; who in vain revenged themselves on the empty Cage after the bird was
flowne: whereas Huss was the first that entered the list with that furious
element, and fought body to body wi^h the fire. Seriveners use with gaudy
flourishes to deck and garnish the initiall caracters of copies. The like may
be expected from me, seeing Huss may be termed a leading letter; in the
pattern of patience, that semnably with rhetorical flusculations I should
endeavor to adorn his memorial. But such superfluous pains may well be
spard, seeing this Letter is conspicuous enough in it self, died red in its
own blood. Being tied with a chain to the stake, by chance he was turned
toward the east; And here behold the Criticisme of Superstition; For some
cried out, He should not look toward the East, because he was an heretic.
Whereupon his tormentors (who had power to turn his body, not to move his
mind) reversed him westward. Sad indeed it is to come out of Gods Blessing into
the warm sun; but happy he that is turned out of the warm sun into Gods
blessing, and deny^d the benefit and beauty of the orient beams, had the
inward Comfort of heavenly grace to solace and support him.

17 A paper whereon devils were antiquely painted was put upon him, he wearing
those shadows on his head, whose Substance his enemies felt in their heart.
But when the fire began to be kindled, that furious Element was more merciful
unto him then were his Executioners. For whereas fire has a double property to
burn and to stifle, here it was plea^ed to make use of the latter quality, as
the milder and meeker of the twain. Except we shall say it was rather the
Pity of the wind, than the favor of the fire, which drove the flame so full
upon his face that it quickly choked him; and may be presumed senseless,
though he moved a while after. His heart which was found amongst his bowels,
first beaten with staves and Clubbes, was afterward pricked upon a sharp
stick, and roasted at the fire apart until it was consumed. The least remnant
of his ashes were gathered up and cast into the rever of Rhine, so if possible
for ever to extirpate his memory.

18 One memorable passage must not be forgotten, in the life time of Huss,
which is conceived almost to amount to a prophecy, he had a dream (as he
writes in his forty fifth E^istle, being a letter written to the Lord John de
Clum^e) how he beheld in his Church at Bethlehem in Paris, certai^e men to race
and pull out the images of Christ, and the next day (as it seemed unto hi^)
many other Painters made more and fairer images than formerly; and the Painters
with much people about them said, (in merriment and kind of derision) Let the
Bishops and Priests come now and put out these Pictures. Hereat the people much
rejoiced and Huss himself fell a laughing, which caused him to awake.

19 I know that generally dreams are nothing, but Fancies descant on the
former days work. And he that lays too much pressure on such slender props
may be laid in the dust. How ever it was verified in the event, that many
worthy Christians the truest Images of Christ (as Christ is the image of God,)
were by Huss his preaching and suffering converted to the truth, in defiance of
all Anchristian opposition, who endeavored to deleate and expunge all
im^ressions of Truth in them.

This most illustrious Lamp of Gospel Light,
Which in B^hemia, first, shon forth most bright,
By this renowned Martyrs industry,
Heavenly her^ick Huss; yet, furiously,
Affronted was by Papal enemies.
But, in the midst of this their rage, did rise,
Among themselves, a mighty Schism and rent;
Three Anti-Popes, at Once; by which event,
Renowned Huss did great advantage gain,
The Gospels Light to propagate, maintain.
But, at the last, that Schism being sew'd-up,
Again, they fill their wraths and rages Cup;
And gave it Huss to drink, who, valiantly,
Drank-up the same, to deaths extremity;
And, though, they Painted-Devils plac^d on his head
, Yet, he their rage and scorn did nothing dread.
Thus, faithless Rome breaking her promise given
In firey-Chariot sent his Soul to Heaven.
HIERONYMVS PRAGENSIS.
The life and Death of Jerome of Prague.
TRavellours Bydalph Morrison sandye.
report, that the place wherein the Body of Absolon was buried, is still extant
at Ieruselem, and that it is a solenme custom of Pilgrims passing by it to
cast a stone on the place; the like, in expression of their detestation of his
unnatural Rebellion against his own father. But a well disposed man can
hardly go by the memory, or mention of Hierom of Prague, without doing his
greatfull homage thereunto, in bestowing upon him, some passage in his praise
and Commendation. Amongst others therefore who have raised the Heap of this
good man's Monuiment, we will cast in the Contribution of our Stone also,
(though but a rough and unpolished one) to advance the height of this History.

2 This Jerome of Prague was by his Country a Bohemian, though we find not the
Allowing him 45^ years old at his Death, he was borne 1372.
principal date and place of his Birth, nor the Condition of his parents. We
account it more modisty, to confess our ignorance hereof, then to wrong the
Reader, by obtruding on this Belief our roving Conjectures for certain
Truths. But Bohemia, though she was happy to enjoy him, was not so covetous to
ingrosse him, but that for his profit; and her own honor. She lent him to
other parts of Europe, there to have his Education. He traveled into France,
and at Paris proceeded Master of Arts, and in the University of Collen and
Hidlebury, had the same degree confirmed unto him. He was as exact in
observeing, as happy in remembering, the most note worthy passages, which his
judicious Eye met with in foreign Parts.

3 But there is a secret Loadstone, in every man's native Soil, effectually
attracting them home again to their Country, their Center. This skillful
merchant for Learning, having made a long voyage to the most principal Parts
and Staple places of Literature, and by that his adventure much enriched
himself, has a mind to return home to his Haven, and safely arived at Prague
in Bohemia. He needed no other harbenger ^o send before to provide him welcome,
then the fame of his own reputation, being so well known in that place, that
the City passes for his Surname, and the commonly styled Hierom of Prague.
For here he had, if not his Birth, his first breeding, here he made so many
pious Sermons, here he held so many famous disputations. In so much as it is
questionable, whether Ierom be more honored with the Addition of Prague, or
Prague more renowned with the name of Ierom. For sooner shall the river MVLTAW
cease with her silver streams to water and divide that famous City, then the
memory of Ierom be forgotten.

4 Hitherto Ierom was but a wild stock and ungrafted, going on with the
multitude in Erroneous ways, having drunk as deep as the rest of Romes
bewitched Cupp, till his conversion happened on this Occasion: The Bohemians
which brought their lady Anne over into England to be married to our King
Richard the second, brought back the books of John Wicklief home with them into
their Country. Ierom of Prague lighting on one of them, by perusing it,
perceived the abominable Supersticions then used in the Church, and began by
degrees, first in his judgment, to dislike them; afterward, in his Practice,
to disuse them; and lastly, in his Preaching to Confute them. Thus Contemptible
beginnings, being blessed by divine Providence, proversi parents of most
considerable effects.

5 But no sooner had Ierom publicly opposed the doctrine of Purgatory and
prayers for the dead, but all the orders of Friars, like a nest of Hornets,
with there venomous stings were busy about him. We read of Elephants, that
though their whole Body be by reason of the hardness of their Skin of proof
against the sword, yet they have a tender and soft place under their Belly,
wherein they are easily wounded, as appears by the example of Eleazer in the
1. Maccabes 6.46.
Maccabes, who taking advantage thereof killed one of them in fight. But O how
tender are the Monks Bellies; those Lazy Lubbers could not abide to be taught
in point of Ease and profit, they are suddenly Sensible with Sorrow, if any go
about to abate of their dainty diet, and therefore were bemadded with fury to
hear Purgatory called into question, the pretended fire whereof did really
heat their kitchen. But Ierom having Scripture and truth on his side, like a
valliant Champion asserted his opinions in defense of Opposition, having got
the Society of John Huss to assist him.

6 Two Pillars there were in Solomon's 1 Kings 7.15.
Temple; two Olive Trees dropping oil into the Candl^sticke in Zac^^. 4.12.
Zacharyes vision. Our Savior sent his Seventy Disciples to Preach two by two.
And two Witness^s Prophesied in Sackcloath till ^hey were sla^ne. 1 ^^ke 9.1.
So here God had a Pair of his Preachers, who by their mutual Company, abated
the tediousness of Solitariness, and by their invited strength twisted
together, were thereby more effectually enabled against their Adversaries. One
Soul might seem to animate them both, and as they were lovely in their Lives,
so in their deaths they were not long divided.

7 Now a general Couns^ll was called at Constance, which awakened the
Christian world with the expectation of the Success thereof. John Huss, out of
his own Accord, having first obtained full and free license, to come thither
and return thence with safety, repaired to the Counsel, and there, in
Confidence of God and a good Cause, proffered to defend the doctrine of
Wicklief, to be sound and true both by Scripture and reason. His very name Huss
which in the Bohemian Tongue Signifies a Goose, was a plesa^t instrument ready
strung and tuned, for the wanton fingers of his Enemies, to make mirth and
music upon it, and every dull wit was sharp enough to use a jeere made to his
hand. But let them break Jests on his name, whilst he break their
Superstitions in Earnest, and as once the Geese kept the Roman Capital from
their Enemies; so this Goose kept the Capital of Truth from the Romans. Though
Naball was his name, yet fo^^y was not with him, being of a Solid judgment,
subtle wit, and discreet deportment in his Conversation.

8 But Huss could in no manner obtain free Audience; yea contrary to his
Assurance, formerly granted, had his person restrained. Ierom of Prague,
hearing thereof, would not stay at home, (when one hand is bound will not the
other endeavor the loosing thereof?) but hasteneth to Constance, either to
produce the freedom or partake of the Fetters of his Christian Brothers. Thus
when one Arrow is shot, and in haz^rd to be lost, a second is sent after it,
and either hi^ fellow is found, or both lost together, and happy it had been
for the Church, if she had had her Quive^ full of such Arrows. April 4. 1415.
Jerome coming to the Counsel, makes means to be heard, and puts up the
heads of some positions, profering publicly to defend them, moving withal
that he might have leave to come and go with Safety confirmed unto him under
the Faith of the Counsel.

9 This by no means could be obtained, Liberty they would freely give him to
come but not to depart, and on the same terms the Woolfe will grant free
Conduct to the Lamb, to come to hi^ den, but vestigi^ Nulla retrorsum. Ierom
hereupon finding justice obstructed, secretly departed the City, and in his
return home was taken and brought back to the Counsel. His Adversaries much
insult on his flight, as one evidence of his guilt; whereas if matter^ be well
weighed, seeing he could not obtain License Safely to stay, Christ gave him a
warrant lawfully to de^part, in those word^, not only Permissive Directive,
but Injunctive, when you are persecuted in one City flee to another.

10 Then was he brought with a long Chain about him (like Saint Paul before
King Agrippa,) into the Counsel, his fetters on set purpose being shaken by
those that led him, to make the more noise, to render him more ridiculous.
Whereas indeed the sound of such Shackles made more melodious music in the
eare^ of the God of Heaven, then all the loud chanting and unintelligible
affected singing in their Superstitious Qui^es. They baited him with railing
and opprobriaus terms; but what is most remarkable, none solidly opposed him
concerning the opinions of Wicklief, whereof he was accused, but charged him
with youthful extravagancies, rather importing a Luxury of wit, then amounting
to any dangerous Opinon. But principally the Master of the University of
Hidelburoh objected against him, that long since, when a S^udent there, he had
c^used a shield or Eschuchion to be painted, in representation of the Persons
in Trinity, comparing them therein to Water, Snow and Ice.

11 Ierom denied not the fact but defended the same, Seeing God had stamped in
natural matters, some countenance^ of supernatural mysteries. Thus the
coeternity of the three Persons (besides the aforesaid Instance) are Shadowed
ou^ in the Sun, and in light that proceeds from it, and in a beam, that
aris^th from ^^th. And seeing that Friars fancies most surfeit with such
devices, and that more dangerous pictures nearer confining on Blasphemy, were
commonly presented and privileged by them, they of all other were most unfit
to cast the first stone at him, for such innocent and harmless Portraitures
which he had depicted. Thus they vexed him with trivial objections about
unconcerning matters; but as for the maine business of Heresy, they presumed
him to be guilty thereof, and he was never brought to a fair, and legal
disputation concerning the same.

12 From the Counsel he was carried home to the Prison, and there for many
days kept with bread and water, so that had the proudest Anchorite, pretending
to the highest abstinence been Commoner with him, it would have tired his
swiftest Devotion to keep pace with him; much other hard usage he felt for the
space of a twelve month, wherein his feet were hurt in the Stocks, the Irons
entered into his Soul. So that long durance, short diet, hard lodging, love of
Life, hope of Liberty, fear of Torture, wantig friends to advise him, made
such impressions upon him, that at last he was not only contented to abjure
all Wickliefes opinions for false, but also to allow the murder of his dear
brother Huss to be a lawful and laudible Act of exemplary Justice.

13 Here let none Tyrannically trample on the prostrate credi^ of a penitent
sinner. Consider that he did not surrende^ the ^astle of his integrity at the
first summons, but kept it a full year, in many a furious assault, till the
Constant battery of Importunity, made at last an unhappy breach in his Soul. O
there is more required to make a man valiant, then only to call an other
Coward. Had we been in Ieromes Case, what we ought to have done we know, but
what we should have done God knows. And may we here remember the Blessing
which Jacob bequeathed as a legacy to one of his Sons, Genesis 49.19.
Gad a Troop shall overcome him, but he shall overcome at the last. Let none
look to long on the intermediate falls and failings to which the best Saints of
God, in this life, are Subject, but lift up their eyes to the ultimate and
final victories of Gods servants, who at last, through Christ, prove more then
Conquerours.

14 But Ieromes Condition was rather impar'd then improu'd by his recantation.
Great is the Differance betwixt deliverance out of dangers o^ Gods giving in
his due time, and forcible escapes by sinister courses, which men rashly snatch
to themselves. The former is ever attended with inward joy and quiet of
Conscience, the Soul Sola^cing it self, not only in the end attained, but
also in the lawfulnsse of the means used thereunto; whereas when men do not
ishue out of a danger by a door of Gods opening unto them, but break through
the wall, (as Jerome by perjury) by violent and unwarrantable ways, their
minds are daily haunted with scruples and perplexities, even sometimes to
doleful distraction: besides, such escapes never ^row prosperous, rather
easing then curing, and the comfort got by them unraueleth again, as it happened
in Jerome of Prague. By whose objuration his conscience was wounded, God
offended, truth betrayed, good m^n made to grieve, and bad men to insult, the
malice of his Adversari^s being no what abated in violence, but increased in
subtilty. For conceiving his recantation (as indeed ^t was) rather indicted from
his Tongue then his Heart, these Spanels resolved to Retrive the game, and to
put him a fresh on the trial.

15 No fewer then 107. Articles were fr^med against him, and he brought to his
purgation before the Council, near the titular Patriarch of Constantinople,
who formerly had condemned Huss was appointed his judge; Happy had it been, if
this pragmaticall persecutor had had no more power in Constance, then he
received profit from Constantinople, whence he was only qualified and
dignified with an Aeriall title. Ierom most valiently and elequently assessed
the truth, recanting his recantation? And protesting that nothing more troubled
him in his life, then his former cowardice. Thus, as the well levelled Canon,
though at the discharging by the force of the powder it recoyleth some paces
backward, yet it ^endeth the Bullet to the right mark. So Ierom now hit home,
notwithstanging his former fearful failing, and became the more courageous in
Gods cause, yea bashful blushing for their former faults, so becomes the
faces of good men, that it makes them look the more beautiful.

16 Sentence of condemnation was presently passed upon him, and a paper Mite
was made for him to wear, wherein red devils with monstrous visage^ were
depainted, done to affright the vulgar, who commonly carry their souls in
their eyes, much affected with such representations; the heathen Romans had a
custom that at the Apotheosis, or Pagan Canonizing of an Emperor for a god,
when his body was solemnly burned, an artificial Eagle was curiously made at
the top of the Rogus or funeral pile; and people persuaded, that that soaring
Eagle did withal carry and convey the Emperors soul into heaven: Or at
leastwise was an Emblem of his mounting up into happiness. Thus this pageant
of painted devils was presented to the people to possess them with an opinion,
that in the same sort the Fiends of hell did arrest and seize on the soul of
Ierom, who notwithstanding would have done well enough, if the devils in flesh
their present had not done more to him, then the devils in paper. This Saint
rather smiling at the folly then angry at the malice of his enemies, cheerfully
put the Miter on his head; Did my Savor, said he, wear a Crown of thorns
for me, and shall not I as willingly wear this foolish Cap for his sake?

17 He was fastened to the stacke, which was an ^mage of wood made to resemble
John Huss. (sometimes deep malice expresses it self but in shallow fancies)
and singing all the while, suffered (as I may say) many Marterdomes. It was
almost quarter of an hour, before he gave up the ghos^, rather roasted then
burnt: so as blisters, as big as Eggs were raised upon his skin: the fire
tormented him at distance, being made round about him. Here my soul being to
be sent on two several errands, knows not which first to dispatch: whether I
should enveigh on the cruelty of his Murderers, who had martired all humanity
in themselves, artificially skillful to descant on the doleful plain ^ong of
death, that the poor man might feel himself dye, whilst their revengefull
eyes played the Epicures on his torment: or shall I first admire the patience of
Ierom, who standing as stiff as the stake to which he was fastened, like Eliah
went up to heaven in a Chariot of fire: But to omit both, I had best adore the
goodness of God, which gave such strength unto men, conquering the cruelty of
their tormentors by their sufferings.

18 The ashes of Ierom were cast into the river of Rhine, so that he might say
with David, Psalm 66.12.
We went through fire and water: what the Poets fain of ^he river Tayns
car^ying golden sand in the stream thereof, is herein mistically verified of
Rhine; now the channel was enriched with the precious dust of this Saint: that
river long since has perchance scattered their reliqu^s to the German sea, as
that to the main Ocean, though his memory and fame is more dispersed abroad on
the Continent. All this separations of his d^^t shall no^ pose an omnipotent
power, but that at the last day he shall have a glorious resurrection. Wicked
men said of St. Paul, Away with such a fellow from the Earth, for it is not fit
that he should live. God says of his soul, of whom the world was not worthy.
Both agree in this, though grounding their agreement on contray ways, that men
of great piety are not to be long lived in this world.

19 I had almost forgot a perpetual speech of this Ierom, I summon you all
(said he) a hundred years hence to appear before God, and give an account of
my innosent blood; several coments are made of this text, his enemies derided
his words as the fantastical issue of an idle prayer, only wise and wary in
taking the safe term of a hundred years, that none then present might have the
advantage to confute him of falsehood. Others conceived the expression, a
general commination, using a certain time for an uncertain, amounting to
this efect; that the longest lived of them all should one day be called to a
sad reckoning for their cruelty. But ma^ny Protestants not content to have his
words an arrow shot at rovers, but aiming at and hitting a mark, interpret
them of Martin Luther, who in oriticall computation at the end of that Century
(as herein to Ieromes opinions and Executer of his will herein) gave that
deadly wound to that man of sin, which has brought him to an incurable
consumption attended with an hectique Fever, the infallible forerunner of the
speedy approaching of his final destruction.

This brave Bohemian worthy may, indeed,
His brother Huss most worthily succeed;
And, as two Twins, for their heroic Spirit,
The one, the others honor may inherit.
For, by John Huss, Jerome was blestly aided,
Where by the Romish rout he was invaded;
And, Jerome, hearing Huss was wronged by Rome,
To vindicate his quarrel, did presume.
But, in the trial, found his heels tript up.
Fearful (by Romish rage) to taste his Cup;
Yet, at the last, that tempting blast ore blown,
His doubled and redoubled Zeal was shown:
Stoutly recanting his forced recantation,
To the Death he hated Romes abomination.
Which did their Romish fury so inflame,
That, torturing him, they Tigers fierce became;
His head (like Huss) with painted Devils, arrayd,
His Soul to Heaven, outrageous flames convayd.
MARTINUS LVTHERVS.
The Life and Death of Martin Luther.
MArtin Luther was born at Isleben, Ann. Dom. 1483. November 10. at 9. a clock
at night on Saint Martins day, and was cal^'d Martin. His parents brought him
up in knowledge and fear of God, according to the capacity of his tender
years, and taught him to read at home, and accustomed him to virtuous
demeanor. The father of George Aemilius (as Luther often has related) first
put him to School, where though the truth was much darkened by clouds of
Popery, yet God preserved still the heads of Catechism, the Elements of the
Cistoian Grammar, some Psalms and forms of prayer.

At fourteen years of age, he with John Reineck, who proved a man of
especial virtue and authority in those parts, were sent to Magdeburg: thence
by his Parents he was removed to Isenak, where was a School of great fame;
There he prefected his Grammar learning, and being of a very quick wit, and by
nature fitted for eloquence, he soon surpassed his School fellows in
copiousnesse of speech and matter, and excelled in expression of his mind both
in proof and verse.

He went to Erford Anno 1501. Where he fell upon the crabbed and thorny Logic
of that age: which he soon attained, as one who by the sagacitie of his wit,
was better able to dive into causes and other places of Arguments then others.
Here, out of a desire of better learning, he read over Cicero, Livy, Virgil,
and other monuments of ancient latin Authors.

When at Erphord he was graced with the degree of Master of Aarts at twinty
years of age, he read, as Professor, Aristotes Phisicks, Ethics and other
parts of Philosophy. Afterward his kindred seeing it fit that so worthy
indowments of wit and eloquence should be cherishsd for the publque good, by
their advise he betook himself to the study of the Law. But not long after
when he was 21. years old, of a sudden besides the purpose of his parents and
kindered (upon an affright from his faithful mates violent death) he betook
himself to the Augustine Monks College in Erphord. But before he entered the
Monastry, he entertained his fellow studients with a cheerful banquet: and
thereupon sent them letters of valedictory; and sending to his parents the Ring
and gown of his degree of Master of Arts, unfolded to them the reason of the
change of his course of life. It much grieved his parents that so excillent
parts should be spent in a life little differing from death. But for a months
space no man could be admitted to speak with him: running over the Books
thereof in order, he met with a copy of the Lanine Bible, which he never saw
before; there with admiration he observed that there were more Evangelicall and
Apostolical Texts then what were read to the people in Churches. In the Old
Testamen^ with great ^ttention he read the story of Samuel and Anna hi^ mother;
and began to wish, that he was the owner of the like book; which not long after
he obtained. Hereupon he spent his time on the Prophetical and Apostolical
writings, the fountains of all heavenly doctrine, seeking thence to inform
his mind with Gods will, and to nourish in himself the fear of God, and true
faith in Christ from true and undoubted grounds. Some sickness and fear whet
him on to attempt these studyes more earnestly. It is said, that in this
College Luther in his younger years fell into a most violent disease, in so
much that there was no hope of life; and that an ancient Preast came to him,
and with these words comforted him; Sir, Be of good courage for your disease is
not mortal; God will raise you up ^o be a man who shall afford comfort to many
other. He was often cheered up by conference with the ancient Priest; to whom
he revealed his fears and scruples of mind.

Then he began to read Augustin^ Works: where both in his Comment on the
Psalms, and in the book, Of the Spirit and letter, he found many evident
places, which confirmed this doctrine concerning faith and the comfort which was
before kindled in his breast. Yet did he not utterly cast of the reading of
Gabriel and Camaracensis, writers on the Sentences, but was able to recite them
by heart in a manner. He spent much time in often reading Occam, and esteemed
him for acuteness of wit before Thomas Acquinas and Scot^s: also he studiously
perused Gerson. But chiefly he read often Austines Works, and kept them well
in memory. This earnest prosecution of his studyes he began at Erphord: and
spent there five years in the College.

In the year 1507. he put on the priests hood. The first Mass which he
celebrated, was May 2. Domini Cantate. Then was he 24. years old. In this
course he continued 15. years; to the year of our Lord 1527. At that time John
Staupicius, who endeavored to promote the University of Wittenberg lately
begun, desired that the study of Theology should there flourish, and well knew
the wit and learning of Luther: and removed him to Wittenberg, An. 1508. when
he was 26. years old. Here in regard of his daily exercises in the Schools and
his Sermons, the eminency of his good parts did more and more show themselves.
And among other learned men, who attentively heard him Martinus Mellurstad
commonly called Lux mundi, the light of the world, often said of Luther: that
there was in him so Noble a strain of wit, that he did verily presage, that he
would change the vulger course of Studyes, which at that time was usual in
Schools, and prevailed.

At Wittenberg Luther first explained Aristotle's Logic and Physics: yet
intermitted not his study of Divinity. Three years after, that is Anno 1510. he
was sent into Italy and to Rome in the behalf of his Covent, for the deciding
of some controversies among the Monks. There he saw the Pope and the Popes
palace, and the manners of the Roman Clergy. Concerning which he says; I was
not long at Rome, There I said and heard others say Mass: but in that manner,
that so often as I call them to mind, I detest them. For at the tabe I heard
among other matters some Curtisans laugh and boast, and some concerning the
bread and wine on the Altar to say: Bread thou art, and bread thou shall
remain; Wine thou art, and wine thou shall remain. He further adds, that
the Priests celeberated the Masses so hastily and perfunctorily, that he left
of saying Mass, before he betook himself to the Gospel. And cried out, A way
with it, a way with it. In talk with his familiar friends he would often
rejoice at this his journey to Rome, and say; that he would not for 1000.
florens have been without it. After his return from Rome, Staupicious so
advising, he was made Doctor in Divinity, after the manner of the Schools, and
at the charge of Duke Fredrick Elector of Saxony. For the Prince heard him
Preach, and admired the soundness of his invention, the strength of his
arguments, and the excellence of the things which he dilivered. Now was Luther
thirty years old, and had attained a maturity of Judgment. Luther himself
used to profess, that he would have refused this honor, and that S^aupicius
would have him permit himself to be grac^d with this degree, saying
pleasently; That there were many businesses in Gods Church, wherein he would
use Luthers help. Thi^ speech then spoken in a complementall way, at length
proved true by the event. Thus many presage^ go before great changes. Soon
after he began (as the place required) to explain the Epistle to the Romans
and some Psalms: which he so cleared, that after a long and dark night, there
seemed a new day to arise in the judgment of all pious and prudent men. Here
he showed the difference of the Law and Gospel, and refuted an error then
most frequent both in the Schools and Sermons: nam^ly, that men b^ their works
can deserve remission of their sins; and that menare just before God by
observing the discipline commanded: as the Pharisees taught. Luther therefore
recal'd men's minds to the son of God, and (as John Baptist) showed them the
Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world.

And taught them that for Christ^ sake their sins are forgiven, and that this
benefit is received by faith. He cleared also other points of Ecclesiastical
truth: This beginning made him of great authority, and that much the more,
because his demeanor was suitable to his doctrine, so that his speech seemed to
come from his heart, not from his lips only. For the saying is as true as
old, (...), A man's pious carriage makes his speech persuasive. Hence it was
that men easily assented to him, when afterward he changed some of their rites.
As yet he attempted not to do it, but was a rigid observer of good order, and
add^d something more strict then usual. With the sweetness of this doctrine
all godly minded men were inamoured, and much it affected the learned, that
Christ, the Prophets and Apostles were brought out of darkness and prison,
and that the diff^rence of ^he Law and the Gospel, of Gods Word and
Philosophy, (of which they read nothing in Thom^s, Scotus and their fellows)
now was manifested. Now also Luther betook himself to the study of the Greek
and Hebrew tongues, that upon his knowledge o^ the phraise and propriety of the
Original, he might more exactly judge of Doctrines grounded thereupon.

Luther being thus busied, into Misnia and Saxony, John Tecelius a Domanican
Friar brought Indulgences to be sold. This Tecelius arrived (as other matters,
so especially) that he had so large a commission from the Pope, that though a
man should have defloured the blessed Virgin, for money he could pardon the
sin. And further he did not only give Pardon^ for sins past, but for sins to
come. Luthers godly zeal being inflamed with these proceedings, set forth
certain propositions concerning Indulgences. These he publicly affixed at the
Church next to the Castle of Wittenberge, on All-Saint^ Eve, Anno 1517.

When Luther perceived that the Positions were very well liked of, and
entertained as sound and Orthodox; which he at first propounded to be discussed
by Disputation, till the Church defined what was to be thought concerning
Indulgences; he wrote to Ierom Bishop of Brandenburg, under whose Jurisdiction
he was, and submitted what he had written to the Bishops judgment; and
entreated him tha^ he would dash out with his pen, or consume with the fire,
what he thought unsound. The Bishop answered Luther, and declared that his
desire was, that the setting forth of his arguments about those matters should
a little while be deferred: and that he wished that the common talk about
Indulgences had never been. Luther answered: I am content so ^o do; and had
rather obey, then work Miracles, if I could well do them.

In the year 1518^ Luther, though most men dissuaded him, yet to show his
observance of authority, went (for the most part on foot) to the College of
Hidleberg. In the College of the Augustinians, now called the College of
Sapience, he disputed about Justification by Faith.

Upon Luthers re^urne, he wrote an Epi^^le to Iudocus a Divine and Philosopher
of Isenac, once his Tutour. Where he has this speech; All the Doctors of
Wittenberge (in the doctrine concerning grace and good works) are of my
Judgment, yea the whole University, except one licentiat Doctor Sebastian:
even the Prince himself and our Ordinary Bishop, and many of the Chieftains,
and all the Ingenious Citizens with joint consent affirm, that before they
neither knew nor heard of the Gospel, nor of Christ. The Pope by Thomas
Cajetan Cardinal cited Luther to Rome. Luther having notice hereof, mainly
endeavored that the cause might be handled in Germany under competent Judges:
and at length he prevailed, by the mediation of Wittenberge University to the
Pope, and by Charles Multitius a German the Popes Chamberlain, and the
mediation of the Elector of Saxony to Cajetan then the Popes Legate, that at
Auspurg before the Legate himself, Luther might plead his own cause.

About the beginning of October, Luther came on foot to Auspurg, and upon
assurance of his safety was admitted to the Cardinals presence. Who admonished
him; first, To become a sound member of the Church, and to recant the errors
which he had divulged: secondly, to promise that he would not again teach his
former doctrines: thirdly, that he would abstain from other Doctrines which
would disturb the Peace of the Church. Here also it was objected to him, that
he denied the Merit of Christ to be a treasure of Indulgences: and that he
taught that Faith was necessary for all which should come to the Sacrament.
Luther entreated some time to deliberate thereon: and returned the next day,
and in the presence of some witnesses and a Scribe, and four of the Empeours
Counselors, professed, that he gave the Church of Rome all due observance, and
if he had spoken any thing dissenting from the judgment of the Church, he
would reverse it: but could revoke no error, being not yet convicted by
Scripture of any, and did appeal to the judgment of the Church. But Luther
not convinced as yet by Scripture, persisted in the truth. Yet at length
fearing least the Cardinal should make more use of his power and greatness,
then Scholarlike disputations, he appealed to Rome, and departed from Auspurg,
October 20. Because the Cardinal charged him not to com into his presence,
unless he would recant. Yet Luther left behind him an Epistle to the
Cardinal, and affixed thereunto a formal appeal unto the Pope.

Cajetan took Luthers departure in ill part, and wrote to the Duke of Saxony,
that he would either send Luther to Rome, or banish him out of his territories,
and entreated him not to give credit to Luthers def^nders^ and to take heed of
staining the ill^strio^^s Family, whence he was descended. The Elector returned
answer; That now it was not in his power to do this, because Luther was not
convicted of any error, and did much good service in the University, and did
offer his cause to trial and disputation. The resolution of the Duke was more
confirmed by an Epistle of Era^mus, and the intercession and vote of the
University of Wittenberg. Here I may not pass over a notable proof^ of Luther^
Heroike courage. When Luther came to Auspurg, he by the counsel of such as the
Prince Elector sent with him, waited three days for to have the Emperors
Letters for his safety. In the mean time the Cardinal sent one for Luther;
but he denied to come, until the Emperor granted what he desired. At this the
messenger was offended and said; Do you think that Prince Frederick will take up
arms in your behalf? I desire it not said Luther, in any wise. Then the
Party^ Where then will you abide? Luther answered, Under the cope of Heaven.
The Italian replied, Had you the Pope and the Cardinals in your power, what
would you do? I would said Luther, give them all due honor and reverence. At
this the Messenger after the Italian manner biting his thumbs, went away.

Upon these dealing^ Luthers spirit fainted not, yet least he should cause
detriment or danger to any one, or derive suspicion on his Prince, and that he
might more freely deal with the Papal cure, would have gone into France or
some other Country. But his friends on the contrary, counseled him to stick
firmly to Saxony: and that the Popes Legate should be certi^ied, that was
ready in any safe place appointed him to make his answer. But Luther having
se^led his resolution to depart, took his leave of the Prince Elector, and by a
letter sent to him, November 29. thanked his Highness for all friendly offices
of his love. The Prince sent that letter to the Legate: and appointed Luther to
abide at Wittenberg. Of this Luther thus wrote; The Prince was fully minded
that I should stay: but what his mind now is, since the Royal proceedings are
published, and I have appealed to the Council, I know not.

For he understanding by the Cardinal^ Letter, that Judgment should pass on
him at Rome, he made a new Appeal, saying, that he was forced of necessity to
appeal from the Pope to the Council ensuing, which was in many respects to be
prefe^red before the Pope.

About the same time toward the end of the 18. year, the Pope sent Charles
Multitius a Misnian Knight, and bestowed on Prince Frederick a golden Rose,
according to custom consecrated by the Pope on the fourth Sund^y in Len^: and
exhorted him to continu^ in the faith of his ancestors. He was earnest with
Luther to be reconciled to the Pope: and had seventy Briefes Apostolical (as
they call them) to show; that if the Prince would deliver him out of his
custody, for which cause the Pope sent him the Ro^e, in seventy Towns, the
seventy Briefes should be set up, and so he should be brought safe to Rome. He
further required of Luther, that he would have a regard to the Churches peac^;
and promised to endeavous, that the Pope should do the like: Luther freely
promised most readily to do what ever ^e could with a saf^ conscience in
regard of Gods Truth: and affirmed that himself was d^s^rous and studious of
peace, and tha^ i^ was no^ his fault that these stirs arose; for n^cessity
had urged him to do, what he had done.

Frederick the Electo^ a prudent and Religio^^ Prince neither yielded to the
Popes desire, nor vouchsafed his ^ose any respect: though Multitius
wornderfully boasted of it at Dresa, and said, Doctor M^rtin is in my power.
About this time the Bohemians sending a book written by John Hu^ to Luther,
encouraged him to constancy and patience^ and confessed that the Divinity
taught by Luther was sound and right.

Matters b^ing grown to this height of dispute, and Luther having many
adversaries; at Leipsick a town in Misni^ belong^ng to George Duke of Saxony
Cosen-german to Prince Frederick, in the 19. year a Disputation was held.
Thither come Andre^^ Carolostadius accompanied with Luther, Melancthon and
Barninus Duke of Pomerania. He at that time was in office in the University of
Wittenberg. Thither came also John Eckius a Di^ine of Ingolstad. Hereupon, I^ne
the 17. John Eckius and Carolastodius began the Disputation about Free Will.
Namely, whether there be in man any free will to do good as of himself? that
is, as they say; whether in congruity we deserve grace, when we do what is in
us to do? Eckius granted that there is not in man a genuine and natural power
and ability to do a good work, but an acquired. On this point eight days
were spent by his playing the Sophester. Lut^er could by no means obtain
leave of Duke George freely with his safety to dispute, and thereupon came not
as a Disputer, but as an Auditor to Leipsick, under the protection granted to
Carol^stadius.

In the year 1520. upon Multitius advise, Luther wrote to the Pope, and sent
him his book lately written concerning Christian liberty, and offered
conditions of peace. About this time Frederick the Elector fell into a grievous
^icknesse. Whereupon Luther moved by some of his friends, and out of Christian
charity wrote the book called Tesseradecas to comfort him. Then also he wrote
the book Of Confession of sins: in which he took occasion to speak of Vows,
and deplored their torturing of men's consc^ences. Charles the Emperor
requested to hear Erasmus judgment concerning Luther, and wondered that so
great and extreme hatred should be raised by some Monks and the Pope against
Luther, whose life and carriage he conceived to be commendabl^, and his
doctrine not impious; Erasmus answered in a pleasant manner; That his Highness
needed not wonder at that; for Luther had in his disputations dealt against the
Monks bellies, and the Popes crown.

It is reported that these advocates of the Pope did promise Erasmus a
Bishopric of rich revenew, if he would write against Luther. But he answered;
That Luther was a man too great for him to write against; and that he learn^d
more from one short page of Luthers writings, then from all Thomas Aquinas
books. It is also said, that Margaret the Emperors Aunt, who ruled all
Belgium; when the Magistri n^stri of Lovan complained, that Luther with his
writings did subvert all Christendme, did demand what manner a man Luther was;
when they answered, that he was an unlearned Monk, she replied: Why then, s^e
that all you learned men, being a great multitude, write aganst that one
unlearned fellow: and doubtless the world will give more credit to many of you
being learned, then to him being but one and unlearned.

Luther knowing what was don with his writings, An. 1520. December. 10. called the
Students of Wittenberg together, and in a frequent assembly of learned men,
before the gate o^ Elister near to the great College, where a fire was made,
ca^t the Popes laws and the Bull of Leo with some writings of Eckius, Emser,
and others thereinto; and said, Because thou troublest Christ the holy one of
God, eternal fire will trouble thee. The next day he expounded the Psalms,
and earnestly charded his auditors that as they loved the salvation of their
souls, they should take heed of the Popes statutes. And in writing gave a
reason presently of this his action.

Here Frederick Prince Elector obtained of the Emrerour to call Luther^ to the
Court held at Worms in March An. 1521. Luther receiving the Emperors grant
for his safety, went from Wittenberg.

Here many did dehort Luther from going to Wormes^ Others said, that by the
burning of his books, he might know what was the Popes censure concerning
himself: Others told him of the usage of Hus and Sav^narola. But Luther with a
resolute courage lightly regarded their advise, and said, that these
disc^uragements were but cast into his way by Satan, who knew, that by the
profession of of the Truth, especially in so illustrious a place, his kingdom
would be shaken and indamaged. He further brak^ forth into th^se words: If I
knew that there were so many Devils at Worms as tiles on the houses, yet would
I go thither. They say ^he Duke of Bavaria his Iester, whether suborned by
others, or by some instinct, met Luther at his entrance into the town with a
Cross, as is wont in funerals, and sung with a loud voice: W^lcome, com^st
th^^ ^ither, and much desired of us, who sat in darkness.

On the twenty ^ix of April Luther taking his leave departed from Worms.
Casp. Sturmius a Messeng^r some hours after followed him, and found him at
Openheim. Luther being in his journey sent Letters back both to Caesar and the
Pirinces Elector^ and Sta^^s of there Empire, commending himself and his cause
to them; and said he was ready to do any thing which was meet, except to
revoke any things that he knew to be warranted by Gods word. Frederick the
Elector ^ prudent Prince, seeing Luther to have incurred the hatred of all;
that no danger might seize on him, ^ommitted the bu^iness of conveying Luther
into some safe place, where he might be free from access, to some faithful
friends of the Nobility, that there he should be kept priv^te, till Caesar was
departed out of Germany. They pr^sently, faithfully and secretly conveyed him
to the Castle of Wartenburg neear Is^nack: This place Luther afterward used to
call his Pa^mos.

At length not enduring further delay and innovations, he returned from his
Patmos to Wittenberg. In this 2^2. year the New Testament came forth, as it was
translated into the German tongue in his P^^mos, and afterward revi^ed some
what by Melancthon. He wrote also a letter to the Bohemians conce^ning matters
of great moment, and exhorted them to constancy in the truth which they had
received, and that the^ would no^ fall back to An^ich^ist for a vain hope of
peace: He also dissuaded them from making themselves g^ilty of the innocent
blood of John Hus an^ Jerome of Prague.

About this time also, Luth^^ ^onfuted Nicolas Stork, Thomas Muncer and other
fanaticall ringleaders, and Prophet^ broaching new d^ctrines, who pretended
revelations Angilicall, and conferences with God, and denied the B^ptisme of
infants: and thereby sowed the seed of An^baptisme. These false prophets came
from the Cygn^an Ci^y to Wittenberg, in Luthers absence, and molested
Car^l^st^de and Melancthon. Now also Luther answered Henry the eight King of
(...), who as other adv^rsarie^ also, (...) ou^ a book against Luther, and had
given him by Pope Leo ^he ti^le of D^fender of the Faith of the Church.

Then Luther set forth the book concerning ^h^ dignity and office of the Civil
Magistrate. He also set forth the five books of Moses in the German tongue,
^hr^e thousand years since the death of Moses. H^ published also a book to the
Senate of Prague, about ordaining of Minist^rs, and another, about avoiding the
doctrine of men.

The year 1526. in October, Luther laid aside his Monkishhood: and declared his
judgem^nt conc^rning the Synod to be called for determination of the
Ceremonies. Now also Luther renewed the ordination of Ministers of the Gospel
in the Church: Of whom Ge^rge Rorarius was the first^ Lut^er being forty two
years old, of a sudden and unexspect^dly m^rried Katherin a Bo^a a noble
Virgin, late a Nun.

Luthers adversari^s not only observed the time of the marryage, but
proclaimed the marriage to be inc^stuous, in which a Monk married a Nun.
Hereupon the King of England in his Answer to Luther, styles this marriage
incestuou^, and there says among other opprobries put upon Luther, that he
could not have committed a ^in of higher nat^re. Against these disgraces Luther
thus animated himself, saying; If my marriage b^ a work of God, what wonder
is there, if the flesh be offended at it? It is offended even at the flesh
which God o^^ Creator took, and gave to be a ransom, and food for the
salvation of the the world: if the world was not offended with me; I should be
offended with the world, and should fear that it was not of God, which I have
done. Now seeing the world is vexea and troubl^d at, I am confirmed in my
course and comforted in God.

Then Luther wrote a consolatory letter to John Husse of Breslow a Teacher of
the Gospel, notwithstanding the scandal raised by the Heretics, and their
fighting against the Articles of our Faith: and in special manner he ^nimated
him against Schwenfeld and Cr^ntwald.

In the 27. year the Anabapti^^s broached their new doctrine, about the not
baptizing of infants; and were themselves rebaptised: they also taught
community of goods. Both Luther and Zwinglius wrote against them, and the
Magistrates punished them in diverse places.

About the beginning of the year 1527. Luther fell suddenly sick of a
congealing of blood about his hears, which almost killed him: but the drinking
of the water of Carduus Benedictus, whose virtues then was not so commonly
known, he was presently helped. This year also he put forth the Story of
Leonard Keisar his friend, who was burnt for the Gospels sake, at the Command
of William Duke of Bavaria.

In the beginning of the year 1529. Luther put fort^ his greater and lesser
Catec^ismes for the good of the under sort of people, and admonished the
Pastors and Ministers that they would seriously attend their offices, and teach
car^fully in the Villages. That they would preach still the same things (...)
the same points and often press them upon the people. Her^ also Luther put
forth a book against the Turk in the German tongue. In this year was held that
solemn and numerous assembly before the Emperor and the States of the Empire,
which was printed and made known to all the Nations of Europe. Luther composed
the seventeen Articles, before the Divines of Saxony took their journey to
A^gusta: In these Articles he omitted scholastic disputes and point^
unnec^ssary for the peoples instruction, and comprised the sum of wholesome
and necessary doctrine for the salvation of men's souls and true piety.

After this the Confession written by Melancthon according to Luthers direction
and advise, was exhibited in the Latin and German tongues in Caesar's palace,
June 25. at two a clock in the afternoon, and was read by the Chancellor of
Saxony before Charles the fifth, Ferdinando and all the El^ctors and Princes
being assessors, and that with so shrill and loud a voice, that not only in
that large Hall, but also in the Court beneath and in the places adjoining it
was well heard. They who subscribed to this Conf^ssion were John Duke of
Saxony, George Marquess of Brandenb^ugh, Ernest and Franci^ brothers, Dukes of
Brunswick and Lunenburgh; Philip Landgrave of Has^ia, Wolfgang Prince of
Anhalt; and two Citi^s of the Empire, Norinberg and Reutling.

In the year 1533. Luther comforted the Citizens of Oschatz by his letter, who
had been turned out for hi^ confession of the Gospel; In his letter h^ says,
The Devil i^ ^he Host, and the World is his Inn: so that where ever yo^ come,
you shall be sure to find this ugly Host. In the year 1534. the German Bible
translated by him, and brought into one body, was first printed, as the old
privilege dated at Bibliopol^^ under the Electors hands shows.

In the year 1535. this Bible was publish^d. Th^n the fancies of the
Anabaptists began to appear in Westphalia, and made a very great combustion.
This year Lut^er began publicly to preach on Genesis, which task ^e ended (as
himself was wont to ominate) with his life, six years after. In February the
year following the Duke El^ctor of Saxony with the Confederate Princes and
Cities, and their Divines held an Assembly at Smalcald for matters of Religion.

At this meeting Luther fell sick of a grievous disease, so that there was no
hope of his life. He was pained of the stone, and obstruction in the bladder
eleven days. Here he, though most of his friends disliked and reasoned against
it, would be carried thence; the event proved his resolution good. George Sturk
the Physician being s^nt for from Erphord went along with him. Luther as he was
carried along, made his Will; in which he bequ^athed his detestation of Popery
to his friends and Pastors: as before in the house of Spalatinus in the year
1530. where he made thi^ Verse.

Pestis eram vivus, moriens ero mors tua Papa.
I living, stopped Romes breath,
And Dead, will be Romes Death.
But the night after his departure thence he begen to be somewhat better.

He took delight to express some things in his own tongue, and in Ryme. Of
which some were to this sense and meaning.

Ea^e what is sodden well;
Dr^^ke what is pure and clear:
That thou the truth does tell,
To all let it appear.
Speak not to all, what ever thou do know^
If thou ^e well, keep wisely were thou art:
Conserve with care, what ever is thine ^^^ne,
Mischan^^ (...) ^ooted comes like th'nimbling ^art.
Be silent in ^ue time, abstain, sustain,
Hold up thy head. Of need to none compl^ine;
Despair not of Gods help, thy state to ^^sy,
Who sends as^^stance to us every day.
He was in his private converse of such behavior that his life was a patterene
of virtue. As he dined or supped, oftentimes he would dicta^e matter to be
preached; sometimes corrected the faults of the press, sometim^s he would
recreate himself and others with Music. He was by nature (which Melancthon
would often wonder at) a moderate eater and drinker: and yet had no small or
weak body: He has been seen for four d^yes together and being in health, to
eat and drink nothing at set meal times: and often at other times for many
days to be content with a little bread and fish. I will say nothing how in the
Cloisters he macerated himself with watchings, fasting, labors. Oftentimes
being invited to Banquets, he went not, because he would not lose his time, I,
said he, lose too much time by invitations to Feasts here in the City: I know
Sa^^n has such an hand in it: that I may not deny it, and yet it does me harm
to accept the courtisy. In company he was familiar, pleasent courteous yet
grave, as beseemed a man of his place. He was ^ffable, and studious of truth.

Melancthon affirms, that he often found him ^t prayer with great ardency and
tears imploring God for the whole Church. He set apart every day a certain
time for the reading some Psalms, and intermixed his own prayers and tears
with them. He often used to say; that he was offended with them, who either
through Idleness or variety of employment said, that it was enough to pray
with groans only. And for that end said he, forms of prayer are prescr^bed
us by the will of God, that reading might in^l^me our minds, yea that the
voice also might profess, wha^ God we call upon.

When ^e recreated his mind, and took it of from study, he delighted to play
at Chesse, and was skillful at it. He sometimes practiced the art of Turning
with his serv^nt Wolfgang; and would say, if the world should den^ us
s^stenance for my pains in Gods word, we would learn to get our living^ with
our hands. Sometimes he did play on an Instrument, sometimes shoot. He was
careful also of the neatness of his Garden, and desired of his friends
variety of plants to furnish it: So that he had no vacant time. Of his
employments thus he writes; I am very full of employment preaching to the
people might well require all my pains, my course of worshipping God and prayer
might wholly busy m^, my pains b^ expounding Scriptures by writing, my
writing Epistles, my care of other men's affairs tak^t^ up my time; my converse
with my friends (which I use to call a feeding of my corpse) does very badly
steal away a great part of my time. It was his usual course either to
meditate, or to read, or preac^, or to give good counsel to his friends: so
that h^ was never idle.

He was very liberal to the poor. On a time when a Stdents asked some money
of him, he bad his wife give him some thing: and when she excused the matter in
regard of their penury at that time: he took up a silver cup and gave it to
the Scholar, and bid him sell it to the G^ld-smith, and keep the money for his
o^^a^^ons. When a friend sent him 200. angels of gold from the metal-mines he
bestowed them all on poor Students: When John the Elector, gave him a new
gowne^ he said, that he was made to much of, for if here we receive a full
recompense of our labors, we shall hope for none in another life. When the
same Elector offered him a vain of Metals at Sneberge: he refused it, lest he
should incur the tentations of the Devil, who is Lord of treasure under the
Earth. He took nothing of Printers for his copies, as he writes, saying, I
have no plenty of money, and thus yet I deal with the Printers, I receive
nothing from them ^or recompense of my many Copies, sometimes I receive of them
one copy. This I think is due to me, whereas other writers, yea translaters,
for every eight leaves have an Angel. Concerning money given him thus he
writes; The hundredth Angels given me I roceived by Tanbenhem, and Schart gave
me fifty: that I stand in fear, that God will give me my reward here. But I
protested that I would not so be satisfied by him, I will either presently
repay it or spend it. For what should I do with so much money? I gave one
half of it to P. Prior, and made him a joyful man.

He was very lovingly affectioned toward his children, and gave them liberal
education: He kept in his house a Schoolmaster to train them up in good arts
and a godly life. When he saw Magdalen his eldest daughter ready to dye, he
read to her in Esaias 26.19. Thy dead servants shall rise again, together with
my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust: For
thy dew is at the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. Come my
people, enter into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee: Hide thy self
as it were for a litt^e moment, until the indignation be over-past,. My
daughter enter thou into thy chamber with peace, I shall ere long be with thee.
For God will not permit me to see the punishments hanging over the head of
Germany. And upon t^is wept plentifully. But in public when he went a long
with the Hearse he bridled his affection, and was not seen to shed one tear.
And as all men of excellent spirits have a zealous anger in due place: So
Luther by nature was vehement, but yet placable: As appears in this, that
when Melancthon much moved to passion once came unto him, and all the rest were
very mute, Luther uttered this Verse.

Vince animos iramque tuam, qui caetera vinci^.
Thine own heart overcome, thy fury tame,
Who all things else have stoutly overcame.
And then smiling, said^ we will not further dispute of this matter, and turned
his speech to other occasions.

He foresaw and foretold many things, as the combustion which rose in Germany;
saying I am very much afraid, that if the Princes give ear to Duke George his
ill counsel, there will arise some tumult, which will destroy all the Princes
and Magistrates in all Germany, and engage in it all the Clergy. Of the death
of Frederick Elector of Saxony, thus he writes, If God in heaven has resolved
in wrath to deal with us, that neither our prayres, nor counsels of amendment
can hinder it, let us obtain this that our Josias may sleep in peace, though
the world be left to go into its Babylon.

Of the covetousness, of Germany and the dearth there, thus he speaks. We
fear Famine, and we shall suffer it, and find no remedy for it. And when as
without necessity, we are solicitous to prevent Famine, like wicked and
incredulous Gentles, and neglect the word of God and his work; he will permit
shortly a dismal day to come upon us, which will bring with it whole W^inloads
of ceares; which he shall neither have power or means to escape. Diverse other
things he also foretold.

He had his health competently well, but that sometimes he was troubled with
the headache, especially in his elder years. Whereupon he was afraid of some
violent Apoplexy: and when he felt a swimming in his head, or noise in his
ears, he used to say, Lord Jesus, smite me gently, for I am absolved from my
sins according to thy word, and am fed unto life eternal by thy body and
blood. Thine Apostle John and our Elector were taken out of this world, by this
kind of death. He endured often tentations, whereupon he said, All here are in
health except Luther, who is ^ound in body, and without suffers at no man's hand
in the world: only the Devil and all his Angels vex him.

He was of an indefferent stature, of strong body, of so Lion-like a quickness
of his eyes, that some could not endure to look directly upon him, when he
intentively beheld them. They say that one of mild spirit, who could not endure
in private to talk with Luther; was courteously used by Luther, yet was so
pierced with the quickness of his eyes, that being amazed he knew no course
better then to run from him. His voice was mild and not very clear; whereupon,
when on a time there was mention at table about Paul's voice, which was not very
perfect and full: Luther said, I also have a low speech and pronuntiation. To
whom Melancthon answered, But this small voice is heard very far and near.

In the year 1544. the 17. of November he finished his explication of Genesis:
which was his last public reading in the University, which he concluded with
these words: Thus end I my explication on Genesis; God grant that others may
more rightly and truly expound it; then I have done I cannot proceed farther
therein, my strength fails me, pray for me, that it would please God to grant
me a quiet and comfortable departure out of this life.

In the year 1546. Luther accompanied with Melancthon vi^^ted his own Country,
and returned again in safety. Not long after, the Council of Trent being
begun, and having ^^te once or twice, Luther was called again by the E^rles of
Mansfield to his own Country, for to compose a dissension among them
concerning their bounds and heritages. Luther was not wont to deal in matters
of this nature, having been versed in sacred studyes all his life time: but
because he was borne at Isleben, a town in the territories of Mansfield, he
was willing to do his Country service in this kind. Wherefore making his last
Sermon at Wittenberg the 17. day of January, he to^ke his journey on the twenty
third day: And at Hall in Saxony lodged at Iustas Jonas his house, where he
stayed three days because of the ro^ghn^sse of the waters, and preached the
26. of January upon Paul's Conversion. On the 28. day being Thursday at Hall he
passed over the river with Iustas Jonas and his own three sons, and being in
danger of drowning said to Dr. Jonas; Think you not, that it would rejoice the
Devil very much, if I and you and my three sons should be drowned? When he
came to the Earls of Mansfield, he was entertained by a hundred horsemen or
more of the Court, and was brought into Isleben very honorable, but very sick,
and almost past recovery: which thing he said did often befall him when he had
any great business to undertake. But using some means for cure of his
infirmity, he sat at supper with the company; and so continued to do from the
29. of January to the 17. of February, and treated of the dfferences, for whose
determination he came thither. In this time he preached sometimes, and twice
received the Lords Supper, and publickely received two Students into the sacred
order of the Ministry. And at his lodging used much godly conference at Table
with his friends, and every day devoutly prayed. The day before his death,
though he was somewhat weak, yet he dined and supped with his company; and at
supper spak of diverse matters, and among other passages asked, Whether in
heaven we should know one another? when the rest desired to hear his judgment
thereof. He said, What befell Adam? he never saw Eve, but was at rest in a deep
sleep when God formed her, yet when he awaked and saw her, he asks not, what
she was, nor whence she came; but says, that she was flesh of his flesh and
bone of his bone. Now how knew he that? He being full of the Holy Ghost, and
endued with the knowledge of God, thus spoke. After the same manner we also
shall be in the other life renewed by Christ; and shall know our parents, our
wives and children, and all about us, much more perfectly, then Adam knew Eve
at her bringing to him.

After supper, when he went aside to pray, as was his custom, the pain in his
breast began to increase: whereupon by the advice of some there present, he
took a little Unicorns horn in wine: and after that slept quietly an hour
or two on a pallat near the fire. When he awaked, he betook himself to his
chamber, went to bed, and bidding his friends good nght, admonished them, who
were present to pray God for the propagation of the Gospel; because the
Council of Trent and the Pope would attempt wonderful devises against it.
Having thus said, after a little silence he fell a sleep: But was awaked by the
violence of his disease after midnight. Then complained he again of the
narrowness of his breast, and perceiving that his life was at an end, he thus
implored Gods mercy, and said.

O heavenly father my gratio^s God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, thou
God of Consolation, I give the all hearty thanks, that thou have revealed to me
thy Son Jesus Christ; whom I believe, whom I profess, whom I love, whom I
glorify, whom the Pope of Rome and the rout of the wicked persecute and
dishonor. I beseech thee, Lord Jesus Christ ^o receive my soul. O my gracious
heavenly Father, though I be taken out of this life, though I must now lay
down this frail^ body: yet I certainly know, that I shall live with with thee
eternally, and that I cannot be taken out of thy hands. He added moreover. God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that every one, who
believes in him should not perish, but have life everlasting. And that in the
68. Psalm. Our God is the God of salvation: and our Lord is the Lord, who can
deliver from death. And here taking a medicine and drinking it, he further
said, Lord I render up my spirit into thy hands and come to thee. And again,
Lord into thy hands I commend my spirit, thou, O God of truth have redeemed me.
Here as one falling asleep and without any bodily pain, that could be
discerned, he departed this life. And when Doctor Jonas and Caelius said, O
reverend father do you dye in the constant confession of^ that doctrine of
Christ, which you have hitherto preached? He answered so as he might be heard:
yea, which was the last word he spoke. Thus he in his native Country, not
having seen it many years before, dyed much lamented by many. This ^ell on the
eighteen day of Febru. on the day in the Calender ascribed to Concord, about
three a clock in the morning, in the great climactericall year of his age. Soon
after his body put into a coffin of Lead, was carried in funeral manner to the
Temple of Isleben: where Iustas Jonas preached.

Then the Earls of Mansfield desired that his body should be interred within
their territories: But the Elector of Saxony, required that he should be
brought bark to Wittenberge. In the return thereof, which way so ^v^r it went,
it was honorably attended, and with much grief accompanied out of each
Princes Dominion: and at lengh upon the twenty two of February in the
afternone, was brought to Wittenberg, and was carried into the Temple near
adjoining to the Castle, with such a troop of Princes, Earls, Nobles, their
living as students, and other people, that the like was seldom or never se^n
in that town. When the funeral rites were perforned, Pomeranus preached to an
ass^mbly of many thousands. And after that Melancthon with many tears and
^ighe^ made a funeral Oration. When this was don, the coffin with his body was
put by the hands of diverse learned men, into the tomb near to the Pulpit, in
which he had made many learned Sermon^ before diverse Princes, Electors, and the
Congregation of many faithful Christians. In a brazen plate his picture,
lively deciphered was there set up, with Verses by it to this effect.

This Sepulcher great Luthers Corpse contanes
This might su^^ice: yet, read these following strains.
HEre, in this Vrne does Martin Luther res^,
And sweetly sleep in hope to rise most blessed.
By whose rare pains, firm faith and Christ's free Grace;
Which formerly, thick Fogs of Error base.
And Duskie Clouds ^j W^rks desert hid quite,
Were well reduced to their ancient Light.
For, when blind Superstition ruled All,
And did fair Trnth, long time, suppress and thrall;
He, by Gods Word and Spirits inspiration,
The Gospels Light re-spred, for every Nation.
And, well-instructed by Paul's sacred voice,
(Scorning Romes Cheats,) to teach pure Truth, made choice.
And as John Baptist in the Wilderness,
Did Gods Lamp, who heals Sin Preach and express:
So (O Sweet Christ) did Luther clear thy book,
When all the World was caught with Errors ^ooke.
And what the difference was betwixt the Law
(Whose tables Moses brake, though God he saw
Upon Mount-Sinai) and the Gospel sweet,
Which heales Sin conscious hearts, which Gods wrath meet.
This difference lost to The World he did restore,
That so Christ's gifts of Grace might shine the more;
He stoutly did oppose Romes Cheats and Charms,
And Papal rule, which wrought Gods Saints great harms.
Exhorting all, Romes idols for to fly,
He many souls wan to true piety.
And, mauger all Romes threats and snares most sly,
Finished in Faith, his Course most valiantly.
Dying in peace, his Soul with Christ does rest,
Crowned with immortal Glory, truly blessed.
For which rare Doctor, let both high and low
Bless God, that they so clear Christ's truth do know.
And pray the Lord that these his Gospels rays
May to the World shine-forth for datelesse days.
Philip Melancthon.
Dead is grave Luther, worthy all due praise,
Who set forth Christ, in Faiths illustrious rays.
His Death the Church laments, with sighs sincere,
Who was her Pastor, nay, her Patron dear,
Our Isreal's Chariots and Horsemen rare;
Is dead, with me let All sad Sables wear;
Let them their grief in groaning verses sing,
For such sad Knells, such Orphans best may ring.
Theodore Beza.
Rome tamed the World, the Pope tamed Rome, so great;
Rome ruled by power, the Pope by deep Deceit.
But, how more large, than theirs, was Luthers Fame,
Who, with One Pen, both Pope and Rome does tame?
Go, fictious Greece, go tell Alcides, then,
His Club is nothing to great Luthers Pen.
John Major.
By Luthers labors Leo the tenth is slain;
Not Hercles Club, but Luthers Pen's his bane.
Joachim a Beuft.
When Luther died, then with him died most sure
A Crown, and credit of Religion pure.
His Soul soared up to heaven, on Concords day,
Which tended Luther thither, on his way:
Dear Christ, since Discord followed with Coats rent,
Give to thy Spouse Elijahs ornament.
Upon his Tombstone the University of Wittenberg, as to her beloved father,
engraved.

MARTINI LVTHERIS. THEOLOGIAE D. CORPUS. H. L. S. E. QVI ANNO CHRISTI
M.D^XLVI.XII. CALL. MARTII EISLEBII IN PATRIAS. M. O. C. V. AN. LXIII.M.III.D.X.

Luthers writing were published at Wittenberg and Iene in several Towns both
in Latin and German tongue. Part of them were expositions of Scriptures, part
doctrinall, part polemicall. Of these this was his own judgment. Above all I
beseech the godly Reader, and I beseech him for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake,
that he would read my writings judiciously and with much pi^ying my case.

In Wedlock he lived chastely and godly above twenty years, and when he dyed,
left three sons and Catharin de Bora a widow, who lived after his death seven
years. To her it was a great grief that her husband died in a place far from
her, so that she could not be with him, and perform the last conjugall offices
to him in his sickness. In the time of the war which presently followed, she
wandered up and down with her orphants, and in banishment was exposed to many
difficulties and dangers: And besides the miseries of widowhood; which are full
many, the ingratitude of many did much afflict her, for where she hoped for
kindness in regard of her husbands worthy and noble deserts of Gods Church,
often she was put of with great indignity. When afterward her house at
Wittenberg in time of pestilence was infected, she for her childrens safety, as
became a godly mother, betook her self to Torg, where was also an University.
But in the way, when the horses affrighted ran out and seemed to endanger the
wagon, she amazed not so much for her own, as her childrens preservation,
lept out of the Wagon, whereby poor wretch she grievously bruised her body in
the fall, and being cast into a poole of cold water, caught thereby a disease,
of which she lay sick three months in banishment, and pining away at length
dyed quietly in the year 1552.

Welfare those gentle Quil^ (whose ere they be)
Whose meritorio^s labors shall set free
The Urne imprisoned Dust of that renowned
Thrice famous Luther: Let his head be crowned
With sacred Immortality, and raised
Much rather to be wondered at then praised.
Let B^bes unborn, like fruitful plants bring forth
To after days new Momuments of his worth,
And time out lasting Name: that Babels Whore
And all his bald-pa^e panders may even rore
For very anguish, and then gnaw and bite
Their tongues for malice and their nails for spite;
Whilst men made perfect in his well know story
May all turn Patr^os, and protect his Glory.
ERASMUS ROTERDAMVS.
The life and Death of Desiderius Erasmu^.
HIs Sirnam^ implies the place of his birth, Roterdam is a City of Holland;
Holland the seat of the ancient Batavi: but now illustrious by the production
of one pen, then by all her former harvests of pykes. Seven Cit^es, no
co^temptible portion of witty and work-like Greece, accounted the Nativitie of
Homer, so great an access to their other glories, that they seriously contested
about it. Although Homer (because Antiquity will have it so) be greater then
Erasmus; yet little Roterdam has more to boast of in him, then great Athens,
Smyrna, Rhodes, Colophon, Chios, Salamis or Argos, in the other. For it is
certain, Erasmus was born at Roterdam, but pitch upon what City of those seven
you please, it is six to one, whether Homer was born there or not. But what
talk we of Roterdam? Rhenamus sticks not to impute his Nativity to the fortune
of Emperors, and felicity of the whole German Empire: within the limits whereof
he was born, upon the vigil or Eve of Simon and Jude, under Frederick the
third: But in what year of our Lord, or that Emporors reign, is not remembered;
this is certain in the year of grace 1519. he was either 50. or 52. his
mothers name was Margaret, daughter to one Peter, a physician of Zavenberg; his
father Gerard. These accompanied together secretly (but not without promise of
marriage) until the young woman proved with child. Gerards father was named
Helias, and his wife Catherine: each of them lived till past 95. They had ten
Sons, without any daughters, all married except Gerard, who was the youngest
save one. All of them much resented this Clandestine combination and commixture
betwixt Gerard and Margaret; wherefore to prevent their marriage, to gain his
portion to themselves, and yet not loose a brother, able in time, to feast them
at his own cost; they resolve out of ten, to give Gerard, as the Tieth, unto
God: that is to dedicate him to the Church; whereby perceiving himself
excluded from marriage, and not yet resolved to enter into holy Orders, he fled
to Rome. By the way he wrote back to his friends; the reason of his journey he
intimated by the impresse of his seal, which had one hand infolded in another.
In the mean time Margaret was brought to bed, and the child (the subject of
this discourse) cheerfully received, and carefully nourished by his
grand^mother. Gerard after his arrival at Rome, maintained himself by his
Pen; for he wrote an exellent hand, and Printing was not then found out, or but
in the infancy: In process of time the Copying out of learned books begat in
him a love to learning it self: so that besides his knowledge in the Tongues
both Greek and Latin, he became a considerable proficient in the Laws, which
he might the more easily do, Rome then abounding with many learned and able
Scholars, and he himself having the happiness to be an Hearer of Guarinus.

His father and brethren having certain intilligence, both of his being and
well being at Rome, fraudulently advertise him by letters, that she was dead,
whom he intended to marry, and therefore advise him to dispose of himself to
his best advantage; which he rashly believing, out of mere grief, became a
Priest: applied himself wholly to those studies which he judged most
isntrumental to his function: after his return into Holland (whereby the
Popes favor he obtained a Benefice) though he plainly saw how he had been
deluded, yet would he never thereafter keep her company, or she marry any
other. Notwithstanding he took special care for the liberal education of the
child, whom he put to School when he was yet scarce four years of age.

From Vtrecht, where for the sweetness of his voice he had been chosen
Querister; and after some years spent (but without any notable proficiency) in
reading, writing, Music, and the elements of Grammar, he removed him to
D^ventry. That his tender years must not want a nurse, his mother (impatient of
his absence) accompanied him: what learning that semibarbarus school afforded
was formerly raked out of Ebrardus, and Johannes de Garl^^dia; this was also in
the fate of Erasmus, to find there before him, Alexander Hegius skillful in
Latin, and not ignorant in Greek: having had Rodolphus Agricola, and Guarinus
Veronersis, the one for his Companion, the other for his schoolmaster: together
with Zi^thius, a man not unlettered, considering the times; who perceiving in
Erasmus an admirable wit, joined with an incomparable memory, promoted him to
the third Class, and dismissing him with a kiss, foretold he should become the
envy and wonder of all Germany^ And indeed the event came nothing short of his
prophecy.

At Daventry, in the thirteenth year of his age, his mother died of the Plague;
and with her most of the family where she lodged: those sad and sudden news,
so affected Gerard that within few days after, he followed her to the next
world whom he was not permitted to, enjoy in this. Which caused Erasmus (now an
Orphane) to return into his own Country; where he found three Curators or
Gardians assigned him by h^s Father (the cheiefe was one Peter Winkell a
schoolmaster) these three trusty Trojans in hope to make a booty of his
Patrimony, in sted of an University, for which he was ripe, resolve to s^rve
him into a Monastery: From Daventry therefore they committed him to a convent
of Friars regular at Boslednt in Brabar^; Here he lived, that is (as himself
expou^ds it) almost lost three years, Romboldus their reader, partly out of
affection, and partly prompted thereto by Winkell, did what he could to draw
him to their Order, but in vain; he had already seen enough to dissuade him
from that, or any other Fraternity of that kind. Whilst he remained a Recluse
at Bosleduc, he became intimatly acquainted with Hermannus Gaudensis, a learned
young man, and a notable student, by whose persuasion, and help, he most
accurately red over almost all the Classical Authors extant in the Latin
tongue; whether in prose or verse. But whilst, for bettering his mind, he
overcharged and neglected his tender body, he fell into a tertian Ague: His
Guardians lay hold on the occasion, press him again and again to a Regular
profession, to blandishments add threats leaving no stone unroled, in
prosecution of their perfidious design: He excuses himself modestly, and by
many arguments defends his diniall; but they pricked on by avarice, resolve
not to be satisfied with reason.

Wherefore from Bosleduc, they hurry him to Sion, a Monastery near Delfe: At
Emaus a neighboring Convent, it was his fortune to meet with Cornelius his
Companion and Chamberfellow at Daventry; by whose importunity rather then
arguments, he was persuaded to spin out his Probasion year at Emaus; which
almost finished, through poverty, which hindered his present removal, and
shame to seem averse from Religion, though he persisted in his opinion, he made
a shift for some few days longer, to dissemble his resolution. In the mean
time Henricus a Birgis, a noble man by extraction, and Bishop of Cambray,
preparing for Rome, in hope of a Gardinals Cap, wanted nothing so much as ready
money, and a young man skillful in the Latin tongue, to accompany him; this
fell out pat for Erasmus, whose great abilities in that kind, being reported to
the Bishop, he thought it needles to go further and speed worse. And Erasmus
(now in Sacred orders) to avoid the profession he so much disaffected, readily
under^ook the journey. The Bishop of Vtrecht with the consent of the Prior and
General of the Order, was easily persuaded to license his departure; but
Cambray, in whom avarice counterpoysed ambition, choosing rather to keep his
old Mitre with his money, then purchase a new Hat at so vast a sum as was
demanded, upon b^tter consideration stayed at home: this made Erasmus, fearing
his inconstancy in other things, beg leave to prosecute his Studies at Paris;
which he obtained, with promise of a yearly pension for his better
encouragement, and many other good-morrows, which like other great men in like
cases, he never performed. At Paris in the College (named) of the Mount, he
studied School divinity, applying himself therein according to the custom of
the pla^e, to the precepts and principles of Sco^us, who for his great wit, and
inextricable distinctions, was there chiefly followed, and in greatest
admiration: but these conimbrums, whether Real or Nominall, went down with
Erasmus like chopped hay, having some show indeed of soliditie, but scarce the
substance of a mere shadow. He was a sworn enemy to whatsoever savord of
barbaritie, and here he found nothing, whether for food or physic, but
Rabarbarum, unless you will needs reckon rotten eggs, and a stinking
infectious chamber into the bargain; which in process of time so poisoned his
dainty and amiable complexion, as enforced him to quit the place, and return to
his old Patron the Bishop of Cambray: with whom he not only advanced his
private studies, but s^rued himself into the familiar acquaintance of many
famous and learned men, amongst whom the principal were Antonius Abbas, and
Iacobus Battus Recorder of Be^gen.

Having recovered his health, he returned into Holland, with a full purpose to
settle himself in his own Country: from whence notwithstanding, whether by
advise of friends, or upon some emergent discouragement, he went immediately
back again to Paris. Where the Pestilence raging for a long time without
intermission, and benevolences coming either short, or but slowly from the
Bishop, for his private supply he was forced to make a journey once every
year into Holland, to the great interruption of his other employments; this
made him lend a more willing ear to the motion of young Montjoy, who being at
that time a Traveller in France, made choice of him for his Tutor: and
thereafter invited him into England, where his civilities far exceeded his
munificence. Howsoever upon this occasion, he began here first to be taken
notice of; at his return, there befell him a very shrewd misfortune in Dover,
where all the gold he brought with him, or was given him by way of viaticum
here, (no inconsiderable sum in a poor Scollers purse) except five pounds,
was seized and taken from him by the Customers; he was not ignorant of the
danger, but Sir Thomas Moore persuaded him that no foreign coin was liable
to such forfeiture: it is strange a man so well seen in the Laws could be so
foully mistaken; but more strange that neither he, nor the Lord Mountjoy at any
time thereaftter, interposed with the King, in his behalf: perhaps being a
lavish and indigent Prince, they knew him inexorable in such cases. All men
expected some bitter invective, and not without reflection upon the whole
Nation, should have followed this barbarous plunder executed upon so poor, and
yet so conspicuous a stranger: but he patiently swallowed the gudgion, whereby
he infinitely gained upon the affection of the English; and was so far from any
thought of revenge, that not only in a treatise written of purpose immediately
thereafter, he made honorable mention both of the King and Kingdom. But having
recruted in Holland, he forthwith returned into England, drawn thither by his
affection to Groci^us, Linacer, More, Pacaeus, Cole^, Latimer, and Tonstall,
Stars of prime magnitude in the British orb: who because they honored
learning, strove which of them should most honor Erasmus: in England he did
read publicly at Cambridge; in Germany (after his return) at Lovane; being
thereto invited, and accommodated with lodgings by Johannes Paludanus the
Rhetorician? from Lovane he visited France, and wa^ from thence the third time
drawn over into Englaud, by many large promises, which proving in the
performance, but Timpanous clouds, or not with child of so much moisture as he
expected, made him re^olve for Italy; perhaps out of desire, both to know, and
be known in that Country; then which Europe affords none, whether for Arms or
Arts, more accomplished. To itch out his traveling charges he agreed with
Bap^ista Boeria Phy^itian to King Henry the 8. to accompany his two sons to
Bononia: By the way as he past the Cottian Alps, he was created Doctor of
Divinity at Taurinum: thereby importing into Italy, what others usally
exported, learning and Honor. At Bononia (be^ides other Professors) he gained
the acquaintance of Paulus Bombasius: Beroaldus died before his arrival, and
his death was the more lamented, because his successor Baptista Pius, a bad
Critic, but no better Antiquary, vomited up ^^thing in his Chair, but Oscos
and Volscos: Here he dismissed ^^^^ia's sons, not so much for their own
petulancy, as the morosity of their Father; finished his Adages or Proverbs
whereof he had given the world an essay or taste formerly at Paris: and laid a
side his Monastical Habit assumed at Emaus, where he was a Probationer, and
until that time constantly retained, upon this occa^ion. At Bononia,
Chirurgians appointed Triers of the Plague wear white linen Napkins hanging
transuerse their shoulders, and tied with a knot to their girdle, as Friars do
Scapulars; that others fearful of infection, may (if they please, avoid them
in the streets. Er^smus going abroad somewhat early one morning, was met in a
narrow lane by a company of mad shavers, who perceiving his white Scapular,
and thereby mistaking him for a Tryer, after insinuation by signs, (but by him
not understood) to get him out of their way, they took up stones, wherewith
they had undoubtedly pelted him, if others invited by the noise into their
Balconies, whence they beheld both the mistake and danger, had not speedily
run down and pulled off his Scapular: To prevent such morning salutations for
the future, by a Dispensation from Julius 2. confirmed by Leo 10. he changed
his Regular Habit of Friar, into that of a Secular Priest. I see no great
reason he had to usurp the Habit, since he despised the Profession, or why he
troubled two Popes, about such a trifle; but he is past twice one and twenty,
let him answer for himself.

After a year and three mounths stay at Bononia, he saluted Venice; where he
printed his Adages, gave us a new edition of Plautus and Terence, with the
distinction and structure of their verses, reprinted his Hecuba and Iphigenia
two Tragedies of Euripides, and added to his numerous acquaintance Ambrosius
Nolanus, Baptista Egnatius, Paulus Canalis a Patrician, and Hieronymus Aleander
Mottensis, who for his skill in the Tongues, was afterward promoted to a
Cardinalship: he lodged at the house of Andraeas Asulanus and was supplied with
all things necessary by Aldus Manutius, who likewise supplied him with diverse
Greek Manuscri^^^ but extremely corrupted, all which, at his better leisure ^e
red over and corrected at Padua: the principal were Pausanius, Eustathius, the
Interpreters of Licophron, Euripides, Pindarus, Sophocles, and Theocritus;
being therein assisted by Marcus Musurus Cretensis, and Scipio Carteromachus;
the one incomparable for his skill in History and Mythology, the other for his
ingenuity: His spare hours he bestowed upon his pupil Alexander the young
Archbishop of Saint Andrews, and Brother to James King of Scots whom he
accompanied, to Senae, in Hetruria, and there leaving him for a short time,
went to Rome: where fame as his Harbinger had already taken up his lodging in
the affection of most of the Inhabitants. It is incredible with how great
applause of all sorts of people, he was received into the City: the Pope
off^red him a room amongst his Peni^entiaries, a place both of profit and
credit, and a step to the highest preferments in that Court. Raphael Cardinal
S. George, John Medices afterward Leo 10. and Aegidius Viterpiensis outvy'd
one another as much in their gifts, as complements; but he, having seen
Phaedra famous for extemporarie eloquence, and reputed an Actor nothing
inferior to old Roscius, returned according to promi^e, to his late and Royal
charge, in whose retinue, he took a general view of most parts of Italy as
far as Cumae, where (not without some Religion and horror) amongst other
monuments of Antiquity, he beheld the Cave of Sibilla.

Here the Archbishop was recalled into Scotland, and soon after unfortunately
slain by his Fathers side, in a battle fought against the English, at what
time King Henry the eight besiedged Tourney by the procurement of Julius the 2.
And Erasmus, rather satiated then satisfied with Italian delights, and
rarities; began likewise to turn his face homward, shaping his course by the
Rhetian Alps, he past first ^o Curia, thence to Constance, and so through the
Martian Forest by Brisgoia, to Argentoratum or Strasbury, and from thence by
the Rhene into Holland: where had no sooner saluted his friends at Antwerp and
Lovane, but he immediately took shipping for England. Upon his arrival William
Warham Archbishop of Canterbury collated him to the Rectory of Aldington in
Kent, whereof he accepted somewhat unwil^lingly, alleging how inconvenient it
was to abridge those of any part of the Benefice, who discharged the whole
Office. But, replied the Archbishop, who ought more to be maintained by Church
benefices, then those by whom the Church is most benefited? Curates are indeed
instructers within their particular Charge, but Erasmus instructs the
Instructers; to express his thankfulness for this, and many other favors
received in this Kingdom, he honored Doct^r Cole^ Deane of Paul's, and founder
of the School caled Catechizatiquis, with the Inscription of his Books De
Copia Verborum et Rerum; whereupon he said merrily that he was turned
Bankrupt, and had no more to part with. His Adages the thi^^d t^me revised and
enlarged with diverse Treatises translated out of Plutarch, he dedicated to his
old M^caoenas the Lord Mon^joy: his Emendations and Censures upon S. Hieroms
Epistles, an unparalled work to his unparralleld benefactor the Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury. Longer he intended to have stayed, but hearing that Frobenius,
at the request of many French and Germane Universities, had undertaken to
reprint his Adages at Basil, and having both them and S. Hieroms Epistles ready
for the Press, at which he was desirous to be present, setting all other
business aside, he took the most compendious way thither. Frobenius he found
in his grave, yet was not disappointed of his welcome, that was abundantly
supplied by his Sons Bruno and Basilius, and John Frobenius his kinsman, in
whom the old man still survived, both for his skill and honesty; they
quartered him under the same rooff with Amerbachius; whom after S. Ambrose, and
S. Augustine, he found wholly employed in the restitution of S. Hierom; wherein
at first he used the help of John Reuclin a civilian, but afterward fell upon
a more happy Critic Iohannus Con^n Norimbergensis the Dominican; who out of
worm-eaten Manuscrips supplied what he found wanting; corrected many places
depraved; and replaced not a few formerly disioynted. The work was brought to
such perfection before his arrival, that leaving the rest to Amerbachius
(except when his judgment was required in the variation of Manuscripts) he
appropriation unto himself the only volumn of his Epistles; whereunto he
prefixed Arguments, and added brief, but judicious ^llustrations: many are of
opinion that it cost Erasmus more oil and want of sleep, in repairing such
breaches, as time and ignorance had made in them, then it did the Author in
penning them. To this great work succeeded a greater, and much more
profitable; his Edition of, and Annotations upon the whole new Testament, which
as the chief instrument of our Salvation, he dedicated to the chief Bishop
(as he supposed) Leo the 10. From Basil his private affairs drew him into the
Low Countries, he arrived at Aquisgrane, at what time Charles the fifth was
inaugurated Emperor; and was present at the Diet of Worm^s as one of his
Council, being thereto admitted before the death of Silvagius the Chancellor.
The Diet ended, and Tourney surrendered to the Emperor, he made what have he
could back again unto Basil; from whence the world first saw, and admired his
Paraphrase upon the four Evangelists, and Saint Paul's Epistles? a work
uncertain, whether undertaken, or received with greater alacrity: in composing
whereof, he applied himself, amongst the Latins, to Ambrosse, Augustine,
Hierom, and Hilary; amongst the Greeks, to Saint Chrisostom, and his follower
Theophylact; the contexture and style were his own. The whole, he dedicated by
parts, to Charles the 5. and Ferdinand his Brother; by both he was highly
esteemed, and might (if he pleased) have been as richly rewarded. But since
preferment and he ran on (not by chance but choice) like Parallels, some may
wonder how he supported so vast a charge, as the setting forth of so many
Books of his own, the Emendation of so many written by others: And, (which
was an antecedent to both) the purchase or transcription of so many Manuscipts
(to say nothing of his frequent and expensive travels) must needs draw upon
him: There is no better way to clear this doubt, then (before we go any
further) to measure his great esteem, with the greatest of his Contemporaries,
by the Correspondence he held with them, and their munificence toward him.

When he was scarce crept out of the shell, he pronounced a Panegirick of his
own Composure, before Philip father to Charles 5. as he came out of Spain
into Germany, for which he honored him with a yearly pension during Life. King
Henry the 8. of England, wrote to him with his o^ne hand, offered him a goodly
house (belike some dissol^ed Abbey) worth six hundred Florenes yearly: and
besid^s, gave him several tastes, rather then surfeits of his pr^^cely bounty.
Francis the French King wrote likewise unto him after the same manner, (as
appears by his letter yet extant) offered him a Bishopric, and one thousand
Florenes pre annum to set up his rest in France. Charles the 5. offered him a
Bishopric in Sicily, made him of his Council, and (besides many of his
expressions of his liberality) bestowed upon him a yearly pension of two
hundred Florenes; Ferdinand his brother King of Hungary made him a tender of
four hundred Florenes yearly, with promise to make them up five hundred, to
profess at Vienna. Sigismond as much to come into Poland, and further with a
Royal and liberal hand supplied his present necessities: Mary Queen of
Hungary wrote to him often, and ever with her own Hand; her bounty (without
question) eq^alled her exceeding Humanity. Anne Princess Veriana gave him a
yearly pension of one hundred Florenes. Frederick Duke of Saxony presented him
with two Medals, the one Gold, the other silver, which in a letter to
Spalatinus, he prefers before two Attick Talents: George Duke of Saxony, with
diverse Ingots of silver dug out of his own Mines, and a great drinking
Bole of the same: William Duke of Gulick imitated him in the latter, but
outstript him in the Capacity: Adrian the 6. to whom he consecrateth Arnobius,
wrote to him thrice, which grand respects from the Pope, much abated the fury of
the Friars his enemies: and there is no doubt, but he largly contributed
toward the charge of that work, undertaken especially for his own honor; He
congratulated the Papacy to Clement the 7. who in requital sent him five
hundred Florenes, and by his Apostoticall letters invited him to Rome: Paul the
3. had brought him into the College of Cardinals, but that he was prevented by
death: in the interim he sent him a Collation to the Prepositure of Daventry,
which he refused, saying he was now near the end of his journey, and hoped to
get thither without it: William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury changed his
Prebend into a pension, and scarce ever wrote to him, but in letters of Gold;
his last token was a Gelding, of whom he used to say, that though he wanted
original sin, he was guilty of two mortal ones, Sloth and Gluttony.
Cardinal Wolsey a stately Prelate, and not easy of access, yet wrote unto him
letters full of singular humanity; and besides other remembrances, bestowed on
him a Pension out of a Prebend in York? The Bishop of Lincoln, and Rochester,
bountifully supplied him upon all occasiones; Hammond and Vrswick sent him a
brase of Geldings; Polidore Virgil money ^o buy a third. Cromwell the first,
out of his sacrilegious broak-age, at twice, 30. Angels: Montjoy, More,
Tonstal, and Colet, were his continual supporters; to say nothing of many
others within this kingdom: Cardinal Matthaeus offered him a yearly pension
of five hundred Ducats to live at Rome, and sent him a Cup of beaten Gold: he
received another of the same mettle, but greater and more curiously engraven
with sundry poetical fancies, from Albert Archbishop and Cardinal of Mentz;
Cardinal Gampegius amongst other tokens, sent him a Diamond Ring of no mean
value: Stanislaus Olmucensis, a silver bole double gilt, with four pieces of
Gold, the coin of ancient Emperors? the Bishop of Basil offered him for his
society half his Bishopric, which alluding to the name he termed half his
Kingdom. Thurzo Bishop of Vratislavia went ten days journey out of his way to
behold him; and you must not imagine that when they parted, he gave him
nothing. Another of the same name sent him four Watches, four ingots of pure
gold, and a Muntiro lined with rich Sables. Christopher Shcidlovitz Chancellor
of Poland, a Clock, Spoone, and Forke all of pure gold. Peter Bishop of
Cracovia thirty Duck^ts. Johannes Paungarnerus a good quantity of gold
uncoyned, with a silver Bole of no mean capacity; Rinkius another; Fuggerus a
third; all gifts (as himself jested) not unbefitting a Hollander. Iacobus Piso
two pieces of ancient Coin, the one Gold, the other Silver, resembling Gratian
and Hercules. Vigilius Zuichemus a gold Ring, which explicated, became an exact
celestial sphere. And William Earl of Eysenburg a Dagger, which by the
inscription he wished in the heart of his enemies. Besides these he held
intercourse by Letters, and was often supplied by Erastus Duke of Bavaria,
Croyus Cardinal of Toledo, and Alphonsus Fonseca Archbishop of the same,
Dominicus Cardinal Crimanus, John Cardinal of Bernard Cardinal of Trent,
John Sylvagius Chancellor of Burgundy, the Bishop of Paris and Baion, Erardus
Leodiensis, Philippus Trajectensis, Christopherus Augustanus, Iacobus
Sadoletus, Ennius Verulanus, Hugo Constantiensis, Aloisius Marlianus, Conradus
Wircemburgensis, and Antonius a Bergis Abbot of Saint Bertines. This may seem
a large Nomenclature of Friends, Patrons and Acquaintance; and yet a far
larger might easily be gathered out of his own Epistles and Prefaces. This
(whatsoever it is) I am sure without wrong to posterity, could neither be
omitted nor contracted, seeing thereby we should either deprive him of the
honor of so great friends, or them of the glory of so great Munificence.

What a To^quot of Archbishopricks, Bishopri^ks, Prebends and fat Parsonages
might not this so Patroned a Clerk (had he had but the conscience to digest
them) have accumulated under one red Hat: ^ut he declined civil preferments as
not so suitable to his Priesthood, and had he accepted Ecclesiastical, he
foresaw (having already so much spent himself to inlighten others) that he
should either ruin his body by discharging, or his more precious soul, by
neglecting them; and therefore chose rather to cast himself upon the
benevolence of his friends, though with disparagement to himself, then with
scandal upon the Church, which like a genuine Apostle he labored to benefit,
whether gra^is or ingratiis. Learning wa^ never at a greater loss or lower
ebb, either in France or Germany, then he found it: within few years after
the publication of his Adages and Books de copia, soloecisme (in both) began
to be whooted at; Presses to sweat under the Institutions of Theodorus the
Grammarian, and other Greek Authors newly translated into Latin; and all men,
who either were or desired to seem, whether learned or promoters of learning
to blow the coal that was already kindled. To this only end and purpose
H^eronymus Buslid^us bequeathed the greatest part of a very great Estate; and
Erasmus so prevailed with his Executors, that putting the money into one Purse,
they therewith founded and endowed a College in Lovaine, wherein the three
learned Tongues are exactly taught by as many exquisite Professors, he
himself inlivened it with Statutes. In emulation of the Spaniard, the French
King shortly after erected just such another at Paris; and because he would
have it in nothing inferior to that at Lovane, sent a Commission under his
great Seal to Erasmus to prescribe it Statutes, and furnish it with Professors;
but he accepted not thereof, perhaps hindered by sickness, or some other
employment. The Trojane Horse was never more pregnant with armed men, then
those two Colleges have been ever ^ince, with men learned in all those, and
many other languages.

His judgment was much questioned, especially beyond the Alps, for
prostituting in his Chiliades, so vast and in^valuable a treasure of humain
Learning to every purblinde eye and vulgar capacity; in which wind Aldus
Manutius suffered before him, for his Commentaries upon Sophocles and
Euripides, as though it were an essential of learning to be acquired only in
Italy. But of all Monopolies he abhorred that of Learning most, accounting
nothing too good to be communicated; nor any thing below him, that might bring
others to the same height of knowledge whereunto he himself had already
ascended; we cannot have a better proof of the one then his Adages, or
witness of the other, then his Commentaries upon Cato de Morib^s.

France (I confess) may with great reason glory in Budaeus; No man has
hitherto better discovered whatsoever belongs unto Money, whether you respect
the Greek or Roman standard; His Commentaries of the Greek tongue, and
Anno^ations on the Pandects, are two useful and excellent Pieces. But Erasmus
was nothing his inferior in humanity, when first he applied himself to
Theology; a study, by Budaeus, either not attempted, or persecuted only upon
the bye. The next who with best reason can be brought into this Competition, is
Ludovicus Vives, who can hardly extend his Parallel as far as Budaeus, and
therefore all I will say of him, is, that he was borne in Spain, bred in
Italy; Erasmus brought with him more learning out of Germany, then he found in
both; who but Erasmus, durst ever have attempted to bring a generation of
supercilious, and yet ignorant Friars, bred up in mere Sophistry, and
barbarism, to a true relish of Divinity, as it is delivered to us by the
Fathers? most of whose Works miserably corrupted, he restored to their genuine
and native splendour; others undertook what he was not able to overtake,
provoked by his letters, or aminated by his example: So that directly or
indirectly, he was the true cause of the Restitution of all of them. And yet
this was but half his task, he found the Discipline of the Church in no
better case then the Doctrine, this turned into Sophistry, that into
Ceremonies; which he labored to abridge, not to abolish; being as inseparable
and proper unto Religion, as shadows are unto Substances. Although we may
truly account her far past the M^ridian, in that Church, where she can
hardly be seen, for the length of her own shadow: But how great soever his
desire was, to see Church discipline purged, and restored to its primitive
simplicity and integrity, he attempted nothing (with our late Reformers) by way
of tumult, or Schismatically: And yet this very attempt, though it never
exceeded an unwearied and legal application to those in authority, bred him as
many Enemies, as there were then waspes and hornets, who had wanted food, if
they had wanted Corruption in that kind to have fed upon: of these some
accused him of a Correspondency; others, of a confederacy with Martin Luther?
the first he never denied, the second they were never able to prove. As for the
suspicion of Arianism^, whereof envy it self durst not accuse him whilst he
lived, I hold it a Calumny scarce worth the answering. All that can be said
against him is only this, that he seems to extenuate, (and it were to be
wished, he had employed his wit better) some Testimonies alleged by the
Fathers against Arius; as not so Convincing and ponderous as they imagined: But
in all the nine great volumes of his own Works, there is not one Apex
positively for him, innumerable against him; He was the first man (I may not
except Martin Luther) who with sobriety brought us from Hales and Holcot to St.
Ciprian and Augustine, from ^he Fathers, to the Scriptures themselves; if he had
intended to promote Herisie, his most compendious way had been, to have lef^
both in the same obscurity he found them. But (which I am often necessitated to
remember) by his Annotations, he illustrated the one, and by his piercing
censures removed such ignoble and spur^ous Brats, as after age^, out of intrest
or ignoranc^, would needs have fastened upon the other: Some, not able
themselves to judge betwext ^mitating and Api^g, are bold to censure his style
(though by their own confession, pure, Copius, flexible, and ex^emporary) as
not every where Elevated to the true light of the Cicer^ni^m pole: He can run
but goingly, who ties himself to another m^^s foo^steps. Erasmus had his own
G^nius as well as Cicero; held a Bull as complete a creature as a Baboon, and
that most comely, which was most genuine and masculine; not so much taken with
the Cadency and Chym^ng of words, as the sententious density of the matter. And
therefore rather chose with Saint Augustine to retain some few words in common
use, though less Ciceronian, then by changing them into more eloquent, but
less intelligible, tortur^ his simple Readers upon the continual rack of
their Di^^ionaries.

Many of his noblest Works he elucubr^ted at Basil, the rest at Friburge,
whether he was (in a manner) compelled to retreat by Bernard Cardinal of Trent,
doubt^ull what might befall him in the Reformation of Religion at Basil. I
commend the Cardinals providence, but in that Reformation there was no
indignity offered to any Clergy man's person, whether Regular or Secular: they
had all free liberty to dispose of their Persons, and Personal estates, as
they pleased; At his first Coming to Friburdge, he dwelt in a house sometimes
inhabited by Ferdinand Uncle to Charles the fifth, and built for a retreats to
his old age, by Villingerus his Treasurer: which proving as much to big for
Erasmus, at it was to little for Ferdinand, he purchased one of his own, and
sold it within seven years after: at what teme he was recalled into the
Low Countries by Mary Queen of Hungary, who succeeded her Aunt in the
Government of those Provinces: by the way he visited Basil, where he published
his Ecclesiastes, and intended to finish several other of his Works yet
imperfect, before he past into Holland. But he must pass no further, being
arrested by a more violent fit of the Gout, then at any time formerly. His
convulsions were so thick and vehement, that oftentimes he was forced to go
upon all four: he thought himself in a jumping condition, when Crutches
served his turn. In the intervals of his disease he resumed and renewed the
great volume of his own Epistles, perhaps intending to set them forth more
fully: as many of them fell into his hands, he would say, Et hic mortus est:
but upon just account, when he found the number of his dead Correspondents
exceed the living, he burst forth into these words, Nec ego diutius vivere
Cupio si Christo Domino placeat. Nor desire I (if so it would please the Lord
Jesus) to live any longer. About the beginning of Autumn, from the Gout, he
dropped into an Hepaticall flux: so that for a whole month together, he came
seldom out of bed, and but once over the threshold of his Chamber: yet whilst
his body lay tortured upon this double rack, he wrote a Treatise De puritate
Ecclesiae, and made a hard shift to finish his Recognitions upon Origin: These
were the two last Songs of this dying Swan, whose patience ever increased with
his torments, and in the end surmounted them. He retained his speech to the
last gasp, and breathed out his Soul in these Ejaculations; Mercy sweet Jesus:
Lord loose these hands: How long Lord Jesus? How long? Jesus fountain of
mercy, have mercy upon me, and the like. He changed this mortal life into an
immortal, the twelfe day of July about midnight, in the year of grace 1536.
and 71. or 73. years of his age: he foretold both the year and hour of his
dissolution, the first many months, the other three days before; multitudes of
people flocked to see, and touch his dead body. The Consul and Senators of
Basil accompanied it to the grave, few of the chief Burgers were absent, none
of the University. He lies buried in the Cathedral Church, in a Chapel
Consecrated to the blessed Virgin, and Monument of Parian marble? frequently
visited both by the Citizens, and Srangers. He was of a middle Stature, well
compacted body, and of a sweet, but tender Complexion, which easily yielded to
every little alteration, whether of air, or diet: His hair inclined to
yellow, his eyes were gray, his countinance amiable and cheerful, but some
what of the palest, and his voice shrill, though none of the strongest. His
apprehension was invincible, his judgment exact, and for Memory, he knew not
what it was, to forget any thing except injuries: Terence and Horace he could
have entirely repeated without book, when he was but a Schoole-boy; He was
charitable to the poor in general, bountiful to poor Scholars, and
Travelers; so far from craft that he inclined rather to simplicity, and so
free from suspicion that he often unbosomed himself to his friends (though but
seeming) further then stood with his own safety: Such was his bashfulness,
that though he had a good face, his picture was hardly extorted from him by
extreme importunity: in the point of friendship he was of an unremoveable
Constancy; easily placable being offended: only he had such an antipathy with
lying, that from his youth, he would usually tremble at the very sight of a
noted Liar; His habit neither garish, nor sordid, spoke him at the same time, a
Priest to God, and Councellor to Caesar; His conversation was an exact mixture
of sweetness and severity, without any the least admixture of pride, ambition
or avarice: which rendered him inflexible to imbarque in any thing interruptive
of his Studies, or destructive of his liberty. And though few has written,
either more, or better; none, whose Books have been further, or more
frequently exported; yet upon all occasions, he used no less rigidity in the
Censure of his own works, then Candor, in giving judgment upon other men's:
He seldom enjoyed perfect health, for any Considerable time together:
abundance of rhume (the bane of a sedeutary, and cellish life) inclined him to
the stone, wherewith he was often, and sometimes above measure tormented;
Eating of fish, the very smell whereof he abominated, drove him into many and
dangerous Agues, especially every Lent? And the Gout was no stranger to his
elder years. The Monks and Friars were generally his enemies, the greater by
how much the more illiterate; and yet their successors by his painful labors,
and example, are since become exqui^itely learned. Before the fiftieth year of
his age, no man wrote against him, he against none; resolved (if possible) not
to imbrue his style in any man's reputation; The flame betwixt him and Dorpius,
was quickly quenched; Faber was the first, who put him to a just Apology: By
his last will and Testament, (confirmed both by the Emperor and Pope) he
declared Bonifacius Amerbachius his heir: Hieronymus Frobenius and Nicholaus
Episcopius, Overseeres of his Will: wherein to several friends he bequeathed
several Legacies; as a Clock of gold to Ludovicus Berus, a Spoon and fork of
the same to Beatus Rhenanus; to Petrus Vetere^s 150. Crowns, as much to
Philippus Montanus. To his servant Lambert 200. Florenes: To Brischius a Silver
Tankerd: To Faulus Volfius 100. Florenes: To Sigismundus Tilenius 150. Ducats:
To Erasmius Frobenius his God-son two Rings: To Hieronimus Frobenius, his
wearing clothes, bedding and household stuffs. To his wife a ring wherein was
set a precious stone having therein engraven, a woman looking over her left
shoulder. To Episcopius a fair silver Bole with a cover; to his wife a Diamond
Ring. To Goclenius a silver Bole; His Library he sold upon his death bed to
Johannes a Lasco: His medals, ancient Coin, ready money and debpts, with the
remain'der of his Watches, Clockes, Rings, Plate, Jewels, and other curiosities
of no small value, to his Heir Amerbachius, not for his own use, but to be
sold, and the money by advice of the forenamed Overseers, to be distributed:
first to the poor infirim Persons, whether through age or sickness; Secondly
to Portionlesse Virgins to procure them husbands; and thirdly to poor, but
hopeful young Scholars, for advancement of their studies. His heir he
restrained merely to his Lagacy, whith was none of the greatest. Concerning his
own work, he left nothing in charge, at his death; as modestly doubtful of
their Genius, or how they might take with ensuing, and more learned times;
whereof notwithstanding Frobenius was so confident, that immeadiatly after his
death, he reprinted them (to his as infinite cost, as Commendation) in nine
great Tomes in folio: wi^h promise of a Tenth (which never came forth)
Contaying only his Animaduersions, Castigations and Censures upon the Fathers,
and other Authors: whereof thou may behold both the names and number, in
this Ensuing Catalogue.

Librorum Erasmicorum Classis prima quae Grammeticen and Ethicen Spectant.

DE copia verborum ac rerum, libri duo. Syntaxis in usum Scholae coletanae.
Declamatio Tyrannicidae Luciani respondens. De ratione conscribendi Epistolas.
De pueris statim ac liberaliter instituendi^. De Ratione Studii. La^^
Medicinae. Similium lib. unus. Colloquiorum lib. unus. De recta Latini
Graetique Sermonis pronuntiatione. Ciceronianus, sive de optimo dicendi genere.
De civilitate morum puerilium. Epitome in Elegantias Laurentii vallae. Carminum
diversi gener^s, lib. unus. A^^agiorum Chiliades. Epistolarum, lib. 3^.
Apot^egmatum, lib. 8. Moriae Eucomium sive laus stul^itiae. Panagyricus ad
Philippum Burgundionum principem. Ad eundem carmen Gra^ulatorium. Institutio
Principis Chr^^^iani. De Morte Declamatio. Declamatiuncula Gra^ulatoria. Pacis
Querimonia. Lingua. De senectute Carmen.

Libri secundae Classis, qui pietatem spectant.

Euchiridion Christiani Militis. Oration de virtute amplect^nda. Ratio verae
Theologiae. Paraclesis. Modus confitendi. Enarratio Psalmi, Beatus vir.
Enarratio Psalmi, Quare fremuerunt Gentes. Paraphrasis in Psalm. Domine quid
mul^iplica^ti. Concio in Psalm. Cum invocarem. Enarratio in Psalm. Dominus regit
me. Enarratio in Psalm. Benedicam Domino in omnitempore. Enarratio in Psalm.
Dixi Custodiam vias. Concio in Psalm. 85. De puritate Ecclesiae Christi. De
Bello Turcis inferendo consult^tio. De Amabili Ecclesiae concordia. De
Misericordia Domini coucio. Virginis and Marcyris comparatio. Concio de Puero
Jesus. Epistola consolatoria ad Virgins sacras. Christiani Matrimonii
Institutio. Vidua Christiana. Ecclesiastes sine de Ratione concionandi. Modus
Orandi Deum. Symbolum sive Catechismus. Precationum, lib. 1. Poean Virgini
Matri dicendus. Oration ad Mariam in Rebus adversis. De contemptu mundi. De
taedio and pavore Christi Disputatio. De praeparatione ad Mortem, lib. 1. Ode
de casa natalicia Jesus. Expostulatio Jesus cum Homine pereunt. Hymni varii.
Liturgia Virginis Lauretanae. Carmen votiuum Genovefae. Commentarius in duos
Hymnos prudentii de Natali and Epiphania pueri Jesus. Christiani Hominis
Institutum. Epitaphia in Odiliam.

Libri tertiae Classis.

Nouum Testamentum cum Annotationibus.

Paraphrases in S. Matthaeum. S. Marcum. S. Lucam. S. Iohannem. Acta
Apostolorum.


Paraphrases in D. Paulum Epistolas ad Romanos. Corinthios 1. Corinthios 2.
Galatas. Ephesios. Philippenses. Collocenses. Thessalonicenses 1.
Thessalonicenses 2. Timotheum 1. Timotheum 2. Titum. Philemonem.


Paraphrases in Epistolas SS. Petri 1. Petri 2. Iudae. Iacobi. Iohannis 1.
Iohannis 2. Iohannis 3. Ad Hebraeos.


Libri quartae Classis, sive Polemica.

Epistola Apologetica ad Dorpium. Epist. Apolog. ad Iacobum Fabrum Stapulensem.
Epist. Apologetica ad^ Iacobum Latomum. Ad Atonsem pro Declamatione Matrimonii.
Adversus sanctium Caranzam. Apologia; de in principio erat Sermo. Apologiae
tres ad Notationes Edvardi Lei. Apologia adversus ea quae in Nono Testam. ab
Erasmo Recognito and Annotato, taxaverat Iacobus Lopez. In Natalem Beddam de
loco. Omnes quidem re^urgemus. Adversus Petrum sutorem Carthusianum. Appendix
de Scriptis Clithovei. Declamationes adversus Theologos Parienses. Ad
Phimosthomum de Divortio. Ad suvenem Geron^odidascalum. Ad Monachos quosdam
Hispanos. Apologia contra Albertum Pium Carporum Principem. De Esu carnium. De
libero Arb^^rio collatio. Hyperaspistae Diatribes, libri duo. Purgatio adversus
Epistolam Lutheri. Detectio Praestigiarum libelli cujusdam. Adversus
Pseudoruaengelicos. Ad Ele^therium. Ad Grunnium. Ad Fratres Germaniae
inferioris. Spongia adversus aspergines Hutteni. Pantalabus, sine adversus
f^bricitantem. Adversus Mendacium and obtrectationem. Antibarbarorum, liber 1.
Ad quosdam Gracculos Epistola. Responsio ad Petri cur^ii defensionem. De
Termino. De vita, phrasi and Operibus Originis.

Besides these you have in the University Library at Oxford; not set forth by
Frobenius.

De novo Evangelio novisque Evangelistis judicium. Auris Batana^ Vita Coleti.
Duo Diplomata Papae Adriani ^um responsionibus. Detestatio Belli. Precatio ad
Iesum cum aliis Ejaculationibus. De Hollandis.

Translated out of Greek.

Classis 5.

Ex S. Chrysostomo. Adversus Iudaeos. Homiliae 5. De Lazaro and Divite, Hom. 4.
De Vis^one, Hom. 5. De Philogone Martyr, Hom. 1. De Orando Deum, Libri 2. De
Davide et Saul, lib. 3. Quam Presbyter esset designatus Hom. 1 In psalm Cantate
Domino. Quam Sarionius et Aureliamus acti essent in exilium, Hom. 1. De fide
Annae, Hom. 2. Commentariorum in Acta Apost. Hom. 4 Commentariorum in 2. dam ad
Cor. Hom. 7. In Epistolam ad Galatas. In Epistol. ad Philipp. Hom. 2.


Ex S. Athanasio. De Spiritu Sancto Epistolae, 2. Contra Eusebium de Nicaena
Sinod Ep. 2 Apologetici Duo adversus eos qui Calumniabanter quod in Persequutio
nefugisset.


Ex S. Athanasio. De Passione Domini, Hom. 1. De hoc quod Scriptum est in
Evangelio. Vicum q. Contra vos est. De Virginitate. De peccato in Spiritum. De
Spiritu Sancto.


Ex S. Basilio. Principium Esaiae. De Spiritu Sancto, lib. 1. De laudibus
Iejunii, lib. 2.


Fragmentum Originis in Evang. S. Matthew.

Euripidis. Hecuba. Iphigenia.


Theodori Gazae Grammatices, lib. 2.

Declamatio and alia quaedam ex Libanio.

Ex Plutarcho. De discrimine Adulatoris and Amici. Quo pacto capi possit
utilitas ex inimico. De Tuenda bona valetudine. Principi maxim Philosophandum.
An graviores sint Animi morbi, quam Corporis. De Cupiditate divitiarum. An
recte dictum sit ab Epicuro. (...) De cohibenda iracundia. De Curiositate. De
vitiosa verecundia.


Galeni exhortatio ad bonas litera^ Isocrates de Regno administrando, ad
Nicodem Regem. Tyrannus Zenophonius.

Luciani. Saturnalia. Cronosolon, sive leges Saturnaliciae. Epistolae
Saturnales. De Luctu. Icoromenippus. Toxaris. Pseudomantis. Somnium sive
Gallus. Timon. Abdicatus. Tyrannicida. De mercede conductus. Dialogus Cnemonis
and Damippi. Dialogus Zenophantae and Callidemi. Dialogus Menippi and Mercurii.
Dialogus Menippi Amphilochi and Triphonie. Dial. Charontis and Menippi. Dial.
Cratetis ac Diogenis. Dial. Mirei ac Thersitae. Dial. Diogenis ac Mausoli.
Dial. simyli ac Polystrati. Dial. Veneris ac Cupidinis. Dial. Doridis ac
Galateae. Dial. Martis ac Mercurii. Dial. Mercurii ac Maiae. Dial. Diogenis ac
Alexandri. Dial. Menippi and Chironis. Dial. Menippi and Cerberi. Hercules
Gallicus. Eunuchus. De Sacrificiis. De Astrologia. Lapithae sive convivium.


Fathers and other Authors set forth, Corrected and Commented upon by Erasmus.
Classis 6.

Augustini opera omnia, 10. Tomis. Hieronymi opera omnia, 9. Tomis. Cypriani
opera omnia. Irenaei opera. Arnobius.

Ciceronis. Officia. De Amici^ia. De Senectute. Paradoxa.


Quintus Curtius. Suetoni^s. Aelius Spartia^us. Julius Capitolinus. Aelius
Lampridius. Vulc^tius Galli^^^^s. Trebellius Pollio. Flavius Vopiscus. In Nucem
O^idii Commentarii. In Catonem de Moribus Commentarii. Notae in Plautum. Notae
in Terentium. Notae in Quintilianum. Notae in utrumque Senecam.

Two Books of his Antibarbarus was lost in England; many of his most elabo^^te
Declamations at Rome: two Books de Eucharistia he finished, but suppressed. He
left imperfect at his death, a just Commentary upon S. Paul's Epistle to the
Romans; with many other Treatises, since crept into other Men's Works. And it
is to be noted that the Index Expurgatorius has made more bold with no Man's
Books then with his; so that the first Impression are infinitely the best.

This famous and renowned Writer,
Erasmus, Author and Inditer
Of many learned Works of Worth,
Which, in his life time he set forth;
Was (for his Learning) and rare Parts;
His Wit, his Wisdom, skill in Arts
And Languages, and Uertues rare,
Wherein, he justly might compare
With his Contemporaries best,
In such esteem and high request,
With all the Princes, Potentates,
And learned Clerks of all the States
In Christendom, which knew or saw him;
That they contended who should draw him
To live with them, Him to enjoy,
And with them, his rare Parts t'employ:
Sending him many Gifts most great,
His presence with them to entreat.
But, crowned (at last) with honors Bays,
In Basil He did end his days,
As full of years, as fragrant fame;
Leaving behind, an honored Name.
HVLRICVS ZVINGLIVS.
The life and Death of Huldericus Zuinglius.
In the year of our Lord God one thousand four hundred eighty and seven,
Huldericus Zuinglius the Angel of the Church at Tigurum, was borne, and on the
first of January in a little village which in the language of the Switzers, is
called Wild-house: he was descended from pious, virtuous and Religious Parents;
his Father also being a man advanced unto great dignity and authority, amongst
the Switzers in regard of his approved and well deserving parts.

He by daily observation, (without doubt to his great comfort) seeing and
perceiving more then an ordinary towardliness in his Son; and beholding a
future worth to discover it self, even from his infancy and cradle: not only
for the advancement of the glory of God, but also for the benefit and profit,
of his native soil and Country, (therein conferring a more charitable and
friendly censure on him, then that Schoolmaster on Thenistocles) and causing
others also to make trial of his ingenious disposition, who beheld his
natural parts with astonishment and admiration: he was very careful to
perfect nature by Art, and for that cause (his age condescending thereunto) he
committed him unto the tuition of a certain Schoolmaster, living not far from
the place of his birth to be instructed and trained up in the elements and
grounds of the Latin tongue: with whom in short time, by reason of the
vigilance and watchfulness of the one, and the carfulness and industry of
the other, he attained not without great applease to that discretion and
judgment, that he esteemed those things which were read unto him, as a subject
fitter and more convenient for duller brains, then for his quick and ready
apprehension.

This proceeding therefore not answering his expectation, he removed thence and
being not yet fully ten years old, he was sent unto Basil a City in Germany
situate upon the River of Rhine, where he obtained for his Tutor Gregorius
Bi^^zlius, eminent in those da^es for the excellent endowments of learning and
piety wherewith he was invested; under whom this Huldericus attained unto that
perfection both in civil behavior and learning, that he seemed always to
exceed, outstrip, go beyond, and carry away the victory from those who were
his contemporanean School-fellowes; and that nothing might seem to be wanting
to the perfection of so hopeful a Plant, he reached unto the knowledge of the
Scince of M^sicke, wherein he showed himself so excellent, and so complete an
Artist, that his judgment compared with the tenderness of his years,
enforced his spectators to the greater admiration: and his Master Bintzlius,
well perceiving that his S^udies and learning were incongruous and too mean for
so apt and so virtuous a disposition, sent him back again unto his Father
together with his judicious opinion concerning him, advising him to provide
otherwise for him, and to search out for such a Master whose learning might be
correspondent unto the promptness of his natural disposition.

His Father being joyful with this approbation of his Master, and also
fearful least these springing virtues should suffer an Eclipse by the
interposition of that odious vice of Idleness, he forthwith sent him unto
Berna, a famou^ City in Switzerland, to be instructed and brought up by
Henricus Lupulus, a man well learned, and excelling in Po^try: from whom,
through the reading of Classi^ Writers he became a good Orator and got some
knowledge in the art of Logickes: having now spent at Berna almost two years,
and longing after the knowledge of Philosophy, whose ground and Basis was
already laid, he removed unto Vienna, a famous City of Austria, situate on the
river Danubius, where he not only attained to the knowledge of Philosophy, but
he also augmented and perfitted those things which in former time he had
learned; and having spent here some few years, he returned again to Basil,
where he first began to employ that talent which God had bestowed on him; for
here he began first to teach others that which he himself had learned; and
having spent some time in the instructing of others, and in furnishing himself
with the knowledge of the Liberal Arts, he wa^ advanced unto the title of
Master, which being obtained, h^ forthwith addicted himself (being guided
thereunto by the spirit of God) unto the study of School. Divinity, wherein he
remained silent for a while, being rather a spectator then an Actor, until he
was called by the Glareanes to the discharge of a Pastoral function and office
amongst them, where with all alacrity and cheerfulness^, he finished that which
had been formerly begun by others.

And by this means having received holy Orders, he gave himself wholly to the
study of Divinity, spent all his time in searching into the old and new
T^stament, that so he might be able not only to speak, but also to judge of
the Scriptures: as for the writings of the Ethnicks, he did not gre^tly esteem
and account, only he made use of V^lerius Maximus, who by reason of the
variety of his examples, he perceived it would be beneficial unto him.

But because he well understood, that he could have no sound judgment
concerning the Scriptures, nor concerning the writings of pious and learned
men, unless that he were well skild in the tongues; he forthwith betook himself
to the study of the Greek tongue, wherein in short time he so well profited,
that the Greek seemed more easier unto him then the Latin, and he better able
to judge of a Greek then of a Latin Author; and for the better understanding of
the tongue, he used help of the best Lexicons and translations, and with them
translated Saint Paul's Epistles, committing them all to Memory, and other
books of the New Testament. But when he had found it written in Saint Peter,
that the Scripture was not of private interpretation: he lifted up his eyes to
heaven, beseeching the holy Ghost, and earnestly wrestling with him by prayer,
that he would be pleased so to illuminate his understanding that he might
rightly and truly understand the sense and meaning of the holy Scriptures: so
that he might neither decieve himself, nor lead away others with a false image
of the spirit.

Having thus in some measure fitted himself for the beating down of sin, and
advancing and furthering of the truth; he then first began to condemn the
Helvetian Pensions, laboring to overthrow them, and to reduce and bring back
again former sanctity and worship into the Country; and hence hatred and
reproachful speeches had and took their beginning against this good, pious and
laborious man; who notwiths^anding this affront, at the first showing of
himself for the glory of God, and that in his own Country, cheerfully
proceeded Preaching the Gospel, and endeavoring rather as yet to plant truth
in the hearts of his Auditors, and to cause them fully to understand it rather
then to open and to discover unto them the vices and wickednesses of the whore
of Babylon.

Not long after, occasion being offered and D. Theobaldus Gerolzeggius,
desiring or rather earnestly entreating the sam, he departed from Glarona, and
went to Eremus; there intending to continue for a time, but indeed the chiefest
cause of his reparing unto that place, was the happy opportunity of preaching
Christ and his truth unto diverse remote and foreign Nations, being at that
time gathered togethered unto that place, from all parts of the world.

In the mean time it fell out that the Church of Tigurum, was destitute of a
Curate or Priest; many there were which greatly labored to bring in Zuinglius,
he being altogether ignorant of this matter comes to Tigurum; where being
demanded, by a certain Canon who accidentally met him; Whether he could preach
the word of the Lord unto those of Tigurum: he presently answered, that he
could; upon which answer he is called unto the Church of Tigurum, not without
the great joy of many godly minded persons: and that which he promised, he
began with happy success to perform, (the Lord being with him and giving a
blessing unto his labors) in the year of grace one thousand five hundred
twenty and one: During the time of this happy proceeding of his at Tigurum, the
Switzers had taken great notice of the name of Martin Luther, by reason many of
his writings which in all places came unto their hands, these he exhorted them
to read and to peruse, that so they might perceive the unity of the spirit
drawn out of those holy writings in them both, and so by that means, nothing
doubting but that they would be the more willing to consent and to give place
unto the truth.

This is also remarkable in the godly man, that notwithstanding his continued
pains in the discharging of his Pastoral office, he omitted not his reading
of the difficultest Greek Authors for the preserving of that knowledge which he
had formerly gotten, and not cea^ing here, he adventured on the Hebrew;
wherein, by the help and assistance of some who were his associates he
profited so much that he was able aptly to expound the two major Prophets,
Isaiah and Jeremiah.

About the same time Franciscus Lamberius a Friar Minorite forsaking his
Monastry came to Tigurum, who disputed publicly, with Zuinglius, concerning
the intercession of the Saints, and concerning the sacrifice of the Mass; but
being easily confuted he recanted, confessed his error, and gave thanks unto
Almighty God, that had prepared so excellent an instrument to open his eyes,
and to show unto him clearly the knowledge of the truth.

This his denial of the intercession of the Saints and sacrifice of the Mass,
Stirred up Hugh Bishop of Constance, to make an opposition against him,
insomuch that Zuinglius was enforced to declare publikly unto the world, that
which he believed concerning those and other differences betwixt himself and
the Church of Rome; by reason whereof his report and ^ame was brought unto
Adrian the sixth then Pope of Rome, who forthwith wrote unto him af^^r this
manner:

Beloved Son, gre^ting and Apostolical Benediction.
We send our venerable brother Ennius Bishop of Verulan our Domistick Praelate
and Apostolical Nuntio, a man wise and trusty, unto that strenuous and warlike
mo^ion which has been friendly and faithful unto us, and to our Apostolical
Sea: that he may treat with them about serious affairs which concern not
only us and our Sea, but also the whole Christian Commonwealth; now although
we have straightly commanded him that he shall relate those things in public
before all in general, yet nevertheless seeing that special notice is given
unto us of those excellent virtues wherewith thou art endewed, we cannot but
entirely love and greatly rejoice in thy zeal reposing a spiciall kind of
Confidence in thee: wherefore we have commanded the same Bishop our Legate,
that he deliver these our letters unto thee in particular, and withal to
declare our great affection toward thee; finally, we exhort you to be zealous
in the Lord and to repose all your confidence in him: and look with what
affection we tender your honor and preferment, we desire the same from you in
respect of our, and the affairs of the sea Apostolical: and for which you
shall find no small favor a^ our hands.

Given at Rome; 23. Januvary 1523. and in the first year of our Popedom.


Letters were also written by the same Pope, unto Franciscus Zinggius to this
intent, that he should not be wanting to use all means to draw and to allure
this godly man to the prefession of the doctrine of the Church of Reme; which
Francis^us being damanded by Mysconius, what reward the Pope had promised unto
him, on condition that he could persuade Z^inglius to revoke his opinion, he
seriously answered that Peter's Chair excepted, he had promised him all things
else.

Whence it is evident that the Devil and his members labored as much as in
them lied to hinder the knowledge of the truth of Christ and to detain men in
blindness and ignorance.

And hence we may observe the constancy of this holy man, who could not be
allured to forsake and fall from the truth of God and of his word, no no^ ^or
all the preferments of the world, ^steeming with Saint Paul, all things as dung
in respect of Christ.

The Gospel now with the blessing of God being received and embraced of the
Zigurins and gathering strength every day more and more, Zuingli^s began to
enter into a serious consideration of changing the form of things present into
a better state and condition, reducing the Monks and Priests, unto three
orders: some for labor, some for Marrage, some for learning; because the
number of them seem greater then might se^ve for the use of Religion.

Being busied about this Reformation, there crept in the Heiresie of the
Catabaptists, who forbad the Baptizing of Infants, and did rebaptize
themselves; with these Zuinglius dealt friendly at the first, disputing with
them and convincing them of their errors: but they being obstinate in their
opinions, he caused the Senate severely to punish them, some with imprisonment
some with death.

But to return again, his alteration of the state at Tigurum concerning
Priests and M^nks, and the decree against Pensioners being by his means sealed
and confirmed, caused him to be every way surrounded with enemies, who waited
daily, and hourly to take away his life: and also in the night season;
insomuch that he durst not walk abroad without a strong guard to defend him
from his enemies: who used openly in the streets all reproachful speeches
against him; and these wicked and ungratious villains, when they saw that they
could neither prevail against the Gospel, nor against this good Preacher of
the Gospel, then they bent all their forces against those who were obedient to
the word of God, imagining nothing but mischief toward them, always
intending their destruction and ruin.

Hence it was concluded and resolved on to take up Arms for the de^ence of the
truth of the doctrine of Christ, and they all enter into a new League, the old
being notwithstanding no way violated but remain firm, and that by the great
labor and industry of Zuinglius: not that he intended any thing hurtful unto
his Country but to extirpate and to root out their vices, and to plant in it
firmly the doctrine of the Gospel, both for the glory of God, and also for the
good of all Switzerland: for he de^ired nothing more, then that all Nations
might confess the Lord Jesus, and therefore he exhorted those that were his
friends, and which stood up for the truth of Christ, to undergo the hazard of
their lives, in so good a cause with these express words following:

That whith heretofore I have written unto you, I exhort you unto it still,
be^eeching you to remain constant and immovable, and not to be afraid of your
enemies; for that peace which some so greatly urge and press, is open war
and not peace, and that war which we are to undertake is peace, and not open
war: for we do not thirst after any man's blood, neither do we desire to
spill it by such tu^multuous actions; but this we maintain and defend, that
the nerves and sinews of an Oligarchy, are to be cut off: and unless it be
the truth of the Gospel and the Ministers thereof, will never have any safe
and quiet residence and dwelling amongst us. Alas, it is not cruelty that we
think of, but our actions are both fatherly and friendly, we desire to be a
means to save those who are like to perish through ignorance, our greatest
ambition is to preserve our liberty: therefore do not so much estrange your
selves from our determinations, you shall find them more peaceable and more
just, then some have related unto you; you are apt to believe those which
speak false of us, who notwithstanding hitherto have had good and sufficient
trial of our truth and of their inconstancy, I will not say, lies. In this
show your selves to be men, that ye remain Constant and immovable as we do,
for our faith toward God and men; In a word, let not fear dismay you, for
through the goodness of God, we shall so behave our selves in this League,
that it shall neither purchase shame nor grief to your selves.

Thus did he cheerfully animate and encourage these his friends to fight for
the glory of God, and to give sufficient testification of his zeal toward
God: he was himself present in Person in two several Battles fought betwixt
them nea^e unto Capella, a Monastery situate in the fields of Tigurum: unto the
first he came freely of his own accord, that he might be present at their
Consultations, and to see that there were no declining from truth and equity.
This Battle was finished without the shedding of blood, concerning which he
was often heard to say, that he had seen more malice and more wicked Counsel
in it, then he knew all his life time either by experience or from reading.

Unto the second he wa^ elected and chosen us chief Commander, and being
unwilling at the first to undertake such a burden; the ground of that quarrel
being something displeasing unto him, it being only Grameatus denegatio: yet
at the last he resolved to go, presaging as it were his own death by the
u^tring of these words, Seio, scio quid rei sit ut ego ^ollar fiunt omnia. I
know, I know, how the case stands now, all these preparations are for my ruin
and destruction.

Wherefore being well horsed and completely Armed, he followed the Tigurunes in
the rear, being ready to join battle; he went not forth as a Captain or
Commander of the Army, but as a good Citizen and faithful Pastor, who would
not forsake his friends in their greatest peril. In this Battle Zuinglius was
slain together with three hundred eighty and three of his confaederates; it
happening on the eleventh day of Octobrr, in the year of our Lord 1531. after
that he had Preached the Gospel of Christ at Tigurum the space of 12. years,
and at Glarona and Eremus the space of a 11. years, himself being 44. years
of age.

They which were near unto him when he fell, wounded even unto death heard him
utter these words; What misfortune is this? Well, they can indeed kill the
body, but they cannot kill the soul: being in this misery he was demanded by
his enemies, whether he would yield unto Papisticall invocation of the Saints;
being not able to speak, he refused it apparently by the motion of his head,
and by the lifting up of his eyes to heaven, he gave them to understand, that
he would invoke and call on none but on the Lord above; wherefore in a raging
and cruel manner took his life away from him, condemned his body to be cut in
four quarters, and to be burnt unto ashes in the fire.

Some of his faithful friends greatly lamenting his death came full of sorrow
unto the place where his body was burnt, and lightly moving the ashes, found
his heart sound and untouched with the flames; some ascribing it unto the power
of God, who by this miracle would declare unto the world both his innocence and
also his zeal: others spending their judgments accordingly as they were
affected toward the Person.

And this was the end of the godly Minister of Christ, whose great desire for
the advancement of the truth of Christ, will clearly show it self, by those
painful and learned labors of his which are extant in the Church, being
comprehended and contained in four Tomes.

Tome 1.

1. A work of Articles. 2. An exhortation to the whole State of Switzerland. 3.
A Supplication to the Bishop of Constance. 4. Of the certainty and purity of
Gods Word. 5. An answer unto Valentine of the authority of the Fathers. 6.
Institutions for Youth. 7. A good Shepherd. 8. Of Justice Divine and Human.
9. Of Providence.

Tome 2.

1. Of Baptism. 2. Of Original Sin. 3. Of true and false Religion. 4. An
Epistle to the Princes of Germany. 5. Of the Lords Supper. 6. Of Christian
Faith, written unto the French King.

Tome 3.

Commentaries on Genesis. 2. Exodus. 3. Isaiah. 4. Jeremiah. Psalter out of
Hebrew into Latin.

Tome 4.

1. Annotations on the four Evangelists. 2. History of our Saviors Passion.

Annotations on

3. The Romans. 4. Corinthians. 5. Philippians 6. Collossians. 7.
Thessalonians. 8. Hebrews. 9. James. 10. John Epist. 1.

They that are willing to engage, and prove
Themselves true Soldiers in the field of Love
Must follow Zuinglius, whose ample glory
Affords the World an everlasting Story.
Ye Prelates of these Times, stoop down and see
The Wisdom, Valor and the Constancy
Of this renowned Father; whose deserts
Ought to be printed in all noble Hearts:
He fell with Honor, and all those that fall,
Guarded with Truth, deserve a Funeral
Adorned with Angels, that all tongues may say,
Here lies Relig'ons and the Churches stay.
Brave Zuinglius died (though it be hard to do)
A valiant Soldier, and a Martyr too.
JOHN COLLET.
The Life and Death of John Colet.
John Colet was borne in London, of honest and wealthy Parents: His Father was
twice Lord Major of that famous City, to whom, his Mother (a chaste and
fruitful Matron) brought forth eleven Sons, and as many daughters: of which
numerous offspring, John Colet was the eldest, and sole Survivor; the rest
dyed before their Father, whereby he became Heir to a very considerable
fortune: and yet nature to him was no less indulgent then fortune, being
endowed with all the Simmetry almost imaginable in a tall and comely Person. In
his younger years he gave himself to the study of Philosophy, and in the
seventh after his Matriculation in the University, obtained his degree of
Master in Arts, an honor not so much given to his Standing, as due to his
knowledge, in the Liberal Sciences; in none whereof he was ignorant, in some
exquisitly learned. All Tullies works were as familiar unto him as his
Epistles, neither was he any stranger to Plato and Plotinus, whom he not only
read, but conferred and paralleld, perusing the one, as a Comm^ntator upon the
other: As for the Mathematickes, there is scarce any part thereof, wherein he
was not seen abov^ his years, certainly above expectation. Having thus
fethered his nest at home, he began to look abroad, and improve his stock in
foreign Countries: In France he added his Humanity, what he thought necessary
to the study of Divinity: which thereafter he effectually prosecuted in Italy;
amongst the Ancients he was most taken with Dionysius, Areopagita, Origin,
Saint Cyprian, St. Ambrose, and Saint Hierom: with St. Augustine (whether out
of Singularity, or judgment) amongst all the Fathers he seemed most disguised:
And yet he did not so mancipate himself to Antiquity, but that as occasion
served he sometimes survayed Aquinas, Scotus, and other Schoolmen. In a word,
he was seen in both Laws; and singularly well read in History, both Civil
and Ecclesiastical. And because he saw that England had her own Dant's and
Petrarchs as well as Italy, who have perform^d the same here, that they there:
those and these, he both read and diligently imitated; accommodating thereby
his style to the Pulpit, and Preaching of the Gospel.

After his return from Italy, he made choice to live at Oxford, where he
publicly, but freely without stipend, ^xpounded all Saint Paul's Epistles; when
he was not yet full thirty years of age. At Oxford, Erasmus and he became
first acqu^inted, who witnesses (^o his no small commendation) that though at
that time, he was neither Graduat, nor Candidat in Theology; that yet there
was neither Doctor, Abbot, nor Master in the whole University, who frequented
not, and (which is more) took notes of hi^ Lectures: Howsoever before he left
the University, they honored him with the degree of Doctor, whereof he accepted
rather to please the givers, then himself. From Oxford, and these sacred
employments, he was called to London by King Henry the seventh, who bestowed
upon him the Denary of St. Paul's; of all the Denaries in England the highest in
the rank, but not the deepest in the manger: which Colet embraced rather as
aburdensome charge, then honor; And therefore as soon as he had regulated his
College of Canons, and restored it to its ancient Discipline, he resolved
(which was not Customary in those times) to Preach every Holy Day in the
Cathedral, over and above his Sermons at Court, and many other Churches in the
City, to one or other whereof, the want of able Predicants, invited him almost
every Lord's Day: In his own Church he expounded the Scriptures, not by retale,
but wholesale; running over, sometimes a whole Epistle, sometimes a whole
Gospel; wheresoever he Preached, he was exceedingly followed, both by
Courtiers and Citizens. The Deans Table, which in former times had been two
much prostituted to excess and luxury, he reduced to temperance and moderated
by his frugality: For he restrained himself to one meal a day for many years
together, both before and after his preferment; which at one blow c^t off all
his Supper-guests, late dinners not a few, and the more, because his
entertainment, though neat, was neither costly nor excessive, his sitting
short, and his whole discourse attemperd either to learning or piety, for
immediately after grace, his boy red a Chapter, out of which, he himself (for
the most part) chose the theme or subject of that meals discourse: wherein not
only Scholars, but idiots also his Conviu's had their share, if he perceived
their want of learning supplied with a good mother wit, and ready natural
judgment; Casting one bone after another, until he dismissed them with no
less satisfaction to their minds, then refreshments to their bodies; for
although he hated prodigality and scurrility, he was no enemy to good Company;
who came more frequently, because with less charge to his Evening Collations,
then set Dinners: and with whom (commonly) he spunne out a good part of the
night in ventilating one point of Divinity or other; if none came, or such
only as had no great feli^ity in these sacred Saturnals, having dismissed them
with some few complements, his Boy red him a parcel of holy Scripture,
whereupon he usually ruminated till he went to bed. In his travels he was
cheerful, but his chief Companion was ever some chief Book: Solecisme he
accounted the worst point of Slovenry, affecting neatness in his
household-stusse, and clothes, Books, meat, and all things else, magnificence
in nothing, much less prodigality: Black he loved above all Colors,
preferring it far before Purple, which preserved his Doctorall robes the
longer. His upper garment was always of broad-cloath, and that too none of the
finest, which against hard frosts, he fortified with deep Furs; whatsoever
accrued unto him by the Church, he entirely committed to his steward, to be
spent in Housekeeping: His own hereditary rents and profits (which were
great, for he was heir to his Father and some of his brethren) he himself
pursed up, and distributed to pious uses. But perceiving the manifold
distractions which accompanied the managing of so plentiful an estate, he
called in his Fathers debts, and sold his whole Patrimony, which in the total
amounted to a very great mass of money: and wherewith he erected and endowed
that stately and famous Free-schoole in Saint Paul's Churchyard: whereunto he
joined a fair dwelling house Capable of two Schoolmasters, to whom he
assigned liberal Stipends, because they were to teach gratis. The whole
fabric he divided into four parts, whereof one is (as it were) for your
Catechumany, and bears the inscription of Catechizationis; the second for
such as are under the Usher, divided from the third part, by a veil drawn
upon great Curtaine-roddes, and contains only such youths as are disciplined
by the chief Schoolmaster; the forth and last part, confisteth of an Oratory
or Chapel for Prayer, and other religious exercises: Above the Masters head
(if the Reformation have not pulled it down, and levelled him with his Cross)
stands the child Jesus curiously engraven, and as it were in the posture of
one reading a Lecture, with this Motto, Ipsum audite: whom the Children as they
entered the School, were wont to salute with a sacred Hymn, composed (if I be
rightly informed) by Erasmus: Every Form contains sixteen, and the Captain
or Dux of every Class, sits by himself in a Pue or Throne somewhat more
eminent then the rest; great respect had wont to be had, both to the Ingine and
Ingenuity of the Intrants; how matters are now carried, I know not? This is
certain, though the whole amounted to an infinite charge, yet Colet would
therein admit of no Copartners. An hundred pounds left by a charitable
Citizen, for advancement of the Structure, he bestowed (with the Bishops
license) upon Books, and sacred Vestments for the Quire; And yet though he
would permit no Layman to have a finger in the building, he entrusted no
Clergimen with the oversight of its Revenewes: As all men praised him for this
School, so many wondered what he meant to build so magnificent a house for
himself, within a Curtilage of the Carthusians, and so near the honor of
Richmond. But to take both the best and the worst together, He was by nature
high minded, impatient of inivries, much given to sleep, and (as he confessed,
but not sub Sigillo, to his best friend) no stranger to the temptations both of
lust and Luxury; a great admirer of witty jests, and inclinable enough unto
Covetousness; Over all which imperfections, through grace, he became more then
conqueror: for his haughtiness of mind and proud stomach, he levelled even to
humility, by the common grounds of reason and Philosophy: being then best
pleased, when he was most freely admonished. Covetousness he put to flight, by
a charitable profusion of his whole temporal Estate, upon works of mercy and
piety: Venery, sleep and Luxury he nobly profligated by holy confercences,
fasting, praying, indefatigable study, and often Preach^ng: But yet so, that at
great feasts, and in his entertainment^ of Ladi^s and Gentle-women, where
without too much rigidity, he could not but give way to a more free and
liberal discourse; a man might easily perceive the recoylments of his own
natural and exorbitant proclivities: so impossible is it for flesh and blood,
not sometimes to discover themselves, even in the most regenerate: which made
him almost abstain from all such meetings, or if he came, he commonly brought
with him some learned Second, with whom he conferred in Latin, Ne intelligerent
Sacerdotes; His custom was to begin and end dinner with the same dish, to
content himself with one glass of Beer, or two at the most; and though he
loved rich Wines, yet he drank of the best but very sparingly, knowing that all
men's eyes then present, were upon him. He had a wonderful happy wit himself,
and was much taken with it in others, especially young Boys and Maids, with
whose natural purity, softness, and simplicity he seemed greatly effected,
and the rather, because our Savior himself, commends in them those qualities,
to our imitation. In many things he dissented from those who thought themselves
learned, in some, from those who indeed were so: to whom only he unbosomed
himself, especially if they were his friends: your Scotists, who then seemed
to monopolize, and divide the whole stock of wit amongst themselves, he
e^teemed of all others, the most dull, barbarous, stupid, and insufferable
dunces. And yet of Acquinas (I know not upon what grounds) he had a worse
opinion, then of Scotus: In whose defense, when it was objected by Erasmus
(perhaps ironically, for he was no great friend to either) that of all the
ancient Schoolmen, Aquinas only seemed to have read the Fathers; witness his
Aurea Catena, and that some of his Work^ were highly commended for stirring up
men's affections to piety: Colet answered, what tell you me of his reading, or
stirrring up affections? unless he had been transported with the Spirit of
Arrogance, he had never so rashly, and yet so magisterially and peremptorily
presumed to define all points of Religion: and if he had not savored too much
of the flesh, he had not therewith mixed so much vain and fruitless
Philosophy. He was no great admirer of Monks, not that he hated the Profession,
but because he saw the Professors lived not accordingly: wherefore whilst he
lived he gave them little, when he dyed, nothing: And yet his intent and
purpose was, to end his days in a Monastery, if he could have found one
qualified to his mind: This, by many, was censured in him, that although he
himself lived most chastely, and as Erasmus verily believes, dyed a pure
Virgin, notwithstanding his natural inclination to the Contrary, yet he had a
very charilable opinion of such Priests and Frier^, whose greatest fault was
their umcleann^sse. For said he, these out of the Conscience of their own
imper^ection, are (for the most part) humble, mode^t, and tractable: whereas
the devil himself, were he not what he is, could hardly abide the pride,
avarice and hypocrisy of the other: Not that he thought incontinence a light
Sin, but intractability and pride far more incompatible with piety. And
therefore though it was his ill luck to live under a perverse and wrangling
Diocesan (of whom we shall say more anon) yet he was a true friend to
Episcopacy, by being a mortal enemy to such Bishops, as under an hypocritical
mask of sanctity, pro^tituted their sacred function to ambition and Luxury:
Relative worship he held no such spur to Devotion as some would make it; And
was not far from their opinion, who think a notoriously wicked Priest
operates nothing by his consecration; for he abominated irregularity,
especially in his own order, and could not but wi^h indignation look upon
those whose impure and contaminated lives, gave the first rise and ground to
this suspicion, whether true or false: In his judgment concerning public
Schools and Universities, he was not only heterodox, but, like the bird
spoken of in the Proverb, clearly bewrayed diverse Symptoms of an exulcerated
mind: but let that pass amongst Moles in the most beautiful faces: Secret
Confession he generally approved, as that whereby himself had received much
comfort and benefit, but as much disliked that which was too anxious, and
descended to a needless enumeration, of what can no more be numbered then the
stars in heaven, or sand upon the Sea shore. Priests here, in his time,
Officiated once every day, he contented himself with Sundays and Holy Days;
it may be to set the greater edge upon his Devotion, which by these intervals
was the more sharpened, or perhaps to gain the more time for his private
studies, the better to fit himself for his Cathedral or Pulpit employments.
Learning he really loved, and labored for; only that Encuclopedicall wisdom,
which cannot be attained but by knowledge of all Arts, and devouring of all
books, he esteemed rather a learned sort of madness, then any true
provocation to Christian simplicity and charity. He deferred much to the
Apostolical Epistles, but when he compared them with that sweetness, wisdom,
and majesty, which is to be found in our Saviors own sayings and Sermons, he
thought them saplesse, and scarce to be named the same day; which as one of his
Paradoxes, I leave to be sensured by the Reader, for both proceed from the
same Spirit; Howsoever, omitting the former, the latter he intended to
trichotomize or reduce unto Ternaries, but was prevented by death: Gods worship
and Service (as much as in him lay) he performed with an equal decency, and
magnificence: and was no great approver, either of their zeal, or wisdom, who
tied Priests every day (those wherein they travel, not exceped) to the private
repetition of so many and long prayers: which perhaps he knew by experience,
they rather mumbled over with their lips, then considerately evaporated from
their hearts. He willingly and attentively read over many Heretical books,
professing he sometimes bettered himself more by them, then theirs who without
dispute, define what they please, and as they please. He endured not that any
man should square his style by the rules of Grammar, or Grammarians, but by
reading and imitating the most approved Authors; which opinion brought its own
punishmeat with it, for though he was eloquent both by nature, and erudition,
yet when he set himself to write in Latin, he often tript, even in things
common and obvious to every Schoolboy: which did so much discourage him, that
he never set forth any thing: it were to be wished, his modestey had not so
much stumbled at this straw; for certainly howsoever his expression had taken
the ear, his conceptions could not have disrellished the understanding: but in
this, as in many things else, he dissented from the common Tenets and practice
both of his own and former times; yet so as his private opinions never
troubled the public peace, his friends were as many, as there were men of
learning and Candor in the whole kingdom. His greatest enemies were certain
illiterate and irregular Friars: and amongst these his own Bishop, of whose
Sophistical Sco^istry the Deane made no great account, and the Bishop as
little of his Ciceronian Divinity; The heart burning went so far, that at
last it broke forth into Articles: wherein the Bishop assisted by two of his
brethren, almost as learned and Cordat as himself, accused him before the
Archbishop of Canterbury, that preaching, upon the triple Pasce ous meas, he
expounded the first, by good example; the Second, by Sound Doctrine, according
to the common Interpretation and consent of the Doctors. But that in the third,
which they expound Subsidio vitae, he had dessented from them: affirming that
something else must be there understood, and that the A^postles being extreme
poor, could not be bound to feed their flocks with what they had not
themselves. Secondly, that in another Sermon he had Preached against worshipping
of jmages: and thirdly, that in the same Sermon, he seemed to tap those, who
Preached out of their note books; which the Bishop took to himself, for at
that time he was aged eighty; and forced by this help to piece out a Seni^e and
decayed Memory. The Archbishop received the accusation, but answered it
himself; not suffering Colet to be so much as Summoned to his Consistory.
Their second attempt at Court succeeded little better, the occasion this. The
King being resol^ed upon a war with France, Colet was invited to Preach at
Court; His Theme was Christ's victory, in handling whereof, he preferred the
most unjust peace, before the justest war: for, said he, when the evil, out
of hatred or ambition fight against the evil, and kill one another, there they
fight not under Christ's, but the Devils Banner; showing how difficult a thing
it was, to dye like a good Christian, how few followed the Wars, not tainted
with envy or avarice: and how almost inconsistent brotherly charity is, with
sheathing our sword in the Bowels of our brethern. Concluding, that it was
better for Christians, to imitate in their warfare, their blessed Lord and
Savior, then either Caesar's or Alexanders. At this Sermon (amongst others)
were present the Bishop and two Friars Minorites, whereof the one was the
chief incendiary to the war, for which his ghostly counsel, he was soon
after rewarded with a Bishopric; the other, an obstreperous and stentorian
whoreson, who in all his Sermons (which in all were not many) was sure to have a
fling at Poets and poetry: intending thereby to mump Colet, who though he had
skill in music, yet never wrote a verse in his life: But so ignorant was the
vulgar of that frye, in those days, that they knew not ^he difference betwixt
a piece of Tully and Virgil; accounting all Poetry that was not mere
barbarism. These three made agrievous complaint of him both to the King and
chief Martialists, as though Colet had done all ^his of purpose, to weaken the
hands of his Majesty's Forces, and discourage the Commons, from so noble and
necessary expedition; and to speak the truth, the King himself was somewhat
startled at it. But in the Carthusian gardens at Greenwitch, he gave his
Majesty such satisfaction, that when most men gave him for lost, he never
parted from the King, more loaded with promises, both of protection and
preferment: who enjoined him only in his next Sermon, to clear such
misprissions and Scruples, as the Common people, and Soldiery had ignorantly
collected from his former; after which neither the Bishop nor his Bricot durst
meddle no more with him. But he lived not long to reap and enjoy the fruits of
this double victory: for after the third relapse into a pestilentiall Fever (a
disease almost peculiar to the English) he fell into a Dyssentery, where of he
died.

Some of his Physicians judged him far gone in an Hydropsie, but upon his
imbowelling, there appeared no such thing to the Anatomists, only the
extremities of his liver seemed (as it were) bearded with certain rough and
curled strings or pendants: he lies buried in Saint Paul's upon the south side
of the Quire; a place designed by himself; and almost in the eye of all who
pass that way.

Behold his Emblem, whose admired worth,
Few Pens can prove sufficient to set forth
Unto the World, and much less mine, whose skill
Can be derived but from an Infant Quill.
He had a rare and well innobled heart,
Whose rich endeavors gave a life to Art:
He always was ambitious to embrace,
(Although it were seated in the meanest place)
True virtue; and he took delight to see
Youth well adorned with Ingenuitie
Paul's School can witness that his liberal Purse
Was ever open to reward the Nurse
That gave true Wisdom suck: therefore his Name
Shall always ride upon the wings of Fame.
IOHANES OECVLAMPADIVS.
The life and Death of John Oecolompadius.
IN the year of our Lord God 1482. this worthy instrument of advancing the
truth of Christ Johannes Oecolompadius was borne at Weinsperge, a town
situated in Germany; which year also was remarkable for the birth of
Georgius Spalatinus, who afterward proved a faithful and laborious Minister
in the Church of God; being sometimes Chaplain unto the Duke of Saxony.

His Parents were greatly esteemed amongst their neighbors, for their virtuous
and civil demeanor, being endewed with a sufficient competency of outward
necessaries, both for the supporting of themselves and also for the education
of such Children as it pleased the Lord to bless them with, and with a great
number of these they were for a time beautified; but it pleased God to take
again those which he had given during the life of these Parents; leaving unto
them only this Oecolompadius, unto whom he had granted a longer life for the
good and benefit of his Church.

Both of them beholding the ingenious disposition of the child, and finding
him to be capable of Learning, they carefully sent him to be instructed and
brought up in the rudiment of Learning; his Father intending that after he had
attained unto some knowledge and perfection, to place him with a Merchant,
supposing that course of life to be the most fittest for him; but his Mother
being acquainted with this resolution of her Husbands; and finding it not
suitable to her own will, she never ceased from entreating him to desist from
his intent, until such time as she obtained of him, that he should continue
longer in the Schools, unto which there appeared in him a natural
inclination; the Lord beginning even in his Infancy to frame his mind unto
that wherein he afterward used him as his instrument for the converting of
many unto himself.

Not long after, his Father yielding unto the request of his Mother, who was as
careful of Oecolompadius as ever Monica was of Augustine, he sent him unto
Heilbronna, which place was famous in Germany for an exact training up of
Youth in the knowledge of the Latin tongue; where he having remained a few
years, he removed him unto Heidelberge, an Accademy eminent both for the Arts
and tongues; here he attained unto that perfection in Learning, that at the age
of 14. years he proceeded with great approbation Bachiler of Arts. And unto
his proceeding in the knowledge of human Learning, he adjoined a Religious
and civil behavior, persuading himself, eum, qui proficiat in literis and
deficiat in moribus, non proficere sed deficere. That he which went forward in
Learning, without having respect unto an orderly carriage of himself, would
prove to be retrograde in his motion.

Not long after he was graced with the title of Master of Arts, in the same
Academie; after which dignity conferred by the advice of his Parents, he went
unto Bonnonia, with an intent to apply himself unto the study of the Civil Law;
but because the alteration of the air proved adverse unto his former health,
after that he had made trial for the space of half a year, and in that time
finding no amendment, he returned again unto his Father, with whom he remained
until that he had recovered his former h^alth, and ^hen he went unto
Heidelberge again, where contrary to the will of his Father, he left the study
of the Civil Law, and gave himself wholly unto the study of Theology, being
thereunto led and guided by the spirit of God. In the performance of which Act
he imitated the example of that burning Lamp of the Church John Chrysostom,
the same act being also approved and embraced by Martin Luther, John Calvin,
Peter Martyr, Theodore Beza, Lambertus Danaeus, and others.

Here he began to acquaint himself with such Schoolmen, whose judgments in
points of Controversy were most approved of in that Academie, as Thomas
Aquinas, Gerson, and others; these he prosecuted with an indefatigable labor,
studying them day and night, desiring the explanation of such distinctions
which he could not understand, etc.

This more then ordinary industry procured unto him a ge^erall approbation,
together with a certain demonstration of his future worth, not only in
Heidelberge, but also in the adjacent places; insomuch, that he was recommended
unto that illustrious Prince Phillip, Elector Palatine, who sent for him, and
committed his youngest Sons unto his tuition, bearing always a reverend respect
unto him, for the excellency of those parts where with he saw he was endewed:
After that he had continued a season in this employment, and perceiving that
Courtly life to disagree with his natural inclination, he left it, and
returned again (as one that had been long captivated) unto the study of
Divinity.

Hi^ Parent^ perceiving that his mind was altogther set on that study, and
having no other child but only him, they made use of that means wherewith God
had ble^sed them, for the procuring of a Priesthood for him, in the town
wherein he was borne, unto which was also added the authority of Preaching;
unto this place he was called, but finding himself after a fortnights
performance to be unable to undergo so laborious an office, he desired leave
to return again unto Heildelbirge: for the furnishing of himself with a
greater measure of knowledge, that then he might return from thence better
fitted for the discharging of that sacred Function.

Having obtained leave, he alters his resolution and shapes his course toward
Tubinga, and from thence unto Stutgardia, where Reachiling lived, a man famous
for his excellent knowledge in the tongues: here he stayed for a short space,
during which time, he received from him some light concerning the Greek, which
being increased by daily exercise he so well profited himself, that he did set
forth a Greek Grammar, at his return again to Heidelbirge: where he also
learned the Hebrew of a Spanish School^master, whose evil nature was to envy
that knowledge of that holy tongue in those that were his Scholars.

Finding himself somewhat better provided, by the addition of the tongues, he
returns unto his native place, and cheerfully underwent his Pastoral office,
Preaching Christ so powerfully unto them, that he was greatly admired of his
Auditors, neither was he only excellent for doctrine, but also for his life
and conversation, giving good example unto those unto whom he Preached, being
familiar always with the better sort, and especially with Wolfangus Capito,
with whom he was acquainted during his residence at Heidilbirge: their
friendship being here renewed it continued firm until ^hey were separated
each from the other by death.

During his discharge of his Pastoral office, in his native place, Wolfangus
Capito was called unto Basel, to be their public Lecturer, which advancement
caused him not to forgit his old friend Oecolampadius, but rather moved him
unto a ^onsideration, how he might be a means of promoting him, unto a more
eminent place: Pitying that so b^ight a lamp of piety, should obscure it
self, by being shut up and con^ined unto such a narrow and unregarded angle of
the country; Wherefore he used all means to persuade the inhabitants of
Basel, unto whom he commended the worth of the man, to invite him unto this
City, and to confer a dignity on him correspondent unto his desert; which was
no sooner uttered but they condiscented thereunto, and he was called unto the
discharge of a Pastoral office in that City, in the year of grace 1515. Where
after that he had received that Function for the space of a year with great
applause, he was honored in the same Academy with the title of Doctor, about
the same time that Erasmus Rotherodamus came to Basel, to set forth his
annotations on the New Testament; for the perfecting whereof he used the
assistance of this Oecolampadius in regard of the eminency of his parts, as he
himself freely confesses.

Which work being finished, he left Basel and went unto Auspurge, being called
by the Commons of the Cathedral Church to Preach in that place unto the people,
but her^ he remained not long (partly because he feared and had a distrust in
himself that he was not fit for so eminent a place, and partly by reason of
that melancholy humor which was praedominate in him, insomuch that he esteemed
not the society of men, but would remove himself from them into some solitary
place) but departed from them and entered into a Monastry lying without the
City of Auspurge, and consecrated unto Saint Bridget; yet making his covenant
so with the Monks, that he would have liberty to study, and to believe what he
would, and to depart from them when he pleased; for said he, Etiamsi sexcentis
juramentis me obstenixero, nequaquam ea servare potero, si quando utilis
ministerio verbi sum futurus. Although I should bind my self by the virtue of
six hundred oaths, I shall not be able by any means to keep them, if at any
time I shall perceive that any profit will come unto the Church by my Ministry.

The Monks perceiving his worth joyfully received him into their society,
bestowing all things liberally on him that he desired, and also acquainted him
with all their privileges and in general he found such content amongst them,
for the space of a few months, that he intended to spend all the rest of his
days in that lazy manner of life: but it pleased God to call him from this
manner of life, and for that cause he stirred up his friends, and amongst the^
more especially Capi^o, who seriously persuaded and earnestly exhorted him, to
give over that Monastical life; upon which persuasion he intended to forsake
the Mon^stery and to betake himself again unto his former profession, and for
a preparation thereunto, being as yet in the Monastery he set forth a book of
confession, wherein in many things he opposed the doctrine of the Church of
Rome, whereby he brought himself not only into danger of his life, but the
Monks also were greatly afraid, lest any inconvenience might happen unto them
by reason of his actions, and therefore they greatly labored to free their
Monastery of him; during their plodding, he sharply reprehended them for their
errors, perswad^ng them to embrace and lay hold on the truth, whereby they came
to be more and more incensed against him, and privately labored with his
friends, to be more earnest with him in the leaving of the Mona^stery.

Having be^n resident in this place not fully two years he departed, and went
unto Franciscus Sickingen, a man nobly descended by whom he was entertained,
and i^ the same hou^e he labored to put down the Mass, affi^ming it to be an
Idolatrous worship; but Franciscus being at that time greatly distressed with
an unhappy war, he left him and went to Basel, in the year of our Lord 1522.
to publish such things as he had at vacant times collected.

Here he was again advanced by the Senats unto a Pastoral office, and an
annual stipend designed unto him, which he performed with great zeal and
constancy to the glory of God and good of his Church; here he bouldly
discovered unto his Auditors those errors which by continuance had got firm
footing in the Church, he opened unto them the perfection and sufficientcy of
the Merits of Christ, he declared unto them the true nature of faith, he
revealed unto them the true doctrine of Charity; insomuch that the authority of
the Po^ish religion began to stagger in the minds of many: Whilst he was
totally occupied about these things some there were who labored to draw him
again to the Pseudo Catholic religion, but more especially Iohannas
Cachlaeus who in the year 1524. wrote letter^ unto him, wherein he testified
himself, to be deeply afflicted with sorrow, to hear that a man so
excellently learned, should lay aside his coule, and adhaere unto such
haereticall opinions, and withal exhorted him to revoke his opinion, and to
return again into the Monastery, promising him a dispensation from the Pope,
and the favor of the Prior, which he had formerly enjoyed: but these and such
like things were slighted by Oecolampadius, who bringing them unto the word of
God, found that they would not endure the trial.

In the performance of his Pastoral office an assistan^ was appointed unt him
by public authority, and he began to settle a more excellent Reformation in
the Church, commanding the Sacrament of Baptism to be administered in the
mother tongue, and the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to be received under both
kinds; he taught that the Mass was not a sacrifice, for the living and the
dead, or for those who were tormented in their feigned Purgatory; but that
perfect satisfaction was obtained for all believers by the passion and Merits
of Christ: he dissuaded them from sprinkling themselves with holy water, and
from the consecration of Palms and the like, declaring unto them that they who
did attribute virtue unto any such things did detract from the glory and power
of God; which doctrine of his took such deep ^ooting in the hearts of his
Auditors, that it gave a period unto many superstitious actions amongst them.

The foundation of future reformation was no sooner laid, but the old Dragon,
began to play his part, and to discover his malicious ^nvy, against such things
as make for the glory of God: either by hind^ing their proceedings, or laying
some foul aspersion on them; for at that time broke forth that, yet continued
sacramentary dissension, by means whereof that good work begun in the Church
was hindered: Martin Luther at this time openly opposed and contradicting by
writing the doctrine of Huldericus Zuinglius, Pastor of the Church at Tigurum,
concerning the Euchiarist, by reason whereof there was a great dissension
betwixt the Churches of Helvetia, and Saxony; for the taking away of which,
Oecolampadius set forth a book concerning the true understanding of these
words, Hoc est corpus meum; and by many strong arguments he affirmed, that a
trope lay therein, and yet his industry and labor therein took not away the
contention betwixt the Churches.

This intended reformation was again hindered by Eccius and his followers, who
taught (1) that the substantial body and blood of Christ was in the Sacrament
of the Altar; (2) that they were truly offered up in the Mass, both for the
living and the dead; (3) that the virgin Mary and the Saints were to be
worshipped as intercessours; (4) that the images of Jesus and the Saints were
not to be abolished; (5) that after this life there was a Purgatory.

These positions were vehemently opposed by Oecolampadius, at the public
dispu^ation held at Baden: the event whereof was this, some of the Helvetians
subscribed unto Eccius, some unto Oecolampadius; and so there remained still a
dissension amongst them which could by no means be taken away, although
attempted by many worthy instruments of Christ, who have undergone many
dangers, for an effectual performance of the same, yet Oecolampadius wrought
so with the Saints, that liberty of conscience was granted unto the Citizens as
touching religion.

In the year following there was a disputation held at Berne, which continued
for the space of twenty days, wherein Oecolampadius labored so powerfully for
a reformation that his acts there recorded give a sufficient testimony thereof,
unto the world.

In the year 1529. an assembly was appointed by the Lantgraw of Hassia at
Marpurge touching a reformation in the Churches, concerning which more in the
life of Melancton.

After the painful sustaining of so many labors, at home and abroad, he
returned to Basil, where he spent the residue of his life in Preaching,
reading, writing, setting forth of books, visiting the sick, and having also a
care of the adjacent Churches, until the year 1531. wherein it pleased God to
visit him with sickness, wherewith he was constrained to take his bed, hourly
exspecting death. And forthwith sending for the Pastors of the same place, he
welcomed them with ashort and pithy oration, wherein he exhorted them to
remain constant and firm in the purity of the doctrine which they professed,
because it was conformable unto the word of God: as for other things he willed
them to be less careful, assuring them that the All-sufficient God would care
for them, and that he would not be wanting unto his Church.

His Children standing before him, he took them by their right hands, and
afterward gently stroking their heads, he advised them to love God, who would
be unto them in the place of a Father.

A little before his death one of his intimate friends coming unto him, he
asked him what news? he answered, none. But said he I will till thee news,
being demand^d what it was, he answered, Brevi ero apud Christum Dominum, I
shall in short time be with Christ my Lord. In the morning before he died he
repeated the 51. Psalm of David, at the end whereof he added^ Salva me Christi
Jesus; being never heard afterward to utter any word; those who were present
betook themselves unto their prayers, wherein they continued until he had
surrendered his Spirit unto his Creator: which was willingly and cheerfully
performed by him, on the first of D^cember, in the year of our Lord 1531. and
in the 49. year of his age, and was buried with great lamentation in the some
City.

He died intest^te, quia unde conderet, pauper Christi servas non habebat.

He was of a meek and quiet disposition, in the undertaking of any business,
he was very circumspect, and nothing indeed was more pleasing unto him, then to
spent his time in reading and commenting: the works which he left behind him,
are these which follow.

1 Annotations on Genesis. 2 On Job. 3 Isaiah. 4 Jeremiah. 5. Ezekill. 6
Daniel. 7 Hosea. 8 Amos. 9 Jonas. 10. Micah, Cap. 2. 11. On the three last
Prophets. 12. On the Plasmes. 13 Matthew. 14 Romans. 15 Hebrews. 16 1 Epistle
of John. 17 Of the genuine sense of these words Hoc en corpus meum. 18^ An
exhortation to the reading of Gods word. 19 Of the dignity of the Eucarist. 20
Of the joy of the resurrection. 21 A speech to the Sena^ of Basil. 22 A
Catectisme. 23 Annotations on Chrysostom. 24 Enchyidion to the Greek tongue.
25^ Against Anabaptists. 26 Annotations upon the A^ts and Corinthians. 27 Of
Almsdeeds. 28 Against Julian the Apostata. 29 Of tru^ faith in Christ. 30 Of
the praises of Cyprian. 31 Of the life of the M^ses. 32 Against Usury.

Reader, behold the rare-adorned Face
Of him, whose very looks import a grace;
He was a Man whose constancy to truth,
Ripened in age, and blossomed in his youth:
He was a rock, whose daring front disdained
Papisticke Waves he still opposed; and gained
The upper hand, though threatening danger lined
Each word he spoke, yet would he speak his mind:
It Was not their proffered wealth could make him bold
To sin in Want, and then repent in Gold;
Religion was the Star by which he steered
His well run-course, his heart was still endeer'd
Two sollid Principl^, he loved to court
The truth, Love was his Ship, and heaven his port.
The life and death of JOHN FRITH, Who suffered Martyrdom, 1533.
John Frith was borne at We^trame in Kent; in whom being a child, nature had
planted a marvelous love unto learning; he had also a wonderful Promptness of
wit, and a ready capacity to receive and understand any thing, neither was
there any thing wanting in him equal unto that towardness of dispsi^ion;
whereby it came to pass that he was not only a lover of learning, but also
became an exquifite learned man. He first begun his s^udy at Cambridge, where
he profited much in all sorts of learning; At last he fell into knowledge of
and acquaintance with William Tindall, through whose pious instructions, that
seed of the Gospel and sincere godliness was first instilled into his heart.
At that time ( Cardinal Wolsey) prepared to build a sumptious College in
Oxford, now called Christ's college: And sought out for such as did excel in
knowledge and learning to be Fellows in the same, and amongst others, John
Frith was appointed one: Now these choice young men there placed, confer^ing
together upon the abuses of Religion, which at that time were crept into the
Church, were therefore accused of heresy, and cast into prison, where many of
them, through the filthy stink thereof dyed: Afterward John Frith, (with the
others remaining alive) being dismissed out of prison, went beyond the seas;
and too years after returning, he was taken for a Vagabond at Reading, and set
in the stocks, where he remained until he was almost pined with hunger; at
lenght he desired that the Schoolmaster of the town might be brought unto him,
which was Leoward Coxe a learned man; as soon as he came (in the Latin tongue)
he bewailed his captivity unto him: The Schoolmaster being overcome with his
eloquence, did not only take pity and compassion upon him, but also begin to
love and embrace him, especially when he spoke unto him in the Greek tongue,
and rehearsed by heart diverse Verses out of Homer; whereupon the Scholemaster
went with all speed unto the Magistrates and procured his enlargment. Yet this
his safety continued not long, through the deadly hatred of Sir Thomas Moore,
at that time chancellor of England, who persecuted him both by Sea and land,
promising great rewards to any man that could bring tidings of him. Thus this
good man being beset with troubles round about, wandered up and down, from
place to place, until at the length being betrayed by a seeming friend, he was
apprehended, and sent unto the Tower of London, where he had many disputes with
Sir Thomas Moore, and others, touching the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ. In which quarrel he withstood the violence of three most obstinate
enemies, with the Bishop of Rochester, Moore and Rastall, but he fighting with
them all three at once, did so refute, and confound them, that he converted
Rastall to his part. But when neither Scripture, nor reason would prevail
against the firce and crulty of of these furious foes, the twentieth day of
June, 1533. he was brought before the Bishops sitting in Paul's Church, where
they ministered certain interrogatives unto him, touching the Sacrament and
Purgatory; to which he answered according to his former disputation, and
subscribed unto his answer, these words with his own hand, I Frith thus do
think, and as I think, so have I said, written, taught, and affirmed, and in
any Books published; So that when as by no means he could be persuaded to
recant, he was condmned by the Bishop of London to be burned, and so being
delivered over unto the Mayor and Sheriffs of London, the forth day of July he
was by them carried into Smithfield to be burned; when he was tied to the
stake, he showed much constancy and courage, for when as the fire and faggots
were put unto him, he willingly embraced the same, thereby declaring with what
uprightness of mind he suffered those torments for Christ's and the truths
sake, whereof that day he gave with his blood a perfect and firm testimony;
The wind drove away the flame from him, unto his fellow Martyr Andrew Hewet,
who was burned with him, which made his death the longer, and his pains the
greater; But God assisted him with such strength, and fortifyed his soul with
such patience, that he seemed rather to rejoice for his fellow, then to be
careful for himself, as if he had felt no pain in that long torment.

There is one thing more very observable concerning this constant Martyr John
Frith, that whereas the Bishop of Canterbury sent two of his servants to fetch
him to Croydon, there to be examined, they were so convinced upon the way, with
his learned and pious discourses, sweet and humble carriage, that they
contrived betwixt themselves how to let him escape; and at the length one of
them delivered himself unto him, in this manner, saying, Master Frith, the
journey which I have taken in hand to bring you to Croydon, as a Sheep to the
slaughter, so grieveth me, that I am overwhelmed with care and sorrow; neither
regard I what hazard I undergo, so that I may deliver you out of the Lions
mouth. And then made known unto him how that they had plotted betwixt
themselves to let him escape: to whom Frith answered with a smiling
countenance, Do you think that I am afraid to deliver my opinion unto the
Bishops of England in a manifest truth? the Gentleman replied, I marvel that
you were so williug to fly the Realm before you were taken, and now so
unwilling to save your self. Master Frith answered, before I was attached I
would fain have enjoyed my liberty for the benefit of the Church of God; but
now being taken by the higher power, and by the providence of almighty God
delivered into the hands of the Bishops, to give testimony to that religion and
doctrine, which under pain of damnation I am bound to maintain and defend; if
I should now start aside, and runaway, I should run from my God, and from the
testimony of the Word, and should be worthy of a thousand Hells; therefore I
beseech you to bring me where I was apponted to be brought, or else I will go
thither all alone.

In all past ages and preceding days,
Heaven (to his ^^nour, and eternal praise)
Has never left his Church, yet destitute
Of faithful Witnesses, both to dispute,
And dye^ too, for his spotless Uerity,
(If called thereto) with all Sencerity,
And admirale fortitude of mind;
In which rare Role of Partyers we do find
Famous John Frith, an English man by nature;
Who, from his youth, adorned his education
With promptitude of wit, and other parts,
Whereby he flourisht both in Tongus and Arts.
And to conclude let all rejoice and say,
Religion was Friths prop, and he her stay.
The Life and Death of THOMAS BILNEY, who suffered Martyrdom, Anno Christi
1531.
THomas Bilney, an Englishman by birth, was brought up in the University of
Cambridge from a child, where he profited so much in all the liberal
Sciences, that he in a short time commensed Bachelour of both Laws; But the
holy Spirit of Christ by secret inspira^ion, endewing his heart with the
knowledge of better things, he lefe the study of man's laws, and set himself
wholly a part for the study of Divini^y, accounting godliness his greatnest
gain; And as his own heart was enflamed with a sincere love to Christ and the
Gospel of Christ, so his great desire was to bring others to embrace the same;
and his labor was not in vain, for he converted many of his fellows to the
knowledge of the Gospel, and amongst the rest Master Hugh Latimer, (who
afterward sealed to the truth of Christ with his blood) Master Latimer being
crosse-keeper at that time in Cambridge, bringing it forth upon procession
days: At the last Bilney forsaking the University, went up and down,
Preaching the Gosp^l, where ever he came, sharply reproveing the pride, and
pomp of ^he Clergy, and striveing to overthrow the authority of the Bishop of
Rome. Cardinal Wolsey at that time being in great authority, and well knowing
that the pride and hypocrisy of the Clergy could not long continue against
the word of God, if once the light of the Gospel should open the eyes of men,
he therefore caused Bilney to be apprehended, and cast into prison; And on the
25. day of November 1537. Master Bilney was brought before the said Cardinal
and many other Bishops sitting at Westminster, and there examined whether he
had not taught unto the people, the opinions of Luther, or of any other
condemned by the Church; Bilney answered that wittingly he had not taught any
thing contrary to the Catholic Church. Hereupon he was delivered over to the
Bishop of London, to be further examined: being brought before him, he exhorted
him to abjure and recant; Bilney answered, that he would stand to his
conscience saying, fiat justicia, et judicium in nomine domini. Then said the
Bishop of London, with the consent of the rest, read part of the sentance
against Master Bilney but respites the rest of it until the morrow, to see if
he would recant; then he was brought before them again, but still he refuses
to recant: yet at the last, through infirmity, rather then by conviction, he
recanteth the seventh day of December 1527.

After which abjuration made, he went again to Cambridge, but he had such
conflicts within himself upon the consideration of what he had done, that he
was overwhelmed with sorrow, and was near the point of utter despair, so that
his friends were afraid to let him be alone, but continued with him day and
night, striving to administer some comfort unto him; But he was in such an
agony for the space of a whole year after, that he could receive no comfort,
yet at the length, having bin thoroughly humbled for his sin, through the
goodness of God he came unto some quiet in conscience, being firmly resolved
to spend his dearest blood in giving testimony to that truth which before he
had renounced. Having thus determined in his mind, he took his leave of his
friends in Trenityhall, and said that he would go to Jerusalem and so should
see them no more (alluding to Christ's going up to Jerusalem before his
passion.) And immediately he departed into Norfolk, and there Preached, first
privatley in houses, and then openly in the fields, bewailing his former
subscription, and owning that doctrine for truth which before he had abjured,
willing all men to be warned by him, and never to trust to their fleshly
friends in causes of religion; whereupon he was apprehended, and carried to
prison; while he there remained, Doctor Call and Doctor Stokes, with many
others, were sent to dispute with him, the form of which, by means of
Bilneies doctrine, was somewhat reclaimed; After many tedious disputes, seeing
that by no means they could not withdraw Master Bilney for truth, he was
condemned to be burned.

The night before his execution, many of his friends resorted unto him, found
him eating heartily with a quiet mind and cheerful countinance, where upon
they said unto him, that they were glad to see him thus to refresh himself,
being shortly to suffer such painful torments; He answered, I imitate those,
who having a decaying house to dwell in, hold i^ up by props as long as may be.
Continuing with his friends in heavenly discourses, one of them said, that
although the fire which he should suffer the next day, would be of great heat
unto his body, yet it would be but for a moment, but the spirit of God would
refresh, and cool his soul with everlasting comfort; At these words Master
Bilney put his finger into the flame of the candle then burning before them,
and feeling the heat thereof, said, I find by experience, and have known it
long by Philosophy, that fire is naturally hot, yet I am persuaded by Gods holy
word, and by the experience of some Saints of God therein recorded, that in the
flame we may feel no heat, and I constantly believe, that however the stubble
of this my body shall be wasted by the fire, yet my Soul and Spirit shall be
purged thereby; and although it may be somewhat painful for a time, yet joy
unspake^ble follows there-upon.

As he was led forth to the place of execution, one of his friends spoke unto
him, and desired him to be constant, and to take his death as patiently as he
could; to whom Master Bilney answered with a quiet and mild countenance; When
the Mariner undertakes a voyage, he is tossed on the billows of the troubled
Seas, yet in the midst of all perils he hears up his spirit, with this
consideration, that ere long he should come unto his quiet Harbor; so says
he, I am now sailing upon the troubled Sea, but ere long my Ship shall be in a
quiet Harbor; and I doubt not, but through the grace of God, I shall endure
the Storm; only I would entreat you to help me with your prayers.

As he went along the streets, he gave much alms to the poor, by the hands of
one of his friends. Being come to the Stake, he there openly made a long
confession of his faith in an exellent manner, and gave many sweet exhortations
to the people; and then earnstly called upon God by prayer, and at the end
rehearsed the 143. Psalm.

Then turning to the Officers, he asked them if they were ready, whereupon the
fire was kindled; he holding up his hands, and crying sometimes Jesus,
sometimes Credo: but the wind did blow away the flame from him, which made his
pain the longer, yet he patiently endured it; continuing to call upon God,
until he gave up the ghost.

Just such another Saint-like singing Swan,
Was blessed Bilney, born an Englishman;
Brought up in Cambridge University,
Famous for Arts, and Parts, and Piety:
Where by powerful preaching, he converted
Holy Hugh Latim^r, then much perverted
To Popery, made many a proselyte,
Of's fellow-Students, by the Gospels light.
At last by Card'nall Wolsey, prosecuted;
Who, and his shavelings, with him often disputed,
They by their subtle treats and threats at length
Tript up his heels, and foyld his humain strength,
And caused him to recant: In which sad case,
This blessed Saint abote a twelve months space,
In bitter anguish and perplexity
Of Soul, in danger, in despair to dye.
At last, again, by Gods all-guarding grace,
Recovered comfort did despair quite chase,
And fill his Soul with such redoubled joy
As all his former preciovs parts to employ,
In constant and courageous preaching down
The odious errors of Romes tripple Crown;
For which our tongues may never cease to express
That Bilney's Crowned with true happiness.
WILLIAM TINDALL.
The Life and Death of William Tindal.
WIlliam Tindal was borne about the borders of Wales, and brought up from a
child in the Universitie of Oxford, where he grew up, and increased in the
knowledge of the Tongues, and the Liberal Arts, but especially in the
Scriptures, whereunto his mind was singularly addicted: insomuch as being in
Magdalen-Hall, he read privately to some Fellows and Students some parts of
Divinity, instructing them in the knowledge and truth of the Scriptures: his
life also was so blameless, that he acquired much love, and esteem thereby:
After he had profited exceedingly, and taken his degrees there, he removed to
Cambridg, and being well ripened in the knowledge of God's Word, he went to
live with one Master Welsh in Glocestershire, where he was Tutor to his
children: and many Abbats, and Doctors resorting thither, Master Tindal
discoursing with them of Luther, Erasmus, etc. showing them plainly his
judgment in Religion, proving the same by the Word of God, and confuting their
errors; which caused them to bear a secret grudg in their hearts against him:
and afterward they took occasion to rail, and rage against him, charging him
with Heresy, and accusing him to the Bishop and Chancellor, whereupon the
Chancellor appointed those Priests, and Master Tindal also to appear before
him, and Master Tindal suspecting the matter, as he went prayed heartily unto
God to give him strength to stand fast to the truth: when he came the
Chancellor threatened him grievously, reviling and rating of him, as though he
had been a Dog, accusing him of many things whereof no proof could be brought,
and so dismissed him for the present: not long after Master Tindal happening
into the company of one that was estee^ed a learned Doctor, in disputing with
him, he drove him to that issue, that the Doctor burst out into these
blasphemous words, We had better be without God's Laws, then the Pope's.
Maste Tindal hearing this, full of Godly zeal, replied; I defy the Pope and
all his Laws, and if God spare me life, ere many years, I will cause a Boy
that drives the plough to know more of the Scriptures then you do. The rage of
the Priests increasing, Master Tindal told Master Welsh, that he well perceived
that he could stay there no longer with safety, and that his stay might be
prejudicial to that Family also, and therefore with his good leave he departed
and went to London, where he preached a while, as he had done in Country
before: and then hearing a great commendation of Cuthbert Tonstal Bishop of
London, he endeavored to get into his servic^, but the Lord saw that it was not
good for him, and therefore he found little favor in the Bishop's ^ight:
remaining thus in London about the space of a year, and being desirous, for the
good of his Country, to translate the New Testament into English, he found
that there was no place for him to do it in England, and therefore being
assisted by Master Humphrie Munmoth, and other good men, he leftt the land, and
went into Germany, and there set upon that work: translating the New Testament
Anno. Christi 1527. and then setting upon the Old, First Bible transl^ted.
he finished the five books of Moses, with sundry most learned, and godly
Prologues perfixed before every one of them: the like also he did upon the N^w
Testament: besides diverse other godly Treatises which he wrote there; which
being published, and sent over into England, became exceeding profitable to the
whole English Nation. At his first going over into Germany, he went into
Saxony, and had much conference with Luther, and other learned men in those
quarters, and then returning into the Netherlands, made his greatest abode at
An^werp: when he had finished his translation of Deuteronomy, minding to print
it at Hamborouth, he sailed thitherward, but by the way upon the coast of
Holland he suffered shipwreck, Great afflictions.
by which he lost all his books, and writings, and so was compelled to begin
all again to his great hinderance and doubling of his labors: yet afterward
he went in another ship to Hamborough, where he met Master Coverdal, who
assisted him in the translation of ^ive the books of Moses; the sweating
sickness being in the town all the while, which was Anno Christi 1529. and
during their imploiment in that work, they were entertained by a religious
Widow, Charity.
Mistress Margaret Van Emerson: when his English Testament came abroad, Satan's
and the Popes instruments raged exceedingly, some saying that there were a
thousand Heresies in it: others that it was impossible to translate the
Scriptu^es into Euglish: Popish lies
others that it was not lawful for the Lay People to have it in their own
language, etc. and at last the Bishops, and Priests procured of King Henry the
eight a Proclamation prohibiting the buying or reading of it: yet not satisfied
herewith, they suborned one Henry Philips to go over to Antwerp to betraie him:
who when he came thither, in^inuated himself into Master Tindal's company, and
pretended great friednship to him; and having learned where his abode was, he
went to Bruxels and there prevailed so far, that he brought with him the
Emperors Attorney to Antwerp, and pretending to visit Master Tindal, he
betrayed him to two Catchpoles, which presently carried him to the Atturny: who
after examination, sent him to prison in the Castle of Filford, 18. miles off,
and seized upon all his writings, and what else he had at his lodging: the
English Merchants at Antwerp, who loved Tindal very well, did what they could
to procure his release, also letters were sent by the Lord Cromwell, and others
out of England in his behalf: but Philips so bestirred himself, that all their
endeavors came to nothing: and Tindal was at last brough to his answer; and
after much reasoning although he deserved not death, yet they condemned him to
die: and being brough forth to the place of execution, whilst he was tying to
the stake, he cried with a servent and loud voice, Lord open the King of
Englands eyes. And so he was first strangled by the hangman, and then burned,
Anno Christi 1536. The power of his Doctrine, and the sencerity of his life was
such, that during his imprisonment (which was about a year and an half) he
converted his keeper and his daughter, and some others of his household: and
Philips that betrayed him, long enjoyed not the price of innocent blood, but by
God's just judgment he was devoured by lice.

Master Fox in his History of Martyers says, he might be called Englands
Apostle. The Works which he writ, besides the translation of the Scriptures
are these that follow.

1. A Christians obedience. 2. The unrighteous Mammon. 3. The practice of the
Papists. 4. Commentaries on the seventh Chapter of Saint Matthew. 5. A
discourse of the last will and testament of Tracij. 6. An answer to Sir Thomas
Mores Dialogues. 7. The Doctrine of the Lords Supper against More. 8. Of the
Sacrament of the Altar. 9. Of the Sa^cramentall signs. 10. A foote-path
leading to the Scriptures. 11. Two letters to John Frith.

All these are extant together, with the works of two Marty^s, Barnes and
Frith, in English, in Folio: and thus after much labor and persecution, this
worthy member of Christ, yielded to the fla^es, expecting a joyful
reresurrection.

Zeal crowned his heart^ and made him to out vie.
Papisticke stocks of Hell-bred Tyranny;
He feared them not, but boldly would dispute
Against their swelling Errors, and confute
Their Principles with a most dexterous art;
His tongue was never Traitor to his heart;
Truth was the hand that pointed to the way,
Where full content and rich Salvations lay:
It Was not a loathsome prison ^ould devorse
His ready lips from the profound discourse
Of true Religion, nothing could prevent
His just endeavors, Time, he thought misspent
If not employed to good; Reader^ admire,
His body flamed to make his soul a fire.
The life and Death of URBANUS REGIUS, who died Anno Christi 1541.
URbanus Regius was borne in Arga Longa, ^n the territories of Count Montfort,
of honest parents, who principl'd him in the rudiments of Learning, and from
school sent him to Friburg, where he lived with Zasius an excellent Lawyer, who
loved him dearly for his diligence and industry: from thence he went to Basil,
to study other Arts, and from thence to Ingolstad, where, after a while, he
read privately to diverse Noble-men's-sons, whose parents desired him to furnish
their children with books, and all other necessaries, for which they would take
care to pay him again quarterly: but when he had run into debt for them, they
neglected to return their money, which caused him to think of departing, and
having an opportunity, he listed himself a soldier under a Captain that went
against the Turks, leaving his books, and oher furniture, to be divided
amongst the Creditors: being now amongst the soldiers, it happened that John
Eccius (who was Gov^rnor of the University) coming forth to see the soldiers,
he espied Regius amongst them, and enquired the cause of his so sudden a
change; he told them how those Noblemen had served him, whereupon Eccius got
him released from his Captain, and by his authority procured the Debts to be
paid by the parents of those youths, which had been with him; whereupon he
returned to his studies again, wherein he growing famous for his wit and
learning, Maximilian the Emperor passing through Ingolstade, made him his
Laureat-Poet and Orator: afterward he was made Professor in that University:
Then he fell hard to the study of Divinity, and a while after, the controversy
growing hot between Luther and Eccius, Rhegius favoring Luther's doctrine,
because he would not offend Eccius, to whom he was many ways bound, he left
Ingolstade, and went to Augusta, and there, at the importunity of the
Magistrates and Citizens, he undertook the Government of the Church, and being
offended at the gross Idolatry of the Papists, he joined with Luther, and
Preached against the same: and having written to Zuinglius to know his
judgment about the S^crament and Original Sin, he received such satisfaction,
that he joined in opinion with him about the same. At that time the Anabaptists
crept into Augusta, and held private conventicles to the disturbance of the
public peace, for which the Magistrates imprisoned the chiefest of them, and
afterward for their obstinacy punished them. R^egius Preaching against
Purgatory and Indulgences, the malice and cruelty of the Papists prevailed at
length to ^he driving of him out of that City: bu^ ^f^e^ a while, by the
earnest prayer of the Citizens, he was called back (...) to his former Charge,
where also he married a wife, by whom he had thirteen children: Eccius also
came thither, and sought by all means to turn him from the truth, but in
vain: he sent also Faber and Cochlaeus with flatteries, and lage promises, who
prevailed as little as the others.

Anno Christi 1530. when the Diet was held at Augusta for quieting of the
controversies about Religion, the Duke of Brunswick coming thither, by
importunity prevailed with Regius to go to Luneburg in his Country, to take
care of the Church there, in which journey at Gobu^g he met with Luther, and
spent a whole day in familiar conf^rence with him, about matters of great
moment, of which himself write's, That he never had a more comfortable day in
his life. Er^nestus Duke of Brunswick loved him dearly, and esteemed him as his
father; insomuch as when the City of Augusta sent to the Duke, desiring him to
return Regius to them again; he answered, that he would as soon part with
his eyes as with him: and presently after he made him Bishop, and over-seer of
all the Churches in his Country, with an ample salary for the same: afterward
going with his Prince to a meeting at Haganaw, he fell sick by the way, and
within few days, with much cheerfulness yielded up his soul into the hands
of God, Anno Christi 1541: he often desired of God that he might dye a sudden
and easy death, wherein God answered his desires. He was of an excellent wit,
holy of life, and painful in the work of the Lord.

Reader, this serious Fathers well-spent days
Were filled with love, and love was filled with praise;
He was abjured by a Noble race
Which made him only debtor, but not base;
Heaven was his port, to which he faild through tears^
Steered by his faith, blown by the wind of prayers;
Let his example teach us to invest
Our hearts with wisdom, and we shall be blessed,
With him, who now enjoyes the life of pleasure,
Whose comforts know no end, whose joys no measure;
He that shall choose true virtue for his guide
May march on boldly, and not fear a slide.
The Life and Death of CARALOSTADIUS Who died Anno Christi 1541.
ANdreas Bodenstein Caralostadius was borne in France, in a town called
Caralostadium, by which he received h^s name: he was brought up at School
there, where afterward he went to Rome, and having spent sometime in the study
of Divinity, he went thence to Wittenberg, where he commensed Doctor in
Divinity, and was a public Professor Anno Christi 1512. afterward he became
an earnest as^ertor of Luthe^'s doctrine, and a defendor of it against Ecc^us,
both by disputation and writing: at the time of Luther's being in his Pathmos,
Caralostadius obtained of the Elector the abolishing of private Mass,
Auricular confession, Images, etc. at Wittenberg; which Luther being offended
at, returned presently thither, and Peeached eagerly against that alteration,
whereupon Caralostadius wrote in justification of it, which was the first
beginning of greater differences betwixt them about the Sacrament; whereupon he
left Wittenberg 1524. and went to Orlamund, being called to a Pastoral charge
there: but after a while he was called back to his place in Wittenberg; yet
before he went, Luther being sent by the Elector of Iene, and Orlamund, in a
Sermon where ^aralostadius was present, he enveighed bitterly against the
Anabaptists, and said withal, That the same spirit reignd in the Image-haters,
and Sacramentaries; whereupon Caralostadius, being much offended, went to his
lodging to confer with him about it: afterward Lu^her coming to Orlamund went
not to salute Caralostadius, but in his Sermon quarrelled with their abolishing
of Idols: and shortly after he procured the Elector to banish Caralostadius;
whereof Caralostadius afterward complained in a letter to his people in
Wittenberg, that unheard and unconvicted he was banished by Luther's
procurement: from th^nce he went to Basil, where h^ printed some book^ that he
had written about the Lord's Supper, for which the Magistrates (being offended
with the novelty of the Doctrine) cast the Printers into prison, and the Senate
of Tigurine for bad their people to read those books: but Zuinglius in his
Sermon exhorted them first to read, aad then to pass judgment on them,
saying, That Caralostadius knew the truth, but had not well expressed it:
afterward Caralostadiu^ wandering up and down in upper Germany, when the
sedition of the boorish Anabaptists brake out, (unto which they were stirred up
by Muncer, and for which many of them were brought to punishment) Caralostadius
also escaped very narrowly, being let down in a basket over the wall^ of
Rottenberg: and being in great streights he wrote to Luther, and purged
himself from having any hand in those uproars, entreating him to print his
book, and undertake his defense, which also Luther did, desiring the
Magistrates that he might be brought to his just trial, before he wa^
condemned: Caralostadius wrote again to him a Letter, wherein he said, That
for his opinion about the Sacrament, he rather proposed it for disputation
sake, then that he positively affirmed any thing, which many imputed to him for
levity: but Luther thereupon procured his return into Saxony: yet he finding
little content there, went to Tigurine, and taught in that place till the death
of Zuinglius, and then he went to Basil, where he taught ten years, and An.
1541. he died there of the plague, and was very honorably buried.

This grave Divine ceased not from taking pains
More for the Churches good, then his own gains;
Yet were his gains as great as his desire,
He that obtaines true virtue need require
No greater profit, he that studies how
To live here-after, must not set his brow
On Earths lo things: the pleasure of the Earth
Proved this grave Fathers sorrow, not his mirth;
His thoughts were all divine, he could not hide
Within his Seasoned breast, the flames of pride;
He was an Image-hater, and would not
Let them be worshipped and his God forgot;
'Twas not a Prison could his heart apale,
He that has virtue, needs no other bail.
The life and death of CAPITO, Who died Anno Christi 1541.
WOlfgangus Fabricius Capito was borne at Hagenaw in Alsatia: his Father was of
the Senatorian rank, who bred him in learning, and sent him to Basil, where he
studied Physic, and proceeded Doctor of it: aft^r hi^ Father's death, he
studied Divinity Anno Christi 1504; and under Zasias (a great Lawyer) he
studied Law also, and proceeded Doctor of ^t: He was a great lov^r and admirer
of godly Ministers: at Heidleberg he grew into acquaintance with Oecolampadius,
and there was a near tie of friendship betwixt them all their lives: after with
him also he studied Hebrew, and became a Preacher, first in Spire, and thenc^
was c^lled to Basil: from thence he was sent for by the Elector Palatine, who
made him his Preacher and Counselor, and sent him of diverse Embassies: also by
Charles the fifth he was made of the order of Knights: from Mentz he followed
Bucer to Argen^ine, where he was called to a Pas^oral charge: he was a very
prudent and eloquent man, a good Hebrician, and studious of Peace; concerning
the Sacrament he said, Mittendas esse contentiones, and cogitandum de usu
ipsius coenae: and fidem nostram pane, and vino Domini, per memoriam carnis,
and sanguinis illius, pascendam. Anno 1525. being called into his own Country,
he Preached and administered the Lord's Supper to his own Citizens, and
Baptized without the Popish Ceremonies; he was present and disputed at Berne
against the Popish Mass, etc. He was with others chosen by the Protestants to
go the to Diet at Ratisbone for the settling of Religion; and returning home,
in a great and general infection he died to the Plague An. Christi 1541: of
his Age 63.

Industrious Capito at first inclind
Himself to cure the body, next the mind;
Being endowed with most excellent parts
He did (as it were) monopolize the Art^:
He loved Religion and was always free
TO extol the worth of practiced piety:
He honored peace; his heart was filled with hope
That he might live to contradict the Pope,
And so he did, he labored to prevent
The Ceremon^es of their Sacrament:
And to conclude, he labored to confute
Their babbling Mass. He Is blessed without dispute.
The Life and Death of LEO JUDAE, who died Anno Christi 1542.
LEo Iudae was born Anno Christi 1482. brought up at School, and from thence
sent to Basil, where he joined in study with Zuinglius, was an hearer of Doctor
Wittenbash, by whom he was instructed in the knowledge of the Gospel: ^here
also he was made a Deacon, and from thence he was called into Helvetia, where
he ^et himself to the study of the Oriental Tongues, and to read the Fathers,
especially Hierom, and Augustine; as also he read diligently the books of
Luther, Era^mus, and Capito: at length being called to a Pastoral charge at
Tigure, he opposed the Popish doctrine and Ceremonies, both in the Pulpit and
Press: th^re he continued eighteen years, and spent much of it in expounding
the Old Testament out of the Hebrew; wherein (being grown very skillful) he
set upon (at the importunity of his breathren of the Ministry) the translation
of the Old Testament out of the Hebrew, wherein also he was much helped by the
industry of other learned men: but this work proving very great, he was so
wasted with labor, and old age that he died before he finished it Anno Christi
1542. and of his Age 60. leaving undone Job, the forty last Psalms, Proverbs,
Ec^lesiastes, Canticles, and the eight last Chapters of Ezekiel, which he
commended to Theodore Bibliander to finish, who accordingly did it: and he left
all to Conradus Pelican to peruse, and put to the Press, which he carefully
performed.

Four days before his death, sending for the Pastors and Professors of Tigure,
he made before them a Confession of his Faith concerning GOD, the Scriptures,
the Person and Office of CHRIST, concluding, Huic Jesus Christo Domino, and
liberatori meo, etc. To this my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, my hope, and my
salvation, I wholly offer up my soul, and body; I cast my self wholly upon
his mercy, and grace, etc.

Heaven was the object where he fixed his eyes,
Truth was his Mark, Religion was his Prise,
His studious heart was active to contrive
How to keep other pining Souls alive
With heavenly Food; he never loved to feed
In secret Corners, and let others need;
He never us^d to sweep away the Crumbs
From his poor Flock, and feed their souls with Hums
Like our new-babling Pastors, which infuse
Illiterate Words, patched up with flattring News.
He would not blind them with the intising charms
Of Falseties, or bid them take up Arms
Except for heaven, within whose Tent he sings
Anthems of Pleasure to the King of Kings.
The Life and Death of MYCONIUS, who died Anno Christi 1546.
F^^idericus Myconius was borne in Franconia, of religious parents, and bred up
at School till he was thirteen years old, and then he was sent to Annaeberg,
where he studied till he was twenty, and then entered into a Monastery there,
without the knowledge of his parents: the first night after his entry, he had
a dream, which proved prophetical. In that place he read the Schoolmen, and
Augustine's Works. He read also at meal-time the Bible with Lyra's notes on
it, which he did seven years together, with so much exactness, that he had it
almost by heart: but dispairing of attaining to learning, he left his studie^,
and fell to Mechanical Arts: About which time Tec^liu^ brought his Indulgences
into Germany, boasting of the virtue of them, and exhorting all as they loved
their own and their dead friends salvation that they should buy them, etc.
Myconius had been taught by his f^ther, the Lord's Prayer, the Creed, the
Decalogue, and to pray often: and that the blood of Christ only could cleanse
u^ from sin: and that pardon of sin and eternal life could not be bought with
money, etc. Which caused him to be much t^oubled whether he should believe his
father or the Priests; but understanding that there was a clause in the
Indulgences that they should be given freely to the poor: he went to Tecelius,
entreated him to give him one, for he wa^ a poor sinner, and one that needed a
free remissions of sins, and a participation of the merits of Christ: Tecelius
admired that he could speak Latin so well (which few Priests could do^ in
those days) and therefore he advised with hi^ Colleagues, who persuaded him to
give Myconius one: but after much debate, he returned him answer, That the Pope
wanted money, without which he could not part with an Indulgence: Myconius
urged the aforenamed clause in the Indulgences: whereupon Tecelius his
Colleagues pressed again that he might have one given him, pleading his
learning, and ingenuity, poverty, etc. And that it would be a dishonor both to
God and the Pope to deny him one: but still Tecelius refused: whereupon some
of them wispred Myconius in the ear to give a little money, which he refused
to do, and they fearing the event, one of them proffered to give him some to
buy one with, which he still refused, saying, That if he pleased he could sell
a book to buy one, but he desired one for Gods sake, which if they denied him,
he wished them to consider how they could answer it to God, etc. but prevailing
nothing, he went away rejoicing, that there was yet a God in heaven to pardon
sinners freely, etc. according to that promise; As I live (says the Lord) I
desire not the death of a sinner, etc. Not long after he entered into Orders;
and read privately Luther's books, which the other Friars took very haynously,
and threatened him for it. From thence he was called to be a Preacher at
Vinaria, where at first he mixed some Popish errors with the truth, but by the
illumination of Gods Spirit, and by his reading Luther, he at last began to
preach against Popery, and to hold forth the truth clearly; which spread so
swiftly, not only through Saxony, but through all countries, as if the Angels
had been carryers of it. Afterward he was called to Gotha to teach and govern
the Thuringian Churches, where he lived with his Colleagues twenty years in
much peace, and concord; of which himself says, Cucurrimus, certavimus,
laboravimus, pugnavimus, vicimus, and viximus semper convinctissime, etc. In
the tumult of the Boores he took much pains to pacify their minds, and to
keep them quiet: Yea, he so quieted with an Oration some that were pulling
down some Noble men's houses, that they went away in peace: that year also he
married a wife, by whom, through Gods blessing, he had a numerous posterity. He
accompanied the Elector of Saxony, in many of his journyes into the
Low Countries, and other places, where he preached the Gospel sincerely, though
sometimes to the hazard of his life. About this time Henry the eighth King of
England, fell out with the Pope, for not divorcing of him from his wife
Katharine of Spain, sister to Charles the fifth, by reason of whose greatness
the Pope durst not do it: whereupon the King of England sent over to the
Germane Princes (especially to the Duke of Saxony) to confederate against the
Pope, and to join with them in an agreement about Religion; upon which occasion
Myconius was sent over into England, partly about matters of Religion, but
especially about a match between Henry the eighth, and Anne of Cleve: but
coming thither, he discovered the Kings hypocrisy about Religion, not only by
the six Articles about that time established, but also by his imprisoning of
Latimer, and cutting off the Lord Cromwell'^ head, and burning of Master
Barnes, etc. and by his seizing upon all the Abby-lands: whereupon he left
England, and being come home, he was called by Henry of Saxony to visit and
reform the Churches of Misnia, together with Luther, Jonas, Cruciger, etc.
Which fell out upon this occasion, George Duke of Saxony, lying on his
deathbed, sent to his brother Henry (all his own sons being dead before)
desiring him, that succeeding him, he should innovate nothing in Religion, and
withal promised him golden mountains by his Ambassadors if he would assent
thereto: to whom Henry answered, This Embassy of yours is just like the Devils
dealing with Christ, when he promised him all the world if he would fall down
and worship him: but for my own part I am resolved not to depart from the
Truth which God has revealed unto me: but before the return of the
Ambassador, Duke George was dead: whereupon this Henry (nothwithstanding all
the oppositions of the Papists) made this Reformation in the Churches: which
work being finished Myconius visited all the Churches in Thuringia, and with
the help of Melancthon, and some other, he provided them Pastors and
Schoolmasters, and procured stipends to be settled upon them for their
maintenance.

Anno Christi 1541. he fell into a Consumption, whereof he wrote to Luther,
That he was sick not to death, but to life: which interpretation of the text
pleased Luther excellently well; unto whom he wrote back, I pray Christ our
Lord, our salvation, our health, etc. that I may live to see thee, and some
others of our Colleagues to die, and go to heaven, and to leave me here
amongst the Devils alone, I pray God that I may first lay down thi^ dry,
exhausted, and unprofitable tabernacle: farewell, and God forbid that I should
hear of thy death whi^st I live: Sed te superstitem faciat mihi Deus: h^c
peto, and volo, and fiat voluntas mea, Amen; quia haec voluntas gloriam nominis
Dei, crete non meam voluptatem, nec copiam quaerit. A while after Myconius
recovered according to this prayer, though his disease seemed to be desperate,
and outlived it six years, even till after Luthers death; whereupon Iustus
Jonas, speaking of Luther, says of him, Iste vir potuit quod voluit, That man
could have of God what he pleased. A little before Myconius his death, he wrote
an excellent Epistle to Joan. Frederick Elector of Saxony, wherein he
praises God for raising up three successively in that Family, viz. Frederick,
John, and John Frederick, to undertake the patronage of Lu^her, etc. He was a
man of singular piety, of solid learning, of a dextrous judgment, of a burning
zeal, and of an admirable candor and gravity. He died of a relapse into his
former disease, Anno Christi 1546. and of his Age 55.

Myconius was a man that loved to pry
Into the bosom of Divinity;
His heart was always flexively inclind
To what was good; he had a golden mind
That would not bend to dross, but still aspire
To heaven, and faith gave wings to his desire;
He was beloved of all that loved Gods name.
The trumpet of his voice would still proclaim
The word of God to those that would endure
To have their wounds be brought unto a cure:
By whose examples we may learn to thrive
In grace, His present worth is still alive.
The life and Death of John Diazius, Who dyed Anno Christi 1546.
John Diazius was borne in Spain, brought up at School, afterward he went to
Paris to study the Arts, where he continued thirteen years; but it pleased God
that whilst he read over the holy Scriptures, and some of Luthers books, and
other Protestant Divines, he began to see and abominate the errors of Popery;
and therefore to further himself in the knowledge and study of the Truth, he
went to Geneva, where he spoke with Calvin, and was very dear unto him: From
thence he went to Argentine, where Martin Bucer observed his learning, piety
and diligence in his study, obtained of the Senate, that he should be joined
with him to go to the Disputation at Ratisb^ne; and when he came thither, he
went to Peter Malvinda a Spaniard, the Popes Agent in Germany; who when he
knew that he cam^ in the company with Bucer, and the other Protestant Divines,
he was much a^tonished, and admired how he was so much changed from that which
he knew him to be at Paris: and withal, he fretted exceedingly that they had
gotten a Spaniard amongst them, presuming that they would triumph more in him
then in many Germans: whereupon, he left no means untried to draw him back
again to the Church of Rome; sometimes making large proffers and promises to
him, other-sometimes threatening severe punishments, and mixing both with
earnest entreaties: but when by no means he could prevail to divert him from
the Truth, he sent for his brother Alphonsus Diazius, one of the Popes Lawyers,
from Rome, who hearing that his Brother was turned Protestant, came speedily
into Germany, bringing a notorious cutthroat with him, resolving either to
divert or destroy him: when he came to Ratisbone, Diazius was departed to
Neoberg about the Printing of Bucers Book; which Alphonsus hearing of,
followed him thither; where, after long debating of matters of Religion between
the two Brothers, Alphonsus seeing the heart of his Brother John to be so
constantly planted ^n the sure rock of Gods Truth, that neither Preferments
could allure him, nor threats terrify him, both having been used by the Popes
Agent, nor he by persuasion nor love could persuade him to return to Popery;
he feigned himself, friendly to take his leave of him, and so depar^^d: ^ut
shortly after he returned again with this ruffianly murderer, and by the way
they bought an Hatchet of a Carpinter; and Alphonsus sending this man disguised
with letters to his Brother, he himself following after, as John Diazius was
reading the letters, this bloody murderer cleft his head with the Hatchet, and
taking Horse they both rode away, Anno Christi 1546. and this inhumane Cain was
highly commended by the Papists for it. But the Lord would not suffer such an
unnatural villainy to go unpunished; for not long after, he was so dogg^d and
haunted by the Furies of his own Conscience, that being at Trent, when the
Council was held there, he hanged himself about the neck of his own Mule.

Diazius in his youthful days had clothed
His heart with Popery, and after loathed
What he had done; for when he was inspired
By Heaven, he searched for truth, and soon untyr^d
Himself; and having found the paths of truth,
He hated what he acted in his youth.
Thus being turned from those ways that lead
To utter ruin, Fame began to spread
Her wings abroad, and hover in the ear
Of the distasted Pope, who could not hear
Goodness without impatience, but strove
To win him with reward of promised, love:
But finding ^'was in vain, he changed his mind
From Love to Murder, and with speed inclined
Himself to mischief; being void of grace,
Put out that light which shined so much in's face.
The Life and Death of CRUCIGER, Who died Anno Christi 1548.
GAsper Cruciger was born at Lipsich in Misnia, Anno 1504. of religious
Parents, who carefully brought him up in the knowledge of God, and in learning.
He was melancholy by nature, and of a retired disposition, much in meditation,
and of few words: being principled in the Latin, he learned Greek, and
profited much therein, and so went to the University of Wittenberg, that having
studied Divinity there, he might be more useful to the Church: he studied also
the Hebrew tongue, and grew very exquisite therein: from thence was called to
govern the School at Magdeburg, where he taught with much profit and applause
till 1527. and then being called back to Wittenberg, he preached and ^xpounded
the Scriptures with so much dexterity, that he was graced with the degree of a
Doctor; in that University he studied and practiced Physic also. He was very
helpful to Luther in his Translation of the Bible. He wrote so swiftly, that
he was chosen Scribe at the disputation at Worms, and yet withal suggested to
Melancthon many things for answer to Eccius his subtilties, insomuch that
Glanvell (who supplied the Enperors room) said of him, That the Lutherans had a
Scribe that was more learned then all the Pontificians. He always opposed the
Anabaptisticall errors, and was very careful to preserve the Truch from
corruptions: he always hated new, and ambiguous expressions, which often
caused much troubles in the Church: he often contemplated the footsteps of God
in Nature, saying with Paul, That God was so near unto us, that he might be
almost felt with our hands. He studied the Mathematics in his later time, and
grew so skillful therein that few excelled him: he was excellent also in the
Optics: but with excessive pains, and incessant studyes night and day, he
contracted to himself a mortal disease, whereby he wasted away, and yet his
intellectuals decayed not: he lay sick for above three months, all which time
he gave forth clear and notable demonstrations of his Faith, Pat^ence and
Piety: he called up his two young daughters, and caused them to repeat their
prayers before him, and then himself prayed with great fervency for himself:
the Church, and those his Orphans, concluding, Invoco te quanquam languida and
imbecill^ fide, sed fide tamen credo promissioni tuae, quam sanguine tuo, and
resurrections obsignasti, etc. I call upon thee with a weak, yet with a true
Faith; I beleele thy promises which thou have sealed to me with thy blood, and
resurrection, etc. In his sickness he intermitted not his studies; for during
the same, he turned into Latin Luthers books concerning the last words of
David: he read the Psalms, and other Autors: his ordinary discourse with his
friends was about the Principles of Religion; the admirable government of the
Church; Immortality, and our sweet Communion in heaven. Upon the sixth of
November there was a great Chasm, or opening in the heavens, and in some places
fire fell to the earth, and flew up into the air again; this Cruciger saw, as
he lay in his bed in the night, and thereupon much bewailed the great
commotions, and dissipations in the Church, which he foresaw by this Prodigy:
He spent the few days which remained in prayer, and repentance, and so quietly
ended his days November 16. Anno Christi 1548. and of his Age 45. Considering
the mutabilitie of all earthly things, he used often to say, Omnia praetereunt,
praeter amare Deum.
Besides God's love nothing is sure,
And that for ev^r does endure.
Grave Cruciger, was in his life
A hater of corroding strife;
His soul was ^^l'd with Heaven, and he
Was always constant, always free
In his devotions, all his days
He spent to give his maker praise;
Religions stock did still increase
Within his heart, and crowned his peace.
He was a wonder to all Nations
For Piety, and disputations.
The Anabaptists felt the force
Of his patheticall discourse.
Truth always shined in his breast;
All men speak truth, that speak him blessed.


PAVLVS FAGIVS.
The Life and Death of Paulu^ Fagius.
IN the year of our Lord God 1504. Paulus Fagius, alias Buchlin, was borne in a
Town situate in the Palatinate, not far from Bretta, which in the Germain
language, is called Rhein-taberne; his Father was called by the name of Peter
Buchlin, being chief Schoolmasters of that Town, his Mother by the name of
Margaretta Iager, daughter unto Henricus Iazger of Heidelberge: who was much
beloved of Frederick the Prince Elector Palatine, by reason of his excellent
knowledge in the art of War.

He was first acquainted with the grounds of Leaenrng in the same Town, and
that through the carfulness and pains of his Father, which indeed seemed
pleasing unto him, because of the sharpness of wit and quickness of
apprehension which he saw in the child; and therefore for the better
perfection of his natural parts (when he had reached unto the age of eleven
years) he sent him unto Heidelberge, and committed him unto the tuition of
Johannes Brentius and Martinus Frechtus, two learned men; by whose means he
was furnished with an excellent insight in human Learning.

When he had continued with these learned men for the space of seven years, and
being now eighteen years of age, and longing for a greater perfection of
learning; he left Heidelberge and went unto Stratsburge; and because poverty
twharted the good will of his Parents, so that they could not afford him ^uch
maintenance as they were willing, he framed himself unto the teaching of
Youth, during his abode in that place; by which means he defended himself
from that miserabl^ condition which was likely to ensue, and also furnished
himself with money for the procuring of such Books as he had most use of for
his Studies.

About this time the study and profession of the tongues began to appear and
to show it self in Germany, and Wolfangus Capito set forth two Books,
containing solid instructions for the obtaining of knowledge in the Hebrew
language, a thing worthy of admiration in those times; and there were also some
Jews, who wandering up and down did impart the grounds of that knowledge unto
many in Germany. Fagius laying hold upon this opportunity, gave himself
wholly unto the study of this tongue, and for that cause he happily insinuated
himself into the familiarity of Capito Hedio, Bucer, Zellius, and other
learned Professors, who were the first planters of the Church of Christ in
those places.

Having here indifferently furnished himself with learning, and with the
knowledge of the tongues, in the year 1527. he left Strasburge, and betook
himself unto Isna, a town in Algaria, (being thereunto constrained with his
poverty, and also with the small regard that those people had of learned men)
where, by the entreaty and furtherance of his friends, he underwent the
painful office again of a Schoolmaster; wherein he used such diligence that
he gained the love of all that knew him, but finding within himself a natural
inclination unto the Ministry, he left his School and returned again unto
Strasburge, to furnish himself with sufficient knowledge, for the discharge of
that function: here he continued for the space of two years, spending them
altogether in the study of Divinity, at the end whereof, he was called from
Ssasburge by the Senate of Isna, to undergo a Pastoral office in the same
town, which he performed for the space of five years, with the great
approbation of his Auditors; when he gave himself again unto the study of the
Holy tongues, wherein in short time he proceeded beyond expectation, so that he
was adjudged to be the most absolutest in those days; for the attayning unto
this perfection he used the help of Elias Livita, a most learned Jew.

Petrus Buflerus one of the Senators of Isna having notice of his perfection in
the holy tongue, and of his natural inclination unto the Arts, at his own
cost and charge he erected a Printing house; to the end that Fagius might
publish some works for the futur good of that Nation, and for the credit and
good fame of himself; but the event not answering their expectation, Fagius
came at last, to be deeply indebted unto his friend Petrus; whereby he was
dishartned, and kept from proceeding any further; which being perceived by
Buflerus he encouraged him again to go forward, and for that cause he
lovingly forgave him all the debt, which amounted unto the sum of one
thousand Crowns and more.

But he finding by experience that Isna was not a place for his purpose, he
resolved to remove; and opening the same unto the Inhabitants, they seemed
unwilling, yet afterward they consented: receiving Johannes Marbachius into
his room. Before his departure, the town was greatly afflicted with the
Pestilence, and he understanding that many of the wealthiest of the Inhabitants
intended to forsake the place, without having any respect or care of such as
labored with that disease, and that the houses of such as were infected, were
commanded to be shut up by the Magistrate; he openly admonished them, either to
continue in the town, or liberally to bestow their alms before their
departure, for the relief of such as were sick: and during the time of the
visitation, he himself in person would vis^^ those that were si^ke; he would
administer Spiritual comfort unto them, pray for them, and would be present
with them day and night, and yet by the providence of God he remained
untouched, and was preserved by the alpowerfull hand of God.

At the same season the Pestilence was hot in Strasburge, and with many others,
it took away Wolfangus Capito, by reason whereof he was called by the Senate,
and designed to be his successor in the same City, where he continued
Preaching until the beginning of the Germain wars; for then Fredecicus
Secundus, the Prince Elector Palatnie, intending a reformation in those
Churches which were subject to him, he called Fagius from Strasburge unto
Heidelberge, being then reputed to be a most eloquent and learned man, and
constituted him the public Professor in the same place; but the Emperor
prevailing against the Elector, and triumphing in Germany, that which was begun
in Germany, touching reformation, fell again to the ground and became extinct:
during his residence here, he set forth many books, but more especially such as
he adjudged would be most profitable for such as intended to study the Hebrew
tongue; which were so approved of by Bucer Martyr, and Hedio, then ordinary
professors of Divinity, that he was advanced to the reading of a Divinity
Lecture on the week days, and designed to discharge their Pastoral functions,
in case they were restrained either with sickness, or any other serious
employments; and in this course he remained for the space of six years.

At the end of which time, the Church was greatly afflicted in Germany, and
banishment was threatened unto such as would not adhaere unto the doctrine of
the Church of Rome, and in the beginning of these troubles, it pleased God to
stir up Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury and Metrapolitan of
England, to call for him out of Germany, who together with Bucer was honorably
entertained by the said Archbishop and disposed of, etc. vide Bucer.

He died in Cambridge, in the year 1550. and was honorably buried in the
Church of Saint Michael; his bones together with Bucers in the days of Queen
Mary, were diged up and burned, because he was condemned of haeri^ie; Amongst
many Epitaphs which were set forth in the commending of this man, that of
Gulielmus Day deserves impression, that his worth might be manifested unto
future times: Bucero primas, dedimus tibi Paul secunda,
and damur, Haebreae, gloria prima scholae,
Hoc uno inferior Bucero, Paul, fuisti
Quod prior extremum cernis adesse diem,
Verum illo major Bucero, Paul, fuisti
Quod prior aeterno jussus adesse Deo,
In reliquo similem duxisti tempor vitam
Ambo salutiferi buccina fida, dei
Ambo stilliferi sparfistis semina regni
Semina proventu non caritura suo,
Vnde utrumque Deus mogno dignatus honor
V^rumque ad superi transtulit astra poli
Felices animae superas licet iistis ad oras
A nobis vestrum nomen abrie negint
Eximia semper viretis laud perennes
Quam canit Aoniis nostra Thalia modis.
Our first applauses unto Bucer we
Ascribe, the second we bequeath to thee,
Whose knowledge in the holy dialect,
A fame eternal will to thee erect.
In that thou first did bid the world godnight,
Thou seem inferior to that burning light,
But being first with heavens glory cround
Thou do appear a Saint more worthy found;
In other things both fitly did agree
Both faithful preachers of his verity,
Both painful Sowers of the heavenly grain,
Both blessed with good success, it sprung again.
Wherefore God blessed you both with honor high
And clothed you both with immortality.
O happy souls though heaven keep you there
Your fame shall ever be intombed here.
Your worthy praises all the earth shall know,
Divulged by our Muses here below.


He was of a tall stature, somewhat blacke-visaged; his countenance appeared
outwardly severe, extorting reverence; but he was inwardly of an affable and
courteous disposition, loving, meek and lowly: he was an excellent Orator, a
great Student, as appears by his Works here inserted.

1 A work called Thysby. 2 Apothegmes of the Fathers. 3 Moral Sentences of
Ben Syra, alphabetically digested. 4 The translation of Tobias the Hebrew. 5
Hebrew Prayers. 6 A literal exposition of the Hebrew sayings on the four
first chapters of Genesis, with a Chalde Paraphrase. 7 Of the truth of Faith. 8
Commentaries on certain Psalms by Kirachi. 9 An Hebrew Preface to Elias
Levila his Chalde Lexicon. 10 Thargum. 11 An Introduction to the Hebrew tongue.

Reader, behold, here stands before thine eye,
The perfect ^mbleme of true gravity:
Turn from his face, then read, and thou shall find
The rare endeavors of a serious mind.
He was a man, whose ever-active heart
Was always digging in the Mines of Art;
And (like a Be) he labored every hour
To suck some Honey from each spreading Flower.
It Was not the face of poverty could fright
His soul from goodness; Heaven was his delight,
And earth his scorn: he studied how to give
A life to Language, and make Virtue live.
It is not unfit, that he, whose Works affords
So many Languages, should want for words.
MARTINUS BVCERVS
The Life and Death of MARTIN BUCER.
IN the year of our Lord 1491. Martinus Bucerus was born at Selestadt, a town
in Germany, famous for many learned Scholars, which it has afforded unto the
World in these latter times: amongst which this Bucer deserves not the meanest
approbation, if we shall but consider those excellent virtues wherewith he was
endewed, or his learned and laborious acts for the propagation of the truth of
Christ.

In his youth he was trained up in the knowledge of the liberal Arts and
Sciences in his own Country, wherein he profited beyond expectation, to the
great credit of his Ma^^er, and to the unspeakable comfort of his friends.

About the year of our Lord 1506. and about the fifteenth year of his age,
through the advice and persuasion of his friends, he adjoined himself unto the
order of the Dominicans, where he manifested and gave them so singular a
glympse of his industry and towardness, that the most judicious and best
eye-sighted Friars conceived him to be set apart for the performance of more
^hen ordinary Acts.

Being now a D^minican he greatly desired to take a view o^ Heidelberge, which
was granted unto him by the Pryor: here he earnestly gave himself to the study
of Rhetoric and Phylosophie; and not to these Arts only but also to
Divinity; but when he found by experience that the knowledge of the Tongues was
so necessary unto the study thereof, that without them it could not by any
means possible be attained to any perfection, he forthwith bent all his forces
for the gaining of the knowledge of the Greek and Hebrew tongues.

About that time came forth the Works of Erasmus Roterodamus, in the reading
whereof Bucer greatly delighted, and was by them first instructed (God opening
his eyes) in the grounds of Evangelicall truth; and happening also on some of
Luthers Works newly published, and comparing the Doctrine therein delivered
and taught with the holy Scriptur^s, he fell into a susp^tion of the truth of
the doctrine of the Church of Rome.

Bucer having now attained unto some perfection of learning, and notice being
taken of those excellent qualities wherewith he was adorned, upon the
commendation and approbation of Franciscus Sickingen, he was entertained by
Frederick Prince Elector Palatine, to be his Chaplain; and forsaking that
profession which he had formerly taken, he professed himself to be a
Protestant, and Preached the word both privately and publicly, as occasions
were offered and given unto him, being much strengthened and animated
thereunto, by hearin^ the disputation of Luther at Heidelberge, concerning
Free Will, whereby he became better satisfied in the point of justification.

And thi^ wa^ the first acquaintance which he had with that burning light of
the Church, by whom it pleased God to work an alteration in his heart, and an
earnest intent to beat down the sins of the times, to dispell the foggie
mists of darkness and ignorance, that the glorious light of Christ's Gospel
might the better appear. For the Prince Elector having urgent occasions to go
into Belgiuno, and taking him with him as his associate, he sharply reproved
in his Sermons and Exercises the supersticious impieties of those places;
wherein he proceeded with that eagerness of spirit, that the Monks and Friars
there living, were much offended at his Doctrine, as a thing prejudicial to
their lazy manner of life: Wherefore to prevent his proceeding, they intended
secretly to take away his life (an old practice of that hellish brood) but the
providence of God would not suffer this light to be thus extinguished; for he
having notice of the snares which were laid for him secretly fled away, and
went unto Franciscus Sickingem, of whom he was kindly and lovingly
entertained, promising him safety until that the times were better quieted as
touching Religion; with whom he remained until such such time as Luther was
called unto Worms, unto whom he went, and having sp^nt many days in
conference with him, he departed from him, not without he embracing of his
Doctrine, with an intent to make public profession of the same, for the glory
of God, until he had finished that time which was allotted unto him here in
earth: and resolving to take his journey for Wittemberge, he was stayed by the
entreaty of the faithful Pas^ors of the Church at Wissenburge, where he
continued Preaching for the space of half a year, not without the great
benefit of the Church, until that he with Henricus Mothererus were with great
sorrow compelled to depart that place, through the means of the Vicar of Spire,
which at that time was a great enemy and an opposer of the truth of Christ.

Now although the Word of God had no good success in this place, yet it
pleased God that it flourished in Strasburge, by the pains of Matthias Lellius
and Casper Hedio, faithful laborers in the Lords Vineyard, hither came Bucer
in the year of our Lord 1523. and was b^ them with all joyfulnesse received,
as one who labored with them for the converting and wining of Souls unto
Christ, and for the propagation of his truth: and was by them appointed to
Preach publicly in ^he Church, and to teach openly in the school, so that
within short time the doctrine of the Gosp^ll took firm rooting in many
pl^ces of the City, and they altered many things in the Church, concerning
Mass, the Sacraments, holy days, jmages, and the like, rendering strong
reasons for what they did, in a book set forth by them, and dedicated unto
Frederick the Prince Elector Palatine.

Now because ^here was a difference betwixt the professors of the Gospel,
concerning some important matters, therefore a meeting was appointed at
Marpurge, where Bucer and Hedio had conference with Luther and Zuinglius, where
they agreed in all points, the Sacrament of the Lords Lupper only excepted,
wherein Consubstantiation was affirmed on the part of Luther, yet they departed
each from the other friendly, intending to abstain altogether on both sides
from strife and contention, and to pray unfainedly unto the Lord that he would
vouchsafe to instruct and guide them with his holy Spirit in the way of truth.
But Bucer hearing that this dissension amongst them conc^rning the Supper of
the Lord, was very grateful unto the Papists; he went unto Luther again, to
urge him to a reconciliation in that point; from whom he received such an
answer, that forthwith he went to Zuinglius and the Switzers, to persuade them
to adhere unto the same Doctrine, for well he foresaw what great hurt that
Sacramentary dissension would ^ring unto the Church, if it were not quickly cut
off, and taken away.

In the year of our Lord, 1531. it pleased God to open the eyes of the
Inhabitants of Vlmes, so that they greatly desired a reformation in their
Churches, and for that cause they requested the Sen^te of Strasburge, that
Bucer might be sent over unto them to lay the ground of so happy a building,
which was faithfully performed by Bucer, together with the help and assistance
of Oecolampadius, and a form of Divine worship prescribed unto them; but
perceiving still the course of the truth, to be hindered and stopped by this
difference about the Sacrament, with the consent of the Elect^r, he repaired
again to Luther, being resident at Wittenberge, where after some discourse;
conclusions concerning the Sacrament were agreed on betwixt the Divines of
Wittenberge and Highec Gumanie, in the year 1536. yet after some
consideration, Bucer renounced the opinion of Luther concerning
Consubstantiation, (although he had subscribed unto it at Wittenberge) and
taught the Contrary; wherefore Bucer with many others were there detained by
the Lantgrave of Hassia until they came to an agreement amongst themselves,
the chief heads whereof were sent unto Basil, which were not approved of by
the Senate; then Bucer returned to Strasburge, went forward in his exercise of
Preaching and Teaching, not only in the Church, but also in a public school,
which had been newly erected at the proper cost and charges of the Senate, where
he remained unto the year 1541. about which time the Emperor Carolus Augustus
ret^rned into Germany, and commanded a public conference at Reinspurge a City
in Bavaria concerning the reformation of Religion, and through the means nnd
entreaty of Frederick Prince Elector Palatime, and other Protestants and
Princes, he appointed Julius Alugius, Johannes Eccius, Johannes Gropperus,
Papists, and Phillip Melanc^hon, Martinus Bucer, and Johannes Pistorius
Protestants for the performance thereof; the Emperor himself greatly charged
them, (in so weighty a matter to have respect only to the glory of God and of
his truth, and not to be carried away with any other favor or affection
whatsoever; but in their conferences such disagreements were found amongst
them, that by no means their opinions could be reconciled, and because also
that Germany at that time feared the approaching of the Turks, the assembly was
dissolved.

In this Assembly Gropperus took great notice of Bucer, much applauding him
for his lenity, conjoined with a comely gravity, and withal commended him unto
Heirmannas, then Ar^h-bishop of Colen, who at that time endeavored also a
reformation in the Churches, and told him that he was a man most fit for such a
purpose, being excellently learned, a lover of peace, and a man of an unspotted
life and conversation: where upon Hermannus sends for Bucer, who in the year
1542. came unto him, who with exceeding joy received and entertained him, where
together with Melancthon he wrote the manner of reforming Churches, which they
dedicated unto the same Archbishop; many of the inhabitants approved of the
work, and willingly yielded unto a reformation, but the Clergy and those of
the College, were mightily incensed against Bncer, greatly reproaching and
reviling him, affirming that they had rather lead their lives under the Turk,
then under a Magistrate, who intended to settle that reformation, and therefore
they desired that Bucer, and all those new Doctors (as they termed them) might
be far removed from that City, shuting as it were the gates of mercy against
their own souls, and Gropperus who formerly had showed and professed much
love unto him, came now to be his greatest enemy; and the Archbishop for his
desire of a reformation, was excommunicated by the Pope and deprived of his
function and g^vernment, by the Emperor, and all those part^ returned again,
like dogs unto their vomit.

In the year 1546. there was another ass^mbly appointed by the Emperor at
Renispurge, unto which also Bucer was called, who at that time had a great
conflict with Petrus Malvanda a Spaniard, touching the justification of a
sinner before God, but in regard of diverse troubles which did accompany these
times nothing could be concluded.

In the year 1548. Julius Pflugius, Michael Heldingus and Johannes Agricola,
by the commandem^nt of the Emperor, wrote a form of Ecclesiastical
reformation, little or no way differing from the opinions of the Church of
Rome; which work was approved by the Emperor, and Bucer was craftily called
by a Magistrate of Brandenburge unto Auspurge, to subscribe unto the same
work, persuading him that it was collected out of the most learned writers;
but Bucer uderstanding the matter fully, told him after a freindly manner, that
he could not approve of it, because it savored too much of the doctrine of the
Church of Rome, neither would he be drawn thereunto, although the same party
promised to confer large benefits upon him.

This Book, by the command of the Emperor, was thrust upon the Reformed
Churches, and those who withstood it were severely punished, either with
imprisonment or banishment; and as it happily fell out, the fame of Bucer and
hard fortune of his painful contemporaneans came into England, in the reign
of that virtuous Prince of blessed memory Edward the sixth, even when a
Reformation began to be established in the Church: wherefore Thomas Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury, perceiving that he would be advantageous in that
behalf, sent over letters unto him, wherein he persuaded him with Paulus
Fagius to come into England; assuring them both of kind entertainment and a
sufficient stipend, if it would please them to continue amongst them.

These Letters coming to their hands (because they saw little or no hopes of
doing any good in Germany) they resolved to visit England; and Bucer taking
his leave of the Senate of Strasburge, after he had supplied a Pastoral office
amongst them the space of twenty years, he with Fagius went for England in the
year of grace 1549. where they arrived in good health, and were most
courteously entertained, and a place provided for them in the University of
Cambridge, for the expounding of the holy Scriptures, and a large Stipend
allotted unto them for the maintenance of their Families; the University
conferring one privilege on him, which was not given unto any before him;
being this that according to his desire, he was inaugurated into his Office
without any public Ceremony. He was much admi^ed of in the University for his
learning, for the integrity of his life and conversation; for his plainness
in his apparel, for his temperaten^sse in his diet, for his constancy in his
labors, and for his patience in his sickness.

Within short time after they came hither, they both fell into an irrecoverable
sickness, by reason of the change of the air and diet; Fagius was the first
that yielded his soul into the hands of God; Bucer followed shortly after, who
before his death prayed unto almighty God, that he would not suffer England to
fall into those sins, which had brought Germany unto great misery; and
withal, desired that those things which he had written unto the King
concerning the discipline of the Church, might take firm footing in the
Kingdom. Master John Bradford coming to him in the time of his sickness, and
telling him that he would remember him in his prayers, being that day to
Preach, he uttered these words, Ne abiicias me Domine in tompore senectutis
meae cum defecerit virtus mea; forsake me not O Lord in the time of my age, and
when my strength fails me. Being admonished in his sickness that he should
arm himself against the assaults of the Devil; he answered, that he had
nothing to do with the Devil, because he was wholly in Christ, and God
forbid; God forbid, but that I should have some experience of his heavenly
comfort.

After Sermon Bradford came to him again, and after some words, declared unto
him the great fear which the Physicians had to prescribe any thing unto him,
by reason of the weakness of his body, which he apprehending, with his eyes
fixed toward heaven, he uttered these words: ille, ille regit and moderatar
omnia, he, he it is, that rules and governs all things; and so in the midst
of many godly prayers he quietly yielded his soul unto the hands of God, on the
27. of February, in the year of our Lord 1551. being 61. years of his age, he
was buried with great solemnity in Saint Ma^ies in Cambridge, to the grief of
many students; before his burial a Funeral Sermon was delivered by Gualterus
Haddon, at his burial by Doctor Parker.

After the death of Edward the sixth, his sister the Lady Mary coming to the
crown, she restored the doctrine of the Church of Rome, and in her days
Cardinal Poole, the Popes Legate being a man of great Authority, labored with
might and maine, for the rooting out of haeresie and haeretick (for so he
termed the Gospel and the professors thereof) and for that cause he appointed
five Inquisitors, for the reformation of the University of Cambridge, these
obtained that the bones of both these faithful Ministers of Christ should be
dug up, condemned of haerisie, and delivered to the Magistrate to be burnt,
together with all the books of theirs which were extant in the kingdom; but
in the rain of Queen Elizabeth, this sentence was not approved but rejected,
and they were reckoned amongst the number of Martyrs which had suffered for the
truth of Christ.

The labors which he left behind him, as so many witnesses of his sufficiency
and worth, are these which follow.

1 The Psalms done out of Latin into Hebrew. 2 Enarrations on the four
Evangelists. 3 Metaphrases one the Epistle of St. Paul. 4 A reconciling of hard
places of Scripture. 5 Commentaries of the Romans and the Ephesians. 6 A
Commentary on Sophonu^, done out of Hebrew. 7 A preface to the fourth Tome of
Luthers postils. 8 Of the true doctrine, discipline and Ceremonies of Chu^ches.
9 A Gra^ula^orie letter unto the Church of England. 10 An answer to the two
Epistles of Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester concerning the single life of
Priests. 11 Of the best way to have Counsels. 12 A treatise of restoring Church
good. 13 An Epistle to the University a^ Marpurge. 14 To those of East
Friezland. 15 The confession of the four Cities Strasburge, Constance,
Menning, and Lindare. 16 An Apology against Brentius, that jmages are not to
be had in Churches. 17 Of the Baptism of Infants. 18 Of the Euch^rist. 19 Of a
Nationrall Synead. 20 Of a Council against Coceleius and Gropperus. 21 Of the
false and true administration. 22 Of the Lords Supper. 23 Of offering Masses.
24 Of care for ^he dead. 25 Of Purgatory. 26 Causes of the absence of Divines
from the council of Trent. 27 Of the kingdom of Christ unto Edward the sixth
King of England. 28 Lectuers at Cambridge, upon the Ephesians. 29 Of the power
and use of the ministry. 30 An admonition to the Ministers at Switzerland. 31
Psal^er translated into Dutch. 32 An admoni^ion to the Ministers at Strasburge.
33 Of the true office of a Pastor. 34 Of the Jews, how for to be suffered
amongst Christians. 35 A Confutation of the new faith set forth at Loran. 36 A
defense of the Colenish reformation. 37 A defense against Gropperus. 38 An
an^wer to a dialogue against Protestants. 39 Of Church-goods, and who are the
right possessors of them.

40 Against the Bull of Paulus the third, and his Legates demands. 41 A godly
admonition to the Emperor, Princes, and other states of the Empire assembled
at Worms. 42 Against the restoring of the Mass. 43 Impediments of
Reformation. 44 Against the Sophistes of Colen. 45 Of the conference at
Reinsburge. 46 An exposition of the 120. Psalm. 47 A treatise of Afflictions.
48 A refutation of Calumnies. 49 A Sermon at Berne. 50 Of the Ministers and
Sacraments. 51 Luthers commentaries on the two Epistles of Peter. 52 Some
writings of Sturmius. 53 Retractations, with Commentaries on the Gospel. 54 A
trea^ise that none ought to live to themselves.

That light of truth which shined in Bucers breast
Enlightened others, and restored much rest
To many, whose unquiet souls did lie
Under the burden of Idolatry.
He was laborious, striving every hour
To suck some honey from each plea^^ng flower;
He was beloved of all, that loved to pry
Into the bosom of Divinity:
Sweet was his life, and death; his well spent days
Began in goodness, and expired with praise.
The Life and Death of CASPER HEDIO, who died Anno Christi 1552.
CAsper Hedio was born at Etling, in the Marquisat of Baden, of honest Parents,
and educated in learning at Friburge, where also he Commensed Master of Arts;
and from thence went to Basil, where he studied Divinity, and Commensed Doctor:
whence he was called to Preach in the chief Church at Mentz, but some, not
liking such plain Preaching, and the Monks raising a persecution against him,
he went thence to Argentine, Anno Christi 1523. where he was a great assistent
to Capito, and Bucer in reforming of Religion by the command of the Senate:
there also he married a wife Anno Christi 1533. and though the Papists raised a
great persecution in that City, yet he Preached ^oldly against Masses,
Indulgences, Auricular Confession, etc. and wrote against them also. Anno
Christi 1543. when Herman Archbishop of Collen began a Reformation, he sent for
Bucer, and Hedio, to assist him therein, whence (after he was driven by Caesar,
and his Spaniards) escaping through many difficulties and danger, he returned
to Argentine; what time he could spare from his Ministerial employment, he
spent in writing Commentaries, and Histories. Anno Chris^i 1552. he sickened
and died.

It Was not the rage of Papist could remove
The heart of Hedio from the real love
Of true Divinity; he still inclined
Himself to Preach with a resolved mind.
Let his example teach us to repose
Our trust in God in spite of threating Foes.
The Life and Death of GEORGE PRINCE of A^halt, wh^ died Anno Christi 1553.
GEorg Prince of Anhalt was born An. Chr. 1507. his Father was Prince Ernest,
who was careful to bring him up in the fear of God; and for that end he placed
him with George Forcheme, who was eminent for training up of youth, under whom
he profited exceedingly, both in humane literature, and in princip^ls of
Divinity: then he was set to the study of the Law, wherein he profited very
much also: having attained to the age of twenty two years, he was chosen by
Albert, Elector of Men^z to be one of his Council, wherein he carried himself
with high commendations, in managing the greatest State Affairs: But the
Controversies about Religions waxing hot at this time, and Luthers books coming
abroad, he fell to reading of them, and suspecting his own injudiciousnesse,
he would often pray with tears to God to incline his heart to the Truth,
saying, Deal with thy servant according to thy mercy, and instruct me in thy
righteousness. He was frequent in reading the Scriptures, Ecclesiastical
Histories, Augustine, Hierom, and Lombard: he studied also Greek, and Hebrew:
and discoursed with learned men about the Controversies: and after all, upon
mature deliberation, he embraced the Reformed Riligion, and reformed the
Churches with the counsel of his brethren, within his own jurisdiction. Anno
Christi 1545. he was called to the Government of the Churches within the
Diocese of Mersburge, where he was careful to have the Truth Preached to the
people; he lived with much continency in a single life: he took much pains
both in writing, and Preaching: he was very charitable, a great promoter of
Peace amongst Princes: very free from ambition, hatred, and revenge: he used
often to say, Subdi^us esto Deo, and ora eum, etc. Submit thy self to God, and
pray unto him; for he is near to those that are of a contrite heart, and will
save the humble in spirit. He employed his time so well, that he left none for
pleasures; and used to say, That nothing refreshed him more in his sorrows,
then conference with learned and godly men. Falling sick of a most troublesome
disease, he was frequent in holy prayer, for himself, for all the Princes of
that family, for his country, and for Germany; he had some portions of holy
Scriptures daily read to him: he made his Will, wherein he set down the
Confession of his Faith, and commended the defense of his Churches to his
brother: he added something to the stipends of all the godly Ministers under
his charge: He often ruminated upon those texts, God so loved the world, that
he gave, etc. No man shall take my sheep out of my hand. Come unto me all ye
that are weary, etc. and so in holy meditations, and prayer he resigned up
his Spirit unto God Anno Christi 1543. and of his Age 47.

A Prince by birth, and of a Princely mind,
Full frought with virtues, of each several kind
Is here presented; ornaments of grace,
Such as do challenge, not the second place,
But first by merit: here you may behold
One, whose rare virtues no Pen can unfold.
In pious duties he did strive to be
Transcendant; who was by nature free,
For to the Poor he relief did give,
During the time that he on earth did live,
Read but his life, and then at large you will see,
Monopoliz'd in him most virtues be.
The life and Death of Justus Jonas, who dyed Anno Christi 1555.
IVstus Jonas was born at Northusa Anno Christi 1493. where his Father was a
Senator; who falling sick of the Plague, and having applied an Onion to the
Soar, and taking it off, and laid it by him, this little Jonas coming, took
the Onion and eat it up, yet without any prejudice to himself, God miraculously
preserving of him. He was first brought up at School, afterward he studied
Law, and made a good progress therein: But upon better though^s he studied
Divinity, and proceeded Doctor, and embraced the Reformed Religion, and was
called Anno Christi 1521. to a Pastoral charge in Wittenberg: he was present
at most of the Disputations about Religion, where he defended the truth
strenuously, and endeavored to promote peace: he was also made a Professor in
that Universitie: He, with Spalatine and Amsdorfius was employed by the Elector
of Saxony to Reform the Churches in Misnia and Thuringia: From thence he was
called unto Hale in Saxony, where he Preached and promoted Religion
exceedingly: Luther sometimes resorted thither to him, and took him along with
him in his last journey to Isleben, where he dyed: after whose death he
remained a while in the Duke of Saxonies Court, and was a constant companion of
John Frederickes sons in all their afflictions: and lastly, he was set over the
Church in Eisfield, where he ended his days in much peace, and comfort, Anno
Christi 1555. and of his Age 63. Being once under temptations, and in great
agony, he showed much despondencie, but his servant, partly by comforting of
him and partly by chiding of him, cheared him up; and at last, through Gods
mercy, the Spirit prevailed against the Flesh.

Justius by name, no poison sure could kill,
God so protected him, from what was ill:
The venom of the Plague did seem to be
No poison unto him, for he escaped free;
Although the Duyon he by chance did eat,
That poisoned was, by the Plagues strong heat;
Nor was his body, but his mind as free
From the contagion of hels leprosy.
For all his study was, how to obtain
That happy treasure, whereby he might gain
Heaven a^ the last; and sure unto that place
He Is long since gone; who was his Conntries grace.
The Life and Death of John Rogers, who died Anno Christi 1555.
John Rogers was borne in England, and brought up at the University of
Cambridge, where he profited very much in good learning; and from thence was
chosen by the Merchant A^venturers to be their Chaplain at Antwerpe, to whom
he Preached many years, and there falling into acquaintance with William
Tindall and Miles Coverdal (who were fled from persecution in England) he, by
their means, profited much in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and joined with
them in that painful and profitable work of Translating the Bible into
English: there he married a wife, and from thence he went to Wittenberg, where
he much profited in learning, and grew so skillful in the Dutch tongue, that he
was chosen Pastor to a Congregation there, where he discharged his Office with
diligence and faithfulness many years: but in King Edwards time, he was sent
for home by Bishop Ridley, and was made a Prebend of Paul's, in which place he
Preached faithfully till Queen Mary's days; and in the beginning of her Reign,
in a Sermons at Pauls-Cro^se, he exhorted the people constantly to adhere to
that Doctrine which they had been taught, and to beware of pestilent Popery,
etc. for which he was called before the Lords of the Council, where he made a
stout, witty and godly answer, and was dismissed: but after the Queens
Proclamation against True-Preaching, he was again called (the Bishops thirsting
for his blood) and committed prisoner to his own house, whence he might have
escaped, and had many motives, as his wife, and ten children, his friends in
Germany, where he could not want preferment, etc. But being once called to
answer in Christ's Cause, he would not depart, though to the hazard of his life:
from his own house he was removed by Bonner to Newgate amongst thieves and
murderers: he was examined by the Lord Chancellor, and the rest of the
Council, and by them was re-committed to prison: he was much pressed to
recant, but stoutly refusing, was first excommunicated and degraded, and then
condemned: after which he desired that his wife (to whom he had been married
eighteen years, and by whom he had ten children, and she being a stranger)
might be admitted to come to him whilst he lived: but Stephen Gardener, then
Lord Chancellor, would by no means suffer it. February the fourth Anno Christi
1555. he was warned to prepare for death before he rose: If it be so, said he,
I need not tie my points, and so he was presently had away to Bonner to be
degraded, of whom he earnestly requested to be admitted to speak with his
wife, but could not prevail; from thence he was carried into Smithfield, where
scarce being permitted to speak to the people, he briefly persuaded them to
perseverance in that truth which he had taught them, which also he was now
ready to seal with his blood: then was a pardon proffered to him if he would
recant, but he utterly refused it; his wife, with nine small children, and the
tenth sucking at her breast came to him, but this sorrowful sight nothing moved
him, but in the flames he washed his hands, and with wonderful patience took
his death; all the people exceedingly rejoicing at his constancy, and praising
God for it. He was the Proto-martyr in Queen Mary's days. The Sabbath before
his death he drank to Master Hooper, who lay in a chamber beneath him, bidding
the messenger to commend him to him, and to tell him, That there was never
little fellow that would better stick to a man, then he would to him; supposing
they should be both burned together, although it happened otherwise.

Though this grave Father was enfor'd to fly
His envious Country for security,
Yet his und^unted courage would not move,
That always stood (as Sentinel) to love.
'Twas not a prison could affection swage;
He, like a Bird sung sweetest in a cage.
When first the Bible, with great pains and care,
He into English did translate so far,
That knowing men did admire the same;
And justly did extol his lasting fame.
Who did contemn the fury of all those,
Who both to us and him were mortal foes.
The Life and Death of Laurence Saunders, who died Anno Christi 1555.
LAurence Saunders was borne of worshipful Parents, brought up in learning at
Eaton School, and from thence chosen to Kings College in Cambridge, where he
continued three years, and profited in learning very much; then by his Mo^her,
who was very rich, he was bound to a Merchant in London; but not affecting that
course of life, his Master gave him his Indentures, and he returned to his
studies in Cambridge, where also he studied Greek and Hebrew, but especially
the holy Scriptures: he was frequent, and very fervent in Prayer, and when
assaulted by temptations, he still found much support, and comfort in prayer,
whereby he gained such experience, that he became a great comforter of others:
he Commensed Master of Arts, and stayed long after in the University. In the
beginning of King Edwards Reign he began to Preach (being first Ordained a
Minister) and that with such general approbation, that he was chosen to read a
Divinity-Lecture at Fotheringay, where by his Doctrine and life he drew many to
God, and stopped the mouths of the adversaries: about which time he married a
wife: and from thence he was removed to the Minster of Leichfield, where also
he, by his Life and Doctrine, gat a good report, even from his adversaries:
from thence he was removed to Church-Langton in Leicestershire, and from thence
to Al^allowes in Breadstreet London; and after his admission there, he went
back into the Country to resign his Benefice, which fell out when Queen Mary
raised stirs to get the Crown: In his journey he preached at Northampton, not
meddling with the State, but boldly delivered his conscience against Popish
Doctrine, and errors; which (said he) are like to spring up again, as a just
plague for the little love which England has borne to the true Word of God, so
plentifully offered to them: And seeing the dreadful day approaching, infl^med
with godly zeal, he Preached diligently at both his Benifices, not having
opportunity to resign e^ther, but into the hands of the Papists: and
notwithstanding the Proclamation to the contrary, he taught diligently the
Truth, at his Country-place where he then was, confirming the people, and
arming them against false doctrine, till by force he was resisted: some
counseled him to fly out o^ the Kingdom, which he refused; and being hindered
there from preaching, he traveled toward London, to visit his flock in that
place, coming near London Master Mordant one of the Q^eenes Counsel overtooke
him, asked him if he did not Preach such a time in Breadstreet? he said, Yea:
And will you, said Mordant, preach so again? Yes, said he, to morrow you may
hear me there, where I will confirm by Gods Word, all that I then Preached. I
would counsel you (said the other) to forbe^r. Saunders said, if you will
forbid me by lawful Authority, I must then forbear: Nay, Mordant, I will not
forbid you, and so they parted. Mordant went presently to Bishop Bonner, and
informed him of Master Saunders his purpose to Preach the next day: which
accordingly he did, and at his lodging being ^omewhat troubled in his thoughts,
a friend of his asked him h^w he did? truly said he, I am in prison, til^ I be
in prison: In the afternoon he prepared himself to Preach again, but Bonner
sent an officer for him, who carried him to the Bishop, where was Mordant also:
the Bishop charged him with Treason, Heresy, and Sedition: and required him to
write his judgment about Transubstantiation; which he did, saying, You seek my
blood, and you shall have it: I pray God you may be so baptized in it, that you
may hereafter loath blood sucking, and become a better man: then Bonner s^nt
him to Gardener, where he waited four hours before he was called in: and after
some discourse with him, Gardener sent him to prison; to whom he said, I thank
God that at last he has given me a place of rest, where I may pray for your
conversion. He continued in prison one year, and three months: in a lettter to
his wife he writes, I a^ merry, and I trust I shall be merry, maugre the
teeth of all the Devils in hell: Riches I have none to endow you with, but that
treasure of tas^ing ^ow sweet Christ is to hungry consciences (where^f I
thank my Christ, I do feel part) that I bequeath unto you, and to the rest of
my beloved in Christ, etc. Being at last brought again to examination, and lif^
b^ing promised if he would recant; he answered, I love my life and liberty, if
I could enjoy them without the hurt of my conscience: but by Gods grace I will
^bide the most extremity that man can do against me, rather then do any
thing against my conscience. Being condemned, he was sent to Coventrie to be
burned: when he came near the place of execution, he went cheerfully ^o the
stake, kissing of it, and saying, Welcome the Cross of Christ; welcome
everlasting life; and the fire being kindled, he sweetly slept in the Lord.

Doctor Pendleton, and this Master Saunders meeting together in the beginning
of Queen Mary's reign, and speaking of the Persecution that was like to ensue,
about which Master Saunders showed much weakness and many fears. Pendleton
said to him, What man? there is much more cause for me to fear, then for you,
forasmuch as I have a big and fat body, yet will I see the utmost drop of this
grease of mine molten away, and the last gobbit of this flesh of mine consum^d
to ashes, before I will forsake Jesus Christ, and his Truth which I have
professed: yet not long after, upon trial, poor, feeble, faint hearted
Saunders, by the power and goodness of God, sealed the Truth with his blood:
whereas proud Pendleton played the Apostate, and turned Papist.

He from inferior Parents did not spring,
But such as noble were in every thing;
Nor did his life, but to their splendour add,
Which make both them and all that knew him glad;
For he in knowledge did so high excel,
That ^asseth aut of man almost to tell:
Whether his knowledge or his virtues were
The more resplendant, yet a holy fear
Did seem to equal both; and which does crown
Him all triumphant, he past Martyrdom
With ^uch high courage, and so rare a zeal,
That I want words his worth for to reveal^.
The Life and Death of John Hooper, who dyed Anno Christi 1555.
JOhn Hooper was a Student, and Graduate in the University of Oxford, where
having abundantly profited in the study of other Scienc^s, he was stirred up
with a fervent desire to the love and knowledge of the Scriptures; in which
study he joined earnest prayers to his diligence, for the better understanding
of the same: but the six Articles coming out at that time, h^ was so hated by
some, especially by Doctor Smith, that he was compelled to leave the
Univ^rsity, and went to live with Sir Th^mas Arrundel; and danger approaching
there also, he left the Kingdom, and went to Paris, yet after a while he
returned again, and lived with one Mr. Sen^low; but understanding that snares
were again laid for him, with much difficulty and danger he escaped the second
time into France, and from thence traveled into Germany: at Zurick Master
Bullinger became his especial friend, where he studied Hebrew: and hearing
that King Edward the ^ixt was come to the Crown, he was desirous to return
into England; and when he took his leave of Bullinger, he, with hearty thanks
for all kindnesses, promised to write often to him of all his affairs: but,
says he, the last news ^f all I shall not be able t^ write; for where I shall
take most pains, there shall you ^ear of me to be burned to ashes. Returning to
London, he preached twice, but at least once every day: the people so flockt to
him, that the Churches could not contein them: in this pains-taking he
continued to his lives end, neither did his labor break him, nor promotion
change him, nor dainty fare corrupt him: he was of a strong body, sound health,
pregnant wit, and of invincible patience: spare of diet, sparer of words, and
sparest of time: a liberal hous-keeper, and very grave in his carriage. Being
by King Edward made first Bishop of Gloucester, then of Worcester; he carried
himself so uprightly and inoffensively, that his enemies had nothing to say
against him: He used to go about from town to town, and from village to
village to preach unto the people: he governed his house so, that in every
corner of it there was some smell of virtue, good example, honest conversation,
and reading of the Scriptures: In his Hall there was daily a table spread with
good store of victuals, and beset with poor folk of the City of Worcester by
turns, who were served by four at a Mes^e, with whole and wholesome meat: and
when they were served (being before examined by himself or his deputies, of
the Lords Prayer, Creed, and ten Commandments) then he himself sat down to
dinner, and not before. In the beginning ^f Queen Mary's days he was sent for
by a Pursivant to London; and though he had opportunity, and was persuaded by
his friends to fly, yet he refused, saying, Once I did fly, but now being
called to this place and vocation, I am resolved to stay, and to live and dye
with my sheep. By Winchester when he came to London, he was railed upon and
committed to prison; afterward also at his examination, they called him Beast,
Hypocrite, etc. which he bore without answering again: in the Flee^ where he
was prisoner, he had nothing but a pad of straw for a b^d, and a rotten
covering, till good people sent him a bed to lie on: of one side his chamber
was the sink and filth of the house, on the other the town-ditch, enough to
have choked him. After he had laien thus a while, falling sick, the doors,
bars, hasps and chains being all made fast, he both mourned, called and cried
for help; yet the Warden hearing, would suffer none to go to him, saying, Let
him alone, if he dye, it were ^ good riddance of him, etc. At last being
degraded and condemned, he was sent to Gloucester to be burned: the night before
his death he did eat his meat quietly, and slept soundly; after his first
sleep, he spent the rest of the night in prayer; the next day Sir Anthony
Kingston coming to him, told him that life was sweet, and death bitter; to
which he answered, The death to come is more bitter, and the life to come more
sweet: I am come hither to end this life and suffer death, because I will not
gainsay the former Truth that I have here taught unto you: also a blind Boy
coming to him, after he had examined him in the grounds of Religion, he said,
Ah poor Boy, God has taken from thee thy outward sight, but has given thee
another sight much more precious; having endued thy soul with the eye of
knowledge and faith. Being delivered to the Sheriff, he said to him, My request
to you Master Sheriff, is only that there may be a quick fire, shortly to make
an end of me, and in the mean time I will be as obedient to you as you can
desire; if you think I do amiss in any thing, hold up your finger, and I
have done: I might have had my li^e with much worldly gain, but I am willing
to offer up my life for the Truth, and trust to dye a faithful servant to God,
and a true subject to the Queen: when he saw the Sheriffs men with so many
weapons, he said, This is more then needs, if you had willed me, I would have
gone alone to the stake, and have troubled none of you all: as he went to the
stake he was forbid to speak to the people: he looked cheerfully, and with a
more ruddy countenance then ordinary: being com^ th^th^r, he prayed about half
an ^our: and having a box with a pardon set before him, he cried, If you love
my soul away with it, if you love my soul away with it. Three Irons being
prepared to fasten him to the stake, he only put on an Iron-hoop about his
middle, bidding them take away the rest, saying, I doubt not but God will give
me strength to abide the extremity of the fire without binding. When reeds were
cast to him, he embraced and kissed them, putting them under his arm, where he
had bags of gun-power also: when fire was first p^t to him, the faggots being
green, and the wind blowing away the fl^me, he was but scorched: more faggots
being laid to him, the fi^e was so suppressed, that his n^ther-parts were burned,
his upper being scarce touched: he prayed, O Jesus the son of David have mercy
upon m^, and receive my soul: and wiping his eyes with his hands, he said, For
Gods love let me have more fire. A third fire being kindled, it burned more
violently, yet was he alive a great while in it; the last words which he
uttered, being, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. In one of his Letters he wrote,
Imprisonment is painful, but liberty upon evil conditions is worse: the
Prison stinkes, yet no^ so much as sweet houses where the fear of God is
wanting: I must be alone and solitary; its better to be so, and have God with
me, then to be in company with the wicked: Loss of goods is great, but loss
of grace and Gods favor is greater: I cannot tell how to answer before great
and learned men; yet it is better to do that, then stand naked before Gods
tribunal: I shall dye by the hands of cruel men; he is blessed that loses
this life, and finds life eternal: there is neither felicity, nor
adversity of this world that is great, if it be weighed with the joys and
pains of the world to come.

Reader, behold, and then admire
Ho^pers most rich Seraphicke fire:
His constanc^ wa^ great, his heart
(Balso^'d by heaven) out-vi'd all smart:
Rare was his life, rare was his death;
Whilst time remains his fame shall want no breath.
The Life and Death of Rowland Tailor, who dyed Anno Christi 1555.
ROwland Tailor was Doctor in both the Laws, and Rector of Hadley in Suffolk,
where Master Thomas Bilney had formerly been a Preacher of the Word, and in
which place there were few either men or women that were not well learned in
the holy Scriptures; many having often read over the whole Bible, and could say
a great part of Paul's Epistles by heart. Here this Doctor Tailor Preached
constantly on Sabbaths, Holy Days, and at other times when he could get the
People together. His life also, and conversation was very exemplary, and full
of holiness: he was meek and humble, yet would stoutly rebuke sin in the
greatest: to the poor, blind, lame, sick, bedridden, or that had many children,
he was a father, causing the Parishioners to make good provision for them,
besides what of his own bounty he gave them: he brought up his children in the
fear of God, and good learning. In the beginning of Queen Mary's reign, two
Popish persons suborned a Priest to come and say Mass in his Church; he being
at his study, and hearing the Bell to toul, went to Church, and finding this
Priest guarded with drawn swords, in his Popish robes, ready to begin the
Mass, he said unto him, Thou Devil, who made thee so bold to enter into this
Church, to profane and defile it with this abominable Idolatry; I command
thee thou Popish Wolf in the name of God to avoid hence, and not to presume
thus to poison Christ's flock: but the ^tanders by, forcing Doctor Tailor out of
the Church, the Priest went on with his Mass: and shortly after, the Bishop
being informed hereof, sent his letters Missive for Doctor Tailor; whereupon
his friends earnestly entreated him to fly, telling him that he could neither
expect justice nor favor, but imprisonment and cruel death: to whom he
answered, I know my Cause to be so good and righteous, and the Truth so strong
upon my side, that I will by Gods grace appear before them, and to their
beards resist their false doings; for I believe that I shall never be able to
do God so good service as now, and that I shall never have so glorions a
calling, nor so great mercy of God proffered me as I have now; wherefore pray
for me, and I doubt not but God will give me strength, and his holy spirit that
all my adversaries shall be ashamed of their doings: and so preparing himself,
he went to London, and presented himself to Stephen Gardener, Lord Chancellor
of England; who railed upon him, asked him if he knew him not, etc. to whom he
answered, Yea, I know you, and all your greatness, yet you are but a mortal
man: and if I should be afraid of your Lordly looks, why fear you not God the
Lord of us all, etc. But after other discourse, he sent him to the Kings Bench,
commanding his Keeper to keep him strictly. In Prison he spent his time in
prayer, reading the Scriptures, Preaching to the prisoners, and to others that
resorted to him: he was diverse times examined of his Faith, and witnessed a
good Confession before his adversaries, for which at last he was condemned to
dye: when his sentence was read, he told them that God, the righteous Judge,
would require his blood at their hands, and that the proudest of them all
should repent their receiving again of Antichrist, and their tyranny against
the flock of Christ.

He was sent down to Hadley to be burned, and all the way as he went, he was
very merry as one that went to a banquet, or Bridal. In his journey the
Sheriff of Essex persuaded him much to return to the Popish Religion, etc. to
whom at last he answered, I well perceive now that I have been deceived my
self, and shall deceive many in Hadley of their expectation: when the Sheriff
desired him to explain his meaning, hoping that he would recant, he said; I am
a man of a very great carcass, which I had hoped should have been buried in
Hadley- Churchyard, but I see I am deceived, and there are a great number of
worms there, which should have had jollie feeding upon this carryon, but now
both I and they shall be deceived of our expectation: when he came within two
miles of Hadley he desired to alight, and being down he leap't, and fet a
frisk, or two, saying God be praised I am now almost at home, and have not past
a mile or two, and I am even at my fathers house: at Hadley towns-end a poor
man with five children met him, crying, O dear father, and good shepherd, God
help and succor thee, as thou have many a time succou^'d me, and my poor
children: The streets were full of people weeping, and bewailing their loss;
to whom he said, I have preached to you Gods Word and Truth, and am come to
seal it with my blood: He gave all his money to the poor, for whom he was wont
thus to provide formerly: once a fortnight at least he used to call upon Sir
Henry Doil, and other rich Clothiers to go with him to the Alms houses to see
what the poor lacked in meat, d^ink, apparel, bedding, and other necessaries:
withal ^xhorting, comforting, and rebuking as he saw occasion. Coming to the
pl^ce of execution he was not suffered to speak to the people, who much
lamented his death, yet he was very cheerful, saying Thanks be to God, I am
even at home, and when he had prayed, and made himself ready, he went to the
stake and kissed it: the fire being kindled, he held up his hands, called upon
God, saying, Merciful father of heaven, for Jesus Christ my Saviors sake
receive my soul into thy hands, and so stood still without moving, till one
with an halberd struck out his brains.

Among the many Champions of the Lord,
Who with their blood to Truth did bear record,
And feared not in furious flames to fry,
That they Christ's Gospels light might magnify,
Was pious precious Doctor Tailor stout;
Who did the fight of Faith to th'death fight out.
A very learned, painful Pastor grave;
Who to his Flock full testimony gave
Of his great wisdome^ charity and love,
And all Soul saving graces from above:
Who for opposing Romes impiety,
Being apprehended and condemn^d to dye,
He kissed his Stake, being bound to it in chains;
Burning a Popish wretch beat out his brains.
And thus this blessed Martyr cheerfully,
Went to his heavenly home triumphantly.
JOHN BRADEFORD
The Life and Death of John Bradford.
NExt to this last mad Septenary of unchristian liberty, and unparalled
distractions, the Devil never seemed to enjoy more chain in this Ki^gdome,
then in the time of Queen Mary: wherein, laying hold on the weakness and
super^ticion of a silly woman, bred up in Popery; and by reason of the bar
interposed betwixt her and the Crown, by her Royal Brother Edward the sixth,
wholly subjected to the violent and bloody counsels of that faction, which
finally prevailed in her restitution and establishment; he kindled more
Bonefires in the space of three or four yeer^s in England then the world had at
any time beheld, in so few years, and in one Kingdom, since the last of the
first ^en Persecutions. I dare not upon Master Foxes bare report (who was
sometimes, and perhaps of purpose, by the adversaries themselves, miserably
abused in hi^ informations) acknowledge all for Martyrs, whom I find in his
Catalogue. But what will Stapleton or any other Papist get by that? The Church
of England, as it was of late reformed, and the Reformation by Law established,
has produced and added as many genuine, knowing and valiant Champions to that
Noble Army, as within these thousand years, any Church in Christendom: which
is glory enough, without hooking in either Heretic or Schismatique, or any
other, who suffered for nothing less then well doing. And from a chief place
amongst those holy men, and witnesse^ to the truth of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, all Stapletons exceptions, bitter railing, and intemperat scoffs, can
not, ought not, exclude this blessed Saint and servant of God, John Bradford;
as shall evidently appear to as many, as without prejudice shall peruse, and
pondor his ensuing History; which God willing we will drive throuh the whole
Course of his life, from his Birth to his Martyrdom: But to take our rise from
his Birth.

He was borne in Manchester, the quality of his Parent^ (though their means be
not recorded) may be easily gathered by his Education, which was the best that
either that place, or those times could ^fford; for he arrived very early at
the knowledge of the Latin Tongue: and for Ari^hmaticke, he had few equals in
those parts, both which b^ing adorned, and helped forward by a fair, and
speedy hand, he became fit for employment abroad, before any great notice was
taken of him at home: which moved Sir John Harrington, a noble Knight, and in
good esteem both with King Henry the eight, and his Son Edward the sixth, to
assume him into the number of his fellows: and employ him in his most private
and and urgent affairs both at home and abroad. For at Bulloigne he was
Treasurer at wars, and here he had the charge and oversight of all his
Majesty's buildings: In both employments, he found the service of young
Bradford (who besides his honesty and diligence, had a notable dexterity in
casting up, and Auditing accoumpts) of such importance, that where ever he
employed him, he committed all to his trust, and owned whatsoever he did, as
immediately done by himself. And truly therein he more ^avored himself, then
Bradford, who in the whole course of his employment, so acquitted himself, as
it is hard to determine, whether therein he used greater diligence, or
integrity. But having spent diverse years in this honest and thrifty course of
life; wherein if he had persisted, he was in a fair way both of wealth and
worship: he began to Elevate his thoughs above these temporary things, and
aspire to a service less profitable, but much more honorable: wherefore making
up his accoumpts with his Master (who neither would nor could diswade him from
what he had once resolved) he gave himself wholly to the study of Divinity,
and reading of the Scriptures. But perceiving how useful and necessary a
Handmaid Humanity is to Divinity, and how short he came of those Tongus and
Sciences, without which it was improbable, if not impossible for him, to
attain any perfection in the noblest, and most supereminent of all other
Sciences, at which he chiefly aimed: leaving the Temple at London, where he
usually bestowed some few hours every day in hearing the Reader of the
Common Law; he betook himself to the University of Cambridge, as neither able
nor desirous, to suppress that which inwardly moved him, to fit himself for
an able workman in a more spiritual building. After a year and some few
months spent in the University, he attained his degree of Master in Arts,
whereunto others are hardly admitted, after long examination, and seven years
painful study: But such was his Carriage, diligence and profeciency, that this
favor, though extraordinary and insolent, was thought well bestowed upon him
by the whole University: And least any man may think, it was rather (out of
Charity) deferred to his years, then abilities: he was immediately hereafter,
without any interposall of time, chosen Fellow, of Pembrooke Hall: which first
brought him to the eye, and afterward to the bosom, of that learned and
notable stickler in the reformation, Martin Bucer, by whom he was again
encouraged, and stirred up to the work of the Ministry; not that he found him
stagger in his Resolution, or fall from his principles: but because the greater
measure of knowledge he attained, the longer he defered the performance of his
promise, as ever thinking himself, the more insufficient for so high and
laborious a Calling: Being one time (amongst many) moved by Bucer, to defer the
employment of his Talent no longer, and he pretending (as formerly) his present
inability. If thou can not attain unto Manchett (said Bucer) may thou not
therefore feed this poor and Soul starved People with Barley loaves; which
proceeding from a man he so sincerely loved, and upon whose j^dgment he so much
relied; made him lay aside all his former tergiversations, and in good earnest
buckle himself to the work: But because no man can take upon him that
function, unless he be called, as was Aaron; though he doubted not of his
inward vocation by God, yet would he by no means thrust his shickle into that
sacred harvest, before he was called by the Church, and separated thereunto by
Imposi^ion of Hands: which, with a License to Preach, and a Prebe^d in S^int
Paul's, he obtained from that renowned Bishop, and glorio (...) Martyr, Doctor
Ridley, Bishop of London: For three years together, he Preached faithfully and
diligently, in season and out of season; being a sharp and impartial reprover
of vice, a vehement exhorter to virtue, no man opposing Heresies with greater
animosity, or asserting the truth with more evidence and perspicuity: whereby
his fame spread it self almost over the whole kingdom; And yet all this was
but an Introduction, to that which followed. For King Edward the sixth (of
blessed Memory) expiring with the last of these three years: and his sister
Queen Mary, contrary the his last will and Testament, advanced to the Crown,
though not without some opposition, which she easily overcame: he was suddenly
deprived both of his livelihood and and liberty, upon an occasion which
deserved much rather reward then punishment: And this it was:

In the first year of the Queens Reign, and not long after her Coronation,
Master Bourne, who was shortly thereafter by the favor of Secretary Bourne,
consecrated Bishop of Bath and Wels, made a most invective and seditious Sermon
at Paul's Cross: wherein he not only cast dirt upon his late deceased King
Edward the sixth, but vented and maintained many Popish tents, contrary to the
orthodox Religion then established: which drove the Common People into such a
fury and tumult, that neither the reverence of the place, the persuasion of the
Bishop, nor the authority and presence of the Lord Major, could stop them from
pulling him out of the Pulpit; gladly he would have ended his Sermon, (for
belike his greatest strength and confidence to lead his auditors hood winkt
into their old Mumpsimus, lay in his peroration) but perceiving by a drawn
dagger, (which amongst other implements) was flung at him, and missed him but
very narrowly, that the multitude were in good earnest, and his life in
jeoperdy, he turned himself about, and perceived Master Bradford standing at
his back within the Pulpit; whom he earnestly entreated to supply his place,
and save his life, by pacifying the People. He no sooner appeared in the others
room, but the people joyfully ingeminated with a loud voice, Bradford Bradford:
and by that time he had a little enlarged himself in the point of obedience,
the Tumult seemed more then half appeased. But the Sermon ended and Bourne (as
he had reason) not yet daring to commit himself to the so lately enraged
multitude, notwithstanding he was back'^ by the Lord Major and Sheriffs,
besought Master Bradford not to leave him, until he brought him into some
place of security; whereunto he willingly consented, and when the multitude
(for the greater part) were dispersed, under the covert of his own gown, he
conveyed him into the next house, which was the Scholemasters; effecting that
by the Word, which the Major could not do for him by the Sword: many were ^ore
grieved at his escape; and some stuck not to Prophecy (I know not by what
Spirit) that by saving this wiling Rashaketh from death, he had given a deadly
blow to his own life. Howsoever Bradford, committed the issue to almighty God,
nothing repented his Charity, which he was sure would find, reward with him,
what acceptance soever it found amongst wicked and unthankful men; yea so far
was he from being afraid or sorry for what he had done, that in his afternoones
Sermon at Bow Church, he sharply reprehended his Auditors, for their forenoones
tumultuous Carriage and sedition: And yet such was the malice of the common
adversary, and iniquity of the times, that about three days after, for this
very fact he was summoned to appear before the Council, and by the Lords
Committed to the Tower, from whence within few weeks, they removed him to the
Kings Bench; where (through the Keepers connivance) he had often conference
with Master Laurence Saunders, at that time a prisoner in the Marshalsey.
Bishop Farrar he found in the Kings Bench before him, where having endured a
close and tedious imprisonment, he began at length, through humane infirmity,
to recoyle in the point of Transubstantiation, in so much that he undertook to
Communicate under one Kind at Easter following. But Bradford dealt so
effectually with him, that he revoked this promise, and resumed his former
principles. His occasions of escape were as many as the days of his
imprisonment, whereby any man may see, to save in life, he would not break his
word with his Keepers; being asked what course he would take, if God should
deliver him out of prison: he said, he would not fly o^t of the Kingdom, but
there Preach, though secretly, as the times would per^it him. During his long
restraint, he was oftentimes examined; first by the Lords of the Council at
what time he was clapped up in the Tower; which was in August 1553. but of that
examination there is nothing now extant, except only one passage repealed in
the second. After that by the Bishop of Winchester Lord Chancellor of England,
and other select Commissioners, January 22. 1555. The things laid to his charge
were principally these: That he was the Author of the tumult at Bournes Sermon,
because (forsooth) he so readily and dexterously appeased the same: That he
presumed to Preach without License, though he had been a Divinity Lecturer at
Paul's two years before that tumult. And that upon his first Committall to the
Tower, he had answered the Queens Council peremptorily and saucily in the
point of Religion: As that he was now more then ever confirmed in the same, as
it was reformed and professed under Edward the sixth. The first and last of
these Articles he denied, saving the words last repeated; the second he
labored to justify, as not requisite from them, by any law at that time in
force, when he Preached; in the conclusion, they twitted him in the teeth with
Heresy, and accused him of writing from the Tower seditious letters into
Lancaster: whereto, because they desended not to particulars, he gave them
only general answers. The whole conference was larded with an often repealed
tender of the Queens Mercy, in case he would confess his sedition, acknowledge
and abjure his Heresies, and return to the bosom of the Romish Church after
their example. To the first he said, he could not acknowledge himself guilty
of what he neither Committed, nor intended. To the second, that he never
Preached or Patronized any error to his knowledge: being ready to abjure
whatsoever he was not able to defend. To the third, that he willingly embraced
the Queens Mercy, though he neither needed, not could accept thereof, as they
were pleased to Clog it with Conditions repugnant to the word of God, and the
clear light of his own Conscience. The 19. day of January following, he was
the third time convented in Saint Mary Overies, before the same Winchester, and
diverse other Bishops his fellow Comnissioners; where, at first the same things
were again objected unto him, and received the same Answers. After much
jangling and a second offer of mercy upon the former Condition, they required a
Peremptory and positive accoumpt of his faith, concerning Christ's Corporal
presence in the Eucharist. To which he replied, that during a year and eight
months imprisonment, they had never pressed him with that question, but now,
that by altering the state of Religion, they had made the Contrary opinion unto
theirs, Heretical, and all Heresy interpretatively, and by consequence,
Capital; it is more then Evident, what thereby they hunted after. This drove
the Lord Chancellor into a long Apologeticall Oration of his own innocence and
notorious lenity in that kind; which ended without expecting what Bradford
would reply; upon some intelligence from the Kitchen, he adjurend the Court,
and went home to dinner. The day following which was the fourth and last of his
appearance, he was brought to the same place, and before the same judges; where
after many Interrogatories and answers concerning the corporal presence, the
Pope and Queens authority, and other Emergent questions (which if here
inserted, would swell the process of his death to thrice the length of his
lif, but may be found at large in the Martirologie) he was finally condemned
for worshipping the God of our fathers, after that way which those bloud-suckers
called Heresy, excommunicated, and delivered over to the Secular powers, (
January 31. 1555.) who first committed him to the Clinke, and afterward to the
Counter: where he remained to the first of July following, and had many hot
Disputes and sharp Conflicts. 1. with Bonner Bishop of London. 2. with Master
Wollerton the Bishops Chaplen. 3. Percivall Creswell and Doctor Harding. 4.
Doctor Harpsfieled and Doctor Harding. 5. with Het^^ Archbishop of York and
Day Bishop of Chichester. 6. with two Spanish Friars, Alphonsus a Castro, and
King Philips Confessor. 7. Doctor Weston and Master Coillier Warden of
Manchester. 8. Doctor Pendleton. 9. with Doctor Weston, and others. 10. with
Doctor Weston alone; for many visited him after condemnation, some as the
Devil did our blessed Savior, to tempt and pervert him, and some to receive
instruction and comfort by him: for in his two last prisons he Preached
constantly twice every Lords day, and freequently administered the Lords Supper
to his fellow prisoners: visiting them all, almost every day, even to the
thieves and cutpurses in the Grate, and almost (if he had it) as often
relieving them. At first, they resolved to burn him at Mancheste^, where he was
borne, but altered that resolution, I know not upon what occasion. The Saturday
at night before he suffered, he dreamed his chain was brought to the Counter
gate, that the next day being Sunday, he should be had to Newgate and burned at
Smithfield the Monday ensuing, which after many frightfull awakings, still
recurring to his troubled fancy, he arose, and communicating what he had
dreamed to his Chamber-fellow, fell to his old exercise of reading and praying.
The next day after dinner, whilst he discoursed of the ripeness of si^ne, of
death, and the kingdom of heaven, up came the Keepers wife half beside her
self, and said unto him with tears in her eyes, O Master Bradford, your chain
is now a hammering, to night you will be removed to Newgate, and to morrow
burned at Smithfield: having heard her out, with hands and eyes lifted up unto
heaven, he blessed God who had thought him worthy, and made him willing to
suffer for his tr^th; thanked the good woman for her Compassion, but more for
her news, and so went up to his Chamber, where he spent some hours in prayer,
and then called up his Chamber-fellow, to whom he gave some things privately in
charge, and dilivered certain papers, but of what concernment I cannot find;
the rest of that after^noon he spent in prayer and other heavenly exercises,
which he performed with admirable adhesion to God, and obstraction from the
world, being often times so trans^ported and elevated in his raptures, that he
seemed already in possession of that Crown, which for the present, through
fire and faggots, he but aspired to: to the great admiration and comfort of as
many of his friends, as that day had the happiness to visit him. Having blessed,
and distributed such things amongst the servants of the house, as he thought
fit, he made a most fervent and pacheticall farwell-prayer in the company of
his fellow prisoners, with such ravishment of Spirit, and abundance of tears,
that the hardest hearted amongst them, could not choose but Simpathize with him.
In the midst of this prayers, when he put on the shirt wherein he was to be
burned, he enlarged himself in a most sweet meditation, of the Wedding
Garment, and after that, about twelve a clock in the night, came down into the
Court, where the prisoners took their final leave of him, as he went from the
Counter to Newgate, (though it was about midnight, yet) great multitudes of
people were gathered together in the streets, who much lamented, and earnestly
prayed for him; to whom he returned their courtesy in both kinds, with
interest. About nine in the morning he was led forth to Smithfield with a very
great Guard, as he came down the stairs he espied an old friend whom he
called unto him, embraced, and after some private whisperings bestowed upon him
his velvet nightcap, handkershiefe, and some other trifles. And yet Roger
Beswicke his brother in law had his head cruelly broken by Seriffe Woodrofe,
for but offering to speak to him: for which, and other his barbarous
inhumanities, committed against the Saints, and faithful witnesses of Jesus
Christ at such times, a heavy and visible judgment overtooke him, within few
years thereafter; for besides the Palsy, which for eight years together,
disinabled him from riding, walking, or turning himself in his bed, he fell
into a most devouring, and insatiable Bulimy. As soon as he approached the
stake, he fell flat on the ground, intending there to power forth hi^ private
prayers (for he was not permitted to do it publicly) unto almighty God: But
Woodrofe the Sheriff commanded to him arise and dispatch, for that the people
increased and pressed upon him; whereat eftsoone he got up, and when he had
embraced the stake, and kissed it, he put off his Clothes, which he entreated
might be given to his servant, because he had nothing else to leave him: being
tied to the stake he comforted the stripling that was burned with him, and
earnestly exhorted the people to repentance: which so enraged the Sherieffe,
that (which was not usual) he commanded his hands should be tied. His last
audiable Words were those of our Saviors; Strait is the way, and narrow is the
gate that leads to Salvation, and few there be that find it: He endured the
flame as a fresh gale of wind in a hot Summers day, without any reluctance;
confirming by his death the truth of that doctrine, which he had so diligently
and powerfully Preached, during his life; which ended, July the first 1556. in
the prime, though in what year of his age, is not certainly known. He was,
for his stature, tall but slender: of a faintish sanguine Complexion, his heir
and beard auburne, his countenance was full of sweetness mixed with reverence
and austerity: He spent the whole time of his inprisonment in reading,
Preaching and praying: eating but once every day, and that but sparingly;
scarcely ever rising from that meal, wherein his tears did not largly bedew
his trencher. He slept not (commonly) above four hours a night, from the time
he went to bed, till dead sleep locked up his senses, his candle went not out
nor his book out of his hand. Half an hour he sent usually after dinner in
discourse, (which was all the recreation he used) the rest of his time, in his
own private devotions and studies: His death was generally lamented by all who
knew, or bus heard of of him; yea many Papists themselves, being convicted with
his innocence of his life, or taken with the quickness and modisty of his
answers; but especially considering ^he implacable malice and cruelty of his
enemies, heartily wished his deliverance; for all men observid, how they had
first committed him without law, and then after a years imprisonment made one
to take away his life: He denied indeed the Popes authority over the Church of
England, and so had his judges done but the year before: And for Christ's
corporal presence in the Sacrament, (which was the Artickle whereupon they
chiefly condemned him) he never denied it in the worthy Receiver, as to the eye
of Faith, and no man yet, whether Papist or Prot^stant, could never discover
it, through the accidents of Bread and Wine, by the eye of the body. We are
informed by Master Fox, that he wrote many comfortable Treatises, especially
during his imprisonment, o^ which these only have had the fortune to reach our
times.

1 Two Sermons, the first of Repentance, the second of the Lords Supper. 2 Some
le^ters to his fellow Mar^yres. 3 An answer to two letters, desiring to know
whether one might go to Mas^ or not. 4 The danger ensuing the hearing of
Mass. 5 Hi^ examination before the officers. 6 Godly Meditations made in
Prison, called his short Prayers. 7 Truths Complaints. 8 Melancthon translated,
of Prayers.

See how undaunted Bradford has displayed
Truths golden Colors; nothing could invade
His heaven filled thoughts, but heaven, in whose just cause
He lived, though murdered by Papistick laws.
Relgion told him that his cause was good,
He need not fear to sign it with his blood
And seal it with his heart; Bradford agreed
To sign, whilst Heaven was witness to the deed.
Insulting Papists, what can ye declare
But this, your foulness made our Bradford fair;
Your fire refined his heart, and made it prove
A perfect lover of the God of love.
NICOLAS RIDLY.
The Life and Death of Nicolas Ridly.
AN other Paul otherwise in diverse respects, save that we find not that he
ever persecuted the flock or faith of Christ, may this choice instrument of God
Nicolas Ridley be not unfitly, nor unworthily be styled. For he was for a long
time a maintainer and practiser of Popish superstitions, which his adversaries
also twit^ng him with in the time of his troubles, he denied not, but freely
confe^sed; yet withal profe^sing, that he had since that time repented him
thereof, and God, he trust^d had in mercy pardoned upon his repentance, wha^ in
ignorance he then did: But after it pleased God to reveal hi^ truth to him
more clearly, he labored as earnestly as any of his fellow laborers in the
propagation of it; being endowed with as eminent parts as any of them for that
purpose, and at length sealed it up, as did some others of them also, with his
blood.

He was borne in Northumberland, as some say, or as others, in the Bishopric
of Durham, descended of a worshipful Family bearing that name, and trained up
in the first rudiments of literature in the Grammar school at New Castle upon
Tine; which town situate upon that river, which divides those two Counties,
though standing within Northumberland, is by a bridge joined unto the
Bishopric of Durham: from the school there he was first transplanted into the
University of Cambridge: and from thence, as it seems, removed upon some
occasions to Oxford; for tha^ learned and industrious Bishop, who has compiled
a Catalogue of our English Prelates, does of his certain knowledge assure us,
that he was some time fellow of University College there. Those of Pembrooke
Hall in Cambridge, among whom he was first placed, could not, it seems well be
without him, or he without them: with whom, if he continued not at first, yet
he returned shortly again to them, whither of his own accord, or invited by
them, does not appear. But certain it is that he was head of that house, and
there took his d^gree of Doctor in Divinity: Before which, or after I cannot
certainly say, being desirous to see what Schools of learning are abroad, and
to try if better means for the inproving of himself and his excellent parts
elsewhere be found, he left these part^ for a time, and visited the University
of Paris, being the prime place of note for schoole-divinity in those dayes^
But there he made no long stay, not finding peradventure what he looked for;
but returned again to his own Country and his former place of aboade.

Upon his return, or not long after, especial notice being taken of him, as
his good parts well deserved, he was called to be Chaplain unto King Henry the
eight, and wa^ in process of time preferred to the Bishopric of Rochester
becoming vacant by the translation of Henry Holbeach thence to Lincoln:
Concerning which his preferment I find different relations; for Mr Fox in his
Martyrologie affirms that he was by and under King Henry promoted to that See;
whereas the forementioned compiler of the Catalogue of Bishops, (who seems to
have followed the authentic records) refers both the removal of Holbeach,
and the advancement of Ridley his successor to the first of King Edward in the
year of our lord 1547. However, in that seat he sat not long, for in the third
of King Edward, upon the deprivation of Bonner, that bloody persecutor of Gods
people and butcherer of Christ's flock, he was translated to the Bishoprike of
London: wherein how he bemeaned himself, shall hereafter be related.

Before these his latter times, having long walked in the dark, he came at
length to see better and clearer light, in the points then questioned,
especially concerning the blessed Sacrament of Christ's body and blood; first by
reading that worthy and (for these times especially) learned works of Bertram
written long since of that argument; wc^ is to this day such a mote in the
Papists eyes, that they know not well how to handle it, or which way to dispose
of it, though they wish it out of the world, not out of their eyes only, as
appears by their long disput about it in their Index Expurgatorius: and
afterward by conference with Cranmer and Peter Martyr, two other of Christ's
champions who confirmed him in the same: and lastly, as himself solemnly
calling God to witness, seriously protested, upon due enquiry and diligent
examination, finding the doctrine he after that maintained to be not only
grounded upon Gods word, but agreeable also to the writings of the ancient
Fathers.

Nor was he less zealous and forward in the profession and progatation of the
truth and faith of Christ once known and embraced, then ever he had been in
any erroneous or superstitious way before, and careful by a godly religious
course of life to adorn it in himself, and commended it to others; for being
passing well learned (which his adversaris themselves neither do nor dare
deny, of great reading and endued with d^xterity of wit, strength of memory,
and a very graceful elocution; he employed diligently these hi^ talents to his
M^sters behoof, for the instructing and winning of as many to God as he might.
And to thi^ purpose following the Apostles instructions to Timoth^e, to preach
the word instantly and constantly, in season and out of season, he suff^red no
Lords day lightly, nor other Festival, to pass over his head, but that he
preached on it in some place or other, unless some other very weighty and
urgent occasion (which unless such indeed, he gave not way to) cast a rub in
his way: with his Sermons the better sort of people were so taken, that they
swarmed about him like bees, allured by the sweet flowers and pleasant j^yce of
that wholesome doctrine, which was in them by him in a very plausible, and yet
no less powerful and profitable manner delivered.

Besides that for his own family, while he resided at Fulham, his manner was
to read to them every day at the time of morning prayer, a lecture out of the
New Testament, which he constantly performed, beginning with the A^ts of the
Apostles, and so going on through all Saint Paul's Epistles: to those of his
family he used also to read over the hundred and first Psalm; thereby to
admonish them, what they ought to be, and what he expected from them, should
they continue in his service, or such of them as could read, he bestowed
Testaments; hiring them also with rewards to get some principal Chapters
thereof by heart, and especially that of Acts the thirteenth. By thi^ his care
came his house to be so well ordered, that it seemed a school or nursery of
virtue, and pattern of piety and good life unto others, as himself also was to
it.

For he was a man of so holy, just, sober, continent, and life generally
unblamable, that his most malicious and mischievous advers^ries could fi^d
nothing therein to tax him with^ll, though challenged solomly so to do. Hi^
very outward making, promised a well-composed inside; for he was a very comely
person, and of well proportioned limbs and lineaments; nor did his outside
deceive those that then conjectured well of him: it pleasing God eft even
outwardly to imprint in the face and frame of his body, a living portraiture of
those endowments, wherewith the inner man he has adorned, yea what his looks
tes^ified, his li^e gave witness to, wherein all manner of sound piety and
true virtue did most illustriously shine forth.

For matter of piety, he was much addicted to contemplation and prayer, wherein
his common and constant course (if not otherwise enterrupted) was this; So
soon as he wa^ up in the morning, (nor was he any sluggerd, a little sleep
served him) and his apparel once on, he retired himself again to his
bedchamber, and there on his knees he spent some half an hour in prayer:
That done he betook himself to his study, where he continued till ten of the
clock, at which time he came to the common prayer, which was used daily in his
house: After that he dined, feeding temperately, not using much talk at table,
but that he used, sober, grave, wise and discreet, sometimes also not
unpleasant, if occasion were. After dinner (which he sat not long at) he spent
about an hour usually either in conference with others, or in a game or two at
chesse, the only recreation he made use of for the refreshing of himself:
Then he returned again to his study, where he sat, unless suitors or some
other affairs knocked him off, until five of the clock, his constant hour for
the afternoon Common prayer. That finished, he supped, and after supper havi^g
passed over about an hour before, he returned the third time to his study,
continuing there until eleven of the clock at nigh^, his usual bed hour,
which yet he went not to before he had spent some time, as in the morning in
private prayer by himself. Thus used he to make his religious addresses unto
God, both as a key to open the door in the morning to his daily employments,
and as a bolt to shut and close them up all at evening again.

For his other virtues, he was a man of a very patient spirit; which Solomon
pronounces a principal point and part, not of wisdom only, but of true
valor and honor; though zealous in Gods cause, when occasion was, yet in his
own very moderate and temperate, taking all things in good part; nor retaining
rancor against any, but very prone and ready to forgive and forget wrong^, and
those no small ones, and offered by those, as whose hands he had deserved better
usage.

To his kindred very kind, as nature it self required: but without partiality
or prepesterous affection to all, hi^ brother and sister not excepted, not
bearing with them in ought not agreeable to right; but giving them this
general rule, that if they did evil, they should look for nothing a^ his
hands, but they should be as mere strangers and alien^ to him; and those in
their steed as his brother and sister, that carried themselves honestly and
followed a godly course of life. Nor was his kind carryage such to them alone,
but so lovingly and courteously demeaned he himself to his people, that never
was any good child more dearly beloved of its natural parents, nor gentle and
kind parents of their natural children, then he was of his flock and those
both of his diocese and others that had occasion to know him, and take notice
of his kind disposition, and demeanor. That which extended it self even to
those also of the other side, who for his Religion brooked him not, yea to the
near kindred and friends of those that for the same most maligned him. For not
by rage and harshnesse, but with much mildness and gentleness, he labored to
reduce such as remained obstinate Papists, seeking by kind carryage rather to
woe and win them if it might be, then by harsh courses and rough dealing,
either to force them, or to exasperate them, and so make them the more
obstinate.

This appeared, among other instances whereof many might be given, in that
friendly usage of Bishop Heath; who continued for a twelve month as prisonner
in his house; as prisoner, I may well say, rather then prisoner indeed; and yet
not a prisonner neither, for he could not have enjoyed more liberty, or better
respect and attendance, then he found and had there, had he been a free man in
his own.

But above others in this kind most remarkable (which I shall therefore add
only letting pass all others) and the more remarkable, because so far
otherwise relatiated, is this that insueth. Being in Bonners room created
Bishop of London, so often and so long as he made his abode at Fulham, he made
the Mother of the said Bonner, (whom he used also to call his Mother, and
indeed used her as if she had been his own natural Mother) his daily guest
constantly at meat and meal, dinner and supper (which bounty and courtesy he
affoorded often also to one Mistres Mung^y Bonner sister and her daughter)
placeing her continually in a chair at the upper end of the table; nor
suffering her to be displaced; whatsoever guests he had else at board, albeit
they were Noblemen or of his Majesty's privy Consell, as often as it fell out; in
way of excuse telling them, that by their Lord-ships favor, that place of
right and custom was for his Mother Bonner. But know this his kindness was by
Bonner and others after requited, in his and their carryage both to this man of
courtesy himself, and to another of his near kindred, the sequel will in
part show, and those that list further to see, may take notice from Master Fox
his relations, in that his laborious and useful works of Acts and Monuments,
that shines so much in Popish stomachs; though it be not fraught with such
rediculous legens and notorious lies, as de Voragine, Vsuardus, and some others
of theirs are.

In these works and exercises, of piety, charity, pity, mercy, and Christian
clemency, did this worthy Prelate pass his time, during the short, overshort
reign of King Edward, working the harder in Christ's Vineyard, the later h^ came
unto it. But the wheel being turned, upon the decease of that almost
matchless Princess of his years, as well for piety as other excellent parts;
shortly after the entrance of Queen Mary, the rather for a Sermon, which by
the Counse^s appointment, he had formerly made against her, and in favor of
the Lady Jane, he was with the first of these that suffered, clapped up in
prison, and deprived of his bishopric, and Bonner reinvested in it. After
repairing to Fremingham, where the Queen then abode, he was from thence on a
lame halting jade sent up to the Tower at London. Where during the time of his
restrait some conference he had with Fecknam and others about Christ's presence
in the Sacrament: But from thence, not long after, by the Queens appointment,
he was together with Cranmer and La^imer his fellow prisoners, conveyed first
to Windsor, and then sent to Oxford; where they were laid in the common joale,
commonly called Bocardo: whereupon in one of his letters he says merrily, that
Bocardo was now become a College of Quondams; that is, such as had once been
Bishops, but then were not.

After that they had been detained some space of time there, down came a
Commission for a disputation to be held between the said three prisoners
Christ's champions, but a part, on the one part, and certain Doctores and
Divines of either University, thereunto designed, on the other part; whereupon
they were severed one from another, that they might not have any help either
from other; and Bishop Ridley was committed to the house of one Irish then
Major of the City; whence being convented, as the other two also were before
certain Commissioners, he had certain Articles tendered him to subscribe unto,
concerning the real presence of Christ's natural body and blood, and the utter
abolition of the substance of bread and wine in the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
and concerning the Mass, as containing in it a sacrifice propitiatory for the
quick and dead, which refusing to subcrsibe to, and affirming them to be false,
and such as sprung from a sour and bitter rooe, he was willing to deliver in
writing his mind of them the night following; and being withal demanded,
whither he were willing to dispute of them or no, he made answer very roundly,
that so long as God gave him life, he should have, not his heart only, but his
tongue and his pen to defend his truth: but required, as was meet and equal,
to have time and books: Howbeit no further respit could be obtained then to
write his mind against the next day, and to prepare for disputation against
Tuesday following, it being then Saturday at even: mean space it was told him
he should have what books he pleased, but could not be suffered to have any of
his own books or notes: Howbeit notwithstanding all disadvantages, neither few
nor small, and the dispute it self most partially and tumultuousl^ carried,
many baiting him at once, interrupting him ever anon in his speeches and
answers, reviling and railing instead of reasoning and arguing, and enciting
the rude multitude to hiss and clap their hands at him. How well and worthily
he quieted himself in the same, may to any indifferently and unpartially
affected appear by the Acts of it, so much as for clamor and confusion could
be taken of it, yet extant. It is no unfiting censure, that a reverend Prelate
gives of the three disputants, that Cranmer answered very learnedly and
gravely, Ridley very readily and acutely, Latimer merrily and yet solidly,
beyond the expectation of his age. Yet if taking somewhat from his sentence
concerning either of the other, not as denied unto them, but imparted and
applied unto him, I should say, that he answered very readily and learnedly,
acutely and yet solidly, I should neither wrong them at all, and do him but
right; for he was a man of sharp wit, a sound judgment, a strong memory, well
versed in School learning; and indeed seemed to have been one of the learned
of those that then maintained Christ's cause against the malicious enemies and
oppugners of the maintainers of it, and of it in them. That which themselves
were not ignorant of, but in a manner acknowledged, when they openly gave out
in their ex^mination of him, that Latimer leaned to Cranmer, and Cranmer to
Ridley, and Ridley to the singularity of his own wit, whom therefore if they
could prevail against, they hoped to have removed a principal prop, that the
other party relied upon. But they were herein deceived, both he and they being
both built upon a firmer and sounder foundation then they were able to
undermine, much less to blow up.

After this disputation thus had for a show, that they might seem to have don
somewhat, for the satisfaction of such as had little need of any, save that
they would have somewhat to say for themselves, and their own turning from the
truth, and against those that stuck to it, and stood in the defense of it; on
the Friday following, together with the other two his copartners therein, he
was again convented before the Commissioners, and upon refusal to recant,
being condemned for an heretic, was returned to the Majors house, where he was
more strictly kept and restrained then either of the other two, in the places
of their restraint. That which he imputes most to the wayward and
superstitious and disposition of his keepers wife, being a woman as naturally
very waspish, so withal extremely Popish, and persuaded therefore that she
pleased God the better, the worse she dealt with such a one as she deemed him
to be; her husband otherwise a man mildly disposed, yet durst not do what he
otherwise desired, overawed either by his wife, who ruled him as he the town,
or else by authority and charge from the Commissioners; whose power there was so
dreadful, that not one of the University had the courage to repair to the
prisoners even then when access was more free.

But all the strict and hard usage showed him, he end^red with much patience,
comfort, contentment and cheerfulness, as by his letters then written may
evidently appear. In the custody of this I^^sh he abode from the time of the
disputation in April A^^^ 1554. unto the thirtyeth of September 1555. ^t which
time being agai^e convented together with these two other beforementioned,
before some other Commissioners authorized by Cardinal P^^le the Popes Legate,
and having stood uncovered in their presence, till he heard the Lega^e and
Pope named, he then put on his Cap, professing withal that he so did, not in
d^rogation any way from the person and worth of the Cardinal, whom he honored
and reverenced as one of the blood Royal, and a^ a personage end^wed with
excellent parts both of learning and virtue; but in regard of his Legateship
and deputation for the Pope, whose usurped supremacy and abused authority he
re^used and renounced, and ther^by defied the same. But his ^ap being taken
from him, after some dispute about the Sea of Ro^e and the Po^es power, th^re
were certain Articles propounded to him, much in effect with those that had
formerly bin disputed of; concerning the Sacrament of Eucharist, and the
Sacrifice of the Mass, unto which he was required to give in answer the next
day by eight of clock in the morning, having Pen Ink and Paper, with such
books as he pleased to require for the accomplishment of the same; but withal
they required from him an answer by word of mouth at present, who thereupon
told them that he presumed of their gentleness, that they would have given
him time as they had before said, until the morrow, that upon good advi^ement
he might make a determinite answer. And they replying, that his answer then
should not be prejudi^iall to ought that he should after give in, but he should
have liberty to add, detract, alter and change wha^ he pleased; he tho withal
challenging them with former breach of promise concerning the disputation, that
he should have a copy of what was there done; see what the notaries had taken,
have liberty within a certain time to alter what he would in his answers, or
to add thereunto, whereof no part was performed; yet condescended to answer by
word of mouth at present, and so did according to that which formerly he had
done, maintaining dispute with them about the same for some good space of time,
until he was committed again to the Major; and Master Latimer called in to be
baited by them, as he had bin.

The next day appearing again before them, with such gesture as before, and so
again entertained, he delivered u^ his answer in writing, concerning a
protestation against their authority and jurisdiction as delogated and derived
from the Pope, and his judgment concerning the Articles exhibited, explained
and confirmed not by Scripture alone, but by the testimonies also of the
Fathers; which he required to have read, but could not obtain it, save a line
or two here and there as they pleased: they affirming that it contained words
of blasphemy; and he averring, that a line or two excepted, there was nothing
in it but the sayings of the ancient Doctors, confirming his assertions;
hardly could he have leave to utter a few words, and that not without often
interruption, and with telling on their fingers-ends how many words he had
spoken. A^ length they excomunicated him with the greater excomunication, and
having passed sentance of condemnation against him, turned him over to the
Secular power.

On the fifteenth day of the same month he was by Brooks Bishop of Gloucester
assisted by some other degraded, at which time he requested the said Bishop to
second his petition to the Queen, that such Tenants as he had made Leases to,
while he was possessed of the Bishopric of London, and his Sister among the
rest might quietly enjoy the sam: this he promised to do, acknowledging it to
be agreeable to equity and right, but it seems it could not be obtained; for
that cruel bloud-sucker, whose Mother and Sister he had so kindly dealt with,
thrust his Sister and her Husband, against all Law and conscience out of the
keeping of a Park, which he had conferred upon them: nor is it likely that the
rest fared much better then they did.

The day following he suffered together with Master Latimer: who much
strengthened him as by conference before, so at the Stake then. The evening
before he suffered he washed his Beard and his Feet, and bad those at board
that supped with him to his wedding the next day: demanded of his brother
Master Shipside, whether he thought his sister his wife could find in her heart
to be there; and he answering, that he durst say she would with all her heart,
he professed to be thereof very glad. At suppertime he was very cheerful and
merry, desiring those there present that wept (of which number Mrs Irish his
Hostess tho a blind and eager Papist was one) to quiet themselves, affirming
that tho his breakefast was like to be somewhat sharp and painful, yet his
supper he was sure should be pleasant and sweet. His brother offered to watch
all night with him. But he refused it; telling him, that he intended to go to
bead, hoping to sleep as quietly that night as ever he did in his life.

So on the next day being the sixteenth of October, this meek Sheep of
Christ, and yet a stout Bel-weather of his flock, faithful and constant to his
blessed shepherd and sovereign owner unto death, yea unto pains and torments
worse then death, was together with his copartner, both in defense of the
Faith, and of afflictions for the defense of it, brought out to the place of
their Martyrdom, in a Ditch or low parcel of ground lying on the North side
of the City behind Baliol College; where Doctor Smith, who had before in King
Edwards time recanted, instead of a Sermon made a bitter invective against
them; which they offered to answer: but when they could not b^ permitted to
spe^k, they committed their cause to God, commended their souls into his hands,
and with much readiness and resolution yielded their bodies to the merciless
flames, and such cruel torments therein as other their breath^rn and
fellowwitnesses of Christ had before them unde^gon^; wherein this our worthy
and valian^ spiritual Champion, through the i^discret^on o^ those that
composed ^he pile, and managed the fuel about him, hindering there where they
thought to help, and lengthening his torments by those means whereby they
hoped to have shortened them, endured a long time in grievous pains, to the
heart grief of the behoulders, burning in a manner by piece-meale; till at
leng^h having passed this fiery trial, his soul was as in a flaming Chariot
with Elias, carried up into the highest Heaven. Some works of his though not
many remain.

1 A Protestation or Determination delivered in the Schools at a Disputation
in King Edwards days. 2 His Disputations at Oxford in Q^eene Mary's time. 3 An
assertion of the true faith concerning the Lords Supper against
Transubstantiation, translated after into Latin, and Printed a^ Geneva. 4 A
Treatise concerning the right form of Administration of the Lords Supper. 5 A
Treatise against setting up and adoring of Imagis. 6 A Conference between him
and Master Latimer in Prison. 7 A large Farewell to his faithful friends;
together with a sharp Admonition to obstinate Papists. 8 An other Farewell to
the imprisoned and exiled for the Gospel. 9 A Treatise con^aimning a
Lamentation for the change of Religion, and a comparison of the Romish doctrine
with that of the Gospel. 10 Diverse pious Letters written to diverse persons.

Read in the progress of this blessed story
Romes cursed ^ruelty, and Ridlyes glory:
Romes S^r^ns song, but Ridlyes careless ear
Was deaf. They ^h^rmd; ^^t Ridly would not hear^
Rome s^^g preferment, but brave Ridleys tongue
Condemned that f^lse Preferment which Rome ^ung:
Rome whis^red wealth^ but Ridly (whose great gain
Was godliness) he w^v'd it with disday^e:
Rome threatened Durance, but great Ridleys mind
Was, too too strong for threats or Chains to bind:
Rom^ thundered death b^t Ridlyes dauntl^sse eye
Star'd in deaths face, and scornd death ^tanding by:
In spite of Rome for England^ Faith he ^tood,
And in the flames, he sealed it with his Blood.
PETRVS MARTYR.
The Life and Death of Peter Martyr.
THe year from Christ's birth 1500. ^s for many matters of much moment very
remarkable. Among others for the Jubilee, that Pope Alexander the sixth (whose
h^^lish life and dismal end the stories of those times relate) held that year
at Rome, and the terrible tempest that ensued the same, wherein the Angel that
stood on the top of the Pop^ Church was overthrown; and the Pop^ own Chamber
by the fall of a ^unnell so ^eaten down upon him, that diverse of those were
slain that attended then upon him, and he himself so buried in the rubish,
that he was hardly got out alive. The same year (amid^ ^hi^ height of Popish
imposture, together with these direful presages of its downfall) was born to
Philip King of Spain his son Charles after Emperor, the first of that name,
under whom the Gospel (though much against his will) gained good footing in
Germany. And the same year also came into this world that famous Scholar and
Divine Peter Martyr Vermily; one that much furthered the advancement thereof,
as well in those parts as elsewhere: He came of that ancient and worshipful
family of Vermily; born at Florence in Italy; Stephen Vermily his father, and
Mary Fumantine his Mother.

His name was given him by his Parents from one Peter of Milaine a Martyr,
reported to have been slain sometime by the Arrian faction, whose Church stood
near unto their house.

This Peter Martyr being the only son of his Parents that attained to any
years, was by them carefully trained up in good literature from a child; his
mother her self (a pretty scholar) reading Terence to him in Latin. After
which domestic discipline he was turned over for further institution to
Marcellus Virgilius then Town-cleark or Secretary of State to that City, a man
of much learning, as may appear by his edition and translation of Dioscorides,
with his Commentaries thereupon: He was willing to take pains, notwithstanding
his employments in the State otherwise, with many young Gentlemen's sons,
whereof diverse also proved famous for their learning and learned writings; and
this our Martyr among the rest, who albeit he surmounted the most of his
fellow-students, in sharpness and readiness of wit to apprehend, and strength
of memory to retain what was taught, joined with an insatiable ardor and
unweariable endeavorour of continual either hearing or reading, and a measure
of proficiency much more then ordinary, proceeding necessarily from the the
same; yet such was his modesty and amiable demeanor that he drew to him the
affections of all his consorts, and there grew no emulation between him and
them.

Being now grown up to riper years, and affecting such course^, as might both
further his studies, and keep him within compass, he grew into liking of a
Monkish life; and because the Regular Canons of Saint Augustines order, were at
that time in greatest fame throughout all Italy, for the study of Divinity,
and for severity of Discipline, he betook himself to their society; and being
sixteen years old was admitted into the Fessulane College near to Florence;
which fact of his was not greatly pleasing to his father; whether in regard of
some dislike of the profession it self, or because he desired by him the
propagation of his family,; and disposing therefore at his decease his maine
estate to an Hospital, he left his son only out of it a small yearly pension:
howbeit his ^ister, his Parents only daughter liking so well of it, that she
followed him therein, and became a veiled Nun.

In that College, wherein the younger sort were trained up for the most part
in the Rules of Retoricke and the reading of Scripture which they used to get
by heart, having past over three years with great good^liking of the whole
Society, he was from thence sent over to the University of Padua, and there
entered into the Monastery of Saint John of Verdera, whereof albeit a man not
unlearned himself and a lover of learning in others was Abbot. There he gave
himself to the study of Philosophy, freequenting the Lectures of diverse of
prime note that then red the same in that University; under whom also in
disputations he frequently exercised himself; so acquiting himself in the
same, that the Readers themselves took special notice of him; in so much that
Branda a chief man among them would often call him out to dispute, stiling him
his Florentine, as ^rinaeus sometimes Arminius his Hollander.

For his better furtherance in these his studies, he spent sometime in getting
skill of the Greek tongue, that he might read Aristotle in his own langvage^
and in the study of that tongue he so profited, (a^ one apt to take ought that
he bent himself to) that in a short time he was able to read any Greek Author,
Historian^ Orator or Poet wit^out help of a translation. And withal he so
followed the study (...) Divinity, hearing diligently and constantly those that
read the same there, adjoining also his own private ^ndvour^ thereunto, that
being of six and twenty years (a thing among them then not usual) he was by
the Fellows of the College he lived in, made a public Preacher and partake^ of
those privileges that to such of their orders were a^^nexed.

His first preaching was at ^rixia, in the Church of (...) after that he
preached at Rome, Venis, Mantua, Mo^n^fer^^^^ and in others the Cities of Italy
and the confines of Fr^^c^^ besides that in the College of his own society, he
read (...) Philosophy and Divinity and Homer in Geek; and hitherto having
studied most Schoole-divinity. Thom^s of Aquin^ especially, and Gregory of
Rimino; he now began in more special manner to addict himself to the study of
the Scriptures, and to this purpose labored with much sedulity, using the help
of one Isaak a Jew that professed Physic, to get the knowledge of the Hebrew
tongue.

His constant pains in Preaching and teaching gained him that singular esteem,
that he was by general consent chosen Abbot of Spoleto; in which place he so
wisely and worthily carried himself, that it was much admired how a man so
bookish, and so much adicted to his studie^, should attain such abilities for
dexterity of government. For he not only reduced the College and two Nunne^i^^
belonging to it, that had bin very loose and scandalous in their courses
before, to a more regular and orderly deme^nour; but so also by his authority,
good persuasions, and discreet ordering the matter, prevailed with two po^^^t
factions that had long desturbed the State there, that ^^composed their
differences, and wrought concord between them; which they also continued in, so
long as he continued there with them.

Three year he abode there, and at three (...) a solemn assembly of the whole
Order, (...) was made ^^vernor of Saint Peter's at the Altar in Naples, a place
of very pleasant situation, great dignity, and rich and large revenew. Here
addicting himself more diligently and seriously to search into the Scriptures,
the light began daily to appear more and more to him, and to discover to him
the errors and superstitious conceits that he had formerly bin possessed with.
And now he fell to read some of our men^ writings; Bucers commentaries upon the
Psalms, and the Evanglists, Zuinglius his Treatise of true and false Religion,
and another of Gods Providence, with some pieces of Erasmus: whence having
gained more insight into these things, he communicated therein with some others
likewise piously disposed, to wit, Benedyct Cusane, Anthony Flaminy, and Io^n
Valdesie a Spaniord; by whose joint endeavor a pretty Chuch of pious people was
now gathered at Naples.

Nor did this our Peter forbear publicly to Preach that truth that God had now
reveiled unto him. For handling the first to the Corinthians, to which his
Lectures, among others, diverse Noble men (whom that City never wants) and
some Bishops also resorted; when he came to the third Chapter, the 13. and 14.
verses, he affirmed that place not to be meant of Purgatory; since that the fire
there spoken of is such a fire, as both good and bad all must pass. This
seeming to shake a maine pillar of Purgatory, the Popes furnace, the fire
whereof, like the Prilosophers stone, melts all his leaden Bulls into pure
gold; his under Chemists some of them, like Demetrius and his consorts, b^gan
to bestir themselves, and so wrought, that from above he was inhibited to
proceed in his reading. Which inhibi^ion he yet refused to obey; and appealing
to the Pope, by help of some Cardinals of better sort, among whom our Poole was
one, and some other learned men in grace with the Pope, he gat the interdict
revoked. Howbeit he continued not long his readings there afterward, for
falling not long after into a very dangerous sickness, whereof he hardly
recovered, the Fathers of his Order, in a general Assembly, shortly after his
recovery, supposing that the air of that City did not so well agree with him,
made him their General Vi^iter, when he had been yet but three years at
Naples. In which employment, supported by the Cardinal Gonzag^ the Protector
of their Order; he so carried himself, suppressing some that carried
themselves tyrannously in their places, and severely chastising others that
lived loosly and leudly, that though he gained much grace and credit to the
Order, and no less love and affection to himself from the better minded among
them, yet incurred he withal much envy ill will from those that were otherwise
disposed.

It is a point of divellish policy too often practiced, under a sembleance of
honor to prefer men to such places as may prove prejudicial to them, and
become a means of their overthrow. Some of these Machiavilians therefore in a
general meeting of the Fathers of the Order at Man^ua, knowing a deadly fewd
and inveterate hatred to intercede between the Inhabitants of Luca, and those
of Florence our Martyrs Country, move to have him made Pryor of Saint Fridian
in Luca, a place of great esteem, for that the Pryor of that House has
Episcopal Jurisdiction over the one moity of the City; hoping that for
Countries sake he should there find opposition and molestation more then
enough. The motion was on all hands soon assented unto, but the event answered
not their expectation: For by his wise, kind and discreet carryage among them,
he gained so much good will and esteem with them, that they affected him no
otherwise then as if he had been a native, and by a solemn embassage made suite
to the Principal of the Order, that Peter Martyr might not be removed again
from them.

Here to advance both Religion and Learning among them, he procured learned men
of great note, to read to the younger sort the tongues, one Latin, and the
other Greek, and a third (which was Emmanuell Tremellius) the Hebrew. He
himself daily read to them some part of Saint Paul's Epistles in Greek, and
examined them in the same: to the whole Company before supper he expounded some
Psalm; to which exercise diverse learned of the Nobility and Gentry did also
usually resort: and every Lords day he preached publikly to the People: By
which his godly labors many attained to much knowledge, as appeared afterward
by the number of those, who after his departure thence sustained exilement for
the truth; among whom that famous Zanchie one.

These his good proceedings his adversaries much maligning held a meeting at
Genoa, and convented him thither. But he having intellidence of their
complotment, and taking warning by their late dealings with a godly Eremite of
the same Order, resolved to decline them, and to betake himself to some place
of better safety: Having therefore committed to his Deputy the charge of the
Monastery, and his Library (his only wealth) to a trusty friend in Luca, to be
sent after him into Germany, he left the City secretly, and from thence
traveled first toward his own Country to Pisa; where meeting with certain
religious Noble men he celebrated together with them in due manner the Lords
Supper: and from thence by letters both to Cardinal Poole, and to those of
Luca he rendered a reason of his departure from them. After that coming to
Florence, but making no long stay there, he departed from thence for Germany,
and passing the Alps came into Switzerland, where he arrived first at Zurick,
and passing thence to Basil, was by Bucers procurement called over to
Strasbourge; where for the sp^c of five years with much amity and agreement
they joined together in the Lords work; during which time he expounded the
Lamentations of Jeremy, the twelve lesser Prophets, Genesis, Exodus, and a good
part of Leviticus.

Here he took him a wife, one of a religious disposition, and in all respects
a meet match for one of his rank and profession, who lived with him eight
years, died in England at Oxford, where she had lived in great repute with the
best, for her singular piety, and with the most for he charity corrrespondent
thereunto: though after her decease in Queen Mary's days, her remains were
inhumanely dug up again and buried in a dunghill; but in Queen Elizabeth's
days restored to their former place of Sepulture again.

For after that our Martyr had spent those five years at Strasbourge, he was
through the procurement of Archbishop Cranmer sent for by letters from King
Edward into England, and made Reader of Divinity in the University of Oxford.
There in his readings, to which those of the Popish faction also resorted, he
expounded the first of Saint Paul to the Corinthians; and though much envying
and stomaking him, yet with some patience they his Popish hearers endured him,
until he came to handle the Doctrine of the Lords Supper; but then they began
to break forth into some outrage, to disturb him in his Lectures, to set up
m^licious and scandalou^ schedules against him, to challing him to disputes;
which he waved not, but maintained, first in private in Doctor Cox the Vice
chancellors house, and after in public before his Majesty's Commissioners
deputed to that purpose; where with what strength of Argument and authorty of
Scripture he convinced his Antagonists, the Acts yet extant may evidently show.
This way little prevailing, they stirred up the seditious multitude against
him, by reason whereof he was compelled to retir^ him to London, until that
tumult was suppressed: Then returning again, for his better security, the King
made him a Canon of Christ's Church; by means whereof he had convenient housing
within the College with more safety.

Thus settled the second time, he proceeded in his wonted employm^nt, opening
now also the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans; and being in times of
vacation called up to London by the Archbishop for his aid and advice in
Ecclesiastical affairs, and in composing of Ordinances for the government of
the Church. And in this course he continued being never out of action, until
by the decease of that our English Phaenix, so much admired in his life, and
bewailed at his death, not with ours at home, but by others also, and that of a
diverse religion abroad, upon the succession of his sister Queen Mary, one of a
contrary disposition, his employment surceased, and with somewhat ado he gat
liberty and departed the land: and though being waylaid (which he had notice
of) both on this side and beyond the seas; yet (by Gods good providence and
protection) he passed unknown and undiscovered through Brabant and other Popish
territories, and gat in safety to Strasbourge.

Thither returning he was received with the greater joy in regard of the
dangers he had past and escaped; and was restored to his professors place
again. Therein being resetled he read upon the book of Judges, and because
the Senate required that the Readers of Divinity should withal at certain
times read Lectures also of Philosophy; it was agreed between him and Zanchie,
his fellow-professor, that the one of them should read Moral Philosophy, which
fell to his lot, and the other Natural, which Zanchie undertook.

Howbeit here he was not long quiet; for some factious ones began to complain
of him to the Magistrates, as not concurring with the Augustine confession in
the Doctrine of the Lords Supper: wherein albeit he gave those in authority
good satisfaction, yet he perceived much heart-burning in other-some, and that
manifested often times, as well by scandalous libels scattred abroad, as also by
open opposition. Whereupon supposing that he should not live qu^etly there, and
do the good that he desired, he began to entertain thoughts of departure; and,
as God in his holy providence pleased to dispose it, a fit and fair occasion
thereof offered it self to him. For they at Zurick (whereat first he desired to
have settled) wanting one to succeed Pellicane lately deceased in the Divinity
Lecture, invite Peter Martyr to come over to them, and supply that place:
thither he came, (tho with much grief and unwillingnesse, dismissed by the
Magistrates and other godly of Strasbourge, his fellow-professors especially)
accompanied with our worthy Jewel, after Bishop of Salisbury, then exile in
those parts, who ever entirely affected and reverenced him as his Father.

At Zuricke with much gratulation was he most lovingly and respectively
received by the Magistrates, Ministers, Bullinger especially, and the maine
body of the people; and notwithstanding an Order before made to the contrary,
denying such admittance for some years unto any, enrolled instantly for a free
Denison. There he taught about seven years, expounding the books of Samuel, and
a good part of the Kings; and writing diverse polemicall discours^s against the
adversaries of the truth. Nor would he remove thence, albeit he were with much
importunity invited to other places, where the means were larger: as first to
Geneva upon the decease of that every way noble Count Maximilian Celsus, Pastor
of the Italian Church there; and after in Queen Elizabeth's days, when Religion
was again here settled, Bishop Jewel laboring with him in it, to return into
these parts, but continued teaching there till he died; howbeit being earnestly
required by letters as well from the Queen mother of France, the King of
Navarre, the Prince of Condee, and other Peers of that Realm, as also from
Beza and the rest of the Ministers of the reformed Churches in those parts, he
obtained leave of the Senate to go over into France to the solemn Conference
at Poys^i, where how wisely and worthily he demeaned himself, by the Acts of
it may appear.

Not long after his access to Zuricke, desirous to continue the race and name
of the Virmilii, he took him a second wife, a Virgin of good note and name,
commended to him from the I^alian Church at Geneva, where she lived an Exile
for Religion, by whom he had two children, a son and a daughter, who died both
very young, before him; and left her great with a third, that proved a daughter.

He departed this life quietly, after some seven days sickness, sitting in
his chair, in the presence of his wife and Religious friends, on the twelfth
day of Nov^m. in the year of grace 1562. and of his own age the sixty third.

He was of an able, healthy, big-boned and well limmed body; of a countenance
expressing an inward, grave and settled disposition: of extraordinary parts of
learnng, as well for humanity as for divinity excellent for disputation, much
admired, wheresoever he came, for his discreet and moderate, though constant
and incorrupt carriage, never seen in heat of dispute to break forth into
chollour; very painful and industrious, endeavoring to do all the good he
could for Gods Church, either in the places where he was resiant, or elsewhere.
Nor may be omitted here the speech used of him to those of Zuricke, by that
learned man Josias Simler, that made the Funeral Oration at his Burial, and
has described his life at large, that, Another they might have in Martyrs
room; but another Martyr they should not have. But what he was and how
laborious, his Works extant (besides many other never published) will soon
show; which are these,

1. A Catechism or Exposition of the Creed, in Italian. 2. A Praye^-booke
composed out of the Psalms. 3. His Commentaries upon Genesis. 4. His
Commentaries upon the Book of Judges. 5. His Commentaries upon the two Books
of Samuel. 6. His Commentaries upon the first Book of Kings, and eleven
chapters of the second. 7. His Commentaries upon the Epistle of Saint Paul to
the Romans. 8. His Commentaries upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians. 9.
His Disputations at Oxford, about the Lords Supper. 10. His Defense about the
orthodox Doctrine of the Lords Supper, against Steph^n G^rdiner. 11. An
abridgement of the said Defense made by him afterward. 12. His Confession
exhibited to the Senate of Strasbourg, concerning the supper of the Lord. 13.
His judgment concerning the presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament
delivered at the Conference of Poyssi. 14. A Discourse concerning the Mass.
15. A Dialogue concerning the place of Christ's Body, against the Ubiquitaries.
16. His refutation of Richand Smiths two books, concerning single life and
Monkish Vows. 17. In his commentaries on the first and second books of
Aristatle Ethics, and part of the third. 18. His Common-Places gathered out of
his Commentaries by others, and digested into Heads. 19. Certain Treatises of
Free Will, Gods Providence, Predestination, and the cause of Sin. 20.
Propositions, some necessary, some probable, out of Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus,
and Judges; together with Solutions of a Question or two concerning some
Mosaicall Laws and Oaths 21. Diverse Sermons and Orations of several Subjec^s,
and made upon several occasions. 22. His letters to sundry Persons, concerning
much variety of useful Discourse.

Behold this Star, which seemed at the first view
Ecc^ipst with Romish fogs; but, after, grew
So bright, that his Refulgence did display
Truths Banner, beaming like the Sun of day.
His sunshine was not visible alone
In true Religions reformed Horizon,
But cast his foraign influence as far
As th'Artick's distant from th'Antartick star;
Uext Romes iugenious Malice did compact
To quench this flame, but failed in the Acts.
The seven-crown'd dragons star confronting train
Lasht at this Star^ but lasht and lasht in vain.
Thus he remains (sustained by higher powers)
A Saint in heavens bright Orb, a Star in Onrs.
HVGH LATYMER.
The Life and Death of Hugh Latimer.
HVgh Latimer, born at Thirkesson in the County of Leicester, being of a prompt
and sharp wit, was by his Parents brought up in learning, and at the age of 14.
he went to Cambridge, where after he had profited in other studies, he gave
himself to the study of School Divinity: commensed Bachelor in Divinity, and
was a very zealous Papist, made an Oration against Philip Melanc^hon: railed
against Master Stafford, Divinity-Lecturer, and willed the Scholars in no wise
to believe him: he carried the Cross before the Procession: Master Bilney
seeing, and pitying his blind zeal, came to his study, and desired him to
hear him make a Confession of his Faith, which Latimer consenting to, was so
touched thereby, that he gave over School Divinity, and studied more O^thodox
Divines. He used often to confer with Master Bilney, and asked Master Stafford
forgiveness before he dyed: he became a powerful Preacher, and instructed
many in private also; whereupon the Devil raised up many Doctors and Friars
against him, and the Bishop of Elye forbad him to Preach Anno Christi 1529. yet
he continued three years preaching with much applause, yea the Bishop himself
hearing him upon a time, commended him, and wished that he had the like gifts
himself: he used oft^n to visit the Prisoners, to relieve the needy, and feed
the hungry. He was afterward sent for to the Court, and employed in the
business about King Henry's Divorce; then by the King he had a Benefice given
him at West-Kingston near Sarum, where with much diligence he instructed his
flock; whereupon some Popish Priest^ drew up Articles against him; and he was
much molested by the Bishop of London and the Archbishop of Canterbury, out of
whose hands the King rescued him, and at the request of the Lord Cromwell made
him Bishop of Worcester: where also he busily employed himself in instructing
his flock, and giving them a good example by his holy life: yet neither there
was he quiet, for one of great place accu^^d him to the King for preaching
Sedition, but the King rested satisfied with his answer. At New-years-tide the
Bishops used to present the King with a New years gift, and Bishop L^timer,
amongst the rest, presented him with the New Testament, wrapped up in a Napkin,
with this Posie about it, Forni^atores, and adulteros judi^abi^ Dominus:
Whoremonger^ and Adulterers God will judge. But the six Articles coming out,
and he seeing that he could not retain his Office with a good Conscience, of
his own accord he re^igned his Bishopric: and when he put off his Rocket in
hi^ chamber amongst his friends, he gave a skip in the floor for joy, feeling
his shoulders lighter, and being (as he said) discharged of so heavy a
burden. Yet neither then would the Bishops suffer him to be quiet, till he was
laid up in the Tower, where he remained till Edward the sixth his reign, at
which time being restored to his liberty, he continued a faithful and painful
preacher all that Kings days; preaching twice every Sabbath, though sixty
seven years of age: he rose to his study Winter and Summer at two a clock in
the morning: he evidently foresaw, and foretold all those plagues which
England afterward felt under Queen Marie: and fore told concerning himself,
that his preaching of the Gospel would cost him his life: S^ephen Cranme^.
and that Winchester was kept in the Tower for the same purpose, which
afterward proved so. In the beginning of Que^n Mary's Reign he was sent for up
by a Pursuivant, whereof he had notice six hours before he came to his house,
yet inste^d of flying, he prepared himself for his journey; and when the
Pursuivant came, he said to him; My friend you are welcome, I go as willingly
to London to give an account of my Faith, as ever I went to any place in the
world. The Pursuivant having delivered his Letter, told him that he was
commanded not to stay for him, and so immediately departed: but Latimer hasted
after to London, and as he rode through Smithfield, he said, That Smithfield
had groaned for him a long time. Coming before the Council, after many mocks
and scorns, he was sent to the Tower, where the Lord gave him such a valiant
spirit, that he did not only bear the terriblenesse of imprisonment, but
derided and laughed to scorn the doings of his enemies. This aged Father being
kept in the cold winter without a fire, he bad the Lievtenants man to tell his
Master, That if he did not look better to him, perchance he would deceive him:
the Lieutenant thinking that he intend^d to make an escape, charged him with
his words; to whom he answer^d, You think I should burn, but except you let me
have a fir^, I shall deceiv your expectation, for I am here like to starve with
cold. From thence he was carried to Oxford with Cranmer and Ridley, where they
spent their time in brotherly conference, fervent prayer, and fruitful
writing; yea, many times he continued so long in fervent prayer, that he was
not able to get up without help. Three things he more especially prayed for.

First, That as God had appointed him to be a Preacher of his Word, so, that he
would give him grace to stand to his Doctrine; that he might give his hearts
blood for the same. Secondly, that God of his mercy would restore his Gos^pell
to England once again, once again; which he often inculcated in his prayer,
and that with so much ardor, as though he had seen God before him, and spoken
to him face to face. Thirdly, that the Lord would preserve Queen Elizabeth, and
make her a comfort to this comfortless Realm of England. The Lord most
graciously answering all thos^ his requests. When he came to the stake, he lift
up his eyes with an amiable and comfortable countenance, saying, Fidelis est
Deus, etc. God is faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above that
which we are able, etc. As he was burning, his blood ran out of his heart in
such abundance, as if all the blood in his body had been gathered thither, to
the great astonishment of the beholders, according to his former r^quest, That
he might be so happy as to shed his hearts blood for the Truth. The other two
requests we have found, and yet have the benefit. When the fire was first
kindled, he cried, O Father of heaven receive my soul: and so receiving the
flame, and as it were, embracing of it, having stroaked his face with his
hands, and bathed them a little in the fire, he soon died with very little
pain or non at all, Anno Christi 1555.
Though Latimer was in his heedlesse youth
A diviator, and abandoned truth,
Yet (heaven having blessed him with a riper age)
At last he banished his too forward rage,
And from a wandering Commet, he became
A blazing star, and blushed not to proclaim
Against his former Errors which had spread
Upon his heart, and almost struck it dead.
He sought the way of truth, and seeking, found
A better Anchor, and a firmer ground
Where on he fixed his thoughts, and would not be
Removed by arguments or Tyranny.
Thus our brave Latimer became a terror
To Papists, and an enemy to error,
Though he at first most wilfully denied
The truth, yet for the truth at last he died.
The Life and Death of John Philpot, who died Anno Christi 1555.
JOhn Philpot was a Knights son, and born in Hampshire, brought up at School,
and sent from thence to New College in Oxford, where he stuied the Liberal
Arts, and the Tongues, and afterward the Civil-law. He was of a pregnat wit,
and singular courage, z^alous in Religion, of nature apert, and far from
flattery, hypocrisy, and dissimulation: from Oxford he traveled into Italy,
where he was in some danger for his Religion: In King ^dward the sixth days,
he returned into England again, and had many conflicts with Bishop Gardener:
He did much good in Hampshire, being Archdeacon of Winchester all King Edwards
days; but in the beginning of Queen- Mary's Reign he was cast into Prison,
where he lay a year and a half before he was examined; then he was sent for by
Doctor Story, and after some captious questions proposed to him, he was
committed Prisoner to the Bishop of Londons Cole-house, unto which was adjoined
a little Blind house, with a great pair of Stocks, both for hand and foot, but
thanks be to God, says he, I have not played of those Organs yet: there h^
found a godly Minister of Essex, who, desiring to speak with him, did greatly
lament his infirmity, for through extremity of imprisonment he had yielded to
the Bishop of London, and was se^ at liberty^ whereupon he left such an hell in
his conscience, that he could scarce refrain from destroying himself; and
could have no peace, till going to the Bishops Register, and desiring to see
his Recantation, he tore it in pieces: whereupon the Bishop sending for him,
buffeted him, plucked off a great part of his beard, and sent him to his
Cole-house, where Master Philpot found him very joyful under the Cross.
Philpot being afterward^ sent for to the Bishop; he asked him, amongst other
things, why they were so merry in Prison, to whom he answered, We are in a dark
comfortless place, and therefore we solace our selves with singing of Psalms:
after other discourse (says he) I was carried to my Lords Cole-house again,
where I, with my six fellow prisoners, do rouse together in the straw, as
cheerfully, we thank God, as others do in their beds of down. After sundry
examinations he was by the Bishop set in the stocks, in a house alone, of which
he writes: God be praised that he thought me worthy to suffer any thing for his
names sake: Better it is to sit in the stocks in this world, then to sit in the
stocks of a damnaple conscience: at last he was condemned for an Heretic;
whereupon he said, I thank God I am an Heretic out of your cursed Church,
but I am no Heretic before God. Being sent to Newgate he spoke to the People
as he went, saying, Ah good people, blessed be God for this day: having notice
given overnight that the next day he should be burned, he said, I am ready,
God grant me strength, and a joyful resurrection; and so he went to his
chamber, pouring out his spirit unto the Lord in Prayer, and giving him most
hearty thanks for accounting him worthy to suffer for his Truth. Going into
Smithfield, the way was very foul, whereupon two Officers took him up and bare
him to the stake; then said he merrily, What? will you make me a Pope? coming
into Smithfield, he kneeled down, saying, I will pay my Vows in thee O
Smithfield: he kissed the stake, saying, Shall I disdain to suffer at thi^
stake, when my Lord and Savior refused not to suffer a most vile death for me?
when the fire was hindled, with much meekness, and comfort he resigned up his
spirit unto God, An. Christi 1555.

Courageous Philpot with a dauntlesse brow
Marched to his death, and would not once allow
The least Submittance to erroneous powers,
But Scorned to smell on their impoysn'd flowers:
And when he labored in the most distress
He was most cheerful, and would still address
Himself to Heaven, where he was sure to find
A healing Balsome to confirm his mind;
He prayed to God, and having done, he cried,
I thank, I thank thee Father, and so died:
THOMAS CRANMER
The Life and Death of Thomas Cranmer.
THomas Cranmer was extracted from an ancient family in Lincolnshire, as that
derived it self from one of more antiquity, (still retaining the said name and
Arms) in ^^rmandy. Of his infancy and childhood, we can give no other account,
then what is common to others of the same age as not capable of any
extraordinary Actions, but silently shaddowed under the ^nnocency and
simplicity thereof.

Afterward he was admitted into Jesus College in Cambridge where he proceeded
Master of Arts, with general applause for his learning and manners. Here he
happened to marry the Inkeepers wives kinswoman at the sign of the Dolphin: An
act beheld by some as destructive to his future preferment, and deeply
condemned by those who preferred height before holiness, and a rich and
plentiful before a chaste and comfortable life.

Malicious tongues on this foundation built many foul and false Scandals
against him, some slandering him for to be an Ostler (because of his often
repairing to that Inn) which causeless report (confuting it self with its
own improbability) his weeknesse and Patience overcame, by contemning it. Thus
worthy Saint Helen Mother to Constantine the great was scoffed at to have been
a Stable-groomes Daughter, for her Zeal in searching the monuments of Christ's
nativity in Bethleham; of whom Saint Ambrosse, Bona Statularia quaedici maluit
Stercoraria ut Christum lucrifaceret.

But Gods Providence who orders all things to the best some year after took
Cranmers wife away, which losse^ proved a great gain unto him. For resuming
his Studie^ (thereby to allay his sorrow and solitariness) he became so
eminent that the Society of Jesus College chose him again into his Fellowship.
Indeed it was against the Fundamental Law of the University, which provides
Nolimus socios nostros esse mari^os vel maritatos: yet seeing a Widdower is the
second part of a Bachelor, and Cranmers extraordinary learning a dispensation
for himself, by peculiar favor he wa^ reelected into that House.

How excellently he behaved himself therein, one Instance for many; At that
time many unworthy Scholars scambled up into the highest degrees, whose
scarlet Gowns might seem to blush the wearers Ignorance. To prevent the
dangerous consequences thereof, and to render Degrees more considerable for the
future, Cranmer by general consent was chosen Public Examiner of the
sufficiency of such candidates for Degrees. Herein he carried himself with
such remarke^ble moderation, neither over remiss to encourage any
unworthiness to presume, nor too riged to dishearten the endeavors of the
ingenious, that it is questionable whether his Carriage brought more profit to
private Persons, or credit to the University. Some whose Graces for the present
were stopped by him returned afterward to thank him, because (prefering rather
to displease then hurt them) the gentle Check he gave them occasioned their
greater diligence in the race of learning.

Here Cranmer lived till the infection of the Plague forced the students to
leave their Colleges and he no entertain the time with more safety and
privacy became a teacher to some Gentleman's sons in the Country where we
leave him for a time, requesting the Reader to accompany u^ to some matters of
higher Concernement. About this time the Divorse betwixt King Henry and
Katherine his wife was agitated in the Court of Rome; Queen Katherines age was
above her Husbands, her Gravity above her age, more pious at her Beads then
pleasant in her Bed, a better woman then a wife, and a fitter wife for any
Prince then King Henry. No wonder then if he were impatient to be delayed in
his Divorce by the Dilatory tricks of the Romish Court (intending first to
divorce all the Gold from England) kept the Cause some years in suspention; so
torturing King Hen^y on the rack, betwixt hope and fear; not to have his
desire effected.

It happened that a Courtier came into Cranmers Company, who familiarly
conversing together amongst other discourse light on this matter of Divorse.
Cranmer informs the Gentleman that the readiest way for the King to attain
his desire was no longer to trace the Labirinths of the Popes proceedings
(where Clyents loose themselves in the endless Multiplication of affected
intricacies) but directly to be take himself to the Word of God, according to
which the Kings marriage unlawful at the first might lawfully be anulled. This
being brought to the Kings Ear (where welcome news would quickly arrive)
Cranmer is sent for, and afterward employed to the most principal Universities
in Europe there publicly to maintain the truth of his aforesaid Assertions;
and after his return was rewarded for his undertaking (no less learned then
Laborious) with the Archbishopricke of Canterbury.

Here I have no leisure to listen to, much less faith to believe those false
Aspersions, which Doctor Sanders cast^th on this reverend Prelate, bottoming
the beginning of his Court Advancement on the Basest Employments performed by
him. Suffices it is to know that as the Herneshaw when unable by maine
strength to grapple with the Hawke does Slice upon her, bespattering the Hawks
wings with dung or ordure; so to conquer with her tail which she cannot do
with her bill and beak. So Papists finding themselves unable to encounter the
Pro^estants by force of Argument out of the Scripture, cast the dung of foul
langvage and filthy railing upon them, wherein Sanders, exceeds all of his
Soci^ty. Yea God may seem to have vindicated the innocence of the one and
punished the slanderous mouth of the other, in that the foresaid Sanders was
afterward famished in Ireland, that mouth being starved for want of food, it
surfetted with superfluity of Falsehood.

Cranmer now Archbishop, so became the Place with his Piety and Gravity that he
indeared himself to all conditions of People. This was the greatest fault he
was guilty of, That his nature was bad in being too good; he was of too easy
and flexible a disposition, which made him cowardly to comply with the Church
of Rome. For although he never did any harm to the Protestants, yet he did not
unto them so much good as he might and ought.

Some may conceive this passage might well be omitted, but the truth of our
love to this good man's memory, must not make us to forget our love to Truth:
besides this recording of such slips, does read to us in him a Lecture of our
own Infirmities, if Gods grace be not more Active in our Hearts. Oh there is
more required to make us Valiant, then barely to be able to call another Coward.

During the Reign of Henry the eight and Edward the sixth, our Cranmer
flourished in favor. But no sooner came Queen Mary to the Crown, but he was
scorched with the heat of her Anger; As an earnest that his whole Body should
afterward be burnt by her cruelty. Indeed he well deserved of Queen Mary in
this particular, because he with Justice Hales would never consent to the
dissinheriting of Queen Mary, and refused to subscribe the Will (shall I say of
Edward the sixth or the Duke of Northumberland) translating the Crown on the
Lady Jane: But all this would not advance him into the Queens favor, no nor
recon^ile to her good Will, she being still troubled with the fit of the
mother, and meditating revenge against him, because Cranmer had been the
principal promoter of Queen Ka^herines Divorse: Or, which is more probable,
(being the Queen of her self was not cruelly minded) some under her, which did
bite where she did not bark ( Gardener the Spanniell, Bonner the Bloudhound)
projected his destruction.

For being pardoned of Treason (of which he stood guilty with the rest of the
Privy Council) he was ch^rged with Heresy and sent to Oxford, there to
dispute upon certain Controversies, being nothing else but a plausible
contrivance of his Death, which was concluded on before any Sylogisme in that
Disputation was propounded. However his Adversaries improved themselves so much
on his facile nature and love of life, that their large promis^s prevailed on
him so far, as to make him subscribe to Popery, though presently after he
recanted his recantation, and was burned to ashes for the profession of the
Truth; first thrusting his own right Hand (faulty for his former subscription)
into the fire, so that his Hand died a Malefactor, and the rest of his body a
Martyr. All which passages are so largely reported by M^ster Fox, who in his
Hi^tory has so carefully gathered in the Harvest, that his diligence has left
no gleanings for Posterity to pick, having omitted nothing in his life
remarkable for such as succeed him to observe. He writ many things which are
here to his eternal praise truly registered.

1. A catechism of christian Doctrine. 2. Ordinations of churhes reformed. 3.
Of ordaining Priests. 4. Of the Eucharist with Luther. 5. Of defense of
catholic doctrine. 6. To the professors of the Truth. 7 Ecclesiastical Laws
in Edward the sixth his reign. 8. Against Gardners Sermon. 9. Doctrine of the
Lords Supper. 10. Twelv Books of common places, out of the Doctors of the
church. 11. Christian Homilies. 12. To Richard Smiths calumnies. 13.
Confu^a^ions of unwritten truths. 14. Of not marrying ones sister, two Books.
15. Against the Popes primacy, two books. 16. Against Popish purgatory, two
books. 17. Of Justification, two books. 18. Epistles to learned men.

Out of Prison he writ these.

1. Against the sacrifice of the Mass. 2. Against adoring the Host. 3. To
Queen Mary with others. 4. Emendations of the Translation of the English Bible,
and added Prefaces to it.

'Twas not enticing Honor could remove
The constant heart of Cranmer from the love
Of sound Divinity, he always stood
Firm to God's Caus^, and died it with his blood:
A true Seraphicke and Tyrannicke fire
Proved (as it were) ambitious to aspire;
And both prevailed, being willing to control;
The One burnt his Body, the other cured his Soul.
Image adoring Papists, boast your fills;
Ye sent a Soul to Heaven against your wills.
What can ye say, but this, your rage was spent;
Ye did him good, though with an ill intent?
Prick up your ears, and h^are this fatal tone,
Those fires which made him screek, will make you gro^
The Life and Death of Conrade Pelican, who dyed Anno Christi 1556.
COnrade Pelican was born at Rubeac in Swedeland, Anno 1478. and brought up in
learning by his Parents: at thirteen years of age he went to Heidleberg, after
sixteen months study there, he returned home, where he entered into a
Monastery: yet afterward returned to Heidleberg, and from thence to Tubinge,
where he studied the Liberal Arts, and was much admired for his quick wit: he
studied also School Divinity, and Cosmography, wherein he profited exceedingly;
he took very great pains in the study of Hebrew: and at Basil was made Doctor
in Divinity, afterward the Popes Legate took him with him toward Rome, being
affected with his learning, but falling sick of a Fever by the way, he returned
to Basil. Whilst he thus continued a Friar, he was of great esteem amongst
them, because of his learning and integrity: but it pleased God at last, that
by reading Luthers books, and conference with learned and godly men, he began
to dis-relish the Popish Errors, and so far to declare his dislike of them,
that he was much hated, and persecuted for a Lutheran: but about the same time
the Senate of Basil chose him Lecturer in Divinity in that City together with
Oecolampadius: where he began first with reading upon Genesis, then on
Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes. An. Christi 1526. he was by the means of
Zuinglius, sent for to Tygure, and being come, was most courteously entertained
by him: there he laid down his Monks Coul, and married a wife, by whom he had
a son, which he named Samuel, being then preaching upon the history of Samuel:
that wife dying, he married again, but had no children by his second wife: he
was present at the Disputation at Bern about Religion: after Zuinglius his
death, there were chosen into his room, Henry Bullinger, and Theodor
Bibliander, who was an excellent Linguist, and began to read upon I^aie, to the
great astonishment of his hearers, for that he was not above 23. years of age.
Pellican^ at the earnest request o^ learned men, Printed all his Lectures, and
Annotations, which were upon the whole Bible, excepting only the Revelations;
which portion of Scripture he not intending to write upon, caused the Commeta^y
of Sebastian Meyter upon it, to be bound with his, to make the work complete:
He translated many books out of Hebrew, which were printed by Robert Stevens:
and having been Hebrew Professor at Tygure for the space of thirty years,
wherein he was most acceptable to all, not only in regard of his excellent
learning, and indefatigable pain^, but also in regard of his sweet, and holy
Conversation. At las^ falling into the pain of the stone and other diseases, he
departed this life upon the day of Christ's Resurrection 1556. of his Age 78.

After our Pelican had wandered long
In the worlds wide-wildernesse, he grew so strong
In grace and goodness, that he soon became
An ample Subject for the mouth of Fame;
He was admired by all that loved to be
Serious proficients in Divinity;
He lives, he lives, although his body lies
Inshrin'd by earth; True virtue never dies.
The Life and Death of Bugenhagius, who died Anno Christi 1558.
John Bugenhagius was born at Iulinum in Pomerania, An^^ christi 1485. His
Parents were of the rank of Senators, who bred him up carefully in Learning,
and sent him to the University of Grypswald, where he profited in the study of
the Arts, and the Greek tongue. Being twenty years old he taught School at
Trepta, and by his learning and diligence, he made the School famous, and had
many Schola^^ to whom also he red daily some portion of Scripture, and p^^yed
with them and meeting with Erasmus his book again the ^^str^onicall carriage
of the Fryar^, and the Idolatry of the times, he gat so much light thereby,
that he was stirred up to instruct others therein, and for that end in his
School he read Matthew, the Epistles to Timothy, and the P^alms, to which he
added Catechizing, and also expounded the Creed, and the ten Commandments;
unto which exercises many ^entlemen, Citizens, and Priests resorted: from the
School he was called to preach in the Church, and was admitted into the
College of Presbyters: many resorted to his Sermons of all ranks, and his fame
spread abroad: insomuch as Bogeslau^, the Prince of that Country, employed him
in writing an History of the same, and ^urnished him with money, books, and
records for the enabling of him thereto: which History he completed in two
years, with much judgment, and integrity.

Anno Christi 1520. one of the Citizens of Trep^a, having Luthers book of the
Babylonish Captivity sent him, he gave it to Bugenhagius, as he was at dinner
with his Colleagues, who looking over some leaves of it, told them that many
Heretics had disq^ieted the peace of the Church since Christ's time, yet there
was never a more pestilent Heretic then the Author of that book: but after
some few days, having read it with more diligence and attention, he made this
public Recantation before them all; What shall I say of Luther, All the world
has been blind and in cimme^ian darkness, only this one man has found out
the Truth. And further disputing of those questions with them, he brought most
of his Colleagues to be of his judgment therein: Hereupon Bugenhagius read
Luthe^'s other Works diligently, whereby he learned the difference between the
Law and the Gospel, Justification by Faith, etc. and taught these things also
to his Hearers. But the Devil envying the success of the Gospel, stirred up
the Bishop to persecute the professors of it, some of which he cast into
Prison, and caused others to fly away; insomuch, as Bugenhagius also being not
safe, and desirous to be acquainted, and to confer with Luther, went to
Wittembourg Anno christi 1521. and of his (...) 36. and came thither a little
before Luther's going to the Diet at Worms: In whose absence he opposed
^arolostadius, who would have all Magistrates to rule by the Judicial^ of
Moses, and Images to be cast out of Churches. Upon Luther's return out of his
Pathmos, he was chosen Pastor of the Church of Wittembourg; which he taught and
governed with much felicity, and in many changes of affairs, for the space of
thirty six years, never leaving his station, neithe^ for War nor Pestilence;
and when he was proffered Riche^ and Preferment both in Denmark and Pomeron, yet
he would never leave his Charge, though he lived but poorly in it^ Anno christi
1522. he was sent for to Hamburg, where h^ prescribed to them a form both of
Doctrine, Ceremonie^ and Calling of Ministers; where he erected a School also^
which afterward grew very famous: and Anno christi 1530 being sent for to
Lubec, he prescribed to them also an order both for Preaching and Discipline,
and set up a School^ there also. Anno christi 1537. he was sent for by
Christi^^ King of Denmark, to reform Religion in his Dominion^; at which time,
he set forth a Book about the Ordination of Ministers: There also, instead of
the seven Bishops of Denmark, he settled seven Superintendents to Ordain
Ministers, and to see to the Government of the Church, whom he ordained in the
presence of the King and the Senate, in the chief Church of Hafnia. He set up
Lectures also in that University, and Ordained Ministers for the Churches of
Denmark and Norway, of which there were four and twenty thousand. Anno christi
1542. he was employed by the elector of Saxony, to Reform the Churches in the
Dukedom of Brunswick: the year following, the Senate of Hilvesia sent for him
to Reform their Churches; where he, with Corvinus and Henry Winckle, wrote them
a Form of Ordination, and Ordained six Pastors for their six Congregations.
Anno christi 1533. he proceeded Doctor, at the instigation of Ioh. Friderick,
Elector of Saxony. Afterward, in the Wars of Germany for Religion,
W^ttenberg was besieged, and Bugenhagius being grown old he met with many
troubles, yet would he never fly, but by daily prayer to God he much cheared
up himself, considering that in so great tempests, the poor Ship of Christ's
Church was not swallowed up and devoured.

The Controversies and Quarrels which sprung up in the Church, were the
greatest grief to him. Being grown old, and his strength so decayed that he
could no longer Preach he yet resorted daily to Church, where he poured forth
fervent Prayers both for himself and the afflicted condition of the Church of
God at that time. Afterward, falling sick (though without much pain) he
continued instant in prayer, and holy conference with his friends. And drawing
near to his end, he often repeated, This is life eternal, to know Thee the
only true God; and him whom thou have sent Jesus Christ: and so quietly
departed in the Lord Anno christi 1558. and of his Age 73.

He was a faithful Pastor; merciful to the poor; severe and stout in reproof:
an earnest defendour of the Truth against Errors: ardent in Prayer, etc. He
joined with Luther in the Translation of the Bible: which being finished, every
year upon that day, he invited his friends, and made a Feast, which he called,
The Feast of the Translation of the Bible.

When the Cimmerian darkness had forsook
Brave Bugenhagius, he roused up, and took
Truth by the hand, and from a Foe he turned
A friend to Luther, though at first he spurned
Against his writings, yet at last his breast
Repented what he rashly had expressed.
Then like a Star he shined and was content
To teach himselfe^ and others to repent.
PHILIPPUS MELANTHON.
The Life and Death of Phillip Melancthon^
IN the year of grace 1497. Philippus Melancthon (that vigilant Watchman for
the general good of the Church) was borne at Bretta, a Town situate in the
Lower Palatinate, and only famous for the birth of so excellent a man. His
Parents although they were not endewed with any store of earthly treasures, yet
they were rich in grace, both of them being godly, wise, virtuous, grave and
honest; his Father attaining to no greater advancement then to be chief
Gentleman of Arms unto Philippus and Rupertus, two German Princes.

In his youth he was committed unto the tuition of Johannes Aungarus, a man
excellently qualified, of whom he learned the Latin tongue, and afterward
instructed in the knowledge of the Greek, by Georgius Simlerus, who afterward
became a public professor of the Civil Law: concerning whom Melancthon used
to speak with great reverence and respect, both for his eminent gifts, and also
for that singular care which he had over him, being a child and delivered unto
him to be instructed in the knowledge of the ^ame tongues.

Being by these two furnished in some measure with the knowledge of those
tongues; and being not yet fully twelve years old (a sufficient testimony of
his future worth) he was sent to the University of Heidelberge, where he
studied Poetry, and proved also in short time an excellent Historian, and he
being but a child himself, he taught the children of the Grave of Lionsten, by
which means notice being taken of the excellency of his parts, he was graced in
the same University by a general consent, with the title of Bachilor of Arts:
and which is also most remarkable in his youth, here he frequented the Company
of those which were observed to be the greatest and best learned men; and
especially he used the familiarity of Spangelus a Doctor of Divinity, a man
learned, discreet and wise; having continued here for the space of three years,
he went unto Tubinga in the year 1512. where he became an Auditor unto
Brafficanus and Bebelius, the lavrell Poets of those parts; and also unto
Johannes Stoflerus an excellent Mathematician and professor of those Arts in
that Academie: and also Franciscus Stadianus, then Logic Lecturer, all of them
being famous for their excellent endowments; and for the bettering of his
understanding in Divinity, and increased of his knowledge therein, he repaired
unto Doctor Lempus esteemed the soundest and most judicius in that place,
concerning whom he used to say, that he would paint that horrid Monster of
Transubstantiation on a table, and present it publicly unto his Auditors, and
that he could not but much admire and wonder at the insulsitie and
blockishnesse of the man; here he was also an Auditor unto his Master Simlerus
professing the civil Law, wherein he came unto sound knowledge, as is made
apparent by his writings, and having attained unto a singular perfection in the
Arts and Tongus, he was in this University advanced unto the degree of Master
of Arts or Doctor of Philosophy in the year 1513. and in the seventeenth year
of his age: after this dignity conferred on him, he remained four years in the
Academie, where he commented on Virgil and Ter^nce, read the Rhetoric and
History Lecture with singular judgment, and with the great approbation and
applause of his Auditors. About this time there being great tumults raised in
Saxony concerning religion, grounded on the doctrine taught by Luther, he was
called by the Duke of Saxony (God so disposing by his providence) unto
Wittenberge, in the year 1518. and in the 22. year of his age, and in the tenth
year of Luthers residence in the same place, to be a faithful assistant unto
him for the advancing of the Gospel; and in this may that City justly glory,
that it has been blessed with the labors of these two undaunted Champions,
who^e actions can hardly be parraleld by any living either in the ancient or
in these modern times.

At his departure from Tubinga, his Master Simlerus said that his going away
was to be much lamented of the whole City, and forthwith added, Quotquot ibi
essent docti homines, non esse tam doctos ut intelligerent, quanta esse^
doctrina ejus, qui inde evocatus discedecet: that amongst all the learned men
in the City, non^ could be found guilty of so much learning as to judge truly
of that worth which was to be found in that man.

Presently after his coming unto Wittemberge, he publicly began to read his
Lctures, where Luther being present he received an excellent approbation from
him, concerning his sufficiency and so he proceeded in opening the Scriptures,
to the great benefit and instruction of his Auditors.

In the year 1519. he was present at the disputation betwxt Luther and Eccius,
at Leipsich where sometimes he uttered his opinion amongst them concerning the
points in contraversie; Eccius not well brooking his forwardness cries out
unto Luther, Amove a te istam saccum disti^ctionum; remove from thee that
budget of distinctions, and after a scornful manner styled him the Grammarian.

In the year 1520. he expounded the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans at
Wittemberge; which work of his was so well approved by Luther, that he caused
it to be Printed for the general benefit of the Church: and in his Preface to
the same Book, he uses these words unto Melancthon, Ego, quod impii Thomistae
suo Thomae mendaciter arrogant, (viz.) neminem scripsissi melius in sanctum
Paulum, tibi vere tribuo: What the Thomists unjustly ascribed unto their Thomas
(viz.) that none set forth a sounder Comentary on Paul; I attribute it justly
unto thee. And in the year following, having intelligence that the Divines of
Pa^is had condemned the Books and Doctrine of Luther, he opposed by writing
their heady Decree, affirming his Doctrine to be sound and Orthodox.

In the year 1527. he was appointed by the Duke of Saxony to visit all the
Churches within his Dukedom; in the performance whereof he wanted neither
painful labor nor envious backbiting. And finding in them many disorders and
corruptions, he prescribed unto them a form written in the German tongue,
which he willed them to embrace and to make use of in their Churches. This
action of his caused great contention and strife in the Country, which by the
wisdom and virtue of the same Duke was speedily quieted and taken away.

In the year 1529. an assembly of Divines was appointed at Spire, where the
Duke of Saxony was present with Phillip Melancthon; who espying his Mother,
went unto her, and being demanded by her, What she should believe amongst so
many different opinions and controversies; he answered that Pergeret hoc
credere quod credidisset, nec pateretur se turbari conflectibus disputationum.
That she should believe what she had hitherto believed; and withal, willed her
not to ^ay to heart, nor to be disquieted with those Scholasticke combats.

The Church being about this time in a troublesome state, and so continuing for
a season; it pleased the Pope to promise the calling of a general Council,
for the extirpating of these differences out of the Church, and for the
establishing of an Uniforme manner of Doctrine and Discipline: but his intent
was only to make trial how Melancthon stood affected; for when his Legates
requested of him to promise them that he would subscribe to all the Decrees of
the Synod then shortly to be called; he denied their unjust request, and
withal telling them, In concillo and accusationes, and defensiones, and
sententias liberas esse o portere, and in ep^um de even^u pacisci antiquam
cognitio sit suscripta. That in a general Council all occasions, defendings,
opinions and judgments ought to be free; and that it was a tying void of sense
and reason, to yield a subscription unto those things which as yet he did
neither know nor understand. And so remaining unmovable in this resolution,
there was no general Council called, because it lay not in the power of the
Emperor to command it, and because the Pope was unwilling to exercise his
authority in that kind, least the event should have proved fatal unto the
Apostolical See. About this time Comets were seen in the air for the space of
three whole years; concerning which Melancthon wrote many learned observations
unto his friends.

In the year 1535. the fame of Melancthon came into the Kingdom of England and
France; wherefore he was sent for by Henry the eight, and invited by the King
of France, to settle a Reformation in their Churches; but he went unto neither
of them, in regard the Duke of Saxony would not consent thereunto.

In the year 1539. there was an Assembly of the Protestant Princes at Francfort
ad Menum, concerning a Reformation, and Melancthon was commanded to make his
personal appearance; but being fearful least any should offer violence unto
his person, he there published a work, entitled De Defensione Legitima.

In the year 1541. an Assembly was appointed at Worms, where there happened a
sharp Disputation betwixt Melancthon and Eccius touching Original, sin but
by the Commandment of the Emperor, it was forthwith dissolved, and both of
them appointed to meet at Reinspurge, where it fell out that Eccius in his
disputation propounded a Sophistical argument, at the which Melancthon pausing
a little space for the better untwisting of it, said unto Eccius, that the next
day he would give him an answer, whereupon Eccius presently replied, that it
would be imputed as a great disgrace unto him, to require so long a time, unto
which he presently answered. Mi Doctor non quaero meam gloriam hoc in negotio
sed veritatem: Sir, I seek not my own praise in this business, but the
truth; within short time the Emperor, came to Reispurge, appointed certain
learned Persons on both sides for continuation of the conference; of whom in
the life of Bucer, etc. this Conference gave no satisfaction, neither unto
Eccius nor unto the Bishops there present, nor unto William Duke of Bavaria;
and therefore the whole business was referred unto the judgment of a general
Council, and peace was enjoined unto both parties by the strict command of the
Emperor, together with a hope declared as touching the Reformation of the
Churches. In which Conference Mlancthon objected that axiom against the
Papists, Christus adest non propter panem, sed prop^er hominem. Christ is
present in the Sacrament, not by reason of the bread, but by reason of the
receiver. Which when Luther heard, he joyfully uttered these words, M^c^e
Philippe tu eripuisti Pontificiis, quod ego non ausus fuissem: all happiness
attend thee Phil^ip, for thou have overthrown the Papists in that Point, which
I dared not to attempt. And wi^h that sentence Eccius was so confuted, that he
had not a word to speak; yet at the last in a great rage, he told Melancthon
that he would dispute with him ad ignem usque, even unto the very flames: but
the night following he drinking something beyond measure, in regard of the
predominancy of his chollar, he fell into an Ague, wherewith in few days he
dyed.

Again in the year 1545. Frederick the Prince Elector Palatine successor
unto Lodowick, greatly desiring a Reformation in the Churches; he was informed
by Melancthon, that Ecclesiastical government did consist

1. In the soundness and purity of Doctrine. 2. In the lawful use of the
Sacraments. 3. In a conservation of the Minister of the Gospel, and in
obedience toward the Pastors of the Churches. 4. In the preservation of an
honest and godly Discipline, which was to be upheld by an Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. 5. In the upholding of Schools. 6. In supplying such persons as
are employed in weighty matters with sufficient necessaries.

Which points he caused to be dispersed amongst the Churches, but they wrought
little or no Reformation: the year following Germany was oppressed with civil
Wars; which when it was greatly lamented by Melancthon, some out of malice
misinterpreting his words, accused him unto the Emperor, as one who labored
to hinder his proceedings in the Reformation of Religion; for which cause the
Emperor intended his death, but he was defended and delivered by the entreaty
of Mauritius the Prince Elector, who possessed the Emperor with a contrary
opinion. Not long after it happened that there were great preparations for the
Council of Trent, and safe going and returning; being concluded on, Melancthon
was sent with the Letters of the foresaid Mauritius, and taking Norimberge in
his way, he was commanded to stay there until he received an answer concerning
that faith which was generally to be embraced of all the Churches.

During his abode at Noremberge he heard the news of the Expedition of
Mauritius against the Emperor, in regard of the Lantgrave of Hassia who was
detained captive. Wherefore Melancthon lef^ Noremburge and returned again to
Wittemberge. Many are of opinion that if he had been present at the said
Council, and had been suffered to declare his mind freely amongst them, he
would have redified many of their judgments concerning matters of religion.

Being come unto Wittenberge he constantly went forward in his exercise of
teaching, and preaching the word of God until he fell into an irrecoverable
disease, whereby his vital spirits grew so feeble that he was made unfit for
the performance of his pastoral office, and weakness increasing every day
more and more upon him, he was constrained at the last to yield unto death; and
in the midst of many heavenly prayers he surrendered his soul unto him that gave
it, in the year of our Lord 1560. in the 63. year of hi^ age, and after that
he had preached the space of 42. years unto the inhabitants of Wettemberge.
Where he was buried with great sorrow and lamentation, being laid side by side
with Luther.

For his excellent gifts he was not only reverenced by Protestant Divines then
living, but he also gained a singular approbation of such as were his professed
enemies.

He was of a mean stature not exceeding the common sort of men, his forehead
smooth and high, his hair thin, his neck long, his eyes beautiful and
peircing, he was broad breasted, and in general there was a proportionable
agreement betwixt all the parts of his body; in his youth he stammered
something in his speech, but reaching un^o a maturity of age, he so corrected
that infirmity that it gave no offense unto his Auditors; the learned treatises
which he left unto the Church (whose reformation both in doctrine and
discipline, he greatly labored for in his life) are here inserted.

Tome 1.

1. Commentaries on Genesis. 2. Explications on some Psalms. 3. Upon the
Proverbs.

Annotations on

4. Matthew. 5. John. 6. 1 Corinthians. 7. An Apology for Luther against the
Paritians. 8. Anabaptistists. 9. Sentences of Fathers. 10. Of the qualification
of Princes. 11. Of the tree of consanguinity.

Tome 2.

1. A Comment on Paul to the Romans. 2. School-notes on the Colossians. 3.
Common places of Divinity.

Tome 3.

1. A confession of Faith. 2. A Catechism. 3. A method of Preaching. 4.
Theological Disputations. 5. Of Vows. 6. Of the doctrine of the reformed
Church. 7. An Epistle to John Earl of Widae.

Tome 4.

1. Philosophical works. 2. Commentaries on Aristot. Ethics. 3. Politics.
4. An Epitome of Moral Philosophy.

Tome 5.

1. A Latin Grammar. 2. A Greek gram. 3. Logic. 4. Rhetoric. 5.
Enarrations on Hesiods works. 6. Arithmaticke. 7. Epigrams. These were printed
by Hervagius; but there are diverse others set forth by Christopher Pezelius,

As 1. An admonition to those that read the Alcaron. 2. A defense for the
marriage of Priests. 3. Commentaries on Daniel. 4. A discourse on the Nicene
Creed. 5. Luthers Life and Death. 6. School^-notes on Cicero his Epistles. 7.
Translations of Demosthenes and Plutarch. 8. Greek and Latin Epigrams. 9. Two
Tomes of Epistles. 10. Carrion his Cronologie ^nlarged.

Would thy ingenious Fancy soar and fly
Beyond the pitch of modern Poesye;
Or would thou learn to charm the conquered ear
With Reth'riks oily Magik? would thou heare^
The Majesty of language? would thou pry
Into the Bowels of Philosophy,
Moral, or Natural? Or would thou sound
The holy depth, and touch the unfathomed ground
Of deep Theology? Nay, would thou need
The Sisteme of all excellence, and feed
Thy empty soul with learning's full perfection:
Go search Melancthons Tomes, by whose direction
Thou shall be led to Fame, if his rare story
Can make thee emulous of so great a glory.
The Life and Death of John a Lasco, who died Anno Christi 1560.
John Lascus was born of a noble family in Poland, and brought up in learning:
afterward traveling to Tygure in Helvetia, he was by Zuinglius persuaded to
betake himself to the study of Divinity: and when he might have been preferred
to great honor in his own Country, such was his love to Christ, and his
Church, and such his hatred to Popery, that he chose with Moses to suffer
affliction with the people of God, rather then to live in worldly honor, and
peace amongst his friends: coming into Frisland Anno Christi 1542. he was
called to be a Pastor at Embden, where he fed, and ruled his flock with great
diligence: the year after, he was sent for by Ann the widow of Count
Oldenburg to reform the Churches in East-Frisland; and the next year after by
Albert Duke of Prussia, but when he agreed not with him in judgment about the
Lords Supper, the work remained unperfected: about that time (the Emerour
persecuted the Protestants) he was sent for by King Edward the sixth (upon
Cranmers motion) into England, where he gathered, Preached unto, and governed
the Dutch-Church, which remain's to this day. In the days of Queen Mary, he
obtained leave to return Beyond Sea, and went with a good part of his
Congregation into Denmark: but there he found but cold entertainment, by
reason of his differing from them about the Lords Supper: the Churches of
Saxony also rejected them, not suffering them to live amongst them upon the
like reason: at length that poor Congregation found entertainment in Frisland,
under the Lady Anne Oldenburg, and settled at Embdem: Anno Christi 1555. he went
thence to Francford upon Main; where, with the consent of the Senate, he
gathered a Church of strangers, especially out of Belgia: from thence he wrote
a Letter to the King of Poland and his Council, vindicating his Doctrine from
some aspersions cast upon it by his adversaries: many enemies also rose up
against him and his Congregation, for differing from them about Christ's
presence in the Sacrament, especially o^e Westphalus, who wrote bitterly
against them, calling them Zuinglians, and affirming that all those which had
suffered about that point in Belgia, England or France, were the Divel's
Martyrs. At last Lascus returning into his own Country, from which he had been
absent twenty years: there he found God's harvest to be great, and the
laborers to be very few. His coming was very unwelcome to the Popish Clergy,
who sought by all means to destroy him, or to get him banished; and therefore
they accused him to the King for an Heretic, beseeching him not to suffer him
to stay in the Kingdom: to whom the King answered, That though they pronounced
him an Heretic, yet the S^ates of the Kingdom did not so esteem him, and
that he was ready to clear himself from those aspersions. When they thus
prevailed not, they cast abroad reproaches, and all manner of lies, as if he
would stir up a civil War in the Kingdom: but it pleased God when he had
spent a little time in instructing his friends, that he sickned, and dyed anno
christi 1569. He was of an excellent wit and judgment, and took much pains
to have composed that difference in the Churches about Christ's presence in the
Sacrament, though it succeeded not. The King of Poland had him in such esteem,
that he made use of his advice and help in many great and difficult businesses.

Wisdom and goodness both conjoined
To beautif^e Alascos mind:
He was laborious to fulfill
And prosecute his makers will.
His heart was proud to undertake,
To do, or suffer for Gods sake:
Therefore no question but he is blessed,
And rests in peace and endless rest.
AVGVSTINVS MARLORATVS
The Life and Death of Augustine Marlorat.
AVgustine Marlorat was born in the Dukedom of Lorrain anno christi 1506. His
Parents dyed whilst he was young, and his kindred gaping after his estate,
thrust him at eight years of age into a Monastery of Augustine Friars: by which
means (God so ordering of it) he was brought up in learning; and having
studied the body of Divinity in France, came to the University of Lasanna,
which is a famous Town of the Lords and States of the Country of Bern,
situated hard by the Lake of Lemon, and is a place famous for Divinity, where
he profited much in learned, and came to the knowledge of the Truth; and from
thence he was chosen to be Pastor at Vivia; and from thence he was sent for to
Rottomag, where he behaved himself with much piety and wisdom. Anno Christi
1561. he was present at the conference at Posiah, between the Cardinal of
Lorrain and Theodore Beza; where he acquitted himself with much courage. The
year following when the Civil Wars brak^ forth in France, the City of Rotomag
was besieged, and after a hard siege, was taken: where Marlorat and four other
chief Citizens, by the malice of Mont-Morenzie and Francis Duke of Guize, were
hanged; though some of his adversaries would have saved him. This was done the
thirtieth of October anno chris. 1562. and of his Age six and fifty: whose
Works being ever living Monuments, are preserved to the benefit of the Church
of God, and are here set down.

1. A Catholic and Ecclesiastical Exposition of the new Testament. 2. An
Exposition upon Genesis. 3. An Exposition on the Psalms of David. 4. An
Exposition upon the Prophecy of Jsaiah. 5. His Thesaurus, or Treasure-house of
the whole Canonical Scripture, digested into common places: Also the hard
Phrases Alphabetically Printed, which usully are met withal in the Scriptures,
by the care and industry of William Feugerius of Rohan, professor of Divinity;
to whom Marlorat left this Work, being not altogether perfected at the time of
his Dissolution.

Renowned Marlorat did breath to give
A breath to worth, which worth shall make him live;
Virtue shall be his Heravl'd, and his name
Shall stand recorded in roules of fame:
The trumpet of his praise shall sound the bolder
Because true virtue need crave no upholder.
The Life and Death of Amsdorfius, who died Anno Christi 1563.
NIcolas Amsdorfius was born in Misnia, of noble Parents Anno Christi 1483. and
brought up in learning: From School he went to the University of Wittenberge
about that time that Luther began to preach against Indulgence: in Anno Christi
1504. he Commensed Master of Arts, and aftewards Licentiary in Divinity: he
embraced the Truth that brake forth in those times, and preached it to others:
he accompanied Luther to Worms: in the time of Luthers recesse into his
Pathmos; he, with Melancthon, and Iustus Jonas being sent to by the Elector of
Saxony for their judgment about the Mass, declared that it was an horrible
profanation of the Lords Supper; whence ensued the abolishing of it out of all
Churches in Wittenberg: he wrote also that the Pope was Antichrist. Anno Christ
1524. Luther being sent for to Magdenburg, he went thither, and having preached
to them, he commended to them, and afterward sent Amsdorfius to gather and
instruct the Churches there, who faithfully labored eighteen years in that
place: Anno Christi 1541. he was sent by the Elector of Saxony to govern the
Church at Naumberg in the Palatinate; where also the year after he was
ordained Bishop by Luther, three other Pastors also imposing of their hands
upon him: but six years after he was driven away from thence by the Emperor
Charles the fifth, whence he fled to Magdenberg, and was there during the siege
of it. Anno Christi 1550. and the year after George Major, having Published
this proposition, That good Works were necessary to Salvation; Amsdorfius in
heat of contention wrote, That good Works were hurtful and dangerous to
Salvation: he died about the four score and eight year of his age, Anno Christi
1563.

Amsdorfius was the life of worth, his days
Were filled with trouble, yet perpetual praise
Waited upon him; for he did oppose
The Errors of the Pope in spite of those
That were his enemies, he did maintain
The Pope was Antichrist, the Mass profane.
He feared them not, but boldly did profess
The truth and now is Crowned with happiness.
WOLFGANGVS MVSCVLVS.
The Life and Death of Wolfangus Musculus.
IN the year of our Lord God 1497. and on the sixth of the Ides of September (a
day much observed by our Ancestors for the birth of the Virgin Mary, and also
for the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus the son of Vespasian) was Wolfang^^
Musculus, that faithful servant of Christ, born at Dusa, a little town
situate in Litharingia famous only for the abundance of Salt Pits, wherewith
it is richly stored.

His father was called Antonius Musculus, who by his profession was a Cooper,
he was religiously given but of a mean estate, his mother was named Angela
Sartoria descended from an honest and well esteemed Parentage, a woman endewed
with zeal toward religion, with unspotted Chastity, and also with a singular
wisdom; they were blessed with two sons Hammanus and this Wolfangus.

The former was brought up in his Fathers professions, the other appearing more
ingenuous, and more fit for learning, he was set apart thereunto, which he
prosecuted with such an ardent affection, that even in his tender years, he
would exercise himself continually in reading or writing, unless he were
violently withdrawn from, and as it were with rains restrained from those
actions.

Reaching unto that maturity of age, wherein he appeared fit for more solid
studies, his father (furnishing him with some necessaries for the journey) sent
him away unto other Schools, wherein according to his own desire he might
attain unto greater perfection: the reason why he sent him so slenderly
furnished, was because he would have him to get his victuals by singing and
beging from door to door, according to the custom of those times, who used
(although rich) to thrust out their sons into the world after that manner, that
by that means they might join patience, temperance and humility with their
learning, fearing that if they should be tenderly and delicatly brought up,
they would be more addicted unto, and sooner follow and embrace Idelnesse and
lust, then their studies.

Being sent away after this manner, he went into Alsatia, and taking a view of
some certain towns in that Country, at the length he came unto Rappers^ill,
where a well disposed widow fixed her eyes upon him, and inwardly lamenting
his outward misery, whose cheerful countenance promised a more favorable
fortune, received him into her house, and according unto her ability sustained
him (he frequented the School) until such time as a general and noble
Gentleman living in the same place, had notice of him, who conferred
extraordinary courtesies on him, for his maintenance at the School, as he
himself freely confessed.

Having continued here a certain space, he shaped his course unto Selestadt,
where he addicted himself unto the study of Poetry, wherein he proved
excellent, to the great approbation of his Master, and in this course of study
he continued, un^^l he reached unto the age of 15. years.

Then having a desire to return unto Dusa, to visit his Parents, he directed
his course unto a Monastery and (lying in the Palatinate, founded by the Lords
of Luzelstein, and consecrated to S^int Benedict) because he intended to visit
his Aunt Sophia, living at Westreich, near adjoining unto the said Monastery,
where he was lovingly entertained by her, who brought him the evening following
with her into the Monastery, to behold the forms and customs of the place, in
the performance of their divine exercises: where he adjoined himself unto the
Choristers, and sung his part with them, with such a comeliness of gesture and
pleasan^nesse of voice, that the Prior was greatly affected toward him,
intending to allure him if possible he could, to be ^ member of the said
Monastery, and for that cause he diligently observes his going out at the end
of prayers, and withal follows him close at the heels, accompanying his
Aunt, of whom he demanded whose son he was? and from whence he came? she
forthwith replied, that he w^^ her sisters son, and that he was returning from
School unto Dusa unto his Parents.

The Prior then turning himself unto Musculus he demanded of him how he liked
a Monasterical life? and withal told him that if he would frame himself
thereunto, he would use means that he should be admitted gratis into the
College, (which favor had as yet been conferred on none) and that he should
be sufficiently provided of apparel and lodging, and that he would esteem
him as hi^ own son.

His Aunt returned many thanks unto the Prior for thi^ unexpected favor,
promising that she would forthwith acquaint his Parents with the motion, and
would also return a speedy answer unto him, how they stood affected^ so taking
their leave of the Prior, they provided for Dusa, where arriving, she declared
the kind motions of the Prior; his Parents were exceeding joyful of the news,
and persuaded themselves that it was a blessing proceeded from God, and
therefore they hasted again to return him to the P^ior, who lovingly
entertained and received him into the number of his own family, clothed him
wi^h an habit suitable to the Monastery, sent him unto the Bishop to be admitted
(according to the custom) into his office, and lovingly esteemed him as if he
had been his own son, unill he died.

In this Monastery he continued for the space of fifteen years, which time he
spent, not a^ lazy and idle Monks commonly do, but in the increasing and
perfecting of his learning, sometimes perusing the works of Tully, sometimes
reading the books of Ovid, and contracting them into a briefer volume, which
work was much applauded by Claudius Cantiuncula, a learned Lawyer in those
times: Sometimes spending time in the Art of music, wherein also he attained
unto excellent knowledge; neither did he confine himself only unto those
studies, but passed from them unto Divinity, into which he entered about the
twentieth year of his age, and being told by an old devout Monk, that if he
intended to become a good Preacher, he must endeavor to be familiar with the
Bible; he forthwith gave himself unto the reading of the Scriptures, reposing
and laying up those things in his memory, which seemed unto him most useful
for future occasions.

And notice being taken of his knowledge therein, and of the ability of his
parts, the office of a Preacher was imposed on him, and he was first designed
unto the Church at Leixheim, belonging unto the jurisdiction of the Monastery;
where his Auditors perceiving his excellent gif^s, ^hey dispersed his fame,
whereby he came to be called to the exercising of his gifts in many other
Churches.

During his continuance in this exercise, many of Luthers books were dispersed
through Germany, some of which were conveyed to him by an intimate friend of
his, these he diligently perused and read day and night, and not with less
benefit then labor, embracing the purest doctrine that he found therein, with
great zeal; and would confer with his Colleagus many times about the same,
stiffly defending and maintaining that doctrine against their Culumnes,
disdaining that aspersion of haeresie, which was by some of them fastened upon
him; affirming that although Luther as he was a man, might err in some points,
yet he was not therefore to be pronounced an haeretick; neither did he
vindicate this in the Monastery only, but publicly he delivered the same for
true and undoubted doctrine unto hi^ Auditors, that for the same he was by many
evil disposed persons styled the Lutheran Monk.

But his desire of propagating the truth, wanted not (by the blessing of God)
good success; for besides many of his Auditors, he converted some of the Monks
of the same Monastery, who afterward forsook that Cloister life, and
constantly professed the Gospel of Christ unto their lives end. He also
converted many Noble men, and amongst them Reinhardus a Rottenburge Governor
of the Castle at Lutzelstein, a man in great favor with the Prince Elector
Palatine.

In these proceedings he wanted not mighty and bitter enemies; for in the
Monastery the Senior Monks (who were deeply rooted in superstition) sharply
opposed him, doing him all the mischief that they could: as for outward
enemies they were not wanting; for the Bishops and Ments and Strasburge, had
many times surprised him, had he not been carefully protected by the foresaid
Governor.

This Governor being willing to make trial of his constancy in the cause of
Religion; on a time (during his abode under his protection) came to the Church
where he wa^ Preaching, guarded with some few Horsemen, and having altered his
habit that he might not be known, he calls unto him after a bold threatening
manner, and commands him to come forth out of the Church. Musculus supposing
that they had been some sent from the Bishop to app^ehend him; he desired of
them that they would give him leave to finish his Sermon, and then he would go
with them whether soever they pleased; which being granted, he went forward in
his Sermon, without making any show of the least fear: his Sermon being ended,
and he supposing that he should dye, he exhorted his Auditors unto constancy,
faith and piety; and withal desired them to pour out their prayers unto God
for him, who was then ready to lay down his life for Christ; and so committed
them all unto Almighty God (who were wonderfully astonished with this action)
he came down and yielded himself into the hands of tho^^ who expected his
coming.

Reinhardus admiring the undaunted courage of the man, discovered himself, and
embracing him in his arms, exhorted him always to retain the same constancy,
promising him sure defense, as long as he continued and resided within his
liberties.

But Musculus perceiving danger to increase daily, so that he could not have
liberty to make profession of the Gospel in that place, he resolved to forsake
the Monastery, and to betake himself unto some place where he might with more
freedom and less danger profess the same. He acquainted some of the Monks
which were his intimate friends with this resolution; they, by reason of the
death of the Prior at that time, desired him to stay, and would willingly have
conferred the government of the Monastery on him; but he knowing that that
dignity would prove a hinderance unto that which he most aimed at, refused it,
and willed them to bestow it on Brisacius. Before he departed he betroathed
himself unto a Kinswoman of the said Brisacius; who also went together with
him unto Strasburge, in the year 1527. and in the thirtieth year of his age;
where according to the manner of that Church he was publicly married; the
Minister bestowing a Wedding dinner on them in his own house.

Here misery began to creep more and more upon him, partly because of that
little money wherewith he was furnished to sustain both himself and his wife;
and partly because there was no hope left unto him of getting any thing by
Preaching; because many eminent persons were Silenced in the same City.
Wherefore for the avoiding of further poverty, his wife turned servant, and he
covenanted with a Weaver to do him service for the space of two Months. Which
action although that it ministered grief unto him, yet casting himself upon
God, he comforted himself with this distick: Est Deus in coelo, qui providus
omnia curat,
Credentes nunquam deservisse potest.
God by his foresight has such order taken,
That true Believers cannot be forsaken.


This Weaver with whom he had Covenanted was an Anabaptist, who nourished in
his house a teacher of that sect. Musculus perceiving his great hypocrisy and
idleness, would sometimes object unto him those words of Paul, He that will
not work, let him not ea^. At which saying the Weaver was greatly offended, so
as at the end of two Months he gave him his wages, and bad him be gone.
Musculus was now compelled to seek him a new Master; and it happened at that
time that the Inhabitants of Strasburge employed many laborers, about the
scouring of the Ditch which environed the City, and about the repairing of the
breaches in the Walls. He agrees with the Master of the Work, and toward night
he walks about the walls to view what place might please him best to work in;
which being done, he returned unto his wife, who certified him of better news;
and as God so disposed of a better work, and that was this, that a Messenger
was in the house, who willed him to meet the Senate and Bucer in the Cathedral
Church. He much admired at the first what this should mean, yet forthwith he
went; Bucer having notice of him, calls him unto him: he being no sooner come,
the Council commanded him to go unto the Village called Dorl^ckzein, distant
three miles from S^rasburge, and there to Preach the Gospel of Christ unto the
People, and to exhort them unto Humility and Obedience.

At his first entrance upon this Cure, Bucer took him into his own House, and
made use of him for the writing of such things as he intended for the Press.
Afterward, by the advice of the Ministers of Strasburge, he settled himself
with his wife in the Village. The Inhabitants received him with all courtesy,
freely offering him all things necessary for his house. Here he continued
Preaching for the space of twelve months, receiving not any thing for his
paine^, which notwithstanding he performed without grudging: the reason was
because the Abbot of Ho^enforst, who received the tithes of the Parish, refused
to give him any money: Which being understood by those of Strasburge, he was
bountifully relieved out of the common treasury.

Unto his preaching he also added the teaching and instructing of youth,
whereby he gained the entire love of his parishoners, so that they received him
as a grave father. Not far from this Villiage there was a Monastery dedicated
unto St. John pertaining unto the Dioces of the Bishop of Strasburg, wherein an
ann^al feast of dedication was celebrated; at which a Monk, or some Mass
Priest used to preach; Musculus at the entreaty of his neighbors went along
with them to here the Sermon; the Monk discoursed on that saying of Saint Paul
to the H^brews, that without faith it was impossible to please ^od: and having
delivered many things as touching the excellency of faith; at ^he last, he
bitterly enveighed against the Lutherans, and especially those of Strasburg,
caling them deserters of the Catholic Faith. This railing act as it was
pleasing unto the Monks and Priests there present, so it grieved Musculus to
hear the true professors thus scandalized. Wherefore at the coming down of
the Monk from the Pulpit, he goes unto him, and utters these words, in the
audience of the congregation. O thou wicked f^llow, stay here a while, and thou
shall hear me lay open thy wickedness unto all this Congregation: and then
ascending the Pulpit, he repeated again the same words of Saint Paul^ where he
showed unto them that by faith in that place, w^^ meant a true and a saving
faith in Jesus Christ, and that those professors at Strasburge did rely on none
but on this faith, and therefore unjustly wronged by the Monks.

The Priests and Monks hearing this, they withdrew themselves out of the
Chapel; in comes the Pryor, interrupts him, and commands him to desi^t, and
to come down; and withal, asked him who gave him authority to Preach in that
place? He forthwith replied; Who gave thee authority to constitute a lying
Monk here, who does unjustly and impudently reproach the Senate and people of
Strasburge: and know thou this, that I am in duty bound to clear my Magistrates
from unjust and false aspersion^. The Pryor being repulsed with this answer,
was for a while quiet, and he went forward in his Sermon. But being not so
contented, sets on him again, and kindly intr^ats him that he would give
over; telling him, that his proceeding would cause a seditious tumult. He
again desires him to be pacified, and exhorts the people to be quiet; and
so with a bold and courageous spirit, he continued even unto the end of his
Sermon. The report of this coming to Strasburge, it procured unto him great
applau^e, and a reverent esteem amongst all good men. Having spent a year in
this Village, he was called by the Ministers of Strasburge, to take upon him
the Office of a Deacon; which Office h^ was very unwilling to take upon him,
urging his own inability; yet by the persuasion of the Ministers, he yielded;
and performed it for the space of two years.

In which time this memorable act is recorded of him, that being sent unto
Dosna, a Village near Strasburge, to Preach unto the Inhabitants who were
obstinate Papists; he wrought upon them so effectually at his first Sermon,
that of their own accord they abrogated the Mass, and cast the Priest with
all his ornaments out of the Church^ after that he had taught here six weeks,
he was called again unto the City to perform the office of a Deacon: during
his residence in the City, he became an Auditor unto the Lectures of Wolfangus
Capito and Martin Bucer, and also at vacant ^imes he gave himself to the study
of the Hebrew tongue, wherein he attained unto that perfection, that with his
own hand he writ an Hebrew Lexicon, and understood the most obscured
Commentaries of the Rabbis, together with the Caldey Interpreters.

At the end of two years, the Citizens of Ausp^re sent unto Strasburge to
desire Musculus a few years, for their Churches: they consented unto so pious a
motion; but Musculus was unwilling to go, pleading again his insufficiency;
neither had he gone, notwithstanding the entreaty of the Ministers, had not the
Senate commanded him thereunto.

At his coming unto Auspurge, he found the Church much troubled and afflicted,
not only by reason of the evil attempts and endeavor of the Papists, who
never ceased to extinguish the light of the Gospel; but also by reason of the
Anabaptists, who seduced and led away many, whose boldness also advanced it
self unto that height, that they would come publikly into the Protestant
Churches, and openly in their Pulpits they would divulge their errors: whereby
sedition and tumults were raised in the City, for which many of the Anabaptis^s
were committed by the Magistrate unto Prison: Musculas deals first with the
Anabaptists; in their first conference they did obstinatly opposed him, but
afterward considering his solid and weighty reasons and arguments which they
could not withstand, they acknowledged their error, and many of them made a
public recantation, forsook their errors, and became members of the Church.

Afterward he had a sharp conflict with the Pap^sts, whom also in the
presence of the Senate and people of Auspurge, he openly confuted, with such
powerful arguments, that the Senate expeled and banished them all the City,
purged the Churches from all Idolatrous worship, and consecrated them only
unto the Evangelicall truth; designing unto Musculus one of the principallest
Churches in the City, and having him in a reverent Estimation; in this place
besides his labors in the Ministry which were great, he attained the
knowledge of the Greek tongue, together with the Arabic.

He taught in this City eighteen years, to the great benefit of his Auditors,
in his Sermons he was vehement and powerful, wonderfully working upon the
hearts of the people; he was a sharp reprover of vice; his method which he
observed in teaching was exact and easy, which drew the greater concourse of
people unto him, for their better instruction and information in the way of
truth.

In the year 1536. there was a Sinod proclaimed at Isenacam a town situate in
the Dukdome of Saxony, for the reconciling of the Churches about the
Sacrament, whither Musculus was sent by the Senate of Ausburge; but because
Luther came not thither he with many other Divines went unto Wittenberge,
touching the conclusion. viz. Bucer, Melancthon: In the year 1540. the Princes
and Senates of the Empire were assembled at Worms, and Reinspurge, to hear a
disputation betwixt the Protestant Ministers and the Papists, touching
Religion, where Musculus by the command of the Senate was present, and
delivered two Sermons before the Princes, concerning the Popish Mass, which
for their excellency were afterward Printed at Wittenberge. The Assembly being
desolved, without any thing affected, he returned again to Auspurge, where he
continued in his Ministerial function until the year 1547. wherein Carolus
the Emperor commanded an assembly of the Prince^ and Senates of the Empire at
Auspurge, unto which both himself with his brother Ferdinand King of the
Romans, and also the Princes, being accompanied with Cardinals and Bishops: At
the first entrence, of the Emperor into the City, Musculus was put void o^ his
Church, it being given unto the Emperor, yet he ceased not to perform his
office, and boldly to preach in other places of the City, ^he Senate and people
as yet constantly retaining the pro^^ssion of the Gospel.

He wanted not enemies at that time in the City, who acquainted the Emperor,
the King, the Cardinals and Bishops with his proceeding, accusing him of
sedition and heresy, and the Senate perceiving the danger that he was in, they
commanded a Guard to accompany him unto the Church and home again, which his
enemies perceiving, and not daring to use any violence against his person in
the street^; they wi^h one consent flockt unto his house, using many
reproachful speeches, laying on him many false aspersions, and withal breaking
his windows with stones; all which he suffered with an undaunted Spirit,
resolving to persevere in that truth which he taught even to the period of his
day^. But it so fell out that in the year following the Emperor had promulgated
a book written concerning Religion called the Interim, which he would have to
be embraced and confirmed by the States and Cities of the Emprie; which when he
perceived that it was received by the Senate first, he publikly opposed it in
the Church, and exhorted them to the constant profession of their former
doctrine; and secondly he told them that he must be compelled to depart from
them, in case they did refuse his motion: but he perceiving no hopes of
altering their opinions after that he had taken his supper, he left the City,
being accompanied only with one Citizen, committing his wife and eight
children which he left behind him unto the protection of the Almighty: and
being without the Ports he chang^d his hablit, least through the same he might
be discovered by his enemies.

And having turned a Wagon, he went toward Ti^urum, where he remained a few
days with Bullinger, and from thence he departed and went unto Basil, unto
Iohanner Hervagius; his wife followed immediately after him, not knowing where
to find him unless at Basil; wherefore when she came to Constance, for her
assu^a^ce she sent letters by a trusty friend, whom she desired to certify her
husband of her aboade at Constance: the messenger finding Musculus at Basil
delivered the letters, and forthwith returned unto Constance where he found his
wife and children: upon the Lords day following he preached twice in the City,
taking for hi^ text, those words in John the 6. ver. 66. From that time many of
the Disciples went back and walked no more with him; Then said Jesus unto the
twelve, I will yet also go away, etc. from which place of Scripture he showed
unto them, how greatly those Cities did offend, which did fall from the truth
of Christ for the favor of m^n; and withal he earnestly exhorted the people
of Constance, not to follow the examples of such, but constantly to adhaere
unto the truth taught by Christ in his Word: and this was the last Sermon that
was Preached in the peaceable state of the Commonwealth; for the day following
the Spanish Forces under the conduct of Alfonsus Vives beleagured the City;
during the Siedge, by the persuasion of Ambrosius Blavrerus a reverend Pastor,
Musculu^ with his wife and children were conveyed out of the City with safety,
and they escaped the fury of the enemies, intending to go for Tigurum, but by
reason of sickness, which seized on his wife, he was compelled to remain at
Sangallum; after her recovery he went unto Tigurum, where he was joyfully
received of the Inhabitants, with whom he continued six months, before he was
called to perform his Ministerial function; in which vacancy he was called by
Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, into England; but in regard of his
own age as unfit for travel, and in respect of the weakness of his wife, and
the many children which he had, he modestly refused.

Not long after the Inhabitants of Berne were destitute of a Divinity Lecturer
for their Schools; wherefore he was called by the Senate unto that profession,
which indeed was most welcome unto him, partly for the excellency of that
Church and Commonwealth, and partly for the renewing of his acquaintance with
his old friend Johannes Hallerus. He entered upon this Lecture in the year 1549.
and constantly continued in it for the space of fourteen years, to the
exceeding benefit of the Church of Christ; opening in that space unto his
Auditors almost the whole Bible. He naturally detested Contraversies, and
would write his mind, without the injury or contempt of others; so that his
Works were opposed by no man in public during his life, only those two
Sermons excepted, which he Preached before the Princes at Worms, which were
opposed by Cochlaeus.

The great love which he carried toward the Inhabitants of Berne appears in
this, that he refused great honor and ample Revenues, which were proffered unto
him during his Lectureship at Berne; for he was thrice called into England,
seconded with large rewards: also the Inhabitants of Auspurge having again
obtained their former liberty, amongst other banished Ministers, they first
recalled Musculus. He was again desired by the Inhabitants of Strasburge;
invited by Otho Henricus, and Fredericus Prince Elector Palatine, and by the
Land grave of Hassia many times; but he modestly refused all these, though
honorable calings: intending to perform his best service unto the end of his
days, unto that City who had showed and vouchsafed him such kindness in his
greatest extremity; which indeed was truly performed.

Not long before his death he was sickly, partly by reason of his years; his
body being spent with infinite cares and labors, and partly by reason of a
vehement cold which did much afflict him; whereby he gathered that he was to
leave that house of clay, and therefore setting all other things aside, he
entered into a heavenly meditation of death; the sum of which he has left unto
the world, being written by himself before his death.

Nil super est vitae, frigus praecordia captat
Sed in Christ mihi vita parennis ad es.
Quid crepidas anima? ad seeds abitura quietis,
En tibi ductor adest, Angelus ille tuus.
Lingua domum hanc miseram, nunc in sua fata ruentem.
Quam tibi fida Dei dextera restituet
Peccasti? scio: sed Christus ardentibus in se,
Peccata expurga^sanguin^ cuncta suo.
Horribilis mors est? fateor sed proxima vita est,
Ad quam te Christi gratia c^rta vocat.
Praesto est de Satana, pecca^a est morte triumph^s
Christus, ad hunc igitur; l^^a alacrisque migra.
This life is done, cold Death does summon me:
A life eternal I expect from thee
My Savior Christ: why do thou fear my Dove?
He will conduct thee to his throne above.
Forsake this body, this corrupted creature:
Thy God will change it to a better nature.
Do thou abound with sin? I do confess
That thou art guilty, and do often transgress.
But Christ his blood does wash and cleanse all those,
That can themselves in him by Faith repose.
Does Death appear an object full of horror,
Both ugly, ghastly, and not wanting terror.
I do confess it, but that life again
Which follows death does take away that pain.
Unto which life we called are by Christ;
Then do no longer O my soul resist,
But yield thou with all cheerfulness to dwell
With him triumphing over Death, Sin and Hell.
Afterward the strength of his sickness did increase by the addition of an
Ague, whereby he was brought so weak, that he was not able to sit up right in
his bed; wherefore he s^nt unto Master Johannes Allerus and other Ministers,
unto whom he declared the Faith which he dyed in; and withal, committed the
care of his Wife and Children unto them; who told him that they would not b^
deficient in any thing wherein they might show themselves beneficial and
helpful unto them.

As he was a man endewed with an extraordiry patience in his life, so he also
testified the same during his sickness: for he (...) that affl^^^ion with
admired patience, still calling upon and praying unto almighty God, relying
only upon him; as appeared by that Speech of his unto his Son, who standing by
his Bedside weeping, he turned to him, and told him, that he need not doubt of
his Fathers Faith, which indeed were the last words which he uttered; and not
long after he yielded up his soul with all quietness into the hands of God,
in the year of Christ 1563. and in the sixty six year of his age, and was
buried at Berne.

He was a man learned and grave, affable and courteous, sparing in hi^ diet; he
was something tall in stature, having a body straight, a face red, eyes clear
and quick-sighted; in general, there was a proportionable agreement betwixt
all his parts. His Works are these:

1. Commentaries on Genesis. 2. Psalms. 3. Matthew. 4. John. 5. Romans. 6.
Corinthians. 7. Philippians. 8. Colossians. 9. Thessalonians. 10. 1 Timothy.
11. His common places. 12. Upon the Commandments. 13. Of Oaths. 14. Of the
Germane Wars.

Translations of Greek Authors.

1. Commentaries of Chrysostom on Saint Paul's Epistles. 2. Epistles of Saint
Basil. 3. Ethics of Basil. 4. Of solitary life. 5. Homilies. 6. School-notes
of Basil on the Psalter. 7. Thirty nine Epistles of Cyril. 8. A Declaration of
the twelve Anathemos in the Ephesnick Council. 9. Opinions of Nestorius
con^i^ed. 10. Synopsis of the Scriptures out of Athana^iu^. 11. 140. questions
out of the old and new Testament. 12. A Synopsis of Theodore Bishop of Tire.

Ecclesiasti^all Histories.

1. Ten books of Eusebius of Ecclesiastical affairs. 2. Five ^ookes of
Eusebius of the life of Constantine. 3. Eight books of Socrates. 4. Nine
books of Zozomen. 5. Two books of Theodore. 6. Six of Evagr^us. 7. Five of
Polybius.

'Twas neither fear nor danger, could estrange
Undaunted Musculus, or make him change
His resolutions; nothing could prevail
Against the bulwarks of his Fort, or scale
His well armed thought; he would (in spite of those
That were so barbarous to be his Foes)^
Proclaim the Truth, and would not let it rest
(Until discovered) in his serious brest^
He lived Gods faithful Factor here below,
To send him souls to heaven, and to bestow
That talent he had gave him, that he might
When Is Master called, cast his accounts aright.
The Life and Death of Hyperius, who dyed Anno Christi 1564.
ANdreas Gerardus Hyperius was born at Ipres in Flanders, Anno Christi 1511.
his Father was a Counselor, who brought him up carefully in learning. At 13.
years old he traveled through the Islands of Flanders, and learned the French
tongue: afterward he went to Paris, where he studied in that University the
Arts for three years, and then went home to visit his friends; but after a
short stay, he returned to Paris, and studied Divinity and Physic: and every
year in the vacation time he traveled abroad into France; so that in three
years he had seen most part of France, and part of Italy, and visited the
chiefest Universities in both: then he went to Lovain, and into most parts of
the lower Germany^ and at twenty six years old, he traveled into upper
Germany: then he sailed into England, where faling into the company of Charles
Montjoy, [Baron Montjoy's Son] he took such affection to him, that he desired
him to live with him, where he lived four years with much content, and then he
visited Cambridge: and the Lord Cromwell being beheaded about that time, and the
six Articles pressed with rigor, he thought of returning into his own Country;
first visiting Oxford, and from thence he went to London, and so sailed to
Antwarp, and from thence he went home: but hearing the fame of the University
of Argentine, and of Bucer there, he traveled thither also: but in the way he
went to Marpurg, where Noviomagus was Divinity-professor, who importuned him to
stay there, and to give some taste of his learning, and to be his assistant;
when he had prevailed with him, he shortly after dying, Hyperius was chosen in
his room; and after two years stay, he married a wife, one Catharine Orthia,
with whom he lived with much comfort, and had by her six sons, and four
daughters: he taught there with much diligence, and faithfulness 22. years: he
directed young students in the composing of their Sermons, and heard them first
Preach in private, that if any thing were amiss, either in their voice, or
gesture he might rectify them in it: he was never idle, but always either
writing, reading, or meditating, so that he much weakened his body thereby: at
last falling sick of a Fever he gave diverse instructions to his wife, for the
education of his children; and to his children, whom he exhorted to serve God,
and to obey their mother; and when his friends visited him, he requested them
to bear witness, That in that Faith wherein he had lived, and which he had
taught, he now dyed: and so continued making a profession of the same till he
yielded up his spirit unto God, being about 53. years old, Anno Christi 1564.
having been Pastor of the Church, and professor in the University 22. years.

Studious Hyperius always loved to be
In consultation with Divinity:
He lo^'d the truth, and always strived to fly
Upon the wings of true sollidity:
Religion was his guide; he always stood
Firmly obedient unto what was good.
JOHANNES CALVINVS.
The Life and Death of John Calvin.
IN the year of our Lord God 1509. this reverend and faithful Minister of
Jesus Christ John Calvin, was born at Noviodunum a famous town fituate in that
part of Aquitane, which borders upon Picardy: he may well be termed the Luster
of the French Nation, for his excellent endewments of learning and piety; he
was descended from virtuous Parents; blessed only with a competency of worldly
riches, sufficient to preserve an honest report amongst their neighbors; their
greatest blessing appeared in the gift of this gracious infant. His Fathers
name was Gerard Calvin, ^ man much esteemed of the Nobility inhabi^ing
Aquitane, because he was a singular Politician, approving his judgment and
advice touching the administration of the Commonwealth, desiring his presence
whe^soever that they consulted about serious affairs and important matters of
State; whereby it came to pass that his son Calvin was brought up in his youth
with the sons of the eminentest persons in that Country: His mother was called
Ioanna Franca.

These children he accompanied unto Paris, for the increasing of his learning,
where he had Maturinus Corderius for his Tutor, a man much reverenced for his
internal and external qualities, and esteemed the best for the instruction
and bringing up of youth within the Relme of France. The reason why his father
brought him up in learning, was because he perceived a voluntary inclination in
his son thereunto, which appeared two manner of ways; first because in his
youth he was religiously given; and secondly, because it was observed that he
was a sharp reprover of vice in his School-fellowes. These were sufficient
^estifications unto his Father; wherefore when he came to some maturity of age,
his father so wrought with the Bishop of Noviodun^m, that he had a Canons place
in the Cathedral Church, and also a Cure in a Parish near adjoining, where it
is thought that he Preached many Sermons, although not advanced to the
Ministerial function; but this proceeding continued not long, partly by reason
of his fathers desire, who was earnest with him to addict himself unto the
study of the civil Law, a surer step unto wealth and preferment; and partly by
the persuasion of Rober^us Olivetanus, (a man well deserving of the Fr^nch
Churches, for the doing of the Hebrew Bible into French) who willed him to give
himself wholly unto the reading of the sacred Scriptures, and to separate
himself from those superstitions which were odious in the sight of God.

Being willing to testify his obedience unto his father, he therefore left his
Cure and went to Orleans, where h^ became an Auditor unto Petrus Stella (then
public professor in that place, and reputed to be the soundest Civilian then
living in France) by which means he attained unto great perfection in that
Art, so as he seemed in short time to be rather a teacher then ^n Auditor, and
would many time^ supply the places of the professors themselves; by which
means he gained so great love in the Academy, that at hi^ departure from
Orleance they proffered to confer freely on him, the dignity of Doctor in the
Civil Law: this is also remarkable in the prosecution of his Fathers Will, he
was not forgetful of the counsel of his kinsman Olivetanus, so as withal he
diligently gave himself unto the study of Divinity; in which also he attained
unto such perfection that those Inhabitants of Orleans, who were touched with a
desire of a more pure religion, would resort unto him to have private
conference with him, greatly admiring both his zeal and knowledge during his
residence in that Academy; besid^ his daily exercises, he used to spend half
the night in reading, and the morning following he would meditate awhile in his
bed on that which he had read; by which constant watchfulness, as it was a means of
furnishing him with solid learning and with a retentive memory; so it was also a
means of procuring unto him many diseases, and at the length untimely death.

About this time the Academy at Bordeaux was famous for the presence of that
Prince of Lawirus, Andraeas Alcia^^^ who came out of Italy to be their public
Professor; whereupon Calvin le^t O^leance and came to Bordeaux, where he
acquainted himself with Alciatus, and also with Melchior Volmarus, then
public Professor of the Greek tongue; whose learning, piety and other
virtues, together with his admirable d^xterity, in the bringing up of youth
cannot receive worthy commendations of this Wolmarus: Calvin learned here the
Greek tongue, and a thankful rememberance of which benefit he has recorded
unto future ages, by dedicating unto him his Commentary on the second Epistle
to the Corinthians. Whilst he studied this tongue, he laid not aside the study
of Divinity, but made it his only aim, a^ it a^peared by his actions; for
during his continuance in Bordeaux, he would entreat Wolmarus to walk with him
into the Country, and to be an Auditor unto his Sermon^, which were approved by
him, with no less then an as^onished admiration.

Here he continued earnestly prosecuting his Studies with all diligence, until
such time as he was called home by his Fathers death, where he continued no
longer space but until that he had put off the days of mourning, and then he
went again unto Paris, where at the age of twenty four years, he wrote a
Commentary upon that book of Seneca, de clementia; he had not continued long
here, but his worth procured him the favor and love of such z^alous persons as
desired a Reformat^on, and especially the love of Stephanus Forgeu^, an
honorable Merchant, who afterward suffered Martyrdom for the truth of Christ:
In this Academy he forsook the study of human learning, and betook himself
wholly unto the study of Divini^y, to the exceeding joy of such godly persons,
who durst not to discover their profession to the world, because of the
strength of their enemies, but kept their private assemblies in Paris.

During his residence here Nicalaus Copus the son of Gulielmus Copus of Basil,
the Kings Physician, was designed Rector of Paris; who b^ing to deliver his
Oration according unto the Custom, the same day that religious acts were
celeberated by the Pops; he requested Calvin to perform it for him, who
willingly condicended thereunto, and in his O^ation he discoursed more freely
concerning the purity of Religion then others in that place had formerly done.
This act being not well brooked by the Senate, they call a Parliament, and the
Rector is summoned to appear; in his journey thither he was admonished by some
of his friends to take heed unto himself, because he wanted neither many nor
powerful enemies. He taking these words into a deep consideration, returns
back again, departs out of the Kingdom, and conveighs himself to Basil.
Neither was Calvin free from danger in this act; for some were sent into the
School which is called Fortre^um, where his lodging was; but finding him not
within, they brake open the doors of his Study, take such Papers as they
find, and amongst them many Letters which were sent by zealous p^^^sons unto
him, whereby they also were brought into gre^^ danger of their lives; but they
were all delivered by the means of the Queen of Navarre, who honorably
receiv^^ and entertained Calvin in her house, and became an Audi^o^ unto his
Sermons.

Having continued here a while under the protection of the Queen, he shapes his
course toward Neracum a City i^ Aquitaine^ to visit Iacobus Stapulensis, who
was protected and defended by the Queen for the same cause, and therefo^^
placed in that City under her Dominion. This old man having a certain relation
from him how all things wen^^ he most courteously entertained him, was right
glad to confer with him; and withal spending this judgment on him, that he
would be an excellent instrument for the establishing of the Kingdom of Christ
within the Kingdom of France.

Having continued a few days with this Iacobus, he returns again to Paris,
being led thereunto by the hand of God, for the purging of the City of that
damned haere^i^ of Servetus concerning the Trinity; but after long expectation
and secret hiding of himself, he was constrained again to leave the City
without the effecting of any thing; the enemies of the truth still laboring to
take away his lif^.

In the year 1534. Gerardus Ruffus and Coraldus, zealous professors of the
truth of Christ, and laboring to promote the Gospel in France, were with
great cruelty pulled down out of their Pulpits and cast into prison: and the
King was so enraged, by reason of certain writings opposing the Mass, which
were scattered up and down the C^ty, and fastened unto the door of his Bed
chamber, that aft^^ public Prayers, he commanded (at the which he himself was
present, together with his three Sons, being bar^headed, and holding a
burning Torch for expiations sake) eight persons, supposing to be guilty of
that act, to be burned alive; and in the presence of the People, he bound
himself with a solemn Oath, that he would not spare his own ch^^dren, ^f he
should but know that they were infected with that most horrible and damned
heresy.

Calvin beholding the miserable state and condition of things, resolved to
leave France; revealing his intent unto an intimate friend of his, with whom he
was formerly acquainted during his residence with the Queen of Navarre. Who,
out of his singular affection unto Calvin, promised to accompany him in his
journey; wherefore they forthwith prepare for Basil, committing their money
unto the custody of one of their servants, who being well horst and espying an
opportunity answering his wicked intent, leaves them to shift and to provide for
themselves; and doubtless they had been driven into great distress, had not
the other servant furnished them with ten Crowns, which he h^d about him, by
means whereof they came at length to Basil.

Here he found Symones Grinaeus and Wolfangus Capito, who received him with
great joy, where he continued and gave himself unto the study of the Hebrew
tongu: here he also set forth his Institutions, a laborious and learned work,
and well worthy of the Author, with a Preface most excellent unto the King of
France, which if he had read, it had without doubt given a great wound unto the
Popish religion: b^t the sins of that King and of that Nation were so great,
and vengeance so near at hand, that leave was not given unto them by the Lord
to peruse the same.

Having set forth this book, and in some sort performed his duty to his
Country, he left Basil and went into Italy to visit the daughter of the King of
France, a virtuous and a godly Princess, whom he there confirmed and
strenthned in her religiou^ course of life, whereby she greatly affected him
during the time of his life, and also made a kind testi^^^tion of the same unto
the world after his death. Hence he returned again into France, with an intent
to go for Germany, but in regard of the Wars, passages were shut up that he
could not travel, and therefore he turned into Ge^eva, not thinking to make any
residence at all in that place, but by the observation of future actions, it is
evident that he was guided thither by the hand of God: into this City, not long
before his coming, the Gospel of Christ was wonderfully brought, and that by
the labor and industry of two famous Divines, (viz.) Gulielmus Farellus
somtime^ Scholar unto Iacobus Stapulensis, and Petrus Viretus, whose labors
were aboundently blessed by the Lord: Calvin going for to visit these Genevan
lights, he was entertained by Farellus with a long discourse, and thereby
discovering the excellency of his parts, desiring him to remain at Geneva, and
to be an ass^ant to him in that place for the advancing of the truth of Christ:
but when he saw that Calvin could not easily be drawn and persuaded thereunto,
and being a man of a bold spirit, he said unto him after a vehement manner, I
pronounce unto thee in the name of the living and alpowerfull God, that unless
thou join with us in this work of the Lord, it will come to pass, that he
will curse thee as one that seeks more his own then the glory of Christ.

Calvin being astonished with this terrible sentence and speech of Farellus, he
forthwith submitted himself unto the pleasure of the Presbytery and
Magistrates; by whose voices and consent of the People, he was not only chosen
to be a Preacher, but was also designed to be their Divinity Lecturer, and
graced with the title of Doctor, in the year 1536. which year also is
remarkable for that League concluded betwixt the Cities of Brene and ^eneva,
touching Divine Worship; and also for the conversion of the Inhabitants of
Lausanna unto Christ.

The first thing which he attempted, after his admission into this City, was a
more exact reformation in the Church; and for that cause drew a compendium of
Christian Religion and form of Doctrine, unto which he labored to have the
Inhabitants to subscribe, and to bind themselves by an Oath to abjure the
supersticious Doctrine of Rome, and to defend the same with their lives. This
motion was refused by many at the first, yet not long after (God so disposing)
even in the year 1537. the Senate and people of Geneva, took their Oaths for
the defense of the same.

The ground being thus laid, there wanted not enemies, and those bitter ones to
oppose him in his proceedings; for first the Anabaptists began to sow their
erroneous opinions in the hearts of many, to the great detriment of the Church;
but these were so confuted by Calvin in public disputation appointed by the
Senate, that scarcely any one of them appeared afterward in the City. The
other disturber of the peace and happiness of that Church was, Petrus Caroli
born at Sarbona; who, as she brought him forth an impudent Sophister, so she
cast him out again as a more wicked haeretick: being thence cast out he came
to Geneva, accompanied with the spirit of the Devil; when he saw himself to be
sharply reproved of the Inhabitants, he went unto their en^mies, and from
thence he returned unto Geneva again, intending to leave behind him some
expressions of his worse then diabolical opinions; and for that cause he first
began openly to accuse Farell, Calvin and Viret, of a misconceived opinion
concerning the Trinity; whereupon a Synad was called at Berne, wherein that
calumny of Petrus Caroli was condemned.

But that which struck the greatest strok for the crushing of these hopeful
beginnings, was the intestine dissentions and seditions in the City, who would
not endure this new form of Government; these Farell and Calvin, began first
to correct with mild admonitions, and when they saw that would not prevail
they used more severe and sharper reprehensions, which many not brooking, the
City came to be divided, and many renounced that Oath which they had formerly
made; in respect of which actions Calvin and Farell, with an undaunted courage
openly protested, that they could not lawfully administer the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper unto them, by reason of the disagreements amongst themselves, and
by reason of their alienation from all Ecclesiastical discipline.

There also happened unto this another evil, ( viz.) a difference betwixt the
Churches of Geneva and Berne, about some ceremonies; which because it could not
presently be concluded on by the Synod at Lausanna, but was referred unto
another appointed at Tigurum; the Commissioners unpatient of delay, assembled
the people together, and persuaded then to command Farell, Calvin and Coraldus
to depart the City within two days, because they had refused to administer the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper to them; which message when it was delivered unto
Calvin he replied; Indeed, if I had served men, I had been evilly rewarded, but
now it shall go well with me, because I have served him who will truly pay
unto his servants that which he has once promised.

Who could otherwise have thought but that this action would have proved fatal
unto the Church of Geneva? yet the event manifested the contrary, and showed
that it came to pass by Divine providence, partly because that by exercising
him with these trials, he might be the more fitter for weightier matters; and
partly because he might purge that Church again from many gross and wicked
errors. When that sedition had overthrown and sunk it self with its own
weight; so wonderfully does the Lord appear in all his works, but more
especally in the Governing and protection of his Church.

Some there were who greatly bewailed the departure of these faithful Pastors,
who also inwardly as much lamented the the miserable and wretched State of that
City. From Geneva they went unto Tigurum, where a Synod was called to effect a
reconciliation betwixt the Churches, and those of Geneva; being willed by an
Ambassador sent from Berne to subscribe unto the decrees thereof, they would
not condescend thereun^o; whereupon Calvin left Tigurum and went unto Basil,
where after that he had remained two or three days, he directed his course
unto Strasburge, where he was called by the Senate, Bucer, Hedio, Capito, and
many other reverend Pastors, to be the Divinity Lecturer in that City, which he
did not only perform with the applause of all the learned, but also with the
consent of the Senate he planted the French Church in that City.

Here Calvin remained until the year 1541. in which year a Convocation was
enacted by the Emperor at Worms and Reinspurge, for the taking away of
differences out of those Churches concerning Religion; at which Convocation
Calvin was present, and unto this Assembly came also the Commissioners before
mentioned, who persuaded and prevailed with the Inhabitants of Geneva for the
casting out of Calvin out of the City; upon one of them God showed a terrible
example of vengeance in the same place; for being censured guilty of sedition,
as he was about to save himself by escaping through a window, he fell down
headlong, and with the weight of his body he so crushed himself, that within
few days after he dyed. Another of them being found guilty of murder, he had
his head stricken off; the other two, by reason of their ill carriage in the
affairs of that Commonwealth, were in their absence condemned and ejected by
the Citizens.

During his abode at Strasburge, until this Assembly called by the Emperor,
the Church at Geneva was greatly afflicted with sundry opinions, which were
brought into the City in the year 1539. by Iacobus Sadoletus, which
notwithstanding took no deep rooting, Calvin by his letters in his banishment
persuaded the contrary.

These Commissioners being thus taken away, as the fountains of all sedition
in the City, it pleased the Lord to work a desire in the hearts of the
Inhabitants of recaling Farel and Calvin into the City; but when they saw that
they could not possibly recall Farel from Neocum, they send Ambassadors with
all speed unto Strasburge, making the Tigurines also their intercessours for
the obtaining of Calvin.

The Inhabitants of Strasburge appeared unwilling to grant their desire, and
Calvin himself; because he saw his actions to prosper and to be blessed of
God; in that City refused also himself to go unto Geneva, fearing least his
proceedings should be again hindered by the like sedicious uproares.

The Ambassadors were urgent, and followed their matter ^o close, that at the
last it was concluded that Calvin should again to Geneva; but because he was
to accompany Buc^r unto Reinspurge, his journey was deferred for a space, and
they of Geneva procured Viret from Lausanna to Preach unto them, until the
return of Calvin from Reinspurge; which fell out in the year 1541. where he
was received with exceeding joy and gladness, not only by the Senate, but
also by all the Inhabitants; and he was again restored unto his Church.

But at his entrance again, he told them, that he could not truly discharge
his Ministerial function, unless they would also entertain a Presbytery,
strengthened with Ecclesiastical discipline together with his Doctrine: unto
which motion they consented; whereupon a Presbytery was chosen, their Offices
were declared unto each of them: and unto this form of Government they all
subscribed.

The joyful news of Calvin's coming unto Geneva again being spread abroad, it
caused many godly minded persons to resort, some out of Italy, some out of
England, some out of Spain, unto the same place to be Auditors unto him: these
increased unto that number, that there wa^ not room in the City to entertain
them; and Calvin perceiving that ordering of all things in the City, would be a
labor too weighty for him; he de^ired that he might have Farel and Viret
adjoined unto him; but it could not be granted; for Viret was returned again
unto Lausanna, and Farell was detained at Neocum; so as Calvin alone carries
away the glory of that reformed Church.

It was Bezaes opinion concerning these three, that a complete Pastor might be
composed of them; taking boldness from Farel, eloquence from Viret, and solid
substance from Calvin, every word appearing a grave sentence.

In the year 1542. Calvin was exercised with many laborious employments; not
only concerning the affairs of Geneva, but also about the comforting and
relieving of such as were banished their Country for the profession of the
Gospel, and also by writing consolatory Letters unto them, for their
confirmation and strengthening in the extremity of their afflictions: unto these
also were added; first, a Famine: secondly, a Pestilence, both being
predominant at one and the same time in Geneva. Now because the custom of the
City was to place such as were infected, in a Pesthouse, for that cause erected
without the City; one Blanchetus took upon him the charge of visiting the
sick; and Calvin by the command of the Senate was delivered from that action.

Then he turned himself unto the suppressing of such false Doctrine as crept
into the Church for the eclypsing of the truth. And first he confuted that
opinion of Petrus Tossanus, concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: Then
he confuted the Articles set forth at Sorbon. He overthrew Albertus Pighius
concerning Free Will: refuted the opinion of Sebastianus Castellio, concerning
the Song of Solomon, and caused him to be banished the City of Geneva.

In the year 1544. Carolus the fith, intending to make War against the French
King, commanded a peace amongst the Churches in Germany, until such time as a
general Council was called, which he promised should shortly be effected, and
in the mean time granted unto them liberty of Conscience; which when it came
to the ears of Paulus III. Pope of Rome, he sharply reproved the Emperor,
saying, That he esteemed of Heretics as highly as of Catholics, and that he
seemed to thrust in his sickle into another man's harvest. The Emperor
answered, That he was persuaded that his act was just. And Calvin perceiving
the truth of the Gospel to be deeply wounded b^ these Letters, he sharply
reprov^d the boldness of the Pope. In this year also there was a Convocation
at Spire; whereupon Calvin took occasion of writing his Book, entitled, De
necessitate reformandae Ecclesiae. And in the same year also he refuted the
Anabaptists and Libertines, and that with such invincible arguments, that none
reading and observing hi^ Work, can (unless wittingly and willingly) be
deceived and seduced by them. But the Queen of Navarre was greatly offended
with that Work of his against the Libertines, because he had particularly
reproved Quintinus and Pocquetus, two Ringleaders of that Sect, and not of
small account with her Majesty. Calvin being informed of this, he so wisely and
discreetly behaved himself, that he gained again the favor of the Queen; and
withal, caused that impious and blasphemous Sect to be banished out of France,
who afterward seated themselves in Amsterlodam, the prime town in Holland.

In the year 1545. by the conspiracy of some wicked and evilly disposed
persons, the thresholds and posts of the doors in Geneva were done over with
an ointment so strongly composed of poison, that whosoever touched it, death
imediately followed; and from this also proceeded a raging Pestilence in the
City, whereby an infinite number of souls were swept away: this accident
procured great envy unto Calvin from all places; yet at the last some of the
authors of this inhumane act were discovered, and suffered worthy punishment
for the same. In this year also he labored to remove the false opinion of
Osiander concerning the Lords Supper, out of the Church; and also the errors
of the Nicodemites, and many other gross opinions which hindered the growth of
the truth of Christ. In which proceedings he was abundantly blessed by the
Lord, who never permitted his enemies to have their pleasure of him, by taking
away his life, which they intended; and more especially he shelterd him from
the fury of Amedenus Perinnus, a Captain of great authority in the City, but
deprived for that fact of his Office.

These continued dissentions and defamations in the Church at Geneva, were
motives which drew Farellus and Viretus unto the same place; who in the year
1548. delivered before the Senate an eloquent and learned Oration, concerning
the suppression of Sedition, and the taking away of differences out of the
Church. The motion was approved of all, and Perinnus having hopes thereby to
attain again unto his former preserment, consented thereunto; but he soon
discovered his wicked intent, for he was no sooner graced with his former
dignity, but he and many others burst forth into reproachful speeches against
Calvin; and after a disgraceful manner, calling his Dog by the name of Calvin;
others style him by the name of Cain; and some by reason of that violent and
fierce hatred which they conceived against him, they would absent themselves
from the Communion, and so draw down a double vengeance on themselves.

In the midst of these evils (which were of force to have caused him to have
forsaken the City) he constantly performed his Ministerial office; and at
vacant times he enlightened Paul's Epistles with learned Commentaries. He also
most learnedly laid open and discovered the falsity and vanity fo Judiciary
Astrology. He comforted Beratius living as a banished man at Basil, and also
Bucer in England.

And this is also remarkable, that notwithstanding the daily increa^ing of
these contentions, the Church did wonderfully flourish in Geneva; and also it
enjoyed some peace and quietness. In the year 1551. for then there sprung up a
company of factious fellows, who denied the privileges of the City unto such
as were banished for the truth, and fled to that place for succor: And being
persuaded by Calvin in a Sermon Preached for that purpose, to grant the
privileges of the City unto them; he was well beaten for his pains as soon as
he came out of the Pulpit. These stirred up also another Tumult in the Temple
of St. Gervas, because the Minister refused to Baptize a child by the name of
Balthazar. Calvin not forgetting his late kindness received, was contented
with patience to let it pass. In this year the City was also much troubled
with that blasphemous heresy of Servetus; who by the means of Calvin was
apprehended and convicted; but remaining obstinate in his opinion, he was bu^nd
alive in the same City.

The cause of Servetus being as yet in hand, one of the factious company,
called Ber^lerius an impudent and wicked fellow, (whom the Presbitery had
fo^bidden to come unto the Lords table, by reason of his ill lead life) and
excomunicated, came unto the Senate, and desired his absolution; which he
persuaded himself was sufficient; Calvin earnestly opposes this action of the
Senate, declaring unto him that he ought to be a defender and maintainer, and
not a violator of holy and good laws; yet Berlterius prevailed with the
Senate, and he granted unto him his absolutory letters. Perinnus by the
imitation of Bertlerius, thought to take Calvin in a trap, and either to raise
a tumult against him, if he would not obey the Senate, or if he consented, then
no disanull the authority of the Presbitery: Calvin being fore-admonished of
this intent, in his Sermon before the Communion, in the presence of both of
them, he uttered these words with great fervency; But I imitating Chrysostom,
will rather suffer my self to be slain, then that this hand shall reach the
holy things of the Lord, unto such as are apparently known to be the contemners
and despisers of him: which wrought such an impression in them, that they durst
not presume to come unto the Lords table; nay it is probable that he was at
that time fearful of his life, for he Preached as if they never afterward
should have heard him again. In this troublesome state the Church of Geneva
continued unto the year 1555. wherein a conspiracy was happily discovered, by
which means most of the factious persons were put to death, and banished the
City. By which example of Divine vengeance, others were delivered and kept in
awe, and that Common-wealt^ freed from many inconveniences; yet in the same
year the errors of Servetus seemed to revive again, and to be nourished by
Matthaeus Gibraldus an excellent Lawyer, who came unto Geneva, and would
willingly have been familiar with Calvin, which he most willingly would have
had embraced, so as he would have consented with him in the Article of the
Trinity.

The same year also yielded much sorrow unto Calvin, in regard that persecution
raged in many places, and especially in England; which took away Hooper,
Ridley, Latimer, and afterward Cranmer, men of incomparable piety; whereby the
propagation of the truth was hindered. There happened also other causes of
discontent, as the faction of some neighboring Pastors, bewitched with the
instigation of that Carmelite Bolsecus, who bitterly inveighed against him
concerning Predestination; whereupon he obtained leave of the Senate to go unto
Berne, to be censured by the Church concerning that point; in which censures
the adversaries being found guilty, they were expelled and banished the
Country; and he found favor, and was in great estimation amongst the best. In
the year 1556. Calvin preaching in Geneva, he was taken so strongly with an
Ague, that he was forced to leave in the midst of his Sermon, and to come down
from the Pulpit: upon this accident, news was spread abroad concerning his
death, which in short space came unto Rome, and it was so joyfully entertained
by the Pope, that he forthwith caused public prayers and thanksgivings to be
dedicated unto God in all the Church for the same; but the prayers of the
faithful prevailed more; for he was so far from dying, that being as it were
endewed with another life, he went unto France, fuet ad Maenum, being thereunto
called for the removing the dissentions out of the Churches of France; whence
returning, although somewhat sickly, yet he ceased not to execute his constant
course in his Ministry; and also he carefully and timely confuted the
heretical opinion of Valentinus Gentilis, touching three Gods and three
Eternals, lest by continuation it should take such root, that it would hardly
be plucked up. And these were his actions until the year 1558. wherein in
pleased God to afflict him with a quartan Ague, which caused great sorrow and
lamentation in Geneva; yet it continued with him but for the space of eight
weeks; in which time it weakened and so enfeebled his body, that he was never
sound until the day of his death. During this sickness, he was advised by the
Physicians and some of his friends, to forbear his usual exercises, and to
cherish his body with a little ease; but he would not, declaring unto them,
that he could not endure an idle life.

In the year following Henry King of France intended to level Geneva with the
ground, and to put the Inhabitants thereof to the sword; but before he could
effect that bloody project, he was taken captive by a higher power; and the
City still flourished, even in the midst of her enemies: and that nothing might
be wanting unto her prosperous and flourish^ng state, Calvin caused a School
to be erected, and consecrated unto the great God, which should always be
furnished with learned Ministers and public Professors of the Arts and
Tongues, and especially of Divinity; that so the City might enrich it self
with its own treasure.

In the year 1560. the Waldenses sent unto Calvin for his judgment concerning
some points, wherein he gave them abundant satisfaction, and exhorted them to
join themselves with the other Protestant Churches. And at the same season,
many Protestants in France, hearing of ^he peace and quietness which the
Church in England enjoyed at the beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
many of them came into England, and desired of Edmund Grindal, (...) Lord
Bishop of London, that they might have leave to s^^d for a Preacher unto
Geneva, for the planting of the French Church in London; who condiscended
thereunto; Galas^^^ was sent.

Calvin having spent his days hitherto in extraordinary labors (for his life
may well be said to be a continued labor mixed with grief, as appears by
the Works which he wrote being at Geneva.) The time was now at hand in which he
must go unto his eternal rest; his diseases, contracted by his indefatigable
labors, caused him to give over his Divine exercises; for indeed, how could he
continue long? when as his body was by nature weak and lean, inclining to a
consumption; and because he slept very little, spending almost all the year
either in Preaching, Teaching, or Dictating; for ten whole years he never
Dined, and after the set hour he would not receive his Supper. He was subject
unto the disease called the Migram, for the curing of which he used nothing but
fasting, and that sometimes for the space of six and thirty hours. After that
his quartan Ague left him, he was troubled with the Gout taking him in his left
leg; which to make it the more grievous was seconded with the Colic. The
Physicians applied what remedies they could, and he carefully followed their
counsel. He was armed against these afflictions with an admired patience, no
man ever hearing him uttering a word unworthy of himself in his greatest
extremity, but lifting up his eyes unto heaven, he would cheerfully utter the
words of David, How long O Lord. When he was exhorted by his friends to desist
from reading or writing in the time of sickness, he would reply, What? will
you have the Lord find me idle?

Not long before his death, some of his fellow Pastors coming accordingly as
they used to visit him, they found him contrary to their expectation
apparalled, and fi^ting at his Table in that form as he used to meditate,
resting his head on his hand, he spoke these words unto them; I thank you
brethren for the care which you have over me; but I hope that within these
fifteen days the Lord will reveal how he intends to dispose of me, and I
think that I shall leave you, and be received of him.

Growing weaker and weaker, he was brought into the Senats Court by his
command, where after an humble manner he thanked the Senate for the courtesies
formerly conferred on him, and for the special care which they had of him in
this his last sickness. Not long after he received the Communion at the hands
of Beza, laboring the best that he could to join with the rest of the
Congregation in singing of Psalms unto God.

The day wherein he dyed, he seemed to speak somewhat heartily, but this was
but the last struggling of nature, for about eight of the clock apparent signs
of death were seen; which being perceived of Beza, he ran forth to acquaint his
other Colleagues with it, but besure his return he had quietly yielded his
soul into the hands of God, leaving such a cheerful countenance unto the
beholders, that he seemed rather to be asleep, then dead. Thus was that light
taken away, even at the se^ting of the Sun. The day following, there was great
lamentation throughout the City; the Church lamented for the death of her
faithful Pastor; the School sorrowed for the loss of so famous a Doctor; and
in general, all were filled with mourning, because they were deprived of their
only comforter, next unto God.

Many of the Citizens desired to behold him after that he was dead, so great
was their affection to him; and some strangers also whom the fame of Calvin had
drawn unto that place, and amongst them the English Ambassador for France
desired greatly to see him being dead; but it could not be granted, least it
might raise a scandal on him amongst the Papists. He was buried in the common
Churchyard, without any extraordinary pomp, and without any Gravestone laid
over him; for which cause Beza wrote these Funeral Verses: Romae ^uentis
terro^ ille maximus,
Quem mortuum lugent boni horrescunt mali;
Ipsa a quo potuit virtutem discere virtus,
Cur adeo exiguo ignotoque in cespite clausus,
Calvinus lateat; rogas?
Calvinum assidue comitata modestia vivum,
Hoc tumulo manibus condidit ipsa suis.
O te beatum cespitem tanto hospite!
O cui invidere cuncta possunt marmorae!
How happens it that this is Calvin's share,
To lie under this little, unknown pare^
Is not this he who living did appear,
Decaying Romes continued dread and fear?
Whose death the godly does with sorrow fill,
And at whose name the wicked tremble still?
Whose life was known to be so holy, clear,
That virtue might have learned a lesson here?
It Is true, but know that humble modesty,
Which in his life did him accompany:
That has ordained this green and turfie cover,
On his deceased Corpse to be laid over:
But since thou coverest such an one as he,
How can the Marbles all, but envy thee.


A little before his death, he delivered an excellent Oration unto the Senate,
unto which was also added a serious exhortation unto all the Pastors of Geneva.
His Works which he has set forth for the general good of the Church, which
are sufficient declarations of his worth are these which follow.

Commentaries upon the old Testament.

1. Upon Genesis. 2. An Harmony upon the four books of Moses. 3. Upon Iosuah.
4. Upon the Psalms.

Lectures.

1. Upon Jeremiah. 2. Upon the twenty one of Ezekiell. 3. Upon Daniel. 4. Upon
the lesser Prophets.

Upon the new Testament

1. His Harmony on the Evangelists. 2. His Coment on the Acts. 3. On all Paul's
Epistles. 4. On the Hebrews. 5. On Peter, James, John, Jude.

His Sermons.

1. Vupon Deuteronomy. 2. Upon the Decalogue. 3. Upon Job. 4. Upon 119. Psalm.
5. Upon the Canticles. 6. Upon 38. Chapters of Isaiah. 7. Upon the eight last
Chapters of Daniel. 8. Upon the Nativity, Passion, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension of Christ. 9. Upon Gods Election and Providince. 10. Upon the first
of Kings. 11. Upon Iosuah.

Other Works.

1. His institutions. 2. Upon the Eucarist. 3. Upon the victory of Jesus. 4.
Genevaes Catechism. 5. Of Reforming Churches. 6. Of Scandals. 7. Of Free Will.
8. Against Anabaptists. 9. Libertines. 10. Sorbonists. 11. Against Judicial
Astrology. 12. Of Predestination. 13. Of a true Communicant. 14. Part of Seneca
enlightened with a Commentary. 15. His answer unto Sadolets Epistle.

Had we but such Reformers in our days
As Calvin was, we should have cause to praise
. Their bless endeavors; but alas our Times
Are daily acting (not Reforming) Crimes;
Heroic Calvin's heart was always true
To truth, and still would give the Church her due,
His soul was truly willing to take pains,
More for the public good, then private gains.
His life was filled with troubles, yet his mind
(Even like the glistring Glow-worme) always shined
Brightest, when most surrounded with the night
Of sad afflic^ions; Calvin's whole delight
Was in the law of God, from which his heart
Being steel^d with truth, could not be moved to start.
The Life and Death of William Farellus, who dyed Anno Christi 1565.
WIilliam Farellus was born in the Delphinate of a Noble family, Anno Christi
1589. and sen^ to Paris to be brought up in learning, and was one of the first
that mad^ a Public Profession of the Gospel in France: but when persecution
arose, he fled into Helvetia, where he grew in^o ^amiliarity with Zuinglius,
^ec^lamp^dius^ and Hall^rus. Anno Christi 1524. he went to Basil, where he
prof^rred a public Disputation with the Popish Divines of that place, but the
Masters of the University would not suffer it, till the Senate interposing
their autohrity, and then Farellus set up his Theses publicly, which he also
maintained by desputation: but the Bishop and his Associates drove him from
Basil: from thence he went to Mont-pelier, and to some other places, where he
Preached the Gospel with so much fervor and zeal, that all might see that he
was called of God thereunto. He coming to Metin Preached in the Chuch-y^rd
belonging to the Dominicans, who by ringing their be^l^ thought to have drowned
his voice, but having a strong voice, he did so thunder it out, that he went on
audably to the end of his Sermon. Anno Christi 1528. he, with Virete went to
Geneva, where they planted the Church, and propagated the Gospel; and where,
by his earnest obt^station, Calvin was forced to make his abode. Anno christi
1553. the Genevians, though they owed themselves to him, yet were carried on
with such fury, that they would have condemned Farell to death. And afterward
they did such things against him, that Calvin wished that he might have
expiated their anger with his blood. And from thence he went to Neocome, where
he discharged his Pastoral office with singular diligence and zeal. When he
heard of Calvin's sickness, he could not satisfy himself, though he was
seventy years of age, but he must go to Geneva to visit him. He survived
Calvin one year and odd Month, and dyed age 76. years, anno christi 1565. He
was very godly, learned, innocent in life; exceeding modest, stout, and sharp
of wit; and of such a strong voice, that he seemed to thunder in his speech;
and so fervent in Prayer, that he carried his Hearers into heaven with him.

Renowned Farell lived a life,
Not spotted with the stains of strife:
He loved the thoughts, the name of Peace
His virtues had a large increase;
Earth was his scorn, and Heaven his pride:
In Peace he lived, in Peace he died.
The Life and Deoth of Vergerius, who dyed Anno Christi 1565.
PEter Paul Vergerius excellently learned both in the Law, and Popish Divinity:
he was sent by Pope Clement the seventh, as his Legate into Germany to improve
his uttermost abilities to hinder a National Council: where accordingly he
bestirred himself to hinder and endamage the Lutherans, and to encourage the
Popish Divines in opposing of them. Anno Christi 1534. Paul the third sent for
him to Rome to give him an account of the state affairs in Germany: after which
he sent him back into Germany, to promise the Princes a General Council to be
held at Mantua, but withal to perscribe such rules about coming to it, as he
knew the Protestant Divines would not accept of: he had in charge also to stir
up the Princes minds against the King of England, and to profer his Kingdom
to whosoever would conquer it, and to try if by any means he could take off
Luther, and Melancthon from prosecuting what they had begun. Anno Christi 1535.
he was called home again by the Pope, and when he had given him an account of
his Legation, he was sent presently to Caesar to Naples, to stir him up to take
Arms against the Lutherans. Anno Christi 1537. he was again sent into
Germany; and also Anno Christi 1541. to the Convention at Worms: after which
he was called back to Rome, and the Pope being to make some Cardinals, intended
to make Vergeri^^ one, but some suggested that he had been so long in Germany
that he smelled of a Lutheran, which made the Pope to alter his purpose, which
when Vergerius heard of, he went into his own Country, purposing to clear
himself by answering some of Luthers books; but it pleased God, that whilst he
read them with an intent to confute them, himself was converted by them;
whereupon he retired himself to his brother the Bishop of Pole, and
communicated his thoughts to him: his brother at first was much as^onished, but
after a while was persuaded by him to read, and study the Scriptures,
especially in the point of Justification by Faith, whereby it pleased God that
he also saw the Popish Doctrines to be false, and so they both became zealous
Preachers of Christ to the people of Istria: but the Devil stirred up many
adversaries against them, especially the Friars, who accused them to the
Inquisitors: whereupon Vergerius went to Mantua to his old friend Cardinal
Gonzaga: but there he could not stay in safety, whereupon he went to the
Council of Trent to purge himself: but the Pope by his Legate, stopped him from
being heard there: from thence he went to Venice, and so to Padua, where he was
a spectator of the miserable condition of Francis Spira; which so wrought upon
him, that he resoved to leave his Country, and all his outward comforts, and to
go into voluntary exile, where he might freely profess Christ; and
accordingly he went into Rhetia, where he Preached the Gospel sincerely, til he
was called from thence to Tubing, by Christopher Duke of Wurtenburge, where he
ended his days, Auno Christi 1565.

Those Popish errors which at first bore sway
In our Vergerious heart, were chaste away
By the increasing sun of truth; his mind
(Which was before all dross) was refined:
And from a cruel enemy; became
A perfect friend, and boldly would proclaim
The real truth; feared not to be withstood.
Thus brave Vergerius turned from bad, to good.
The Life and Death of Strigelius, who dyed Anno Christi 1569.
VIctorine Strigelius was born at Kausbita in Switzerland Anno Christi 1524.
his father was Doctor of Physi^k, who died in his sons infancy: when this
S^igelius was fit for it, his friends finding him of a prompt and ready wit,
they set him to School in his own Country, where he quickly drunk in the first
rudiments of learning, and so Anno Christi 1538. he went to the University of
Friburg, and having studied the Arts there for a while, An. Christi 1542. he
went to Wittenberge where he was inflamed by God with an ardent desire to know
the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches: for which end he diligently attended on
Luthers and Melancthons Lectures, and wholly framed himsel^^ to the imitation
of Melancthom. Anno Christi 1544. he Commensed Master of Arts, and by the
persuasion of Melancth^^ he taught a private School at Win^^enberg, where he
did much good, and gat himself great repute: But when the Wars in Germany
waxed hot, he left Wittenberg, and went to Magdeburge, and from thence to
Erphurd, where he published some Orations being about twenty two years old.
Anno Christ 1548. he went thence to Ienes, and their h^ Preached, and the year
after married a wife, which lived with him but two years. Anno 1553. he married
again: whilst he continued there he had diverse disputations with Major about
Good Works: and with Flacius; but An. 1559. the Flacians prev^iled so far, that
he and Aquila the Pastor of Ienes were both cast into prison, the marks whereof
he carried to his grave. In Prison he fell very sick, insomuch as the Prince
suffered him to go unto his own house, but yet made him ^ Prisoner there:
Christopher, Duke of Wurtenburg, and Philip Lantgrave of H^sse mediated for his
release, and yet could not obtain it: but at last the Emperor Maximillian
(interposing his authority) procured it, after he had been a prisoner abov^
three year^. But perceiving that he could not be in s^f^ty in that place, h^
resolved to depart, which the University understanding, wrote to him, earnestly
importuning his stay: to whom he returned thanks for their love, but told them
withal, That his life was in con^inuall danger by reason o^ false brethren,
and therefore he wa^ resolved to go^ where he might do more good: and
acco^dingly from thence he went to Lipswich, where he sp^nt his time in writing
upon the Psalms: and having it lef^ to his choice whether to stay at Lipswich,
or to go to Wittenberg (being sent for thither) he chose to stay where he was,
and was chosen Professor of Divinity in that University: There he continued his
Lectures till An. Christi 1566. at which ^im^ he came to deliver his judgment
about the Lords Supper: wher^upon, by the command of the Rector of the
University, the doors of the College were shut against him, and he not
suffered to read an^ more: yet they would have restored him to his place, if h^
would have promised to meddle with that point no more: but refused to make any
such promise, and withal com^plained to the Elector of Saxony of the wrong
don unto him, from whom he received a sharp answer; and therefore leaving
Lipswich and went to Amberg in the upper Pala^inate, where, after a short stay,
he rec^ived letters from the Elector Palatine, and the University, inviting of
him to Heidleberge, whither he presently went, and was made Professor of
Ethics: in which place, he took very great pains both in reading his Lectures,
and Writing: But his body having contracted some diseases by his former
imprisonment. Anno Christi 1569. he fell very sick, whereupon he said, Sperare
se finem vitae su^ adesse, etc. That he hoped that his life was at an end,
whereby he should be delivered from the fraud, and miseries of thi^ evil
world, and enjoy the blessed presence of God, and his Saints to all Eternity;
and acordingly presently after he quietly departed in the Lord, Anno Christi
1569. and of his Age 44.

When a resolved heart is once inflamed
With heavenly motions, it will not be reclam'd
By easy terms, because a faithful breast
Is filled with Heaven, and Heaven is crowned with rest^
And had not stout Strigelius his heart
Been steeled with courage, he had felt the smart
Of a bad conscience; but he still persisted
In what was good, and would not be resisted:
Those wrongs and injuries which he endured
On earth, was by Heavens grand Physician cured.
The Life and Death of John Brentius, who dyed Anno Christi 1570.
John Brentius was born at Wile in Sweveland, Anno Christi 1499. his father was
Mayor of that City 24. years, who carefully brought up his son in learning: and
at eleven years old sent him to Heidleberg to School, and at thirtee^ years
old he was admitted into the University: and at fifteen he commensed Bachelor;
there also he studied Greek and Hebrew; and was so studious, that he usually
rose ^t midnight to his Book; whereby he contracted such ^n h^bit, that he
could never after whilst he lived, sleep longer then till midnight; the rest
of the night he spent in holy Medita^ions. And in his old age he had a candle
by hi^ bedsid^, and deceived the time by writing and meditation. Partly by his
diligence, and partly by his acute wit and strong memory, he profited so much
both in the Art^ and Tongues, that at eighteen years old he was made Master of
Arts. About this time Luthers Books coming abroad, Bren^ius, by reading of
them, came to the knowledge of the Truth, which he willingly embraced. And
being desirous to p^opagate it to others, he began to read upon Matthew, first
to some friends of his own College, but his Auditor^ increasing out of other
Colleges, he was fain to read in the public School^; for which the Divines
hated him, because he grew so popular, say^ng; That neither was the place fit
for Divinity Lectures, nor he fit for such a work, being not yet in Orders.
Wherefor^ to take away that objection, he entered into Orders, and Preached
often for other men, to the great delight of his Hearers. From thence he was
called to be at Pastor at Hale in Sweveland, where his gravity, gesture,
phrase, voice and Doctrine did so plea^e the Senate, that though he was but
three and twenty years of age, yet they chose him to that place; and he carried
himself with such gravity, holiness of life, integrity of manners, and
diligence in his Calling, that none could contemn his youth: and the Lord so
blessed his labors there, that many were converted to the Truth; yea, amongst
the very Popish Priests, some of them were converted, others l^ft their places
for shame, and went elsewhere. He used much modesty and wisdom in his Sermons;
and when (in the beginning of his Preaching there) the Popish Priests railed
exceedingly upon him and his Doctrine, and the People expected that he would
answer them accordingly; he, contrariwise, went on in teaching the fundamental
points of Religion, and as he had occasion he confuted their Errors without
bitterness from clea^e Scripture arguments; whereby in time he so wrought upon
them, that he brought them to a sight of their Errors, and to a detestation of
their Idolatry.

About this time Muncer, and his companions rose up, and stirred almost all the
Boor^ in Germany to take Arms against the Magistrates and rich men; abusing
Scripture to justify their proceedings; whereupon Brentius was in great
danger, for many cried out, that his opposing of Popery and casting out the old
Ceremonies, was the Cause of these tumults: and when as the Boors in Hale were
risen up, and threatened to besiege the City of Hale, the Magistrates and
Citizens were in such fear, that they were ready to slye, or to join with the
Boors: but Brentius encouraged them, and told them, That if they would take
Arms, and defend their City, God would assist them, etc. And so it came to
pass, for six hundred Citizens beat away four thou^and of those Boors. He
also published a Book, in confutation of their wicked opinions; and showed how
dissonant they were to the Word of God.

Presently after rose up that unhappy cont^n^ion between Luther and Zuinglius,
about Christ's presence in the Sacrament, which continued diverse years, to the
great disturbance of the Church, scandal of the reformed Religion, and
hinderance of the success of the Gospel: and when a conference was appointed
for the composing of that differance, Luther, Brentius, and some others met
with Zuingli^^ and some of his friends; but after much debate, they p^^ted
without an agreement.

Anno 1530. was the Diet held at Auspurg, unto which the Protestant Princes
brought their Divines with them, and amongst others Brentius; at which time
George Marquess^ of Brandenburg told the Emperor, That he would rath^r shed
his blood, and lose his life, or lay down hi^ neck to the heads-man, then
alter his Religion. Here the Divine^ drew up that famous Confession of Faith,
which, from the place, is ^alled the Augustine-Confession. Brentius, at his
^eturne home married a Wife, famous for her chastity, modesty and piety, by
whom he had six children. Vlric^^ Prince of Wurtenburg, intending to reform
Religion in hi^ Dominions, thought it the best way first to reform the
Universitie of Tubing, and considering where he might have a fit man for so
great and difficult a work; he at last resolved upon Brentius, whom he sent
for; and who, with much diligence, prudence, and fidelity accomplished the same.

In the year 1547. the Emperor with his Army coming to Hale, Brentius hoping
to prevail with the Captain th^^ no Soldiers should be quartered in his
House; but when h^ came home, he found the soldiers beating at his door, and
ready to break it down; and when they perceived that Brentius was M^^ter of
that House, one of them set an Halbert to his breast, threatening to kill him, if
the door was not presently opened. Whereupon they were let in, and he caused
meat and drink to be prepared for them, and in the mean time conveyed away all
his papers; and when he saw the fury and rage of the soldiers, he conveyed
himself and family out at a back door. The next day came a Spanish Bishop with
his train, and putting forth the soldiers, he quartered in Brentius his house,
searched his study, looked over his papers and letters, and finding some
letters to his friends, wherein he justified the Protestant Princes in taking
Arms against the Emperor, he presently carried them to the Emperor; whereby
Brentius was in great danger, and was fain to hide himself in a very high
Tower, and not being safe there, he changed his apparel, left his wife and
children, and with one only companion passed through the Spaniards safely, and
wandered up and down the fields all that night. But when the Emperor was removed
with his Army, he returned to Hale again.

In the year 1548. when Caesar had published his Book, called the Interim, the
Protestant Princes and Magistrates required the judgments of their Divines
upon it: and the Magistrates of Hale desired Brentius to tell them his
judgment; who when he had considered it, told them, That it was a wicked
Book, and altogether contrary to the Scriptures, and that he would lose his
life before he would assent to it. This coming to Caesar's ears, he sent a
Commissary to Hale, charging him to bring Brentius to him, either alive or
dead: when the Commissary came thither, he insinuated himself into Brentius
his acquaintance, invited him to his Table, persuaded him to walk abroad with
^im, having prepared Horses to carry him away, but that succeeding not, he
called the Senate together, and having sworn them to keep private what he
should tell them, he imparted his Commission, telling them how acceptable it
would be to the Emperor, if they would send to him Brentius; but if they
refused, the Emperor would destroy their City, etc. It pleased God that
whilst he was thus persuading the Magistrates, there came in one later then
his fellows, and the Commissary not minding it, did not tender the Oath to
him; so when they were dismissed, this man wrote to Brentius; Fuge, fuge,
Brenti, cito, citius, citissime: which note was brought him as he sat at
supper: having read it, he told his Family that he must go forth upon
business, but would return ere long. As he was going out of the City he met
the Commissary, who asked him whither he went? He answered, To a sick friend in
the Suburbs who had sent for him: Well (said the Commissary) to morrow you must
dine with me. He replied, God willing, and so they parted. Being thus escaped,
he hid himself in a thick Wood, and for some weeks together he lay in the Wood
all day, and every night came into a Villege to a friends house where he
lodged; he wrote also to the Magistrates of Hale that if they could and would
protect him, he was ready to come back, and not to forsake his flock, but if
they could not, he did not desire that they should endanger themselves for his
sake: They answered, that they could not protect him, and therefore left him
free to go whither he pleased. Presently after Vlricus Prince of Wurtenburge
invited him to him, and ordered him to be so private that he himself might not
know where he was, that if he was asked, he might safely deny his knowledge of
him: yet upon suspicion, his Castle was searched, but Brentius was in another
place, where in his retirement he wrote a Comment upon the ninety third Psalm:
afterward he went to Basil, as to a safer place, where his wife dyed of a
Consumption: from thence he removed to the Castle of Horrenburge in the
Hyrcinian Wood, where he changed his name, and gave out that he was the Keeper
of the Castle: and whilst he was there, he frequented the Sermons in a neighbor
town, where the Minister used to spin out his Sermons to a great length:
whereupon Brentius took occasion modestly to tell him of it; to whom the
Minister answered, You Castle-keepers think all time too long at Church, but no
time too long that you spend in drinking: Brentius smiling at it, said no more.
Whilst he was there, he perfected his Comment upon Isaiah, and some other
Works: afterward he had great profers made him by the Citizens of Magdeburge,
by Edward the sixth King of England, and by the Duke of Broussia, but he
refused them all, and thus continued in banishment for the space of two years.
Anno Christi 1550. Vlricus Duke of Wurtenburg dyed, and his son Christopher
succeeding, he resolved to restore the Ministers which were driven away by the
Interim to their Charges within his Dominions, and to perfect the Work of
Reformation: and for that end, sent for Brentius and kept him in his Castle of
Stutgard that he might have his advice and assistance in carrying on of that
work: neither was he discouraged by the admonitions of the Princes and Bishops,
nor by the threats of the Garrisons that were about him: but caused Brentius to
write a Confession of Faith, and of the Doctrine of Christian Religion, and
about the chief points in Controversy, which he intended to send to the
Council of Trent: about that time Brentius married again, one Catharine
Isenmam a choice woman, who was a great comfort to him all the rest of his
life, by whom also he had twelve children: the year after the Pastor of
Stutgard dying, Brentius was chosen in his room: in which place he continued
all his life, and carried himself with much sedulity, piety and prudence in
the same. Anno Christi 1557. he was sent by his Prince to the Conference at
Worms, which came to nothing, because the Popish party would not suffer that
the Scripture should be ^he Judge of their Controversies. In his old age he
wrote upon the Psalms: and whereas there were many Monasteries in Wur^enburge,
out of which the Friars were driven, he persuaded his Prince to turn them to
Schools for the training up youth in learning, which was accordingly don, and
once in two years Brentius visited those Schools; and took notice how the
Scholars profited in learning, and encouraged them to make a daily progress
therein: he had almost finished his Comment upon the Psalms when as his old
age, worn out with studyes, and labors, put a period unto the same, and his end
was hastened by grief for the immature death of hi^ Prince, for whom he
professed that he would willingly have sacrificed all his estate, and his own
life also. Falling in^o a Fevor whereby he perceived that his end approached,
he made his Will, wherein he set down a Confession of his Faith: and sending
for the Ministers of Stutgard, he caused his Son to read it to them, and
requested them to subscribe their hands as witnesses to it: he also received
the Sacrament, and exhorted them to unity in Doctrine, and love amongst
themselves: he was exceeding patient in all his sickness, neither by word, nor
gesture showing the least impatience: always saying, That he longed for a
better, even an eternal life: the night before his death he slept sweetly, and
when he awaked, the Minister repeated the Apostles Creed, and asked him whether
he dyed in that Faith, to whom he answered, Yea: which was his la^t word, and
so he quietly resigned up his spirit unto God, Anno Christi 1570. and of his
Age 71. He was buried with much honor, and had this Epitaph: Voce, stylo,
pietate, fide, candore probatus
Johannes, tali Brentius ore fuit.
With voice, style, piety, faith, candor graced,
In outward shape, John Brentius was thus faced.
Tossed in the ship of fortune B^entius sailed
From place, to place, his courage never failed;
But with resolved Constancy, he bent
His mind to suffer, free from discontent:
The rage of Papists could not make him yield
To their desires; True virtue was his shield;
The strength of his afflictions added strength
Unto his soul, his sufferings had no length
Except of days, and them he knew to be
B^t servile Subjects to Mortality:
Thus like a patient sufferer he fled
From earth, to heaven, and there reposed his head.


The Life and Death of Peter Viretus, who dyed Anno Christi 1571.
PEt^r Viretus was born in the Country of the Bernates, brought up in learning
at Paris, where he began to be acquainted with Farellus: from thence he went to
Lusanna, where he was chosen Pastor, and spent much of his time in teaching,
and writing there: and when Calvin was sent to the Conference at Worms Anno
Christi 1541. and from thence to Ratisbone, he obtained of the Senate of
Lusanna that Viretus should supply his place at Geneva til his return: and when
he came back he much importuned that Viretus might still continue there,
affirming that it would much conduce to the good of the Church at Geneva to
enjoy his labors: but he would needs return to Lusanna to his former charge:
yet afterward, at the earnest entreaty of the French Churches, he went to
Lions; where, in the midst of the Civil Wars, and the Pestilence which
followed, he, with his Colleagues, governed the Church with much prudence: till,
by the Jesuits means, there was a Proclamation sent abroad that none but such
as were Native French should be Preachers in the Protestant Churches: then at
the request of the Queen of Navar he went to Bern, where he continued until
his death, which was in the year 1571. and of his Age threescore. He was much
bewailed of all good men: wh^^est he lived he was of a very weak constitution,
and the rather by reason o^ poison which a Priest had given to him at Geneva;
as also because of some wounds that he had received from a Priest in another
place, where he was left for dead. He was very learned, of a sweet disposition,
and so exceeding eloquent, that he drew many to be his Hearers which were no
friends to Religion; and they were so chained to his lips, that they never
thought the time long wherein he Preached, but always wished his Sermons
longer. At Lions, which was a populous City, he Preached in an open place, and
turned some thousands to the Truth and Faith in Christ: yea, some that passed
by, with no purpose to hear his Sermon, he did so wo^ke upon them, that they
neglected their other business to harken to him.

Reader, observe the Malice of his Foes,
Who having not the wisdom to oppose
Brave Viretus by arguments; thought fit
To labor with a diabolick wit
To work his ruin; first by poison they
Contrived his fall; but poison scorned to bey
Their base desires, which made them rage and swell,
Into a madness, till advised by Hell
To a more speedy way, which soon took place
Within their hearts; being destitute of grace
They thought it good to employ a Papist, whose arm
Was ready to perform what might prove harm
To harmless Viretus, and with a knife
(As they supposed) deprived him of his life:
But God (the great abhorror of such crimes)
Preserved rare Viretus for better times.
JOHN IEVELL.
The Life and Death of John Jewel.
IF ever any were happy in the imposition of names in those whom they dedicate
to God at the Font, certainly they were who christened this holy and learned man
John Jewel; for his rare and admirable part^, and both natural and
supernatural gifts were every way corresponding to his gracious and precious
name. According to his christian name John signifying gra^e, he was a gracious
instrument of Christ, to reform the gold of the Sanctuary, which through the
negligence or impiety of later times became dim and drossie with superstition.
And according to his surname he was a rich Jewel, consisting of many Gems,
shining as well in his life, as his incomparable writings extant, almost in all
languages. This great Clerk was borne at Berrenber, in the County of Devon: of
which it may truly be said as it was sometimes of Hyppo, that Hyppo was more
ennobled by great Saint Austine, then Saint Austine by little Hippo. For his
education, it was first in Morton and after in Corpus Christi College in
Oxford. The former has proved a famous nursery of Philosophy and School
Divinity; the latter of the knowledge of Tongus and polite literature; in both
which our Jewel showing by his golden thighs what flowers he most sucked and
longest sat upon; excelled for an acuter Disputant, an eloquenter Orator, a
more universal Scholar, and every way an accomplished Divine the Church has
not had for many hundreds of years.

The first glistering of this Jewel was in the Rhetoric Lecture conferred
upon him in Corpus Christi College, when he was yet but Bachelor of Arts. This
Lecture he read with such facility and felicity, that all his Auditors
perceiving that he spoke potius ex art, than de art rhetorice; rather from an
excellent faculty he had in that flexanimous Art, then of the Art it self.
Neither were these his Lectures only strewed as it were with flowers of
Rhetoric, but richly fraught with all variety of human Learning; which drew
many Auditors unto him from other Colleges, and among them his Tutor Master
Parkhurst, afterward Bishop of Norwitch, who took great delight to behold the
sparklin^ of that Diamond, which himself had first pointed; and h^ could not
contain his joy, but vented it on the sudden in this extempore Disticon: Olim
discipulus mihi chare Juelle fuisti,
Nunc ero Discipulus te renuente tuus.
Dear Jewel whilome Scholar thou were mine,
But now against thy will I will be thine.


This his fame and love abroad purchased him envy and hatred at home; for he
found shortly after to his cost, the truth of the Philologist his observation
concerning truth, virtue and courtesy, three of the best Mothers, are often
delivered of three of the worst Daughters; truth of hatred, courtesy of
contempt, and virtue of envy; Vrit enim fulgore suo; the glory of eminent
worth dazelleth the infirm eyes of worthless men; such, as at this time the
seven Seniors and Officers of that Coledge were; who as the Patriarks moved
with envy, sold Joseph into Egypt; so they, sick of the same malady, expelled
Jewel out of the House, more to their own discredit and disadvantage, then to
his. For soon after his expulsion, they found a great miss of him in the
education of their Youth; and his greatest enemies who cloaked their envy for
the present, with pretended zeal for the Romish religion, yet after were heard
to speak thus of him within themselves, we should love thee if thou were not a
Zuinglian; though we believed Jewel that thy Belief is not sound, yet in thy
life thou art an Angel. Neither was this all, but when Master Welsh Dean of the
College made his brags before Doctor Brooks, sometimes Fellow of that
College, but then Bishop of Gloucester, that they alone had kept safe their
rich Copes, ^ushens, Plate, and other Ornaments of their Chapel. It is true,
quoth Doctor Wright, Archdeacon of Oxford, standing by, you have saved them,
but you have lost a more precious Ornament of your house, your Jewel.

But the best was, what the College lost, the University found; and of a
private Lecturer, made him their public Orator, and for the substraction of
his maintenance by the loss of his Fellows place in the College, that defect
was abundantly supplied by the bounty of some of his Scholars Par^nts, who
procured for him, and conferred upon him a good Benefice near Oxford. And now
he grows in estate and fame in the University, and grace with all the Heads of
Colleges and Hals; but especially he was precious in the eyes of the most
renowned Doctor of the Chai^, Peter Martyr, by whom he was presented Batchelour
of Divinity; and now nothing seemed to stand in his way from orderly ascending
to higher degrees and preferment in the Church. But the face of the sky is not
more changeable then the condition of our estate in this world, all the fair
weather we spoke of but now was overcast in a moment; for by the untimely death
of Edward the sixth, and by the succeeding advancement of Queen Mary to the
Crown, a bitter storm of persecution fell upon the newly reformed Church of
England, and blew away many of our prime Doctors, and other men of eminent
worth, and among them our Jewel, who now banished from his native Soil, found
yet great comfort in conversing, first at Frankeford with Sir Francis Knowls
and his eldest Son, Robert Horn, and Edward Sands, and afterward at Argentine
with John Poynet, Edmund Grindall, John Cheek, Anthony Cook, Richard Morison,
Peter Carew, Thomas Wroth, and diverse others.

These noble Confessors deserve rather the naming, because in this their
retiring, they seemed as it were, to fetch their fees, to make the greater leap
in England; where after their return, they were highly preferred, Grindall to
the Archbishop first of York, then of Canterbury; Sir Francis Knowls to be
privy Counselor and Lord Treasurer, Robert Lorne to the Bishopric of Winton,
Sands of London, Poynet of Worcester, and the rest all of them to eminent
places in the Church and Commonwealth, to set off their future glory, their
present poverty and misery served as a foyl: It was yet for the present
lamentable to see these men of worth, who had change of houses in their own
Country, hardly getting a shed to shelter them from wind and weather in
foreign parts; they who opened the fountain of their bounty to other men in
England, were now constrained in Germany to fetch waters of Comfort, drop by
drop, from others Conduits. At the first, the pious charity of the Londoners
(be it spoken to the honor of that City) was as an unexhausted mine to them,
till by Stephen Gardner it was discovered, and the rich vein stopped by the
imprisonment of their chief Benefactors: And now these servants of Christ, of
whom England at this time was not worthy, were putt o many difficult plunges,
yet partly by the comfortable letters of Zuinglius, Peter Martyr, Calvin,
Melancthon, Pelican, Lavater, Geznar, and other privy Pastors of the reformed
Churches beyond the Seas, they were held up by the chin, and partly by the
charitable contributions of Christopher Prince of Wittenberg, and the Senators
of Zurick, they were so kept above water, as it were, with bladders, that none
of them utterly sunk in their hope. And for Jewel in particular, though he
were tossed from pillar to post, and sometimes dashed upon one rock, and
sometimes upon another, yet in the end he found safe harbor in Peter Martyrs
house, first in Argentine, and after in Tigury; where it is hard to say, utrum
Euripides ex Archelai an Archelai ex Euripides familiaritate fama magis
incluruerit. Whether Jewel gave more luster and reputation to his Host, or his
Host to him; certain it is, Jewel assisted Peter Martyr in setting forth diverse
Books; and by name, his learned Comentaries upon the Judges: And very fortunate
to the Church o^ God was the conjunction of these two Stars of the first
magnitude; for from them had we the first light to find the tract of those who
in the former Ages and purest time walked with a right foot to the Gospel, and
professed the Doctrine of the reformed Churches. Although we must acknowledge
our Churches very much indebted in this kind to Reynolds, Whitaker, Bilson,
Abbot, Ca^mier, Morney, and Chemitius; yet it cannot be denied, that these
later tinded their candles at these Torches; for Peter Martyr had cleared the
judgment of Antiquity in the point of the Sacrament, and some other
controversies between us and the Church of Rome; and Jewel in all before
Chemitius took Andradius to task, or Bilson, Allen; or Reynolds, Heart; or
Whitaker, Stapleton; or Abbot, Bishop; or Morney, Perrane; or Camier,
Bellarmine; our I^wel was the first who made a public challenge to all the
Papists in the world, to produce but one clear and evident testimony out of any
Father or famous Writer, who flourished within five hundred years after Christ,
for any one of the many Articles which the Romanists at this day maintain
against us, and upon good proof of any such one allegation to yield them the
bucklers and reconcile himself to Rome; and although Harding and some others
undertook him, and entered into the lists with him about the controverted
Articles: yet they came off so poorly and Jewel on the contrary so amaz^d and
confounded them with a cloud of witnesses in every point in question, that a^
Bishop Godwine, upon good ground affirms no one thing in our age, gave the
Papacy so deadly a wound, as that challenge at Paul's Cross so confidently made
and bravely maintained. But this challege was not now made in the time of
Jewels banishment, but after his return into England; at this time he and many
other clear lights of the Church, were hid under a Bushel, till the fire of
persecution of England (in which, not only many faithful brethren, but
diverse reverend Fathers, as Latimer, Cranmer, Ridley, and Hooper were burned
to ashes, for the testimony of the truth) was laved out partly by the tears of
compassionat^ Confessors, povring out their souls to God in public and
private, but especially by the blood of so many Noble Martyrs.

But as soon as God in justice looked upon the persecutours of the truth, and
called Queen Mary, and those who diped their hands in his Saint blood to his
tribunal, and set Queen Elizabeth upon her sisters throne that mirror of
Princes, and parragon of her sex, and phaenix of her age, restoring at the same
time preachers to the Gospel and Gospel to the preachers; themselves in the
first year of her Reign commanded a survey to be taken of the whole Realm,
and finding in many parts palpable Egyptian darkness, sent for all these
concealed lights above mentioned, and after they were fetched from under the
bushels which had covered them, she set them in golden candlesticks in all the
Counties within her Dominions, and among them Jewel in the diocese of Sarum.
Where he shined most brightly for eleaven years, and after his extinction by
death left a most sweet smell behind him, the savor of a good name, much more
pretius then ointment, for his Apostolic doctrine and Saintlike life, and
prudent government, and incorrupt integrity, unspotted chastity, and bountiful
hospitality. In his first visitation he began, and in his last he perfected
such a reformation, not only in the Cathedral and Parochial Churches, but in
all Courts of his jurisdiction, that even those who before esteemed not so well
of Jewel as Bishops, yet now were brought to have a reverend opinion of
Bishops, for Jewels sake; for he was a careful overlooker and strickt observer
not only of all the flocks, but the Pastors also in his Diocese according to
the Apostles prescription; first he attended to himself and his own doctrine,
and then to all the doctrine which as he heard was Preached in his See; first
he examined his own actions, and then the proceedings of all his inferior
officers. The Chancellor and Archdeacons, are in the count of the law, the
Bishops eyes, and his Collectours and receivers and his hands: therefore he had
a continual eye upon these his eyes, and held a strickt hand over these his
hands, and if these his eyes caused him to offend, or raised any scandal in
his Diocese, by winking at foul abuses, and enormities, or these hands by
exaction and scraping, or taking bribes, he plucked out the one and cut off the
other. And if other Bishops take not the like course though in their own
persons they be never so innocent and incorrupt; yet they will never free their
See from foul and scandalous aspertions. Iniquity will be committed even in
the seat of justice, and carnal vices winked at in spiritual Courts, and one
corruption be borne out by another, corporal by pecuniary: the heaviest
censures of the Church will be inflicted upon the lightest offenders, if they
offer not to the Officiate shrine, and the foulest delinquents will escape away
by the Posterne gate of Juno Moneta's temple: Poor gnats if they be taken in
their nets will be straigned to death, and a camel laden with gold swallowed
up, and it will be said that Churches are visited before they be sick, nay,
that they are sick of their Visitations, and that all the Processes, and
Citations are ad collegendum, not ad corregendum: for collection of moneys,
not for correction of manners. To prevent these and the like abuses for which
the court Christians hear ill abroad, the good Bishop sat often in his
Consistory, and saw that all things were carried straight there, neither did he
only sit as judge in the Consistory, but also oftentimes as assi^tant on the
bench of justice, informing the Judges in such causes where the law of God and
of the land seemed to clash, and exhorting the prisoners willingly and
patiently to subject themselves to the stroke of justice; but especially to
prostrate themselves before the throne of mercy in heaven; and though they were
cast by the Jury, and condemned by the last, yet they might be justified by
grace and saved by mercy, at the tribunal of Christ.

What shall I speak of his peaceable ending (for the most part at his Table)
litigious strifes and contentions, of which it is hard to say whether they more
nourished the Law or the Law them. So was he thrice happy by the judgment of
truth it self, because a threefold peacemaker in his Consistory on the Bench
and at his Table, as a Judge, Justice and an Arbitratour. Yet did he no way
forget that unum necessarium, which Saint Paul so deeply charge Timothy
before God and his Angels, to be careful of, to wit, to Preach in season and
out of season, 1 Cor. 9.16. I have heard of the Hetrurian, goddess, that
whilst she was clad in a Coun^rey habit, and worshipped under a shed in the
field, she delivered many Oracles; but after she was brought into a Temple, and
clothed with Purple and fine linen, she became mute, and gave no answer at
all: So it falls out with many, whose office it is to publish and interpret
the Oracles of God, like Saul, when they come to the high places, they make an
end of Prophesying. Jewel did not so, but the more eminent he was in dignity,
the more diligent in the work of the Ministry, not so much in frequent as in
exq^isite Teaching; for though his Sermons were very frequent, yet they were
always rare for the matter and manner of his delivery; he never Preached
quicquit in buccam, but as Abraham offered to Melchisedecke, as St. Jerome
renders it, de prenpuis, or summi^ate a ceri, of the top and best of the heap.
The Roman Orator tells us of negligentia quedam diligens, a certain diligent
negligence, and learned ignorance; when the speaker carefully shunneth all
affectation of Art, and labors that his speech may not seem elaborate. But
the sober and discreet hearer has often cause to complain of diligentia
quedam negligens, a negligent kind of diligence in many popular Preachers, who
ascend frequently into the Pulpit, but with extempora^y provision, are often in
travile but without pain, and delivered of nothing for the most part, but
empty words and idle tautalogies; as if Sermons were to be valued by the number
and not by the weight. These men's Sermons, though they exceed the hour in
len^th, and the days of the week in number; yet they themselves lie open to
the curse of the Prophet denounced against all those that do the work of the
Lord negligently. From the danger of which malediction Jewel was freest of all
of his parts and place; for though he might best of any presume in this kind
upon his multiplicity of reading, and continual practice of Preaching, yet
never would he Preach in the meanest Village, without precedent meditation and
writing also the chief heads of his Sermons. And as his tongue was the pen of
a ready writer, so was his pen the tongue of a living speaker to all posterity.

When I perused the catologue of his Sermons, I wonder what time he had to
write: agane, when I number and weigh his writing, I wonder what time he had to
provide for Preaching; and when I compare both, I wonder how he could do any
thing else. Yet did not his constant preaching take him off from his aceurate
writing, nor both from his discharging each part of his Episcopal function in
his own Person. Which that it may not seem incredible, I will open his day
book and read out of it how he spent every hour: Rising at four of the clock,
after prayers with his family at five, and in the Cathederall about six, he was
so affixed to his studies all the morning, th^^ he could not without great
violence be drawn from it^ after dinner his doors and ears were open to all
Suter^; and it was observed of him, as it was of Titus (who was styled amor and
delitiae humane generae) that he never sent any sed from him. Suitors being thus
dismissed, he heard wi^h great indifferency and patience, such causes debuted
before him as either were devolved to him as a Judge, or refer^^d to him as an
Arbitrator; and if he could spare any t^me from th^se troublesome businesses,
he reckoned as clear gain to his Study.

About nine of the clock at night he called all his s^rvants to an account,
how they had spent the day, and then offered up his enening sacrifice together
with them to God; from his Chapel he with^^ew himself again to hi^ Study
till near midnight, and from thence to his Bed; in which after he was laid, the
Gentleman of his Bedchamber red to him till wearied nature shut up the offices
of hi^ senses; long after his Porter had locked up the Gates of his Palace.

This watchful and laborious kind of life without any recreation at all, save
what his necessary refection at hi^ meals, and a very few hours of rest in the
night aforded him, spent the oil of this sweet Lamp the faster, and thereby
hastened his extinction and death in this world. Which as he foresaw by the
spirit, so he foretold by letters to the Bishop of No^wich.

Yet upon record in the works of Doctor Humfrey, and as he forefaw it, and
foretold it, so accordingly he prepared for it, as a Traveller, who has little
day and much way left, spurreth on faster, that he may reach home by daylight:
so he, desirous to finish his course before the night of death approached,
mended his pace, and dispatched all sorts of business with more celerity; and
as he was visiting his Diocese more severely then ever before, God visited
him; and as he preached at Lacock upon the words of the Apostle, Walk in the
Spirit, Death arested him in the Pulpit, from whence he was carried to his bed,
where he still continued preached to all that came to visit him, either by
heavenly instruct^ons, or pious ejaculations, or divine meditations and
paraphrases upon the p^ssages of Scripture, which were read unto him even till
at one and the selfsame instant he committed both his hearers and his soul to
God.

Valerius Maximus writes of Sylla, that it was hard to say whether he or his
anger were first extinct, for he threatened his enemies dying, and dyed
threatening: but on the contrary, it may be said of this servant of Christ
Jesus, it is hard to determine whether his natural heat or his zeal first was
extinguished, whether his Prayers or his soul first arrived at Heaven, for he
dyed praying, and prayed dying: His last words worthy to be written with a pen
of Diamond, never to be rased out, were these^ A Crown of righteousness is
laid up for me, Christ is my righteousness; this is my body, this day quickly
let me come unto the^, this day let me see the Lord Jesus. He was buried in the
midst of the Quire, where after he had been interred two years, Dr. Humfrey
laid upon him a fair marble stone, with an inscription upon it, containing a
brief Chronicle of his life; of which monument of that religious Professor it
may be truly said, as it was of that which Julius Caesar raised to Pompey,
Caesar dum Pompeii statuas erexti suas confirmavit. In making this monument to
continue the memory of Jewel, he eternized his own; but Jewel left himself a
second monument more famous then that, the Library he built in Salisbury; and
yet a third more lasting then either of the former, his Works here ensuing;
whereof these were Manuscripts.

1. A Paraphrasticall Exposition of the Epistles and Gospels through the whole
year. 2. A continuate Exposition of the Creed, Lords Prayer, and ten
Commandments. 3. A Commentary upon the Epistle to the Galathians. 4. A
Commentary upon the Epistle of Saint Peter.

The Printed are these.

1. Anno Dom. 1550. A latin Sermon preached at Saint Mary's, upon 1 Pet. 4.11.
[ 2. An. Dom. 1558. Diverse Sermons preached before Queen Elizabeth at Paul's
Cross. 3. An. Dom. 1559. Epistola ad Scipionem patritium vene^um de causis cur
Episcopi Angliae ad Concilium Tridentinum non convenerint. 4. Anno 1560. A
Challenge to all Papists at Paul's Cross, with an Answer to Doctor Cole, in
defense of a Sermon preached before the Queens Majesty, and her most honorable
Council. 5. Anno 1561. Apologia Ecclesiae Anglicanae. 6. Anno 1562. An
Exposition upon the first Epistle to the Thessalonians. 7. Anno 1563. An
Exposition upon the second Epistle to the Thessalonians. 8. An. 1564. A Reply
to Master Hardings Answer, concerning the seven and twenty Articles contained
in Master Jewel his Challenge, viz.

1. Of private Mass. 2. Communion under both kinds. 3. Of Prayer in a strange
tongue. 4. Of the Supremacy. 5. Of the real presence. 6. Of Polytopue, or
being in many places at once. 7. Of the Elevation. 8. Of adoration of the Host.
9. Of carrying the Sacrament under a Canopy. 10. Of accidents without subject.
11. Of dividing the Sacrament. 12. Of a figure in the Sacrament. 13. Of
plurality of Masses. 14. Of adoration of Images. 15. Of reading the Scripture
in the mother tongue. 16. Of Consecration under silence. 17. Of the Sacrifice
of the Mass. 18. Of receiving the Communion for others. 19. Of the application
of Christ^ death by the Mass. 20. Of Opus Operatum. 21. Of the Title of the
Sacrament Lord and God. 22. Of remaining under accidents. 23. Of Mice eating
the body of Christ. 24. Of Individium Vagum. 25. Of the form and shows of Bread
and Wine. 26. Of hiding and covering the Sacrament. 27. Of Ignorance, whether
it be the mother of Devotion.

9. Anno 1565. A Rejoinder to Mr. Hardings Reply. 10. An. 1566. A defense of
the Apology of the Church of England. 11. An. 1567. An answer to Mr. Hardings
Preface. 12. An. 1568. A Treatise of the Sacraments. 13 An. 1569. The view of a
seditious Bull sent into England. 14. An. 1570. A Treatise o^ the holy
Scriptures.

If any desire to be more familiarly acquainted with Jewels, and to be
particularly informed of his method and course of study, his witty and learned
Discourses at Table, his Poems and penned Speeches in the College, his
Exercises for his Degrees, his holding the golden Balances of Minerva before
Urania, being Moderator in Divinity, Disputations in the presence of Queen
Elizabeth, at an Act at Oxford; as also, how he attained to that admirable
faculty of memory, whereby he wa^ able on the sudden to repeat Chapters of
names, read to him backward and forward, broken sentences and exutick words,
Welsh, Irish, or any other Language, after once or twice reading, at the most;
let him read the story of his life at large in Do^tor Humfrey, or at least the
abridgement thereof, which I drew in the year of our Lord 1611. being then
Student in Corpus Christi College, at the command of Archbishop Bancroft:
which as soon as it was sent up, was suddenly printed, and prefixed to Jewels
Works, before I had time to revise it: and note the Errata, which I entreat
thee for thine own sake as well as for mine, thus now to correct.

Page 5. line 30. The wisdom of God so ordered this matter, add, For Jewel
his greater honor, and the advantage of the truth. P. 7. l. 10. for the
blessed Spouse of Christ, r. the blessed husband of the Spouse of Christ. P. 8.
l. 21. for Valerius, r. Vellerius. p. 9. l. 16. for his Apology fell in the
year 1566. r. the defense of his Apology. And l. 23. for cene, r. scene. p.
12. l. 17. which is his Church, add, on earth, and set it in a Crown of pure
Gold upon her head in Heaven.

The Preface to the King before the life is not mine, but Dr. Overals, then
Dean of St. Paul's: the Appendix likewise i^ not mine, but Doctor Morton, then
Lord Bishop of Duresm; the model of the life drawn by me, begins thus: If
rare and admirable qualities of our Ancestors deserve a ^hankefull
acknowledgement of Posterity. And ends thus: Lord adorn and en^ich
continually thy Church with such Jewels, deck her cheeks with rows of such
Rubies, and her neck with chains, make her borders of gold, with st^ds of
silver, Amen.

Holy Learning, sacred Arts;
Gifts of Nature, strength of Parts;
Fluent Grace, an humble mind;
Worth reformed, and wit refinde;
Sweetness both in tongue and Pen;
Insight both in Books and Men:
Hopes in woe, and fears in weals;
Humble knowledge, sprightly zeal;
A liberal heart^ and free from Gall;
Close to friends, and true to all.
Height of courage in Truths duel,
Are the stones that made this J^well.
Let him that would be truly blessed,
Wear this Jewel in his breast,
The Life and Death of Zegedine, who dyed Anno Christi 1572.
STeven Zegedine was borne in the lower Fanonia, in the ye^r 1505. brought up
in learning, wherein he profited to admiration, and became a Schoolmaster
himself; about which time (hearing the fame of Luther and Melancthon) he had a
great mind to go to Wittenberg; but wanting opportunity in sundry reg^rds, he
went to the U^iversity at ^racovia, where having studied a while, he was made a
Reader to others, and grew very famous; and having gotten some money there, he
then went to Wittenberg, where he studied Logic and Divinity three years, and
then returned into hi^ ow^ Co^ntrey. And in the City of Thasniadine he
instructed Youth in the knowledge of Ar^s, and Preached Jesus Christ also to
the Pe^^le, before u^know^e unto them: whereupon the King^^ Treasurer fell upon
him, beat him, and drove ^im out of the City: there he lost two hundred Books,
and was so barbarously kicked by this Tyrant with his iron Spurs, that he was
almost slain.

Thus wandering up and down as an exile, Anno Chisti 1545. he was called to
Iulia, where he was made governor of an illustrious School: and the year after
he was sent for to Cegledine, where he was hired to Preach publicly in the
Church. There also he married a wife, and after three years stay, he went
thence, and was sent for by the Governor of Temeswert to govern the School
there, where also he preached to the people: but that Governor dying, there
succeeded him one that was a strong Papist, who drove Zegedine from thence.
Being again an ex^le, he was called to govern the School at Thurin, where he
also preached to the people, who eagerly embraced the Truth, and loved him
exceedingly. From thence he wa^ called to Bekenese, where he also preached to
the people, and read in the Schools: whilst he was there, a Country man
coming to him said; Sir, what do you here, when there are some soldiers
coming upon you, to slay you? therefore fly hence speedily if you will save
your life. Whilst he was speaking, the noise of th soldiers was heard
without; whereupon he slipped into his chamber, but the soldiers breaking in
upon him, plundered him of all he had, and binding him, carried him away with
them: but behold the gracious providence of God; amongst those bloody Soldiers
there was one that favored him, and conveyed him away, so that swiming over a
river, he escaped, and returned home again: shortly after, his fame spreading
abroad, he was called to Tholna to govern a School there, and there also he
preached to the people: and his former wife being dead, he married another: and
not long after he was chosen to Lascovia to be the Pastor there: and was
Ordained Minister by the Imposition of Hands, and taught School also: about
which time he was made Doctor, and the Superintendent of all that Baronry: he
read also in private to many that repaired to him, and intermitted not his
pains, no not in sickness, if he had but strength to speak that his voyc^ might
be heard. Anno Christi 1558. he was removed thence by the authority of the
Governor of the Castles to Calmantsem. Anno Christi 1561. the Vayvod of
Copasware with his soldiers (being Turks) came upon the inh^bitants of
Calmantsem for neglecting to pay their Tribute, as they were at Sermon, and
took many of them prisoners, together with Zegedine, and carried them away to
Copasware: the rest that escaped gathered the Tribute, carried it presently to
the Vayv^d, entreated his pardon, and the restitution of the prisoners,
especially of Zegedine: but he told them, that if they would have them restored
to liberty, they must go and pitition the Bashaw for their release: which they
doing, the prisoners were presently relea^ed: but when they afterward accused
the Vayvod to him of Tyranny, and injustice, he required that Zegedine, and
some of the chief Citizens should come and testify those things before him:
but when Zegedine came, he picked a quarrel with him, and cast him into
prison; whereupon his people, by rich presents endeavored to procure his
release, and when they had almost obtained their request, one whispered the
Bashaw in the ear, and told him, that he might have 1000. Florens for his
ransom: whereupon he still detained him, and told them that he would not
release him till they had paid him a 1000. Florens: but when the money came in
slower then he exspected, the barbarous Tyrant chid his Keeper for using him
too gently, which (as he said) was the cause that his ransom was not yet paid;
whereupon his Keeper bound, and whip't him with thongs, till he was bloody all
over, and almost killed him: afterward the Bashaw promised that i^ they would
procure the release of the daughter of the Major of Tolne, who was prisoner
with the Hungarians, and bring her unto him, he would release Zegedine: her,
theref^re, his people of Calmantsem redeemed for three hundred Florens, and
presented her to the Bashaw; yet the Infidel falsified his promise, and kept
him still prisoner: then the Prince of Transylvania sent Ambassadors, and a
rich present to the Bashaw, requesting the release of Zegedine, yet nothing
would prevail: many, pitying his miserable captivity, came to visit him, and
gave him money, but his cruel Keeper extorted most of it from him. B^ing
lo^den with heavy chains, the Citizens, with much importunity, prevailed to get
him leave once a day to come to the Christians to whom he preached, and so
returned to prison again: yet God stired up the hearts of some of the
Courtiers to commiserate his deplorable condition. During his imprisonment the
Bashaw used all means both by threats, and promises to draw him to abjure the
Christian Religion, and to turn Turk: but he always answered him stoutly,
That such arguments might prevail with children, but could not prevail with
him. Having leave at last to lie amongst the other Prisoners, he wonderfully
refreshed, and comforted them by his godly exhortations, and consolations drawn
from the Scriptures, whereby they were much confirmed in the Christian Faith:
and whereas before they were almost pined through want of food, God so stirred
up the heart^ of some to bring relief to Zegedine, that all the rest of the
prisoners were provided for plentifully thereby. Remaining thus in prison he
was not idle, but wrote there his Common-places, and some other Works: thus he
remained in Prison above a year, in which time three of his children dyed,
which added much to his a^fliction, and though his people had used the
intercession of all their great men there about for his liberty, yet all
prevailed not, till it pleased God that a Noble Baron, and his Lady passing by
that way, saw this worthy man of God in so miserable a plight, that the Lady
much pitied him: and afterward being in Child bed, and ready to dye, she
requested her Lord (who loved her dearly) for her sake to improve all his
interest in the Bashaw to procure Zegedines liberty; which he with an oath
promised to perform, and accordingly engaged himself to the Turk that he
should pay 1200. Florens for his ransom: thereupon he was released, and went
about to diverse Cities to gather his ransom, and God so enlarged men's hearts
toward him, that in a short time he carried 800. Florns to this Baron, and so
returned to his people at Calman^sem. The year after being 1564. as he was
going by coach to Buda, when the horses came near the great river Danubius
being very hot, and dry, thy ran violently into the river: but behold the
admirable providence of God, when they had swam some twenty paces in the river,
they turned back again, and drew the coach, and him safely to the shore.

The same year, by the Imposition of Hands, he ordained three excellent men
Ministers. About that time there came a bragging Friar, and challenged him to a
Disputation, which he willingly accepting of; the great Church was appointed
for the place, and many of both sides resorted thither; and the Friar came with
much confidence, his servants carrying a great sack of Books after him: but
in the Disputation, Zegedine did so baffle him, that all his friends shrunk
away with shame, and the Friar, with his great sack, was left all alone, so
that himself was fain to take it on his own shoulders and go his way. About
that time the Vaivod, who had before betrayed him, coming to the place where
Zegedine was, desired to speak with him, and requested him to forgive him,
professing that he could rest neither night nor day, he was so haunted with
apparitions, and the Furies of his own conscience; which Zegedine easily
affented unto.

In the year 1566. Zegedine being very hot, invited a friend to go with him to
the River of Danubius to bathe himself: but as they were swiming, his friend
looking about him, saw not Zegedine, and wondering what was become of him so
suddenly, at last he spyed his hoarie hairs appearing above water, and swimming
swiftly to him, Zegedine was sunk; whereupon, he diving to the bottom of the
river, caught hold of him, and drew him forth, carrying him to a Mill that was
not far off, where he laid him to bed: about midnight Zegedine coming to
himself, enquired how he came there, and who drew him out of the River; hi^
friend told him the whole story, and kept him carefully till he recovered. In
the year 1572. he fell into a mortal dsease, which so much the more afflicted
him, because he could not sleep; whereupon he sent for a Surgeon, who gave
him a bitter potion, which caused him to fall a sleep, but after a little
while he quietly breathed forth his last, being sixty seven years of age.

How full of patience, how divine
Was this our learned Zegedine?
Though cast in prison, and restrained
From food, yet he the truth maintained.
His heart resolved from his youth
Rather to starve, then starve the truth.
For Disputations, few there were.
That could with Zegedine compare:
His rare example lets us know,
Patience o'recomes the greatest woe.
The Life and Death of John Knox, who dyed Anno Christi 1572.
JOhn Knox was born at Gifford in Lothain in Scotland, Anno 1505. of honest
Parentage: brought up first at School, then sent to the University of Saint
Andrews, to study under Master Io. Mayor, who was famou^ for learning in those
days, and under whom in a short time he profited exceedingly in Philosophy and
School Divinity, and took hi^ Degrees, and af^erwards was admitted very young
into Orders; then he betook himself to the reading of the Fathers, especially
Augustine's Works; and lastly to the earnest study of the holy Scriptures; by
which, being through God's mercy informed of the Truth, he willingly embraced it,
and freely professed it, and imparted it to others. But when there was a
persecution raised up by the Bishops, against the Professors of the Truth, he
fled into England, where he preached the Gospel with much zeal and fruit, both
at Berwick, Newcastle and London. He was much esteemed ^y King Edward the sixth,
who proffered him a Bishopric, which he rejected, as having Aliquid commune
cum Antichristo; something in it common with Antichrist. King Edward being
dead, the p^rsecution raised by Queen Mary made him leave England, and go to
Frankefort, where for a time he preached the Gospel to the English
Congregation: but meeting with opposition there, both from Papists and false
brethren, he went to Geneva. Anno Christi 1559. and of his age 54. the Nobility
of Scotland, with some others, beginning the Reformation of Religion, sent for
him home, and shortly after he was settled Minister at Edinbrough, where he
preached many excellent Sermons. Anno Christi 1566. the Earl of Murray being
slain on the Saturday, Knox preaching at Edinbrough the next day, amongst the
papers given of those that desired the prayers of the Church, he found one with
these words, Take up the man whom ye accounted another God: At the end of his
Sermon he bemoaned the loss that the Church and State had by the death of that
virtuous man; adding further, There is one in this company that makes this
horrible murder the subject of his mirth, for which all good men should be
sorry; but I tell him, he shall dye where there shall be none to lament him.

The man that had written those words, was one Thoma^ Metellan, a young
Gentleman of excellent parts, but bearing small affection to the Earl of
Murray; he hearing this commination of John Knox, went home to his Sister, and
sa^d, That John Knox was raving to speak of he knew not whom. His Sister
replied with tears, If you had taken my advice, you had not written those
words; saying further, Tha^ none of John Knox his threatenings fell to the
ground without effect. And so indeed this came to pass; for shortly after,
this Gentleman going to travel, dyed in Italy, having none to assist, much
less to lament him. Toward Knox his later end, his body became very infirm,
and his voice so weak, that People could not hear him in the ordinary place;
wherefore he chose another place, wherein he preached upon the History of
Christ's passion, with which, he said, it was his desire to close his Ministry:
finding his end near, he importuned the Council of the City to provide
themselves a worthy man to succeed in his place: Master James Lawson Professor
in Aberdene was the man pitched upon, and Commissioners were sent from the
Church of Edinborough to request him to accept of the place; John Knox also
subscribed that request; adding, Accelera mi frater, alioqui ^ero venies; Haste
my Brother, otherwise you will come too late: this made Master Lawson to hasten
his journey, and when he was come, he preached twice to the good liking of the
people, whereupon order was taken by the rulers of the Church for his
admission, at which time John Knox would needs preach, though very w^ak, which
also he performed with such fervency of spirit, that he was never before heard
to preach with so great power, or more content to the hearers. In the end of
his Sermon, he called God to witness that he had walked in a good conscience
with them, not seeking to please men, nor serving either his own, or other
men's affections, but in all sincerity, and truth had preached the Gospel of
Christ. He exhorted them in most grave and pithy words to stand fast in the
Faith they had received: and so having prayed zealously for Gods blessing upon
them, and the multiplying of Gods spirit upon their new Pastor, he gave them
his last farewell: Being conveyed to his lodging, that afternoon he was forced
to betake himself to his bed: and was visited by all sorts of persons in his
sickness, to whom he spoke most comfortably: amongst others the Earl of
Morton came to see him, to whom he said, My Lord, God has given you many
blessings, Wisdom, Honor, Nobility, Riches, many good, and great friends, and
he is now about to pr^fer you to the Government of the Realm (the Earl of Mar,
the late Regent, being newly dead.) In his name I charge you, use these
blessings better then formerly you have don: seeking first the glory of God,
the furtheance of his Gospel, the maintenance of his Church, and Ministry; and
then be car^full of the King to procure his good, and the welfare of the Realm.
I^ you do thus, God will be with you, and honor you: if otherwis^, ^e will
d^prive you of all these benefits, and your end shall be shame, and ignonminie.
These speeches the Earl called to mind about nine years after, at the time of
his Execution, saying, That he had found John Knox to be a Prophet. A day or
two before Knox his death, he sent for Master David Lindsey, Master Lawson, and
the Elders, and Deacons of the Church, ^o whom he said, The time is
approaching, which I have long thirsted for, wherein I shall be released from
all my cares, and be with my Savior Christ for ever: and now God is my
witness whom I have served with my spirit in the Go^^e^^ of his Son, that I
have taught nothing but the true and sinc^r^ Word of God: and that the end that
I proposed in my M^nistry was, To instruct the ignorant, to confirm the wea^,
to comfort their consciences who were humbled under the sense of their sins,
and born down with the threatning^ o^ Gods judgments. I am not ignorant that
many have, and do blame my too great rigor, and severity; but God knows that
in my heart I never hated those aga^ns^ whom I thundered Gods judgments: I did
only hate their sins, and labored according to my power to gain them to
Christ: That I did forbear none of what condition soever; I did it out of the
fear of my God: who hat^ placed me in the function of his Ministry, and I know
will bring me to an account. Now brethren, for your selve^, I have no more to
say, but to warn you that you ^ake he^d to the Flock over which God has
placed you Over seers, which (...) has redeemed by the blood of his only
begotten son: and you Master Lawson fight a good fight, do the Work of the
Lord with courage, and with a willing mind, and God from heaven bless you,
and the Church whereof you have the charge: Against it (so long as it continues
in the Doctr^n^ of the Truth) the gates of hell shall not preva^le: having thus
spoken, and the Elders, and Deacons being dismissed, he called the two Preacher
to him, and said, There is one thing that grieveth me exceedingly, you have
sometimes seen the Courage, and Constancy of the Lord of Grang in the Cause of
God; and now that unhappy man is casting himself away: I pray you go to him
from me, and tell him, That unless he forsake that wicked course that he is
in, the Rock wherein he confideth shall not defend him, nor the carnal wisdom
of that man whom he counts half a god [which was young Leshing^on] shall
yield him help; but he shall be shamefully pulled out of that nest, and his
carcass hung before the Sun, (meaning the C^stle which he kept against the
Kings Authority) for his soul it is dear to me, and if it were possible, I
would fain have him saved: accordingly they went to him, conferred with him,
but could by no means divert him from his course: But as Knox had foretold,
so the year after his Castle was taken, and his body was publicly there hanged
before the Sun: yet at his death he did express serious repentance. The nex
day Knox gave order for the making of his Coffin, continuing all the day (as he
did also through all his sickness) in fervent prayer, crying, Come Lord Jesus:
sweet Jes^s into thy hands I commend my spirit: being asked whether his pains
were great, he answered, That he did not esteem that a pain which would be to
him the end of all troubles, and the beginning of eternal joys. Often after
some deep meditation, he used to say, Oh serve the Lord in fear, and death
shall not be troublesome to you: Blessed is the death of those that have part
in the death of Jesus. The night before his death, he slept some hours with
great unquietness, often fighing, and groaning, whereupon when he awakened,
the standers by asked him how he did, and what it was that made him mourn so
heavily? to whom he answered: In my life time I have been assaulted with
Temp^a^ion^ from Satan, and he has often cast my sin^ into my teeth to drive me
to despair, yet God gave me strength to overcome all his Temptations: but now
the subtle serpent takes another course, and seek's to persuade me, That all
my labors in the Ministry, and the fidelity that I have showed in that service
has merited heaven and immortality: but blessed be God that brought to my
mind these Scriptures: What have thou that thou have not received? And, Not I,
but the grace of God in me: With which he is gone away ashamed, and shall no
more return: and now I am sure that my battle ^s at an end, and that without
pain of body, or trouble of spirit, I shall shortly change this mortal, and
miserable life, with that happy, and immortal life that shall never have an
end. After which, one praying by his bed, having made an end, asked him, If he
heard the Prayer? Yea, said he, and would to God that all present had heard it
with such an ear, and heart as I have don: Adding, Lord Jesus receive my
spirit: With which words, without any motion of hands, or feet, as one falling
a sleep rather then dying he ended his life. Never was man more observant of
the true and just authority of Church-Rulers according to the Word of God, and
the practice of the purest Primitive time: he always pressed due Obedience,
from the people to the faithful Pastor^, and Elders of the Church. He dyed
Anno Christi 1572. and of his Age 62. Men of all ranks were present at his
Burial: The Earl of Murray, when the Corpse was put into the ground, said Here
lies the body of him, who in his life time never feared the face of any man.

Undaunted Knox would never fear to tell
The bett their follyes, if they did not well:
He was severe to those that would not
Observant to his preached Divinity:
He loved the ways of peace, and would delight
Himself in ^ods just Laws both day and night:
His soul would be laborious to fulfill
The sweet commands of his dear makers will.
In peace he lived, and with a peaceful breath
He called on God, and yielded unto death^
The Life and Death of Peter Ramus, who dyed Anno Christi 1572.
PEter Ramus was born in France Anno Christi 1515. His Grandfather was a
Nobleman, who (having his estate plundered by Charles Duke of Burgundy,
General under the Emperor Charles the fifth) was forced to leave his Country,
and to betake himself to the poor, and painful life of an husbandman: and
his father being left very poor by him, was fain to live by making of Charcole:
Ramu^ being from his Childhood of an excellent wit, of an industrious nature,
and much addicted to learning, was compelled for his subsistence to live as a
servant with one of his Uncles: but finding (that by reason of his many
Employments) he had no time to follow his book there, he thought it better to
betake himself to the service of some learned man: so going to Paris, and
being admitted into the College of Navar, he labored hard all day for his
Masters, and spent a great part of the night in study, so that in a short time
he was made Master of Arts, and Laureat-Poet: and the Professors in that
College, every one taking much delight in his diligence, each strove to
forward him in learning, and lent him such books as he needed: then he betook
himself to instructing of others, and to exercise himself in private
Lectures, till thereby he had fitted himself for more public employments:
then was he appointed publicly to read Logic, and when he was tw^nty one
years old, he published his Logic, with some Animadversions upon Aristotile:
this procured him much love, every one admiring such ripe parts, in so young a
man: and envy being the usual concomitant of virtue, he had also many that
envied, and aspersed him; especially the Sorbone Doctors, who accused him of
Heresy in Phylosopgy, for that he being but a Novice, dust take upon him to
correct Aristotle, the Prince of Philosophers: and by their authority they so
far prevailed, that Ramus was forbidden to read, or write any more of
Philosophy: This being very gri^vous to him, it pleased God to stir up the
heart of the Governor of another College to send for him to assist him in
restoring of that College, which was now empty; the students being all fled by
reason of the infection of the Plague: a^^ it came to pass that in a short
time ( Ramus being so famou^ a man) the College was better stored with
students then ever it was before: the Sorbonists much raged at this, and
labored to so^ division between the Governor of the College and him: yet
Ramus carried himself with so much candor and ingenuity, that they lived
together with much concord: at last, that Governor dying, Ram^s succ^eded him:
and by the Cardinal of Lorrain's means (who who was a great favorer of
Learning) he was made the Regius Professor of Rhetoric, and Philosophy, Anno
Christ^ 1551. and of his Age thirty six. His fame spreading into all the
Universities of Christendom, there were many Princes that strove to get him
out of France, profering him large stipends if he would come to them: but he
being now famous in France, preferred his own Country before all others; and
therefore rejected all their offers. In Pari^ he had so great esteem, that
(though his enemies strongly opposed it) yet he was made Dean of the whole
University: and so having obtained a more quiet kind of life, he betook
himself to the study of the Mathematics, wherein he grew very exquisite. But
when the Civil Wars brake forth in France for Religion, and that none could
safely enjoy themselves, or any thing that they had, when under pretense of
Religion, every one revenged his own private quarrels upon others; Ramus, to
free himself from this tempest, left Paris, and went to Fontainblew, where the
Kings Library was: yet neither there could he be in safety: so that at last, he
was compelled to betake himself to the Camp of the Prince of Conde: But when
he saw that France was no fit place for him for the present to reside in, he
resolved to travel into Germany, till God should restore peace to his Country
again: and accordingly he went to Argentine, Basil, Lusanna, T^g^re,
Heidelb^rge^ Nore^berg, and Auspurg, and was entertained in all these
Universities with great applause, and with much joy by all learned men. And
when the Civil War was ended in France, he returned to Pari^ again. Then he
remained in his College till that horrible Massacre happened on Saint
B^rtholomews Eve, wherein so many thousands perished by the cruel hands of
bloody Papists: at which time the College gates being fast shut, he locked
himself up in his own house till those furious Papist^ brake open his door^,
and finding him, (...) him through, and being half dead, threw him out of his
window; and not ^^^^^fied therewith, they cut off his head, dragged his body
about the streets in the channels, and at last threw it into the river of S^in,
Anno Christi 1572. and of his Age seven and fifty. After which also they sel^ed
upon his Goods, Library and Writings, whereby many ^xcellent Comm^ntaries and
other Works (not fully complea^) perished, to the great loss of learned men.

Ind^^^rious (...) from his youth inclined
Himsel^e (...) a well composed min^e:
His hear^ was serious, and he took great pains
To sow good seeds, and after reap the ga^nes.
He was beloved of all that loved the ^ame
Of learning; for he had a winged name.
His care, his love, his industry was such,
That in few yea^s his heart attained to much:
But in conclusion, Envi^ that still crowds
Into true Fame, involved him in the clouds
Of sudden ruin; P^^ist^ thought it good
To take a furfeit of his guiltless blood.
The Life and Death of Matthew Parker, who dyed Anno Christi 1574.
MAtthew Parker was born in the City of Norwich, Ann^ Christi 1502. and having
some years at School, h^ went to Cambridge, where he was admitted into Corpu^
Christi [Bennet] College, in which place he profited so much that he was chosen
Fellow, and grew so famous that Queen Ann Bullen [mother to Queen Elizabeth]
made him her Chaplain, whereupon he Commensed Doctor in Divinity: and after her
death, King Henry the eighth; and after his death, King Edward the sixth made
him their Ch^plaines, and preferred him to be Master of Bennet College;
besides other Ecclesiastical dignities which they advanced him to: but in
Queen Mary's days, he was despoiled of all, and was compelled to live a poor,
and private life: but so soon as Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, she made
choice of this Doctor Parker for his admirable learning, and piety to be the
Archbishop of Canterbury Anno Christi 1559. which place he supplied with great
commendation for above fifteen years. His works of Charity were very eminent:
He gave to the Corporation of Norwich, where he was born, a Basin and Ewr
double guilt, weighing 173. ounces: as also fifty shillings a year for ever to
be distributed amongst the poor of that City: and six anniversary Sermons in
several places of Norfolk: to Bennet College he gave thirty Scholarships,
built them a Library, and bestowed many excellent books, and ancient
Manuscripts upon it, besides three hundred ounces of silver, and guilt-plate:
and the perpetual Patronage of Saint Mary Ab-church-London. He carefully
collected, and caused to be printed diverse ancient Histories of England, which
probably had otherwise been lost. He dyed in peace An. Christi 1574. and of his
Age 72.

What Heaven bestowed upon him, he was free
To give to others; for his Charity
Was known to many, whose impatient grief
Enforced them to implore his sure relief,
His worth was such, that it was disputed, which
Prayed for him most, either the poor or rich.
The poor, they prayed (as they were bound to do)
Because he filled their souls and bodies too.
The rich destr'd his life, because his store
Sustained their souls, and helped maintain the poor.
Thus having spent his days in love, he went
In peace to Heavens high court of Parliament.
HENRICUS BVLLINGERVS.
The Life and Death of Henry Bullinger.
IN the year of our Lord 1504. Henricus Bullingerus was born at Bremogarta, a
Town in Switzerland: he was descended from an ancient and a noble Family, much
esteemed and honored in those parts. Being an Infant he was twice in great
danger of his life, but preserved by the powerful hand of God, contrary to the
expectation of his Parent^ and friends: first, from the Pestilence, wherewith
those parts were at that time grievously punished: and secondly, from a wound
which he received in his ^hr^at, by reason of a fall; whereby he was made
unable to admit of any nourishment for the space of five days.

His Father being a man of great learning, and bearing an extraordinary
affection unto the Arts and their Professors, he was very careful to provide
that the tender years of this his Son might be bathed in the Fountains of
Learning; and for that cause (he being not fully five years old, he was sent
unto a Country School near adjoining, where he continued seven years; but by
reason of the inability of his Master, he profited not much; yet he attained
unto that perfection, that he exceeded those which learned with him, not
without the approbation of his Master. His Parents well perceiving the
towardliness of the child, and finding that Schoolmaster not to be a
sufficient Tutor for him; they presently entered into a consideration of sending
him unto some more eminent place, where he might be instructed in the Arts, for
the better perfection of nature; and therefore in the year 1516. he was sent
unto Embrick, a Town in the Dukedom of Clire, then famous for the many learned
Scholars wherewith it was adorned: and here he was committed unto the tuition
of Casparus Glogoriensis, and of Petrus Cochemensis, Mosellanus, and others,
being men beautified with excellent endowments, and famous both for their
Method of Teaching, and severity of Discipline; which latter was most
acceptable unto this Bullinger; and for that cause, being yet a child, he had
an intent to unite himself unto the Order of the Carthusians, it being the
stric^est and most severest. In this place Bullinger concinued three years, to
the great perfection of his Studies, and increasing of his knowledge in the
Arts and Tongues. During which time he received little maintenance from his
Father. He furnished himself with victuals, sometimes by singing, sometimes by
begging from door to door. Which action he performed not because his Father
was poor and could not, or covetous and would not confer a sufficient annual
pension on him; but he did it, because he desired to have some experience of
the miserable and wretched condition of poor men; that iu future times he
might be the more willing and ready to relieve and succor them. Afterward, he
removed unto Colen, where he studied Logic, and notice being taken of his
excellent qualities, he proceeded Bachelor of Arts; and because there was great
controversies in the Churches then, touching some points of Divinity, he
inclined unto the Study of Theology, and withal desired to know of those who
were esteemed the best Scholars, what Authors were fittest to be read, to
ground him in the knowledge thereof. They all advise him to consult with
Lombard, his writings being of good account and authority in those times. This
counsel was embraced by Bullinger, who not contenting himself with that
Author, he went unto Georgius Deinerus; by whose procurement he obtained an
admission into the public Library at Colen; where he studied the Homilies of
Chrysostom on Matthew, read over some chief parts of the Works of Augustine,
Ambrose, Origin, the Works of Luther he read privately in his own Chamber,
which indeed were the means of inlightning his understanding; for by the
reading of them he was induced to peruse and to search into the Scriptures, and
especially into the New Testament; whereby he entered into a detestation of the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and into a constant and firm resolution of
rejecting the auster^ life of the Carthusian Monks.

In this Academy he went forth Master of Arts, and then he returned unto his
Fathers house, where he spent a whole year in his private studies and
meditations, at the end whereof he was called by Wolfangus Ionerus, unto
Capella (he being Abbot there) a Monastery situate in the fields of Tigurum,
and advanced by him to be Head-schoolmaster, during his residence he was
entirely beloved, not only of the Abbot, but also of Simler Zuinglius
O^colampadius, and of other excellent and reverend personages, for those
excellent parts wherewith he was endewed.

About this time he joined with Zuinglius as touching a reformation in the
Church, the laboring to produce it at Tigurum, and the other endeavoring to
effect it at Capella; which in short time took good effect, for they cleared
both places of Masses, and Idols, and of many other things, which appeared
superstitious in the Church, this he did during his residence at Capella, and
with so much the more happy success because he was appointed to read the
public Divinity Lecture in the same school.

In the year 1529. he was called unto Bremogart, the place of his birth, to
Preach the Word of truth unto them: here he began openly to condemn the
errors of the Papists, stoutly defending his Fathers doctrine, who had
formerly discovered and confuted their errors, but some of the more eminent
Citizens, not well brooking his doctrine, exercised their authority, in
expelling him the City; placing in his office a godly and learned Theologue,
named Gervasius Scholasticus, but his name being famous amongst the Switzers,
and many of them having a great desire to hear him, he was called unto his own
Country to preach the Gospel of Christ, wherein he was so powerful that he
caused them to rectify many abuses in the Church, and so well approved of,
that the Senate kindly entreated him to remain there, and to go forward in
his teaching? he answered them, that he was so strictly bound by promise unto
the Senate of Tigurum, and to the Abbot of Capella, that he could do nothing
without their leave and consent: Wherefore they presently dispatched an
Ambassador unto Cahella, who wrought so effectually with the Senate, that they
willed Bullinger to remain in his own Country, where he continued Preaching
the Gospel together with Gervasius three years with the Unanimous consent of
all the Citizens, and the Gospel by the industry of these two learned and
vigilant watchmen flourished in the same place: which (although it wear
opposed by the Anabaptists, who labored to hinder the growth of the Church)
was preferred by God, who stirred up this Bullinger to confute with invincible
arguments in the presence of the whole Church, their erroneous opinions.

But as one misery seldom comes alone, without the addition of another, even
so it happened at this present, for the Church of Bremogart was not only
troubled with the erroneous opinions of these Anabaptists; but also vexed with
intestine discords, where in the Papists having the upper hand, Bullinger with
his father and brother, and his faithful colleague Gervas^ius were banished
their Country, in the year of our Lord 1531. whence departed they went unto
Tigurum, and were kindly entertained by Wernerus Striner, who together with
them greatly lamented the troublesome State of the Church. In the same year
the Church of Basil was destitute of a Pastor, by reason of the death of
Oecolampadius, whereupon he was called by them unto the discharging of a
Pastoral office amongst them, but the Senate of Tigurum detained him, and
appointed him in the place of Zuinglius, according to his own desire, for when
he went forth with the Tigurines to Battle, he desired of them if any
misfortune came unto him, that they would be pleased to Nominate Bullinger to
be his successor.

And unto this office he was called in a time full of danger, even to build up
and to confirm and strengthen a Church, greatly shaken and afflicted. Which he
performed with such patience and modesty, that false Doctrine began again to
be discovered, and the truth to be firmly planted in the hearts of many; which
he well perceiving, ceased not to proceed and go forward, praising almighty God
for ordaining and esteeming him a worthy instrument for the advancing and
propagating of his Truth: and for that cause he wrote a Confession of his
Faith, sending it unto Constance to Bucer, and other learned Divines there
assembled for the establishing of an agreement amongst the Churches; which
work of his was approved of by Bucer and by the whole Assembly, esteeming it
worthy to be embraced of the adjacent Churches.

In the year 1536. he was present at Basel with Bucer and others, about the
reconciling of different points, which did great hurt unto the Church, and
especially about the reconciliation betwixt Luther and the Hevetian Churches;
where it being declared against him, that he labored for a defection unto
Luther, and all his opinions he cleared himself of that asper^ion, but
departed unsatisfied concerning his desire, to his great grief; who
notwithstanding so brideled his affection, that in the midst of their
contentions, he abstained from all bitterness of speech.

In the year 1538. some of our English Nobility came unto ^igurum, to be
instructed in the grounds of Religion, and to have his judgment concerning the
public rites and Ceremonies of the Church. This happened about the time that
Henry the eight had disburdened himself of the weight of the Pope, the English
being greatly inflamed to embrace a pure worship of the Lord, which had not yet
been conversant amongst them; these men were kindly entertained by Bullinger,
who also gave them full satisfaction concerning the things demanded; before
their departure, they entreated him that he would write some short Treatise
concerning Religion unto their Sovereign, whereby he might be egged forward in
his resolution touching the reformation of the Church. Unto which he willingly
condiscended, and wrote unto the King two learned Treatises, exhorting him to
set aside the inventions of men, and to give himself wholly unto the Word of
God; and to have all things in his Dominion regulated and squared according
unto the Canonical Scripture.

In the year following he labored to purge the Church of that gross error of
Casparus Schroenckfeldius a Silesian, concerning the Humane nature of Christ,
who taught that after his ascension into heaven, and sitting at the right hand
of his Father, it was so Deified and made coequall unto the Word, that it was
no more a creature; which error received strength and was fostered by the
approbation of great persons in Suevia, but quickly overthrown by the
laborious Preaching and writing of Bullinger. Within short time after, there
^ell out a hot and irreconcilable contention betwixt Luther and the other
Protestant Pastors, insomuch that he openly styled them damned Heretics and
enemies unto the Sacrament; insomuch that Melancthon said unto Bullinger,
desino sperare ecclesiarum pacem; I despair of a settled peace amongst the
Churches; and again, privato periculo, quod nunc mihi impendet, etsi non est
Leve, tamen tantum non movear quan^^m Ecclesiarum distractionibus. I am not so
much grieved with that private danger which on all sides threatens my ruin, as
I am with these distraction^ of the Church: but these contentions ceased and
were taken away by the death of Luther: yet there followed an happy consent and
agreement betwixt Calvin and the Church of Geneva of the one ^ide, and the
Tigurines on the other, concerning the Sacrament; wherein Calvin seemed to
adhaere unto the opinion of Luther in the judgment of the Tigurine Ministers.
Wherefore that he might free himself from this suspicion, taking Farellus with
him, he came unto Tigurum, where a form of agreement was written by Calvin and
Bullinger, and approved of by the Churches of R^etia and Helvetio, and
afterward published for the general good of the Church; and by this means
(God so disposing) the Churches were not only united firmly amongst
themselves, but also many were confirmed and strengthened in the knowledge of
the truth. And this agreement set such an edge on the teeth of their
Adversaries, that they began more bitterly to inveigh against the truth of
Christ; and still laboring to propagate the truth, he wrote several Decades
unto Edward the sixth King of England. And because a free and unmolested
Preaching of the Gospel was granted unto the English, he sent frequent letters
unto the Nobility, Bishops and Pastors of the Church, exhorting them unto a
perseverance in the work begun, and that with all purity and constancy. During
which act of his, a Legate came from the Pope with Authority to command the
Helvetian Prelates to be present at the Council of Trent. Who was answered by
Bullinger, that Concilium Tridentinum institutum esse ad opprimendam veritatem:
that that Council was ordained for the suppressing of the truth; and withal,
he denied Helvetios Evangelicos Papae, obedientiam ullam debire: that they owed
not any obedience unto the Pope at all, whose yoke they had now cast off, etc.

Not long after there was a dissension in the Church of Geneva, concerning Gods
Election, the Author whereof was Hieronimus Bolsecus, a Professor of Physic:
who openly opposed the doctrine of Calvin, exhorting the people not to suffer
themselves to be seduced and led away by him; affirming Bullinger, and many
other learned Divines to be of the same opinion with himself; wherefore it
seemed good unto the Senate and unto the brethren of the Church of Geneva, to
send unto Bullinger for his opinion concerning that point, who in express
words returned this answer, that he which did teach that Gods eternal Election
did depend on foreseen Faith, did maliciously abuse the doctrine of the Church
of Tigurum. About this tim^ Edward the sixth dyed in England, whose eldest
sister coming to the Crown, changed that form of Religion established by her
brother, and subjected the whole Kingdom again to the Pope of Rome; sharply
persecuting those who were known to make profession of the true faith:
wherefore many Noble and learned men were enforced to fly, some into Germany,
many into Switzerland, building themselves a College at Tigurum; being greatly
assisted by Bullinger, who then ratified that covenant of friendship, which he
had formerly promised in the days of Henry the eight. In the year 1561. the
Council of Trent was begun again by Pius the fourth then Pope, but the States
and Protestant Princes of Germany refused to be present, and likewise the
English together with the Helvetian Cities: during the continuance of which
Council Bullinger labored to extirpate the haeresies newly crept into the
Church ( viz.) That of Brentius, affirming of the Ubiquity of the human
nature; until such time as a merciless pestilence invaded the City of
Tigurum, ceazing upon Bullinger himself, insomuch that he dispaired of his
life, and therefore called the Ministers of Tigurum unto him, and took his
leave of them with a grave admonition, but it pleased God to restore him again
unto his former health, and he became an instrument of much good after in the
Church; about this time or immediately after began that War which was called
Sacrum, and the Prince of Condey suspecting some treason intended against his
Excellency, sent an Ambassador unto the Switzers in general, and unto
Bullinger in particular to entreat some ^de and succors from them; but the
Ambassador of the King coming thither, at the same time there was no answer
given unto the Ambassador of the Prince of Condey, who after a private manner
departed from Tigurum, forthwith there arose cruel Wars in France: great was
the number of Pastors and godly persons who fled, some to Geneva some to Berne,
and most of them being in extreme want and poverty, Bullinger caused public
collections to be made for them in the Churches, whereby they received
unexpected relief; and so he continued being careful for the members of the
Church, that their doctrine might be pure and uncorrupted, until it pleased
God to vi^it him with his last sickness, which indeed was the longest, it
continuing for the space of four whole months, in which time he endured the
sharpest pains with an admirable patience, yielding no sign or token of any
indignation or displeasure; the greater pains he suffered, the ferventer were
his prayers unto God; whenever he found some eas^, he would enter into some
good discourse either with his family, or with such strangers as came to visit
him, to whom he would often say, si deo visum fuerit, mea opera ^lterius in
ecclesiae ministerio uti, ipse vires sufficiae and libens illi parebo, sui
(...) voluerit, quod opto, and hac vita, etc.

It seems good unto Almighty God to account me worthy to exercise a Pastoral
office in his Church yet longer, let him give me strength and I will willingly
obey him, but if he will call me out of this life, which is the thing that I
desire, I am also ready to obey his will, for nothing can be more welcome unto
me then to leave this wretched and sinful world, and to go unto my Savior
Christ.

His pains still increasing, he caused the Pastors and Professors of the City
to come unto him, unto whom he delivered a large Oration: where in the first
place he kindly thanked them for that their love in coming unto him,
afterward he opened unto them that faith in which and for which he was ready
to lay down his life, in the thi^^ place he freely, and from his heart forgave
all his Enem^es, then he exhorted them constantly to continue in that doctrine
which they had together Professed with him, and withal he wished them to take
heed of the vulgar vice of the German Nation, because they who were subject
unto that sin could by no means do good in the Church of God: such good
things as proceed from them will be contemned of the people, he exhorted them
also unto a concord and unity amongst themselves, to love one another and to
defend one another, because they should be sure enough to find many opposers
and enemies, who would desire nothing more then their ruin; and in the last
place he advised them to have a reverend respect unto the Senate, who had
hitherto constantly defended the doctrine of the Gospel.

As he took his leave thus of the Pastors by word of mouth, so he took his
leave of the Senate by writing commending the care of the Church and
publick-schoole unto them, and withal desires that Rodolphus Guatterus might be
his successor, whom he adjudged the most fit for the discharging of a Pastoral
office in that place; having thus after a friendly manner taken his leave, he
prepared himself to meet the Lord; and in the midst of his extremities
sometimes repeating the sixteenth, sometimes the forty two, sometimes the fifty
one Psalms, sometime^ the Lords prayers, sometimes other prayers^ at the last
framing himself as it were to sleep, he quietly yielded his soul into the
hands of God, on the eighteenth of September, in the year 1575. and in the 71.
year of his age.

He was the most excellent of all the Divines that Switzerland yielded; he was
an undaunted defender of the truth of Christ; he was of a weak disposition,
plain^ in teaching, a lover of truth, but a det^ster of Sophistical and
unprofitable arguments in his speech, he was affable and courteous, as well
toward those of his family as toward strangers; he was sparing in his diet,
loving unto all, and studious, as it plainly appears by his works here
following which he left behind him, as testifications of his desire unto the
general good and benefit of the Church.

Tome 1.

1. A Catechism for the Trigurine Schoolmasters. 2. An Epitomie of Christian
Religion, in ten Books. 3. Sermons on the ^eads of Christian Religion.

Tome 2.

1. A Confession and Exposition of the Orthodox Faith. 2. A Declaration proving
the Protestant Churches ^o be neither Heretical nor Scismaticall. 3. A
Compendium of the Popish and Protestant tenets. 4. The old Faith and Religion.
5. Of Gods eternal Covenant. 6. An Assertion of the two natures in Christ. 7.
Instit^tion of Christian Matrimony. 8. Instructions for the sick. 9.
Declarations of Gods benefits unto the Switzers. 10. Exhortations to Repentance.

Tome 3.

1. A Treatise of the Sabbath, and of Christian ^easts. 2. Of the Office of
Magistrates, and of an Oath. 3. Of Repentance. 4. Of Conversion unto God. 5. An
Explanation of Daniels Prophesies. 6. Of the office Prophetical. 7. An
Exhortation unto Ministers to leave off Controversies. 8. Of the Original of
Ma^omenatisme. 9. Of the Persecutions of the Church.

Tome 4.

1. A Preface to the Latin Bible. 2. Sixty six Homilies on Daniel. 3. Epitomie
of the times from the Creation to the Dest^uction of Jerus^lem.

Tome 5.

1. Homili^s on Isaiah. 2. Sermons on Jeremiah. 3. An Exposition on the
Lamentation.

Tome 6.

1. Commentaries on Matthew. 2. Mark. 3. Luke. 4. John. 5. Acts of the
Apostles. 6. A Series of times and actions of the Apostles.

Tome 7.

1. Commentaries on the Epistles of Saint Paul. 2. Sermons on the Revelation.

Tome 8.

1. A Demonstration of Christian perfection to Henry the second King of France.
2. Of the authority of the Scripture. 3. Of the I^stitution of Bishops.

Never could worth lodge in a richer breast;
Those blessings he enjoyed, made others blessed;
He was composed of sweetness, and his heart
Was always cheerful, willing to impart
The truth to them that studied how to grieve
For sin, and would prove willing to believe.
He was laborious and he could express
Hatred to nothig, more then Idelnesse.
Grave Doctors of those times would then submit
To his profound, incomparable wit;
For his grave judgment was so highly pris'd
That most would act, what Bullenge^ advised.
Is it not ^iting then, that we should give
Due praise to him, whose worth will make him live.
The Life and Death of Edward Deering, who dyed Anno Christi 1576.
EDward Deering was borne of a very ancient family in Kent, and carefully
brought up both in Religion, and Learning: From School he went to Cambridge,
and was admitted into Chris^'s College, where he profited exceedingly, and
became a very famous Preacher, as may appear by his most learned and holy
Sermons, and Tractates full of heavenly consolation. He never affected nor
sought after great titles of preferments, and therefore rested content with his
Fellowship in that College; and only Comensed Bachelor of Divinity: yet
afterward he was made a Preacher in St. Paul's Church in London: and having
worn out himself with his labors in the work of the Lord, he fell sick, and
discerning his approaching death, he said, in the presence of his friends that
came to visit him; The good Lord pardon my great negligence, that (whilst I
had time) I used not his precious gifts to the advancement of his glory, as I
might have done: Yet I bless God withal, that I have not abused these gifts
to ambition and vain studies. When I am once dead, my enemies shall be
reconciled to me, except they be such as either knew me not, or have no sense
of goodness in them; for I have faithfully, and with a good conscience served
the Lord my God. A Minister standing by, said unto him, It is a great
happiness to you, that you dye in peace, and thereby are freed from those
troubles which many of your brethren are like meet with. To whom he answered,
If God has decreed that I shall sup together with the Saints in heaven, why
do I not go to them? but if there be any doubt or hesitation resting upon my
spirit, the Lord will reveal the truth unto me. When he had layen still a
while, a friend said unto him, that he hoped that his mind was employed in
holy meditation whilst he lay so silent^ to whom he answered, Poor wretch,
and miserable man that I am, the least of all Saints, and the greatest of
Sinners; yet by the eye of Faith I believe in, and look upon Christ my Savior:
yet a little while, and we shall ^ee ^ur hope. The end of the world is come
upon us, and we shall quickly receive the end of our hope which we have so
much looked for: Affl^ctions, deseases, sickness, grief, are nothing but part
of that portion which God has allotted to us in this world. I^'s not enough to
begin for a little while, execept we persevere in the fear of the Lord all the
dayer of our lives, for in a moment we shall be taken away. Tak^ heed therefore
that you do not make a pastime of, nor dis-esteem the Word of God: blessed are
they that whilst they have tongues, use them to God's glory. When he drew near
to his end, being set up in his bed, some of his friends requested him to speak
something to them that might be for their ^dification, and comfort: whereupon
the Sun shining in his face, he took occasion from thence to say thus unto
them: There is but one Sun in the world, nor but one Righteousness, one
Communion of Sts^ If I were the most excellent of all creatures in the world:
if I we^^ equal in righteousness to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, yet had I
reason to confess my self to be a sinner, and that I could expect (...)
salvation but in the righteousness of Jesus Christ^ For we all stand in need
of the Grace of God: And as for my death, I bless God I feel, and find so much
inward joy, and comfort to my soul, that if I were put to my choice whether to
die, or live, I would a thousand times rather choose death, then life, if it may
stand with the holy wi^^ of God: and accordingly shortly after the slept in the
Lord, Anno Christi 1576.

What greater Simptomes can there be of grace
Then to be penitent; the greatest race
A Christian can desire to run, is this
Fron earths base center, to eternal bliss.
This race our Deering run; he spent his time
Whilst here he lived in studying how to clime
To Heavens high Court, true v^^tue was his prize,
And God the object where he fixed his eyes:
Faith, Hope, and Charity did sweetly rest
Within the Council Chamber of his breast:
And to conclude, the graces did agree
To make a happy soul, and that was he.
The Life and Death of Flacius Jlliricus, who dyed Anno Christi 1575.
MAtthias Flacicus Illiricus was born in Albona in Sclavo^a, Anno Christi 1520.
his Father, whilst he lived, bro^ght him up in learning care^ully; but after
his death, his Masters so neglected him that he almost forgot all; but when he
began to have discretion, he desired much to attain to learning, and for that
end he went to Venice, and after some progress made, at seventeen years old he
began to ^tudy Divinity, but wanting means to maintain him in the University,
he proffered half his estate to be admitted into a Monastery, either at
Bononia, or Padua: but a friend, di^swading him from that kind of life,
advised him rather to go into Germany where were store of learned men. He went
therefore to Basil, where he studied under Grynaeus, and from thence to Tubing:
where also he studied a while, and then went to Wi^tenb^rg Anno Christi 1541.
where he privately taught Greek and Hebrew for hi^ maintenance, and heard
Luther, and Melancthon. He was much troubled there with temptations about sin,
God's wrath and Predestination: but by the good council of Pome^^ne and
Luther, and the public prayers of the Church for him, it pleased God that he
overcame them. Melancthon loved him much for his wit, and learning: there he
was made Master of Arts: married a wife, and had a stipend allowed him by the
Prince (...) But when, by reason of the Wars, that University was dissipated,
he went to B^^nswi^ke, and got much credit by his public teaching: but the
Wars being ended, he returned to Wittenberg, Anno 1547. But when the Inter^m
came forth, and Melancthon thought that for peace-sake some thing should be
yielded to in things indifferent; Flacius, with many other Divines, strongly
opposed it, as opening a gap to the retnrne of Popery: whereupon he removed
from thence to Magdeburg, where he strongly opposed whatsoever was contrary to
the Augustine Confession: there als^ he assisted in writing the Magdeburgenses
Centuries. And when the Duke of Saxony had erected an University at Ieans he
sent for him thither, Anno Christi 1556. but after five years a great
contention arising between Strigelius, and him about Free Will, he left that
place, and went to Ratisbone^ an^ Anno Christi 1567. the Citizens of An^werp,
having pro^^^^^ liberty for the free exercise of the Reformed Religion, sent
for Flacius amongst others thither: but Religion being quickly expelled thence,
he went to Argentine: and from thence to Franckefurt upon the Main, where after
a while falling out with the Ministers about the Essence of Original Sin, he
fell into great disgrace: and not long after dyed Anno Christi 1575. and of his
age 55. He was of an unquiet wit, always contending with some or other; and
brought much grief to Melancthon: yet wrote some excellent works for the
benefit of the Church: and amongst oothers, his Catalogus Testium Veritatis.

He was a man (as some reported) fit
To be the Master of unquiet wit.
He was contentious, which brought discontent
To rare Melancthon; yet some time he spent
In serious studyes, leaving at his death
Rare works behind, to give his fame a breath.
The Life and Death of Josias Simlerus, who dyed Anno Christi 1576.
Josias Simlerus was born in Helvetia Anno Christi 1530. his father was a
godly, learned, and prudent man: by whom he was carefully brought up in
learning, and at fourteen years of age he was sent to Tygure, where he lived in
Bullinge^'s family (who was his godfather) almost two years; from thence he
went to the University of Basil, where he studied the Arts, and Tongues one
year, and from thence he went to Argentine, where he made a further progress
in those studies; and at the end of three years he returned to his fathers,
with whom he spent his time in study, and teaching a School, and sometimes also
preaching. Anno Christi 1552. he began publicly to expound the New Testam^nt,
beginning in Matthew in Tygure, being twenty two years old; which work he
performed with great judgment, fidelity, and diligence, having not only many
of that City to be his hearers, but many Exiles, especially of the English;
also four years after he was made Deacon, and went on in his former work with
admiration, so that he was highly prized by all. Bibliander being grown very
old, Simler supplied his place, and was Colleague to Peter Martyr: who foretold
that Simler was like to prove a great ornament to the Church: who also when he
dyed expressed much joy that he should leav so able a man to succeed him.
Simler, besides his public labors, instructed many also in private, and
amongst them some Noblemen, both in sacred, and humain learning: he had such an
acute wit, and strong memory that he was able Extempore to speak of any
subject, and to answer his friends questions out of any author, and to give an
account of their wrintings to the great admira^tion of the hearers: and though
in reading of books he seemed to run over them very superficially, yet when he
had don, he was able to give an exact account of any thing that was in them:
and being so troubled with the gout that many times he was confined to his bed,
and had the use of none of his members but his tongue only; yet in the midst
of his pains, he used to dictate to his amanuensis such things as were
presently printed to the great admiration of learned men: besides the gout, he
was much troubled with the stone, so that the pains of these diseases, together
with his excessive labors in his Ministry, hastened his immature death: which
he also foresaw, yet without any consternation or fear, but by his frequent,
and fervent prayers to God, he endeavored to fit himself for it: and
accordingly Anno Christi 1576. he resigned up his spirit unto God, being forty
five years old, and was buried in Peter Martyr's tomb: he was of a very loving,
and gentle nature, free from passion: very charitable, spending all his
Patrimony upon the poor, and strangers, and such as came thither to study he
entertained them in his house, and often feasted his friends, with whom he
would be very merry, otherwise he was very sparing of speech. He delighted much
in history: he had two wives, the first of which was Bullinger's daughter, who
dyed without issue; by the second he had three sons, and one daughter.

He was a man whose life and conversation,
Furnished both eyes and ears with admiration:
He was so pithy in his speech, that those
Which heard him, gave a plaudit to his close:
He always meditated how to be
A perfect Scholar in Divinity:
He lived in Peace, his heart was still contented,
His life was well beloved, his death lamented.
The life and death of Immanuall Tremelius, who dyed Anno Christi 1580.
IMmanuell Tremelius was born in Ferara, having a Jew to his father, who so
educated him, that he was very skillful in the Hebrew tongue: He was converted
by Peter Martyr, and went with him to Lucca, where he taught Hebrew: from
thence he went with him also to Argentine, and from thence into England under
King Edward the sixth, after whose death he returned into Germany, and in the
School ^f Hornback, under the Duke of Bipont, he taught Hebrew: from thence he
was called to Heidleberg, under Frederick the third, Elector Palatine, where he
was professor of the Hebrew tongue, and translated the Syriack Testament into
Latin. There also he set upon the translation of the Bible out of Hebrew, and
associated to himself in that work Francis Iunius: From thence also he
removed to Seden, at the request of the Duke of Bulloin, to be the
Hebrew-Profes^sor in his new University, where he dyed Anno 1580. and of his
Age seventy.

This rars Hebritian, though at first conf^n'd
To Jewish principles, at last in^lin'd
Himself to goodness, and employed his heart
To trace and follow a diviner art;
And so improved himself, that he became
From a small spark, a most aspiring flame.
And at the last he laid his ^empels down
In Abr'ams bosom, and received a Crown.
The Life and Death of Peter Boquine, who dyed Anno Christi 1582.
PEter Boquinus was borne in Aqritane, and being in his youth brought up in
learning, he entered into a Monastery in Biturg; where afterward he was made
the Prior, and was very much beloved of all the Covent. But it pleased God in
the midst of all his riches and honors, to discover the Truth to him; and
thereupon, after the example of Luther, Bucer, O^colampadius and Peter Martyr,
he resolved to leave all, and to follow Christ, whose example diverse of the
Friars also followed. From thence he went to Wittenberg, traveling through
Germany, and by the way he went to Basil, where he wintered, by reason of the
Plague very rise at that time in many Countries: there he diligently heard the
Lectures of Myconius, Caralostadius, and Sebastian Munster: from thence he went
to Lipswich, where he stayed three weeks, and so went to Wittenberg; coming
thither he had some converse with Luther, but more with Melancthon: and whilst
he was there, Bucer ^ent to Melancthon to request him to send an able man to
Argentine to supply Calvin's place, who was now gone back to Geneva; whereupon
Melancthon requested Boquine to go thither, which he accordingly did, and
began to read upon the Epistle to the Galatians. Shortly after Peter Martyr
came thither also. But Boquine finding that the Ecclesiastical and
Scholasticall affairs went but slowly forward in that place, upon the request
of a friend, he resolved to go back into France: and so taking Basil in his
way, he went to Geneva, where he heard Cavin preach, and from thence to Biturg,
where (hoping that the French Churches would have been reformed) he began to
read Hebrew, and to expound the Scriptures. About that time Francis King of
France being dead, the Queen of Navar came into those parts, about the marriage
of her daughter: to whom Boquine went, and presented her with a book about the
necessity and use of the holy Scriptures; whereupon she undertook his
Patronage, and allowed a yearly stipend, appointing him to Preach a public
Lecture in the great Church in Biturg: which place he continued in so long as
he had hope of doing any good; but when he saw that there was no hope of any
further Reformation, and that his enemies lay in wait for his life, he gave it
over of his own accord: yet the Friars and Papists would not let him alone, but
cited him to the Parliament at Paris, and afterward brought him before the
Archbishop of Bi^urg; so that he was in great peril of his life, but God
raised up some good men to stand for him, whereby he was delivered from the
present danger: then he resolved to fly into England; but hearing of King
Edward's death, he altered his purpose, and by the persuasion of a friend, he
resolved to return to his people in Germany; and so accordingly he went to
Argentine, and when he had scarce been there a month, it so fell out that the
French Church in that place wanted a Pastor, and chose him to that office; yet
for sundry reasons he refused to acc^pt of it, till by the persuasion of John
Sturmius, and some other friends, he was content to preach to them till they
could provide themselves of another. In the year 1557. he went from thence to
Heidleberg, being sent for by Otho Henry, Prince Elector Palatine; who was
about to reform his Churches: there he was made the public Professor of
Theology, and met with much oppositions and manifold contentions in that
alteration; which he bore with much prudence: there he continued in the
execution of his place twenty years under Otho and Frederick the third; after
whose death in 1576. by reason of the prevalency of the Heterodox party, he,
with other Professors and Divines, was driven from thence: and it pleased God
that immediately he was called to Lusanna, where he performed the part of a
faithful Pastor, so long as he lived. In the year 1582. on a Lords day he
preached twice, and in the evening heard another Sermon, then supped
cheerfully, and after supper refreshed himself by walking abroad; then went to
visit a sick friend, and whilst he was comforting of him, he found his spirits
to begin to sink in him, and running to his servant, he said unto him, Pray;
saying further, Lord receive my soul, and so he quietly departed in the Lord,
in the year 1582.

This loyal convert carefully did strive,
To make Religion and true virtue thrive:
By his example many Friars went
To seek for Christ, and leave their discontent:
They banished former erro^s to embrace
The truth, and fill themselves with heavenly grace:
But sudden death made B^quines heart to faint;
He lived a Convert and he died a Saint.
WILLIAM GRINDALL.
The Life and Death of William Grindall.
WIlliam Grindall was born in Cumberland Anno Christi 1519. and carefully
brought up in learning, first (...) School, and then in the University of
Cambridge, where being admitted into Pembrooke-Hall, he profited so exceedingly
that he was chosen first Fellow, and afterward Master of that house: and Bishop
Ridley taking notice of his piety, and learning, made him his Chaplain, and
commended him to that pious Prince King Edward the sixth, who intended to prefer
him, but that he was prevented by an immature death. In the bloody days of
Queen Mary, Grindal, amongst many others, fled into Germany where he continued
al^ her reign; but coming back in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, she
pre^erred him to that dignity which her brother King Edward intended him to,
making him Bishop of London, wherein he carried himself worthily for about
eleven years; and Anno Christi 1570. he was removed by the Queen to the
Archbishopric of York, where he continued about six years; and then for his
piety and learning she made him Archbishop of Cant^rbury, wherein he lived
about seven years more, and then falling sick at Croydon, he resigned up his
spirit unto God that gave i^, An. Christi 1583. and of his Age 64. Both in his
life, and at his death he did many excellent works of Charity^ at Saint Bees in
Cumberland, where he was born, he erected a Free School, and endowed it with 30
l. per Annum for ever. To Pembrok Hall in Cambridg, where he was educated, he
gave 22 l. a year in Lands for the maintaining of a Greek Lecturer, one Fellow,
and two Scholars, to be chosen out of the foresaid School of Saint Bees: he
gave also much money to the said College. To Magdalen College in Cambridge he
gave lands for the maintenance of one Fellow from the said School: To Christ's
College in Cambridg he gave forty five pounds. To Queen'^ College in Oxford
he gave twenty pound per Annum in lands to maintain one Fellow^ and two
Scholars out of the aforesaid School: and at his death he gave his Library,
which was a very great and good one, to that College; besides a great sum of
money. To eight Almshouses in Croydon he gave fifty pounds per Annum: and to
Canterbury he gave an hundred pounds to set the poor on work.

True virtue rained in Grindals breast,
His Charity bespeaks him blessed:
He loved peace, and hated those
That dared to prove Religions foes^
Renowned Ridley took delight
To see his virtue shine so bright;
He like a star gave light to all
That sat in darkness, pinched with thrall,
And thus this glistring star went down,
And set in Heaven with much renown
Where now he bears his part, and sings
Blessed hallalujahs to the Kng of Kings.
The Life and Death of Bernard ^ilpin, who dyed Anno Christi 1583.
BErnard Gilpin was born at Kentmire in the County of Westmoreland Anno Christi
1517. of an ancient, and honorable family: when he was but a child, a Friar
pretending to be a zealous Preacher, came on a Saturday night to his fathers
house, and at supper eat like a Glutton, and drank himself drunk; yet the next
morning in his Sermon sharply reproved the sin of Drunkenness: whereupon yo^ng
Gilpin, sitting near his mother, cried out, Oh mother! do you hear how this
fellow dar's speak against drunkenness, and yet himself was drunken last
night? but his mother stopped his mouth with her hand, that he might speak no
further, it being a mortal sin in those times to speak against these men. His
parents perceiving his aptness were careful to make him a Scholar: and when
he had with great approbation passed his time in the Grammer-School, they sen^
him to Oxford Anno Christi 1533. where he was admitted into Queen's College,
and profited wonderonsly in humane learning: he was very conversant also in the
writings of Erasmus, which were much esteemed at that time: And to the study of
Logic, and Philosophy, he added that of Greek and Hebrew; yea after some few
years spent in these studyes, he grew so famous, that their was no place of
preferment for a Scholar, whereof the eminency of his virtues had not rendered
him worthy: whereupon he was one of the first that was chosen a member of
Christ-Church by Cardinal Wol^ey. At that time he was not fully instructed in
the true Religion, but held Disputations against John Hooper, afterward Bishop
of Worcester; as also against Peter Martyr who was then Divinity Lecturer at
Oxford: upon the occasion of which dispute, that he might defend his cause the
better, he examined the Scriptures, and ancient Fathers: But by how much the
more he studied to defend his Cause, the less confidence he began to have
therein; and so whilst he was searching zealously for the Truth, he began to
discern his own Errors. Peter Martyr used to say, That he cared not for his
other ^dversaries, but (says he) I am much troubled for Gilpin; for he does,
and speaks all things with an upright heart, and therefore he often prayed,
That God would be pleased at last to convert to the Truth the heart of Gilpin
being so inclinable to honesty: and the Lord answered his prayer; for Gilpin
resolved more earnstly to apply himself both by study, and prayer to search
out the Truth, and it pleased God accordingly to reveal it unto him; as also
the many Errors of Popery, and the necessity of seperating from that
Apostaticall Church. In the mean while Cuthbert T^nstal Bishop of Durham being
his Uncle, resolved to send him beyond Sea to visit the Churches in foreign
parts, and to allow him means for his travel; but before his going, he was
called to preach before King Edward the sixth, which he performed with good
approbation. Then resolving upon his journey, he had a Parsonage given him,
which Tunstal persuaded him to keep to maintain him in his travels; but he,
sending for a friend whom he knew to be learned and religious, resigned his
Parsonage to him: for which, when it came to the knowledge of Tunstal, he chid
him sharply, and told him, That he would dye a beggar: but he excused it,
saying, That he could not keep it with the peace of his conscience: but (said
the Bishop) thou shall have a dispensation: to whom Gilpin answered, That he
feared when he came to stand before Christ's tribunal, it would not serve his
turn to plead a Dispensation, etc. When he came beyond Sea he went to Lovain,
Antwerp and Pari^: and after a while Tunstal sent again to him to persuade him
to accept of a Parsonage, which he would confer upon him: to whom he wrote
back, that he had discussed it with all the learned, especially with the
Prophets and best writers since Christ's time; so that he was fully resolved
not to burden his conscience to accept of a Change which he could not live
upon, etc. Whilst he was at Paris, Tunstal sent him over a Book which himself
had written, about the Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, to be printed
there, which Gilpin performed faithfully. He returned into England after three
years, in Queen Mary's reign, and beheld (to his grief) the Church oppressed
with blood and fire: and being placed by Tunstal in the Rectory of Essingdon,
he began sharply to tax the vice^ which then reigned in the Church, and
propounded the Doctrine of Salvation plainly, and soundly, which procured him
many enemies, especially of the Clergy, who accused hin often to the bishop for
an Heretic; but Tunstal could not endure to shed blood, and therefore he de^lt
mildly with him. At a certain time the Bishops Ch^plain^ discoursed with him
about Luther, and the Sacrament of the Altar: whom he answered so judiciously,
that the Bishop hearing their discourse, said to his Chaplains, L^th^^ alone
for he has more l^arning then you all. The Archdeacon^^ of Durham being
annexed to the Parsonage of Essingdon, Master Gilpin for a ^ime supplied both
places, but after a wh^^^ he wrote to the Bishop, that he might have his good
w^ll to resign one of them; which the Bishop was very angry (...) saying, I
told thee thou would die a beggar. Not long after ^he Bishop conferred upon
him instead of them, the Rectory of Houghton, which was a great Parish, and a
very fine s^^t. He took great care to perform the dutye^ of the Mini^^ry
amongst his people; and seeing the miserable condition of many places in those
parts; where ^he Ti^hes being Impropr^ated, the Souls of the people were
st^rved, he preached often abro^d also: and once a year he took a journey into
No^thumberland, Riddesdale, and Tindal, usually about C^^istmas, because of the
opportunity of so many holy d^ie^; where he gat himself much ^steem by his
pr^achi^g to thos^ barbarou^ people, and distributing money to the poor:
sometimes h^ was forced to lodge in the snow all night in that jou^ny, at which
times he made his man to trot his horse^ up and down whilst he bestirred
himself that he might not perish by the could. Once as he returned home, a
husbandman, as he was ploughing, had a horse in hi^ team that fell down, and
dyed, for which he made great moan; whereupon Master Gilpin caused his man to
alight, and take off his saddle and bridle, and so to carry them to the next
town, and gave his horse to this husbandman; and when by chance h^ met with any
naked poor people, he would pull off some of his own clothes, and give them. In
the town of Houghton there was a street of poor people; for whose reliese
every thursday, he caused a great pot of meat to be boyl^d, and distributed
amongst them; ye^, his charity was such, that he was commonly called, The
Father of the Poor: Yet had he many enemies, who often accused him to Bishop
Tunstal, but he abhorring to shed blood, was still a sweet defense to him. At
last they accused him to Bonner, who sent a messenger to apprehend him, whereof
he had notice before hand, and therefore prepared himself for Martyrdom,
commanding his Steward to provide him a long garment to go to the stake in,
but it pleased God that by the sudden death of Queen Mary he was freed from
thi^ danger. In the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign Master Gilpin was
exc^eding studious to do all the good that possibly he could; whereupon he
erected a Grammer-School, allowing maintenance for a Master, and Usher: diverse
of the Scholars he also instructed himself, so that in that School were bred
many that were exceedingly profitable to the Church afterward: for there was
great resort to it, some of which he tabled in his own house, others in the
town; yea, upon many poor men's sons he bestowed both meat, drink, apparel,
and ^eaching: out of this School were sent daily many to the University, to
diverse of which he allowed maintenance, whereby his name was renowned, and the
Earl of Bedford much esteemed him, and procured of the Queen the Bishopric of
Carlisle for him, and sent him his Congedeslier, but Master Gilpin returned it
back with many thanks, alleging his own insufficiency for the discharge of so
great a place. Not long after also he was much importuned to take upon him the
Provost's place of Queens College in Oxford, but he refused it, being wholly
unwilling to remove from the place where God had set him.

He was much given to Hospitality, insomuch as William Cecill Lord Burghley
returning out of Scotland, drawn with the same of Master Gilpin came to
Houghton, where he was entertained with all due respect: and when he had well
observed Master Gilpin, and the diligence, and abundance of all things, with so
complete service in the entertainment of so great, and unlooked for a Guest, he
said at his parting, That he had heard much of Master Gilpin, but what he had
now seen, and tried was much more then the report; and thereupon taking his his
leave of Master Gilpin, he r^quested him if he had any occasion, or suit at the
Court that he would make use of him to meditate it for him. He still continued
his yearly visit of Riddesdale, and Tindale, where he was esteemed a Prophet,
and little less then adored by that barbarous people. Being once amongst them,
one had stolen his horses, whereupon Hue and Cry was sent abroad for Master
Gilpin's horses: the fellow that had stolen them, hearing that they were Master
Gilpin's, fell a trembleing, and presently carried them back again, humbly
craving pardon, and the benediction of Father Gilpin, protesting that he feared
that he should be thurst into hell if he should do him any wrong. Also he
being to preach at a town called Rothbury, there was a deadly fewd between the
Inhabitants, so that the men of both sides never met at Church without
bloodshed, and therefore when one party came the other used to stay away: but
Master Gilpin being in the Pulpit, both parties came to Church, one party going
into the Chancell, and the other into the body of ^he Church, armed with Swords
and Javelins; Master Gilpin, though somewhat moved with this uncouth spectacle,
yet went on in his Sermon; but when their weapons began to make a clashing
sound, and the one side drew near to the other, Master Gilpin came down from
the Pulpit, and stepping to the ringleaders of either faction, he labored to
establish a peace; and when he could not prevail in that, yet he got a promise
from them to continue the peace whilst he was in the Church, and afterward
whilst he was in those quarters, and so going up again, he spent the rest of
the time in discharging that barbarous and bloody custom. At another time
Master Gilpin coming to a Church in those parts, before the people assembled,
and walking up, and down, he espied a glove hanging up in the Church; end
enquiring of the Sexton the meaning of it, he told him that it was a glove of
one of the Parish who hung it up as a challenge to his enemy, with whom he
would fight hand to hand, or with any else that durst take it down. Master
Gilpin requested the Sexton to take it down, who replied, That he durst not.
Then said Master Gilpin, Bring me a staff, and I will take it down; which
accordingly he did, and put it into his bosom, and in his Sermon he took
occation to reprove these inhumane challenges, and reproved him in particular
that had hug up the glove, showing them that he had taken it down, and that
such practices were unbeseeming Christians, and therefore he persuaded them to
love, and mutual charity amongst themselves: after Sermon he distributed money
amongst the poor, and as his manner was, visited the prisoners, gave them money,
and preached to them, and brought many of them to repentance, and for some that
were condemned to die he procured pardon, and saved their lives.

Not long after a Rebellion was raised in the North by the Earls of
Northumberland, and Cumberland; which Master Gilpin having intelligence of,
resolved to retire himself, and making a speech to the Master, and Scholars to
demean themselves carefully, and peaceably in his absence; he went to Oxford,
till the Queens Army commanded by the Earl of Sussex, had dissipated the
Rebels: but before that Army came, the Rebels having seized upon Durham, some
of them flew as far as Houghton, and finding Master Gilpin's Barns full of
corn, young cattle fatted, and many things provided for hospitality, they made
spoil of all; the chiefest of which plunderers was a knave whom Master Gilpin
had saved from the Gallows: but when those Rebels were overthrown, Master
Gilpin returned home, and begged the lives of many of the simpler sort, whom he
knew to be drawn into that Rebellion through ignorance.

After the death of Bishop Pilkington, who was Master Gilpins faithful friend,
there succeeded in the Bishopric of Durham one Richard Barns who was offended
with him upon some false suggestions, which came thus about: Master Gilpins
custom was sometimes to go to Oxford, and once as he was upon his way, he
espied a young youth before him sometimes walking, and sometimes running. Master
Gilpin demanded of him what he was, whence he came, and whether he was going?
He answered, That he came out of Wales, and was bound for Oxford to be a
Scholar.

Master Gilpin thereupon examined him, and finding him a prompt Scholar for the
Latin, and that he had a smattering in the Greek, asked him if he would go
with him, and he would provide for him: the youth was contented, whereupon he
took him with him to Oxford, and afterward to Houghton, where he profited
exceedingly both in Greek, and Hebrew, whom Master Gilpin at last sent to
Cambridge: and this was that famous Hugh Broughton, who afterward r^quited
evil for good, by stirring up of the Bishop of Durham against Master Gilpin.
Now the Bishop sent to Master Gilpin to preach at a Visitation, appointing time
and place: but it fell out just at that time when Master Gilpin was going his
Northern journey into Riddesdale, etc. whereupon he sent his man to the Bishop,
desiring him to appoint some other to preach the Visitation-Sermon, for that he
might have many to do that, but none would go amongst the Borderers if he did
it not: when his man had delivered his message to the Bishop, the Bishop h^ld
his peace, which being related to Mr. Gilpin, he said, Silence argu^'s consent,
and so went on in his journey. But so soon as the Bishop heard of it, he
suspended him, which Master Gilpin at his return much wondered at: Shortly
after the Bishop sent to him to warn him to meet him, and the rest of the
Clergy at Chester: whither Master Gilpin went, and when the Bishop and Clergy
were all met in the Church: he said to Master Gilpin, Sir, I must have you
preach to day. Master Gilpin desired to be excused, because he was unprovided,
and for that he was suspended. But (says the Bishop) I free you from that
suspension. Yet Master Gilpin replied, That he durst not go up into the Pulpit
unprovided. You are never unprovided (says the Bishop) you have such an habit
of preaching. Master Gilpin still stiffly refused, saying^ That God was not so
to ^e tempted, etc.

Whereupon the Bishop commanded him to go into the Pulpit forthwith. Well Sir
(said Master Gilpin) since it must be so, your Lordships will be done, and so
after a little pause, went up, and began his Sermon, and though he saw some
extraordinarily prepared to write his Sermon, yet he proceeded in his
application to reprove the enormities in that Diocese. And now says he,
Re^erend Father, my speech must be directed unto you; God has exalted you, and
will require an account of your Government: a reformation of what is amiss in
the Church is required at your hands, etc. neither can you henceforth plead
ignorance, for b^h^ld I bring these things to your knowledge this day, and
therefore what evils you shall ^ither do your self, or suffer by your
connivance ^ereaf^er you make it your own, etc^ His friends hearing him thu^der
out these things, much feared what would become of him: and after Sermon, some
of them told him with tears, That now the Bishop had that advantage against him
which he had long looked for, etc. to whom he answered, Be not afraid, the
Lord God over-ruleth all, and if God ^ay be glorified, and his Truth
propagated, Gods will be done ^on^erning ^ee. After they had dined together
(all men exspecting the issue of this business) Master Gilpin went to take his
leave of the Bishop. Nay (said the Bishop) I will bring you home, and so went
along with him to his house, and walked there together in a Parlour, the Bishop
took him by the hand, saying, Father Gilpin, I acknowledge you are fitter to be
Bishop of Durham, then my self to be Parson of your Church, I ask
forgiveness^ for errors past; forgive m^, Father, I know you have hatched (...)
some chickens that now seek to pick out your eyes; but be sure so long as I am
Bishop of Durham, no man shall injure you: Master Gilpin, and his friends much
rejoiced that God had so overruled things^ that that which was purposed for his
disgrace, should turn to his greater credit.

His body being quite worn out with pains-taking, at last he feeling before
hand the approach of death, commanded the poor to be called together, unto whom
he made a speech, and took his leave of them: He did the like also to others;
made many exhortations to the Scholars, to hi^ servants, and to diverse others,
and so at the last he fell asleep in the the Lord, March the fourteenth An.
Christi 1583. and of his Age 66.

He was tall of stature, slender, and hawk-nosed: his clothes not costly, but
frugal in things that belonged to his own body: bountiful in things that
tended to the good of others, especially to the Poor, and Scholars. His doore^
were still open to the poor, and strangers; he boorded, and kept in his own
house twenty four Scholars, most of them poor men's sons, upon whom he bestowed
meat, drink, apparel, and learning. Having a great Parish he entertained them
at his table by course every Sabbath, from Michaelmasse to Easter. He bestowed
upon his School, and for stipends upon the Schoolmasters, the full sum of five
hundred pounds, out of which School he supplied the Church of England with
great store of learned men. He was careful not only to avoid all evil, but
the least appearance of it: Being full of faith unfeigned, and of good works;
he was at last put into his grave as an heap of wheat in due time put into the
garner.

What pen can be susficient to set forth
Th'exuberous praises of brave Gilpins worth?
Though at the first his heedlesse soul did stray,
And ramble in a foul erroneous way:
Yet at the last he left those paths which bended
Unto destruction; and his follyes ended:
Then he began to exercise the truth,
And hate the former errors of his youth.
His soul was filled with piety, and peace;
And as the truth, so did his joys increase:
His fame soon spread abroad; his worth was hurled
Through every corner of th'inquiring world.
And to conclude, in him all men might find
A real heart, and a most noble mind.
The life and death of Zachary Ursin, who dyed Anno Christi 1583.
ZAchary Vrsin was born in Silesia Anno Christi 1534. of honest parents, who
were careful of his education in his childhood; and having profited
exceedingly at School, he was sent to the University of Wittenberge at sixteen
years old, where he heard Melancthon with great diligence two years: at which
time the Plague breaking forth there; he retired with Melancthon to Tergaw, and
having an ample testimony from him, he went thence into his own Country all
the winter, but in the spring he returned to Wittenberg, where he spent 5.
years in the study of the Arts, and Tongus, and Divinity: he was very familiar
with Melancthon, and much esteemed of many learned men, who flocked to that
University out of all Countries, with whom also afterward he kept
correnspondency: he went An. Christi 1557. with Melancthon to the conference at
Worms about religion; and from thence he traveled to Marpurg, Argentine,
Basil, Lausanna, and Geneva, where he grew into familiar acquaintance with many
learned men, especially Calvin, who gave him such books as he had Printed; from
thence he went into France, to Lions, and Paris, where he perfected his skill
in the Hebrew under the learned Mercerus; in his return he went to Tigure,
where he acquainted himself with the learned men, and so to Tubing, Vlme,
Norimberg, and so to his old Master Melancthon. Anno Christi 1558. he was sent
for by the Senate of Vratislave (which was his native place) to govern a School
there; where, besides his Lectures in the Arts, and Tongues, he was employed in
the explication of Melancthons book of the Ordination of Mini^ters, wherein he
declared his judgment about the Sacrament, and thereupon he was cried out
agaainst for a Sacramentarian; which caused him to give a public account of
his Faith about the Doctrine of the Sacraments, in certain strong, and accurate
propositions; Melancthon hearing of the opposition which he met with, wrote to
him to stand firmly to the truth, and if he enjoyed not p^ace in that place to
return to him again; and to reserve himself for better times: whereupon he
requested of the Senate that he might be dismissed, and having obtained his
desire, he returned to Wi^tenberg, where foreseeing Melancthons death, and the
great alterations in that University, he left it, and went to Tygure, Anno
1560. being invited thither by Martyr, Bullinger, Simler, Lavater, Gualter,
Gesner, and Frisius, who much desired his company: there he was a constant
hearer of Martyr, and profited much under him in the knowledge of Divinity:
Anno 1561. their came letters to Tigure from Thomas Erastus signifying that
there wanted a Divinity Professor at Heidleberg, and desiring supply from
thence; whereupon, knowing Vrsines fitness, they presently sent him with their
letters of ample commendation both to the Elector Palatine, and to the
University: where he discharged his place so well that at twenty eight years of
age they graced him with the title of a Doctor in Divinity, and he supplied the
place of a public Professor, to the year 1568. at which time Zanchy succeeded
him, their also he made his Catechize, for the use of the Palla^inate: Anno
Chri^ti 1563. there brake forth a grievous pestilence that scattered both the
Court, and University: yet Vrsin remained at home, and wrote his tractates of
Mortallity, and Christian consolations for the benefit of Gods people. He was
so dear to the Elector Palatine, that when the Bernates sent Aretius to
Heidleberg, to crave leave that Vrsin might go to Lusanna to be the Divinity
Professor there, he would by no means part with him, but gave him leave to
choose an assistant, that so his body might not be worn out with his daily
labors: Anno Chapter 1572. he married a wi^e, by whom he had one son that inherited
his fathers virtues: But upon Prince Fredricks death their grew a great
alteration in the Palatinate, insomuch that none but Lutherans could be
suffered to continue th^r^, so that Vrsin with his Colleague were forced to
leave the University: but he could not live private long, for he was sent for
by Prince John Chassimire: also the Senate of Berne sent importunatly for him
to succeed Aretius there: But Cassimire would by no means part with him,
having erected a University at Newstad, and chosen Vrsin and Zanchy to be the
Divinity Professors thereof: But Vrsin by his excessive studies and neglect of
exercise, fell into a sickness which held him above a year together, after
which he returned to his labors again, and besides his Divinity Lectors, he
read Logik also in the Schools: desiring his auditors to give him what doubts,
and objections they met with, which upon study at his next Lecture he returned
answers to: But his great labors cast him into a consumption and other
diseases, yet would he not be persuaded to intermit them, till at last he was
confined to his bed: yet therein also he was never idle, but always dictating
something that might conduce to the public good of the Chuch: The hour of
death being come, his friends standing by, he quietly slept in the Lord, Anno
Christi 1583. and of his age 51. He was very pious, and grave in his carriage,
and one that sought not after great things in this world.

Let those whose hearts desire to be
Professor of Divinity:
Trace Ursins steps; so shall they find
The comforts of a studious mind:
He had a greater care to nurse
Distressed souls, then fill his purse:
He would not tell a frutlesse story
Unto his flock; his oratory
Served not flatter, but to bring
Subjected souls unto their King:
Where now he rests with him that says
Shephards of Flocks, look to your ways.
The Life and Death of Abraham Bucholtzer, who dyed Anno Christi 1584.
ABraham Bucholtzer was born at Schovavium in the year 1529. and from his
infancy brought up by his Parent^ in Religion and Learning. When he was first
set forth to School, he profited to admiration, outstripping all his
Schoolf^llows by his acute wit and industry: and being well p^incipled at
School, he went to the University at Witt^nberg: Accounting it his great
happiness, that he was borne after the light of the Gospel brak^ forth, and
bred up under M^lancthon, upon whose Lectures he attended diligen^l^, and
^ucked in from him not only the principles of Learning, but of Religion also.
About that time there sp^ang up many errors, but by the help of Melancthon he
was able both to discover and confute them. There also he studied Gr^^k and
Hebrew. When he was six and twenty years old, he went from thence into Silesia
to visit his friends, and to see the chiefest Cities; and whilst he was there,
the Senate o^ Grunberg consulted about the erecting o^ a School in that C^ty;
and for the a^vancement of the same, they chose Bucholtzer to be the Master
thereof, and sent to him by Luke Cunon, who was their Pastor, desiring him to
undertake that office. Hereupon he asked Melancthons advice, who much
encouraged him to accept of the place, saying, Quantum solatium est pio
paedagog^, assidentibus ca^stis angelis, sedere in coe^u incontaminato juniorum
qui Deo placent, and docere tenera ingenia ut recte agnoscant, and invocent
Deum, and deinde organa fiant utilia Ecclesiae, and suis animabus? Upon his
advice therefore he went thither, in the year 1556. and by his excellent
abilities and diligence, he quickly made that place which before was obscure,
to become famous. Scholars resorting to him from all parts, whom he bred up
both in Religion and Learning, and fitted them so excellently for the
University, that Melancthon never questioned any that came from his School,
saying, Hoc est persuasum sibi habere, ^udes and impolitos esse non posse, qui
a politissimi judicii homine Abrahamo Buchol^zero essent informati. That he was
verily persuaded, that they could not be rude, or unfitting for the University
that came from under the tuition of Abraham Bucholtzer, who himself was a man
of so polite a judgment.

In the year 1559. he married a wife, who proved a great comfort to him, and by
whom he had many children, whom he tendered exceedingly, and educated them in
the fear of God from their very infancy. He grew so famous all over Silesi^,
that many desired to have him for their Pastor; and at last Sprottavia enjoyed
him, where he continued doing much good to 1573. at which time Catharine the
relict of Henry Duke of Brun^wick sent for him to her Court; to whom he went,
partly by reason of his great engagements to that Family, but especially
because he enjoyed not his health in Sprottavia. The year after this pious Lady
dyed, he then was called to Eleutheropolis by Euphemia the wife of Sir Fabian
Belloquert; he Preached ^here in the great C^^rch, to which the Citizens
flocked exceedingly, insomuch as when that pious and illustrious Ernest Prince
of Anhalt sent for him, and proffered him an honorable stipend, he refused to
leave his place. He had an excellent sweetness and dexterity in Preaching; was
of a sound judgment and holy life. His Sermons were so piercing, that he never
Preached, but he wrought wonderfully upon the affections of his hearers. If any
were cast down under the sense of sin and wrath, he exceedingly com^orted them.
If any were troubled with tentations and afflictions, he raised them up, etc.
He had a lively voice, lively eye, lively hand, and such were all his gestures
also: his Ministry was so grateful, that his hearers were never weary, or
thought hi^ Sermons too long: He was full of self-denial, insomuch as that
excellent Lady Catherine of Brandenburg used to say, that all the rest of her
Courtiers and Family were alwaye^ craving something of her, Bucholtzer on the
contrary never asked her for the worth of a farthing, yea he refus^d gifts,
when they were proffered to him, preferring kindness before the gift, and the
fruit of his Ministry before the reward of it: He was so humble that when his
friends blamed him for living in so obscure a place whilst he taught School,
he told them that he preferred it before a Kingdom: he could never endure to
hear himself commended; and if his friends in their letters had written any
thing to his praise, he could not read it with patience: sed terreri se
laudationibus illis tanquam fulminibus dicebat, qui nihil in se magni videret,
etc. His candor was such that he never spoke, or wrote any thing but from his
heart: he never read, or heard any thing from others, but he made a candid
construction of it: His care in his public Ministry was to avoid those
question^ that do but gender unto strife, and to instruct his auditors how to
live well, and dye well. He spent his spare houre^ in reading Ecclesiastical,
and Profane histories, and profited so much thereby, that one affirmed in
writing universam antiquitatem in Bucholtzeri pectuscuol latuisse reconditam,
that all antiquity lay hid in his breast: he finding some great errors in
Funccius his Chronology, set himself to write one, which with indefatigable
pains he brought to perfection: whilst he thus publicly, and privately busied
himself; he fell into a grievous disease, and just about the same time he lost
his faithful, and beloved yoke fellow that was the Mother of nine children:
but upon his recovery he married another, with whom he lived not long before
the Lord put an end to all his labors, and sorrows Anno Christi 1584. and of
his Age 55.

Religion, Learning, both agreed to met,
And make Bucholtzer prove their winding sheet;
Nay, and their Sepulcher, for there they lay
Embracing in his little lump of Clay:
He loved virtue, and his heart dispis'd
To follow that, which Papists had devised;
His balmy language heald the bleeding hearts
Of them whose consciences retained the darts
Of wounding sin; his soul still took delight
To bring them out of darkness into light;
But since he is gone, what can we say but this,
He rested here, with love, In heaven, with bliss.
The Life and Death of John Wigandus, who dyed Anno Christi 1587.
JOhn Wigandus was born in Mansfield, in the year 1523. of honest Parents of a
middle rank, who carefully brought him up in Learning, which naturally he was
much addicted unto; having an excellent wit and firm memory; so that having
profited much at School, he went to the University of Wittenberg, where he
continued about three years; which time he spent in the studi^ of the Arts and
Tongues, which night and day he employed himself in: and in the year 1541. by
the advice of his Tutors and friends, he went to Norinberg, where he was made
Master of the School, and for three years exercised himself with much
diligence in instructing youth; but having an earnest desire to perfect his own
studies, he returned to Wittenberg again, Luther being yet living: there he
commensed Master of Arts before he was two and twenty years old, and applied
himself wholly to the study of Divinity: but tht Wars waxing hot, the Emperor
placed a Garrison in the Castle and Town of Wittenberg, and the Students were
driven away from thence^ at which time Wigand was called to Mansfield (his own
Country) to be an assistant to their ancient Pastor Martin Seligman, where
also he was ordained Minister by Prayer, and imposition of hands, by John
Spang^rberg, the Superintendent there: which place he discharged wi^h much
^^delity and industry, and read Logic and Phylosophie to the youth in the
Schools: there also he wrote a confutation of the Popish Catechism; and a
confutation of George M^jor, who held, That a man by Faith only is justified,
but not saved, etc. He delighted exceedingly in a Garden, and in observing the
wisdom of God in the nature, shape and various colors of Herbs and Flowers,
for which end he gatt the greatest variety of them that possibly he could into
his Garden. He was one of those that strongly opposed the Interim.

In the year 1553. he was chosen by them of Magdeburg to be their
Superintendent, but the Earl of Mansfield and the People strongly opposed his
remove from them, yet at last by the means of the Prince of Anhalt, they
consented unto it. At Magdeburg he took excessive pains in reading, writing,
meditating and Preaching, whereby he converted many Popish Priests in those
parts to the Truth: he also took great pains in writing the Magdeburgenses
Centuries, which he, together with Matthew Iudex, Flacius Illiricus, Basil,
Faber, Andrew Corvinus and Thomas Holthuterus finished, to the great benefit of
the Church. Of which book Sturmius gave his Testimony, that it was necessary
and profitable, and had these four virtues in it, viz. veritatem, diligentiam,
ordinem, perspicuitatem: Truth, diligence, Order and perspicuity. In the year
1560. the Elector of Saxony having begun a University at Ienes, sent earnestly
to Wigand to come thither to be the Divinity Professor, which for weighty
reasons he assented unto, and performed that office with much acceptance of all
that heard him: yet by the subtilty, and malice of one Stosselius he was
dismissed from that place, and so returned to Magdeb^rg again: but not staying
there, he was chosen to be the Superintendent at Wismare An. Cstristi 1562.
where he employed himself wholly in Prea^hing, disputing, expounding the
Scripture, and governing the Church. Anno Christi 1563. he commenced Doctor of
Divinity in the University of Rostoch: he stayed at Wismare seven years, at the
end whereof, John William Duke of Saxony sent for him again to Ienes, but the
Duke of Megapole would by no means part with him; yet at last after several
embassies the Duke of Saxony prevailed that he should come for one year to
Ienes: His people parted with him very unwillingly with many sighs, and tears,
and at the years end sent for him back again, but could by no means obtain
his return: he was not only made the Professor of Divinity at Ienes, but the
Superintendent also: Anno Christi 1570. he went with his Prince to the Diet at
Spire, and at his return to Ienes was received with great joy: but after five
years Duke John William dying, he was again driven from thence, and went to
the Duke of Brunswick who entertained him kindly: but presently after he was
called into Borussia to be the Divinity Professor in the University of
Regiomon^anum, and after two years was chosen to be Bissiop there Anno Christi
1587. he fell sick especially upon grief, conceived for the afflicted
condition of the Church in Poland, and the death of his dear friend John
Wedman an excellent Divine: this desease increasing, and his strength decaying
he prepared himself for death: he made his own Epitaph. In Christo vixi,
morior, vivoque Wigandus:
Do sordes morti: caetera, Christ tibi.
In Christ I lived, and died, through him I live again: What Is bad to death I
give: my soul with Chist shall reign.

And so in the midst of fervent prayers, and assured hope of eternal life, he
resigned up his spirit into the hands of God that gave it, Anno Christi 1587.
and of his Age 64.

Rare-soul'd Wigandus bowed his whole desires,
To warm his spirits by th'inlivning fires
Of sacred fuel, and he always stood
Engaged to that which heavens blessed mouth called good;
He was a man whose life, and conversation
Were well sufficient to adorn a Nation
With good examples: nothing could devorse
His ready lips from the beloved discourse
Of heavenly matters, till at last he cried
My God receive my soul, and so he died.
MARTINUS CHEMNICIVS.
The Life and Death of Martin Chemnisius.
MArtin Chemnisius was born at Brit^^a in Old March Anno Christi 1522. his
father being poor he met with many impediments to discourage, and hinder him in
Learning, yet bearing a great love to it, by his exceeding industry he overcame
all, and after some progress at home, he went to Magdeburg, where he studied
the Tongues, and Arts,: and from thence to Frankefurt upon Oder: and after he
had studied there a while, he went to Wittenberg where he studied the
Mathematick^: and from thence to Sabinum in Borussia where he taught School,
and commensed Master of Arts; and Anno Christi 1552. he wholly betook himself
to the study of Divinity. By his modest, and sincere carriage he procured much
favor from the Prince, and all his Courtiers: after three years stay there, he
went back to Wittenberg, and by Melancthon was employed publicly to read
Common places: from thence he was sent for to Brunople ^n Saxny by the Senate,
and made Pastor; which place he discharged with singular fidelity, and
approbation for the space of thirty years, and commensed Doctor in Divinity at
Rostoch: many Princes, and Commonwealths made use of his advice, and
assistance in Ecclesiastical affairs: He took great pains in asserting the
truth against the adversaries of it: as his excellent Examen of the Tridentine
Council shows: at last being worn out with study, writing, Preaching etc. he
resigned up his spirit unto God Anno Christi 1586. and of his age 63. He is
said by one to be Philosophus Summus, Theologus pro^undissimus, neque
veritatis, bonarumque arti^m studio, neque laud officii fac^le cuiquam
secundus.

This Author, eminent Chemnisius grave,
Among these worthies, a prime place may have;
Who, by his most industrious pains ore came
The many rubs which would have quentcht his fame:
And to such height of learning did arise
As made great Princes him most highly prize.
Yea, so transcendently his fame did shine,
That, One him styled, a most profound Divine,
A prime Philosopher, one justly known,
For parts and p^ety, second to none.
And thus he lived, and dyed full of years,
And with much honor left this vail of tears.
The Life and Death of Rodolphus Gualterus, who dyed Anno Christi 1586.
ROdolphus Gualter was born in Tigure Anno Christi 1518. was of an excellent
wit, and therefore carefully brought up at School, where he first profited
exceedingly in Oratory, and Poetry, and being admitted into the University he
became famous, first in the knowledge of the Arts, and afterward of Divinity,
insomuch as he wa^ chosen Pastor in that City where he first drew in his vital
breath: neither were they which chose him deceived in their exspectation; for
he proved an admirable instrumen^ of Gods glory, and their good, discharging
his place with singular industry, diligence, and fidelity, not only by hi^
frequent public preaching, but by his learned private writing^, as his
Homilies upon much of the Old, and N^w Testament do sufficiently declare: and
having governed, and fed that Church for above forty years together, he dyed in
a good old age Anno Christi 1586. anp of his Li^^ sixty eight.

Virtue, and honor both combined
T'adorne Gualterus his mind:
His wise and well composed heart
Was principl^d in every part,
He was a Poet too, it is therefore fit
We should applaud his rare Poeticke wit.
The Life and Death of Casper Olevian, who dyed Anno Christi 1587^
CAsper Olevian was born in Trevir Anno Christi 1536^ and carefully brought up
in learning by his Grandfather, and at thirteen years old he was sent to Paris
to study Law, from thence also he went to the Universities of Aurelia, and
Biturg, where he heard the most famous Lawyers of those times; he joined
himself also to the Congregation of Protestants which met privately together
in that place: there he was admitted into the Order of Lawyers, after the
solemn manner of the University, Anno Christi 1557. about which time there
studied in that University under Nicolas Iudex, the young Prince Palatine^ son
to Frederick the third, afterward Elector: and Olevian being very intimate
with Iudex, went one day after dinner to the river hard by the City, together
with him and the young Prince; and when they came thither, they found some young
Noble Germans that were students there, going into aboat, who desired the
Prince and his Tutor to go over the River with them: But Olevian perceiving
that they had drunk too freely, dissuaded them from adventuring themselves
amongst them: which council the Prince, and his Tutor neglecting, went into
the boat; and putting from the bank, the drunken young men began so to thrust,
and jus^le one another that at last they overthrew the boat, where they were
all drowned. But Iudex being skillful in swimming caught the young Prince,
hoping to save him, but being unable to draw him with him, they both sunk.

Olevian standing on the bank, and seeing this sad spectacle, leap't into the
water to try if he could help them; but at first he stuck into the mud, and
water up to the chin, where he dispaired of his own life: in that danger he
prayed unto God, and vowed that if God would deliver him, he would preach the
Gospel to his own Citizens. At which time it pleased God that a footman of
one of the Noblmens, coming to the river side, and seeing of him, ca^ght him by
the hand (thinking that it had been his own master) and drew him out: whereupon
Olevian being delivered, together with the Law, studied Divinity: especially
reading over Calvin's Commentaries diligently, and then returning to Trevir, he
was retained to plead a cause th^re, but seeing the great deceit in that
calling, he gave it over; and that he might perform his Vow, he wholly set
himself to the study of Divinity: and went to Geneva, and after to Tigure,
where he was much holp^n by Martyr, and Bullinger: and after taking ship at
Lusanna to go to Geneva^ Farrell happened to be with him in the ship, who in
discon^^ asked him, Whether he had ever preached in his own^ Country, which he
denying, Farrell persuaded him to do^ it so soon as he could: and he
accordingly promised that he would: therefore Anno Christi 1559. he returned to
T^^vir, and was by the Senate, and his friends requested to und^^ take the work
of the Ministry there, and for his encouragement, they allowed him a stipend:
he readLogick also in the School: but when he began to preach the Truth of
Christ and to discover the Errors in Popery, he was forbidden^ by the Clergy to
preach any more, and shut out of the School. Then the Senate appointed him to
preach in an Hospital: where after he had preached a while, his
adversariessuborned a Priest to step up into the Pulipt before him^ but as soon
as the people saw the Priest, they called to him to come down, for that they
would not hear him. Olevian desired them to hear him, promising that so soon as
he had don his Sermon he would preach himself: but they would not endure it;
but made a great stir, so that the poor Priest thought that he should have been
pulled a pieces by them: but Olevian in^reating the people to be quiet, took
him by the hand, and led him forth safely: and going into the pulpit himself,
the people cried to him, We desire thee for Gods sake to preach unto us: for
this cause the Archbishop of Trevir imprisoned the two Consul^, and eight more
of the Senators for ten weeks, who desired Olevian to come to them to instruct
and comfort them, which accordingly he did; but afterward they were all freed
at the request of the Elector Palatine, and some others: and the Elector
Palatine sent for Olevian to Heidleberge, where he made him Rector of a
College: about which time he married a wife, and commensed Doctor in Divinity,
and was made a Professor of Divinity in that University: he was also called to
a Pastoral charge in the City, which he carefully and holily discharged, till
the death of the Elector Frederick the third; and shortly after he was called
to Berleburg, by Lodewicke Count Witgenstein, where he Preached and instructed
some Noble men's sons.

In the year 1584. he was called by John of Nassau to Herborn, where he
preached, and taught in a School three years. Anno Christi 1587. he fell into a
mortal sickness, which (notwithstanding all means of our) daily grew upon
him, and so weakened him, that at last he quietly resigned up his spirit unto
God. In his sickness he made his Will, and by pious, and holy meditations
prepared himself for death: being visited by some great men, he told them,
That by that sickness he had learned to know the greatness of Him, and the
greatness of Gods Majesty more then ever he did before.

John Pis^^^ur coming to visit him, he told him, That the day before, for four
hours together, he was filled with ineffable joy, so that he wondered why his
wife should ask him whether he were not something better, when sa indeed he
could never be better: for (said he) I thought that I was in a most pleasant
meddow, in which as I walked up and down, me thought that I was besprinkled
with a heavenly dew, and that not sparingly, but plentifully powered down,
whereby both my body, and soul were filled with ineffable joy: To whom
Piscator, That good shepherd of Jesus Christ led thee into fresh pastures. Yea,
said Olevian, To the springs of living waters. Afterward having repeated some
sentences full of comfort out of Psalm forty two, Isaiah nine, and Matthew
eleven: he often repeated, I would not have my journey to God long deferred. I
desire to be dissolved, and to be with my Christ: he gave his hand, and
farewell to his Colleagues, and friends, and when he was in the Agony of death,
Alstedius asked him whether he was sure of his salvation in Christ, and^. he
answered, Most sure, and so he gave up the Ghost, Anno Christi 1587. and of his
Age fifty one.

Nor must Olevian also be omitted,
But have a place of Honor fairby fitted
Unto his fame, among these Heroes brave;
Who, of his Parts in Arts much witness gave.
A sound Divine, to Rome an enemy,
Preaching Christ's truth with courage, constancy:
And who at last, as he had long desired,
Exchanging earth for heaven, blestly expired.
JOHN FOX.
The Life and Death of John For.
JOhn Fox was born a^ Bosten in Lincolns^ire Anno 1517. his Parents were
neither so rich as by their wealth to be exposed to envy, nor so mean as by
want to be liable to contempt; more enriched they were with the love of their
Neighbors, and most of all in having this so towardly and hopeful a Son.
These perceiving that nature pointed out their Son (by the rare parts bestowed
upon him) to be a Scholar, and therefore following her directions carefully
bred him in learning, and sent him to Braz^nnose College in Oxford.

Here he was Chamber-fellow wit Alexander Nowell afterward Doctor and Dean of
Paul's, and friendship betwixt them took so deep an impression in their tender
years, advantaged with the simpathy of their natures, that it increased with
their Age to be indelible. These communicated their studyes together, and with
harmless emulation, and loving strife, whilst each endeavored to outstrip
others, both surpassed themselves.

Hence Fox was translated and chosen Fellow of Maudli^ College; whereat such
as were bred in that foundation counting themselves the proper Heirs to all
the pr^ferment in the House, were much offended, til his patience an^ humanity
reconciled them unto him; so that he becam^ not only affected but admired. And
as Naturalists^^ ob^serue that Plants are meliorated by removing, not abatin^
their old but acquiring new spirits unto them; so th^^ Scholar by changing his
Soil to a new College, w^^ thereby marvelously improved in all manner of
learn^ing.

Now King Henry had lately set up a mongrell Religi^^ in the Land, like the
Toes of Nabuchadnezars jmage, partl^ Iron, partly Clay; one moity thereof,
strong with undeni^able Truth, the other dawbed with untempered morter^ in the
six Popish Articles still retained. Our young Fello^ in the Colledge^ sees and
sigh^ at the sup^rsti^ion, an^ retiring ^imsel^e to a grove, entertaines the
time with So^litarinesse, only the silent midnight was witness to hi^ sobs
and groans. He sees what, but not whither to f^^^^ but at last resolves
hereafter to absent himself from the Romish Church: Hereupon being accused for
a Separatist, and unwilling to over purchase his safety at the price of ^ lie
he is convent^d and expelled the College. But because Thieves must be thanked
for giving what they do not take away, his enemies challenged Commendation due
to their courtis^, because they took not Foxes life from him, according to the
Severity of the Laws then in force.

By this time his own Father was dead and his Mother married again; Fox
repair^s to his Father in law for succor, but finds no entertainment. For as
when a hunted Dear, ch^sed with the Hounds, takes sanctuary by flying to the
rest of the herd, they out of a Principle of self preservation drive him away,
for fear least the Hounds in persuit of him, fall on them; so his Father in law
was loath to receive him, and sorbad him the protection of his family, least
Persecutors in quest of his Son should bring him and his whole household into
trouble.

Here it would be tedious for us but to tell (and then how troublesome for him
to endure) in how many places this poor man lurked, for fear of informers,
those Birds of prey which have as quick sight as sharp Talons, sometimes at Sir
Thomas Luceys in Warwickeshire, sometimes^ at Boston, most commonly at London,
taken covert in that forest of houses; it being a strange truth, that in such
wherein are most eyes, a man is least seen. The Foxes (says our Savior) have
holes, literally true of that cunning creature, but ou^ Fox, being indeed a
sheep, in Innocence and Simplicity, had not where to lay his head, like Christ
his Master.

But soon after happened the death of King Henry, and Edward the sixth succeeded
him. This put a period to his frights and flights, and for five years this good
man enjoyed peace and prosperity, till the reign of Queen Mary: Under whom
for a while he lived safe in the house of the Duke of Norfolk, once his
Pupil, until Gardner Bishop of Winchester, that cruel Bloud-hou^d scenting
him out, designed his destruction. For coming on a visit of respect to the
Duke, Fox casually passing by, the Bishop demanded who that was; my Physi^ian
answered the Duke: the Bishop replied, I like well his ingenuous countenance,
and when I have need will make use of him. Thus Herod pretended he would
worship Christ when he intended to kill him; Winchester meant this Physician
should be his patient, on whom he would practice with fire and faggot, the
usual dosis Prescribed to all those who were accused to be infected with the
Protestant Religion.

Now flies our Fox beyond the Seas, who escaping fire fell into as merciless
an element of Water. A terrible Tempest overtook him, frighting the profane
Seamen into their prayers, and melting their hearts, which might seem made of
those Rocks amongst which they sailed. Hereby he was driven back again to
Yarmo^th, but at last by Gods Providence got beyond the Seas, and some months
after arrived at Basil. Here he began that famou^ work of Acts and Monuments,
which he finished many years after: And here making a Sermon to his fellow
Exiles, he plainly told them, that now the Time was come for their return into
England, and that he brought them that news by commandment from God.

These Words were differently censured by several m^n, some took them to be
the evaporations of a melancholy Brain; others as Words shot at random, which
if casually hitting the mark, would afterward be observed, if otherwise would
be buried in Oblivion amongst a heap of oth^^ Expressions. A third condemned
them for a presumptiou^ intrusion into Gods secrets, prying into the Arc of
future con^ingencies which God has veiled only for him^ But the success
proved them to be Prophe^icall; and thi^ Confessor having his body macerated
with fasting, and prayer and other afflictions, through the chinks and cle^^^
thereof, stole a glympse of heaven and the knowledge of future things. For the
day before his surrender, Queen Mary dyed; and now Fox with the rest of his
friends hastes home, so that if fear gave them feet to run beyond the Seas,
joy gave them win^es to fly home to their nativ^ Country.

Here arrived, he continued and finished that worthy Work formerly begun. For
as God preserved one of Jobs s^rvants from fire and ^ury of the Caldeans, and
Sabeans^ to report to Job the loss of his fellows; so divine Providence
pro^ected this man from Martyrdom intended for him, that he might be the
worlds intelligencer to tell the Tidings of the number and m^nner of Gods
worthy Saints and servants who were destroyed by the cruelty of these Romish
adversaries: Which bad news is very well told in his Unpartiall relation.

For for the maine it is a worthy Work (wherein the Reader may rather have
then lack) presenting it self to Beholders, like Aetna, always burning whilst
the smoke has almost put out the eyes of the adverse party, and these Foxes
firebrarnds have brought much annoyance to the Romish Philistines. But it were
a Miracle if in so Voluminous a Work there were nothing to be justly reproved;
so great a Pomgranate not having any rott^n kernel must only grow in
Paradise. And though perchance he held the beam at the best advantage for the
Protestant party to weigh down, yet generally he is a true writer, and never
wilfully deceives, though he may sometimes be unwillingly deceived. Many
years after Master Fox lived in England, highly favored by presons of
quality: So that it may seem strange, considering the height of his friends
and largeness of his deserts, that he grew to no place of more honor, and
spread to no preferment of greater profit in the Church. But this must be
wholly imputed to h^s own modesty in declining advancement: For although the
richest Myter of England would have counted it self prefer^'d by being placed
upon his head, yet he contented himself only with a Prebend of Salisbury,
pleased with his own obscurity, whilst others of less desert make greater
show. And whilst prou^ people stretch out their Plumes in Ostentation, he used
their Vanity for his shelter, more pleased to have worth then to have others
take notice of it.

Now how learnedly he wrote, how constantly he preached, how piously he lived,
how cheerfully he dyed, may be fetched from his life at large, prefixed before
his book. O^e passage therein omitted we must here insert, having received it
from witnesses beyond exception: In the eighty eight when the Spanish half
Moon did hope to rule all the motion in our Seas, Master Fox was privately in
his Chamber at prayers, battering heaven with his importunity, in behalf of
this sinful Nation. And we may justly presume that h^^ devotion was as
actually instrumental to the victory, as the wisdom of our Admirable, valor of
his Souldi^rs, ^kil and industry of his Seamen. On a sudden coming down to
his Family, ^e cry^d out, They are gone, they are gone; which indeed happened in
the same instant, as by exact Computatio^ afterward did appear.

His Liberality to the poor^ was boundless, so powerful was the holy spell of
the name of Jesus unto him, that no poor person ever charmed him therewith,
but presen^^ raised his charitable spirit to bestow an alms upon him^ One d^y
Master Fox came from the Palace of Bishop Elmer in London, when a company of
poor people (by th^^ retinue he might ever be tracted) importunately begged o^
him; Master Fox having no money, returned back to the Bishop, desiring to borrow
five pound of him, which wa^ readily granted, and going forth di^tributed it
amongst the poor. Some mounths after, the Bishop asked Father F^x (for so he
was commonly styled) for the money he ow^d him; I have laid it out (quoth
Master Fox) for you, and have paid it where you owed it, to the poor People
that lay at your gate. The Bishop was so far from being offended with him, that
he thanked him for being so careful a Steward, such was the marvelous
familiarity betwixt them, and great respect the Bishop bore to this Holy man.

But Master Fox (this extraordinary instance excepted) did not offer free
offerings of other men's goods, but of hi^ own: So great was his Bounty that it
fell under the censure of excess, the stream being likely to draine the
Spring and impair his Estate. But God whose Providence provideth meet help
fellows for men, fitted him with such a wife, whose hands as they knew not
basely to scrape, so they were skillful thriftily to keep; and this excellent
medley so preserved his Estate, that a competency was left to his children.

He was not nipt in the Bud, nor blasted in the blossom, nor blown down when
green, nor gathered when ripe; but even fell of his own accord^ when
altogether whithered. As for the tim^ of his death take it from his own
Epitaph on his Monument, which for the beauty thereof bears better proportion
to the outward means then to the inward merit of his person, there entombed in
St. Giles Church without Criplegate.

Christo S. S.

Iohanni Foxo Ecclesi^ Anglicanae Martyrolg^ Fidelissimo, Antiquitat^^
Historicae Indagatori sugacissimo, Evangellicae veritatis, Propugnatori
acerrimo, Tha^maturge admitabili; Qui martyrs Marianes, tanquam Phoenices, ex
cineribus redivivos praestitit. Patri suo omni pietatis officio inprimis
Colendo, Samuel Foxus illius Primogenitus, hoc Mon^mentum posuit, non sine
Lac^rymis.

Obiit die 18. men's April, An. Dom. 1587. Iam septuagenarius.

Vita vitae mortalis est, Spes vitae immortalis.
Rare Fox (well ^urr'd with patience) lived a life
In's youthful age devoted unto strife;
For the blind Papists of those frantic times,
Esteemed his virtues as his greatest Crimes;
The hot persuit of their ful-crying hounds
Forced him to fly^ beyond the lawless bounds
Of their hot sented Malice; though their skill
Was great in hunting, yet our Fox was still
Too crafty for them; though they ranged about
From place, to place, they could not find him out:
And when they saw their plots could not prevail
To bless their noses with his whisking ^ayle,
They howled out curses, but could not obtain;
Their pre^ being fled, their curses proved in vain:
From whence I think this Prove^b came at first,
Most thrives the Fox, that most of all is cursed.
The Life and Death of George So^nius who dyed Anno Christi 1589.
GEorge Sohnius was born at Friburg in Wetteraw Ann^ Christi 1551. of honest
parents, and brought up a^ School in learning, where he sucked in the first
rudiment^ with much eagerness; and fom School went to the Un^versity of
Marpurg, at fifteen years old: where he profited so exceedingly in Logic and
Philosophy, that he was made Bachelor of Arts at the years end. Anno Christi
1569. he went to Wittenberg, where he studied Philosophy, Law, and Divinity
with incredible pains, so that at three year^ end with the approbation of the
whole University, he wa^ made Master of Arts: he intended at first the study of
Law^ But it pleased God on a sudden so to divert his heart from it, and to
incline him to the study of Divinity, that he could have no rest in himself
till he had resolved upon it^ Anno Christi 1571. he returned to Marpurg, and
studied H^^brew, and the year after he read the Arts to many student^
privately, and became Tutor to three Noblemen: at twenty three years old he was
so famous, that by the consent of all the Divines in that University, he was
chosen into the number and order of Professors of Divinity: the year after he
married a wife, a choice maid, by whom he had three sons, and two daughters:
the same year also he was chosen the Professor of the Hebrew Tongue in that
University: Anno Christi 1578. he was made Doctor in Divinity, and falling sick
about that time, he made an excellent conf^ssion of his faith: But it pleas^d
God that he recovered, and was not only a constant preacher of the truth, but
a strong defender of it against errors, confuting the Vbiquitarians, and that
so boldly, that he chose rather to hazard banishment then to connive at errors:
His fame spread abroad ^xceedingly, so that many sought for him, especially
John of N^ssaw and John Cassimire the Elector Palatine, the first desired him
to come and begin his University at Herborn, where he should have had greater
honor, and a larger stipend: the other desired him to Heidleberg to be the
Divinity Professor in that place. His answer was, That he was born rather for
labors, then honors, and therefore chose to go to Heidleberg, being thirty
three years old, and was entertained lovingly of the Prince: and his coming was
most grateful to the University, where he took exceeding great pains: and
was eminent for Piety, Humility, Gravity, Prudence, Patience and Industry: so
that in the year 1588. he was chosen into the number of the Ecclesiastical
Senators, for the government of the Church. He was famous for Learning,
Eloquence, Faithfulness and Diligence in his place, and Holiness and
Integrity in his life. In the year 1589. he fell sick, for which and his
change he had been carefully fitting himself beforehand; and therefore bore it
with much patience, and with fervent Prayer; often repeated, O Christ, thou art
my redeemer, and I know that thou have redeemed me: I wholly depend upon thy
providence and mercy: from the very bottom of my heart I commend my spirit
into thy hands, and so he slept in the Lord Anno Christi 1589. and of his Age
38.

Industrious, humble, prudent, patient, grave:
What other virtues that a man could have
Sohnius enjoined with peacefulnesse: his hand
Was apt to write, his heart to understand:
He took delight to meditate upon
The love of God; his own salvation:
He studied how to dye: his wel-spent breath
Was but a rare preparative to death:
And having ended his laborious days,
He died in peace, and now he lives in praise.
The Life and Death of Laurence Humfried, who dyed Anno Christi 1589.
LAurence Humfried was borne in the County of Bucking^am, and brought up at
School, and then sent to Oxford; where he was admitted into the College of
Mary Magdalen, and followed his Studies hard all the days of King Edward the
sixth. But in the beginning of those bloody Marian days, wherein so many were
forced to forsake their native soil, he (amongst the rest) went beyond Se^
into Germany, where he continued till the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign,
whom God raised up to be a nursing Mother to his Church; at which time he came
back, and returned to Oxford, where he was very famous both for his Learning
and Preaching: then also he commensed Doctor in Divinity; and by reason of his
excellent parts, h^ was very isntrumental in the advancement of Gods glory.
And whereas that wicked Sect of the Jesuits was lately risen up, he, by his
learned writings, did both from Scripture and Antiquity, di^cover their
impostures and Popish deceits. Afterward he was made the Master of Magdal^^
College, and the Regius Professor; which places he discharged with singular
commendations for many years together; and at the last, quietly resigned up his
spirit into the hands of God, in the year 1589.

Though persecuting Times pursued and chaste
This pious Father, yet he still embraced
And hugged the Truth; his heart remained free
From persecution and captivity.
Those weighty words which pleasantly persu'd
Out of his mouth^ soon conquered and subdued
Enticing Jesuits; he made them know
Their errors by a fatal overthrow.
Thus having labored with a faithfell breast,
Heaven thought it fit to crown his soul with rest.
The Life and Death of James Andreas, who dyed Anno Christi 1578.
JAmes Andreas was born in Waibling in Wittenberg, Anno 1538. When his father
had kept him three years at School, being unable to maintain him any longer, he
intended to have placed him with a Carpenter: but being dissuaded by some
friends, and having obtained an exhibition out of the Church-stock, he sent him
to Stutgard to a choice Schoolmaster, under whom in ^wo years space he learned
Grammar, and Rhetoric; and so An. Christi 1541. he went to Tubing, where he so
profited, that at the end of ^wo years he was made Bachelor of Arts; and two
years after that, Master of Arts: there also he studied Hebrew and Divinity
Anno Christi 1546. and of his age eighteen: he was called to Stutgard, where
Preaching in a great Auditory, he was chosen and made Deacon; which place he
executed so well, that he presently grew famous, insomuch as the Duke of
Wittenberg sent for him to Preach before him in his Castle; which he did with
much applause: at Tubing also that year he married a wife, by whom he had
eighteen children, nine sons, and nine daughters: about that time brake forth
that fatal war betwixt Charles the fifth, and the Protestant Princes, wherein
the Emperor being conqueror, he seized upon the Dukecome of Wittenberg, by
reason whereof the Church there was in a sad condition; yet Andreas, with his
wife remained in Stutgard, and by Gods special providence was preserved in the
midst of the Spanish Soldiers, and yet preached constantly, and faithfully
all the while: and so he continued till An. Christi 1548. at which time that
accursed In^eirm came forth, which brought so much mischief^ to the Church of
God: Andreas amongst other godly Ministers that oppsed it, was driven from his
place: yet it pleased God that the year after he was chosen to be Deacon at
Tubing, where by Catechizing he did very much good: Anno Christi 1550. Vlri^ke
dying, his son Christopher succeeding him in the Govern^ment of Wittenberg, and
affected Andreas exceedingly, and would needs have him commens Dr, which degree
(having performed all his exercises) he took the twenty fifth year of his age,
and was chosen Pastor of the Church of Gompping, and made Superintendent of
those parts: about that time he was sent for by Lodwick Count of Oeting to
assist him in the reforming of the Churches within his jurisdiction, and when
he took his leave of his own Prince Christopher, h^ charged him, and gave it
him in writing, that if Cou^^ Lodwicke set upon that reformation, that under
pretense of Religion, he might rob the Church, and ceaze upon the revenues of
Monasteries, and turn them to his private us^, that he should presently leave
him, and come back againe^ he assisted also in the reformation of the Churches
in He^^fanstein; At that time, hearing of a Jew that for these w^^ hanged by
the heels with his head down, having not se^^ that kind of punishment, he went
to the place, where h^ was hanging between two Dogs that were always snatching
at him to eat his flesh: the poor wretch repeated i^ Hebrew some verses of the
Psalms, wherein he cried (...) God for mercy; whereupon Andreas went nearer to
hi^^ and instructed him in the Principles of Christian Religion about Christ
the Messiah, etc. exhorting him to believe (...) him: and it pleased God so to
bless his exhortation to him, that the Dogs gave over tearing of his flesh,
and ^h^ poor Jew desired him to procure that he might be taken down and
Baptized, and hung by the neck ^or the quicker dispatch, which was done
accordingly.

A^dreas was of such esteem, that he was sent for by diverse Princes to reform
the Churches in their jurisdictions: he was present at diverse Synods and
Disputations about Religion. He traveled many thousands of miles, being
usually attended but with one servant, yet it pleased God that in all his
journies he never met with any affron^. The year before his death, he used
often to say, that he should not live long; that he was weary of this life, and
much desired to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which was best of all.
Falling sick, he sent for James Herbrand, saying, I expect, that after my
death, many adversaries will rise up to asperse me; and therefore I sent for
thee to hear the confession of my Faith, that so thou may testify for me
when I am dead and gone, that I dyed in the true faith. The same Confession
also he made afterward before the Pastors, and Deacons of Tubing: the night
before his death he slept, partly upon his bed, and partly in his chair: when
the clock struck six in the morning, he said, my hour draws near: he gave
thanks to God for bestowing Christ, for revealing of his will in his Word, for
giving him Faith, and the like benefits. And when he was ready to depart, he
said, Lord into thy hands I commend my ^^irit; and so he fell a sleep in the
Lord Anno Christi 1590. and of his Age 61.

Ingenius Andreas always loved to pry
Into the bosom of Divinity.
He hated idleness, and took delight
In doing good; his virtues shined as bright
As Fame could make them; and he always stood
A firm maintainer of the Churches good.
Religion was his helm by which he steered
His soul to heaven; and there he was endeared
To his Creator; in whose Court he sings
Blessed halalujahs to the King of Kings.
HIERONYMVS ZANCHYVS.
The Life and Death of Hieronimus Zanchiu^.
IN the year of grace 1516. Hieronimus Zanchius descended from a Noble and
renowned Family; was born in Italy at a Town called Alzanum, situate in the
valley S^ria^ who became such a light unto the Gentiles, that many parts in
Christendom dawned with the luster of his writings. His Father was called
Franciscus Zanchius, famous not only for his Parentage, but also for his
knowledge in the Civil Law; he was blessed with many other children, which he
received from Ba^bara, sister unto Marcus Antonius Morla^tus, both Nobly
descended.

This Zanchius in his youth showing some testifications of his hopefulnesse, he
was sent forth by his Father to be instructed in the Grounds of Learning, in
the Schools he continued until that he was twelve years old; at which time
his Father dyed, and shortly after his Mother also. Being thus deprived of both
his Parents, he began to consider with himself what course to take, for the
increasing and bettering of his knowledge in the Arts; and withal, perceiving
that not only his Uncle Eugenius Mu^ius, but also many of his Kinsmen and
Cozen-germans had betaken themselves unto a Monastical life, and were advanced
unto the dignity of Regular Cannons, he persuaded himself that there were many
learned persons to be found in that Society, and that youth might be well
instructed and brought up amongst them, as well for civil behavior as for
learning; he resolved to take that course of life upon him, being also
thereunto induced by the advice of his intimate friend Basileus. Wherefore
revealing himself unto his Uncle and other friends, he was by their means
elected and chosen into the Monastery.

In this place he lived almost ninteen years, and was by profession a Lateran
Canon Regular; in which space he gave himself first unto the study of the
Tongues, and proved a good Linguist. Secondly, unto the study of Aristotle, and
became a good Logician: and thirdly, unto the study of School Divinity, wherein
his excellency is manifest by his Works. For the space of sixteen years he was
familiarly acquainted, and dearly beloved of that illustrious and virtuous,
grave Celsus Martinengus; who perceiving that his life was sought for the
profession of the truth, fled out of Italy, and went unto Geneva, and was the
first Pastor which the Italian Church had in that place; who when he dyed
commended the care of his Flock to Calvin, 1558.

During his residence in this Monastery, he would walk sometimes with
Martinengus, for recreations sake unto Luca a Town in Tuscanie, where he heard
Peter Martyr openly expounding the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans, and in
private the Psalms of David unto their Canons: and these Expositions of this
learned man wrought so effectually with him, that he gave himself wholly unto
the study of Divinity, and made diligent search into the Commentaries of the
most learned and authenticke Fathers; perused positive and polemicall
discourses, and delivered for a season the purity of the truth of the Gospel
of Christ in Italy. But in regard that Italy was too hot for Peter Martyr,
and much more for his Scholars, who were hardly permitted to reside in the
Country, much less to be public Teachers; eighteen of them within the space
of one year followed their Master, amongst whom was this Zanchius.

Being thus freed and delivered from this Babilonian captivity (an expression
often used by himself) in the year 1550. he first went unto the Rhetians,
because a greater liberty was ganted unto their Churches, and because ^e might
serve Christ with a free and a good conscience amongst them. Yet here he
continued not fully nine months but he left them, and went unto Geneva; and
after that he had spent other nine Months in that place, by the means of
Peter Martyr, he was called into England, to perform the place of the Divinity
Lecturer; unto which motion he willingly condescended: and having taken his
leave of his friends and acquaintance he sets forward in his journey; he was
detained by the Inhabitants of Strarburge, because their Pastor Casper Hedio
was then dead, and because it was decreed by the Magistrates that an Italian
following the Doctrine of Peter Martyr should be called unto the Citie^ and
therefore they first used means to bring in the grav^ Martinengus; but he
refused to leave his Flock in Geneva: wherefore seeing, they could not prevail
that way. They kindly entreated Zanchy to stay amongst them; hither he came in
the year 1553. and in this place he performed a Pastoral office almost eleven
years; and at vacant times he expounded Aristotle unto such as were desirous to
attain unto some understanding in the Arts.

Here he was commanded by the Magistrates (if he intended to teach in that
City) to subscribe unto that Confession of Faith concluded on, and set forth at
Auspurge, called the Augustines Confession: unto which he consented with this
caution, modo Orthodoxe intilligatur; now because his opinion about the
Sacrament wa^ the chiefest cause which did urge this Subscription, he wrote a
Treatise concerning the Lords Supper; wherein he delivered his opinion thus.

First, that the true body of Christ, which was given for us, and his true
blood which was shed for the remission of ^innes, was truly eaten and drunken
in the Supper. Secondly, that it was not eaten with the mouth and teeth of the
body, but with true faith. Thirdly, and therefore received of none but of those
which were elected.
And this his opinion was generally answered unto, and approved in the City, so
that when they had made a trial of the sufficiency of his parts, for the space
of two years, and had approved of that method and order which he had observed
both in teaching and disputing, he was admitted and chosen into the Society of
the Thomists: where he lived a Canon for the space of nine years, in which time
he was beloved of all good men that knew him: a detester of Contraversies as
cau^es of strife, and he was also a lover, and a favourer, and a furtherer of
pear and quietness.

Yet notwithstanding diverse Controversies and accusations, were afterward
instituted and moved against him, during his residence here, and that by some
of the Divines and Professors of the same Commonwealth concerning the
Sacrament, and concerning the Ubiquity of the humain nature, concerning the
setting of ^mages in Churches and Chapels, concerning Antichrist, and the end
of the world, concerning Praedestination, and concerning the perseverance of
the Saints in Faith; wherein his opinions were condemned by them as
haereticall; this flame also was increased by the addition of the fuel of a
Tractate of the Lords Supper, printed by Hestrusius in the same City: and it
came also unto that height, that he must either voluntarily depart, or else be
forced thereunto by the College: although means were used for a
reconciliation, and the cause referred unto thirteen men; and although he
offered publicly to dispute with his adversaries touching the same points, and
had obtained the judgments of all the Churches and Academies throughout
Germany, concerning the same, and had presented them in writing unto the
Senate; yet no conclusion could be effected, until the Senate had procured
learned Divines and Lawyers from Tubinge, Bipont and Basil, who were appointed
as Judges to hear both parties, and to establish an agreement.

These Judges, after the hearing of the matters controverted, privately
withdrew themselves, and composed c^rtaine arcicles, unto which they desired
that the disagreeing parties would subscribe, for the settling of peace and
qui^tnesse in the City. To this request Zanchy used delay in the performance,
and declared unto them, that there were two especial things which detayned him
that he couly not subscribe; first because in so doing he should give an
occasion of offense unto the godly, and secondly it would come to pass that by
his subscription, those who were seduced from the truth would be confirmed in
their errors, yet notwithstanding when he perceived that his subscription
might be done without any prejudice unto his doctrine, for quietness sake he
subscrib^d with this Caveat, Hanc doctrine formulam, ut piam agnosco, ita etiam
recipio: this subscription was so joyful unto his adversaries, that after a
boasting and tryumphant manner, they dispersed the tidings by letters unto
their friends in Saxony and in other adjacent Regio^s, whereas if they had
truly understood it they could no^ have h^d received from it such matter and
cause of glory.

But it happily fell out at that time during these action^ that the Church at
Clavenna, by reason of the death of Augustinus Moynardus was d^stitute of a
Pastor, and the inhabitants of that place had with one consent made choice of
Zanchy; as soon as he had notice hereof, and perceiving little hope of
quietness^ in the City he forthwith repaires unto the Senate obtaines leave to
depart, and thereupon resignes his Cannonship and leaves Strasburge, and makes
toward Clavenna, a famous Town situate in Rhetia.

During this controversy and contention in Strsburge he was called by the
Tigurines, to succeed Peter Martyr, but he refused to go, because he would not
be seen to betray and give over the truth, and that good cause which he had in
hand; he was also desired by the Italian Church at Geneva, to be their Pastor;
he was sought for by the Inhabitants of Heidleberg and Marpurge, he was invited
also unto Lausanna, but from these latter he was detayned by the Senate.

Immediately after his coming unto Clavenna a vehement and heavy pestilence
invaded the City, which was the cause of great sorrow and lamentation in that
place: for within the space of seven months three dyed 1200. persons, yet
Zanchy continued his course of teaching so long as any Auditor came unto him;
afterward he removed himself out of the town, unto the top of an high
Mountain, with his family, where he spent three months in reading, meditation
and prayers; and at the end thereof it pleased God to remove his scourge from
the City, and he returned and performed his ordinary function for the space of
four years, to the great benefit of that Church, but not without many
afflictions and crosses unto himself.

Hence then he was called by that incomparable virtuous and religious Prince
Frederick the third Elector Palatine, unto that famous Academie at Heidleberge,
and by him most courteously entertained, and constituted successor unto Zachary
Vrsin, at his entrance into his office which was in the year 1568. he delivered
an excellent and learned speech concerning the conservation of the purity of
doctrine in the Church, and in the same year he was graced with the title of
Doctor in Divinity, in the presence of the Prince Elector, and of his son
Casimirus; who being most desirous of propagating the truth of Christ, enjoined
him (after his return from Rhetia to the Palatinate) to lay open the true
doctrine concer^ing God, and concerning the three Persons in the Diety, and to
confute the opinion and to overthrow the arguments of such adversaries as at
that time opposed the Diety of Christ, and of the holy Ghost, in Poland and in
Transylvania: whereupon he wrote his treatises full of learning and piety, de
natura Dei, detribus Elohmi filio and spiritu Sancto, uno eodemque Jehovah.

In this Academie he professed Divinity ten years even unto the death of
^rederich the third Prince Elector, afterward he went unto Neostadt where he
was entertained Divinity Lecturer, in a School newly erected, where he
continued seven years: after the death of Frederick the third he was called
unto the Academy at Leyden in Holland, then newly consecrated, in the year
1578. and also unto Antwarp in Brabant, in the year 1580. but because that
School could not want him, he was willed by the Prince to remain there where he
continued until such time as the School was translated unto Heidleberge, and
then by reason of his old age, he was discharged of his office by Casimirus
then Elector Palatine; whereupon he went toward Heidleberg to visit some
friends which he had there, whom when he had seen and comforted in those
perilous times, he changed this life for a better and more durable, in the
year 1590. and in the 75. year of his age, and lies buried in St. Peter's
Chapel at Heidelberg.

He was well read in the ancient Fathers, and in the writings of the
Philosophers; he was of singular modesty, he alwayas earnestly desired peace
amongst the Churches, and in his old age was afflicted with blindness.

His works are here inserted.

1 Divine Miscillanies, with the explication of the August^n Confession. 2 His
judgment of the Controversies about the Lords Supper. 3 Of the Trinity, books
thirteen in two parts, in the first the Orthodox mystery of this Doctrine is
proved, and confirmed by Scripture, in the latter the adversaries are confuted.
4 A C^mpendium of the chief points of Christian Doctrine. 5 A Perfect tretise
of the sacred Scriptures. 6 Of the Incarnation of Christ. 7 Of the Divine
Nature and his Attributes. 8. Of the Works of God in six days. 9^ Of Man's
Redemption. 10 A Commentary upon Hosea. 11. A Commentary on the Ephesians. 12.
Colossian.. 13 Thessalonians. 14 John. 15 Observations of Physic. 16 His
answer to an Arrian.

He sought and found the truth, and would not hide
That light from others that did still abide
Within his breast, his soul was always free
To Advance the works of real piety;
Virtue, and gravity were both combined
Within the ceture of his breast, and shined
With equal luster; all that heard his voice
Were filled with raptures, and would much rejoice
At his discourse, for what his tongue expressed
Always proceeded from a real breast.
Let his examples teach us how to stand
Firmly obedient to our Gods command:
That at the last we may rejoice, and sing
Praises with Zanchy to heavens glorious King.
The Life and Death of Anthony Sadeel, who dyed Anno Christi 1591.
ANthony Sadeel was born upon the confines of Savoy, and France, not far from
Geneva Anno Christi 1534. and his father dying whilst he was young, his mother
brought him up in learning, and sent him to Paris, and having studied a while
there, he went to Tholous, where falling into the society of some godly
students of the Law, it pleased God that he left Popery, and went from thence
to Geneva; where he was much helped by Calvin, and Beza: afterward being sent
for home, and some controversy arising about his inheritance, he went to Paris
and there joined himself with the private Congregation of the Protestants:
there the Pastor Collongius called the young students that were of that
congregation together, persuaded them to apply themselves to the study of
Divinity, which afterward turned to the great good of the French Churches, and
amongst others, Sadeel faithfully promised to apply him self thereto; and having
profited much in those studyes, being scarce twenty years old, he was by the
approbation of the whole Church, chosen one of the Pastors: the year after fell
out that horrid violence offered to the Church at Paris, when they were met
together to hear the word, and receive the Sacrament, where above one hundred
and fifty of them were laid hold of, and cast into Prison, but by a miracle of
Gods mercy the Pastors escaped: the year after Sadeel was delivered from a
great danger, for at midnight many Apparitors brake into his house, searched
every corner, and at last brake into his chamber, seized on his books, and
papers, crying out they were Heretical, and so laid hold upon him, and carried
him to Prison: But it pleased God that Antony of Burbon King of Navar who knew
him, and had often heard him, hearing of his imprisonment, sent to the officers
to release him as being one of his train; and when they refused to do it, he
went himself to the Prison complaining of the wrong that was don him by
imprisoning one that belonged to him, being neither a murderer, nor thief, and
withal bad Sadeel follow him, and so took him away with him: whereupon the
day after he publicly before the King gave thanks to God for his deliverance,
expounding the 124 Psalm: then it being judged the safest for him to absent
himself for a while, he went to vi^it the Churches in other parts of the
Kingdom, and at Aurelia he continued some months Preaching to many Citizens,
and students in the night time to their great advantage: then he returned to
Paris again where a Synod of Ministers, and Elders (the first that was there)
were assembled to draw up a confession of their Faith, which afterward was
presented to the King by the Admiral Coligny: But the King shortly after
dying, the Queen mother, and the Guises drew all the Government of the Kingdom
into their hands, and raised a great persecution against the Church, drawing
many of all ranks to Prisons, and punishment: yet Sadeel intermitted not his
office, but was wholly employed in Preaching, comforting, confirming the weak
etc. till the danger increasing, it was thought fit that the care of the Church
should be committed to one Macradus, a man less known, and that Sadeel should
retire himself: and so he went into several parts of the Kingdom, and
ther^by much propagated the true faith. The year after, the persecution not
being so violent at Papis, Sadeel could not refrain from going to his flock
which he loved so dearly. In the year 1561. he fell sick of a quartan Ague,
and by the advice of his Physicians and friends, he was persuaded to go into
his own Country: yet neither there did he live idle, but Preached up and
down, to the spiritual advantage of many. From thence he was called to be the
Moderator in a Synod at Aurelia, where the opinion was discussed, and confuted
of some that held, That the Government of the Church should not be in the
Eldership, but in the body of the Congregation: and Sadeel took so much pains
in this point, that the the first Author of that Schism was confuted, and
converted, and publicly in writing confessed, and recanted his error: being
returned to Paris, the persecution began to grow so hot there again, that he
was persuaded to retire himself from the same, after which he never could
return to his flock that so loved, and was beloved of him: after his departure
he was present at, and moderated in many Synods of the French Churches: but
withal he was so hated of the wicked, that at last he was driven from thence
to Lusanna where he Preached for a time, and from thence he went to Geneva,
where for diverse years he was a Pastor: but the Church in France having some
peace, he returned thither, and at Lions, and Burgundy he edified the Churches
exceedingly: Afterward he was sent for by Henry the fourth King of Navar, to
whom he went very unwillingly not liking a Court-life; yet, by the advice of
his friends he went to him, and for three years space in all his troubles was
with him, comforting and encouraging him very much: and at the Battle of
Cour^rass, a little before it began, he stood in the head of the Army and
prayed earnestly for success, which much encouraged all the Soldiers; and
when they had gotten the victory, he also gave Public, and solemn thanks unto
God for the same: but by reason of sickness and weakness, being unable to
follow that kind of life any longer, he was with u^willingnesse dismissed by
the King, and went through his enemies Countries in much danger till he came to
hi^ wife, and children at Geneva: but shortly after he was sent by order from
the King into Germany, upon an Embassy to the Protestant Princes, where not
only the Universities, but the Princes also received him in a very honorable
manner, especially Prince Cassimire and the Lantgrave of Hesse. Anno Christi
1589. he returned to Geneva, where in the midst of many troubles he continued
in the work of his Ministry to the end of his life: and when the City was
besieged by the Spaniards and others, he often went out with the Citizens to the
fights, so encouraging them, that through Gods mercy, a few of them put
thousands of the enemies to flight many times: At last he fell ^ick of a
Plurifie, and though the Physicians apprehended no danger, yet he foretold
that it would be mortal: and retiring himself from the world, he wholly
conversed with God: Prayers were made daily for him in the Congregations, and
Beza and the other Ministers visited him often, with Prayers and tears begging
his recovery: he enjoyed much inward peace, and comfort in his sickness, and
at last slept in the Lord Anno Christi 1591. and of his age fifty seven: his
loss was much bewailed by the whole City; his Preaching was not too curious,
and yet not void of Art, and eloquence: So that his Ministry was always most
grateful to the people; he was very holy, and exemplary in his life, and had
most of the learned men of those times for his special friends.

Renowned Sadeel spent his days
In giving the Almighty praise:
He through floods of danger went
To feed his flock, whose great content
Fatten'd their souls and made them thrive,
(No food like truth to keep alive)
Iu grace; they ceased not to applaud
His worth, that was not over-awde
By Papists rage; it was not a Goal
Could make his lofty courage fail;
Let his example teach us to express
Our selves contented when we feel distress.
WILL: WHITAKER.
The Life and Death of William Whittaker.
UPon the entrance of that gracious Prince of blessed memory King Edward the
sixth, at which time began the general ^xilement of Popish superstitions out of
this Realm, and the settling of sincere Religion in room thereof; it pleased God
withal to bring into the world with us a choice instrument of his, one that
should in due time prove an eager and able both opposer of the one, and
maintainer of the other. For in the first year of that pious Princes reign was
William Whittaker borne at the Manner of Holme in the Parish of Burndley in the
County of Lancaster.

Under his Parents he was brought up at Grammar School until being now about
ten years of age, about the time of the second restoration of the sincere
profession of Religion, shortly after the beginning of the reign of Queen
Elizabeth of holy and happy memory, he was by that reverend and religious
Divine Alexander Nowel, Deane of Pa^ls, being his Uncle by the Mothers side,
sent for up to London from his parents, with whom he had been nursed up in
Popish ^uperstitions; taken into his family, and trained up in further matter
of learning fit for his years, in the public School founded by Doctor Colet
his pious sometime predecessor.

There he so profited in good literature, and gave such presages of what would
afterward ensue, that being now eighteen years old, he was by the foresaid
venerable Deane his Uncle sent to the University of Cambridge, and there
admitted into Trinity College; where making further progress answerable to
his former beginnings, he was chosen first Scholar, and after Fellow of that
House: and having received the degree of Master of Arts, he began now to grow
into no small esteem and fame by reason of disputes and other exercises
performed by him, with the good approbation, and to the great admiration even
of the best and chiefest.

Among other things that caused the more general ^otice to be taken o^ him,
and gained him much reputation, were the transl^tion of his reverend Uncle
Master Nowels Catechism into pure and elegant Greek, and the dispu^e ^f that
our right precious Jewel against Harding into the l^ke Latin.

Hence it came to pass, that contention sometime arising between the two
Proctors of the same year, whether of them should at the ensuing Commencement
be Father of the Philosophy Act; to end the controversy being referred to the
Heads of the University, it was by their joint consent, as deeming none fitter
for such a performance, devolved to Master Whittaker, though one then far
younger then either of them, and that might for his years have seemed too young
for such an office. But they were confident, as appeared upon former proof, of
his sufficiency for the place. Neither did he therein either fail their
estimation, or frustrate their expectation of him: For he discharged the office
thus imposed upon him^ with the general applause of all, as well strangers as
others.

From the study of the Arts and Tongues, wherein he gave sundry pregnant proofs
of his proficiency beyond most of his equals, (having thereby laid a sound
foundation for a further firmer and fairer future fabric) he betook himself to
the study of Divinity. Unto which now mainely addicting himself, he began (as
was most need) with the Scriptures, the pure Wellspring of all divine truth:
the authority whereof as he always maintained, so he made them ever his
Groundwork for all matters of Faith, and his Touchstone for the trial of all
humane either writings or opinions. From the^ he proceeded (a good course to be
taken by young students in Divinity) to the writings of our modern Divines of
the best note: and from these to the Monuments of the ancient Doctors; all the
works of whom, whither Greek or Latin Fathers of any note (being one as of a
strong and able body, so of pains and industry unweariable; by night watches
repairing what at any time by day he lost through emergent occasions) he read
over and dispatched within few years.

Herein he both so profited, and made his proficien^y to appear, that nothing
ordinary was now expected from him; and being chosed when he took his first
degree in Divinity, to answer the Act at the Commencement in that solemn
Assembly, he therein so acquitted himself, that the place of the chief
Professor of Divinity becoming shortly after, even the very next year vacant,
by the removal of Doctor Chader^on (who then held it) from the Headship of
Queens College to the Bishopric of Chester; notwithstanding his immaturity of
years, as might be deemed for such an employment: his maturity of judgment and
learning, joined with singular piety, modesty, gravity and discreet carriage,
prevailed so much as to procure him that plac^, though much labored for by
some others far auncienter then himself, and of good darts and note other^ we
see.

Being now brought upon a most eminent Stage, wherein he lay open to all eyes,
to envious ones especially (seldom wanting in such cases, and of all other
most curious and quick-sighted to pry narrowly into the defects and defaults of
those whom they envy;) he therein so worthily demeaned himself, beyond all
expectation, that he not only surpassed the expectation of his wel-wishing
friends, but surpassed also the emulations of his ill-affected adversaries: not
unlike a prevailing pillar of fire, that with i^s clear and bright flames
mounting up on high, dispelleth and consumes the smoke that would obscure and
smother it.

He began with the opening in a dogmaticall way, of sundry Books and parcels
of Scripture: the three first chapters of S. Lukes Gospel, the Epistle of S.
Paul to the Galatians, his first Epistle to Timothy, and Salomons Song of
Songs: all which he went through with, in his public Lectures, within the
space of six years; being attended continually with a constant concourse of the
best, and an auditory at all times well filled.

Neither was his Pen idle the whiles but was withal employed otherwise, as
well as his tongue. For during this time, he dealt by writing with Campian that
flourishing Jesuit, and refuted his ten frivolous and reasonlesse Reasons,
which he so much vaunted of; he replied upon Duraeus the Scot, his scurrilous
railings, in defense of that his refutation, and stopped his foul mouth. He
grapled with sedicious Sanders, evicting his Arguments, whereby he labored to
prove that the Pope is not Antichrist; and with Rainolds his second, who had
bin nibling only at the Preface to his eviction of Sanders his Demonstration,
but had no heart to meddle with the Work it self.

After this, considering the state and necessity of the times, in his public
Lectures he betook himself to Controversies; and singled out Bellarmine, the
Popes then greatest Champion and Romes Goliath, to bicker with. The
Controversies he handled, were concerning the Scriptures, concerning the
Church, concerning Councels, concerning the Bishop of Rome, concerning the
Ministers of the Church, concerning the Saints deceased, concerning the Church
Triumphant, concerning the Sacraments in general, the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, and of Baptism in special; whereof some small part he published in
his life time, some other part has bin published since his death.

And as his Readings at home, so his Writings both at home and abroad, have for
ingenuity, perspicuity, soundness, succinctnesse, received high commendations
from the most judicious Divines that this age has afforded; yea, it is
credibly reported, that Cardinal Bellarmine himself so esteemed of him, that
he procured hence his Portraiture, and had it hanging in his Study among the
Pictures of other men of prime note; and that being demanded, why he would
keep so near him the effigies of an Heretic, and one that had written
against him, and grace such an one so much; he made answer, that Though he were
an Heretic and an Advarsarie, yet he was a learned Adversary: nor is any
testimony deemed more firm and credible, then that that proceeds from a
professed enemy. Only, while he lived, Stapleton a peevish piece, ^narled at
some passages in one of his Controversies; whom he so answered, that the
waspish dotard had little lust to reply.

Having some years sat in the Professors chair, and taken the degree of
Doctor; upon removal of Doctor Howland to the Bishopric of Peterborough, he
was called by speciall^ Mandate from the Queens Majesty to be Master of S.
John's College; which College by his access to it, he much advanced. For in
his government thereof (which with much moderation and singular discretion he
carried himself in) he had a special eye to the advancement, as well of
Religion as of Learning, taking notice even of the lowest and the meanest; and
giving much encouragement every way to such as he observed to be forward in
either. By means whereof, that College (during all the time of his
continuance there) greatly flourished, and was more frequented then any College
in the whole Universitie besides.

About his latter times some Controversy arising in the Universitie, concerning
certain points of Doctrine; he was together with some other of chief note and
place called up to London, for the composing of the same; wherein having
traveled and taken much pains to good purpose; in his return homeward from
thence, being well near midwinter and sharp weather, he took (by some cold in
likelihood) that sickness, of which (turning to a violent Fever) he not long
after deceased.

During the short time of his sickness (for he lay not many days) he carried
himself very comfortably and cheerfully, and departed with much peace.

He was a man very personable, of a goodly presence, a body well compact, tall
of stature, upright, proportionally limmed, black hayred, of a grave aspect, a
ruddy complexion, a strong constitution; of a settled carriage, a solid
judgment, a liberal mind, an affable disposition; a mild, yet no remiss
Governor; a free disposer of Places; a constant frequenter of the public
service; a general Scholar; a great Student to the last; a lover of Learning
and Learned; a contemner of money; of a moderate diet; a familiar demeanure; a
life generally unblameable; and (that which added a luster to all the rest)
amidst all these endowments, and the respects of others, even the greatest,
thereby deservedly procured, of a most meek and lowly spirit.

He had two wives successively, women of good birth and note, and eight
children by them. He left this world (to his eternal joy and gain, but to the
great loss of Gods Church, and grief of all sound and godly learned) on the
fourth day of December, in the year of our Lord 1595. and in the forty and
seventh of his age: having held the Professors chair about sixteen years;
and the Mastership of Saint John's College almost nine. His corpse was with very
great solmnity, and general lamentation brought to the ground; and lies
enterred in the Chapel of the foresaid College; his Epitaph being engraven
with letters of gold on a fair stone in the wall near to the place of its
enterment. His Works extant testifying his worth, are these:

1 His Translation of Master Nowels Catechism into Greek. 2 Hi^ Translation
of Bishop Jewels disput^ against Harding into La^^ne. 3 His Answer to Edmund
Campian his ten Reasons. 4 His defense of that his answer against John Durey. 5
His Refutation of Nicolas Sanders his Demonstration, whereby he would prove,
that the Pope is not Antichrist. 6 A collection thereto ^dded of ^n^ie^t
Heres^^s ^a^e^ i^ (...) to ma^e up the Popish Apostasy. 7 His Thesis
prop^unded and defended at the Commecement 1582. that the Pope is the
Antichrist spoken of in Scripture. 8 His answer to Willam Reinolds against the
Preface to that against Sanders in English. 9 His Disputation con^erning the
Scripture against the Papists of ^hese times, Bellarmine and Stapleton
especially. 10 His defense of the Authority of the Scriptures, against Thomas
Stapleton his defense of the Authority of the Churches. 11 His Lectures on the
Controversies concerning the Bishop of Rome, set forth by John Allenson after
his decease. 12 His Lectures on the Controversy concerning the Church, set
forth by the same Party. 13 His Lectures on the Controversy concerning
Councels, set forth by the same. 14 A Treatise of Original sin, against
Stapletons three former books of Iustifi^ation, set forth by the same. 15 A
Lecture on the first of Timothy 2.4. read on Febrvary 27. 1594. before the Earl
of Essex, and some other Honorable Persons. 16 His Lectures concerning the
Sacraments in general; the Eucharist and Baptism in special: taken by John
Allenson, and set forth by Dr Samuel Ward.

Let such whose merits, whose indifferent fames
Keeps life and soul together in their Names,
With much a do, let such require the praise
Of hired quils to clear their cloudy days
With borrowed Sunshine; let them strive to vamp
Their wasted Mem'ryes, by another Lamp:
Let those whom ordinary wrrth commends
Receive Almes-praise from charitable friends:
Our learned Whittaker craves no expression,
Noe vote, no Trumpit but his foes confession;
Whose well refuted Arguments proclaim
His everlasting honor, and their shame:
He was the shield of Truth, the scourge of error,
This Islands Triumph, and proud Babils Terror.
The Life and Death of Lambert Danaeus, who dyed Anno Christi 1596.
LAmbert Danaeus was born at Aurelia in France Anno Christi 1530. he was of an
acute wit, and wonderfully addicted to learning, so that by his diligence, and
extraordinary pains he attained to a great measure of it: in his younger years
he studied the civil Law four years at Aurelia under Anna Burgius: then he
betook himself to the study of Divinity, and (embracing the reformed Religion)
went to Geneva Anno Christi 1560. He had a vast memory, and read over many
Authors; he was so versed in the Fathers, and School-Divines that few attained
to the like exactness therein, whence one says of him, Mirum est, homuncionis
unius ingenium, tot, and tam diversas scientsas haurire, and retinere potuisse:
At Geneva he was admitted into the number of Doctors, and Pastors, and by his
learned labors was exceeding useful both to the Church and Unixersity; always
employing himself, in writing, ann publishing Commentaries upon the
Scriptures, and other learned treatises which were of special concernment:
From thence he was called to the University of Leiden, where he was received
with much joy, and was exceedingly admired for his learning, acuteness of wit,
promptness, and strength of memory, in alleging, and reciting the sentences
of the Fathers, Schoolmen, Canonists, and profane writers; From thence he was
called to Gaunt Anno Christi 1582. where he taught a little while, but that
City being full of tumults, he foreseeing the storm that was coming upon it,
left it, and being sent for went into Navar, where by his teaching, and writing
he made the University of Orthesium famous: and at last he there laid down his
earthly tabernacle Anno Christi 1596. and of his age 66.

Danaeus that was acute and wise,
Owned virtue as his chiefest prize;
He was a jem, that much adorned
The Church, he much contemned; and scorned
The ways of Popery; his heart
Was filled with comfort, joined with art:
He was esteemed and loved of those
That were industrious to oppose
Erroneous principels; his mind
Was by heavens powerful hand refined:
Who at the last received his spirit
And made him happy to inherit.
The Life and Death of Robert Rollock, who dyed Anno Christi 1598.
RObert Rollock was borne in Scotland of the ancient Family of the
Levingstones, in the year 1555. His Father knowing the worth of Learning, was
very careful to bring up his Son therein; and for that end he sent him to
Surline, and placed him under Thomas Bucanan, who finding hi^ promptness and
diligence, took much delight in him. From thence he went to the University of
Saint Andrewe^; there he spent four years in the study of the Arts, and so
eminently profited therein, that he was chos^n a Professor of Philosophy. In
the year 1583. the States of Scotland intending to erect a University at
Edenburg, sent some to S^int Andrews to find out a fit man that might
undertake the Government of it: where, by the general vote of all, there was
none thought so fit for this work as Rollock: which the States being informed
of, they presently sent for him: and when he was come, they entertained him
court^ousl^: after he had been there a while, he set upon the work^, and young
Students flock't thither a pace from all parts of the Kingdom: whom he
instr^^ted in the Ar^^, and governed with severity mixed with ^lemen^y, and so
educated them in Religion, that God blessed his labors ^xceedingly amongst
them. After four years he examined them strictly, and finding their
proficiency, they commenced Masters of Art: then four Professors of Philosophy
were joined with him to share in the pai^s, which were chosen out of the ablest
of thos^ that had commenced Masters of Ar^^ Every morning Rollock ^alling the
stud^nts together, prayed fervently with them and one day in the week,
expounded some portion of Script^^^ to them: after which Lecture he took notice
which of them had committed any fault^ that week, whom he would so reprove, and
lay the wrath of God before them, that he much r^formed them thereby. He took
extraordinary pains to fit such for the work o^ the Ministry, as were grown
up to it; so that the Church received very much benefit from thence, h^ving so
many able Pastors sent forth into it.

Besides this, he Preached every Lords day in the Church, and that with such
fervency, and evident demonstration of the spirit, that he was the inst^ument
of converting very many unto God. He wrote also many Commentaries upon the
Scriptures, which being Printed, and going abroad^ into other Countries, Beza
meeting with that upon the Romans and Ephesians, he wrote to a friend
concerning them that he had gotten a treasure of incomparable value, and that
he had not met with the like before for brevi^ie, elegancy, and jud^ciousnesse.

He was so humble that he prefered all others before himself, and labored
after privacie from public business, that he might the better apply himself
to his studies: yet in the two last years of his life, he was so involved in
Public affairs, that it much weakened his health. He was greatly tormented
with the stone, yet did he not intermit his labors. He was made Moderator in a
Synod, and chosen for one of the Commissioners of the Church in the interval^
of Synods.

In the year 1589. his disease so increased upon him, that he was confined to
his house: and being removed into the Country air, he seemed at first to be
better, but presently his disease returned with more violence, so that he was
forced to keep his bed: whereupon he set his House in order, and his Wi^e,
after ten years barrenness, being with child, he commended her to the care of
his friends: two Noblemen coming to visit him, he requested them from him to
go to the King, and to entreat him, in his name, to take care of Religion, and
to persevere in it to the end, as hitherto he had done; and to reverence and
esteem the Pastors of the Church, as it was meet.

And when the Pastors of Edenbrough came to him, he made an excellent
exhortation to them and profession of his sincerity and integrity in ^is place
that God called him to^ death approaching, he made such a divine and heavenly
speech as astonished the hearers: and when the Physicians were preparing
Physic for him, he said, Tu Deus medeberis mihi, thou Lord wilt heal me: then
he prayed fervently that God would pardon his sins for Christ's sake, and that
he might have an happy departure, enjoy God's presence which he often breathed
after: saying I have hitherto seen but darkely in the glass of his word: O
Lord grant that I may enjoy the eternal fruition of thy countenance which I
have so much desired, and longed for: the day after diverse of the Magistrates
of Edenburg coming to him, he spoke to them to be very careful of the
University, desiring them to choose into his room Henry Charter, a man every
way fit for that employment: he commended to their care also his wife,
professing that he had not laid up one penny of his stipend, and therefore
hoped they would provide for her: when he had their promise for those things,
he said, I bless God, I have all senses entire, but my heart is in heaven: and
Lord Jesus why should not thou have it, it has been my care all my life
long to dedicate it to thee, I pray thee take it that it may live with thee for
ever; C(...) Lord Jesus, put an end to this miserable life: have Lord and tarry
not: Come Lord Jesus and give me that life for which thou have redeemed me: and
when some told him that the next day was the Sabbath, he said: thy Sabbath O
Lord shall begin my eternal Sabbath: my eternal Sabbath shall take it is
beginning from thy Sabbath. The next morning feeling his approaching death, he
sent for Master Belcanqual to pray with him, who in his prayer desired the Lord
if he pleased, to prolong his life for the good of his Church, whereupon he
said: I am a weary of this life, all my desire is that I may enjoy the
celestial life that is hid with Christ in God: and thus continued he in such
heavenly prayers, and speeches till the evening, and quietly resigned up his
spirit unto God Anno Christi 1598. and of his Age forty three.

Renowned Rollock, a most learned Scot,
Deserves also, as his most worthy lot
A Crown of Bays, his learned brows to dress;
Who did such parts and piety express;
Such gravity, mixed with sweet Clemency;
Such love to truth, and spotless verity,
As that the Scottish States minding to make
At Edenburg an Academ, did take
Especial notice of him; and then sent
Desiring him to take that Government;
Which he performed with such diligence,
That Scotland reapt great benefit from thence,
He, on the sacred Scriptures Comments wrote,
Whereof two were of such renowned note,
That Beza of them, gave his witness fair,
That they were rich, and prizelesse Tr^asures rare:
This precious Saint, thus piou^ly did spend
His days on earth, and had heavens Crown in the end.
The Life and Death of Nicolas Hemingius, who dyed Anno Christi 1600.
NIcolas Hemingius was born at Loland in Denmark Anno Christi 1513. of honest
Parents, but his Father dying when he was young, his Grandfather brought him up
carefully in learning, placing him forth in diverse Schools, and when he had
laid a good foundation of learning there, he had an ardent desire to go to
Wittenberg, which was made famous by Philip Melancthon's Lectures, and having
gotten some little money in his purse he traveled thitherward, but by the way
some thieves met him, and stripped him of all that he had: yet when he came to
Wittenberg, he found the people very charitable to him, especially Melancthon:
there he remained five years, and by his writing for, and attending upon
richer students, and teaching some privately, he maintained himself: When he
returned home he had an ample testimony from Melancthon for his excellent wit,
and learning: and was there entertained by Olaus Nicholas to teach his
daughters, and from thence he was chos^n to be Pastor at Hafnia, and
accordingly ordained to it^ which place he discharged with much diligence, and
faithfulnes^: and many young students resorting to him, he read privately to
them, and afterward was chosen Hebrew Professor in that University.

In the year 1557. he was made Doctor in Divinity, and performed his place with
much sedulity twenty six y^^res. Anno Christi 1579. when he was grown old, and
exhausted with his daily labors, Frederick the second, King of D^nmark gave him
a liberal Pension, upon which he lived holily, and comfortably all the
remainder of his days: some years before his death he grew blind, and was
troubled with several diseases, desiring nothing more then that he might be
dissolved, and be with Christ: A little before his death he expounded the 103.
Psalm, with so much fervor, efficacy, and power of the holy Ghost, that all
that heard him wondered at it, and shortly after resigned up his spirit unto
God, Anno 1600. and of his age 87.

Hemingius does deserve to be
Recorded in each memory.
Who for his wit and worthy parts
In Learning, Tongues, and exc'lent Arts,
Was by Melancthon much respected,
And for his learned gifts elected
Hebrew Professor, worthily,
In Hafnia Universitie;
Where six and twenty years he stayed
With great esteem, and there was made
A Doctor in Theology,
And full of years and love did dye.
The Life and Death of James Heerbrand, who dyed Anno Christi 1600.
JAmes Heerbrand was borne at Noricum, in the year 1521. of an ancient Family;
his Father was one of Luther's Disciple^; and seeing the towardliness and
promptness of his Son, was careful to bring him up in Religion and Learning:
at twelve years old his Father bought him a fair Bible, which he diligently
read over. Afterward he went to Vlm, where he studied the Tongues; and at
seventeen years old his Father sent him to Wittenberg to hear Lu^her and
Melancthon in the year 1538. which year was famous for diverse things; for then
the Kingdom of Denmark embraced the Gospel, the Emperor and King of France
met together; the Bible was Printed in English at Paris; the University at
Argentine was erected; the sect of the Antinomians was detected; the Marquess
of Brandenburg embraced the Augustine Confession; and the Sea by the Kingdom
of Naples was wholly day for eight miles together, out of which place fire and
ashes brake forth so abundantly, that many places were miserably destroyed
thereby.

In the University of Wittenberg, Heerbrand studied the Arts with great
diligence, and was so sparing of his tim^, that he would not intermit one hour
from his Studies; insomuch that other Students called him Suevicam Noc^^am; the
Swevian night-crow. He h^ard Luthe^ and Melancthons L^ctures with much
diligence; and in the ye^r 1540. he comm^nced Master of Arts^ He Preach^d also
abroad in the Villages on the S^bbath days.

Thus having spent five years there in his Studies, he returned home with ample
testimonies from Melancthon and the University. When he came home, the Pastors
of the Church ^ppointed him to Preach, which he performed with great
approbation and commendation of all. His Parents rejoicing much at his
profic^ency, would needs have him employ his talent in his own Country, and
at Stutgard, Snepfius (being Superintendent) examined him, and finding his
abilities, he said, Dominus te mihi obtulit, the Lord has offered thee unto
me. Being but twenty two years old, he was made Deacon at Tubing; and three
years after he married a wife, by whom he had eight Sons, and three Daughters:
shortly after that accursed Interim coming forth, he, amongst other Ministers
that rejected it, was banished from Tubing: and being out of employment, he
studied Hebrew; till Prince Vlrick being dead, his Son Christopher succeeding
him, called back the Ministers and Heerbrand amongst them to their former
places. He also made him Pastor of Herrenberg: shortly after he commenced
Doctor in Divinity, and for four years and an half, he studied the Fathers. In
the year 1556. he was sent for by Charles Marquess of Baden, to reform
Religion in his Dominions; where also he prescribed a form of Ordination of
Ministers. Presently after he was chosen to be the Divinity Professor at
Tubing: and after that the Pastor, and Superintendent also.

In the year 1562. he was sent for by the Duke of Saxony to be the Professor
at Ienes, who proffered to allow him the stipend of one thousand Florens per
annum, but he refused it, continuing at Tubing; where he had much honor and
respect: his wife having lived with him fifty years and an half, dyed; who
being the staff of his old age, he wa^ much afflicted for her loss, and began
to grow weaker and weaker; whereupon he refigned his Office, and had a stipend
allowed him by his Prince, and so prepared himself for death. He was much
troubled with the Gout, which he bore with much patience, often using that
saying of the Apostle; Godliness is profitable to all things, having the
promise of this life, and that which is to come. He fell into a Lethargy, and
^o dyed in the year 1600. and of his Age 79.

James Heerband was a rare Divine, most grave,
Deserves a Garland of Fames flowers to have;
Who, in all Learning was so excellent;
And at his Studies constant, diligent,
That his contemporary T^ndents said,
He was a Sweviary night Crow. And, he made
Such benefit his Studies up to rear,
When he did Luther and Melancthon hear,
(As often he did) that he himself became
A Preacher rare, and of surpassing fame;
Commencing Doctor of Divinity;
Made Tubings Pastor, with respect most high.
Superintendent also there elected,
And of the Germain Princes much respected.
At last, his wife (who fifty years, at least,
Had lived with him) did dye: his strength decreast,
Together with her loss, and sickness, so,
Upon his feeble corpse began to grow;
That near the age of fourscore years, in peace,
He changed earths wars, for heavens eternal peace.
The Life and Death of David Chytraeus, who dyed Anno Christi 1600.
DAvid Chytreus was born in Ingelfing in Swevland, in the year 1530. of godly
and religious Parents, who seeing his ^owardlinesse and ingenuous nature, were
careful to educate him both in Religion and Learning; the principles whereof
he drunk in with such celerity, that his Father ^ooke much pleasure in him,
and became an earnest and frequent suitor unto God, That his Son might be
fitted for, and employed in the work of the Ministry: and for this end, when
he was scarce seven years old, he sent him to School to Gemmingen, and after
two years stay there, he removed him to Tubing, where he was educated under
excellent Schoolmasters, and afterward admitted into that Universitie; and
whilst he was very young he commenced Bachelor of Art, studied the Languages,
Arts and Divinity under Snepfius.

In all which time he profited so exceedingly, that at fifteen years of age he
commenced Master of Arts, with the general approbation of the University: and
presently after, having a large allowance from a worthy Knight Sir Peter
Menzingen, he traveled to Wittenberg, where he wa^ entertained by Philip
Melancthon into his Family; so that he did not only gain much profit by his
public Lectures, b^t by private convers with him also; which happiness he so
esteemed, that all his life after, he acknowledged, that next under God, he was
bound to Philip Melancthon for his proficiency in Learning. When he came first
to Melancthon, and delivered some Letters of commendation in his behalf,
Melancthon finding in them that he was Master of Arts, looking upon him, he
wondered at it, saying, Are you a Master of Arts: yea, said Chytraeus, it
pleased the University of Tubing to grace me with that degree: Can you, said
Melancthon, understand Geeke; which he affirming, he g^ve him Thucydides to
read, and construe a piece of it; which when Chytraeus had done, Melancthon
enquiring hi^ age, and admiring his forwardness, said unto him, Thou do
worthily deserve thy Degree, and hereafter thou shall be as a Sonn^ unto me.

Whilst he was there, he heard Luther's Lectures upon (...) ten last Chapters
of Genesis. And as Plato, when he was ^eady to dye, praised God for three
things; first, that God had made him a man; secondly, that he was bron in
Greece^ thirdly, that he lived in the time of Socrates. So did C^^traeus also
acknowledge it as a singular mercy: first, tha^ God had made him a man:
secondly, a Christian: thirdly, that he had his education under those excellent
lights of the Church, Luther and Melancthon. He was very diligent in attending
upon Melancthon; studied in his study; heard all his discourses public and
private, about matters of the weightiest concernment; followed him when he
walked abroad, and endeavored wholly to fashion his life by hi^ example. And
Melancthon looked upon him as his own Son, and used to call him suum Davidem,
his David.

Presently after Luther's death, the Wars in Germany breaking forth by Charles
the fifth, the University of Wittenberg was dissipated by reason of the same;
whereupon Chytraeus went to Heidleberg, where he studied Hebrew, and then went
to Tubing, where he applied himself to the study of the Mathematics. But when
Prince Maurice of Saxony had restored the University, and called back
Melancthon, he pre^ently returned to Wittenberg; where he buckled close to his
former studies, fearing the like interruption again: and in the year 1548. he
began privately to read to young Students; by which means having gotten some
money in his purse, he resolved to travel into Italy, and other parts; that
so he might see those famous places, which he had often read of, and grow into
acquaintance with the eminent men of those times. For which he (having gotten a
fa^thfull companion [ Andrew Martin of Rostoch] he tavelled through most parts
of Italy; and being returned to Wittenbern, Melancthon was requested to send
two learned men to Rostoch, for the advancement of that University; whereupon
he commended John Aurifabar and Chytraeus to them, who accordingly went
thither, and began their Lectures, to the great satisfaction of the Auditors;
and in a short time Chytraeus gr^w so famous, that Christian King of Denmark,
and the Senate of Auspurg sent for him to come to them; he was desired also by
the University of Argentine to succeed Hedi^ lately dead: also Frederick the
second, Prince Elector Palatine, sent earnestly for him to come to Heidleberg,
but his Prince John Albert would by no means part with him; two years after he
traveled into Frisland, Brabant, Flanders and other of the Belgic Provinces:
upon his return the Elector Palatine sent again for him to Heidleberg; and
the King of Denmark proffered to double his s^ipend, if he would come to him:
but his answer to them both, was, That his Prince had dealt so friendly with
him, that he could by no means leave him. Some years after the Nobility of
Magdeburg sent to request his presence and assistance in reforming of Religion,
and ejecting of Popery from amongst them; but when he could not go himself,
he wrote his mind fully to them about the same. About that time he commenced
Doctor in Divinity, at the charges of his Prince.

In the year 1565. the Senate of Stralsund sent for him to be their
Superintendent; and the King of Sweden also desired him to come thither; but
nothing would prevail to get him from Rostoch. The year after his Prince took
him with him to the Diet at Auspurg, where matters of Religion were to be
debated. At which time Ambassadors came to him again from Argentine, to
request his remove thither; and he gave them some hope of a^senting, if his
Princes good will could be procured: but he would by no meane^ part with him;
and to express his love, he proffered to enlarge his stipend; but Chytraeus
refused the same. Two year^ after he was sent for into Austria, to assist them
in the Reformation which they intended; thither he went, and gave them such
full satisfaction, that they sent him back with an ample testimony of his
abilities and integrity. Then he made a journey into Hungary, where he visited
many of the chief Cities in that Kingdom.

In the year 1571. his Prince made him the chief Visi^or of all the Churches
in his Dominions. He assisted also in the work of Reformation at Berline: the
Marquess of Brandenburg sent for him also to be the Divinity Professor at
Frankefurt, but could not obtain him. Two years after the States of Stiria sent
for him to help them in reforming their Churches; whither he went for half a
year, and was exceeding useful to them therein. At his return he was sent for
by the Elector of Saxony, and the University of Wittenberg, to be a Professor
there; but they could not prevail. The year after, the Duke of Brunswicke
being to erect an University at Iuliers, sent to him to assist in making Laws
for the University, choice of Professors, etc. Which he dispatched to his great
content. Shortly after also, he went to diverse meetings of Divines in several
plac^s, about procuring and settling the peace of the Churches of Christ. Whilst
he was at Rostoch, he went over in his Lectures the greatest part both of the
Old and New Testament; and wrote diverse other learned Books also. Growing into
years he began to be diseased, and sometimes was confined to his bed; yet
neither there would he be idle, but upon the least intermission of his pain, he
went on with his Exposition of the two and thirtyeth Psalm, which he had begun
before. And after that, in Commenting upon the Epistle to the Romans; but his
disease increasing (whereby he discerned the approaching ^f his end) he made a
Confession of his Faith; received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and not
long after quietly slept in the Lord, in the year 1600. and of his age seventy.
Whilst he lay sick in his bed, if any present had discoursed about a
controversall point, raising himself up, he would call to them to speak out,
for that he should dye with the more comfort, if he could learn any new thing
before his departure.

In fames large Catalogue of worthyes rare
Chytraeus may impropriate ample share
Of honor and renown; who from a lad
An even Connative disposition had
To learning, which his parents did promove,
And which in time, he rarely did improve:
Commencing at but fifteen years of age,
Master of Acts; and with Melancthon sage
In his own house, was blestly educated,
And most profoundly by him doctrinated.
In whom Melancthon such prof^ciency
Found, even unto admiration high
That this his pregnant Pupil afterward,
He as his son did tenderly regard.
Chytraeus also in process of time,
To such a highth of honor up did clime:
For's excellency in all rare Literature
As did from all that knew him love procure,
And favor from the States of Germany,
And as he lived, so honored he did dye.
ALEXANDER NOWELL
The Life and Death of Alexander Nowel.
ALexander Nowel was born in the County of Lancaster Anno Christi 1511. of an
ancient and worshipful family, and at thirteen years old was sent to Oxford,
and admitted a member of Brasennose College, where he studied thirteen years,
and grew very famous both for Religion, and learning: In Queen Mary's days, he
amongst others, left the Kingdom, that he might enjoy his conscience; and
returning when Queen Elizabeth, of blessed memory, came to the Crown, she made
him Dean of Paul's, where he was a frequent, and faithful Preacher: By his
writings he defended the truth against some English Popish Ren^gado's; for
thirty years together he Preached the first, and last Sermons in Lent before
the Queen, wherein he dealt plainly, and faithfully with her: He was a great
benefactor to Brasennose College, where he had his first education: He was the
enlarger of Paul's School, made the threefold Catechism which was much used long
after. He was very charitable to the poor, especially to poor Scholars: A great
comforter of afflicted consciences; he lived til he was ninety years old, and
yet neither the eyes of his mind, nor body, waxed dim; And dyed peaceably in
the Lord Anno Christi 1601. on the thirteenth of February, and lies buried in
the Famous Cathedral Church of Saint Paul's in London, with this Epitaph upon
his Tomb.

Quam spcio^sa vestigia Evangelizantium pacem.
With some verses also ann^xed, this being the las^ of them.

Sicoritur, floret, demoriturque Deo.
His Works set forth, are as follows.

1 Against Thomas Dormam, an English Papist, in two books in quarto English. 2
Another Book against Dorman and Sanders of Transubstantiation in quarto
English. 3 His greater Catichisme in Latin, in qu^rto. 4 Hi^ less^ Catechism
in Latin, in Octavo. 5 The same in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew.

As grave, as godly Nowel Dean of Paul's,
Most justly for a Crown of honor calls;
Amongst other worthyes, for his piety
His learning, wisdom and humanity:
A famous Preatcher in the halcyon-dayes
Of Queen Elizabeth, of endless praise.
To Pauls-School, and to Braz'nnose College he
A Benefactor great was known to be.
For's threefold Catechism, worthily,
Much honored: and for his great Charity:
Who at the age of Ninety years, in peace,
And full of love, and honor did decease.
The Life and Death of Daniel Tossanus, who dyed Anno Christi 1602.
DAniel Tossanus was born at Moumbelgard in Wertemburge Anno Christi 1541. his
Parents carefully brought him up in learning, and at fourteen years old, sent
him to the Univers^ity of Basil, and after two years study there, he commenced
Bachelor of Arts: from thence he went to Tubing, and was there maintained to
his studyes for two year^ more by Prince Christopher, at the end whereof he
commenced Master of Arts, and then was sent for back by his father to
Moun^pelier, where he Preached for a while, and then went to Paris to learn the
French Tongue, and proceed in his other studyes: Anno Christi 1560. he went
thence to Aurelia, where he read Hebrew publicly: there he was first made
Deacon, and two years after Minister; which place he undertook there rather
then in his own Country, partly because of the great want of Pastors in the
French Churches, as also because he agreed with them in his judgment about the
manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament: he also married a wife Anno
Christi 1565. Whilst he was there, the civil Wars brake out between the
Papists, and Protestants: and Francis Duke of Guise besieging the City of
Aurelia, where Mounseur de Andelot, brother to the Admiral of France,
commanded in chie^e: Tossan continued there all the time of the siege, and took
extraordinary pains in instructing, exhorting, and encowraging both Citizens,
and Soldiers, and when the City was in great danger to be lost, one Poltrot,
who had devoted his life for his Countries safety, went out, and flew the Duke
of Guise under the Wall's; whereupon the siege was raised, and the Church there
preserved almost miraculously from ruin. An. Christi 1567. there brake out a
second civil War: at which time the Papists in Aurelia conspired together to
destroy all the Protestants, so that they were every hour in danger of being
butchered, when it pleased God to send Mounser Novie with a small party of
Soldiers, who entering into the City, and joining with the Protestants, drove
out some of the Papists and disarmed the rest; but after that famous battle at
Saint Danis, wherein so many of both ^ides were slain, and wounded, Peace was
again concluded: though the Papists quickly brake it, and a great company of
Soldiers entering into Aurelia, they began to breath forth threatenings against
the Church of Christ, especially against the Mi^isters of it; hereupon Tossan
was in great danger, i^somuch that when he went into the Church to Preach, he
knew not whether he should come out alive: and that which most troubled him
was, the fear that he had of his wife, and two small children: besides he never
went to the Congregation but some threw stones, others shot bullets at him^ and
their rage grew so great, that they burned down the barn wherein the Church
used to meet together: and every day he heard of one or other of their Members
that were slain, so that he was compelled several times to change hi^ lodging:
yet one day the Soldiers caught him, and pretended that they would carry him
out of the City, but intended to have Murthed him, whereupon hi^ wife, great
with child ran to the Governor, and with much importunity prevailed that her
husband might stay in the City: and the third civil War braking out, the
Popish Soldiers in Aurelia were so enraged, that they burned all the places
where the Church used to meet, and barbarously slew above eighty of the
faithful servants of Christ in them, yet it pleased God miraculously to
preserve the Ministers in that great dang^r: and Tossan, by the help of some of
the faithful, was conveyed privately away out of the Ci^y in the night, but
whilst he fought to hide himself in a wood he fell into an ambush: and was
taken, and was carried to Prisoner into ^ Castle not far of from Aurelia: which
sad news coming to his wife, she left no means untryed for his delivery: and
a^ last, for a great sum of money, she procured his release, whereupon he went
to Argim^nt: and hi^ wife putting her self into the habit of a ma^d-servant,
went toward Argimont after him, where Renata, the daughter of Lewis the
twelf^h of France, and Dowager of Ferrara, lived in a very strong Castle, and
was a great ^^iend to the Protestants, entertaining many that fled to her for
succor: b^t as his wife was going thitherward after him, she wa^ taken by some
Soldiers, and carried back to the Governor of Aurelia: but it pleased God to
stir up his own wife, and daughters to intersede for her, by whose
importunity, the ^overnor set her free, and gave her leave to go to Argim^^t,
whither it pleased God to carry her in sa^ety through ^ thousand dangers, and
where she found her husband: and whilst she was there, she was brought to bed
of a daughter^ to which the Duchess was Godmother; But the King of France
hearing that his aunt the Duchess had sheltered ^^ny of the Protestants, sent
to her to turn them al ou^ o^ (...) Castle, or else he would presently besiege
it, and slay them all: hereupon Tossan with his wife and three children, wen^
presently to Sancerra, which was the nearest place of (...) there went also a
long with him two or thr^e hund^^^ Wagones laden with children, and in their
passage th^^^ lay many Troops of the enemies, especially a^ a river (...) which
they were to pass, purposing to destroy them: (...) it pleased God to stir up
some Protestants thereabout^^ t^ horse and arm themselves, and to profer
themselv^^ (...) guard to those Wagons, who sought often with their en^mies,
and by Gods special providence conducted them all in safety to Sancerra: There
Tossan continued a year, an^ then with his wife, and one or two of hi^
children, he we^^ to Momblegart to visit his father and friends, and (...) (the
Wars being la^ly ended in France) the Church of A^relia could not suddenly
gather themselves together^ ^e continued and Preached in his fathers place who
wa^ (...) grown old for a year: But some Ministers of S^u^gard a^cused him for
Preaching Calvinism and Zwinglinism, and would have him revoke, and recant the
same, or else (...) Preach no more in public: her^upon he w^o^^ at Apol^gy to
the Senate of S^utgard: and Anno Christi 1571. he was called back to Aure^ia^
yet the times were not so peaceable tha^ h^ could Preach there, but he Preached
to his people in a Castle not far from it, which b^longed to Hierom Grosl^tius,
a most godly Nobleman: there repaired to hear him out of the City a very great
multitude of people, whom the Popish party at their return home, received with
many scorns, and ^eproaches, threatening ere long to fire the Castle, and a^^
that were in it: yet they continue^ constant, and Tossan living with that
Nobleman, performed his office with all diligence, and fidelity: Anno Christi
1572. brake forth that abominable massacre at Paris, wherein King Charles the
nin^h, falsifying his faith, caus^d the Admiral of France, and so many Noble
and Gentlemen, Doctors, Pastors, Advocates, and Professors to be so inhumanely
bu^chered, that a more horred villainy was never heard of in the world before
it: where amongst others this Hieronimus Gros^^^ius was also murdered: which
news coming to Aureli^ the Papists rejoiced, and ^ung; seeking to murder, and
destroy all the Protestants that were in, and about that City: Tossan at this
time was in the Castle with the wife of Groslotius, who heard of the Massacre,
and the Murder of her husband at Paris; and it pleased God so to order it,
that a certain Popish Nobleman, as he was traveling toward Paris, was turned
into this Castle to enquire after news, just at the same time when this sad
news was brought thither; but he supposing that it was imposible that the
Protestants which were so numerous there, could be so easily su^pressed, and
thinking rather they stood upon their defense, resolved to return home again,
and took with him this Lady with Tossan and his wife, and children: thus it
pleased God that he was delivered from certain destruction by the humanity, and
industry of a Papist: for the very next morning the inhabitants of Aurelia came
to the Castle brake open the gates, slew some maids that were left to keep it,
plundering all, and amongst the rest, Tossans goods and Library, raging
extremely that they had missed their prey which they most sought after: This
Noblemans house that carried them with him was near to Arg^mont: but Tossan
apprehending himself not safe ^here, he with his wife, and children removed to
an other place where he was acquainted, and presently after the Duchess of
Ferrara sent for him and his family, his wife being again great with child,
and hid them in a Turret in her Castle, and sustained and fed them there: and
when the rage of the Papists was somewhat abated, he with his wife and children
traveled through many dangers into Germany, and being sent for by that pious
Prince Frederick the third Elector Palatine, he went with his family to
Heidleberg where he found so much love, and bounty from the Prince and his
Courtyers, and the Academicks, that he almost forgot his former miseries: but
the world being unworty of such a Prince, it pleased God to take him away Anno
Christi 1576. four years after Tossan came thither: and his Son Lodwick
succeeding him, Tossan amongst others was dismissed: But Prince Cassimire, [
Lodwicks Brother] called him to Neostade, and placed him over the Churches
there: and after Vrsins death, he made him Professor in that University: he was
also over the Church of strangers, and Preached to them in the French Tongue,
till they had chosen themselves a Pastor: he (...) Moderator in a Synod at
Neostade: Shortly after L^dwicke the Elector Palatine dying, Cassimire was made
Guardian to his Son, during his minority, whereupon he sent for Tossan to
Heidleberg that by his advice, and counsel he might reform the Churches; but
when he came thither, his adversaries loured exceedingly upon him, and raised
many false reports, but he remembered that of Seneca, vir bonus, q^^d honest se
facturum putaverit, faciet, etiam si peric^losum sit: ab honesto nulla e
deterrebitur: ad turpia, nullam spe invitabitur. An honest man will do that
which he judges right, though it be dangerous: he will be deterred from that
which is honest by no means; he will be allured to that which is dishonest by
no means: His adversaries in their Pulpits daily cried out of strange Heresies
that he and his party held: but Prince Cassimi^e first sent for them to argue
the case before him, and then appoin^ed ^ Public disput^^ion, wherein they
could prove none of those things which they charged them with; whereupon the
Prince required them to abstain from such accusations for the tim^ to come, and
to study peace: but nothing would prevail ^o ^llay their spleen^ ^ill they
were removed into other Countries^ The care of choosing Pastor^ to the
Churches, Tutors to the young Prince, Schoolmasters and Professors to the
Universi^y, was devolved upon Tossan; all which he discharged with much
fidelity: There also he commenced Doctor in Divinity; But as his cares and
p^ins incre^sed, so hi^ sorrow ^lso, partly by reason of ^n unh^ppy qu^rrell
that fell out between the Students and Citizen^ of Heidleberge, p^rtly by the
death of hi^ dear wife with whom he lived twenty two years in wedlock.

In the year 1588. he married ^gaine, and disposed of his daughter^ also in
marryage to godly and learned men: Not long after Prince Cas^^mire dyed, which
much turned his grief: but Frederick the fourth, being now come to hi^ age,
was admitted into the number of the Electors, and was very careful of the
good, both of the Chu^^^ and University. An. Christi 1594. Tossan was choosen
Rector of the University of Heidleberg, and the year after there brake out a
grievous Pestilence in that City, which drove away the students: but Tossan
remained Preaching comfortably to his people, and expounding the Penitential
Psalms to those few students that yet remained: Anno Christi 1601. he b^ing
grown very old and infirm, laid down his Professors place, though the
University, much opposed it, and earnestly solicited him to retain it still,
b^^ God purposed to give him a better rest after all his labors, and ^orrowes:
for having in his Lectures expounded the book of Job to the end of the 31.
Chapter, he concluded with those words: The words of Job are ended; Presently
after falling sick, he comforted himself with these texts of Scripture, I have
fought the good fight of Faith etc. Be thou faithful unto the death, and I
will give thee the Crown of life: We have a City not made with hands, eternal
in the heavens, and many other such like; he also made his W^ll, and set down
therein a good confession of his Faith, and so departed quietly in the Lord
Anno Christi 1602. and of his age sixty one. He was a very holy man, exemplary
in his life, had an excellent wit^ strong memory: eloquent ^n speech, was very
charitable, and chea^full in his conversation, and kept correspondence with all
the choycest D^^vines in those times.

Germane Tossanus does deserve likewise,
That we his honored name should memorize;
Who notwithstand all th'afflictions great
Which furious faithless Popish Foes did threat,
And prosecute him with, from place to place,
And him, and his dear wife with terrors chase:
In danger often of death, yet mightily
The Lord preserved them from Romes cruelty.
He was a learned and laborious Preacher,
And always against Romes errors, a Truth teacher^
Eloquent, witty, holy, humble, wise,
And now his soul blessed Heaven ^eate^^es.
^
The Life and Death of William Perkins.
IF the Mountain^ of ^ilboah^ 2 Samu^l 1. were cond^mned and cursed by King
David, that n^ dew nor r^in should fall upon them, because valiant Saul, and
piou^ Jonathan, were there unhappily slain; then by rules of opposition, such
places deserve to be praised and blessed where godly men have had their happy
Nativity. Amongst which let M^rston in Warwickeshire com in for his just share
of commendation, where Master William Perki^s was born, and br^d in his infancy.

2. How he passed his childhood, is ^ matt^r before da^^d in the Register of my
Intilligence, whereof I can receiv^ no instructions. Only I dare be bold to
conclude, that with Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 13. 11. When he was a child, he spoke
(...) a child he understood as a child, he thought as a child; whose
infancy, as he with simplicity, so we pass it over with silence.

3. But no sooner (...) he admitted (...) Christ's College in Cambridge, but
qui^^ly the wild fir^ of his youth began to break out. An age which one may
term^ ^he Midsommer Moon and dog-dayes of man's life: It is not certain
whether his own disposition, or the bad company of others chiefly betrayed him
to these extravagancies. Sure it is he took such wild lib^^^^es to himself
(...) cost him many a sigh in his reduced ^ge^ Probably (...) Providence
permitted him to ru^ himself with the prodigal Son out of breath, that so he
might be the better enabled experimentally to repr^^^ others of their vanity,
(...) simpathizing with their sad condition, and be the (...) skilled how to
comfort and counsel them on their ^^pentance. Why should God^ arm, which
afterward gr^^^ously overtook Master Perkins, be too short to reach others in
the same condition.

4. When fir^^ (...) much ^ddicted to the study of natural Magic, digging so
deep, in natures mine, to know the hidden causes and sacred quallities of
things, that some conceive, that he bordered on Hell it ^^^fe in his curiosity.
Beginning to be a practitioner in that black Art, the blackness did not
affright him but name of Art lured him to admit himself as ^^^dent thereof.
Howeve^ herein we afford no certain belief, the rather because other men's
ignorance might cast this aspersion upon him: Who knows not that many things
as pretty as strang^ may really be effected by a skillful hand, lawful and
laudable means? which some out of a charitable error will interpret a
Miracle, and others out of uncharitable ignorance will nickname Sorcery. A very
Lodestone in some Scholars hand, before a silly Townsmans eye is enough to
make the former a Conjurer.

5. The happy hour was now come wherein the straggling sheep was brought home
to the fold, and his vanity and mildness corrected into temperance and
gravity. It is certainly known and believed, that if Quicksilver could be
fired (which all confess difficult, and most conclude impossible) it would
amount to an infinite treasure; so when the roving parts, the giddy and
unstable conceits of this young Scholar began to be settled, his extravagant
studyes to be confined and centered to Divinity, in a very short time he
arrived at an incredable improvement.

6. He began first to preach to the prisoners in Cambridge Castle, being then
himself Fellow of Christ College. Here he truly preached Christ's precepts:
Freely you have received, freely give: And with Saint Paul made the Gospel of
Christ of no expense; yea he followed Christ's example to preach deliverance to
the Captives, whose bodies were in a prison and souls in a dungeon: such
generally their ignorant and desperate condition. Here (though free himself)
he begot sons to God in fetters: Many an Onesimus in bonds was converted to
Christ: Mock not at this good man's mean employment, neither term him with
such as sit in the seat of the scornful, the Goale-birds Chaplain: But know
nothing is base which in it self is lawful, and done in order to the glory of
God, yea better it is to be a true preacher in a prison then a flatterer in a
Princes palace.

7. But so great a star could not move always in so small a sphere: His merits
promoted him to a Cangregation of greater credit in the Town of Cambridge,
where he was most constant in preaching. Wherein as no man did with more
vehemence remove sin, so none either with more passionate affection bemone the
condition of obstinate siners, or with sounder judgment, give them directions
for their future amendment: Luther did observe that Thunder without rain does
more harm then good, whereof he maks this application, that Ministers who are
always threatening of legal terrors to offenders, except also they seasonably
drop the dew of direction; giving them orders and instructions to better their
estates, are no^ wise Master builders, but pluck down and build nothing up
again. Whereas Master Perkins so cunningly interweaved terrors and counsels
in his Sermons, that as a changable taffaty, where the wooffe and the warpe are
of several colors, appear now of one color, now of another, according to
the different standing of the beholders; so one and the same Sermon of hi^,
seemed all Law, and all Gospel, all cordials and all corrasivts, as the
different necissities of people apprehended it.

8. Amongst those his many virtues worthy our imitation, his humility was
eminent, in condescending to the capacity of his meanest Auditors: He had well
read Saint Paul, who calls the people understanding him, mine understanding;
in which sense he may be said to be the most intelligent Preacher, who preaches
plainest to others apprehention: And Ministers being turned Gods interpreters,
it is ill when their langvage is so high and hard, that these Interpreters need
others to interpret them to their Congregations. But this may be said of Master
Perkins, that as Physicians order Infusions to be made, by steeping ingredients
in them, and taking them out again, so that all their strength and virtue
remains, yet none of the Bulk or Mass is visible therein; he in like manner
did distill, and soake much deep Scholarship into his Preaching, yet so
insensibly as nothing but familiar expressions did appe^r^. In a word, his
Church consisting of the University and Town, the Scholar could hear no
learneder, the Townsmen plainer Sermons.

9. He used always before his Sermons, (as to this day is attested by many
surviving witnesses) a set form of prayer, not that out of poverty he wanted
variety and exchange of phrase^, or that out of niggarliness he begrudged his
Auditors the use of them, but out of holy and heavenly Thri^t, he found this
the most profitable way for his people. He would not that his soul should go
to Heaven alone, but in his prayers would have the company of the meanest of
his Congregation along with him, and therefore always used the same form that
others might keep pace with him in his devotions.

10. Commendable was his contentment with his Estate, considering his income so
small, his charge of children so great, and his Professors of removal, so
many, so advantageous. Yet he still was true to his first love, continuing his
pains in the Church of Saint Andrews, where ^he means inconsiderable in it
self, was made up to a competency, not so much by the bountiful hands of
others in giving, as by the moderate mind of Master Perkins in takeing^ yet
wanted he not several Patrons about the Town, who relieved him in a fair
proportion; amongst whom Master Wendey of Haslingfield must stand in the chief
place. Now if honorable mention be made in Scripture of Iohanna, Susanna, and
other benefactors to our Savior, who Ministered unto him of their substance;
let not this worthy Esquires memory be forgotten, with his singular Courtesy to
this painful Minister of Gods word.

11. Many and most excellent are the books which Master Perkins left behind
him. His learning appears most in his Problemes, a difficult task no less
valiantly performed than venturously undertaken to assert the truth of the
Protestant Religion, by the testimony of the Fathers for the first five hundred
years: Which shows that his industry did not only drive a retale trade in
modern Writers, but that he fetched his learning, and bought his wares from
the best hands of the most ancient Authors.

12. Herein excellent his judgment, in fanning the Chafe from the Corn, the
true from the forged writings of the Fathers. The ancient Germans are said to
cas^ their new born children into the river of Rhine, thereby to make an
experiment whether they be true born or no, accounting them legitimate if
swimming, but concluding themselves wronged by their wives dishonesty obtruding
a bastard issue upon them, if the infant sunk in the water. Perkings had
neater, and more infallible touchstones to discern the native and genuine,
from the spurious and adulterate works of the Fathers by the manner of their
style, strength of their matter, time of their writing, censure of other
learned men upon them, whereby many counterfeit Books are not only denied
authenticke authority, but also justly pillored for cheaters to all posterity.
I know it is laid to Perkins his charg^ (learned Whitaker is accu^ed) for the
same fault) that he made all the Fathers Puritans: but certainly in one sense
they were Puritans of themselves without his making, I mean strict in their
lives and conversations, and how far he was from wresting their doctrines to
the Countenancing of any error, be it reported to men of unprejudiced judgment.

13. In case Divinity, he had an excellent dexterity to State controversies,
for the satisfaction of tender and douting consciences: to show what is lawful
and what unlawful; in mixed actions, where good and bad are blinded together
(wherewith many are deceived, like children swallowing the bones with the flesh
to their great danger of choking, great was the fan and fire of his discretion
and judgment, to winnow the chafe from the corn, and separate the one from
the other. And sure in this case Divinity Protestant^ are now defective; for
(save that a smith or two of late have built them forges and set up shop) we
for the most part go down to our adversaries to sharpen our instruments, and
are beholden to the Romanists, (the more our sham and their credit) both for
offensive and defensive weapons i^ this kind. Some object that his doctrine
referring all to an absolute Decree, cut off the sinnewes of men's endeavors
toward salvation. But were this the hardest objection against Master Perkins
his doctrine, his own life was a sufficient answer thereunto: So pious, so
spotless that malice was afraid to bite at his credit, into whch she knew her
teeth would never enter. He lived Sermons, and as his Preaching was a comment
on his Text, so his Practice was a comment on his Preaching.

14. As for his Books, it is a miracle almost to conceive how thick they lie,
and yet how far they overspread, all over Christendom. When the Disciples
were inspired with several languages, Acts 2.7. the strangers of Jerusalem,
were amazed and mervelled, saying one to another; Behold, are not all these
that speak Galileans? And how hear we every man in our tongue wherein we were
born? Here I confess was no inspiration, but much industry, much labor taken
by others, much honor done to Master Perkins: when the Dutch, Spaniards,
French, and Italians, stand wondering at his Works (who understood none of
these tongues) exactly speak them all, being by several pens translated into
all these languages. Thus good Ware never lies long on the Merchants hands,
but is ready money into what Country so ever it be brought.

15. Thus for some years, he constantly Preached to his people even to and
above his strength: It is observed of the bird^ of Norway that they having in
winter very short days, fly faster then any foul in other Countries, as if
principled by the instinct of nature thriftily to improve the little light
allowed them, and by the swiftness of their wings to regaine the shortness of
the time: So this good man, as if presaging that his life was likly to be very
short (dying at the forty fourth year of his age) husbanded it with double
diligence to Gods glory, and by his industry gained in thickness, what he
wanted in length.

16. When Ahab dyed, the Ep^^affe as I may say was written on his grave, That
he built an Ivory House. A great honor indeed to have a milke-white Palace
and a black soul within it. But of gracious Josiah it is said, 2. Chron. 35.
26. Now the rest of the acts of Josiah and his goodness, and his deeds first
and last. This indeed was worth remembering: I can tell the Reader of no Ivory
house, no beautiful building, no stately structures this Master Perkines
erected, but as for his goodness with Josiah, very much may be spoken thereof:
For he did not only, as Scripture praise is, Serve his Generation; that is,
discharge himself with credit in all reference to those persons, to whom he
stood related in that Age he lived in; but also he has provided in his Works
a Magazine of Learning and Religion for all Generations to come. So that the
Levites, which as yet lurkes in the loins of Abraham their great Grandfather
(infants as yet concealed in their causes) have just reason always to b^
thankful to God for the benefit they receive from thos^ Monuments he has left
behind him.

His Stature was indifferent, complexion ruddy, hair bright, body inclined to
corpulency, which proceeded not from any laziness, but pulse and pains shall
make one fat where God gives the blessing. He was lame of his right hand, like
another Ehud, Iud. 3.15. yet made the instrument to dispatch many Eglon errors
in judgment and vice in conversation. And nature commonly compensates
corporal defects with a surplusage of the Soul. As for such as make bodily
marks in men, the brands of disgrace upon them; we will send them to halting,
but true heart^^ Jacob; bleare-eyed, but faithful Leah; stammering, but meek
Moses; lame, but loyal Mephibosheth, with other Saints in the Scripture; so to
have their erroneous judgments rectified into a more charible opinion.

He was much afflicted with the Stone, the attendant of a sedentary life,
whereby his patience was much exercised. This brought him at last to his long
home, so called Eccles. 12.5. not because man is long going thither, but long,
yea for ever staying there. When he quietly surrendered his soul into the hands
of his Creator, dying rich only in Grace, the love of God and good men. It was
true of him what Saint Paul said, 2 Cor. 6.10. being poor, but making many
rich. Even in a litterall sense, the Sellers of his Books gained, but small
profit came to the Author. He was buried in a decent manner, where all the
spectators were Mourners, veris and spirantibus lachrymis. Doctor Mou^tague,
afterward Bishop of Wincher, Preached his Funeral Sermon, taking for his
Text, Moses my servant is dead, Josh. 1.2. and has no other Monument then his
own virtues; except any will say that the plain Stones which cover his Grave
are made Marble by the worth of the Corpse beneath them. A Wife and many
Children he left behind him; she married successively two other Husbands, but
no more Mr. Perkinses.

If any charitable disposed Person has been blessed by God with a Cup which
overfloweth, and if he desires that some drops of the same should fall upon
them, who are the proper objects of bounty; I doubt not but an easy inquiring
he may quickly find out some of this worthy man's Children, as not so poor
openly to request, so not so proud but they would thankfully receive such
expressions of his Charity. Yea, what Saint Paul said of the Jews, may truly
be applied to the good man's memory, We are debtors unto, etc. So that what is
bestowed in this kind on his, is not so much a gift, as a paying an
obligation.

He was borne the first and dyed the last year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth;
so that his life ran parallel with her reign, streaming in equal length, and
had both their fountains and falls together. He dyed Anno Dom. 1602.

1 A foundation of Christian Religion. 2 His Golden ^haine, or description of
Divinity. 3 An Exposition of the Apostles Creed. 4 An Exposition of the Lords
Prayer. 5 A Declaration of the state of Grace and Condemnation. 6 Cases of
Conscience. 7. A discourse of the Tongue, done in Latin by Thomas Drax 8 Of
the nature and practice of Repentance. 9 Of the means to dye well, in all
states and ^imes. 10 Of the combat of the flesh and spirit into Latin by
Drax. 11 Of the course to live well. 12 A Treatise of Conscience. 13 The
Reformed Catholic. 14 Of the ^rue means to know Christ crucified, and the
Gra^ne of Mustard Seed into Latin, by Thomas Draxe. 15 Of true Wealth. 16 Of
the Idolatry of the last times. 17 Of Gods free grace, and of free will in Men.
18 Of men's callings. 19 Of Predestination in Latin by the Author. 20 His Bible
harmony. 21 A Dialogue of the worlds dissolution.

These that follow, were set forth after the Authors death.

1 Three books of the cases of Conscience, translated into Latin by Thomas
Draxe and Meyer. 2 Commentaries on the five first Chapters on the Galathians. 3
Of Christian Equity by Carshaw. 4 Of Man's Imagination, set forth by Thomas
Peirson. 5 Problemes against Coxe, in Latin by himself, set forth by Samuel
Ward. 6 The key of Prophecy, set forth by Thomas Tuke. 7 Commentaries upon the
fifth, sixth, and seventh chapters of Matthew set forth by Thomas Peirson, 8
Commentaries on the three first chapters of the Apocalypse, by Robert Hill, and
Thomas Peirson. 9 Of the tentation of Christ, from the first verse to the 12.
of the fourth chapter of Matthew. 10 An exhortation to Repentance. 11 Two
excellent Treatises of Ministers calling, set out by Master Crashaw. 12 A
Commentary on Judes Epistle, by Thomas Pickering. 13 Of poisoning a Treatise.
14 Against Prognostics: An Answer to a Country fellow. 15 Of the household
Discipline in Latin, by the Author, now Englished.

Of all the Worthies in this learned role,
Our English Perkins may, without control,
Challenge a crown of Bays to deck his head,
And second unto none be numbered,
For's learning, wit and worthy parts divine,
Wherein his Fame resplendantly did shine
Abroad and eke at home; for's Preaching rare
And learned writings, almost past compare;
Which were so high esteemed, that some of them
Translated were (as a most precious jem)
Into the Latin, French, Dutch, Spanish tongue,
And rarely valued both of old and young.
And (which was very rare) Them all did write
With his left hand his right being useless quite;
Borne in the first, dying in the last year
Of Queen Eliza, a Princess without peer.
Place here Bishop Androwes his Life, marked with this Signiture * * *. having
no Folioes.

The Life and Death of the late reverend and worthy Prelate, LANCELOT ANDREWS,
late Bishop of WINCHESTER.
THis grave and honorable Prelate, was borne in the City of London, in the
Parish of All Saints Barking, of honest and Religious Parents; his Father
(having most part of his life used the Seas) in his latter time, became one of
the society, and Master of the Holy Trini^y, commonly called the Trinity house:
and was descended from the ancient family of the Andrews in Suffolk.

From his tender years, he was totally addicted to the study of good letters;
and in his youth, there appeared in him such aptness to learn, answerable to
his endeavors that his two first Schoolmasters, Master Ward, and Master
Mulcaster, (conceiving, or foreseeing, that he would prove a rare scholar)
contended, who should have the honor of his breeding. From Master Ward, Master
of the Coopers Free-Schoole in Radcliffe, he was sent to Master Mulcaster,
Master of the Mercantaylors free school, in London: where he answered the
former opinion, conceived of him; for by his extraordinary industry, and
admirable capacity, he soon outstript all the scholars under Master Mulcasters
tuition, being become an excellent Grecian, and Hebrecian: Insomuch as Thomas
Wattes Doctor of Divinity, Prebend and Residentiary of Saint Paul's, and
Archdeacon of Middle-sex (who had newly Founded some Scholerships in Pembrook
Hall, in Cambridge) sent him thither, and bestowed the first of his said
Scholarships upon his; which places a^e (sinc^) commonly called the Greek
Scholarships.

As soon as he was a Bachelour of Ar^s, and so capable of a fellowship, there
being then but one place void in the said College, and Thomas Dove (late Lord
Bishop of Peterburgh) being then a scholar also in the said College, and very
well approved of, by many of the Society. The Masters, and Fellows put these
two young men to a Trial before them, by some Scholasticall exercises: upon
performance whereof, they preferred Sir Andrews, and chose him into the
fellowship, then void, though they liked Sir Dove so well also, that (being
loath to loose him) they made him some allowance for his present maintenance,
under the title, of a Tanquam Socius.

In the mean while, Hugh Price (having built Jesus College in Oxford) had
heard so much of this young man (Sir Andrews) that without his privity, he
named him in hi^ foundation of that College, to be one of his first Fellows
there.

His Custom was (after he had been three years in the University) to come up
to London once a year to visit his Parents, and that, ever about a fortnight
before Easter, staying till a fortnight after: and against the time he should
com^ up, h^s Father (directed by letters from his Son, before he came) prepared
one, that should read to him, and be his guide, in the attaining of some
Language or Art, which he had not attained before: So, that within few years,
he had laid the foundations of all Arts, and Sciences, and had gotten skill in
most of the Modern Languages: And it is to be observed, that in his journeys
betwixt London and Cambridge (to and fro) he ever used to walk on foot, till
he was a Ba^chelour of Divinity; and professed, that he would not then have
ridden on horseback, but that diverse friends began to find fault with him
and misinterpret him, as if he had forborne riding, only to save charges.

What he did, when he was a Child, and a schoole-boy, is not now known; But he
has been sometimes heard to say, that when he was a young scholar in the
Universi^y (and so all his time onward, he never loved or used any games, or
ordinary recreations, either within doors (as Cards, Dice, Tables, Chesse, or
the like;) or abroad, as Buts, Coyts, Bowls, or any such: but his ordinary
exercise and recreation, was walking either alone by himself, or with some
other selected Companion, with whom he might confer and argue, and recount
their studies: and he would often profess, that to observe the grass, herbs,
corn, trees, cattle, earth, waters, heavens, any of the Creatures, and to
contemplate their Natures, orders, qualities, virtues, uses, etc. was ever to
him, the greatest mirth, content, and recreation that could be: and this he
held to his dying day. After he had been some while a Master of Arts in the
University, he applied himself to the study of Divinity, wherein he so
profited, that his fame began to be spread far and near. Insomuch as being
chosen Catechist in the Colledg^, and purposing to read the ten Commandments
(every Saturday, and Sunday at three of clock afternoon, which was the hour
of Catechizing) not only out of other Colleges in the University, but diverse
also out of the Country, did duly resort unto the College Chapel, as a
public Divinity Lecture.

Before I proceed to his life (after he left the University) give me leave to
relate a story of him, while he yet remained there, and that (as near as I can)
from his own mouth, and in his own words.

Upon his first showing himself at Cambridge, in his Divinity studies,
especial notice was soon taken of him (among his abilities and eminencies) as
a man deeply seen in all cases of Conscience, and he was much sought to in
that respect.

To proceed, with his own particular: His worth made him so famous, that Henry
Early of Huntingdon (hearing of it) sent for him, and thought himself much
honored by his accompanying him into the North, whereof he was President; and
wh^re God so blessed his painful Preachings and moderate private conference,
that he converted Recusants (Priests and others) to the Protestant Religion.
Sir Francis Walsingham (Secretary of State to Queen Elizabeth) took also
especial notice of his abilities, and highly affected him, and (being loath
that he should not be better known to the world) wrought means to make him
Vicar of Saint Giles without Criplegate London; then Prebend and Residentiary
of Saint Paul's; and afterward Prebend of the Collegiate Church of Southwell.

Being thus preferred (to his own contentment) he lived not idly, but
continued a painful labourer in the Lord vineyard, witness Saint Giles
Pulpit and that in Saint Paul's Church, where he read the Lecture thrice a week
in the Term time. And indeed what by his often Preaching at St. Giles, and his
no less often reading in St. Pa^ls, he became so infirm, that his friends
despaired of his life. Upon the death of Doctor Fulke, he was elected to the
Mastership of Pembrooke Hall (whereof he had been a Scholar and Fellow) a
place of credit, but of little benefit; for he ever spent more upon it then he
received by it.

Afterward he was made Chaplain in ordinary attendance (of which kind there
were then but twelve) to Queen Elizabeth; who took such delight in his
Preaching and grave deportment, that first she bestowed a Prebend at
Westminster upon him, and (not long after) the Deanery of that place: and what
she intended further to him, her death prevented.

He soon grew into far greater esteem with her successor the most learned King
James, who (to say but truth) admired him beyond all other Divines, not only
for his transcendant gift in Preaching, but for the excellency and sollidity in
all kind of Learning; selecting him, at his choysest piece, to vindicate his
Regality against his foule-mouthed adversaries. His Majesty (not long after his
happy entrance to this Crown) bestowed upon him the Bishopric of Chichester
(which he held about four years) and withal made him Lord Almoner: and
(because of the exility of that Bishopric) soon after added the Parsonage of
Cheyham in Surrey, to his commendam.

Upon the vacancy of the Bishopric of Ely, his Majesty made him Bishop
thereof; and there he sat about nine years. In which time he was made a Privy
Councellor, first of England and then of Scotland, in his attendance of the
King thither. He was afterward preferred to the Bishopric of Winchester and
the Deanery of the Kings Chapel, which two last preferments he held to his
death, which happened about eight years after, in the third year of the reign
of our late King Charlse; with whom he held no less reputation then he had
done with his Father before him.

It is worth the observation, that having bin preferred to many, and those no
small dignities, yet he never used any means to obtain the least of them, but
they were all conferd upon him without the least suit on his part: For he was
so far from ambition or covetousness, as that when the Bishoprics of
Salisbury and Ely were at several times tendered unto him upon some
propositions, prejudicial to the state of those Churches, he utterly refused
them.

The virtues and good parts o^ this honorable Prelate were so many, and those
so transcendent, that to do him right, a large volumn would be but sufficient,
which I shall leave to some of better abilities to perform, which I shall (by
way of an Epitome) only point a finger at, in these heads which follow.

His first and principal virtue, was his singular zeal and piety, which
showed it self not only in his private and secret Devotions between God and
himself (in which, they that were about him, well perceived, that he daily
spent many hours, yea, and the greatest part of his life, in holy prayers and
abundant tears, the signs whereof they often discovered) but also in his
exemplary public prayers with his Family in his Chapel; wherein he behaved
himself so humbly, devoutly and reverently, that it could not but move others
to follow his example. His Chapel (in which he had Monthly Communions) was so
decently and reverently adorned, and God served there with so holy and reverend
behavior of himself and his Family (by his pat^erne) that the souls of many
(that ( obiter) came thither in time of Divine Service) were very much
elevated, and they stirred up to the like reverend deportment; yea, some that
had bin there, were so taken with it, that they desired to end their days in
the Bishop of Elyes Ch^ppell.

The next is his Charity and compassion, which he practiced even before he came
to great preferments: for while he was yet in private estate, he extended his
Charity in liberal manner, to the relief of poor Parishioners, prisons and
prisoners; besides his constant Sundays Alms at his Parish of Saint Giles.
But when his Means became greater, his Charity increased to a large
proportion; releasing many prisoners of all sorts, that were detained either
for petty Debts or keepers fees. And one thing in his Charity is remarkable;
that whereas he sent much money at several times to the relief of poor
Parishes, Prisons, Prisoners and the like, he gave strict charge to his
servants whom he entrusted therewith, that they should not acknowledge whence
this relief came; but directed that the acquittances, which they (to make the
discharge of their trust appear to him) desired from them that received such
relief, should be taken in the name of a Benefactor unknown. Other large sums
he bestowed yearly (and oftener) in clothing the poor and naked, in relieving
the sick and needy, in succouring Families in time of infection (besides his
Alms to poor housekeepers at his gate:) insomuch, that his private Alms in
his last six years (besides those public) amounted to the sum of 1300 l. and
upwards. Lastly, though it might well have been supposed (by that which is
said already) that he had bin in his life time his own Almoner, yet as he lived
a pattern of compassion and work of mercy so he dyed also; for it appears by
his Will, that his chief care was, to provide that his pious works should
never have end, leaving 4000 l. to purchase 200 l. Land per annum for ever, to
be distributed by 50 l. quarterly, thus; To aged poor men and decayed (with an
especial eye to Sea faring men, wherein he reflected upon his Fathers
Profession) 50 l. To poor Widows, the wives of one Husband fifty pounds. To
the binding of poor Orphans Apprentices fifty pounds. And to the relief of
poor Prisoners fi^ty pounds. Besides (among other, too many to be comprehended
in an Epitome) he left, to be distributed presently after his decease, among
Mayd-servants of honest report, and who had served one M^ster or Mistress seven
years, the sum of two hundred pounds. Lastly, a great part of his Estate (which
remained after his Funeral and Legacies discharged) he left to be distributed
among his poor Servants.

The third is his fidelity and integrity; faithful, upright and just he ever
was, whether you respect him in his ordinary transactions, in which no man
could ever justly tax him with the least aspersion of injustice; or whether
you look upon him as entrusted with those great Offices and Places which he
did undergo; and they were either his Spiritual preferments or Temporal
Office, besides some other matters committed to his fidelity. In the first of
which he declared evidently to the world, that he reputed himself but Gods
Steward, and that he must give an account to his Lord and Master for them. To
begin then with the lowest account: He was ever faithful, provident and
careful to keep in good repair the Houses of all his Spiritual preferments,
and spent much money that way; as upon the Vicarage house of Saint Giles, the
Prebends and Deanes houses of Westminster, and the Residentiaries house of
Saint Paul's. Upon the House belonging to the Bishopric of Chichester, he
expended above 420 l. Of Elye above 2440 l. Of Winchesters (besides a Pention
of 400 l. per annum, from which he freed his See at his own charge) he spent
two thousand pounds.

But in that part of the Account which concerned him more nearly to perfect,
which was his Pastoral and Episcopal charge, the cure of Souls, and the well
ordering of the several Diocese committed to his trust, never any made a more
just and exact account.

Some particulars of this account was, the promoting of sufficient, able and
good men to Livings and preferments which fell within his own gift. To the
better discharge of this part of the account he took order still before hand,
by continual search and enquiry, to know what hopeful young men were in the
University: his Chapleins and friends receiving a charge from him, to certify
him, what hopeful and towardly young wit they met with at any time: and these
(till he could better provide for them) were sure to taste of his bounty and
goodness, for their better encouragement.

Diverse eminent men in Learning that wanted preferment, when any thing fell in
his gift convenient for them (though otherwise they had no dependence at all
upon him, nor interest in him) he would send for, before they knew why, and
entertain them in his own house^ and confer the preferment upon them, and
also defray the very charges incident for a dispensation or a faculty, yea, of
their very journey; and all this, that he might have his Diocese in general,
and his preferments in particular, the better fitted: So that, that may fitly
be applied to him, which was sometimes to Saint Chrysostom. In administratione
Epatus, prebuit se fidelem, constantem, and Vigilantem Ministerum Christi.

And if you look upon him in those Temporales wherewith he was entrusted, you
shall find him no less faithful and just: As first, diverse sums (and many
of them of good value) were sent to him, to be distributed among poor
scholars, and others, at his discretion: all which he disposed with great care
and fidelity, even according to the Donors minds and entents.

For his faithfulness in managing those places, wherein he was entrusted for
others, jointly with himself, let Pembrooke H^ll and Westminster College
speak for him; for when he became Master of the first, he found it in debt,
being of a very small endowment, (then espcially) but by his faithful
providence, he left above eleven hundred pounds in the Treasury of that
College, toward the bettering of the estate thereof. And when he was made
Deane of the other, it is not unknown to some yet living (who will testfie)
that he left it for all orders, as well of the Church as of the College and
School, a place then truly exemplarily Collegiate in all respects, both within
and without, free from debts and arrerages, from encrochments and evil
Customs; the Schoole-boyes (in the four years he stayed there) being much
improved, not by his care and oversight only, but by his own personal, and
often labors also with them.

To these may be added, that whereas by virtue of his Deanery of Westminster,
his Mastership a^ Pembrooke Hall, and his Bishopric of Ely, the elction of
Scholars into the School of Westminster, and from thence to the two
Universities, as also of many Scholars and fellows in Pembrook Hall; some in
Saint Peter's College, and some in Jesus College, were in his power and
disposal, he was ever so faith^full and just, that he waved all Letters from
great Personages, for unsufficient Scholars, and cast aside all favor and
affection, and chose only such as in his judgment were fittest. And lastly
(which is not the least in this kind) being many times desired to assist at the
election of Scholars, from the free Schools of the Merchantaylors, and from
that at Saint Paul's, of the Mercers, and perceiving favor and affection, and
other by respects, sometimes to oversway merit, with those to whom the choice
belonged, and that diverse good Scholars were omitted, and others of less
desert preferred, he of his own goodness, diverse times took care for such
as were so neglected, and sent them to the University; where he bestowed
pro^^ment upon them.

To conclude this account of his, take a view of his fidelity, in that great
place of trust, the Almo^orship; which was sufficiently evident (especially to
those who attended him nearly.) First, in that he would never suffer one penny
of that which accrewed to him by that place, to be put or mingled with any of
his own Rents or Revenewes (and wherein he kept a more exact account then of
his own private Estate:) and secondly, being so separated, he was as fai^hfull
in the disposing of it: not only in the general trust of his Sovereign, in
the daily charges incident to that place, expended by the Sub-Almoner and other
yearly ordinary charges; but when he perceived that he had a surplussage (those
charges defrayed) he would not suffer it to lie by him; but some of it he
disposed to the relief of poor Housekeepers, some in releasing of poor
Prisoners, and comforting them which lay in misery and iron; and some in
furnishing poor people with Gowns, hose, shoes and the like; for all which,
many (so bestowed by him) had he reserved to his own use (his Patent being
sine computo) no man could have questioned him: But he was a faithful Steward
in this, as in the rest, and expected that joyful Euge, Well done thou good
and faithful servant, thou have bin faithful, etc. enter thou into the joy of
thy Lord; which (no doubt but he possesses.

The next is, his Gratitude or thankfulness to all, from whom he had received
any benefit. Of this virtue of his there are and were lately diverse witnesses;
as Doctor Ward Son to his first Schoolmaster, upon whom he bestowed the Living
of Waltham in Hampshire; and Master Mulcaster, his other Schoolmaster, whom he
ever reverently respected during his life, in all companies, and placed him
ever at the upper end of his Table; and after his death, caused his Picture
(having but few other in his House) to be set over hi^ Study door. And not
only showed he this outward thankfulness to him, but supplied his wants many
times also, priva^^ly, in a liberal and plentiful manner; and at his own
death (the Father being dead) he bequeathed a Legacy to his Son of good valune,
who as is said before, bestowed a full Scholarship on him in Pembrooke Hall.
Concerning the kindred of Doctor Watts, after much enquiry, he found only one,
upon whom (being a Scholar) he bestowed pr^ferments in Pembrooke Hall; and (he
dying there) hi^ Lordship much grieved, that he could hear of no more of that
kindred, to whom he might express his further thankfulness. And yet he forgot
not his Patron Doctor Watts, at his end; for by his Will he took order, that
out of the Scholarships of that Foundation, the two Fellowships which he
himself Founded (as you shall see by and by) in Pembrooke Hall, should be
supplied, if they should be found fit for them.

Lastly, to Pembrooke Hall (omitting the Legacies by him bequeathed to the
Parishes of Saint Giles, Saint Martin Ludgate, where he had dwelt; Saint
Andrews in Holborne, Saint Saviors in Southwarke, All^ Saints Barking, where
he was borne, and others) to that College, I say (where he had been a
Scholar, Fellow and Master) he gave one thousand pounds to purchase Land for
t^o Fellowships, and for other uses in that College, expressed in his Will;
besides three hundred such Folio Books of his own, to the increase of that
College Library, as were not there before. Together with a guilt Cut and a
Basin and Ewer, in all points (as weight, fashion, inscription, etc.) so like
to the Cup, Basin and Ewer given about 300. years since to that College, by
the religious Foundresse thereof, as that not Ovum Ovo ^imilius: and these, he
professed, he caused to be made and given, not for the continuance of his own
memory, but for fear that those which she had given so long since, might
miscarry, and so her remembrance might decay.

The fifth is, his Munificence and Bounty. To prove which little need be said
more, then that which has bin touched in his bountiful Charity. But besides
that, the two famous Universities, and they which then were poor Scholars in
them, will witness for him in this point; he never coming near either of them
(after he was Bishop) but that he sent to be distributed among poor Scholars,
sometimes one hundred po^nds, and ever fifty pounds at the least. One thing I
cannot pass over in silence; That when King James was pleased to grace the
University of Cambridge with his presence, in 1617. this reverend Father being
present also at the Philosophy Act, he sent (at his departure) to four of the
Disputants forty pieces of Gold, of two and twenty shillings a piece, to be
equally divided among them. Bu^ what speak I of these? Was ever Prince better
entertained, and in mo^e magnificent but orderly manner, then was hi^ said
Majesty at Farneham Castle (one of the Houses belonging to the Bishopric of
Winchester) where in the space o^ three days he spent three thousand pounds,
to the extraordinary contentment of his Majesty, and the admiration of all his
Followers.

The next is, his Hospitality: from the first time of his preferment (to means
of any considerable value) even to his dying day, he was ever Hospitable, and
free in entertainment to all people of quality and worthy of respect,
especially to Scholars and ^trangers; his Table being ever bountifully and
neatly f^rnished with provisions and attendants answerable; to whom he
committed the care of providing and expending in a plentiful yet orderly way:
himself seldom knowing what meat he had, till he came from his Study to
Dinner; at which he would show himself so noble in his entertainment, and so
gravely facecious, that his guests would often profess, they never came to any
man's Table, where they received better satisfaction in all points, and that his
Lordship kept Christmas all the year, in respect of the plenty they ever found
there. And yet (by the way) take this, that he ever strictly observed in his
provisions of diet, the time of Lent, Embers, and other Fasting days,
according to the Laws of this Kingdom, and the orders of the Church.

I shall not need to speak of the extraordinary great Hospitality he kept, and
the large expense he was at, in entertainment of all sorts of people in
Scotland, at what time he attended King James thither; the Nobility, Clergy,
Gentry, and others of both Nations there present, will (as they often already
have) speak of it for me, to his exceeding great honor. So that I know not,
whether I have fitly couched it under this Head of Hospitality, or whether it
had more properly belonged to that of his Munificence and Bounty.

The seventh, is his Humanity and affability, not only to the last mentioned
(his Guests) but to every one that did converse with him; for which, not only
diverse famous Scholars and others of this Kingdom, but others of Foreign
parts (as they had just cause) have admired him. As (not to mention Natives)
Master Causabow, Master Clu^vecius, Master Vossius, Master Grotius, Master
Moulm, Master Barclay, and (besides many other^) Master Erpenius, to whom he
tendered an Annual S^ipend, to have read and taught here the Oriental tongues
(wherein long before his death he himself had bin well versed, as may appear
by his Commencement Verses) the experienced Professors whereof he much
delighted in, and did much for them, as Master Bedwell (to whom he gave the
Vicarage of Tottenham in Midd.) if living (among others) would testify. And
the reason for this, a late reverend Father of this Church has given Omnes
quid in se amant, in aliis venerantur: loving and honoring those gifts in
others which he had in himself; for among the other parts of his profound
Learning, he by his industry, had attained to the knowledge of fifte^ne
tongues, if not more.

To these former, may be added his Modesty, which was ever such, that although
the whole Christian world took especial notice of his profound and deep
learning, yet was he so far from acknowledging it in himself, that he would
often complain of his defects, even to the extenuating, yea vilifying of his
own worth and abilities; professing many times, that he was but inutilis
servas, nay inutile pondus; insomuch, that being preferred by King James to the
Bishopric of Chic^ester, and pretending his own imperfections and
insufficiency to undergo such a charge, as also that he might have not only
his Clergy, but all others to take notice thereof, he caused to be engraven
about the Seal of his Bishopric, those words of Saint Paul, Et ad haec quis
idoneus? and who is sufficient for these things, 2 Cor. 2.16.

One note of his Modesty (mixed with his last virtue of Humanity) may be added,
that after his Chaplains had Preached in his Chapel before him, he would
sometime privately request them, that he might have a sight of their Notes,
with very good words and full of encouragement; insomuch, as they would
profess of him, that the would never desire a more candid Auditor. So that
what was said of Bid, may as fitly be said of him; A pietate modestia, and
^astitate, nomen Venerabilis adeptus est.

His Indefatigability in Study cannot be paralleld, if we consider him from his
Child hood to his old age. Never any man took such pains (or at least spent
so much time) in Study, as this reverend Prelate; for even in those days, when
it might have been supposed he would have taken some ease for his former
pains, then also from the hour he arose (his private Devotions finished) to
the time he was called to Dinner, which (by his own order) was not till twelve
at noone at the soonest, he kept close at his Book, and would not be
interrupted by any that came to speak with him, or upon any occasion (public
Prayer excepted:) Insomuch, that he would be so displeased with Scholars that
attempted to speak with him in a morning, that he would say, He doubted they
were no true Scholars, that came to speak with him before noon.

After Dinner, for two or three hours space, he would willingly pass the
time, either in discourse with his guests, or other friends, or in dispatch of
his own temporal affairs, or of those, who (by reason of his Episcopal
Jurisdiction) attended him: and being quit of these and the like occasions, he
would return to his Study, where he spent the rest of the afternoon, even
till Bedtime, except some friend took him off to Supper, and then did he eat
but sparingly.

Of the fruit of this his seed-time, the world (especially this Land) has
reaped a plentiful harvest, in his Sermons and writings: Never went any beyond
him in the first of these [his Preaching] wherein he had such a dexterty, that
some would say of him, that he was quick again, as soon as delivered: and in
this faculty he has left a pattern unimitable. So that he was truly styled
Stella perdicantium; and an Angel in the Pulpit. And his late Majesty took
especial care in causing that volume of his Sermons to be divulged (though but
a handful of those which he Preached) by enjoying whereof, this kingdom has
an inestimable treasure.

And for his acuteness and profundity in writing against the Adversary, he so
excelled all others of his time, that neither Bellarmine (champion to the the
Romanists) nor any other of them, was ever able to answer what he wrote: So,
that as his Sermons were unimitable, his writins were unanswerable.

To draw to an end of deciphering his virtues, and endowments: It may truly be
said of him, that he had those gifts and graces, both of Art and Nature, so
fixed in him, as that this age cannot parallel him; for his profundity, and
abisse of learning, was accompanied with wit, memory, judgment, Languages,
gravity and humility: insomuch that if he had bin Contemporary with the Ancient
Fathers of the Primitive Church, he would have bin (and that worthily) reputed,
not inferior to the chiefest among them.

He generally hated all vices, but three (which he ever repu^ed sins) were
most especially odious unto him. First, Usury, from which he was so far
himself, that when his friends had need of such money as he could spare, he
lent it to them freely, without expectance of ought back, but the Principal.
Secondly, The second was Simony which was so detestable to him, as that for
refusing to admit diverse men to livings whom he suspected to be Simonically
preferred, he suffered much by suits of Law: choosing rather to be compelled
(against his will) to admit them by Law, then voluntarily to do that which his
conscience made scruple of. And for the livings and other preferments, which
fell in his own gift, he ever bestowed them freely (as you have seen before)
upon deserving men, without suit: So that we may say of him as was said long
since, concerning Rober^ Winchelsey, Archbishop of Canterbury. Beneficia
Ecclesiastica nunquam, misi doctis con^ulit: Precibus ac gracia Noli^ium
fretos, and ambientes, semper repulit. Thirdly, The last was Sacrilege, which
he did so much abhor, that when the Bishopric of Sarum, and that of Ely
(before it was so much deplumed) were offered to him, upon terms savoring that
way, he utterly rejected them. Concerning that of Salisbury, give leave to add
a particular passage of his, which happened many years after his said refusal
of it, which was this; At a Parliament under King James, when an Act was to
pass, concerning Sherburne Castle, it was observed, that only Bishop Andrews
and another gave their Votes against the same. That the other should so do was
not much merveiled at, but that Bishop Andrews should do it, when none but
that other Lord did so, was so remarkable, as that he was demanded by a great
Person, what his reason was for it. To which he most worthily replied, that it
could not be well wondered, why he should now vote against that which if he
would have yielded unto (many years before, in the days of Queen Elizabeth)
he might have had this Bishopric of Sarum: which reason of his, when his late
Majesty (being then Prince, and present at the passing of the Act) heard; He be
shrewed him, that when he denied his consent, he did not declare the reason of
his denial also: Professing that had he bin made acquainted with the state of
that Case, as now he was, (he would with the King his Fathers good leave) have
labored against the passing of the said Act. To close up this point: This
reverend Prelate went yet a degree further, in refusing (when he was Bishop of
Winchester (diverse large and considerable sums, to renew some Leases,
because he conceived that the renewing of them might be prejudicial to
Succession.

Now let us lay all these together: His Zeal and Piety: His Charity, and
Compassion: His Fidelity, and Integrity: His Gratitude, and Thankfulness: His
Munificence and Bounty: Hospitality, Humanity, Affability, and Modesty: and to
these, His Indefatigability in study, and the fruits of his labors in his
Sermons and Writings, together with hes profundity in all kind of Learning;
his wit, memory, judgment, gravity and humility. His detestation of all vices
and sin, but especially of three. All which (by couching them only in this
Compend) we have seen in him, as ex ungue Leonem, or by Hercules foot, his
whole body: and consider, whether the Chuech of God in general, and this in
particular, did not suffer an irreparable loss, by his death.

Having taken a short survey of his Life, let us now see him Dying. He was not
often sick, and but once (till his last sickness) in thirty years, before the
time he dyed, which was at Downham in the Isle of Ely, the air of that place
not agreeing with the constitution of his body. But there he seemed to be
prepared for his dissolution; saying oftentimes in that sickness, It must come
once, and why not here? And at other times, before and since, he would say, The
days must come, when, whether we will or nill, we shall say (with the
Preacher) I have no pleasure in them, Eccles. 12.1. Of his Death he seemed to
presage himself a year before he dyed, and therefore prepared his oil, that
he might be admitted in due time into the Bride Chamber. That of qualis vita,
etc. was truly verified in him; for as he lived, so dyed he. As his fidelity in
his health was great, so increased the strength of his Faith in his sickness.
His Gratitude to men, was now changed into his Thankfulness to God. His
Affability to incessant and devout Prayers and speech with his Creator,
Redeemer and Sanctifier. His laborious Studies, to his restless groans,
sighs, cries and tears; his hands laboring, his eyes lifted up, and his
heart beating and panting to see the living God, even to the last of his
breath. And him (no dobut) he sees face to face, his works preceding and
following him, and he now following the Lamb, crowned with that immortality,
which is reserved for every one, that lives such a life as he lived.

He departed this life September 25. 1626. in the seventy one year of his age,
and lies buried in the upper Isle of the Parish Church of Saint Saviors in
Southworke. His Executors have erected to him a very fair Monument of Marble
and Alablaster. And one that formerly had been his Household Chaplain (whom
this honorable and reverend Prelate loved most tenderly from his Childehood,
rather like a Father then a Lord or Patron) but since his death a Successor to
him in some of his Places in the Church; for the duty and reverence which he
ever bare to him while he lived, has most gratefully and cordially in his
everlasting honorable memory, added to it a most excellent, significant and
speaking Epitaph, which follows.

LECTOR.
Si Christianus es, siste:
Morae praetium erit,
Non nescire Te, Qui vir hic si^us sit
Ejusdem tecum, Ca^holicae Ecclesiae Membrum,
Sub eadem faelicis Resurrectioni^ Spe,
Eandem D. Jesus praestolans Epiphaniam,
Sacratissimus Antistes, Lancelotus Andrews,
Londini oriundus, educatus Cantabrigiae
Aulae Pembroch: Alumnorum, Sociorum, Prefectorum
Vnus, and nemini secundus.
Linguarum, Artium, Scientiarum,
Humanorum, Divinorum omnium
Infinitus Thesaurus, Stupendum Oraculum:
Orthodoxae Christi Ecclesiae
Dictis, Scriptis, Precibus, Exemplo
Incomparabile Propugnaculum:
Regine Elizabethae a Sacris,
D. Pauli London Residentiarius,
D. Petri Westmonast. Decanus,
Episcopus Cicestrensis Eliensis: Wintoniensis,
Regique Jacobo ^um ab Eleemosyni^,
Tum ab u^riusque Regni Consiliis,
Decanus denique sacelli Regii.
Idem ex
Indetessa opera in Studiis,
Summa sapientia in rebus,
Assidua pietate in Deum,
Profusa largitate in egenos,
Rara amoenitate in suos,
Spectata probitate in omnes.
Aeternum admirandus:
Annorum pariter, and publicae famae satur,
Sed bonorum passim omnium cum luctu dena^us,
Coelebs hinc migravit ad Aureolam coelestem.
Anno
Regis Caroli II 0. Aeta^is suae LXXI 0.
Christi MDCXXVI 0.
Tantum est (Lector) Quod te moerentes Posteri
Nunc volebant, Atque ut ex voto tuo valeas, Dicto
Sit Deo Gloria.
His Works.

In the volumne of his Sermons, there are seventeen Sermons of the Nativity,
Preached upon Christmas day. Eight Sermons upon Repentance and Fasting,
Preached upon Ash Wednesday. Six Sermons Preached in Lent. Three Sermons of the
Passion, Preached upon Goodfriday. Eighteen Sermons of the Resurrection,
Preached upon Easter Day. Fifteen Sermons of the sending of the Holy Ghost,
Preached upon Whit-sunday. Eight Sermons, Preached upon the fifth of August.
Ten Sermons, Preached upon the fifth of November. Eleven Sermons, Preached upon
several occasions.

A Manual of private Devotions, and Meditations for every day in the week.

A Manual of Directions for the Visitation of the Sick.

His Opera Posthuma. Concio ad Clerum pro gradu Doctoris. Ad Clerum in Synodo
Provinciali. Coram Rege habita V 0. August 1606. In discessu Palatini XIII 0.
April 1613. Theologica Determinatio de Iurejurando. De Vsuris. De Decimis.

Respontiones ad 3 Epistolas Petri Molinei. An answer to the 18. and 20. cc. of
Cardinal Perons reply. A Speech in the Star Chamber against Master Thraske.
Another there concerning Vows, in the Countess of Shrewsburies case.

Respontio ad Forti librum. Ad Apologiam Cardinalis Bellarmini.

Reader, be serious let thy thoughts reflect
On this grave Father with a large respect;
Peruse his well-spent life, and thou shall find
He had a rare, and heaven enameled mind.
He was our Kingdoms Star, and shined most bright
In sad afflictions dark, and cloudyst night;
Let his example teach us how to live
In love and charity; that we may give
To those, whose wants enforce them to implore
Our aid, and charity makes no man poor.
Andrews was filled with goodness, all his days
Were crowned and gilded with resounding praise.
The world shall be his Herald to proclaim
The ample glories of his spreading Fame.
FINIS.
FRANCISCVS JUNIUS.
The Life and Death of Franciscus Juniu^.
EMblemes of honor derived from Ancestors, are but rotten rags where their
ignoble posterity degenerate from their Progenitors. But they are both glorious
and precio^s, where the children both answer and exceed the virtues of their
extraction. Such here our Iunius, William his Grandfather, serving under Lewi^
the twelfth in the wars of Navarre, was rewarded for his valor with an
Augmentation of Nobility to his Family. Dennis his Father was a great practiser
of the Civil Law, and got both credit and profit by his profession. But what
needs this superfluous luster to be borrowed from Parentage to him who was
enriched with plenty of light in himself.

2. In the famons City of Bourges in France our Franci^ was born, An. 1545.
Likely almost to have proved a Benjamin to his Mother, and just cause had she
to value this Pearl, for which she paid so dear. His baptism was hastened to
prevent his death, all looking on him as a weakling, which would post to the
grave; whereas he not only outlived most of his brethren but even made his
Parents to survive in him. His soul was condemned to a bad body, his infancy
being a continued sickness, and the small pox being struck into him when a
child, (by negligence of the servants suffering him to take cold) occasioned a
sore in his leg; and ever after even to the day of his death he felt the
Admonition of that malady: for when there was any indisposion in his body,
that the malignant humors mustered themselves together, hi^ leg was made the
Randevous for their meeting.

3. Being sent to school he was unhappy in tirannicall Masters, For though he
was of that capacity to hold as much and more then they would pour into him,
and of that industry, that he refused no labor for learning, yet they were
most cruel unto him. One especially, who as of whipping of boys had been
rather his recreation, then their punishment, and he willing to make faults
where he could not find them, so punished the natural weakness of Iunius for
an offense, that it was familiar with him seven times a day to be corrected,
truly scoring the number of the Liberal Sciences upon him, wherein afterward
he gr^w to be most eminent: yet such was Iunius his love of learning and his
soul was so eagerly set upon it, that he was not at leisure to complain of
hard usage, or to confess it to his mother and sister who susp^cted it.

4. But afterward Iunius, grown to be a stripling in that age wherein youth
and man do meet together, was sent by his father to Lions to study; a
dissolute place, and full of all Licentiousness. Sudden alterations to
extremes commonly prove dangerous: Iunius has now neither Master to fright
him, nor father to awe him, nor friend to direct him. And as waters long curbed
with flood gates, and debarred their natural course run with more fury and
fierceness, when the dams and sluices are suddenly taken away; so what wonder
if this our youth, formerly kept in constant durance with cruel education, now
fly out, and give (as I may say) separation to his corrupt nature for the
^ormer wrong he had sustained.

5. Two dangerous Rocks he was drawn upon, narrowly scaping the one, but
dangerously hitting against the other. The first was, the allurements of wanton
Women, who sought to inveagle him; the City of Lions being a Common which is
sufficiently stockt with such Cattle. Say not that I^nius his weak body was a
preservation for his chastity, for (besides that the heart of a Stallion may be
in the body of an Eunuch) age in him now had out-grown the infirmities of his
childe-hood. But by Gods providence he was protected from this temptation, and
by Satan's suggestions solicited to another, who finding his corporal baits not
to succeed, did try by a more spiritual way to entice him.

6. Here I stand still and demur with my self, whether speech or silence be
better; Tell it not in Gath, etc. It is pity that so great sins of
(afterward) good men, should be committed to memory. But again, considering
that his shipwreck may be a seamarke for others, it must not be concealed. He
turned neither better nor worse then flat Atheist. Certainly, flies as they are
ingenuous to do mischief on Grapes, so they are judicious tasters, to choose
the ripest and sweetest for their palate. And Satan is so subtle, that he
pitcheth on the most fruitful, yea rankest wits, as best for his purpos^ and a
dunce is no dish for the Devils tooth.

7. Full twelve months did Iunius live in and lie under this doleful and
damnable condition, when first it pleased God to save his life in a Tumult in
the City of Lions, that so signal a deliverance in the appehension of Iunius
did point at a Deity, and awakened his drowsy soul to the consideration of
divine Providence. Afterward, his Parents being by improbable and unsuspected
intelligencer^ informed of their Sons Atheism, sent for him home, took order
that he was better instructed, and enjoined him the constant reading of the New
Testament. Iunius lighting on the first chapter of the Gospel of Saint John,
was, by Gods spirit moving his heart, so highly affected therewith, that he
fell on a sudden both into an acknowledgement and admiration of God in his
Word. I have heard that supersticious Exorcistes (who most serve the Devil,
when they pretend most to command him) use, or rather abuse this chapter to
conjure out evil spirits out of persons possessed. What collusion or
confederacy may pass betwixt Satan and his playmates, I neither do nor
desire to know. This sure I am, that that parcel of Scripture was so
sanctified by God to Iunius, that it dispossessed his soul, and ejected thence
that Atheistical Fin, formerly lodged therein. And now Iunius begins to prefer
Salomons Proverbs before Seneca his Sentences; the Psalms of David before the
Odes of Horace; Ieremies Lamentations before Ovid de Tristibus; in a word, he
grew sensible of the majesty in the meanest, of the rich matter in the plain
style of the Scripture.

8. Afterward his Parents sent him to Geneva to the University, furnishing him
with sufficient money for the present, and promising to send him supplies for
the future, when alas presently began the woeful Wars in France, so that the
French Lillies fairly flourishing before, began now to be parched and scorched
in Civil Combustions; insomuch, that the Parents of Iunius could not perform
their promise. Surely War is a cursed thing, were it only for this, that it
makes men unwillingly unnatural, unable to discharge those relative offices,
which otherwise they desire. Iunius begins to want, and resolves with himself,
Cleanthes like, to work ev^ry other day with a Spade or Mattock about the Town
Ditch, so to provide himself maintenance; Gods children making many hard but
ever honest shifts.

9. But a Countriman of his accidentally finding him out (whose Mother, when a
Widow, had been relieved by the Parents of Iunius) took him home, and freely
bestowed both lodging and diet upon him. It is good spiritual husbandry to sow
good works, if not our persons our posterity may reap them, as now did
Iunius. But he, good man, was perplexed, for being as he conceived it a burden
to his friend; for there is no greater rack to an ingenuous nature, then to
receive kindnesses in despair to requite them. Iunius weighing in ^he balance
of his mind every morcell of meat, and for four months together (pretending
Study) dyned only on Air, and supped with two Eggs, and a small draught of
Wine, fearing he should be too chargable; thus he was a Less^an before Lessius,
yea he exceeded him in his Abstinence, till nature as I may say, was over
pressed with too little weight of victuals, which brought him into a
Consumption: But afterward receving money from his Father, he not only
plentifully repaid his Host, but by compitent food, and corediall Physic
repared the detriments, and decays in his body.

10. The Father of Iunius, who formerly was afraid that his Son would have
to little Religion, began now to suspect that he would have to much, and make
Divinity his profession, whereas he intended him for the practice of the civil
Law. Like to many now adays, who begrutch their pregnant children to Gods
service, reserving strait Timber to be Be^mes in other buildings, and only
condemnning crooked pieces for the Temple; so that what is found unfit for
City, Camp or Court, (not to add ship and shop) is valued of worth enough for
the Church.

11. But here happened a sad and sudden accident, the Father of Iunius was most
barbarously butchered, by a companion of Hacks Iers. Here let me beg and borrow
of the courteous reader the help of his imagination, to piece out the
shortness of my expression, in considering the great sorrow Iunius conceived
hereat; but no sooner was he come to shore out of the sea of sarrow, but
presently he dispatched a letter to his Mother, full of pity and piety,
religion and affection: He counseled her to submit to Divine providence,
seeing she was made a Bride the same minute wherein she was made a Widow,
married to God himself, the Husband of the Widdo^, and Father of the
fatherless; he desired her to be careful of the rest of the childeren, but
take no thought for him, who was re^olved to hew out a way for his livelihood,
out of the Rocks of all difficulties.

12. Leaving Geneva (where he had lived a Schoolmasters, teaching Hebrew for a
time; he came into the Low- countries to be Minister to the French Church at
Antwerp, then began the civil Wars there, wherein half of the seventeen
Provinces opposed the King of Spain, whether willingly falling from him for
lack of Royalty, or violently cast away by him, through his own cruelty, the
Chronicles of those parts are best able to inform. Here Iunius had a finger,
yea a whole hand in writing some public Remonstrances in behalf of the
People; which being known (discovered by the sharpness of his own Pen, such
was the activenesse, quickness and vigor of his style) he was sought after,
and four hundred Florens promised to him (more by half then his estate was ever
worth) which would bring him dead or a live to the Regent of that County, yea a
curious Limnner was employed to draw his picture to the life, that thereby he
might be the sooner discovered.

13. The reader will not be offended if I presume to enterpose a thought of my
own, who here did heartily desire I had that picture in my possession, which
made to do him mischief, I would preserve to do him honor; but I r^voke my
wish, seeing the best image and resemblance of Iunius, is what is made by him
in his own works, as that is the best representation of the Sun not made by
pen and pencill, but by his own Beams and Irradiations.

14. Here I pass by many remarkable escapes of Iunius, whose life was nothing
but a mixture of dangers and deliverances, perils and preservations. At last he
went to Limburg there to be Preacher to the truth, where this most memorable
accident happened, which without di^loyalty to Historical truth cannot be
omitteed. There was hard by a widow mother to many childeren wounded in
conscience, because her attendance on her family had caused her often absence
from Mass, and grief so prevailed upon her, that she continually exclaimed,
that she and her childeren were damned. The popish priests like the Egyptian
Iannes and Iambres, sought by exorcismes and magical spells to cast the Devil
out of her, whose superstition took as little effect as the cruelty of her
neighbors, who with bonds and whiping (in artificial arguments) endeavored to
reclaim her to a right mind, all in vain; and she making a forcible escape
fled into the woods, and continued (poor soul) full thirteen years in this
pi^tifull condition: For such who conceive it no great pain, for another to be
^ext but one whole year with a wounded conscience, would count six months of
that sorrow to much for themselves if they foundly felt it. Iunius
understanding the matter, obtained private discourse with her, informing her
that the Mass was both needless and unlawful; whereas she was bound by the
specialty both of nature and grace to provide for her children; and it pleased
God who sharpened the tongue of Iunius, so to bore her ears with attention too,
and apprehension of his arguments, that she was converted both to a quiet mind,
comfortable life, and a sincere professor of the Protestant Religion; this
deserves to be preferred before milions of Monkish miracles, which are only
composed of the conc^rrence of the boldness of some Priests in counterfeiting,
and the blockishnesse of other people in believing them.

15. At Limburgh Iunius lived some years, pestered with Papists and
Anabaptists (as Saint Paul at Athens with Stociks and Epicures) far differing
from themselves, but jointly opposing the truth. Here the Friars raised a
report that Iunius was a monster, and had a cloven foot like the Devil; whereas
it had borne more proportion with truth, if they had said that Iunius had a
cloven tongue, like the Disciples Acts 2.3. because of his great and exact
skill in all learned Languages. From Limburg he was called to Hidelberg, where
he lived many years in the University, and with Emanuel Tremelius, ( Jew and
Ientile well joined together in a piou^ employment) made that excellent
translation of the Bible out of the Original into Latin.

16. Then Henry the fourth King of France sent for him home into his native
Country; he returned by Leyden in Holland, because his necessary occasions
called him thither: Gods children are called wanderers, Heb. 11.38. and yet
they are ever in the right way; and these Planets keep a regular motion, both
in respect of their pious employment, and Gods constant protection. At Leyden
he was choson to be Divinity professor, which place with great industry, and
applause he discharged for ten years or there abouts, till at last he dyed of
the Plague Anno 1602. the thirteenth of October in the fifty sixth year of his
ege.

17. His disease has given occasion to his adversaries to infect his memory as
much as lay in their power with their pestilent tongues; but such would be
silent, when considering that that promise Psalm 91.6. to defend men from the
Arrow that flies by day, and the Pestilence which walks by darkness, is
like all other promises of temporal blessings, and preservation, running with
a secret clause of revocation, in case God conceives the contrary, more for
his glory, and his childrens good.

18. Four Wifes he had successively, all dying of diferent diseases; the first
wronged by the cruelty or ignorance, or both of the Midwife in her travel,
lead a dying life a long time after, to her own much misery, and no less
sorrow of her Husband; the second by a Feavour: the third by a Dropsy: the
fourth a few days before himself of the Plague. The short lives of these his
wives which were godly women. Iunius interpreted to be a just punishment of God
upon him, because in his youth he had been a general hater of all women-kinde;
for having formerly ^^^^eited on the base conditions of some beastly women in
^he City of Lions, he loathed the whole see for their sakes, and would not be
reconciled unto it, though his own Mother (so virtuous a woman) might have
been a fit Mediatrix to compose the quarrel which he unjustly bore against all
women. This Iunius from a false inducement of some few, gathered a general
conclusion of all, put a dangerous fallacy of uncharitableness on his own
soul: And was afterward sensible of Gods holy hand upon him in lending him
four good Wives, and taking them from him, teaching him their goodness rather
by loosing then enjoying them.

19. To conclude, Saint Paul being effectually to move Timothy 2. Tim. 4.6. to
the discharge of his office, and to be instant in season and out of ^eason; in
Preaching uses this forcible motive, (For I am now ready to be offered, and
the time of my departure is at hand.) The death of the godly ought to put life
into the godly; the loss of pious men of the former generations, ought to
enrich such of the age present, to succed in their places, take up their Arms,
and valiantly acquit themselves in their rooms. Let those therefore who have
read over the life of this worthy man now gathered to God, summon their
strength, and unite their forces according to the distance of their parts and
places to discharge themselves to the glory of God and good of his Church. For
it is high time when such Paul's Set, ^for other Timothies to arise. His Works
are many, and are here registered.

1 A Speech in French to the Spanish King for the defense of the Low Countries.
2 An answer to Sandwich his brethren in England, of Images. 3 The Translation
of the Old Testament, with Immanuel Tremelius, out of Hebrew. 4 Acts of the
Apostles, and Epistles to the Corinthians out o^ Arabicke. 5 Confession of
Faith of Frederick Count Palatine the third. 6 Apocrypha translated with Notes.
7 Johannes Tilly of Kings, and of the Kings of France, translated into Latin.
8 A Speech of the Hebrew Tongue. 9 An Hebrew Grammar. 10 Ecclesiasticus, Latin
and French. 11 A Looking-glass of Tremelius against Genebrard. 12 Twelve
Orations for the reading of the Old Testament. 13 An Oration of Ursinus life.
14 Upon Gregory 13. his Cursings against Gebbard, Bishop of Colen. 15 Upon
Saint Judes Epistle. 16 Four Speeches for reading the Old Testament. 17 Upon
the four first Psalms. 18 A Catholic Apology in Latin. 19 An Hebrew Lexicon.
20 His table of Purgatory. 21 A Christian admonition against John Haren in
French. 22 A book called the Academy. 23 His CUROPALATES in Greek and Latin.
24 Translation of two Epistles of the Kings, and one of Plessis in Latin. 25
His sacred Paralels. 26 Upon the Prince of Anhalt his death. 27 Notes upon the
three first Chapters of Genesis. 28 A confutation of some Arguments of the
Creation. 29 Notes upon the Apocalypse. 30 Second Edition of his Bible. 31 Man
lives with corrections and Notes. 32 His first defense of the Catholic
Doctrine of the Trinity. 33 A Commentary one Daniel. 34 The King of France his
confession in French. 35 Upon the Death of John Cassimire, Count Palatine. 36
Commentary on Psalm 101. 37 Expositions upon the Apocalypse in French. 38
Commentary on Jonah the Prophet, 39 An Analysis upon Genesis. 40. Ciceroes
Epistles to Atticus, and Q. his brother, with Corrections and Notes. 41 A
defense of the Catholic Doctrine of Nature and Grace. 42 A praise of Peace.
43 The peaceable Christian in French. 44 Of the observation of Moses policy. 45
Of Divinity. 46 An Oration against the Jesu^tes in Latin, 47 Notes upon
Tertullian. 48 Notes and Animadversions upon Bellarmine, of the Translation of
the Roman Empire.

Reader, observe and thou shall find
A rare, and well-reformed mind:
He that in his youthful days
Storch'd his conscience by the blaze
Of wanton fires, refused at last
The heat of an Athisticke blast;
He started from the deep abyss
Of vileness^, to the height of bliss,
And then that light which filled his breast
Gave himself and others rest,
That they which did before contemn
His deeds, embraced him as a Jem;
And thought him fitting to be set
Within the Churches Cabonet:
His virtue paid what vice had scoar'd
And age abhorred, what youth adored.
EDWIN SANDS ARCHRI^
The Life and Death of Edwin Sands, who dyed Aug. 8. Anno Christi 1588.
THis learned Doctor and famous Divine, was descended of virtuous and godly
Parents, and bred up in the knowledge of the liberal Arts, being well grounded
in the rudements of Learning; he was sent to the famous University of
Cambridge, where he took the degree of Doctor in Divinity, and afterward was
Master of Katharine-Hall, and Vice Chancellor of the said University, at that
time when John Duke of Northumberland came thither with his Army to proclaim
the Lady Jane Gray Queen of England, in opposition to Queen Mary. Hereupon the
Duke required Doctor Sands to Preach on the morrow in relation to the business
then in hand. Though the warning was short, and the business in agitation very
weighty, yet he undertook to Preach; so rising at three of the clock the next
morning, he took his Bible in his hand, and after he had prayed a good space,
he shut his eyes, and holding his Bible before him, earnestly prayed unto God,
that it might fall open where a most fit Text should be for him to Preach on
that day: The Bible (as God would have it) opened at the beginning of Joshua,
where he found a very pregnant text of Scripture for the present occasion, viz.
Joshua 1.16, 17, 18. He that shall consider the Auditory, the time, and other
circumstances, shall easily see that this Text most fitly served for the
purpose; and as God gave the Text, so he gave him such discretion, wisdom,
moderation and sincerity in the handling of it, that he cavsed the stoutest of
them there present to shed tears abundantly.

Shortly after, when the Duke was taken, and Queen Mary proclaimed, one Master
Mildmay was sent to apprehend Doctor Sands, and to carry him to the Tower of
London; who coming unto Doctor Sands, he told him, that he marvelled that so
learned a man as he, should so unadvisedly run himself into danger. To whom he
answered, I am not ashamed of bonds, but if I could do as you can do, I need
not to fear bonds; you came down armed against the Queen, and now you are for
the Queen; before a traitor, now a friend. But I cannot thus dissemble, and
with one mouth blow hot and cold.

As he rode in at Bishops-gate London, a wicked woman hurled a stone at him,
which gave him such a blow on the breast, that it almost feld him off his
horse. To whom he mildely said, Woman, God forgive thee. While he was in the
Tower, one John Bowler was his Keeper, a perverse Papist, yet at length, by the
sweet and gentle persuasions and grave counsel of this holy man, he was so far
wrought upon, as to favor the Gospel, and afterward became a zealous
professor of it. Upon Sir Thomas ^^ yats insurrection, Doctor Sands was
removed unto the Marshall-sea, where God gave him great favor in the eyes of
his Keeper, so that he used him very courteously. After nine and twenty weeks
imprisonment in the Tower, and nine in the Marshalsea, through the mediation of
his friends, he was set at liberty: But Gardener Bishop of Winchester repenting
of what he had done, presently used all means possible to apprehend him
again; yet through the goodness of God and the help of his faithful friends,
he got safe out of London, and went to the Seaside to take shipping for
Flanders; while he stayed at Milton-shore, waiting for a Ship, he was kindly
entertained by one James Mower and his wife. Now his wife was barren, having
bin married about eight years; to whom at parting Doctor Sands said, Be of good
comfort, for ere that a whole year be past, God shall give you a Son. And
accordingly it came to pass; for that day twelve months, lacking but one day,
she was delivered of a Son.

He remained in Germany all the reign of Queen Mary, and returned unto London
the same day that Queen Elizabeth was crowned. The Queen highly esteemed him
for his singular piety and learning, and shortly after bestowed great
preferment upon him. He was made Bishop of Worc^ster the 21. day of December,
1559. He did succeed that famous Archbishop Grindall in two places, to wit, in
the Bishopric of London, and the Archbishopric of York, the one in 1570. and
the other in six years after. And when he had enjoyed that promotion of
Archbishop 12. years, he departed this life Aug. 8. 1588. about the age of 60.
and lies buried in the Collegiate Church in Southwel in No^inghamshire: A man,
of whom it is hard to be said, whether more famous for his singular virtues and
learning, or for his Noble Parentage and Offspring which he left behind him;
for he left many Childen, of which three were Knights and excelently well
qualified Gentlemen, either for body or mind. But his Son Sir Edwin Sands
proved the learneder, and more famous and dear to his Country.

There is a Book of famous Sermons extant in Print of this Prelates, which is
counted a worthy Piece, and does sufficiently declare his Piety and
Schollarship to succeed^ng Ages.

He that will spoke his praises well
Must study first what it is t'excell:
He daily labored to oppose
The Churches most unsatiate Foes;
The truth he would be sure to vent
Though he endured imprisonment.
Read but his Works, and thou shall find
His body was imprisn'd, not his mind.
G^RVAS BABINGTON.
The Life and Death of Gervas Babington.
THis Prelate as he was excellent for his parts, so was he of a very fai^
descent, being born in the County of Nottingham, of the ancient family of the
Babingtons in the said County, where he drew in the first rudiments of
Literature, till by his worthy Parent^ he was sent to Cambridge, and was
admitted into that worthy Society of Trinity College, Doctor Whi^gu^^^ being
then Master.

This Babington proved so famous in Schol^ership, that having his degrees, he
was made Fellow of the same College; and giving himself to the study of
Divinity, he proved a worthy Preacher in that University. After, being Doctor
in Divinity, he was called by Henry that Noble Earl of Pembrooke, to be his
Chaplain, by whose favor he was first made Treasurer of the Church of
Landaffe in Wales, after he was elected Bishop of the same, 1591. and when he
had sitten four years in that See, for his singular Piety and Learning, he was
by Queen Elizabeth translated to the Bishopric of Exeter, where he scarce
stayed three years, but he was made Bishop of Worcester, and in the midst of
all these preferments he was neither tainted with Idleness, or pride, or
covetousness, but was not only diligent in preaching, but in writing books,
for the understanding of Gods Word; so that he was a true pattern of Piety to
the people, of Learning to the Ministry, and of Wisdom to all Governors:
Whereupon he was made one of the Queens Counsel for the Marches of Wales. He
was Bishop of Worcester about the space of 13. years: He dyed of an Hecticke
Fever, and so changed this frail life for a better in the year of our Lord
1610. not without the great grief of all, and had all funeral Rites bestowed
on him, befitting so great and so grave a Governor, and father of the Church;
and was buried in the Cathedral Church of Worcester, in the Month of May. His
Works extant are these that follow.

1. Consolatory Annotations upon Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and
Deuteronomy. 2. Upon the ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer, and the Articles
of the Creed. 3. A comparison or collation between humane frailty and faith.
4. Three worthey and learned Se^mons.

Renowned Babington spun out his days
In truth and peace, and had the ecchoing praise
Of every tongue; his worth was prized by all
That loved religion; nothing could recall
His heart from goodness; peace, and love did rest
Within the closset of his se^ious breast:
Therefore let every tongue proclaim and cry
The fame of Babington shall never dye.
JOHN WHITGIFT.
The Life and Death of John Whitgift.
IN the year of our Lord 1530. being the twenty and first of King Henry the
eight (a year very remarkable for the Parliament then held, wherein that proud
Prelate Cardinal Wolsey was attainted, and the first opposition made by the
maine body of the the Commons therein assembled against the tirannicall
usurpation of the Popish Clergy) was John Whitgift born at great Grimesbie in
Lincolnshire, descended from an ancient and worshipful Family of the Whitgifts
in Yorkshire. An Uncle he had called Robert Whitgift, Abbot of Wellow: who
though himself a professed Monk, yet not greaty liked the profession; and was
by this his Nephew, therefore heard sometime to say, that they and their
Religion could not long continue; for that having read the Scripture over and
over against he could never find therein that their Religion was founded by
God: and it is not unlikly, that by the carriage of businesses in the State at
that time, being an understanding man, he might shrewdly guess at those things
that shortly after sued.

Under this his Uncle was he educated together with some other young
Gentlemen's sons for some space of time: and whether taking some hints from
him, or being by some other means wrought on, through a secret hand of God,
already moulding and preparing him for future employments, he began to grow,
though very young yet, into a dislike of Popish superstitions, and to af^ect
the better way. For being by his said Uncle, who observed his towardliness,
for his further improvement in learning, sent up to London, entered there into
Saint Antonies school, and boarded with an Aunt of his, wife to one Michael
Shaller a Verger of Paul's Church; he was after some time by her dismissed again
and thrust out of doors, because he refused to frequent the morning Mass with
her, albeit by some of the Canons earnestly solicited so to do. Upon return
to his Parents, according to his Unckles advice and direction, finding that he
had well profited in learning, he was by them sent to the University of
Cambridge, and there placed in Q^eenes College. But not so well relishing the
disposition of some in that house, he removed from thence to Pembrooke Hall,
where he was pupil to that blessed Ma^tyr of God John Bradford, Doctor Ridley
afterward Bishop of London being then Head of the house, by whom also in regard
of his forwardness both in learning and godliness, he was made scholar of the
house.

With his years his worth growing, and notice taken of his good parts, his
preferments likewise accordingly came on: For from thence he was chosen to be
Fellow of Peterhouse, D^ctor Pern being then Master th^re: who very tenderly
affected him, and when out of tenderness of conscience, in Queen Mary's time,
upon expectation of some Commis^ioners that were to come down visit to the
University and settle Popery there, he had entertained some thoughts of going
beyond the Seas, the Dr. perceiving it and withal his resolution in matter of
religion, both encouraged and caused him notwithstand to stay, promising him
withal to take such order for him, that keeping himself quiet, he should
remain free from molestation: that which according to his promise given him,
he also faithfully fulfilled.

Having thus by the favor and connivancy of the Doctor (God reserving him for
further and higher employments) rid out those stormy and tempestuous times;
upon the dispersions of those black clouds, that had formerly overspread and
eclipsed the good parts of many, by the happy sunshine of that illustrious
Princess Queen Elizabeth's ascent to the throne of this Realm, contrary to
that that is wont to befall at the natural Suns rising; this our bright Star,
among others and above many others, began now to shine forth and discover its
luster. Notice whereof being taken, as in the Univer^ity so at Court, he
received advancement unto eminent places from either.

For in the University he was called, first to the Professors place founded by
the Lady Margeret Countess of Richmond; and in the same he demeaned himself
with so great approbation and good liking of the whole University, that not
only for his sake they augmented the Salary to that Professors place assigned,
but the chief Professors place becoming shortly after vacant, they conferred
th^^ upon him. Wherein as his other readings were generally both with much
company frequented, and with great applause entertained; so especially those
his Lectures upon the Apocalips, and upon the Epistle to the Hebrews; which
being also put in writing by him at the request of some great ones, are said to
remain yet under hope of seeing sometime further light. During this time h^
took the degree of Doctor in Divinity; when being called to answer the Act at
the Commencement in public, he maintained this Position, that The Pope i^
that Antich^ist.

From Peterhouse, upon the departure of Doctor Hutton, he was chosen Master of
Pembrooke Hall; and the same of him being now arrived at Court, he was sent for
up to Preach before the Queen; who so well liked the method and manner of his
Teaching, that alluding to his name (as her wonted manner was to do in like
case, where she liked, and found fit matter for such expressions) she said he
was a White gift indeed; and in testimony of her good opinion and esteem of
him, ere he was thoroughly warm in the Hedship of Pembrook^ Hall, she removed
him to the Mastership of Trinity College; adding not long after the Deanery
also of Lincoln thereunto.

At his access to Trinity College, he found divisions in the House, by
occasion of some that misliked the solemn rites and government Ecclesiastical
then settled and exercised in the Church, of whom Thomas Cartwright Professor
for the Lady Margaret was a chief man, with whom he also entered the lists in
writing by occ^sion of his Answer to a Work entitled, An Admonition to the
Parliament. But by his wise and discreet carriage the matter was so managed,
that all things were settled in peace and quietness again.

Ten years he continued Governor there; being entrusted with the education of
diverse of great birth, among whom were the Earls of Worcester and Cumberland,
the Lord Zouch, the Lord Verulam, and Sir Nicolas Bacon his elder brother; as
also diverse were trained up under him that were after advanced to Episcopal
dignity, among whom was Doctor Babington sometime Bishop of Worcester, whose
Works testify his worth. And within those ten years he was twice chosen
Vice Chancellor of the University. In which time he labored, with the
assistance of the right honorable Sir William Cecill Lord Treasurer unto the
Queen, to have the Statutes of the University (being in many things defective)
recollected, reviewed, suppyed and amended: that which by his travail and
credit with her Majesty was accordingly effected.

From thence he was removed to the Bishopric of Worcester; having taken his
leave of the University and the College, by two solemn Sermons, both
persuading to peace and unity; the one preached in Saint Mary's Church, the
other in the College Chapel, on 2 Cor. 13.11. The revenues of which
Bishopric finding much impaired and impeached by some sinister courses, making
use therein of his favor and authority with her Majesty, though not without
expense of some round sums of money, to give satisfaction to some, for the more
quiet composition, who had go^ the same into their hands, he recovered again
what had been fra^dulently intercepted, and wrongfully detained, to the no
small behoof of his Successor^.

He had not sat there above a year, but he was made Vice President of the
Marches of Wales, under the right honorable Sir Henry Sidney, being then at the
same time both Lord Deputy of Ireland, and Lord President also of those parts.
In which employment he carried himself as with pains unweariable, so with
exceeding great integrity; reforming many abuses and corruptions, that he
observed to have crept in and to be exercised either by the Officers belonging
unto that Court, or by some other that were joined in Commission with him; and
with no less moderation of Fines and Penalties; that which gained him much
love and respect in those parts.

Besides this, while he sat at Worcester, upon complaint made to the Queens
Majesty of many discords and disorders in the two Cathedral Churches of
Lichfield and Hereford, he was by special Commission from her Majesty
appointed to Visit them; which accordingly he did, reforming them both, and
appointing them Statutes for the better and more peaceable government of either.

Having spent six years at Worcester, to the great contentment, and with the
general good affection of all sorts in those parts, he was now advanced to the
highest pitch of dignity that our Church affords, being called to succeed
that most reverend Father in God, Grindall, in the Archbishopricke of
Canterbury. For the benefit of which seat also being many ways much wronged,
he traveled as much, and with as good success, as for that of Worcester he
had before done: for which his successors in either remain beholden to him
unto this day. In this height of honor together with his Sovereigns highest
favor, he continued during the whole remnant of Queen Elizabeth's reign, and
some small while after King James his entrance; always constantly maintaining
the present Ecclesiastical Government against those that oppugned it; and yet
carrying himself moderately, as toward all in general, so toward those also
that therein stood out, and holding a good correspondency with those in foraine
parts, as Master Beza among the rest, that followed another course of
discipline; that which appears by diverse letters that passed to and fro
between them.

He had the honor to be chief mourner at the solemn exequies of that
Heroical Princess Queen Elizabeth, (who used also in familiar manner to
salute him by the name of her black husband) and of setting the Royal Crown
on the head of that most learned and illustrious Prince King I^mes her
successor, and of Queen Anne his worthy consort. About seven months after
which office performed, returning by barge from the Bishop of Londons house at
Fulham, with whom he had been to consult about Ecclesiastical affaire^, in an
high wind and a sharp day, he took cold on his head: and yet striving to attend
his Majesty at Court on the next day being the Lords day, after his accustomed
manner, he was taken there with a dead palsy, whereof he dyed some few days
after.

He was a man of a middle stature, black heired, of a grave countenance, and
brown complexion; small timbered, but quick and of indifferent good strength,
and well shaped to the proportion of his bulk: of a mild and moderate
disposition, of a free mind, and a bountiful hand toward his household
servants, his poor neighbors, but especially toward Scholars and strangers;
many whereof resorting hi^her out of France and Germany, (among whom that
fa^^^^^ man Drusius, Renicherus, and others) he most courteously entertained,
and very liberally relieved: a diligent preacher, as well after his preferments
as before, seldom failing any Lords day; while he was Bishop of Worcester,
notwithstanding his important and incessant emploiments otherwise, but that he
preached in some of the Parish Churches thereabouts; and no less freq^ently
when he was Archbishop, visiting the Church and Pulpit at Cr^ydon, during the
time of his residence there in the Vacations from attendance at Court.

He departed this world on the last of February being Wednesday, in the year of
grace 1603. and of his age 73. having bin Bishop of Worcester six years and
five months, and Archbishop of Canterbury 20. years and five months: and
lies enterred on the South side of the Church of Croydon, with a fair
Monument in memory of him. His la^^ words to his Majesty, who in person visited
him the day before he dyed, when he could hardly be understood, are reported to
have been, Pro Ecclesia Dei, pro Ecclesia Dei: for the Church of God, for the
Church of God: thereby intimating his care thereof even to the last.

The principal Monuments of his Charity, are, an Hospital builded
Colledge-wise at Croydon, for a Warden and twenty eight Brothers and Sisters;
and a Free School near unto it, with a convenient House for the Schoolmaster,
and a standing stipend of twenty pounds by the year. His Works in writing
published, are only these:

1. His Answer to the Admonition to the Parliament, 2. His Defense of the
Answer to the Admonition. 3. A Sermon on John 6. ver. 25, 26, 27. Preached
before Queen Elizabeth on March the 24. 1574.

You courtly Prelates, you that fear
To loose your honors, look ye here:
Make him your president, and then
You shall have honor, spite of men:
He bred not, but composed debate^
Nor moved he in the Orb of State;
By whose example, Churchmen stood
Less for the style of great then good:
If factions chanced, or diffence fell,
He would persuade, and not compel:
To him our Phenix-Queen did share
Proud Lambeths patriarchall chair,
Where he remained, the Churches Nurse,
Ten years twice told, without a Curse.
The Life and Death of Lucas Trelcatius, who dyed Anno Christi 1602.
LVke Trelcatius was born at Erinum Anno Christi 1542. and brought up by his
Aunt who was Abbess of ^ Nunnery: his first education was in the School at
Dowai^, where (being of an acute wit) he profited exceedingly in the knowledge
of the humane Arts: from thence he went to Paris, and whilst he studied there,
he fell into acquaintance with John Mercer, the Hebrew Professor, and Peter
Ramus, and being exceedingly affected with the love of the reformed Religion,
he forsook his Aunt, and was maintained by the bounty of some Merchants of
Flanders. From thence he went to Aurelia, and from thence to Sancerra in the
twenty eight year of his age: and being driven from thence by the tempest of
Civil Wars, he came into England, and at London he taught a School, by which
he maintained himself eight years: Then was he called by some Merchant^ into
Flanders to be their Pastor; but enjoying little peace there, he went to
Bruxels, where he continued in the exercise of his Ministry six year^s; and
then meeting with opposition, he went to An^werp, and that City being presently
after besieged, he was forced to stay there eight months: after which, being
sent for to diverse places, at length he was by the consent of his brethren in
the Ministry fixed at Leiden, where he was made Pastor of the French Church,
which place he supplied faithfully, for the space of seventeen years. He had
scarce been there two years, when for his excellent parts and learning, he was
chosen Divinity-Professor in that University also: and at last having acquired
much honor in both his offices, he dyed of the Plague Anno Christi 1602. and of
his age 60.

Where virtue lives there need not be
A question of sufficiency:
Trelcatius was a man whose worth
Few men are able to set forth:
They that desire to know him well
Must first know what it is t'excell.
THEODORUS BEZA.
The Life and Death of Theodorus Beza.
IN the year of our Lord God 1519. and on the four and twentieth day o^ June,
this faithful Minister of the Church of Christ, Theodorus Beza came into the
world, being borne at Vezelia an ancient Town in the Kingdom of France; he was
descended from Petrus a Beza, being Governor of the same Town, and Maria
Burdoletia, both of them being beautified with a lineall proceeding from a
Noble and renowned Family.

His name imposed on him by his Parents imports the gift of God; by which act
they declared themselves to be virtuous and religious; and let the Lord
evermore bless his Church with such gifts, with such painful laborers, for
the gathering in of his great harvest, to his endless glory and to the
eternal peace of such as seek salvation through Jesus Christ.

This Beza being yet an infant, not fully two years old, was taken by his
Uncle Nicholas Beza, being a Councellor pertaining to the Senate of Paris;
where he was carefully and tenderly brought up for the space of three years,
being in that time acquainted with the knowledge of the Letters.

Being now five years old, he was committed, through the carfulness of his
said Uncle, unto the tuition of Melchior Walmarius a German, who at that time
taught the Greek tongue at Aurelia, under whom he continued for the space of
seven years; in which time he attained unto great perfection both in the Greek
and Latin tongues; and also, which is more commendable, his tender years were
seasoned with the true knowledge of Christian Piety, being drawn from the pure
fountain of the Word of God, by the same man.

His Master upon some occasions leaving France, and returning into Germany,
Beza, not without the advice of his friends, went unto Orleans, fully intending
and resolving with himself to apply his mind unto the study of the Civil
Law; wherein, at the age of twenty years he was advanced to be Licentiate.

Not long after, leaving Orleans, he took his journ^y unto Paris, to visit
those friends and acquaintance which he had there living, by whom he was
entertained with great joy, and received with much gladness and friendly
courtesy: but more espcially by his other U^ckle Abb^t Trigidimon^an, who to
testify his affection how greatly he loved him designed and appointed him to
be his next successor in the Government of that Abbey, whose revenwe^ were
yearly valued at five thousand French Crowns: annexing also unto this the
profits of two other places, amounting yearly unto seven hundred Crowns,
intending also to confer other preferments upon him.

Beza being as it were in an earthly Paradise, and abounding with those things
which might seem necessary for the prosecution of vice wherewith indeed he was
for a time detained, but not captivated (as who is he that lives and sins
not, nay and falls not sometimes into grievous sins.) For the Lord had
prepared him for better things, and opening his eyes, gave him to understand,
that these were but so many snares laid to entangle him, and to draw him into
everlasting ruin and perdition: wherefore he fully resolved to forsake them
all, and to adhere and stick fast unto that Truth whose sweetness he had
tasted in his youth; which that he might the better perform, he was fully
determined to undergo any labor, and to remove any obstacle, and for that
cause he vowed a vow that he would never embrace nor countenance the errors of
the Church of Rome.

And purposing a constancy in his intended course, and that he might be the
better fitted thereunto, he resolved to free himself from that affection which
uses to be predominate in his youth; and for that cause he betroathed himself
unto a virtuous woman, acquainting only two of his intimate friends with the
same action, and that for two causes.

First, that he might give no occasion of offense unto others. Secondly,
because that money which he received for the discharging of his offices could
not handsomely be avoided, which within short time after was by him performed,
for his propounded honor and preferment, was s^ifly rejected not without the
great admiration and sharp reprehension of many of his friends, who therefore
styled him after a ^cornfull manner, Philosophum novum, the new Philosopher.

These checks and reprehensions of his friends being seconded with the
considerations of the great riches wherewith he was endewed, and these two
being strengthened with the temptation of of the Devil; yielded to many doubts
and oppositions unto Beza, notwithstanding his former resolutions, sometimes
intending to embrace God and his truth, sometimes casting an eye of love on his
present preferments being taken up with this various disposition, it pleased
the Lord to settle his inconstant mind by afflicting him with sickness, which
indeed was the cause of his spiritual welfare and health, for he well
perceiving that it was the powerful hand of the Lord Almighty, against which
there was no contending: after the suffering of many torments both inward and
outward, he fell into a detestation and loathing hatred of his own
backwardness, and turning himself unto the Lord with tears, he renewed that
vow which he had formerly made concerning the embracing of the true worship of
God, promising unfainedly that he would never start from it, but consecrate
himself wholly unto him, and unto the furtherance of his glory, if it would
please him to restore him to his former health: during the time of this
sickness he was often heard to utter those Words of David in his 142. Psalm
v. 7. Educ de carcere animam meam ut celebrem nomen tuum. Bring my soul out of
prison O Lord that I may praise thy name; and indeed the Lord which cannot
withstand the prayers of the faithful, condiscending unto him, and he obtained
his desire of the Lord.

And being recovered, he forthwith forsook Country Parents and friends, to
follow Christ; he forsook all his preferments, preferring the glory of God and
the hope of his Kingdom before all the transitory glory of the world: which
action of his is very remarkable, if we consider but the circumstance of time,
which was presently upon his recovery, being fearful that his remaining there
should be offensive unto God, or that his familiarity with his friends might
draw him into the like inconveniences, who without doubt would labor with
might and maine to reduce him to his former profession. Wherefo^e taking the
Woman unto whom he was betrothed with him, they went unto Geneva in the year of
Grace 1548. where openly in the Church, after a solemn m^nner, he was married
unto her, and there he remained for a season. Where he intended to make
profession of the Art of Printing; but the Lord who knew well that he would be
otherwise more advantageous unto his Church, hindered this proceeding, by
calling him to Lausanna, an Academy pertaining to the Lords of Berna, where he
publicly professed the Greek tongue; which Beza himself acknowledged in his
Confession of Christian Religion, Dedicated by him unto his Master Walmatius.

At that time in Lausanna were famous for Learning and Piety Petrus Viretus
Pastor of the Church, Johannes Ribbilus Professor of Divinity, Johannes
Racmundus Merlinus Professor of the Hebrew tongue, with many other excellently
well gifted; all of which seemed as it were to be ravished with the society of
this worthy member of Christ.

During his Lectureship at Lausanna, a great company of godly minded persons
thirsting after Christ and his truth, resorted unto the same place. Here Beza
perceiving a good occasion offered unto him by God, not only for his own
sa^isfaction concerning Teaching, but also for the satisfaction of the desire
of these people, concerning their instruction in the word of truth. He began
publicly and in the French tongue to expound the Epistle of S. Paul to the
Romans, and both the Epistles of S. Peter; opening unto them the great
mysteries of godliness, and informing their judgments with such Doctrines,
whereby the scales of ignorance being rubbed away, the truth did manifestly
appear unto them, whereby (without doubt) many were drawn nearer and nearer
unto Christ.

Amongst these his employments in this place, whenever any leisure was given
unto him, he would spend that time with Master Calvin at Geneva, from whom he
received great benefit both for Gods glory and the edification of the Church;
and by his persuasion he was induced to finish that excellent and Divine
Commentary on the Psalms, first begun by Marotus, which was also Printed and
published by authority in France, 1561.

About this time there happened a persecution in Paris^ wherein many Christians
suffered, some death, some imprisonment: whereupon Farellus, Beza and Calvin
were chosen Ambassadors unto the Protestant Princes of Germany^ to entreat
them that they would be pleased to intercede for them unto Henry the second
then King of France, that they might be more kindly deabt withal. But little
or no peac^ came unto the Church in respect of this act, because of the
implacable hatred which great men attending the person of the King, did bear
unto the truth of Christ.

Yet in this journey it was Bezaes good hap to have ^ sight of that godly and
learned Melanchton, who as they exceeding joyful of the presence of each
other, so they were also exceeding sorrowful for the present afflicted and
d^stressed state of the Church.

Beza having now remained ten years in Lausanna, he left it, and not without
the good leave and love of the Senate of Berne, and came to Geneva, where
teaching a public School, he expounded the Orations of Demosthenes together
with some Books of Aristotle, and had daily and familiar conference with
Calvin, touching things pertaining unto Doctrine and Ecclesiastical
Discipline; where in short time he was appointed to succeed Claudius Pontanus
(a faithful Minister in the Church of Geneva) for the discharging of a
Ministerial function, and also to join with Calvin in the reading of the
Divinity Lecture. Where he was also again advanced to be head Master of a
Free-schoole, which was set up by the persuasion of Calvin, for the future
benefit of the same City.

Notice being taken in France of his Confession of the Christian Faith, which
without question wrought deep impression in the hearts of many; he was
entreated by Letters sent from some Peers of France, that he would be pleased
to visit Anthony King of Navarre then residing in Aquitaine, and to confer with
him concerning matters of importance, but especially concerning such things
which might be of force to beget true knowledge in the ground^ of Christian
Religion; for there was some hopes that if he could be brought thereunto, that
the Church of God would not be so cruelly and inhumanely dealt withal within
the Kingdom of France. Which enterprise, God giving a blessing thereunto,
wanted not its fortunate and happy success, though not in the days of
A^thony, yet in the days of Charles the ninth; for he not only entering into a
consideration of the truth of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, but also into
the truth of the Doctrine of the reformed Church, and with many of his Nobles
adhered unto the same, and fo^thwith s^nt both Ambassadors and Letters to the
Senate of Geneva, to intrea^ the presence of reverend Beza, concerning the
d^sciding of those Controversies which were at that time on foot betwix^ the
Papists and the Reformed Churches. This request was with great joy condiscended
unto by the Senate of Geneva, who sent Beza with many prayers for the
advancem^nt of Gods glory; Peter Martyr was also called from Tigurum by the
Mother Queen, who with all speed came to Paris.

Great was the conflict which Beza had at that time in the ^resence of the
King, with Cardinal Lotharingus, concerning the Real Presence ^ wherein he
confuted the erroneous opinion of the Cardinal, affirming that the vi^ible
signs were touched with the hands, eaten and drunken with the mouth; but that
the thing signified ( viz. the Body and Blood of Christ) was offered and
received by Faith. Which judgment of his the Cardinal approved of at the
last, as he himself testified unto the Queen, and was also embraced by her
self.

The conference being ended with happy success to the glory of God, and
furtherance of his truth, Martyr returned to Tigurum, and Beza intended to go
unto Geneva, but he was hindered by the Authority of the Queen who plainly told
him, that seeing he was a French man, he might be the Author of much good unto
his own Nation.

Beza being thus detained contrary to his expectation, spent not the time
unprofitably but betook himself unto the preaching of the Word, sometimes in
the Palace of the King of Navarre, sometimes in the house of the Prince
Cordaeus, and sometimes in the suburbs of the City of Paris: for then it was
by public Proclamation decreed, that the use of the reformed Religion should
be tolerated in the suburbs without any Molestation; but they enjoyed not that
benefit long, by reason of a conspiracy performed by Guisius, and other wicked
persons for the utter extinguishing of the truth; who urging the King with the
example of Balderinus, that Religion was but a thing indifferent, and that he
might condemn and renounce the day after that which he approved and allowed
the day before; they received this answer from him; That he would never put hi^
foo^ so far into the Sea but that he would be able to pluck it back again when
he listed; and so he departed and forsook the truth of Christ, and never after
sent for Beza to have any conference with him.

Whereupon a hot persecution entered into the bowels of France, against the
Protestants, forty five of them being put to the sword, in the same place where
they were gathered together to hear the Word of God preached; whereupon Beza
was sent to complain unto the King of their inhumane cruelty, but found no
redress; whereupon preparation was made to defend themselves by force of
Arms; the Prince Condaeus desired Beza to remain with him in so dangerous and
necessary a season, who although^ it grieved him greatly to be absent from his
flock at Geneva, yet he consents unto the request of this religious Prince, and
remained with him, preaching and exhorting Christians privately, to a patient
waiting of the Lords leisure.

The Protestants betook themselves unto Orleans, to which place the enemies
marching, in the fields thereof was fought a terrible battle, wherein Condaeus
was taken prisoner and the Protestants lost the day, who (notwithstanding this
sorrowful accident) were much comforted by those divine letters which were
sent unto them by Beza, and they still remaining firm in that doctrine which
they had received.

Not long after a peace being concluded, and the prisoners restored to their
former liberty, Beza obtained leave of the same Prince to return unto Geneva,
after he had spent two and twenty months with great labor, and manifest
dangers of his life.

Coming to Geneva, not without the great joy of the Inhabitants, he went
forward in his ordinary course of teaching both in the Church and School,
continued with Master Calvin in reading the Divinity Lecture until his death,
then he performed it only himself, appointing Calladonus Danaeus and Fayus,
to be the Humanity Lecturers in the same City.

And in this godly couse he laboriously continued, until the time that he was
called unto Rupella, by the general entreaty and request of the French
Churches, and earnest desire of the Queen of Navarre, and of other Peers of
France, where the confession of the faith of the French Churches was repeated
and confirmed, and strenthned with the approbation of the Queen of Navarre, and
the Prince Condaeus; and so he returned to Geneva again, and indefatigably
continued his constant course of teaching, and then he corrected his
Annotations on the New Testament.

From thence he was cealld again to Berna for the confutation of the error of
Alb^rius concerning justification, who taught that our righteousness before
God, was a mere pasive quality inhaerent in our selves; which opnion with other
error^ of his hindering the growth of the truth of Christ, were there condemned,
and the reading of his books forbidden by the Senate of Berne: which being
ended he returned unto Geneva again, and having notice of the great troubles
to ensue; not only in France in general, but also in Geneva it self in
particular, he cau^ed public prayers to be sent up unto God twice every week
extraordinary for the turning away of his wrath, and for the peace and
flourishing state of the Church: and so he continued preaching and praying for
the advancement of the Gospel of Christ, until such time as age made him
unfit for the performance of these duties.

Yet here by the way we may observe the great malice of the Romish Jesuits,
who before the payment of his debt to nature, scandalized him with a defection
to the doctrine of the Church of Rome; not much unlike that which was of late
cast on that reverend Bishop of London, but this impudent untruth was refuted
by the Pastors of Geneva, who by their writings and subscriptions of their
names, both in Latin and French, testified the contrary unto the world; many
of them being present at his death, who on the thirteenth of October, in the
year of our Lord 1605. being the Lords day, rising early and calling his family
to prayers; which done he walked up and down some few paces, and receiving
some small quantity of wine, repaired to his bed again, demanding whether all
things were quiet in the City, and when answer was made they were, he forthwith
gave up his soul into the hands of Almighty God, with all alacrity and
cheerfulness, after that he had lived in this vale of misery eighty six years
and three months and nineteen days, and after that he had painfully discharged
a Pastoral office, the space of sixth and forty years.

He was of stature somewhat tall, but corpulent or big boned; in his age he
had a long thick beard as white as snow, he had a grave Senators countenance,
broad faced, but not fat, and in general by his comely person sweet affability
and gravity, he would have exhorted reverence from those that least loved him.

His great diligence and laborious travel for the advancing of Christ's
Kingdom, and for the suppressing and beating down of sin, are made manifest
by the learned Works which he has left behind him as so many witnesses, to
eternity, take them after this ordes.

1 Poems printed by Henry Stephan. 2 Psalms printed with Buchanans. 3
School-notes on the Greek Alphabet. 4 Abraham's sacrifice.

In Theology.

1 New translation of the new Testament with Annotations. 2 Confession of
Christian faith. 3 Of punishing haereticks. 4 The sum of Christianity. 5 The
doctrine of the Sacrament. 6 The defense of the Church of Geneva. 7 An answer
against Nestorius and Eutichus his sect. 8 Of the hypostaticall Union. 9 Theses
of the Trinity of Persons and Unity of Essence. 10 An answer to the repr^aches
of Francis Baldwin. 11 A treatise of Polygamie. 12 Calvin's life. 13 Psalms of
David and five books of the other Prophets with Latin Paraphases. 14 French
Psalms. 15 Comments o^t of Saint Paul's Epistles. 16 To the Romans. 17
Galathians. 18 Philippians. 19 Colossians. 20 Icones of many learned men
especially Protestants. 21 Pictures and Embleemes. 22 Moral, Ceremonial,
Judicial law of Moses. 23 A Praeface to Osiander. 24 Of the Pestilence. 25
Solomon's Song in Latin verse. 26 Homilies on Christ's resurrection. 27 Of the
P^onounciation of the French tongue. 28 An answer to Jodic Harth, of the Lords
Supper. 29 Questions and answers on the Sacrament.

Si qua fides famae, proles mihi difiet omnis,
At viria and vera prole biatus ego.
Me populi, me mistae and reges dixere parentu,
Multa virum genui, millia Christ tibi.
If fame may be believed, I am he
To whom an Infant can no relate be,
Yet blessed with issue by a higher fate
And that both many and legitimate:
Not only people, with their priests together,
But also Kings vouchsafe to call me father.
Thousands of souls O Christ have been by me
Begotten through thy holy Word to thee.
Who knows not learned Beza, what dull ear
Has not large volumes of his history there?
Or what ill furnished Gallery cannot show
His reverend Picture, marshalled in the row
Of rare and modern Worthies, to advance
The glory of his pen renowned France?
From whose more painful and illustrious quill,
Such Quintessence of sweetness did distill;
Which like the dropping Hermony pearly dew,
Refresht fair Syons plants, and did renew
Their drooping spirits, wasted heretofore,
And blasted with the breath of Babils whore^
To whose blessed name let every heart that did
Ere prize true virtue, turn a Pyramid.
JOHN RENOLDS.
The Life and Death of John Reinolds.
THis singular man of infinite reading, this treasury of all learning, both
divine and humane ( summus ille vir immensae lectionis doctrinae and omne genus
eruditionis gazophilatium) Doctor John Reinolds was borne in the same County of
Devo^, and bred up in the same College of Corpus Christi in Oxford, with
Jewel his ancient and R. Looker, his contemporary. And what Tully spoke of
Pompey his Noble exploits in War that they could not be matched by the valiant
Acts of all the Roman Commanders in one year, nor in all years by the process
of one Commander; so it may truly be said of these three that they cannot be
parrallelled by the students of all Counties, brought up in one College, nor
the students of all Colleges born in one County: the two former mainely
opposed the enemies of the doctrine, the third of the discipline of the Church
of England with like happy success, and they were all three in several kinds
very eminent if not equal; and as Jewels fame first grew from the rhetoric
Lecture, which he read with singular applause: and Hookers from the Logic, so
Reynolds grom the Greek in the same house. The Author that he read was
Aristotle, whose three incomparable books of Rhetoric, he illustrated with
so exquisite a commentary so richly fraught with all polite littrature, that as
well in the commentary as in the text a man may find that aureum flumen rerum
and verborium, that golden ensturrent, the Prince of Orators tells us of. It
was his manner every Term to begin his Lectures with an exhortatory Oration to
his auditors: of these his elegant paraeneticks, two were published in print by
himself, the other were since his death put forth by Henry Iackeson Fellow of
the same College; of these later an intilligent reader will give a like
censure to that of the Orator, sunt tantuam phidiae Minerva sed tumen ex eadem
efficina; they are not like the other two his malter his pieces, yet any man
may perceive they were drawn with the same pensill. Whilst he continued this
Lecture it was his hap as it had been of Politian, and Erasmus before him to
tread upon a nest of Hornets, a sort of wrangling Sophisters bred of the
excrements of the Dunsticall Commenters upon Aristotle, fed advocates to plead
for all his Phylosophicall errors, and sworn enemies to all polite learning;
these he so strongly confuted in his Lectures, and faceciously derided in his
Orations, that any ingenuous man that peruseth them, be he a Crassus Agelastus
will be in like manner affected, as Erasmus was when he read the Book
entitled Epistolae obscurorum virorum; at which he fell into such a laughter,
that he much hurt his spleen and endangered his health.

All this while this our John Reinolds was well affected to the Romish
Religion, and his Brother William Reinolds earnest for Reformation; which
difference in judgment proved a fireball of contention between them, and
engaged them in a strange Duel, much like to that of Eteocles and Polynices,
wherein both conquered one the other, yet neither enjoyed the victory, nor kept
his prisoner; for John Reinolds, who before was a Papist, by these bickerings
became a zealous Protestant, and William Reinolds who before had been a zealous
Protestant, became a Iesuited Papist, and wrote most pestilent Books against
the Church and State; and as after the death of Eteocles and Polynices, when
their corpse were burnt, the flames are said to have parted: so the contention
of these Brethren expired not with their death; for the writings which they
have left behind them, enflamed with contrary fires of zeal, hold the
quarrel on foot to this day. Of these Bella plusquam civilia, among Brethren,
W. A. a learned Divine, thus elegantly discourses in English and Latin
Verses: Bella inter geminos pl^squam civilia Fratres,
Traxerat ambiguas Religionis apex;
Ille reformandae fidei pro partibus instat;
Ille reformandam deneg^^ esse fidem,
Propositus causae rationibus inter vtruomque,
Concurrere pares and cecidere pures,
Quod fuit in vatis fratrem capi^ alter u^rumque,
Quod fuit in fates perdit uterque fidem,
Captivi gemini sine captivan^^ fuerunt,
Et victor victi transfugor castra petit:
Quod genus hoc pugnae est? ubi victus gaudet uterque,
Et simul alteru^e^ se superasse dolet.


Englished by the Author.

Between two Brethren civil war and worse,
The nice point of Religion long did nurse;
For reformation of the Faith he plyes;
That Faith should be reformed this denies.
The reasons of each cause a part propounded;
Both met alike, both fell alike confounded.
As heart would wish, each one his brother takes;
As fate would have, each one his faith forsakes:
Without captiver both are captive led,
And to the vanguisht camp the victor fled;
What war is this, when conquered both are glad,
And either to have conquered other sad?
John R^inolds might truly have said to his brother a^ Caecillius sometimes
spoke to Octavius in that most exquisit dialogue of Minutius Faelix. Vtrique
vicim^^ tui victor mei and ego triumphator er^eres; thou have conquered me, and
I triumph over my fo^mer errors: but William Reinolds might one the contrary
side have said, we are both loosers, for thou have l^st me thy brother, and I
have lost my mother the Church of England, and the true Religion. As soon as
our John Reinolds according to the manner of Massy bodies, after some
quavering was fixed unmoveably upon the grounds of the Protestant Religion; the
Statutes of the College called upon him to enter into holy Orders, after which
he wholly addicted himself to the study of the holy Scriptures, and because an
excellent textuary and very often exercised his sweet gift in preaching, a
taste whereof we have in his Lectures upon Obadi^^, published after his death by
Master Hind^. When the time drew near that by the Founders Statutes he was
upon necessity to take his degree in Divinity, he was chosen out by the
University to answer the Boctovers in the Act^ July the 13. 1579. and the same
year November the third he answered for his degree in the Divinity Schools,
the Theses maintained by him in the Act were these: 1. The holy Scriptures
teaches the Church all things necessary to salvation. 2. The Church militant
upon earth is subject to error both in faith and manners. 3 The Authority of
the Scriptures is greater then that o^ the Church.


The Theses propounded by him in the Divinity Sbhool (...) the third, were
these.

1. The holy Catholic Church, which we believe is the whole number of Gods
elect. 2. The Roman Church is neither the Catholic Church nor a sound member
thereof. 3. The reformed Churches in England, Scotland, France, Germany, and
other Kingdom^ and Commonwealths have lawfully severed themselves from the
Church of Rome.
The handling of these questions gave so good contentment to the whole
University, that his suppositions as they call them, that is, the Speeches he
made in the explication and confirmation of these Positions were extorted from
him to the Press; by the Printing whereof, when he understood how he had
netled all the Romanists, who in diverse virilent pamphlets disparaged them,
and threatened by a speedy refutation to eclipse the fame thereof; he ^he
better to arm himself against these Romish locusts, with indifatigable pains
in a short space read all the Greek and Latin Fathers, and perused all
ancient records of the Church, that he could come by; and grew so perfect in
them that as Livie conceives that if Alexander had turned his progress
Westward toward Italy, as he did Eastwards toward the territories of the
Persian Empire, the Noble Commander of the Romans Paperius surnamend Curser, or
the raser, would have matched him, if not out stripped him: so if Reinolds his
own inclination or Authority, had put upon him the task of examining Caesar
Baronius his Annals, he would not only every way have matched that so much
admired Cardinal, but in such sort have detected his Romish friends in
postures and forgeries; that any man whose eyes were not darkened with mist of
prejudicate affection should have clearly seen that the doctrine of the
reformed Churches has as great a share in true antiquity as in ancient truth.

But Reinolds was drawn into the Lists with another, one John Heart, who took
the heart and boldness to challenge the learnedest of both Universities to try
the Doctrine of our Church, by the touchstone of Scripture and Faith, etc. To
enco^nter him Master Reinolds is sent for by a great Counselor of Estate, and
many combats ( lingua and calamo) he had with this antagonist; in all which
Master Hear^ gave ground, and in the end quite qui^ted the field^ as appears
by a Letter wri^ten with his own hand, which I have seen, sent from the Tower
of London. In which Letter prefixed to the Conference, he has words to this
effect^ I acknowledge that the Narration of the conference set forth be^weene
Master Reinolds and me is true; and whereas he somewhere affirme^h, namely
chap. 7. Sect. 7. that I should grant that it is not lawful for the Pope to
depose Princes: it (...) tr^e, I said as much, and am still of this judgement^
that howsoever the spiritual power be more excellent and noble then the
temporal, yet they both are from God, and neithe^ depends of the other.
Whence I infer this undoub^ed conclusion, That their opinion who make the
Pope a temporoll Lord over Kings and Princes, has no ground at all, nor so
much as pr^bability nor show of reason.

This conference confirmed by the ^ubscription of both parties, was shortly
after printed by authority; and it gave such satisfaction to all indifferent
readers, that thereby the fame of Master Reynolds was cried up as well at the
Court as the University; and it pleased Queen Elizabeth, after he had taken his
degree of Doctor, to appoint him to read an extraordinary Divinity Lecture in
Oxford; in which he grapled with a more renowned Champion of the Rom^n Church
then John Heart, namely father Robert Bellarmine; for his subtle head,
afterward graced with a Cardinals Cap. This Jesuit was then Reader to the
English Seminary in Rome; whose Dictates (wonderfully favored) no sooner taken
in writing by his Auditors; but by some of Secr^tary Walsingams intelligencers
residing at Rome, they were sent by Post in Packets to the Court, and from
thence speeded to Doctor Reynolds, who acquainting his Auditory with the very
days in every month and week, in which father Robert handled such a point,
addressing himself immediately to make a punctual answer thereunto; insomuch,
that what Saint Bernard speaks to another purpose, may be truly affirmed of
Cardinal Bellarmines books of controversies, that they were primes damnati
quam nati; branded before they were printed.

Never were any Lectures in our memory so frequented, as these in that
University; nor any in Cambridge, save those of Doctor Whitaker, the great
light of the other University as Reynolds was of this; on these golden tapers
were the eyes of all that loved the truth fixed, and the Queen hearing of the
good service they did to the Church, preferred them both, the one to a Headship
in Cambridge, the other to a dignity in the Church, the Deanery of Lincoln.
Into which after Doctor Reynolds was invested, and settled the ^ffaires of the
Church ther^, but of an exceeding delight he took in an Academicall life, he
returned back to Oxford, and there lived some few year^ in Queens College,
which place he made choice of for the infinite amity betwixt him and Doctor
Robinson Bishop of Ca^lile. In which time, besides many other, he began a noble
work of very great importance, de Romanae Ecclesiae idololutria: this most
learned and elaborate piece consisted of eight Books, whereof two he put forth
in the year 1596. and dedicated the^ to the Earl of Essex.

Of his life and manner of conversation whilst he abode in Queens College, let
Dr. Cracanthorp, then a Student in that College speak ou^ of his own knowledge.
When we were young Students in Queen^ College, Doctor Reynolds conversed with
us so familiarly and so profitably, that whatsoever, how often soever, how much
soever any man desired to learn from him in any kind of knowledge, we daily
drew it from his mouth, as an ever-springing and never failing Well; for he had
turned over (as I conceive) all Writers, profane, Ecclesiastical and Divine;
all the Councels, Fathers and Histories of the Church; he was most excellent in
all Tongues which might be any way of use, or serve for ornament to a Divine:
he was of a sharp and nimble wit, of a grave and mature judgment, of
indefatigable industry, exceeding therein Oregen, surnamed Adamantius; he was
so well seen in all Arts and Sciences as if he had spent his whole time in
each of them; moreover for his virtue, probaty, integrity, and which is above
all, piety and sanctity of life; he was so eminent and conspicuous that as
Nazianzen speaks of Athanasius, it might be said of him, to name Reinolds is
to commend virtue it self. In a Word, so modest, courteous, affable and sweet
was his carryage, that though he were to be ranked above the highest, yet he
made himself equal in a manner with the lowest.

In this Naioth he conversed after this manner, with the Prophets and Prophets
children till the 50th year of his age, when by the means of Archbishop
Whitgift and the Earl of Essex, he procured an exchange with Doctor Cole, more
for his convenience then his profit: the Deanery of Lincoln was conferred upon
Doctor Cole and Doctor Reinolds was chosen President of Corpus Christi
College, in which eminent place of preferment in the University, though he
continued not above eight years, yet according to the distinction of Seneca,
between Vixit and fuit N^n, ille diu fuit sed din vixit: we may truly say,
that though he abode not there long, yet he lived ther^ long; diu precedit
licet, non diu fedi^ he ruled there long, though he sat but a short time, h^
did more good to that Society in eight years, then any of his Predecessors in
the like time trebled.

For he brought the College much before hand, which before through the
covetousness of the Governors or negligence of inferior officers, was very
much impoverished: he procured an Act of Parliament for assuring some lands to
it: he caused diverse ambiguous Statutes to be expounded by the visitor Doctor
Bilson Bishop of Winton, and all the Statutes to be more duly observed then
ever they had been before. He repaired and exceedingly beautified the
Chapel, Library and Hall; he much improved the Scholars, Chaplains and
Clerks places; to the Fellowships he added nothing, partly because he found
their maintenance very competent, but especially because he conceived that the
more he should increase their ma^ntenance the more he should take off their
edge from seeking preferments abroad, and taking on them the cure of souls,
and furnishing the Church with able and learned Pastors, which he knew to be
the chief end for which most if not all the Colleges in the University were
built; which as it appears by the Founders Statutes ought to be as nursers for
choice plants to be set and nourished there for a while, and after to be
transplanted into the Spouse garden, and not to wither in these beds. It was
said of Sparta that it was the best place in the world for men to grow old in,
because old age there was most respected and honoured^ but the contrary may be
said of Scholars and Fellows places in the University, for the less time
they stay there after they are ripe for preferment the better they deserve of
the Church and Commonwealth. -- Carpite florem
Qui nisi carpius erit turpiter ipse cadit. During his Government in Corpus
Christi College, though he were incumbered with multiplicity of other
business (and which was worse) often visited with an ill guest the Gout, which
not only keeps possession against the owners will, but imprisons his landlord
and claps such bolts upon his feet that he cannot stir: Yet being moved
thereunto by Archbishop Whitgift (impurum and impium sanderiue schismate,
Anglicano volumen ut refutarem rogusti) he begun the refutation of Sander his
impure and impious book de Schismate Angli, and proceeded so far therein, that
he cleared all matters of faith: But wanting some records to clear diverse
matters of fact objected in that scandalous Libell, he was forced to make a
pause, and in the mean time he ^ramed an Apology of his Theses, and
unanswerably vindicated them against the Roman Elymases Stapleton, Martine,
Bellarmine, Baronius and Iustius Calvinus vetra, Castrencus. And lying in
London to over-see the Press and correct the proofs: as he walked in Finsbu^y
fields, in the year of our Lord 1602. an Arrow whether shot purposely by some
Jesuited Papist or at random I know not, fell upon his breast, but entered not
his body, not so much by reason of the weak fence of his Gown held up before
him in folds, as the strong buckler of faith, which whosoever has on him, need
not fear any torrour by night, nor the arrow that flies by day, Psalm 91.5.

Howbeit, though he then shunned the danger of this flightsha^t, yet he escaped
not other arrow^s mentioned by the Psalmist, even bitter words, these sharp
arrows headed with malice and pointed with envy, were daily shot at him, not
only by foreign enemies abroad, as namely Weston and Spalatenses after his
revolt ( dictione sar^ata studio vanissimus secta fanaticus) but by ill willers
at home, whose loose life kept no good quarter with his strict government. Who
as he was a most exact observer of the Statutes himself. so he was a most
sever censurer of the contemners and wilful breakers thereof, and though he
were of a tender and compassionate disposition, yet like a wise Surgeon,
when h^ saw Plasters and Poultesses would do no good, and the flesh begin to
gangreine, he cut off by expulsion two rotten members of that Society; Cuncta
prius tentanda sed immedicabile vulnus ^use recidendum est ne pars sincera
tra^atur. The one of them was a Chaplain of the House; homo nullarum artium
nullarum par^ium: a worthless man, who to his other impardonable crimes added
a dull but most malicious Lib^ll against the President himself; and therefore
deserved not only to be banished the College, but exiled also out of all
memory; the other was a Batchellour of Art, as I take it, intra brennium
probationes; a man of other wise commendabl^ parts; but of whom it might be
truly said as it was of Galba, ingenium Galbae male habitat.

This Delinquent, who by often reiteration of the like offenses had encurred
the censure of expulsion, which the President and seven Seniors were bound by
oath to execute upon him, craved leave of the President to make his farewell
Oration; His Theme was Medicum saeverum intemporanes aeger facit: that is, A
waward Patient makes a froward Physician. In that Speech of his he took
occasion to justify the President and Fellows proceeding against him, and
dep^ored his incorrigible enormities with tears, but then it was too late:
nullis ille movetur
Fle^ibus aut voces ullus tractabiles audit


I confess Sen^ca his observation is true; qui vult amari languida reg^e^
manu: a Governor that will be loved and generally spoken well of^ must hold an
easy reine; but where mettle Colts or restie jades are to be broken, he that
holds no^ a straight rain, and makes not use of a strong cur^e, may be cast
out of the saddle, as Doctor Reynolds his immediate Predecessor had like to
have been, whose pruning Knife, though it were keen and sharp, yet was so
discreetly used by him, that the choice Plant^ in that Nursery never thriv^d
better then in his time.

About this time Queen Elizabeth exchanged her mortal crown with ^n immortal,
and King James succeeded her, and swayed the Scepter of this Kingdom; who in
the beginning of his reign, desirous to settle peace in the Church commanded
many learned men to meet at Hampton Court, to compose some differences about
the external Discipline of the Church. In that Conference, what part by royal
command was put upon Doctor Re^nolds, and how he acted it (with profession and
promise of all conformity) appears by the Acts thereof set forth by Bishop
Barloe. After this Conference, is pleased his Majesty to set some learned men
on work, to translate the Bible into the English tongue, among others Doctor
Reynolds was thought upon, to whom for his great skill in the original
Languages, Doctor Smith afterward Bishop of Glos^er, Doctor Harding President
of Magdalens, Doctor Kilbie Rector of Lincoln College, Doctor Bret, and
others, employed in that work by his Majesty, had recourse once a week, and
in his Lodgings perfected their Notes; and though in the midst of this Work
the gout first took him, and after a consumption, of which he dyed; yet in a
great part of his sickness the meeting held at his Lodging, and he lying on
his Pallet, assisted them and in a manner in the very translation of the book
of (...) was translated to a better life. All the time of his sickness, sa^^
when he conferred with the translators, was spent in pra^er and hearing partly
Treatises of devotion, and partly books of controversy read unto him. This
course held till Assention day, when his sickness growing sore upon him he
fell in a trance, of which when he was recovered, he spoke comfortably to us
all there present, saying, that He well hoped that he should have ascended that
very day of o^r Lords ascension; but now, says he, I shall stay a little
longer w^^h you, in which time I entreat you to read nothing to me, but such
chapters of holy Scripture as I shall appoint. Among others designed by him
when we read the first chapter of Saint Paul to the Philippians, and staid a
little upon those words, God is (...) record how greatly I long after you all
in the bowels of Jesus Chri^^^ and this I pray, that your love may abound yet
more and more (...) knowledge and in all judgment, that you may approve things
that are excellent; that you may be sincere and without offense till the (...)
of Christ, being filled with the fruits of righteousness which are (...) Jesus
Christ, unto the glory and praise of God. And proceeding afterward in that
chapter to the twentieth verse: As (...) ways so now also Christ shall be
magnified in my body, whether it (...) by life or by death; for to me to live
is Christ, and to dye is gain^^ but if I live in the flesh, this is the fruit
of my labor, yet what I shall choose I wot not, for I am in a strait between
two, having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is far better;
nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you. And as we were
going further and reading the five and twentiet^ verse; having this confidence,
I know that I shall abide and contin^^ with you, he bad us there stop and make
an end; intimatin^ thereby that unto us, which after a few days ^ell out to
our great grief, that he was not to continue with us.

By this time the University being full of the news of his end approaching,
the Noble men Sons then re^iding in the University, and the Heads of diverse
Colleges together with the Kings Professor Doctor Holland came to visit him;
who Prayed with him and for him; for whose love Doctor Reynolds thanked him:
the day before he dyed, when the Vicechancellour Doctor Aerie and Master Bo^lton
of Brazennose, Master Wilkinson of Wadsdowne, Master Lindle Vice President of
the College and my self came to take our last leave of him, at the motion of
Master Boulton Doctor Aerie acquainted Doctor Reynolds what scandalous reports
the Papists had cast out concerning the nature of his disease, and how they
were confuted by Doctor Chennell his Physician, and Master White his
Apothecary, and added withal that it was likely they might sprea^ such a brute
of him as they had of Beza, that he recanted upon his death bed: and therefore
that it was earnestly desired by many of his dear friends in the University,
that he would give some testimony of his constancy in the truth before his
departure: at this he shookee his head and seemed much to be grieved, because
his spe^ch was taken from him; which the Vicechancellor perceiving with tears
in his eyes, besought him that he would give him leave to set down a form in
writing to which if he liked it, God might enable him to set his hand, and
thereby give satisfaction to all his friends: which Doctor Reynolds expressed
by sighs, that he approved of the Vicechancellors advising, with the rest of
us there present wrote a few lines to this effect.

These are to testify to all the world, that I dye in the profession of that
faith which I have taught all my life, both in my Preaching and in my Writings,
with an assured hope of my salvation, only by the merits of Christ my savior:
this form being ^wise read unto him, he seriously pondered every Word, and
after clapped his hand upon his nose, whereby his servant John Duhurst who
attended him in his sickness, told us that he desired a pair of spectacles,
which after they were reached unto him, and he had put them on, he took the
pen out of Doctor Aeries hand and subscribed his name not only in legible, but
in very fair caracters: at which we all admired the more, because he had
diverse times that morning assayed to write but could not through extreme
weakness write one word or syllable in a legible hand, whether the earnest
intention of his mind at this time strengthened his hand, or God
extraordinarily assisted him; I leave it to the judgment of all that are
truly religious, and take such things to heart: The morrow after, death
seazing upon all parts of his body he expressed by signs that he would have
the passing bell tole for him, and as his friends running in compassed his b^d
all about, and every one cast in his shot which was some choice and comfortable
text of holy Scripture; he lifting up one of his hands (which presently fell
down and stir^d no more) and after his lifting up his eyes to heaven, and
fixing them there immovable without any trouble or sign of pain, without so
much as any sigh or groan, he breathed out his soul into the hands of his
redeemer the Thursday after Ascen^ion day between eleven and twelve of the
clock the twenty one of May 1607. on Monday following he w^^ honorably
interred, the Vice Chancellor in close mourning, the Noble men's sons, heads of
Celledges and Hals with all their companies in Academicall habits, and the
Mayor and Aldermen in their Scarlet gowns attending the Funeral; the corpse
brought out of Corpus Christi College, was first carried to Saint Mary's where
a funeral Sermon was made by Doctor A^rie then Vice Chancellor: after the
Sermon ended the body being removed to the Chancell, Mr. Isack^ Wake, then the
University Orator, after Lord Ambassador in Venice and France successively
honored the dead with ^ short but elegant Panegyric, which follows after
this, (...) body was carried back to the College, and their a second Funeral
Oration appointed to be made in the Chapp^ll near his grave, but the Chapel
being not capable of the fourth part of the Funeral troop, a Desque was set
up and covered with mourning in the quadrangle, and there a brief History of
his life with the manner of his death, s^t forth by Daniel Featley then fellow
and deane of Arts in that College. After his burial, a Monument and Statue in
the Chapel was erected for him by Doctor Spencer his successor, with an
inscription in golden letter^ as follows

Virtuti Sacrum.

JO. RAINOL^^ S. The^l. D. erud^tione, Pi^ta^e, Integritate incomparabili hujus
Coll. Pes. qui obi^t May 21 0. Anno 1607 0. aeta^. suae 5^ 0. JO. SPEN^ER
aud^tor^ successor, virtutum and sanctitatis admirator, b.m. amoris er^o posuit.

But these are dark and divine caracters in respect of those wherewith his
fame is Printed in his Works, whereof some are come to light, others may in
good time. His Printed Works are these.

1 Two Orations Printed in the year 1576. 2 His six Theses Printed in the year
1579. 3 His conference with Heart, Prin^ed in English 1585. and afterward
translated into Latin by Henry Pary Bishop of Gloucester, and Printed by command
of Archbishop Bancroft 1610. 4 De Romanae ecclesiae Idololatria, Printed in the
year 1596. 5. An Apology of his Theses 1602. 6 Since his death certain
Epistles between him, Doctor G^g^r and Alberi^us Gentius concerning Stage
plays. 7 A Treatise of divorce, amd marrying again in case of adultery. 8 A
c^nsure of the Apochrypha in two T^m^s contain^ng in them 250. of his Lectures
in the Divinity Schools. 9 Cer^aine Epistles and Orations of his in Latin,
set forth by Henry Jackson. 10 His Lectures upon Obediah in English with a
Sermon of thanksgiving for the Queens Majesty's deliverance from a dangerous
treason, set forth by Mr. Hind. His Works which remain in Manuscript never
yet printed are^ 11 A commen^ary in Latin upon Aristotle's three book^s of
Rhe^oricke. 12 The materials and first draught of six books, de Idololatria
Romanae eccl^siae. 13 Sermons upon Aggi the Prophet, Preached in Oxford. 14 His
learned answer to Sanders de scismate Anglicano, in defense of our Reformation,
the regal supremacy, and the book of Ordination of Bishops Priests and
Deacons. 15 A defense of the English liturgy against Robert Brown the father
of ^he separatists his scismaticall book. 16 A Treatise of the beginning and
progesse of Popish errors, and that for the first three hundred years after
Christ, Bishops ruled their own diocese without subjection to the Pope. 17 A
Treatise of Daniel Weeks against Hugh Braughton, dedicated to Archbishop
Whitgift.

A Funeral Oration delivered in St. MARY'S Church in Oxon; at the sad
Interment of Doctor John Reynols, by Master Isacke Wake, the University Orator,
May 25. 1607. Translated out of Latin.
HOw frail and unconstant the condition of our life is, and how fitly
resembled to a dream, or a tale, I could wish (most honored Doctors, and the
rest of the sad troop, all the children of our mother the University) had it
so pleased the highest, we might have learned by any other experiment, rather
then this sad spectacle; doubtless we have seen but too many evidences of the
decrepit age of the world, now drooping to ruin; as the distemper of the
Heavens, the malignity of the Stars, the boisterous gusts of the Winds, the
deluges of water from the Clouds, the foming billoes of the Sea, swelling with
unheard of fury: which sad presages terrify religious minds with a fear of
the Sky falling about our ears, and nature breathing out her last gasp; yet
we fl^ttered our selves in to a vain belief that the Muses were eternal, and
though all other things fade like flowers, yet that the Arts were immortal
until this great Atlas of learning, with whom sacred studies seemed to totter,
if not lie on the ground; taught us by his death the vanity of that our hope.
Whose happy pass, agreeable to his godly life, God forbid that any should
deplore with Heathenish rikes and lamentable Elegies, since our ferventest
zeal can now wish him no other addition to his happiness then that of
Virginius Rufus to have another Tacitus to make his Funeral Panegyricke. As
for me, when I behold this solemn and sad Assembly, not usually accustomed to
such dejected looks, me thinks I see those tears that fell from the royal
eyes of great King Xerxes dropping at the view of his puissant Army, which
makes me deeply ^igh, because in this deplored mirror, blubbered with tears,
I find the reflection even of your mortality: For which of you now can hope
that either learning, wisdom, or virtue can prolong his life, since the
churlish Sisters refused to spare this mighty Hercules of the Orthodox Faith;
this great Champion of Christian Religion, though they were solic^ted by the
tears of our Mother the University, and importuned by the prayers of our
sorrowing Church. Verily, if the in^stimable treasures of thy mind and
indefeizible riches of thy soul could have contributed any thing to the
strength and vigor of the body, thou should still have lived (worthy
Reynolds) not so much according to thine own desire, who wishedst for heaven
as hours, who wished longer for thee, and so lived 1000. that thou should
never have dyed, waxed old, or drooped. But to the great loss of Mankind and
prejudice of Learning, it falls out far otherwise, even that in those who more
enrich their mind with the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, the soul
sooner grows weary of her earthly habitation, and aspireth to heaven^ and
their body also, by reason their spirits are wholly spent in that noble, yet
laborious work of study, more speedily fails and decays. Which was the
true cause that thou Reynolds after so many conquests and triumphs over the
enemie^ of our Faith, yet the strength of thy body being impaired, in the end
did yield to nature, and breathedst out thy victorious soul, and leftest
nothing to us but sighs for our sad loss.

But what? could not thy singular piety, nor thy virtue, nor thy sanctity, nor
thy so much admired learning preserve thee? Or did thou resolve to live no
longer, because there was nothing left which thy studies had not already
attained unto? Was not Ficinus worthy thy perusing who discourses so
learnedly, not only of the preservation of health, but also of the prerogation
of our life to eternity upon earth? Well: long enough peradv^nture thou have
lived for thy particul^r ends, long enough to be so truly honored, that 'twas
not possible that ever thou should outlive thy fame: Yet not long enough
for the Commonwealth, which misseth in thee a perfect sampler of all virtues.
Not long enough for the University, which has lost in thee the light of a
glorious taper of learning: nor yet long enough for the good state, our pure
Religion, which tossed in the swelling billows of a troubled Sea, is ready
almost to suffer shipwreck for want of thee her skillful Pylot.

Truth it is, none can deny it, that like a second Cocles (but yet more
courageous) thou did rout the tro^p^ of thy stout^st enemies. Truth, that
even when the enemy had cut off the bridge on which thou stoodst, thou leaping
down to thi^^ eternal honor, did preserve the colour^, and as ^ast did
beat the adversaries to a shameful retreat. But the le^guer is not yet broken
up; for though thou have unma^ked the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, and
exposed it to the detestation of God and man, yea and thy sword was ev^n at the
throat of that Antichristian monster, and through the sides of John Heart, thou
struckst Popery it self to the very heart: yet Sanders remained untouched,
save that he has felt the revenging hand of God upon him, and dyed miserably,
being starved on the Irish mountains. Bellarmines forces are not quite
discomfited, or all Baronius his impostures sufficiently discovered; to speak
nothing of those monsterous heads of heresies, which like Hydras continually
grow up in the Church one under another. In the midst of such troubles, how
could thou find leisure to dye? since the harvest is so great, and the
laborers so few: (so few indeed, or none like thee) since Superstition, like
to our Virginian Sea, swells continually with newer billows. This, oh this was
the sad complaint of our lamenting Church, fetched from the deepest sense of
bitterness and sorrow, as if she her self had been ready to expire with thi^
our Reynolds. But what Timanthes has the skill to pourtray the sadder (if yet
a sadder can be immagined) and more dejected countenance of our Mother, the
University.

Here flow the tears so free
That drown our Niobe.
Alas she thinks still on nothing but Reynolds: sees nothing but Reynolds:
and in the strength of her disturbed fancy hears, talks with, catches at
Reynolds. And truly though in this flourishing age our mother be blessed with
such a great and numerous issue, that she has more reason to rejoice that
she is become so fruitful then bewail so much her present loss; and she might
now if ever take up the language of the mother of ^rasidus, my son was a good
Soldier indeed, and valiant, but Sparta has many left that are like him: yet
I cannot choose but excuse her tears of piety, and my self justly lament with
her, when I consider that she has lost her Reynolds, who (let none repine at
it) did so much outshine the rest of her sons in the clearest luster of the
best perfections both in languages, Arts, and Sciences, that he seemed to fly
above the pitch of humane wit and industry, as if he had been borne of purpose
to discover the height of the Muses utmost abilities. Sirs, I detract from no
man in giving Reynolds his due: I know that neither these grave Fathers
assembled, who here at home do honor our Oxford with their authority, letters
and piety, nor those our right reverend religious and learned Prelate^ abroad,
who sitting at the helm of the Church, are become admired Patterns to the
whole Christian world, of wisdom, sanctity and learning, will ever envy his
(...) encomiums.

If any man shall think less of Reynolds then of those great lights, either
of Church or University, because he shined not so gloriously either at home or
abroad in luster of eminent fortunes and outward preferments, let him remember
the testimony which the great Bishop St. Austine gave of Saint Jerome; Though a
Priest be inferior to a Bishop, yet Hierome the Priest is a better man then
Austine the Bishop. And howsoever others admired in Reynolds his knowledge,
lowliness of mind, and incredible abstinence; in all which he so excelled,
that he even exceeded wonder: yet for my part I do, and ever shall admire at
one thing in him chiefl^, even that he could so slight and neglect all ways
of preferment; of whom (although I will not say as Illyricus and Wigandus spoke
of Luther, That he was the Germane Prophet: yet) since neither Luther, nor
Calvin, nor Beza, nor Whitaker can challenge any honor which Reynolds has not
merited, I cannot but exceedingly congratulate our Country where he was borne,
our Mother the University where he was educated, and that most pregnant House
of excellent wits, wherein he sucked the first rudiments of exquisite
Literature; who (that I may compare him with those of the same College) for
virtue, piety, learning, in the judgment of many, is extolled above their
Jewel, Wotton, Vines, Hooker, yea and above their Pole. Let yet Westone that
lewd and shameless Rabshake belch out what reproaches he pleases against him,
and charge him not only with stupid dullness, but also that he counterfeited
sickness, and pretended only to a disease, to preserve his credit. Belike
then all we University men were leaden witted, who admired so dull a man; we
were besides our selves, who believed that he was sick, whom to our great
grief we here see dead. Notwithstanding this Weston himself (so like his
Uncle in his ill conditions and ignominious flight) when he challenged all the
Heads of the University, and branded them for impure, only for that some of
them had entered into the state of Matrimony; could not find any one Act of
Doctor Reynolds in all his life, to blemish him with all.

Let this runnagate Weston pass, who was wandered too far to look into his
life, what report was given him by those that were near? Truly, every one
loved his person, his demeanure, his integrity. If any object against him
overmuch strictness, and a resolution not to be diverted from just proceedings
by any motives, though never so powerful: If thi^ or any thing else of this
nature might be disliked in him, I dare confidently affirm, as Seneca does of
Cato, that a man may with much more ease prove the fact which he charge
Reynolds with to be fair, then Reynolds to be any way foul. But blessed
Saint, he'^ already in the caelestiall Quire: As for us, who now honor the
remains of this most excellent and learned man, we shall never confidently
pronounce Oxford ble^^ed, till she can boast of another Reynolds. For though we
may have men of singular eloquence, infinite reading, rare wits, grave
judgments, studious, courteous, and very famous for their Works to be left
behind them; yet a Reynolds in all respects we shall never have. But why do I
name this man of a thousand, as if we still had him, when we see the grave
opens her mouth wide, to devour these small relics of him before us, which
we now last see, salute, and mus^ take our farewell of ^or ever.

This minute is the last we can
Behold thi^ rare accomplished man.
For my part, I must stand dumb, when I should commend his remains to their
honorable interment: for, Nor tongue, nor pen, nor Poets bays,
Can set forth hi^ deserved praise.
I will therefore borrow part of an Epitaph from Sophocles: Come friends and
lend your help, let us now inter
Truths noble champion, and Romes conqueror.
And never let the best, the chiefest dare,
To wrong his ashes by a proud compare.


Behold, in less then half a span,
The lovely model of that Man,
Whose worth a world as big again
Were all too little to contain,
That famous Reynolds; at the stroke
Of whose learned Quill, Romes sturdy Oak
Trembled; whom, had not early death
Prevented thus, his very breath
Had made such wind falls, round about
In Babels forrest^ that no doubt,
In some few days, her savage Beasts
Had found no covert; nor her Uulters nests.
He was Times wonder, vert^es story,
Truths champion, and the Churches glory.
The Life and Death of Joseph Scaliger, who dyed Anno Christi 1609.
JOseph Scaliger the son of Julius Caesar Scaliger was borne a^ Aginum Anno
Christi 1540. and at nine years old was sent by his father to School at
Bordeaux, but after three years stay there, the Plague breaking forth, he
returned to his father again, who set him every day to make an Oration,
whereby he attained to such an exactness in the Latin tongue, that not long
after he composed that excellent Tragedy of Oedipus, which caused his friends
to admire such ripeness of wit in such tender years: At nineteen years old
(his father being dead) he went to Paris to learn the Gre^k tongue; wh^re for
two months space, he applied himself to the Lectures of that learned man
Adrian Turneby, bu^ wanting other helps, he lost most of that time: which
caused him to shut himself up in his study, and there by extraordinary
diligence joined with his natural aptness, he began to suck in the first
rudiments of the Greek tongue: and before he had well learned all the
co^jugatio^^^ he gat him an Homer, and in twenty one day^s learned it all over,
framed for himself a Greek Grammar, and never us^d the help of any other: he
learned the other Greek P^^ts in four months more: Hav^ng thus bestowed two
year^ ^n the study of the Greek: he grew very desirous to add the knowledge
of the Hebrew to it: and though he knew not one letter of it, yet he fell to
the study of it without any other help.

He wrote much in verse both those languages, but to avoid the repute of
ambition, would not suffer them to be Printed: He read over many Greek and
Hebrew Authors, and spent much time in interpreting, and clearing of them from
errors: Anno Christi 1563. he began to travel into diverse Countries, and made
little stay any where till he was called to the University of Leiden Anno
Christi 1593. to be Professor there, in which place he spent sixteen years,
making the place famous both by his Lec^ures and Writings, and at last dyed of
a Dropsy Anno Christi 1609. and of his age sixty nine: The afor^mentioned
Turneby, who was an excellently learned man himself, called this Sc^liger
Portentosi ingenii juvenem: a young man of a stupendous wit.

How can the worthy name and memory
Of Scaliger in black oblivion dye:
Who by his pregnant wit and studious brains.
And indefatigable care and pains:
In Greek and Hebrew grew so excellent
That being sent for, he to Leid^n went,
Where he was made Professor, and became
A man of high renown and spreading fame:
And gracing much that University
For fifteen years, he there at last did dye.
The Life and Death of Amandus Polanus, who dyed Anno Christi 1610.
AMandus Polanus was borne in Silesia Anno Christi 1561. when his Parents had
bred him up at School, they sent him to Vratislavia, where he spent six years,
and from thence he went to T^bing, where differing from Doctor Andreas about
predestination, he went thence to Basil Anno Christi 1583. in which place he
wholly set himself to the study of Divinity, and being made Tutor to some
young Noblemen, went to Geneva, Heidleberge and to some other places with them:
he was mad^ Doctor in Divinity by Grynaeus, Anno 1590. and having afterward at
Geneva publicly expounded the Prophecy of Malachie, he returned to Basil,
where he was chosen the Professor of Divinity, which place he faithfully
discharged for fourteen years space, expounded Daniel, Ezekiel, and a good part
of the Psalms: afterward falling sick of a Fever, he wholly resigned up him
himself to the will of God, comforted himself with diverse pregnant Texts of
Scriptures, and so departed quietly in the Lord Anno 1610. and of his age 51.

How justly may Polanus have a part
Of honor, amongst these men of high desert:
A learned Doctor of Divinity,
And was of Basils University:
Chosen Professor, where, with love and fame,
For fourteen years he managed the same:
Then falling sick, he of a fever died,
Whose soul does in celestial joys reside.
The Life and Death of Thomas Holland, who dyed Anno Christi 1612.
THomas Holland, was born in Shropshire Anno Christi 1538. and brought up in
Exceter College in Oxford, where he took his degrees with much applause:
afterward he Commenced Doctor in Divinity, was chosen Master of the College,
and for his learning, was preferred to be ^he Regius Professor, or Doctor of
the Chair, wherein he succeeded Doctor Humphred: and so deported himself in
the same, that he gat the approbation, and admiration both of that Univ^rsity,
and of Foreign Universities also: He was like Apollos, a man mighty in the
Scriptures, and as one says of him, Adeb cum Patribus familiaris, ac si ipse
Pater, and cum Scholasticis, ac si Seraphicus Doctor: i. e. he was so
familiarly acquainted wi^h the Fathers, as if himself had been one of them:
and so verst in the Schoolmen, as if he were the Seraphick Doctor: He was also
a faithful Preacher of the truth, and one that adorned it by his holy life and
conversation. A zealous defender of the true Religion, and a great hater of
superstition and Idolatry: iusomuch that when he went any journey, calling the
fellows of the College together, he used to say to them, Commendo vos
dilectioni Dei, and odio Papatus, and superstitionis: I commend you to the love
of God, and to the hatred of Popery and superstition: He continued Doctor of
the Chair twenty years, and was every way as famous for his Religion and
holiness of life, as he was for his learning: when in his old age he grew weak
and sickly, he spent all his time in fervent Prays, and heavenly Meditations:
and when his end approached, he often sighed out Come, O Come Lord Jesus, thou
morning star: Come Lord Jesus I desire to be dissolved, and to be with thee,
and so he q^ietly departed in the Lord A^no Christi 1612. and of his age 73.

And worthily does Doctor Holland merit
His predecessors praises to inherit:
Who for's great learning and his parts most rare
Was Regius Professor, Doct'r oth' Chair:
Of Exeter College with approbation
Of all that knew him even to admiration:
I th'Schoolmen, and the Fathers so well seen
As if he had Seraphick Doctor been.
A pious and most painful Preacher known
A faithful zealous fr^end to Tr^th: and One
That heartily did hate idolatry,
Who as he lived, a precious Saint did dye.
JOHN BALE.
The Life and Death of John Bale.
AMong those who in these latter times have labored in throwing open the
skirts of that Romish strumpet, who with her cup of fornication had a long time
bewitched a great part of the Christian world; and laying open her abominations
to the light of the Sun, and the sight of of the world; none have traveled
more, nor taken pains to better purpose, then this our Countriman John Bale:
whose troublesome life, tossed to and fro, and exposed to many dangers,
difficulties and distresses, my purpose is briefly to relate in its most
remarkable passages, that which is testified of him by that worthy and much
renouned divine D.r Laurence Humfrey in a Poem of his entitled the Burden of
Rome; wherein he affirms that V^rgerius had in this kind done somewhat,
Platina much more, Luther very much or the most of any before him, but this our
Bale, as much almost as could be, even all, if it were at least possible to
rake up all the ^ilth and dirt of that vile ^inke and common sewer.

He came into this world toward the midst of King Hen^y the seventh his
reign, not many years after that famous and useful invention of printing was
grown to some perfection, having not been above thirty years as yet in any use:
by help whereof as learning and knowledge was generally much improved, and many
Monuments preserved, that would otherwise have perished; so great use did this
our Bale make of it (as we shall hereafter show) as well for the bringing to
light of ancient Records, that had lien long bur^ey in the dark, and but for
him might so have done in everlasting oblivion; as also for the publishing of
many writings and works both of his own and other men's.

He was borne in Suffolk, his Parents but of mean estate, nor free from
Romish superstition, that then generally overspread the whole surface of this
realm; by means of of their poverty and geeat charge being overburdened with
a numerous issue, through the advice and persuasion of some of their blind
leaders (such as those days afforded) perceiving the towardliness that then
appeared in him yet a child, being but twelve years of age, he was placed in
the Convent of Carmelite Friars at Norwich: In which place, as also afterward
in the University of Cambridge, (whither he was from thence removed) he gave
himself to the study of the Art^, and of Divinity, such as in those time^ was
in repute, yea alo^e publicly professed.

But when the light of the Gospel, which had formerly for the most part been
smothered and suppressed, began now to break forth, by the instigation of that
right honorable and truly Noble Lord (for it is virtue and piety alone that
affords true Nobility) the Lord Wentworth, he diverted his studies and
applied himself now, not to rake any longer in those muddy streams, and miry
puddles of Divinity falsely so termed, which he had plunged himself in before;
but to repair directly to the wellhead, to betake himself to the fource of
all true knowledge, to search into the written Word of God, where he might be
sure to find the waters clean and clear, free from all impurity and mixture
of humane invention; therein to dive, and thence to draw that which he might
both drink deep of himself, and impart of to others without damage and
detriment to himsele.

That which also accordingly he did. For not content to sell his own cistorns,
and satisfy out of it his own thirst, he was desirous that what he had there
drawn, should be derived also unto others, and should flow out to the like
benefit and behafe unto them, as he had thereby formerly received himself, To
this purpose he betook himself now to the pulpit; and what light of truth he
had by his private studies, and Gods blessing upon them attained, he made known
in public to those that heard him.

And having now wholly shook of that yoke of his former superstitions
profession (as the Word of God warrenteth, and the Apostle in ^uch case
advises) he took him ^ wife one Dorothy by name, and that name well
deserving; a woman piously affected, and one that abode constantly with him, an
inseparable and individual companion and copartner with him in all his
troubles and exilments, which began shortly after to ensue.

For through the malignity of those, who neither loved the light themselves,
and indevoured to keep others from fight of that which themselves neither
loved nor liked, as being that which discovered their gross errors and foul
abuses, he was quickly called in question, and much troubled and molested;
first at York by Lee there Archbissiop ( Erasmus his great, though unequal
antagonist) for Preaching at Doncaster against invocation of Saints: and after
that again at London by Stokesley their Bishop, (the maine opposer of Ales the
Scot, Bales intimate friend afterward, in defense of Popish errors and
inventions) for matters of the like nature.

Thus he soon found opposition, and met with much trouble (as what other was
to be looked for?) for maintaining and publishing the truth of God, which could
not yet be brooked, having so many, so mighty, and those no less malicious
opponets.

Howbeit he escaped, as well then, as often after also out of their hands; God
having still some further employments for him. For having by some elegant and
pleasant Comedies, which he presented unto him, insinuated himself into the
notice and favor of the Lord Cromwell, who was then grown to some greatness,
being a favouror of the truth and the professors of it, he was by his means,
as the Prophet Jeremy sometimes by Ahikams, rescued out of their clutches (who
otherwise would in likelehood, have crushed him) and continued quiet, while he
stood.

But after his unfortunate downfall and death, was under God his chief, yea
alone protector, perceiving that though their former attempts against him had
for the present been frustrate, yet their spite and malice toward him was
enraged rather then abated, ready to break forth into action again, when
opportunity should serve; that means of restraint being now removed, and
persecution about the six Articles (commonly known by name of the whip with six
strings) growing hot; he thought it his best and wisest course (the rather
being tied to no particular charge) to leave the Land until times of more
freedom might be, and to get over into Germany, where by Luther and other his
assistants seconds their labors, many Churches had been establshed, and much
liberty was afforded for the sincere profession of the Gospel.

Unto that common refuge and receptacle of Gods persecuted people in those
times, with much difficulty and hazard, at length he gat and there abode as an
exile for some eight years. During which time he was not idle, but diligently
employed himself in writing and in publishing of many Treatises, tending most
to the discovery of Romish errors, superstitions, idolotries and abominable
practices, and to the manifestation and clearing of Gods saving truth.

Thence upon the decease of King Henry the eight, being by his religious Son
and successor King Edward called over again, and entertained a while in the
family of that learned and pious Poynet then bishop of Winchester; he was
shortly after by his Majesty preferred unto and settled in the Bishopric of
Ossar in Ireland: whither being sent over freely at the Kings own charge, he
was consecrated at Dublin by George Archbishop of that See, assisted by Thomas
Bishop of Kildare, and Vrhane of Down.

In this Seat he sat quietly Preaching Christ and salvation by him alone to
his people, and laboring to withdraw them from Popish superstitions, during the
reign of King Edward by whom he was there seated, expending most of hi^
Episcopal revenew over and above the necessary expense of his family any
relief of the poor, in furnishing himself with books of almanner of
learning, such especielly as were then rare and not ordinarily to be had, as
well manuscrips as printed ones; partly to preserve the perishing Monuments of
antiquity, and partly from them to receive further and fuller information of
the occurrents and carryages of former times: and what a multitude of Authors
he had in that short time gathered togeter, may appear by a Catalogue of them
left upon record by him, in the close of that laborious Work of his, his
Centuries, to show what a treasure he was stripped of at his expulsion from his
place.

For after that half hours silence (as he styles it, alluding to that of
Saint John Apoc. 8.1.) and those few years of rest that Gods people here
enjoyed under that blessed servant of Christ King Edward; his succeeding sister
raising up new tumults and with fire and fogot making havoc of the faithful;
that seat grew too hot for him. And having therefore (as his own relation has
it) his books and chattels seized on (as once before) his servants some of them
slain, others misused, and himself laid for, he was enforced with his wife,
his ever undivided consort, to fly for his life; and purposed as himself
says, to have shaped his course for Scotland, hoping there to find some
succor, as diverse others driven hence at that time did. But man we say
purposes, and God disposes: that project of his took not effect, God it
seems intended him another way; for b^ing put out to sea, he was intercepted
and surprised by wicked pirates sea-robbers, of whom though he were stripped
again and abused in most inhumane manner, (as little better could be expected
at the hands of such) yet was he by Gods good providence preserved among them,
and delivered again from them, being ransomed by certain charitable and
well-minded Merchants.

Having regained his liberty, he gat safe again into Germany, his former place
of retreat, and the then Common sanctuary of Gods afflicted and distressed
Saints. There he found entertainment with, and enjoyed the acquaintance of,
most of the prime men of note for learning and relegion of those parts in those
times, who some of them in their writings, especially for the notes of
antiquity, and of authors both ours and others, do profess to have received
no small light from his writings and observations.

For during the time of his abode in those parts, among other his labors
(being never out of action) he compiled that vast Catalogue of Euglish Scottish
and Irish writers, a work of exceeding great pains and industry, that many of
them and others since have made much use of: wherein also by the way he has
inserted the lives, Acts and carriages of the Roman Popes; that the world
might see and know, what manner of men, or monsters rather, many of them have
been, and how far unlike unto Christ, who yet have given themselves out to be
Christ's Vicars, and the chief pillars of his Church.

Shor^ly after the happy entrance of that blessed Princess Q. Elizabeth, when
the storm raised by her sister Mary was now laid, he returned over again into
England: and as it seems, stepped over from thence into Ireland, to visit (it
may be) his former flock (if any faithful of them were remaining yet) there;
or to look after his library, if he might light upon any remains of it in
those places where it had been disor in the hands of those that had seized upon
it. But he survived not long to enjoy either the peaceable times of Gods Church
here re-established, or the comfort of his people, if he found any left there,
or the use and benefit of his books, if he recovered any of them.

For it is by some reported, that he dyed in Ireland at sixty and seven years
of age, in the year of our Lord 1558. which yet for the year of his decease may
seem not so to be: since that his Catalogue or Centuries of our Brittin
Writers, Printed by him at Basile, while he yet abode in those parts, is
dedicated by himself to Queen Elizabeth then settled in the throne of this
kingdom, who began her reign but in the latter part of that year: besides
that the latter part of that impression bears date the Month of February
1559. as al^o some verses prefixed before the whole Work, wherein mention is
made also of Queen Elizabeth's reign, and of the Authors then taking leave of
his friends in those parts, and intendment of return with his wife for England
again, bear date of March the same year: which though they may be supposed to
imply the close of the year 58. according to our computation, who begin the
year at the latter end of March, whereas they begin it at the first of January,
yet some space of time must be allowed for his travel out of Swii^serland into
England, and from thence again into Ireland if there he deceased. And it may
well be deemed therefore that he survived, if not to 1560. yet to 59. at least:
But this I leave to those that have more certain records of it: nor is the
thing it self much material.

His Wokes for the most part, as himself has related and ranked them,
together with some few omitted by him, and added by others, are these.

First those that he compiled while he was yet a Papists.

1 A Bundle of things worth the knowing. 2 The Writers from Elias. 3 The
Writers from Berthold. 4 Additions to Trithemius. 5 Germane Collections. 6
French Collections. 7 English Collections. 8 Diverse writings of diverse learned
men. 9 A Catalogue of Generals. 10 The Spiritual War. 11 The Castle of Peace.
12 Sermons for Children. 13 To the Synod at Hull. 14 An answer to certain
Questions. 15 Addition to Palaonydorus. 16 The History of Patronage. 17 The
Story of Simon the Englishman. 18 The Story of Franck of Seen in Italy. 19 The
Story of Saint Brocard. 20 A Commentary on Mantuanis Preface to his Fasti.

Secondly those that he wrote after that he had renounced Popery.

First, in Latin. 1 The Heliades of the English. 2 The British writers. 3
Notes on the three Tomes of Walden. 4 On his Bundle of Tares. 5 On Polydore of
the first invention of things. 6 On Textors Officine. 7 On Capgraves Catalogue.
8 On Barnes his lives of Popes. 9 The Acts of the Popes of Rome. 10 A
Translation of Thorps Examination into Latin. 11 That of British writers much
enlarged with the lives and Acts of the Bishops of Rome inserted. 12 An
Additton of Scottish, Irish and other writers.

2 In English. 1 In English Meeter, and diverse sorts of Verse.

1 The life of John Baptist. 2 Of John Baptists Preaching. 3 Of Christ's
Tentatinus. 4 Two Comedies of Christ's Baptism and Tentations. 5 A Comedy of
Christ at twelve years old. 6 A Comedy of the raising of Lazarus. 7 A Comedy
of the High Priests Council. 8 A Comedy of Simon the Leper. 9 A Comedy of
the Lords Supper, and the washing of the Deisciples feet. 10 Two Comedies (or
Tragedies rather) of Christ's Passion. 11 Two Comedies of Christ's burial and
Resurrection. 12 A Poem of Gods Promises. 13 Against those that pervert Gods
Word. 14 Of the corrupting of God Laws. 15 Against Carpers and Traducers. 16 A
defense of King John. 17 Of King Henry's two Marriages. 18 Of Popish Sects. 19
Of Papists Trecheries. 20 Of Thomas Beckets Impostures. 21 The Image of love.
22 Pammachius his T^agedies, translated into English. 23 Christian Sonnets.

2 In English Prose. 1 A Commentary on Saint John's Apocalypse. 2 A
Locupletation of the pocalypse. 3 Wicklefs War with the Papists. 4 Sir John
Oldcastles Trials. 5 An Apology for Bernes. 6 A defense of Gray against Smith.
7 John Lamberts Confession. 8 Anne Askews Martyrdom. 9 Of Luthirs Decease. 10
The Bishops Alcaron. 11 The man of Sin. 12 The Mystery of Iniquity. 13
Against Antichrists or false Christ's. 14 Against Baals Priests, or Balaamites.
15 Against the Clergies single life. 16 A dispatch of Popish Vows and
Priesthood. 17 The Acts of English Votaries in two parts. 18 Of Heretics
indeed. 19 Against the Popish Mass. 20 The Drunkards Mass. 21 Against Popish
persuasions. 22 Against Standish the Imposture. 23 Against Bonners Articles. 24
Certain Dialogues. 25 To Elizabeth the Kings daughter. 26 Against customary
swearing. 27 On Mantuane of death. 28 A Week before God. 29 Of his Calling to
a Bishopric. 30 Of Lelands Iournall, or an Abridgement of Leland, with
Additions. 31 A Translation of Sebald Heydens Apology against Sal^e Regina. 32
A Translation of Gardiners Oration of true Obedience, and Bonners Epistle
before it; with a Preface to it, Notes on it, and an Epilogue to the Reader.

Many other things he compiled, translated and published which neither himself
could suddenly call to mind, nor others easily light on, who yet have added to
his recital. But it may well be admired, how being so haunted, hunted, chased
and hurried as he was from pillar to post, and so often stripped both of books and
other helps, he could come to the sight and view of so many Authors; much more,
how he should have time to surveigh such a multitude of them, as by his
writings it appears he did; and most of all, how he should be able to write
so many volumes (to go no further) as you see here related, although some of
them were but small. His industry therefore is very remarkable, which as it
accompanied him to the last; so it surviveth his decease, in the fruit of it
with us, and in the reward of it to him.

Lo here the man who stirred Romes common shore
Until it stunk, and stunk him out of door.
Twlve years he served the Babilonian with;
Drank of her cup and wallowed in her ditch,
Until the sunshine of diviner Truth
Shot saving Beams into his hopeful youth:
And led him thence to serve another Saint
Whose mirth was ^eares, whose freedom was restraint;
Whose progress was a banishment; whose food
Was want and Famine, and whose drink was blood:
His days were full of troubles, and his nights
Were sad exchanges stored with fears and frights:
His wealth was Poverty, his peace was strife,
His life was death: His death eternal life.
ANDREAS GERARDVS HYPERIVS
The Life and Death of Andraeas Gerardus.
IN the year of our Lord 1511. this Andraeus Gerardus was born at Hyperi^, a
strong and populous Town situate within the Province of Flanders: his Father
was a man of great estimation amongst the inhabitants of the same town by
reason of his singular knowledge in the Law; his Mother was descended from one
of the Noblest families of that Province; both of them being careful of the
education of th^s Gerardus, they sent him unto Iacobus Papa (a famous and
excellent Poet) to be instructed in the knowledge of the tongues, which he
attained unto in short time, partly by the care of this Iacobus, and partly by
the help of Johannes Sepanus, being an assistant unto Iacobus Papa, a man
excellently learned, and very skillful both in the Greek and in the Hebrew
tongue, where he continued until he came unto the age of 13. years, at which
time he desired to be acquainted with the French tongue, and for that cause he
became an Auditor unto Johannes Lactaeus, a man learned and eloquent who
publicly taught the French tongue in those parts; here he remained for the
space of one year, and afterward by the advice of his father he was sent unto
Tovrney, where a public School was newly erected for the information of youth
in the Latin, Greek and Hebrew tongus; but the discipline of that School being
not pleasing unto his father he took him from thence again intending to have
him instructed in manners as well as in learning, wherefore he intended to send
his unto Lavan an Academy in Brabant, but hearing that too much liberty was
there given and granted unto youth, whereby they came to be corrupted with many
vices, he altered his purpose, and bethought himself of sending him unto
Paris, where he himself in his youth had studied; but that determination was
also hindered by the continued wars betwixt Charles the fifth Emperor of
Germany, and Francis King of France: wherefore he resolved to keep him at home
for a space until he could dispose of him according to his mind, employing
him in the writing of such thinks as pertain to the office of a Lawyers
Clarke, in which action he continued so long that he had almost forgotten
whatsoever he had learned before: now in the year 1525. it pleased God to call
for his father out of this vale of misery, who on his death bed straightly
charged and commanded his Mother to send Gerardus unto Paris, that so he might
go forward in his studyes; as soon as the War^ were quieted in France betwixt
the Emperor and the King, which fell out in the year 1528. then went Gerardus
unto Pari^, being furnished with Commendatory letters unto Antonius Helhucius,
then Senator of the P^rliament, and unto Johannes Campis Licenciate in
Divinity, who were also entreated to furnish him with things necessary for his
study^s, if hi^ mother were hindered by the continuation of the Wars, from the
performance of the ^ame; this Johannes de Campi^ seeing the hopefulnesse of the
youth, kept him in his own house the space of one year, where he attained unto
great perf^ction in Logic, the year following he w^nt unto Paris, where he
acquainted himself with I^^^^imus Bingelbi^gu^ ^ B^aban^er, a man excellently
qualified, from whom Gerard^s received good instructions touching a methodicall
manner of proceeding in his studies; after that h^ had continued here for the
space of three years, for the better retayning of that learning which he had
gotten, he priv^tly read both Logic and Rhetoric unto others, himself
remaining still an Auditor unto the public explanation of Aristotle's Phisicks
in the Schools.

In the year following he desired to see Flanders, and to visit his friends,
and to know how much of that Portion was remaining which his Father had left
him for the prosecution of his studyes: which being done, and finding a
sufficient competency to remain, which would keep him ^ long time at the
University, he returned unto Paris again, with and an intent to addict
himself unto studyes of greater moment, and so he forthwith entered upon the
study of Divinity, for which Paris at that time was famous and taking a great
delight therein, he daily frequented the Divinity Schools, so as he came to be
of a singular judgment in matters of Controversies, and at vacant times he
would be take himself unto the Physic Lectures, unto which h^ had a natural
inclination, he would also be familias with Cleonard, S^urmius, Latomus, then
public professors of the Tongues in the same University.

Having now well furnished himself with knowledge, he desired to take a view
of other Countries and Provinces, lying within the Kinodome of France, and that
for two causes, first that he might prrfect himself in the French Tongue, and
secondly that he might have a fuller understanding of the custom and
disposition of that Nation, and so leaving of the University, he traveled
through most parts of France, where having given satisfaction unto himself, he
shaped his c^urse toward Italy, taking a full view of that part which lies
between the Alps and Bononia: being now about the age of twenty four years,
he returned out of Italy into Flanders in the year 1535. From whence he went
unto Lovan, because he had sent his library from Paris unto the same place, and
having safely disposed of the same, he betook himself again to tra^ell,
viewing almost all Lower Germany (viz) Gilderland, Brabant, Cleveland, Vtrecht,
Freezland, Holland and Zealand, and from hence in the year of our Lord 1537.
and in the twenty six year of his age he went into upper Germany, to take view
of such ^^mous and learned men as were to be found in those parts, in which
peregrination he saw Colen, Marpurge, E^ford, Lipsie^, and Wittenberge: and
then returned again into Flanders, where he was set upon by some of his
friends, who advised him to betake himself unto some staid course of life,
seeing that his patrimony was all spent, the grates^ part in the University,
the remainder in his travels: unto which just demand and desire of his friends,
he was soon persuaded to subscribe and consent, and forthwith began seriously
to consider with himself, how he might obtain a place, wherein he might
exercise his gifts for the general good of the Country; whilst he was busy
about that matter, his friends had obtained by letters pattens from the Pope
that a larg stipend should be yearly given unto him, out of the revenews of an
adjacent Abbey for his maintenance, upon condition that Johannes Charondiletus
(then Chanc^llor unto the Emperor, and Arthbishop of Panorma) would give his
free assent thereunto: but (the Providence of God so disposing) he was not
only denied the same by the said Archbishop, but he was also threatened with
the loss of his life, because is was declared unto him, that G^rardus had of
late been in higher G^rmany, unto which place it was not lawful for any
student to go least he should be infected with the purity of the doctrine
taught in the reformed Churches.

This expectation of himself and also of his friends being now made void^ and
having no hopes of getting preferment thereabouts, because the Archbishop
appeared his professed enemy; by the advice of some godly and learned men, and
also because he would not be burdensome unto his friends^ he was resolved to
travel again, and so determined to view that other part of Italy, which he
had not seen, but here he was again hindered by the violence of those Wars
which at that time raged betwixt the Emperor and the King of France; wherefore
he being by this occasion deprived of the sight of Italy, he shipped himself
for England (intending not to visit France or Germany any more) because he
might easily understand in that place by letters continually sent from his
friends, how all things went in Flanders, and whether there were any hopes of
obtaining preferment in those parts: after his arrival in England, as he used
in other foreign parts, so he here also enqured after such as were esteemed
the leanedest Scholars, by which means he addressed himself unto Charles
Mon^joy the Son of William Montjoy Knight Baron, a man much commended and
approved of by Erasmus Roterdamus in his writings, and of great learning in
those days, who conferring after a friendly manner with Gerardus concerning
many matters, and thereby perceiving his more then ordinary parts, received him
into his house, and withal conferred an annual stipend on him, and that after
a bountiful manner; which wa^ so well pleasing unto Gerardus, that he
continued four ye^r^ with thi^ Montjoy, in which time he profited much in the
knowledge of humane and divine learning.

In the year 1540. with the consent of Charles Montjoy, h^ went to take view
of the University of Cambridge, about which time there were great troubles in
the Church of England: the Lord Cromwell was beheaded, others were burned for
their zealous profession of the truth, many also were put to death for denying
the King to be supreme head of the Church under Christ. Proclamations were
every where set up against exotics, and those full of peril and danger; which
caused Gerardus to enter into a consideration of returning again into Germany,
yet before his departure from England, he resolved to recreate himself with
the fight of that other fountain of learning (viz.) Oxford, from whence he
returned to London, where (after that he had prepared and fitted himself with
things necessary for his journey) he not without great sorrow took his leave of
his liberal and loving Master, who earnehly entreated him to continue longer
with him, but by no means he could be enduced and persuaded thereunto, but
forthwith he directed his course toward An^werp, a famous City in Brabant,
from whence he went again into Flanders, and for a season he there continued
amongst his friends: during his abode in that place he heard of the fame of
Bucer, and of the flourishing School at Stra^burge, both which but especially
the fame of Buc^r allured him to take view of that part of high Germany;
wherefore without any delay he sets forward toward Strasburge, taking Marpurge
in his way, that he might take order for the conveying of his books and trunks
unto Frank^furt, and secondly because he knew that he could maintain himself
at a cheaper rate during his abode there then in any other place situate on the
banks of Rhine, and thirdly because he hoped that he should easily obtain
comm^ndatory letters unto the learned Professors at S^rsburge in that place,
and especially by the means of Gerardus Noviomagus, a man of good estemation,
who also had formerly known this Gerardus, and had lived also himself
sometimes at Strasburge.

Maviomagus h^ving notice of the coming of Andraeas Gerardus unto M^rpurge, he
kindly invited him unto his lodging, where they met with mutual embrac^ng^,
being exceeding joyful of the presence of each other; not long after Gerardus
discovering unto Naviomagus the causes of his coming unto that place, together
with his intent for Strasburge, he was de^ired ^o remain at Marpurge, and
withal he was promised faithfully by Naviomagus that he would procure him not
only employment, but also a sufficient stipend for the performance of the
same; Gerardus well perceiving the entire love and sincere affection of his old
friend consented and remained, expecting preferment in the same place;
whereupon assooue as Johannes Ficinus their Chancellor was returned home from
an assembly appointed at Reinspurge, Naviomagus entered into discourse with him
concerning Gerardus, and withal declared that by reason of his sickness he
was not able to perform that place whereunto he was called, desired that
Gerardus might be approved and allowed to be an assistant unto him in the
performance of the place: the motion was well liked of Ficinus, who forthwith
called Gerardus unto him, and wished him to remain at Marpurge, and to make
trial of his gifts in that place, which if they were approved of, he promised
him a sufficient pension for his labors; but Gerardus was so well approved in
that place by his Auditors, that after the death of Naviomagus, he was chosen
and appointed to be his successor in the performance of a pastoral office,
which he faithfully discharged with so great labor and zeal, for the
Propacating of the truth the space of twenty two years, that besides his
appointed times and seasons, he would make use of vacant hours for the
performance of the same.

Here he commanded the public exercise of Preaching in the School^, appointed
texts unto the young Divines to treat of, he would view and correct their
Sermons before they were delivered in the Pulpit, nay he would cause them to
deliver them privately in his study, before he would permit them to deliver
them unto the public Congregation; that if there were any defect in voice or
gesture it might happily be amended.

He much praised those who performed their actions well, contrariwise he
severely rebuked those which were negligent and sloathfull, and as it were
forceably compelled and constrained them unto a greater diligence; he would
daily examine them in points of Divinity, desire their opinions concerning
difficult questions, explain and open unto them hard texts of Scriptures;
insomuch, that in short time he was the Author of much good unto the young
Students: these this he performed without the expectation of any reward.

He entered also into a serious meditation of the reformation of Religion in the
Churches; he desired to conform the Citizens of Hassia, unto the example of
the Primitive Church; he desired to remove many relics of superstition out of
the Church; he desired to establish that Ecclesiastical discipline which was
ready to fall, unto the great detriment of the Church.

In the midst of these heavenly cogitations, it pleased the Lord to send his
messenger for him, which he well perceiving by the continual increasing of his
pains; he desired to have the Communion administered unto him, afterward he
told his wife what he would have done after his death; after that he had
instructed his children how they should carry themselves toward God, and how
toward their mother, and how toward men: and his youngest son standing amongst
them, h^ laid his hand on his head uttering these Words, discemi fili mandata
domini, and ipse ena^riet te: Keep the commandaments of the Lord, my son, and
he will provide for thee: then ^urning himself to those who were present, he
declare^ unto them that he dyed in that faith which he had constantly professed
so many years in that City; which words being spoken, he fell asleep, and was
buried at Marpurge in the year our Lord 1564. and in the 53. year of his life.

All things which are to be required in a Teacher, are to be found in this
Gerardus; first he was learned, and his learning was also joined with
experience, secondly, he had an excellent faculty and method of teaching;
thirdly, he was laborious in his function; fourthly, he was grav^; fifthly, of
an unspotted life and conversation^ he was modest patient and constant, all
which sufficiently declare that he was set apart by the Lord for the converting
of many souls unto Christ. His Works which he left unto the world as a rich
legacy are here set down.

1 A Commentary on the twentieth Psalm. 2 On the twelft Psalm. 3 A method for
a Preacher. 4 On the Romans. 5 Of reading and meditating the Scriptures. 6.
Method of Theology. 7 Theological Topics. 8 Catechism.

Other Works in two Tomes.

First, 1 Of the study of the Scripture. 2 Of the institution of Colleges. 3 A
trial of students. 4 Of Catechizing. 5 Of justification by faith. 6 Of
Benificence to the poor. 7 Of Feasts.

Tome 2.

1 Of the duty of hearers. 2 Of Providence. 3 Of Selfe-examination. 4 Of the
marriage of Ministers. 5 Of the Sacraments. 6 Notes upon Aristotle's Ethics. 7
Physics. 8 Logic. 9 Rhetoric. 10 Arithmaticke. 11 Gromaticke. 12
Cosmographik. 13 Optics. 14 Astronomy.

Set forth after his death.

1 Annotations of Isaiah. 2 Commentaries on the Galathians. 3 Ephesians. 4
Philippians. 5 Colossians. 6 Thessalonians. 7 Timothy. 8 Titus. 9 Philemon. 10
Jude. 11 Hebrews.

You that desire to lead a life
Free from th'incumbrances of strife
Draw near, and with a careful ^row,
Let brave Gerardu^ teach you how.
Reader, observe and thou shall find,
By travel he inrtch'd his mind:
His active heart was always free
To Propagate true piety.
He always studied to displace
Errors from the Churches face:
He gained no envy, but from those
That were Religions chiefest fo^^.
He would persuade, entreat, advise
His Fellow-preachers to despise,
Those fruits of Idleness which he defied.
Thus lived Gerardu^, thus Gerardus died.
ARETIVS BENEDICTVS.
The Life and Death of Aretius Benedictus.
AS the Lord has never been wanting unto his Church both in these and in
foreign parts, in the stirring up of painful and ^ealous Watchmen for the
Propagating of his truth, and for the enlightening of the understanding of those
whom he had elected unto salvation in Jesus Christ, so he has not been
deficient in procuring the affection of eminent persons toward the same
Professors, by whose means, they have been defended and sheltered against the
inviterate malice both of the Devil and his members. Malicious enemies unto
the Word of truth, amonst whom the Senate of Berna may justly receive worthy
Commendations, for the constant love showed unto the zealous professors of the
truth, it being indeed the maine pillar which does support the welfare of a
Commonwealth, and which does draw down a blessing from heaven upon their
intended designs.

In this ^amous City was Benedictus Aretius borne a faithful and zealous
professors of the truth of Christ: being beautified with excellent endowments,
both of learning and piety, which did sufficiently testify that he was set
apart by the Lord for the winning of many unto Christ.

He spent his youth in his own Country amongst the Switzers, wherein he was
instructed and trained up in the knowledge of the Arts: but aiming at a greater
perfection and laboring ^or a sounder judgment in the works and writings of
other learned and Orthodox men, he left his Country for a season and went unto
Marpurg, where by reason of his eminent gifts and qualities he gained the love
of many learned Scholars: and was designed and oppointed to read the Logic
Lecture in the same place; which after he had performed for the space of some
years, to the great profit of his Auditors, to the never dying fame of
himself, and to the general applause of all the City; having also attained in
some measure to that perfection, which he had formerly desired, he returned
again unto Berne where he was joyfully received and by a general consent,
appointed to open the Scriptures, and to instruct the inhabitants in the way of
life; in which exercise he observed such an edifying method both in his public
reading and Preaching, that he drew great multitudes of people unto him, who
beholding his proceedings with great admiration, with one consent praised the
Lord for sending so learned and so painful an instrument among them, for the
plant^ng of the truth in their hearts.

So excellent was his form of teaching that many Divines came unto his
Lectures, not only for the information of their judgments in matters of
Controversies, but also to learn his method of teaching; which being obtained
by some, they proved excellent instruments in the Church for the converting of
the lost sheep of Israel; and many would not in public make trial of their
own parts, before they had continued for a season to be his Auditors. His
writings were greatly in request, and desired greatly of all that either knew
him or heard of him, but especially his labors in Divinity: one of his books
called Eramen Theologic^m came to the Press twelve times within the space of
three years, which does declare the excellency and how useful and beneficial
it was unto the Church in those times, and in these days also it is a Work
fit to be perused of all such as do intend the study of Divinity.

After that he had continued this constant course of teaching in the City of
Berne, for the space of many years, to the great furtherance of the glory of
God and benefit of his Church, it pleased the Lord to take him unto himself,
and to Crown him with a di^dem of everlasting glory with the rest of his holy
Saints in the year of grace 1574. the twentieth two of April, his death was
much lamented by the Citizens of Berne, who received some comfort by the
beholding of those excellent and learned Treatises which he left behind him, as
so many never dying testifications of his zeal, for the advancing of the
Gospel of Christ.

1 A form for Students. 2 Two tables of the Hebrew Grammar. 3 A trial for
Divines. 4 The History of Valentine the Gentile. 5 A censure of the
propositions of the Catabaptists. 6 Two Treatises of the sacred Scriptures. 7
Common places of Divinity. 8 Lectures on the Lords Supper. 9 Commentaries on
the four Evangelists. 10 On the Acts of the Apostles. 11 An Iitroduction unto
the reading of Saint Paul's Epistles. 12 Commentaries on all his Epistles. 13 On
the Revelation. 14 Physical Works of Compositions and their degrees.

His name be-speakes him happy, and his worth
Swells high enough to set his praises forth
In ample volumes; for his soul was lined
With true Divinity; his serious mind^
Was always active, labring to invest
Distressed souls with true angel-like rest:
Let his examples teach us how to be
Content in truth, and love Divinity;
That so at last we may receive those gaiues
That daily wait upon celestial strains.
MATTHEW PARKER.
The Life and Death of Matthew Parker.
IN the year of grace 1504. the nineteenth year of the reign of King Henry the
seventh was this worthy Pralate Matthew Parker borne at Norwich, on the sixth day
of August. His Father William Parker a Citizen of that City, though of no great
eminent note, yet of honest repute and of a competent estate, and descended
from an ancient Family of that name; the dignity whereof in the person of this
Matthew was not revived only, but much advanced. His Father being taken from
him in the time of his minority, he was by the careful provision of Alic^
Parker his mother now a widow trained up in good literature, until he attained
to the age of eigh^een years: who then as a discreet woman and regard^ull of
her child's good, that those rudiments of learning which he had already
received, might not be lost, but improved and further addition made thereunto,
procured his entrance into Corpus Christi College in Cambridge about the
fourteenth year of King Henry the eighth, where she was resolved to make what
shift she could to maintain him, until he had attained that for which she
desired to place him there, to wit, ability for employment in some learned
function.

There being entered he so carried himself, and gave so good proofs of his
parts and pregnancy, that within a few months he was chosen Scholar of the
house, having a Bible-Clearkes place conferred upon him, and so his Mother
eased of her charge. Having after that taken his first degrees, and being made
Fellow of the house, he began to addict himself mainely unto the study of
Divinity, and therein made good progress. Nor was he either of the number of
those that will be flying out of the nest before they be well fledged, and
teaching of others ere they have learned ought themselves, or yet of those that
are wont to wrap up their talent in a towell, and whelm their light under a
bushel, regarding more their own ease then the bene^it of others, and the end
whereunto their studies should tend; but after some four or five years spent in
furnishing himself with (...) the ^ulpit, he began now to look abroad into the
neighbou^ing place^, and considering wha^ great need the people had of
instruc^ion in thos^ blind an^ dark times, wherein the lights were grown dim^
and vision was ge^son, and because so rare, the more pr^^ious; he employ^d
himself dilig^ntly, as occasion and opportunity was offr^d in dilivering out
the Word of God unto them, and that in an other manner of way, then was usual
in those days.

By means hereof notice taken of his diligence and dexterity therein, that he
might the more freely make use of of his talent without opposition or
disturbance, he had Authority granted him by the Kings letters patent and the
Archbishops general license, to preach where he would without control: with
this power backed, he lanched further out; and being not as yet tied to any
special charge he bestowed his labors sometime in one place, sometime in
another; and that in the most eminent Cities and other parts of the realm,
where he deemed most good might be don and was not long after called to be
Chaplain in ordinery to Queen Anne, the pious Mother of that heroical
princess o^ blessed memory Q^eene Elizabeth; by whose favor al^o he was made
Deane of Stoke in Suffolk, where he caused a school^ to be erect^d for the
education and training up of youth in good literature.

Aft^r the unfortunate death of Queen Anne, he was by the King taken into his
^ervice. And having now taken the degree of Doctor in Divinity, he was by his
Majesty's special letters of recommendation, chosen Master of the College,
wherein he had been both Scholar and Fellow before: the Colledg^ not long
after by unanimous consent ^e^ling also upon him the benefice of Landbeach in
the I Will of Ely, not far from Cambridge.

The for^ mentioned preferments he retained during the whol^ re^idue of King
Henry's lif^ and reign; continuing still constant in the exercise of his
m^ni^tery; unto the happy entrance of that relious Prince, and of wisdom and
und^r^t^nding above his years, King Edward. At which time albeit the Deanery of
Stoke were dissolved, Doctor ^arker much grieving for it^ and withstanding it
wha^ he could the rather in regard of the School annexed to it and depending
upon it; yet had he in lieu of it a yearly pension assigned unto him out of
the Kings exquecher: and being by him also entertained, as by his Father before
him, he was further advanced by him (so well he esteemed of him) to the Deanery
of Lincoln and the prebendary of Coldingham in the same Church.

Thus continued he in a plentiful and worshipful estate, until the un^imely
death of that mirror of Princes, and the disastrons succ^ssion of his Sister
Queen Mary; when true religion was suppressed, superstition re^established, and
those godly Teachers that continued constant in the profession of Christ's truth
were deposed, jected, stripped of their means and maintenance, and constrained
either to fly the land or lie hid, unless they would expose themseleves to
fire and faggot; the best and ^east they could look for, if they came into the
hands of those, who had never learned what mercy meant. But these violent
courses now taking place, this reverend man among others, who stuck still to
the better, though now weaker side, was constrained to leave all and to shift
for himself: and the rather for that he had married a wife, a woman of good
note (by whom in process of time he had three Sons, whereof two survived him)
as a thing though allowable, not by Gods Word alone, but by the Laws of the
Land also then in full force^ yet by their Popish Canons inhibited and
condemned as a foul and heinous crime: with his wife therefore (whom he would
not dismiss yet all that time) and such issue as he had then by her, he kept
close in a friends house; though leading a poor and obscure life in very mean
estate, without any aid or succor from abroad, yet in regard of his rest and
freedom ^or study, with such contentment, as that diverse times he professed
he should not have desired any other condition, save for the fear of danger
both to himself and his friend; which could not but much di^tract.

But the fury and rage of those times being over (as nothing violent we say
lasts long; it was but a storm, though a fierce and a fiery one; but a
shoure, though a shoure wherein it rained blood in abundance) a great calm
ensued by the laying of her, who had raised it, to rest; and the raising up of
her Sister, one of a far other spirit in her room, upon whose happy entrance
among others that had lien hid, wanting means and opportunity to escape
otherwise; this our Matthew came abroad again, and was by that blessed servant
of God Queen Elizabeth, whose mother he had formely attended on unto her death,
advanced to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, lately become vac^nt by the
decease of the Cardinal Reginald Poole departing not many hours after his
Mistres and kinswoman Queen Mary; and was thereunto consecrated in the Chapel
of the Palace at Lambeth, on the seventeenth of December, in the year of grace
1559. by William Barl^e Bishop of Bath and Wells, Miles Coverdale Bishop of
Excester, John Scory Bishop of Chichester, and John Hodgekin Suffragane of
Bedford, being the seventieth from Augustine the first of that See, and the
first that without power or pall from the Pope, and such frivolous r^tes of the
Romanists use, was enthronised in that seat.

Being thus suddenly now, as Joseph sometime in Aegipt, not freed only from
his fears and confinement, but advanced to the highest pitch of
Ecclesiastical preferment that our Church and State affoard, and others by
degrees are wont to climb up to, he was nothing thereby altered (as in such ca^e
too often it falls out) but demeaned himself still like himself. Nor did his
true worth ever more then now manifest it self, when by his wise, discreet and
temperate carriage in so sodame a passage from so low a downfall to so high an
ascent, he showed himself a man able to manage either condition, and (that
which is the gift of a very few) to walk steadily and eavenly in either. For
neither was he hereupon, either puffed up with pride, though honors suddenly
atcheived are over pron^ to swell up; or over-wrought to a neglect of his
Ministerial emploiments, which such places often much impeach; or surprised with
a tenatious and avaritious disposition, as is wont to befall those that come
hungry to such preferments, and have had former experience of the fickleness
of them. For he carried himself in a meek and mild manner toward all sorts,
even the meanest; with much discretion in regard of the diversities of
judgments, which could not but be great and not easy to accord in those
times, when such extremity of heat had so lately been exercised by some of the
one side against the other: with great gentleness and patience toward men of
hot and high stomack^, though without any base and servile either condescending
to them or complying with them; with much lenity and forbearance toward
persons faulty and delinquent, thereby to win them to better courses, until
they seemed to be incorrigible; and with no less kind encouragements in every
kind to those, of his Clergy espcially, whom he perceived to be well affected,
of honest carriage, and diligent and industrious in their places. To which
purpose also he visited his whole Province, not by deputies or substitutes, but
in person himself. And, albeit his means at present could be no other then
very short and mean, having been wholly stripped some years past of all his
yearly revenewes, and constrained to live with his charge on such small stock
as he had lying by him all the time of his concealment; and the place he was
preferred to as yet rather enforced him to further and far greater expense then
affording means to discharge the same; yet such was his free, liberal,
ingenuous and generous disposition, that (the like whereof I suppose has been
seldom or never don by any other, either before him or since him) he freely an
frankly remitted unto his whole Clergy those fees that dunder the title of
Procurations are generally and justly at such times demanded. And for the
better encouragement of those of the Ministry to the constant and diligent
execution of their duty in enstruct^ng the people committed unto their charge
(because examples much move, and great men's actions are more exemplary)
notwith^tanding his manifold distractions and various employments by occasion
of his place, he forbear not frequently to preach (as his other important and
more public affairs permitted) sometime in his own Cathedral Church, and at
other times in the Towns and Villages abroad^ continuing constant in that his
painful practice amids^ much weakness and crasinesse, the attendants of old
age.

In that seat he sat fifteen years and five month^. During which time (that
which is not found to have befaln any of his either predecessors or
successors) he either consecrated or confirmed the Bishops of all the seats
throughout the whole land; yea all of them, one alone excepted, within his
first three years; and that one to wit of L^ndaffe^ in his seventh.

He deceased May the seventeenth 1575. having passed over, without any grievous
disaster, to speak of (his party share in that general calamity of the godly
in Queen Mary's time only excepted) the term of seventy and one years. His
common Motto which he had often in his mouth, and caused to be painted on the
walls of his house and the glass of his windows (as one in the greatest height
of worldly honor, minding and meditating on the vanity of this world and the
things of it) was that of S^. John, The World passes away, and the
Concupiscence of it, 1. John 2.17.

Before his decease some space of time, the better to mind him of his
mortality, he caused his monument or tomb to b^ made of plain black marble,
and to be placed in the Chapel of Lambeth house, where he received his
Archepiscopall consecration: in which also according to his Will so disposing
it, his corpse lies enclosed (no other having place of sepulture besides
himself in that Chapel) with this Epitaph, (composed by Docton Haddon
sometime one of his officers, and afterward one of the Masters of Request to
Queen Elizabeth) engraven thereupon.

Matthew Parker lived sober and wise;
Learned by study and continual pactise;
Loving, true, of life uncontrold:
The Court did foster him both young and old.
Ordeely he dealt, the right he did defend:
He lived unto God; to God he made his end.
The reason why he desired to have his remains these reposed, in a vault for
the receipt thereof purposely framed, was (a^ by some is reported) for that a
great Noble man in hig^st favor in those times, having labored earnestly to
get that house from the Sea, this our Archbishop therein stiffely and stoutly
withstood him, and by earnest solicit^tion obtained from the Q^eens Majesty
this promise, that he should never have it so long as the Archbishop abode
there: which he therefore (to add the stronger obligation to that promise)
took order it should be as well after his decease as before.

He was a man of a grave aspect, and of a staid and settled carryage, of a mild
dispo^ition, and courteous demeanure, a favoure^ of learned men, and a lover
and promoter a^ well of learning as of Religon: and as in other thin^^, so
^^p^ially in his disposition concerning these outw^^d things of a marv^ilous
wise and discreet temper, as provident and frugall (without any taint of base
courses, wherewith many, use to to suppl^ and support their prodigality, making
in that ^e hook and crook with the one hand, that wickedly and wastfully they
fling as fast away with the other) otherwise the revenewes of his Se^, being by
some sinister courses formerly much impaired, could never have enabled him to
do as he did: so yet withal very bountiful, yea magnificent^ much addicted
to hospi^ality, and very re^ardfull both of his own credit, and of the honor
and dignity of his place. For first he was careful ^o repair the Palace at
Canterbury, being almost wholly ruined and ready to fall to the ground: the
restavration whereof performed, not in necessary only, but in beavtifull and
stately manner stood him in 1400 ^. The like care and charge he was at with the
Palace of Lambeth b^ing much out of repair (which he also much enlarged) and
with the Quires of the Churches, annexed to his See, being many, and the most
of them much decayed. And wh^reas for the repair and furniture of those and
other his houses, he was feign to take many materials and commodities on trust,
very careful was he to see in due time all such debts discharged, that no
danger or damage might accrue unto those; who perceiving his disposition this
way and how much he abhorred to run long behind hand with any, were right
willing and ready upon all occasions to supply him with whatsoever he required.

Besides that, in his entertainments he was very free, yea magnificent upon
special occasions: as in that sumptuous and well ordered Feast made by him at
the time of the A^sizes, upon the finishing of that stately Hall reedified at
Canterbury; and the like at some other solemn times; to say nothing of a
liberal table constantly maintained with him for the ordinary entertainment of
his own Retinue and such company as commonly repaired to him, and the relief
of the poorer sort.

Nor did his liberality and bounty dye with him, but survived him in many
monuments and fruits of it remarkable: For he founded a free School at Rochdale
in Lancashire. In the diocese of Norwich he took order for six Sermons to be
Preached yearly at certain times in five several parishes with consideration
for the same. To the City of Norwich where he was born, he gave a Basin and
Ewer of silver and gelt of 173. ounces, and fifty shillings by the year, to be
constantly distributed among the poor there. To Corpus Christi College in
Cambridge, where he had been trained up, he gave lands for the maintenance of
two Fellows and thirteen Scholars; three hundred and ten ounces of plate; the
perpetual Advowson of Saint Mary Ab-Church in London; a lease for seventeen
years of fourteen pounds eight shillings by the year, and an hundred pounds to
purchase lands for the mainetainance of a ^ire in the Common hall there from
the first of November to the last of Fabruary: besides all this he built for
them their inner Library, with two Chambers adjoining to it; and furnished it
with no small number of Books, some printed ones, some Manuscripts of no small
value. To G^nwell and Cajus College he g^ve likewise a silver and gelt cup of
fifty and six ounces, besides three other of lesser size, and diverse books. To
Trinity Hall a Schollership, and the like quantity of Plate and books. And
lastly (over and besides many other sums and gifts for other the like pious
uses) to the University Library, an hundred choice books, fifty printed, fifty
written, very precious and rare ones.

His care and study indeed was (spa^ing therein no expense) to gather together
and preserve such monuments of antiquity as might give light to the stories of
former times, or be useful otherwise. And here, because the book of God
justly claims the chief respect, as for antiquity and authority, so for use
and necessity, as containing in it that one necessary thing, on which man's
eternal welfare depends; considering the great want of Bibles in many
places; and through negl^ct the decay of them in others, he took much pains,
with the assistance of other godly learned, in mending the English Translation;
and caused the same so amended to be in a large paper and fair Character
imprinted, and dispersed abroad through the whole Realm.

And for the Works of other writers, those of our own Nation especially, such
as were hard to be gotten, and likely to perish, as remaining only in a few old
Manuscripts, unless some course were taken for the preservation of them; he
gathered together so many of them as he could light on; and disposed them in
such places, where they might both be in safe keeping, and lie ready at hand
for the learned upon all occasions to make use of, withal culling out some of
them to be made more public; which, with much travel and pains therein
taken, having by collation of sundry Copies together corrected and much
amended, he caused to be imprinted, as well for the benefit of strangers
abroad, as for the use of our own at home. Of this sort were.

1 Matthew of Paris his History. 2 Matthew of Westminster hi^ Historical
Flowers. 3 After Bishop of Shireborn his Story of King Alfred, printed in a
Saxon letter, with the Archbishops Preface before it.

He caused also to be compiled and published, a learned and large volumne,
concerning.

4 The Antiquities of the British Church: together with a Story of the
Privileges of the Church of Canterbury, and seventy Archbishops of that See.

At the Funeral of that famous Divine Mar^ine Bucer, he Preached.

5 A Sermon out of the Book of Wisdom Chap. 4. verse. 6.9. Which was
afterward also published in print.

Love, learning, wisdom and true zeal,
Patience in want, and bounty in weal
Were the chief flowers in that Crown
Which gave this Man of men Renown:
The Crosiar did not supersede
His Cure of souls, nor did he plead
Affairs at Court: His past'rall heat
Grew nere the less as he grew great:
Five Kings and Queens, his days did see
Enthroned and septer'd: The first three
Did view his merit, and enhaunc'd him,
The fourth destroyed, the fifth advanced him
To Lambeth Chair, where he the Church did guide
In Peace; and full of age and honor dyed.
The Life and Death of John Drusius. who dyed Anno Christi 1616.
John Drusious was born at Aldenard A^nn Christi 1550. was first brought up at
School in the City of Gaunt, and from thence went to the University of Lovain:
but whilst he was following his study hard there, his father was pr^scribed for
Religion, and thereby deprived of all his estate, which caused him to fly into
England, taking this his son along with him: when he came to London he met with
C^valerius, lately come thither, that was exceeding skillful in the Hebrew; his
Lectures he attended upon both in public and private, and when Cevalerius was
sent to Cambr^ge to be the Professor there, Drusius went along with him,
applying himself espcially to the study of Greek: Afterward when Cevalerius
was called back into France, Drusius still accompanied him, and fell hard to
the study of the Hebrew: he also privately read the same to two young English
Gentlem^n: After while he returned to London again, and when he was purposed
to go back into France, he heard of that bloody Massacre at Paris, which made
him alter his mind^, and having preferment pr^f^^ed to him, ^ither in O^ford or
Cambridge, he chose Oxford, where, for the space of four years, he read Hebrew,
Chalde, and Syriack with great commendation: After which time he went back to
L^vain; but not long enjoying peace there, he returned to London again: where
he continued till the peace was concluded at Gaunt, and then went over into
Flanders, and from thence into Zealand, where the States of Holland chose him
to ^e the Professor in Hebrew, Chalde, and Syriack in the University of Leiden,
Anno Christi 1577. there he married a wife, and the Stat^s of Fris^and having
newly erected a University at Franequer, they called him thither: In which
place he continued taking great pains for the space of thirty one years; and
at length resiged up his spirit unto God: Anno Christi 1616. and of his age 66.

John Drusius was a great Ebrician sound,
Most meritoriou^ly must here by Crowned
With Bays, to's praise: whom for's ability
In Hebrew, Syriack Chalde, worthily,
The States of Holland, had Professor made
Of him in Leiden, where not long he stayed,
Being called to Franquer Univer^^ty
By th'Fri^^and States, where with great industry,
For thirty years he governed it with fame,
And then deceased with an honored Name.
The Lif and Death of John James Grynaeus, who dyed Anno Christi 1617.
JOhn James Grynaeus was born at Berne in Helvet^a Anno Christi 1540. his
father was a Minister, who dyed of the Plague Anno Christi 1547. he was brought
up at School at Basil, and An. 1551. was admitted into the University: the next
year he fell sick of the Plague, but it pleased God to restore him again, and
he followed his st^dy hard: Anno Christi 1559. he began to Preach, and was
ordained Deacon: Anno Christi 1563. he went to Tu^ing, and the year after was
made Doctor in Divinity: and the next year after he was sen^ for to succeed his
father in the Pastoral charg at Raetela, where besides his ordinary ^abors, he
read privately to the Deacons twice a week, and God blessed his labors
exceedingly.

In the year 1569. he married a wife, with whom he lived contentedly forty
years, and had by her seven children: Abo^t that time the form of Concord being
much pressed, he ^ell hard to the studies of the Scriptures, and of ancient and
modern Divines, whereby it pleased God that the light began to appear to him,
for hitherto he was a Lutheran; whereupon d^claring his judgment about the
ubiquity of Christ's body, he began to be hated of many^ Anno Christi 1575. he
was sent for to Basil, to be a Professor in interpreting the Old Testament:
there he expounded Genesis, the Psalms and the Prophets: and God so blessed
his labors, that he healed the difference between the Tygurine, and Basilian
Churches: he had many Noble, and Gentlemen that came out of other countries to
sojourn with him. After the death of Lodweck, Prince Elector Palatine, Prince
Cassimire sent for him to Heidleberge, where he read Divinity and History
almost two years: at the end of which time he was called back to Basil (
Sculcer being dead) to succeed him in the Pastoral office: which place he
discharged faithfully the remainder of his life; at last, after much pains
spent in the Work of the Ministry, in Readings in the University, and
overseeing of the Schools, he began to grow weak and sickly, and his eie-sight
waxed very dim: he lost also most of his friends, with his wife and children,
all but one daughter, and his son in Law Polanus: he was much tormented with
the Colic, yet bore all with admirable pat^ence: and in the midst of his
pains, he said Vt nunc triste mori est, sic dulce resurgere quondam,
Christus ut in vita, sic quoque morte lucrum est:
In terris labor est, requies sed suavis in urna,
In summo venient gaudia summa die:
As death's sad, so to rise is sweet much more,
Christ as in life, so be in death is store:
On earth are troubles, sweet rest in the grave:
In The last day we the lasting'st joys shall have.


After that he fell sick of a Fever, which almost took away his senses, but he
betook himself wholly to Prayer, and tasted the joys of heaven in his soul,
continually wishing that he might be dissolved and be with Christ: which desire
God shortly after satisfied: when he had lived seventy seven years Anno Christi
1617. the Ministers of Basil carred his corpse to the grave: A little before his
death he professed to Doctor Meier that he dyed in the same Faith that he had
taught others: that he had earnestly besought God to provide his people of an
able and faithful Pastor etc. conculding, O praeclarum illum diem, cum ad
illum animarum concilium, coelumque proficiscar, and cum ex hac turba, and
colluuione discedam: O happy day when I may depart out of this trouble^some and
sinful World, and go to heaven to those Blessed souls before departed: He
used to say, Pontifici Roma^o Erasmum plus no ^uisse ^^^ando^ quam Lutherum
stomachando: writing to C^y^raeus, he said^ Si non amplius in his terris te
visurus sum: ibi tamen convenie^^^, ubi Luthe^o cum^ Zuinglio optime jam
convenit: If we never see one another again in this World^ yet we shall meet in
that place where Luther and Zuinglius agree very well together: He used to be
up at his study Winter and Summer before Sun^^^sing, and spent all the day in
Prayer, Writing, Reading, and visiting the sick: He was so famous that many
Princes, Noblemen, and young Gentlemen came from foreign Countries to see, and
hear him.

And this Grynaeus worthy was, likewise,
That we his Noble name should memorize:
Who was a rare Divine in Germany,
And made a Doctor in Divnity:
At Tubing and to Basil, sent for thence
To be Professor, where with diligence
And profitable pains, and in that while
The differance he did reconcile
'Twixt the Basilian Church and Tigurine;
At last his labor made his health decline:
And in his Pastoral Charge, in Basil he
Ended his days in sweet tranquillity.
ROBERT ABBAT
The Life and Death of Robert Abbot.
THis learned and humble man succeeded Doctor Holland in the Chair at Oxford,
and herein exceeded him, that although they were both of extraordinary
sufficiency and vast if not immense reading, yet as Augustus spoke of Cassius,
ingeni^^ habet in^^^^rato, so it may be tr^ly said of Abbo^ variam lectionem
habuit in numerato: he had the command of his learning, and the sum of his
readings upon any point which offered it self to his handling, cast up to his
hand; the other had not so. Whence it came to pass that the diligent hearers
of the one received always from him that which they expected; the Auditors of
the other seldom received what they expected, or expected what they received
from him, yet always went away well satisfied from his full table. And I
conceive the reason hereof may be this, Abbot desired rather multum legere than
multa Holland, rather multa than multum; the meditation of the one wrought upon
his reading; the reading of the other wrought upon his meditation; and us it
surcharged his memory, so it overruled his invention also. Let both have their
due praises.

-- Et viridi cingantur tempora lavro.
For Abbot, envy it self will afford him this testamoniall, that if his tongue
had been turned into the pen of a ready writer, or all that h^ wrote upon the
History of Christ's passion, and the Prophet Esaias, and the Epis^le to the
Romans, had seen the light; he had come near unto if not over taken, the three
prime worthies of our University, Jewel, Bilson and Reynold^; for he gave to Wm
Bishop, as great an overthrow as Jewel to Harding, Bilson to Allen, or
Reynolds to Heart.

He was borne at Gilford in Surry of honest and industryou^ Parents, who lived
fifty years together in wedlock; and because they preserved that sacred bond so
entire and kep^ the marriage bed so undefiled, God powered the dew of his
blessing upon it and made them very happy in the fruit of their body,
especially in three of their children, whereof the first was Bishop of Sarum,
the second Archbishop of Canterbury the third Lord Mayor of London. In the
Catalogue of all the Bisho^s of England, only Seffred sometimes^ Bishop of
Chichester, was consecrated by his brother Archbishop of Canterbury. Abbot had
this happiness and more, for of two of his younger brethren one of them was
advanced to the highest place in the Church, and the other to the highest place
in the City under his Majesty; the youngest of them Maurice Abbot had the
honor to be the first Knight who was dubbed by his Majesty's royal sword: the
elder of them had yet a greater to annoint his sacred Majesty, and set the
Crown upon his royal head; but I leave the two other to a better Herald to
blazen their virtues. Of this our Robert I will endeavor with my pensill to
draw the lineaments, whose silver pen I more highly esteem then the silver
Mace of the one, or golden of the other. He was not as Saint Jerome writes of
Hillarion, a rose growing from a thorn, but rather a province or double rose
growing from a single: for his Parents embraced the truth of the Gospel in
King Edwards days, and were persecuted for it in Queen Mary's reign (by
D^ctor Story of infamous memory) and notwithstanding all troubles and
molestations continued constant in the profession of the truth till their
death, and all their children treading in their holy steps, walked with a right
foot to the Gospel, and were zealous professors of the reformed Religion,
especially George and this our Robert, whose zeal for the truth accompaned
with indifatigable industry and choice learning preferred him without any other
friend or spokesman, to all the dignities and promotions he held in the
University and Church.

He was another Hortensius, his eminent parts were seen and allowed, yea and
rewarded to upon the first glympse of them: For upon an O^ation made by him the
seventeenth of November the day of Queen Elizabeth's inauguration, he was chosen
Scholar of Bali^l College; upon the first Sermon he Preached at Worster he
was made Lecturer in that City, and soon after Rector of All Saints there; upon
a Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross, Master John Stannop one of his hearers
having a benefice of great value in his gift, Bingham by name in
Nottinghamshire, took a resolution upon the next voydance of it to confer it
upon him; and the Incombent not long after dying, sent of his own accord the
Presentation to him; upon a Sermon Preached before his Majesty King James, in
the month he waited at Court, In the year 1612. news being brought of Doctor
Hollands death, the King most graciously nominated him his successor; and
lastly upon the ^ame of his incomparable Lectures read in the University, de
suprema potestate regia contra Bellarminum and Sua^ezium, and the perusal of
his Antilogia adversus apol^giam Garnetti, the Sea of Sarum falling void, his
Majesty sent his Congedelire for him to the Deane and Chapter. Thus as he set
forward one foot in the temple of virtue, his other still advanced in the
temple of honor.

A curious English Poet making use rather of licencea poeti^a, than libertas
grammatica, deriveth Robertus (our Divines Christan name) from three
Monesillibles ros, ver and ^hus; though this etimoligy be affected and
constrained, yet I will make use of it to branch the History of his life into
three parts; and first I will consider him as he was ros in his Countries cure;
secondly, as he was ver in his University preferment; thirdly, as he was thus
in his episcopal See.

First I will speak of him as he was ros: Ros signifies dew, which name very
fitly agreed unto him whilst for twenty years he lived obscurely in the
Country; for as dew does much good to the place where it falls, and yet makes no
noise; so his pains were very profitable in his private Cures, yet was not his
fame cried up nor made any noise in the world: secondly, as dew dropping on
mowen grass refreshes it and makes it spring anew; so his labors in his
Pastoral charge much refreshed the consciences of true converts, which had
felt the cythe of Gods judgments, and made them spring up in hope and newness
of life: thirdly, as dew distilling in silver drops mollifieth the parched
ground, so his heart melting into tears in many penitenciall exhortations
mollified the stony hearts of those who had been before most obdurate in their
sins: lastly, as dew that falls from heaven returns not thither b^ck again,
but inricheth the soil, and makes fruitful the earth; so his pains
wheresoever he bestowed them were never stirrill but brought much fruit of
comfort both to himself and of knowledge in the mysteries of salvation, to his
hearers. In this time of his retired privacy he printed A mirror of popish
subtilties: The exhaltation of the Kingdom and priesthood of Christ, and first
he ruff-hewed, and after polished and published his exquisitr tract entitled
Antichristi Demonstratio, which was not only highly commended by our learned
Andrews Bishop of Winton, but so esteemed by King James (a second Solomon)
that of all the fruitful trees in our Paradise he chose to griffe his
meditations upon the Apocalipse upon Abbot his stock, commanding that his
Comment upon the 7.8.9. and 10. verses of the twentieth Chapter of the
Apocalypse, should be joined unto the end of Abbot de Antichristo; and at the
last impression of the said book at London, 1608. it is Printed after the end
of the twelft Chapter before Elen^cus capitum of the said book; an honor which
his Majesty did to no other of the great Clerks of this Kingdom. Like as Mary
Magdalens spicknard was so mingled with the ointment of the Gospel by our
Saviors precept, that whosoever smelt the one cold not but resent the other:
so King James his savory meditations are incerted into Abbots contemplations of
Antichrist, that whosoever distasteth not the one cannot but well relish the
other. To these his labors which made the press sweat again and again; I
must add his most accurate Commentary upon the Epistle to the Romans, which he
run through all not with brief notes as others, but large Sermons upon every
verse; in which he handled as his text gave him occasion, all the controverted
points of Religion at this day, and he enclosed the whole Magazen of his
learning: and great pity it is that the Church should be deprived of such a
treasure, considering Saint Austines observation is true, the truth is neither
mine, nor thine, nor his, but all of us have a right to it, whom thou call
to the Communion thereof, threatening to deprive us of it if we keep it
private. They therefore who withhold ^his Work from the public view, as they
wrong the Church in general, so in special the City and Cathedral Church of
Worceste^, to which he b^quea^hed it as a kind of legacy, as the authors own
Words in his dedicatory Epistle to Bishop Babington printed with his Sermons
upon the 110. Psalm import, I will endeavor as opportunity may serve to
present to their eyes ( meaning his hearers at Worcester) the things that did
once affect their ears, and to make others also partakers of them; and a
little after in the same Epistle, I am willing to express my affection to that
City wherein I have bestowed the greatest service of my life, and wherein I
assure my self that a few names there are at least, I hope many that shall be
my crown and rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus.

I have considered him as ros according to the first syllable of his name, now
let us view him according to the second, as ver, a spring; first passively then
actively; first as ver in himself, when taken as a choice plant and set in the
famous nurserie of learning and Religion, the University of Oxford, he thrived
exceedingly, springing and growing from one profession to another, from one
degree to another, from an Artist to a Divine, from a Bachelour to a Master,
from a Scholar of Bali^l College to a Fellow. Though this were the time
wherein he replenished his storehouse of good Literature both divine and
humane, yet knowing that this kind of provission is like the oil in the
widows cruze, which filled still by emptying, and like the loaves John 6.
which multiplied by distributing; he joining practice with his contemplation,
and by Lecturing first at Al^allowes, and afterward at Abbington he increased
his store and stock of saving knowledge: and thus he was ver passively in
himself, but when by Bishop Bancrofts means he was called to be Governor of
Baliol College, and much more after when he was advanced to the Chair, he was
ver actively, and caused a spring in others; for then as a careful and
skillful Gardener he set his nurserie with the best plants, making always
choice of the towardliest young men in all Elections, and when he had set them,
he took such care to water and prune them that in no pla^ or knot in the
famous nurserie of the University of Oxford, there appeared more beautiful
flowers, or grew sweeter fruit then in Baliol College whilst he was Master.
What should I speak of his diligent reading to his own Scholars, and his
continual presence at public Exercises, whereby he both Countenanced the
Readers and encou^aged the Hearers.

-- Vrget praesentia Turin.
His first and chief care was to plant the fear of God in the hearts of all
the Students in his College, knowing well that as God is the father of all
things, so Religion^ is the mother of all virtues; and little hope there is
that they will take any care to observe the statutes of these Founders, who
regard not his statute^, who is the Feunder of all nature and grace, and bears
up the pillar of the whole World. To imprint his Laws therefore in their
minds, besides the holy example of his strict and regular life and continual
admonitions and godly exhortations to study the Scriptures, and exercise
themselves in them day and night, he took special care of public Prayers,
from which himself was never missing, if he had his health (though the
mornings were never so dark, and the season bitter (and but finding some
inconvenience in the absence of many of his company at evening Prayer,
pretending diverse occasions of business, he altered the time of those
Prayers, putting them off from five of the clock in the afternoon until eight
of the clock at night, and immediately after payers he commanded the gates to be
locked, to prevent or at least discover all Noctivagators. Next to piety, he
most desired to setle peace in the College, and exterpate all faction which
had been for a long time the baine of that Society; for Doctor Lilly his
immediate predecessor was in ^ome sense not free from, lilliam inter spina^, a
Lilly among thorns, and which was worse, it is though he cherished them for
private ends of his own: but Abbot who had learned from his and our Master
that blessed are the peace makers, and that a house divided within it self
cannot stand, labored by all good means to caement all parties and make up
all the breaches he found, wherein God so blessed him that by reconciling them
one to another, he united them all fast to himself and he gained more every
way by angling in the clear stream, then his predecessors had done by
fishing in troubled waters. Thirdly, because he learned from Saint Ierom that
intemperance in diet, facile dispumat in libidinem; he every week viewed the
buttry book, and if he found lavish expense upon any man's name he would punish
him severely for it, yet was he tender and compassionate to those who were of
weaker constitution^ of body, and he not only permitted them to have such
meats dressed for them as might irretate their weak appetite and strengthen
nature, but he sent to them often from his own Table, and if any were visited
with sickness he took care of them as if they were his own children, and his
house was as an Apothecaries shop to furnish them with all such things they
needed: During the time of his Mastership in Baliol College, he finished his
answer to Will^am Bishop Seminary priest, entitled by the Pope Bishop of
Chalcedon; this nominall Bishop of an Aeriall Diocese took upon him to refute
Master Perkins his reformed Catholic, but our Abbot so refuted his
refutation, and so learnedly, copiously, solidly and perspicuously handled all
those maine heads of Controversy, which his adversary touched upon, that many
judicious Protestants heartily wished that William Bishop had run through all
the above mentioned Refom^d Catholic, for then we should have had in our
Abbots encounter with him a whole system and body of controversies exactly
discussed, and the truth of reformed Religion in all points solidly and
substantially confirmed by Scriptures, Fathers and Reason.

When Hanibal set upon Minutius at an advantage, and put him to some distress
Fabius Maximus brings out his forces against Haniball, and puts him to flight,
and Haniball himself was enforced to confess, that if he gained any thing
upon Minutius he lost it and a great deal more by Fabius Maximus. This William
Bishops conscience told him, and therefore finding himself unable to deal
with Abbot at sharp, he challenged him to fight with him at dull and rusty
foyles, I mean foul language and scurrilous sarcasmes like the Orators taxed
by Quintilian qui causarum vacua convi^^is explebant.

At the end of that his Mr. piece, he added vice coronidis, a singular treatise
entitled the True ancient Roman Catholic, which he dedicated to Prince Henry,
who so thankefully accepted this his present, that he returned him many thanks
in a letter written with his Princely hand, and promised his helping hand upon
the next voydance to lift him up higher in the Church; and though by the
Princes untimely death this most able Champion of the truth sunk much in his
hopes; yet within a few years he was raised up first ad Cathedram Doctoralem,
and then Episcopalem, for Doctor Holland exchanging this life for a better in
the year of our Lord 1612. Abbot was thought the fittest man to succeed him in
that Chair, in the judgment of all men save his own, who ever undervalued
himself, and after this place was conferred upon him refused it till his
brother procured a Mandate from the King to him to hold it, and then being put
into the Chair as it were by force, he so well filled and furnished it that
all men gave him that Evelogne which Saint Ierom gives, Nepotian ide^ magis
erat dignus quod se p^ofitebatur indignum: he was by so much the worthier the
less he knew his worth, for contempt of honor make^ it more due, and humility
in excellency excels excellency it self. And here the third time he made good
the second syllable of his name Ver, for partly by Sermons ad Clerum, partly by
his learned Lectures, partly by his judicious moderating Divinity disputations,
partly by his exquisite Tractates printed a little before his death: he caused
such a spring among Divines as was not seen in many years before. I will not
revive his contentions with Doctor Howson concerning the Geneva notes and
clearing Calvin from Arianisme, because they are dead long since, and were
honorably buried by King James, by whose command Dr Howson being sharpened,
^urned (...) edge from Geneva to Rome, and in the next Sermon he Preached as
Saint Maries^ fell firce and foul upon the Pope himself, threatening to loosen
him from his Chair, though he were fastened thereunto with a te^peny nail.

Neither will I relate much of his Far well Oration at his parting from the
University, because I could not light upon a perfect copy thereof, but a ^ew
fragments only and fragments though of dainty dishes please not the palate of
most men; yet to give you some taste of it, thus he began Salve veneranda matter
Academiarum decus and gloria continere me, non possum quin exultem animo
beatumque me praedicem cui infelicissimae omnium gymnasiorum discere pariter
and doc^re datum est mill eg^ tibi salutes mill felicitates, prosperitates
omnes and successus ex^ptare nunquam desinam, tibi hoc negotium sub
potentissimi principis auspitiis, agitut tibi repetitus labor hic cui pro te
aliq^ando in scholi^ tuis sudatum est. Id nempe agitur ut cavere discant alumni
tui Arminios Berti^s Grevinchonios and reliquos istos scrip^itores quos
pruritus, ingeniorum occupat ut in assueti^ nunquam acquiescant, nunquam se
aliquid esse credant, nisi novitate singulares sin^. Qui vult uno esse, animo
cum ecclesia anglicana par est, (...) inch^et ab ^jus doctrina notitia, quam
ejusdem ecclesia esse cons^^^, ^^gat, in primis and digerat articulos
religionis quibus sub^cribimus omnes illorum recolat explicationes quae
continentur in ^omiliis, carechismos consulat ea quae publica ejus authoritate
prodierunt apologiam ecclesiae, Anglicanae and omnes ejus defensiones
p^oillustres viros Iew^llum, Fuleum, Reynoldum, and Whitakerum, Calvini
Institutiones, opera reverendissimi Whigifti, and in primis v^nerabiles
Hookeri, nullo modo omnititantur; qui vero ^is omnibus relictis, confer^ se ad
magistrum sententiarum and Thomam Aquinatem, and ^uius farinae theologos,
acquid aliter fieri potest, quam ut papismo inficiantur, qui prim^m lac sugunt
ab istis uberibus: neque tamen scholam penitus excludo, imo omnimod^ adhibendam
sentio, se^ ita ut sit ancilla non domina and aff^renda ad il lam fidei
doctrina, non inde referenda; sit asina quae te portet, quod si te inequitet
illa in salibras and praecepitia te ducet. And after singular directions for
stud^nts and passionat expressions of his love to the University, thus he
concluded spero ego, de te spero de tuis optima charissima matter m^a, utinam
vigeas, utinam floreas magisque ac^magis crescas in columnam fidei firmamentum
veritatis usque ad advenium Jesus Christi.

We have felt him as dew softly distilling in his private Cures, according to
the first syllable of his name Ros, and viewed him also as the Spring growing
and flourishing in the University according to the second Ver. Now let us scent
him as Franckincense sending ^orth a most fragrant smell in his Diocese,
according to the last monosyllable Thus.

Franckincense thought it be often used in private houses where the rooms are
dankish, yet it is most proper for the Church, and of all Churches, for the
Cathedrals where is the greatest concourse of people, and the service performed
with most solemnity: here therefore consecrated as it were in a golden censer,
he burnt most fragrantly in his meditations, ejacul^tions, Sermons and
exhortations, breathing out odorem vitae ad vitam, through all the Bishopric
of Sarum. Other Bishoprics were voyced upon him as of Lincoln and Coventrie
and Litchfield; but the business of the nullity, made a nullity for a time in
his Graces good intentions, and our Bishops hopes, in so much that King James
of blessed memory, when Doctor Abbot newly consecrated Bishop of Sarum came to
do his homage, his Majesty spoke pleasantly unto him after this manner, Abbot
I have had very much to do to make thee a Bishop, but I know no reason for i^,
unless it, were because thou writest against (viz. William Bishop a Popish
priest) whose refutation of Master Perkins his reformed Catholic, this our
Abbot had not long before solidly refuted. After his c^nsecration at Lambeth,
and his homage done at Court he took the University in his way to Sarum; and
there taking his leave of his Mother, he was accompanied with all his brethren,
the heads of Colleges and Hals, and of other his Oxford friends of good rank
and quality, till about the edge of his Diocese they left him, with tears in
their eyes, erumpentibus prae dolor, and the Clergy and Gentry of Sarum met
him with tears also in their eyes of another kind, emanantibus prae gaudio; as
he came into the City he was entertained with eloquent speeches, which he
answered ^xtempore in the same language they were made unto him, and with
worthy presence which were thankefully accepted, and the next Lords day
following he offered his first fruits in the T^mple, taking for his text the
Word of the Psalmest 26.8. Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and
the place where thine honor dwells.

After he had verified the Words of his Text in the person of David, his Sermon
ended, he verified it in himself and made a D^monstration that he loved that
house of God, not in ^ongue only and in word, but in deed and veri^y; for
viewing exactly that beautiful Fabric, and finding it very much in decay,
partly through the negligence of his Predecessors, and partly through the
Covetousness^ of the Deane and Prebends, who filled their purses with that
which should have stopped the chi^ks in the Walls, he sent a peremptory summons
for all the Prebends; and partly by a seasonable admonition, partly by
increpations and threatenings, partly by reviving an old Statue de quinta part
Prebenda^um, he drew from them 500. l. which was all spent in the reparation of
that Church. And after the repairing of the material temple he wholly labored
in repairing of the spiritual temple, both by doctrine and by discipline,
visiting his whole Diocese in his own person, and Preaching every Lords day
whilst he enjoyed his health either in the City or in the neighbor Towns: the
last text he handled was John 14. ver. 16. I will pray the father and he shall
give you another comforter, that he may abide with you for ever: upon the first
proposal whereof as many of his hearers presaged his departure from them, so
indeed proved it his last and Far-well Sermon, for soon after he came out of
the Pulpit, he fell into grievous ^its of the stone which first stoped the
passages of nature, and within a few days shut up all the offices of his
senses, so was his hour^glasse contrary to all other, the sooner run by being
stop^ with sand or gravel; for by his perpetual sedentary life, such a stone
was bred in his kidneys as no strength of nature or skill of Art could remove,
but there still remaining, put his patience to the t^st, and by extremity of
pain and torment in a short space took away all sense of pain and life
together, whilst he lay thus as it were upon the rack in unsufferable tor^ure
of body, his soul was at great rest and ease, for the assurance of heavenly
things caused him most cheerfully to part wi^h earthly, and the quick sense he
had of the powers of the life ^o come deaded the sense of his bodily pains.
Many yet living are much revived to recollect those his last admonitions, and
godly exhortations; those I say who came to vi^it him upon his death bed who
were not a few, and among others the Judges being then at Sarum in their
Circuit. To them he communicated out of his rich treasury of learning and
devotion most Christian and grave advice, and amongst many points he discoursed
on before them, he insisted very much upon the benefit of a good conscience,
rendering many thanks to his Creator for the great comfort he felt thereby now
in his extremity, and admonished all that heard him so to carry themselves in
their most private and secret actions as well as in their public, that ^hey
might obtain that at the last which would stand them in more stead then what
all the World could afford besides; w^^h these his godly admonitions and
exhortations and Episcopal benediction and prayers, together with the pain of
his diseas^, being quite ^pent, he lay as it were ^lumbering with now and the^
a short ejaculation, lifting up his eyes and his hands toward heav^n for the
space of two or three hours, and at the length, ( March 2. 1617) between the
hours of seven and eight gave up the ghost, with these words, come Lord Jesus
come quickly, finish in me the work that thou have begun, in manus tuas
domine commendo spiritum meum quia tu redemisti me deus veritatis salvum fac
servum tuum qui in te solummodo, sperat and confidit fiat misericordia tua
domine super me in te domine speravi non confundar in aeternum.

The Thursday following his Funeral was solemnized in the Cathedral Church
over against the Bishops seat, where he was buried not so much in earth as in
water, I mean the tears of the Clergy, and all the inhabitants of Sarum which
they shed in great abundance for his loss as they had great reason. For
whereas there are three vertu^s which most endeere a good Bishop to his
Diocese, diligence in his Pastoral charge, Bountiful, Hospitality and a
lovely and lowly carriage even toward hi^ inferiors: in all these three Abbot
excelled, first for his humility; all they that knew him either under ha^ches,
or upon the deck or s^^ting at the stern of the Church found no difference in
him: he was the same man in his private Cures, and in his doctorall Chair and
in his Episcopal seat. As a violet whether it be set lower or higher in the
bank, retains still the same scent; so whether he were ^^t lower or higher
in the Church he kept close to the earth and retained his sweet, meek and
humble disposition. As for Hospitality besides his extraornary entertainment of
the Earls of Pembrooke, Harford, Mungumry^ the Lord Arundall of Warder, the
Judges of Ass^^es, the Justices at the Sessions, the Mayor and his brethren and
Deane and Cheapter, he feasted all the poor at Christmas, there being in the
City of Salisbury three parishes, he bid a hundred coupels every day at the
lea^t: so that besides the poorest of all, which were his guests on Christmas
day, all the rest of the needy in the City filled up the other three spare
Holy Days. What should I speak of his Charity to the Prisoners, whose Bowls
he refreshed three times every week at least, their lamentable cries piercing
as deep into his heart as the Iron entered into their souls. Lastly, for his
diligence in his Pastoral charge, and his f^ithfull and continual dispencing
the mysteries of salva^ion: I might here raise a cloud of witnesses not only
his thronged Auditories at Oxford, Abington, Worster and Bingham, but his
numerous Sermons, Commentaries and other Tractates of Divinity which he has
left behind him, some in Manuscripts some Printed.

The Manuscrip^s are these.

1 A Sermon Preached at Saint M^ries concer^ing the vindicating of Geneva
Bibles from judaisme and A^ianisme. 2 Three Sermons in English one Preached at
Paul's ^^^sse, inti^^led the Frui^lesse Fig Tree, the other two in the
Cathedral Church of Worcester upon the second of Tim. 4.7.8. 3 Diverse latin
Sermons. 4 Lectures upon the 26.27.28. Chapters of Saint Matthew containing the
story of Christ's Passion, death and resurrection. 5 A Commentary upon the
Prophet E^ay from the first Chapter to the fif^eenth verse of the thir^ieth. 6
A Commentary in Latin upon the whole Epistle to the Romans. 7 A brief
examination of Mr Bishops reproof of the Epistle Dedicato^y and Preface to the
Answer of his Epistle to the King. 8 A Preface to the Reader to ^e interposed
between the Epistle Dedicatory of his book de Anti-christo and the first
Chapter of the same book.

The Printed are these.

A mirror of Popish subtilties written against a cavelling Papist in the
behalf of one Paul Spence, dedicated to Bishop Whitgift London 1594. 2 The
Exaltation of the Kingdom and Priesthood of Christ, being a Commentary upon
the 110. Psalm, dedicated to Gerva^ Babington Bishop of Worcester London 1601.
3 Antichristi Demonstratio dedicated to King James, Printed at London first
1602. and after 1608. 4 A Defense of the reformed Catholic of Master Willian
Perkins lately dec^ased, against the bastard counter Catholic of Doctor
Bishop Seminary Priest, dedicated to King James, the first part Printed 1606.
the second 1607. the third 1609. 5 The true ancient Roman Catholic dedicated
t^ Prince Henry, Printed London 1611. 6 The old way, a Sermon Preached at
Oxford the eigth of July, being Act Sunday, dedicated to Archbishop Bancroft,
Printed at London 1610. 7 Antilogia adversus Apologiam Audreae Eudemon Johannis
Jesuitae pro Henrico G^rnetto proditore, dedicated to King Jame^, Printed at
London 1613. 8 De suprema potestate Regia exercitationes habitae in Academia
Oxoniensi, Printed after his death and dedicated by his Son to George Abbot
Archbishop of Canterbury, Printed at London 1619. 9 De gratia and perseverantia
sanctorum exercitationes habitae in Academia Oxoniensi, dedicated to Prince
Charles Printed London 1618. 10 In Richardi Thopsoni Anglo belg. diatribam de
amissione, and intercisione justificationis and gratiae, animadversio brevis,
Printed London 1618.

As he perfected this last ( March 2. 1617.) Work he finished his course upon
earth, which the Archbishop his brother hearing commanded me then his Chaplain
in house to affix the Attestation here ensuing, which I drew according to
brief notes written in English under his Graces own hand; of which I may say
as the Orator does of his Oration, De haruspicum responsis Oration omnis fuit
non authoritatis meae sed publicae religio^is mea fuerunt verba, fortasse plura
sententiae quidem omnes Archiepiscopi.

A Testatio.
EN tihi (Christian lector) viri (absit verbo invidia) supra omnem invidiae
aliam positi cantionem cygneam, cum qua animam exhalavit. Quod si ut esse
Phaebi dulcius lumen solet jam jam cadentis, ita chariora sint illustrium
virorum jam abeuntium scripta hunc libellum summo in pretio habeas oportet:
quem scias eximii doctoris, ejusdemque Amistites reverende postrema cura
elucubratum. Etenim dum opus hoc ad umbilicum ab ipso authore productium jam
exit in lucem, ipse ex hac luce ad caelestem migrat: nempe commodissima
ecclesiae militanti jam modo praestita opera, ad triumphantem evocatur
ecclesiam, ac a gratioe divinae defensione confestim ad divinae gloria
fruitionem tran^uolat; satur magis studiis, and lucubrationum suarum fama, quam
amnis, dinque non tam fuisse, quam vixisse credendus, Vita enim definiente
Plinio, Vigilia est, quam pr^sul hic noster propetuam sacrae theologiae studiis
videtur impe^di^se. Nam posteaquam in celeberima Academia, Oxoniensi pectus
penitus imbuisset optimarum artium cognitione, and linguam, stilumque sci^e
procudisset, utrumque deo dedicavit, and reliquam aetatis tempus transmisit,
partim sacris concionibus ad populum habendis, quib^s suggestum, partim
praelectionibus dictandis, quibus Cathedram Doctoralem, partim scriptis suis
limandis, quibus praelium plurimum locupletavit. Concedit claris^imi Theologi
diu nomen, and industria, ac nitra a^gustos privatae parochiae limits aluit
eam gloriam, quam haud ita multi nostro saeculo sunt assequuti. Tandem viginti
annos officio pastoris, and ecclesiasticae munere egregie perfunctus, a
serenissima regia Majestate in arenam protractus est, ut in religionis
reformat^ ca^sa de gravissimis saeculi nostri controversiis cum praecipuis
pontificis Romani pugilibus dimicaret. Qua quidem in arena non tantum
adversarios suos Bishoppium, and Eudaemonem Joannem sed and hominum de se
opinionem superavit.

Non multo post ab eodem Seremissimo Rege Iacobo Cathedrae Theologicae in Alma
Academia Oxoniensi preficitur: quam quidem dignitatem cum su^ma dignitate
quinque annis sustinuit. Ad extremum fidelissimi pastoris, and eximii
professoris laud cumulatus ad apicem Episcopalem evehi^ur, diocesi
Sarisburiensi ei demandata quam annis non amplius duobus, and tribus mensibus
administravit. Dum vero ^on solum publicis cutae Episcopalis occupationibus
implicatur, sed and priuatis studiis Theologicis penitus pertinaciusqu^
adhaeret, ex sedentaria vitae ratione calculo intra renes, concep^o gravissime
laborat, ac annum jam agens quinquagessimum octavum cum ejusdem morbi paroxismo
ultimo per aliquot dies protracto in victa patientia conflictatus esset tandem,
non sine ingen^i cleri sui, populique luctu, and pene incredibili.
Salisburiensis civitatis maerore placide in domino conquiescit. Imminente morte
convocat domesticos, and fidei suae professiomem interruptis, ac moribundis
vocibus exorsus, cum amici monerent hinc ut supersederet labori, extare enim
doctrinae, ac fidei suae in scriptis a se, editisque oporibus confessionem;
annuit; and scripta sua omnia suprema hac voce obsignavit. Illa, inquit, fides
quam scriptis meis propugnavi, veritas Dei est; in ejusque assertione morior.
Scripsit autem varia cum latino ^um vernaculo idiomate: quibus illud Solomonis
elogium de aureis pomis in calaturis argenteis, videtur aptissime posse
accommodari. Auream enim rerum optimarum, ex sacrosanctis scripturis, patribus,
and conciliis ab ipso congestam supeliectilem argenteus includit, and illustrat
dictiones candor. Sine quo, lecet caussa veritatis (ut eleganter Lactantius)
defendi possit, ut est a multis saepe defensa tamen claritate, ac nitore
sermonis illustranda, and quodammod^ edisserenda est, ut potentius in animos
instuat, and vi sua instructa, and luce orationis ornata. Certe hic nost^r
(quod praecipit Quintilianus) non tantum fortibus, sed and fulgentibus armis
contra haereticos pariter, schismaticosque dimicat. Nec hoc, quod prae manibus
est, opus pene post humum, a^^ ^loquii ni^ore, aut argumenti digimate reliquis
ejusdem authoris cedit. In quo pius Amistes (...) simul, and (...) niter
ecclesias reformatas tuendae zelo flagrans muros Hierichuntinos a Pelagio olim
extructos, and a sanctis patribus dirutos, nuper vero a Iesuitis, ac numperime
ab Arminianis restaurari caeptos, non cornea, sed argentea tuba demolitur. Ita
enim ^eritatem catholicam densissimis sacrarum scrip^urarum, and sanctorum
patrum testim^niis, ac validissimis rationibus communit, and contra precipua
Semipelagiorum argumenta sive A^minii, sive Thompsoni limarasa recenti, penitus
obterit, and pro^ligat, ut modestis ingeniis, and a partium studio aliemit hoc
libello non dubitemus abunde hac in part iri satisfactum. Cum Arminio, ut
extero, and adversario remotiore velut eminus pagnat; cum Thompsono vero, ut
domistico in ecclesiae Anglicanae venis, and v^sceribus haerente, comminus
congredi^ur, and tractatuli illius hererodoxi, quo justificationis gratia
interciditur, ita nervos omnes incidit, ut qui post hac in Thompsoni Diatribam
inciderit, Diogenis Zenomis Diatribam dicterium merito poteris ^surpare.
Thompsonianam hanc (...) esse (...) vale, benevole lector, in Christo, and cum
opus hoc ^uthoris caussa amplectere, tum authorem operis caussa pio studio
prosequere.

Meo ^ex^u, non meo filo. Daniel Featley, S. T. P. Archiepiscopo Canturiens^
fucius, Englished ^hus.

Thou have here (Christian Reader) presented unto thee the Swan-like song of a
man (let none quarrel the phraise) above the reach even of envy it self, with
which he expired. If then as the glimmering light of the setting Sun renders
more delight to the eye of the beholder, so the Wo^kes of dying men are by so
much the more indeared unto us; thou can not choos but value this Book at the
greater rate, which thou may understand was perfected by the last care of a
learned Doctor, and right reverend Prelate. For so soon as the Auth^r had
finished the piece, and brought it to this ligh^, he himself passed to the
light celestial: Having fitted his labor for the benefit of the Church
Militant, he was called to the Church Tiumphant; and caught up immediately from
his defense of divine grace, to the fruition of divine glory. Laden he was more
with learning, and the fame of his most acurate Works then with years, and to
be thought rather to have lived long, then cont^nued long among us. For our
life (as Pliny defines it) is a Watch, which this our Prelate seemed wholly to
employ in the study of Theology. For after that, in the renowned University of
Oxford he had furnished himself with the knowledge of the best Arts, and had
exquisi^ely fashioned both his tongue and pen, he wholly devoted them both unto
God, and dedicated the rest of his ensuing life, partly to public Preaching
wherewith he honored the Pulpit; partly to the reading of public Lectures,
with which he illustrated the Doctors Chair; and partly to the composure of
his own learned writings, wherewith he wonderfully enriched the Press. Long
was the fame and industry of this reverend Divine, locked up in obscurity, and
for which in the narrow limits of a private Parish, he nourished that of glory
whereunto few of our times have arrived. Afterward when for the space twenty
years he had industriously executed the office of a Pastor and Preacher, by
sovereign command he was required to encounter the chiefe^t of the Roman
Champions in the defense of the Reformed Religion, concerning the greatest
controversies which our times have produced. In which cumbest he not only
over-came his adversaries, Bishop and Eudemon, but far surpassed the opinion
which the world had before conceived of him.

Not long after, by the same our most gracious Sovereign King James, he was
advanced to be Doctor of the Chair in the famous University of Oxford; which
eminent place in the University he held with great reputation. At length having
been famed for a faithful Doctor, and an accurate Professor of Divinity, he
was promoted to the Episcopal See of Salisbury, which he governed but for the
term of two years and three months: For whilst he was not only wrapped in the
public affairs of his Episcopal Government, but also continued most sedulous
and industrious in his private studyes of Divinity; that sedutary life of his
brought him to the terrible disease of the stone in his kidni^s, wherewith
being grievously tortured for some weeks; and now having attained the fifty
eight year of his age, after good proof of his unconquerable patience in the
extremity of his last ^it, he sweetly slept in the Lord, to the infinite sorrow
both of the Clergy and Laity within his jurisdiction, and laments almost
incredible of the whole City of Salisbury. When death approached he gave command
that his family should be called together; before whom, with broken ^peeches in
the language of a dying man, beginning to make a profession of his Faith, his
friends advized him to spare that pains, since an ample Testimony both of his
faith and learning lived extant in his Works. He yielded to their advice, and
signed all his Works with these his last Words; That faith which I have
defended in my writings, is the truth of God; and in the avouching thereof I
leave the World.

Many Works he set forth both in Latin and our mother tongue, to all which
that Testimony of Solomon may be fitly given, They are apples of gold in
Pictures of silver. For the silver brightness of his eloquent style expresses
and gives a luster unto those goulden pieces of his accurate invention and rich
materials furnished out of Scriptures, Fathers and Councels. Now although (as
elegantly says Lactantius) the cause of truth may be defended without
eloquence as it has been often, yet it ought to be illustrated by the Nitour
any clarity of a perspicuous style, so that it may sink deeper into the mind
by its own strength and the help of the Oratory.

Thirdly, this our Champion has fought against both heretics and
schismatics, no^ only with strong, but also (as Quintilian advises) with
gl^stering weapons. Nor does this present Work of his (though born after his
death) either for a fluent style, or weighty matter, come short of the others.
In which this godly Prelate burning with zeal both to defend the doctrine of
truth and unity in the Reformed Churches, not with Ra^s^hornes as it were, but
with a silver trumpet has demolished those walls of Hiericho that were first
raised by Pel^giu^, and then battered down by the holy Fathers, but again of
late times begun to be repaired by the Jesuits, and last of all by the
Arminians. For he has so fortified the Catholic truth with the strongest
Testimonies of the sacred Scriptures and the holy Fathers, and with such
powerful reason against the chie^est arguments of the Semi Pelagians, lately
forbished over with the file of Arminius or Thomson, that we doubt not but this
very book alone will abundantly satisfy all Persons of modest ingenuity
whatsoever. He fights with Arminius as with a foreign and more remote
adversary, at a kind of distance; but with Tomson he closed and grapels, as
with a Domestic, fostered in the bowels of our Church of England, and he has
so coreruated that Pamphlet of his, which cuts off the grace of justification,
that for ever hereafter who so shall fall upon Thomsons Diatriba, he may justly
make use of the censure of Diogenes upon Zeno's Diatriba. This Thomsons
Diatriba is truly Catatriba: that this his passe-time, as he tremes it
(sporting himself with the Precisians) being himself one of the concision) is
a wast mine. Courteous Reader farewell in the Lord; make much of the Work for
the Authors sake, and of the Authors memory for the Works sake.

Surry, Oxford, Sarum clame
Their several intrests in our Abbots Name;
Surry bore him, Oxford bred him;
Sarum (ripe for high promotion) led him
To honors Chair: To whom he gave
More lasting honor, then he could receive^
This like a momentary Blaze
Lent a fair light, but vanished with his days;
But that, like Titans brighter flame
Continues coeternall with his Name:
Nor is it the least addition to his glory
That learned Featlyes pen has writ his story.
The Lif and Death of William Cowper, who dyed Anno Christi 1619.
WIlliam Cowper was born in Edinburgh, and at eight years old was sent by his
father to Dunbar School, where in four years he learned the whol^ course of
Grammar, and profited above his equals, and at that time did God begin to
reveal himself to him: many times in the School he lifted up his heart unto
God, begging of him knowledge and understanding: and always as he went to
Church, he sent up his ejaculation ^o heaven, Lord how mine ear that I may hear
thy Word. At his entry into his ^hirteenth year, his Father sent for him home
to Edinburgh, and presently after he went to Saint Andrews, where he continued
to his sixteenth year in the study of Philosophy, but made no great progress^
the^ein; yet the seed of grace was still working in him, inclining him to a
careful hearing, and penning of Sermons and other Theological Lectures.
During his abode there, Satan working in corrupt nature, sought often to trap him
in his snares, but as himself testifies, the Lord in mercy forgave the vanities
and ignorances of his youth, and preserved him from such falls as might have
made him a shame to the Saints, and a reproach to his enemies.

At the age of sixteen years, he returned to his Parents at Edinburgh, who
proposed to him sundry courses of life: but his heart was still inclined to the
study of the holy Scriptures, whereupon he resolved to go into England, and
the Lord provided him a place at Hoddesdon, 18. mils from London (just as he
had spent all his money which he brought with him out of Scotland) where he was
entertained by one Master Gut^ry a Scotch-man to assist him in teaching of a
School: There he remained three quarters of a year, and then having occasion to
go to London, he was unexpectedly called to the service of Master Hugh
Broughton, with whom he continued a year and a half, and daily exercised
himself in the study of Divinity.

At nineteen years old he returned again to Edinburgh, where he lived with his
elder brother [then one of the Ministers in that City] who much furthered him
in his former studyes: at last he was required to give a proof of his gifts
privately, which he did in the New Church before Master Robert Pont, and Master
Robert Rollock, and some others, by whom he was commanded to Preach in public
also. Being twenty years old he was sent by the authority of the general
Assembly which met at Edinburgh, to be the Pastor at Bothkenner in
Sterlingshire; when he came thither he found in the Church, besides ruinous
walls, neither roof nor doors, nor Pulpit, nor seats, nor windows, yet it
pleased God to give such a blessing to his ministry, that within half a year
the Parishioners of their own accord, built, and adorned the Church in as good
a quality as any round about it: There he continued seven or eight years, yet
subject to great bodily infirmities, by reason of the wetnesse of the soil, and
the moystnesse of the air: and in that time did God begin to acquaint him with
his terrors, and with inward tentations, so that his life was almost wasted
with heaviness; yet thereby he learned more, and more to know Christ Jesus.
About that time there was a General Assembly of the Church at Perth, unto
which some that lived in the North of Scotland sent to desire that a Minister
might be sent unto them; whereupon the Assembly appointed Master Cowper for
that place, and accordingly wrote to him by Master Patrick Simpson, who coming
to Sterling, delivered to him the letters from the Assembly, and the Town,
containing his calling to the Ministry of that place; and shortly after the
Town sent their Commissioners to transport himself and family thither. In
that place he continued doing the work of the Lord for nineteen years together,
where he was a comfort to the best, and a wound to the worser sort: Besides the
Sabbath days, he chose thrice a week to convene the people together in the
Evenings, viz. Wednesdayes, Fridayes and Saturdayes, for preparation to the
Sabbath, upon which days they had no Preaching in the morning: concerning
which meetings, himself writes, That it would have don a Christians heart
good, to have seen those glorious and joyful Assemblies, to have heard the
zealous cryings to God amongst that people, with sighings and tears, and
melting hearts, and mourning eyes: and concerning himself, he says, My
witness is in heaven that the love of Jesus, and his people made continual
Preaching my pleasure, and I had no such joy as in doing his work: and besides
that he preached five times a week, he penned also whatsoever he preached, many
of which holy and godly Sermons are extant in print. All ^he time of his abode
there (except some little intermissions and breathing times) the Lord still
exercised him with inward tentations, and great variety of spiritual combats;
the end of all which (through God's mercy) was joy unspeakable, as himself
testifie's; Yea once (says he) in greatest extremity of horror and anguish of
spirit, when I had utterly given over, and looked for nothing but confusion,
suddenly there did shine, in the very twinkeling of an eye, the bright and
lightsome countenance of God, proclaming peace, and confirming it with
invi^cible reasons: O what a change was there in a moment? the silly soul that
was even now at the brinke of the pit, looking for nothing but to be swallowed
up, was instantly raised up to heaven to have fellowship with God in Christ
Jesus; and from this day forward my soul was never troubled with such extremity
of terrors: this confirmation was given unto me on a Saturday in the morning;
there found I the power of Religion, the certainty of the Word, there was I
touched with such a lively sense of a Divinity, and power of a Godhead, in
mercy reconciled with man, and with me in Christ, as I trust my soul shall
never forget: Glory, glory, glory be to the joyful deliverer of my soul out of
all adversities for ever.

In the midst of these wrestlings with God he wanted not combats with wicked
men also, but the greatness of his inward conflicts made him lightly regard
all their outward contradictions, and to esteem them but as the bitings of a
Flea. It was no marvel to see Satan stir up his wicked instruments to molest
him, since he professed himself a disquieter of him and his Kingdom; and this
much supported him, that he never had a controversy with any of them but for
their sins; and the Lord assisting him, the power of the Word did so hammer
down their pride, that they were all of them at last brought to an
acknowledgement of their evil ways.

But at length (as God turned the heart of Pharaoh and his people the
Israelites, when the time drew on f^r their remove) so by little and little, did
the zeal and love of most of that people fall away, so that his last conflict
was not with the profane, but with Justiciaries and such as were unrebukeable
in their lives: These men were stuffed with such pride, self-conceit, disdain,
and intolerable contempt, that thereby they were carried further from their
duty th^n any of the former, and which should have been his greatest comfort,
were his greatest cross.

Presently hereupon God called him to the Government of the Churches in
Galloway, in the South-West parts of the Kingdom, being chosen by the
Assembly, and presented by the King thereunto: this was effected with out his
privity, or ambitious seeking after it; yea, he was so far from it that
eightteen weeks passed betwixt the Kings Presentation, and the Acceptance of
it. In that place he was very careful to advance the Gospel, and to adorn his
Ministry: concerning the frame of his Spirit thus he writs: My soul is always
in my hand, ready to be offered to my God: Where, or what kind of death God
has prepared for me, I know not: But sure I am, there can no evil death
befall him that lives in Christ, nor sudden death to a Christian Pilgrim, who (
with Job) waits every day for his change: yea (says he) many a day have I
sought it with tears, not out of impatience, distrust or per^urbation; but
because I am weary of sin, and fearful to fall into it.

This faithful servant of God, who had always been faithful and painful in
his Ministry, when sickness grew daily upon him, was no way deficient in the
duty of his ordinary Preaching: taking great pains also to perfect his work
upon the Revelations; which he desired greatly to finish before his death: he
had also much grief by reason of some that disturbed the peace of the Church,
which he always sought to procure: so that his infirmity increasing, he was
compelled to keep home: yet as his weakness permitted, he applied himself to
revise his writings, and to dispose of his worldly estate, that he might be
ready for his passage, which every day he expected: and some ten days before
his decease, he manifested to his friends what great contentment h^ h^d in his
approaching death. Many repaired to him in his sickness, whom he ent^rtained
with most holy and divine conferences, expressing a great willingness to
exchange this life for a better; and at last feeling his strength and spirits
to decay (after he had conceived a most heavenly prayer in the company of those
that were by) he desired to go to bed; in which also, after he had most
devoutly commended himself unto the Almighty God, he took some quiet rest:
After which he spoke not many words, his speech failing, though his memory and
understanding were perfect: and so about seven a clock at night he rendered his
soul unto God in a most quiet and peaceable manner Anno Christi 1619. Some of
his private Meditations were these.

Now my soul be glad: for at all parts of this prison, the Lord has set to his
Pi^ners to loose thee: Head, Feet, Milt and Liver are fast failing: yea, the
middle strength of the whole body, the stomach is weakened long ago: Arise,
make ready, shake off thy fetters, mount up from the body and go thy way.

I saw not my children when they were in the womb, yet there the Lord fed them
without my knowledge: I shall not see them when I go out of the body, yet
shall they not want a Father: Death is somewhat driery, and the streams of that
Jordan between us and our Canaan run furiously, but they stand still when the
Ark com^s: Let your Anchor be cast within the vail, and fastened on the Rock
Jesus: Let the end of the threefold cord be buckled to the heart, so shall ye
go through.

Soli Deo Gloria.

Here also Cowper, Scotlands Prelate grave,
A place of honor does deserve to have
Among these Honored Heroes; whom the Lord
Did many exc'llent Ornaments afford
In piety and parts, but specially
Making him prosperous in the Ministry,
By's constant, and by's conscientious Preaching
And holy life, which was a second teaching:
Famous for's writings on the Revelation;
Piously, thus persisting to's tranats^ion.
The Life and Death of John Piscator, who dyed Anno Christi 1625.
JOhn Piscator was born at Argentine, Anno Christi 1546. at which time Germany
was on fire with civil Wars: Yet that hindered not, but he followed his studyes
very hard, and profited exceedingly in learning: when he came to the study of
Logic, with great felicity, he joined Ramus and Aristotle together: And
afterward having made a good progress in the study of Divinity, he was called
to Herborn to be the Professor there, and his labors were so grateful to young
Students, that many flocked thither out of Germany, France, Hungary, Poland and
other Nothern Countries: He wrote many things with great diligence and labor,
scarce affording any rest to himself: He transl^ted the whole Bible with great
pains and faithfulness into the German Tongue: besides his Logical and
Theological Analisis of the greatest part of it: He dyed at Herborn Anno
Christi 1625. and of his age 80.

This J^hn Piscator born at Argentine,
For his rare parts in Arts did fairly shine
I^ He^b^rn, where Professor he became,
And exercised that place with so much fame,
That many Students out of Germany,
F^^nce, Poland, and from out of Hungary,
Came flocking thither for his grave direction,
Which he afforded them with sweet affection:
In The Germane tongue the Bible he translated
And it with learned Analisis ornated;
And thus his days in pious pains being spent,
At fourscore years his soul to heaven he sent.
ANDREW WILLET.
The Life and Death o^ Andrew Willet.
IT is not long since a large Relation was published Ann. 1634 prefixed before
the fifth edition of his Synopsi. Papi. and written by the same hand with this.
of the life and death of that faithful servant of Christ, Dr. Andrew Willet;
yet least omitted in this honorable Catalogue, he should lose his Augu. Cen^
lib. 10. c^ ^7
right of association in renown and glory with these his Fellow Laborers in
the service of the Gospel; I though good not only to abridge part of that
former discourse (which alone were but Syne. epis^. 141.
to bring forth the same birth again, but to Id. ep. 99.
add some remarkable things then unremembered or undiscovered, being such as
may conduce both to the advancement of his memory, Terent. in Adelph.
and the encouragement of our imitation, who often follow patterns more then
precepts. Lips. de Cons^. l. 2. c. 4.
This learned, prudent and pious man was born of worthy and religious Parents,
by whom he enjoyed that E^rip. Cy^pr. Epist. lib^ 4. Ep. 5.
choice blessing and happiness of ingenuous and godly education and example.
His Father Mr. Thomas Willet was in his younger time Subalmoner unto King Edward
the sixth, while Doctor Coxe was chief Almoner, and Schoolmaster to that royal
Prince, who was presented of God unto this Island, only ut spectaculi and
spiraculi res (to use Tertullian's words) a faire-flourishing and
sweet smelling flower soon withered and taken away.

The sad times of persecution under Queen Mary then succeeding, King Edwards
Almoner and Subalmoner, with many more were not only forced from Court, but
the one from his Country, the other from his comfort of his wife and family, for
the safety of their lives and consciences, till that cloud was blown over and
Queen Mary dead.

Then ro^e Englands Debor^h, that mirror of her sex, and miracle of the World,
Queen Elizabeth: Exiles returned home, amongst them Doctor Coxe, who was
advanced to the Bishopric of Ely, and soon after preferred his old Chaplain
Master Willet, this Doctors Father to a Prebend in that Church, and to the
Parsonage of Barley in Hertfordshire, both which in his old age he resigned
unto this his Son, who lived and dyed in them, Ambros. li. 1. de Abrah. cap. 8.
never having ambitiously hunted after higher promotions, A^ad. Frans s^^lour.
chapter 21
which he rather studied to deserve then to obtain, observing how in ordinary
courses some Lips.
enjoy preferment^, others merit them: yet he went on so cheerfully in his
praiseworthy labors, as if his pains had been his payment; according to that
reason given by some, why they that bore the heat and burden of the day had
put equal pay with him that came at the last hour into the Vinyard, Matthew.
20.12. Can^. Mos (...). 3. epist. 4.
Because (say they) their work is reckoned into their wages, it being no
little honor to be so employed of God.

This Doctor was both born and bred in the Town or City of Ely, lying within
the Fens of Cambridgeshire, a soil not unlike the place of Augustines birth,
(if we believe In Aug. de Civit. De^ lib. 16. cap. ^.
Lud. Vives and others; whereupon Erasmus Praef. ad lib. Epi. D. Augu
takes occasion to divine, that had that Father been born and lived in Italy or
France, his wit though uncomparable, had been much more refined, and the fruits
thereof much more abundant. And Apollonius Tyaneus Ap^l. Philostrat. in vit.
A.T. li. 6. c. 6.
ascribes the subtle inventions of the Indians unto the purer beams or
cleerer air wherein they live. Whereas the ancient heathen gave the attribute
of (...), unto their choysest wits; as if they were men fallen from heaven, as
they said of Antip. apud P^u^. in vit. Ho^.
Homer, Tertius ^ coelo cecidi^ Cato -- Iuven
Cato, and the like. And as Homer said of Egypt, so may we say of every
Country, Sophoc l. in Ajac.
There Is many good and bad things mixed together; Ne^ refert qua terra natus qui
renatus; it matters not where he was borne that is new born. For that which is
of the earth is earthly, Joh. 3.31. But every good giving and every perfect
gift is from above, Iam. 1.17. which even the heathen Poet acknowledges,
speaking thus; These and all gifts of the mind God, I say, works in mankind.
From the Grammar School in Ely, where by reason of his industry unusual in
such years, denying himself even Julian in Caesar.
necessary recreation, he had given many Lips. de Constat. lib. 2. c. 5. Hom.
rudiments of future hopes; he was at thirteen years of age or thereabout sent
to the University of Cambridge: He was first admitted into Peter-house, where
he was well grounded; and afterward removed to Christ's College, where he was
preferred to a Fellowship, every where he found Learnings doors open to him.

Being but nineteen years of age he under-tooke the defense of his Master
Aristotle, in a Latin Tractate against Tempell, a lover of Peter Ramus,
whereof (as I have heard) diverse Copyes were dispersed, one of which not long
since I saw, with an Epistle deditatory to a Prala^e of that age, as if he had
intended it for the press. But his first book which came forth in print, was
that, De anim^ natu^a and viribus, written by him at the age of twenty and two
years. From which time, (...). de. (...) G^^^ang Cic. ora^. pro Arch. p^^t.
repu^ing every hour as lost, which was not spent in reading or writing
something; he never gave over, till he had brought forth those numerous and
voluminous labors, whereof you have the Catalogue hereafter written.

It is the counsel of Jerome, Hi^ron. ad Rustic.
put not on too soon in writing, nor be transported with a kind of light
headednesse; be long in learning that which thou intends to teach. And as
Philostratus says, Vit. Ap^ll. Ty^n. l. 4. c. 11
Palamedes found out letters that men might know not only what to write, but
what not. But his Works plainly show (even those of youngest date) that he had
learned these grave lessons, and that he ran not, before he well understood his
errand. And although I believe he might truly say with learned Augustine,
Pro^m. li. 3 de Trivit.
that even by writing for the profit of others, he had much profited himself:
Yet I am well assured that he had learned over and to good purpose many learned
Authors ancient and modern, till he b^came himself, (...), a living Library; I
have not without astonishment seen his many large paper books written with his
own hand, abundantly testifying how studiously and with singular judgment, he
had read over most of the old Fathers, Councels, Ecclesiastic Histories, the
Civil Code, the Body of the Canon Law, with many other Writers of all sorts;
out of which he was able (...), readily to produce apt sentences, and
observations for every purpose.

And as Eccl. 7.25.
he applied his heart to know, and so search, and to seek out wisdom: and to
that end according to that Apostolical direction gave 1 Timothy 4.13
attendance unto reading. So likewise he followed that godly advice of Cyprian
to Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2.
Donatus willing him to mingle frequent prayer with diligent reading; sometimes
(says he) speak thou to God, and sometimes let God speak to thee: and he
professed to his friends, how much he had thereby improved his talent.

Besides all these labors, when once he had undertaken the care of souls, he
well considered what the Apostle Paul, by the spirit of God^ requires of every
Bishop or Pastor of the Church in those his two Epistles to Timothy, and that
other to Titus, ( Aug. de doc^ Ch^i. li. 4. ^. 5.
which three Epis^les Augustine exhorts ^very Minister of the Word, set
always before his eyes) often lamenting the condition of those poor people,
who live under ignorant or idle Ministers^ of whom it may be said, in the Words
of the Prophet Jeremiah, Lam^nt^c^. 4. v^r. 4.
The children cry for bread, and there was none to break it unto them; and as
much bewailing the estate of those proud Prelates, who (as Espenc. Digres. in 1 Timothy lib. 2. cap. 2.
Espencae speaks of some in his time) though able and learned, yet hold
themselves not learned to descend to that servility and baseness of Preaching;
because when they have obtained fat Benefices, i^ is not the manner to stoop
to such dr^dgery; whilst he like a faithful and diligent steward of Christ,
was most pa^nfull in the execution of his office^ Preaching in his Church of
Barley for a long time thrice every week, and diligently himself Ca^echizing
the younger sort of his Parish, and many of the elder, whom h^ found to have
need of Cry. Hieros. Cate^i. 4.
such milk, as being yet but babes in Christ.

And although he had been Chaplain to that Noble young Prince Henry, and both
during that time, and sometimes since had Preached at Court, and knew how to
tune his tongue to the most elegant ears; yet amongst his own people he taught
(...), after a most familiar way, affecting Vt d^ E^ip^. (...).
a plain phraise and humble style, applying him^selfe Aug. d^ (...) Chri. l.
4. c. 17
to the capacity of his Hearers, reputing that Sermon Vt Philest. de epist. ad
Asp^th. Hier. ad Pa^
best adorned, that was least set out with humane learning or eloquence, or
perplexed with curious questions which Hilar.
help not toward heaven.

He was a man of a most comely presence, his complextion fair and ruddy even
Iul. in Caes.
in age, hi^ countenance composed o^ gravity and sweetness; his disposition
was pleasan^ and cheerful, always merry in the Lord; whereby his
conversation was most delightful to good Christians that were acquainted with
him: And as Suidas speaks of Macariu^ the Egyptian, he drew his friends on in
the ways of God, with a kind of smoothing persuasions, and pleasant discourses
upon all occasions.

And al^hough he knew how to r^prove, and to cut up roundly where there was
just cause: yet he Chrys^st. i^ Tit.
was most aptly fitted and inclined to bind up the broaken and wounded
consciences, and with heavenly consolation^ drawn from the fountain of living
waters, to refresh a wearied and fainting spirit; Job 16.5.
He strengthened them with his mouth, and the moving of his lips did assuage
their grief; Cant. 4.11.
While his lips dropped as the honey comb. How joyfully was he entertained by
such, even as Ambrose by sick Valentinian, whose visits seemed to him as the
Ambr. in Obit. Valent.
approaches of health.

He was a man of a most exemplary life, both in his own Ar^hi. Tare. apud Phil.
family, and abroad with others. He was in fastings often, and always Senec.
epi 8 Cic. Offic. 1.
temperate in his diet, many days eating little or nothing until night, and
that especially when he labored most, as on his Lecture-dayes, professing that
he Hippoc. Epid. l. 6. sect. 4.
found himself both in body and mind more active by it. He was a constant and
unwearied Student, tying himself for the most part to eight hours a day, and
Vt E^eno^
dividing every part of the day unto some peculiar work, nor easily suff^ing
any avocation (though he had many secular cares lying upon him, having a wife
and fourteen children living at his death) till (as he was wont to speak)
Julian in Misopog. ex Menandro.
he had finished his task. His conversation abroad was a perpetual
instruction to Ibid.
his people; That true Maca. ^o. 15
character of a Christian man; Clem. de ^orr. eccl. stat. ca. 22.
that highest degree of perfection, and most near to Christ; that Basil.
treasury of all graces, humility was in him most eminent, he was most just and
upright in all his dealings, and indeed so regardlesse of these earthly things,
that he was (...), easily beguiled by such a^ were dishonest: yet he was well
acquainted with the Laws, but very careful to keep both himself and his
neighbor^ from making use of them, as always studyous of peace. And last, for
that divine virtue of charity Syn^s. ep. 57
wherein alon^ (says Synesius) God and man communicates; read but that
Paragraph in that more large relation of his life first menti^ned, and you will
acknowledge him A^i. c. 2.0.7
Zealous of good works.

Yet let me add one thing there omitted, Phylostratus reported of a miraculous
stone in India, which he calls Pantarbe, Vit. Apo^^. ^a^. l. 3. c. 14
having the virtue attractive of the Load stone, and likewise giving light by
the bright-shining of it. This reverend Doctor, as by his works of charity he
gave much light to others, so by his arguments he was very powerful to draw
them forward 1 Timothy 6.17 18, 19.^
whom God had enabled for such performances.

Read to this purpose his large Synop. Pap. p. 2220. of the fifth edition.
Catalogue of charitable works, done since the times of the Gospel, within the
space of sixty years, under the happy reign of King Edward the sixth, Queen
Elizabeth, and part of King James, and that only within the City of London, or
by the Citizens thereof, and within the two famous Universities, Cambridge and
Oxford; confining himself to these Places, only for want of means to travel
further in the search: By which examples he has not only incited all Tit.
3.8. Cyr. Hieros. Ca^ech. 15. ibid Cat. 1.
that believe God to study to go before others in good works; as hereby
discovering the life of their Faith, and laying up to themselves treasures in
heaven: But withal invincibly confuting that calumny of the Romanists,
charging our doctrine of justification by Faith only, as a great adversary to
good works. For he has made this challenge to all the Champions of that party,
to produce and prove (if possibly they can) the Amounting in the total to
almost 1000000 1.
like acts of piety and charity, to have been done within the same compass of
years under Popery, and within these places, or within twice so many years,
immediately preceding the date, whence his account commenceth. And to ^his day
I hear of none that undertakes to enter the lists with him upon this challenge.

I know there have been some even amongst us who either out of Terem. Adelph.
Tim. Sillagr.
ignorance, envy or Iu^i. Mosop.
proud disdain, or because in some things they accord not with him in opinion,
have cast out flirting censures against this Catalogue (which King James highly
applauded) and against all other of his labors. Some such he met with in his
own life time, who like the Indians prefer Phi^^. vit Apoll. Tyan. l. 2. c.
9.
blach before white, being their own natural hue; whose cavil^ he no more
regarded Iul. Mis.
then the croaking of so many Frogs, Hiero^. ad ^ustic.
he knew he must offend some, who while they take offense at him discover their
own consciences. Many have carpt at his large book of Controversies before
mentioned, as if Greg^ Naz. contr. E^nom
upon every sparkle he had raised a flame, and m^de more difference between
the Church of Rome and us then others have done, and that these things were
sufficiently if not too much exagitated before his time. These and such like
things I have sometimes heard, but I must needs say, only from those of that
sect or cut, whom a Jesuit Church ^^nquera. against Chillingwort. chap. 6.
calls, Moderate Protestants, such as least exoribitate from the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of Rome. Or such squinting Protestants Aug. de (...).
Orig. l. 2. c. 22
as willing to retain their corrupt opinions, and to decline the odious name
of Heretics; dares to affirm R. M. Gagg. page 14.
that there is no Controversy between the Romish party and us, that ei^ther
concerns Faith or good Life; but that the diff^rences are of an inferior
alloy, of which a man may be ignorant without any danger of his soul at all.

And therefore in his defense against these, I will say no more, but
praejudicium tollit judicium; prejudice takes away right judgment: and male
rerum examinat omnis corruptas judex; a corrupt Judge never well examineth the
truth. And for his handling things often handled by others, Prosper Epi. Pros.
ad Aug. de reli^ Pel^g. ^er.
thinks it both necessary and profitable so to do, least the matters be
reputed of small moment which are not often argued.

As for those who have slighted his laborious Commentaries upon diverse parts of
Scripture, pretending them to be but Scraps and Fragments gathered from the
F^asts of others, I know not whether they discover more malice or more folly:
If with Socrates Apud P^at. in P^^^do.
he filled himself as a vessel at the Wels or springs of others, and yet
could say as Lipsius of his Politickes, Omnia mea sunt and nihil, all is min^
and nothing at all. Hier. adve. Vigil.
If he gathered many Flowers together and put them as a Posie into our hands;
if he has Amb. Proe^^^. in Luc.
read many things, to spare us the reading of them; i^ ^e has collected the
judgments of most Writers ancient and modern upon those Books, and disposed
them by a most exquisite method, and fitted them for all necessary use, ^s
plainly appears to every unpartiall and judicious ^ye^ Then have we just
cause to praise God for his profi^able pains, and to desire that some other
would follow him in that way, Op^.
wherein no man has gone before him.

It cannot be denied, but that a^ B^a^us Rhenac^^ truly observes, in (...)
Teriu^.
the most beautiful body some blemish may be found, and we are men Lips. praef.
ad polit.
subject to errors: and cons^quently in the great and many labors of this
learned man, someting may be found that may require a r^v^z ill, some thing may
admit the sponge. B^t when like unto Momus, who could find nothing else amiss
in Venus, but Philo. ep. ad (...).
only that her shoe creakt; men will pretend errors where there are none, I
must tell such in the words, of Ierom^, Ad Domin
when they come to write themselves, and to set foot to foot, they will tug and
sweat, and find great difference between pub^lick writing and private carping.
Or let thi^ blessed Doctor speak to them though dead, and say, Mar^ial. ad
L^lium.
Carpere vel noli nos^ra, vel ede^ua. Snarle not at mine, or se^ forth thin^.
And on the other side, where something may be blame worthy pardon it Theod. de
Cura^d. Greac affect. in Prolo
and do not despise the Works because of this, but reap profit by that which
is well written, and give God the glory, who found folly in hi^ Angel^, and ^s
alone impeccable.

To come near to his death: It is ^^ported by Orat. de vit. and Obit. D. ^^^r.
Mar^^^.
Josias Simle^u^, how that after D^ctor Peter Martyr that famou^ writer had
published many of his Labors, he began at the last, ^b initio Bibliorum, at
the beginning of the Bible, and after he had expounded the book^ of Genesis and
Exodus, and bonam par^^m Levitici, and a good part of Liviticus, prevented by
the stroke of death, he ended all his labour^: So ^his his exact par^^^ed
D^ct^r Andrew Will^^ (besides many other Works) had written his sixfold
Commenta^ie^ upon the same books of Genesis and Exodu^, and had made a good
progress in the like way upon Leviticus (since fi^is^ed by another) here also
God determined his travail^. And le^ me not omit this one thing, it my poor
judgment very remarkable, how God in his divine providence and gracious
favor to him, answered him in a solemn Vow, which you may find expressed in a
latin Epistle of his, in words to this effect in English, Epist. D^d. Prefix.
before the second part of his second Book of He^^p. up^on Exodus
It is most honorable for a Soldier to dye fighting, and for a Bishop or
Pastor praying, and if my merciful God shall vouchsafe to grant me my request,
my earnest desire is, that writing and commenting upon some part of the
Scripture, I might finish my days. And accordingly God gave him his hearts
desire, and denied him not the request of his lips; Blessed is that Servant,
whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing, Matthew. 24.46.

He departed this life December the fourth 1621. in the fifty nine year of his
age: of whom considering his strength and healthful constitution, varying a
little the words of Virgil, I may say, -- Had not God said no, He might have
lived ten years or twenty more. It pleased God who has appointed to every man
(...), his own proper and peculiar kind of death, and without whose
Providence, Tert. li. 1. ad uxorem.
not a leaf falling from the ground, so to dispose of this godly man's death,
that as a Pilgrim here on earth, he must dye in an Inn: In a journey from
London homewards, he was forced to take up his Lodging in Hodsdon, a town in
Hertfordshire, having not far from thence, by Cic. de Fat
a fall from his horse, his right leg broken. It is sweetly said of Gregory
N^ssen. D^ ^^nt. Hierosol.
Wheresoever thou art (whether in thine own house or in an Inn) God will come
to thee, if thou make thy soul a fit lodging for him. And that saying of
Augustine may stop the mouth of every rash unchristian Censurer; Aug. epist.
122.
God regards not in his servants, after what manner they depart this life,
but what manner of men they are when they depart.

Here in this place he continued as Gods prisoner, confined to hi^ bed for nine
day^s together, spending the most part of them, in meditating upon the Song of
Ezekiel, when he had been sick, recorded by the Prophet Esaias chap. 38. which
heavenly contemplations were written from hi^ mouth, by a Son of his then
attending upon him. And upon two Sabbaths following within that time, observing
the people of the hou^e, upon pretense of waiting. upon him, to stay from
Church, h^ called them together, and gave them some concionatory exhortations,
both forenoon and afternoon, and this with such a spirit, as if had been no
ways sensible of his pain; which puts me in mind of that saying of
Tertullian, Tertull. ad Mart.
The leg feels nothing in the nerves, when the mind is (as it were rapt) in
heaven.

Upon the tenth day after his hurt received ( Martia. l. 6 Epigr. 152.
having over night supped cheerfully, and reposed himself to rest) early in
the morning, upon occasion of the toling of a Bell for one then at the point of
death, he suddenly awoke and with him his wife, who lay in the same chamber by
him; he then took occasion to discourse with her touching the joys of heaven,
and touching the Saints mutual acknowledgement of one another in that blessed
estate^ which discourse ended, he with his wife sang an Hymn, composed by
himself, wherewith they usually every morning praised God for their rest the
night past, and prayed his blessing for the day succeeding. Their spirits being
thus raised, they continued their melody, and sang the 146. Psalm; he sometime
stopped a little, and glossing upon the words, applied diverse things therein
unto himself and to his present condition. And on the sudden (his Gennad.
Conc. de more
hour being now come) fetching a deep sigh or groan, he sunk down in his bed;
but help coming in, upon means used, he seemed to raise up himself a
little, and then said, Let me alone, I shall do well; Lord Jesus, and with
that word he gave up ^he ghost.

Soon after his body was carried by coach to hi^ Town of Barley, and was in
his Chancell solemnly interred, with decent Funeral rites and with many
tears, and there lies covered with a fair Graven stone of Marble. But his
more durable monuments are these.

The Work^ of Andrew Willet Doctor of Divinity in Latin and English, Printed
and unprinted.

Printed books in Latin.

1 De animae natura and viribu^. 2 S^cra emblemata. 3 De Universali vocatione
Judaeorum. 4 De conciliis. 5 De Universali gratia. 6 De Antichristo. 7
Epithalamium. 8 Funebres Conciones. 9 Apologiae serenissimi Regis Jac: defensio.

In English.

14 Synopsis Papismi in five books. 16 Hexapla upon Genesis in two books. 18
Hexapla upon Exodus in two books. 20 An Harmony upon the first and second
books of Samuel. 21 Hexapla upon Daniel. 22 Hexapla upon the Epistle to the
Romans. 23 Upon the twenty two Psalm. 24 Upon the seven^eenth of John. 25 Upon
the Epistle of Jude. 26 Te^rastylon Papismi. 27 A Catalogue of good works. 28
Limbomastix. 29 Loedoremasti^. 30 Epithalamium in English. 31 Funeral Sermons
in English. 32 An English Catechism. 33 A Retection. 34 An Antil^gy. 35
Hexapla upon Levi^icus.

Not Printed. In Latin.

36 Defensio Aristotelis^ contra Tempellum. 37 Catechismus Latinus. 38 G^mitus
Columbae, ceu Comment in Jnam. 39 S^cri paralleli. 40 Haeptaphonon. 41 Scala
Coeli. 42 Antithesis Pontificiae and Evangelicae Doctrinae. 43 Variae lectione^
in Pen^a^euchion.

In English.

44 An expos^^on upon Genesis. 45 Marginall Annotations upon the Petateuch. 46
The Doctrine of the Christian Sabbath.

Abi, and tu fac similiter.

See here a true Nathaniel, in whose bres^
A careful conscience kept her lasting feast;
Whose simple heart could never lodge a guile
In a soft word, nor malice in a smile:
He was a faithful labourer, whose pains
Was pleasure; and an others good, his gains:
The height of whose ambition was, to grow^
More ripe in knowledge, to make others know
Whose Lamp was ever shining, never hid;
And when his tongue preached not, his actions did:
The world was least his care; he sought for heaven;
And what he had he held not earnd, but given:
The dearest wealth he owned, the worl^ near gave,
Nor owes her ought but house^rent for a grave.
The Lif and Death of David Pareus. who dyed Anno Christi 1622.
DAvid Pareus was born in Silesia, Anno Christi 1548. His Parents were Citizens
of good rank; when he was about three years old, he fell sick of the small pox,
whereof he was like to dye, and though it pleased God that he recovered, yet he
had thereby a blemish in one of his eyes, which continued so long as he lived:
about that time his Mother dyed; when he grew up to riper years, his Father
perceiving a natural promptness in him to learning, set him to School in his
own City, where one of his M^sters was very rigid and severe in his carriage
unto him, and there he learned Grammar, Music and Arithmetic: But when he was
fourteen years old (by the instigation of his stepmother) his father placed
him with an Apothecary at ^ra^islavia: which course of life he could not well
relish, and therefore after a months stay he returned home again, which his
step mother was much offended with, yet his tender father resolved to keep him
at School, and ^hen he disliked the severity of his former Master, he sent him
to Hirschberg, to one Christopher Schillingus, who was much affected with his
ingenuity and towardliness: the chief Magistrate also of that City took a
great liking to him, for some Verses which he made at his sons Funeral, so that
he gave him his diet in his Family: when he had been there about two years, the
Pastor of that place who was a Lutheran, fell out with his Schoolmaster for
that, in Catechizing of his Scholars, he had taught them, that Christ's body
being ascended into heaven was there to remain till his coming to judgment,
and that in the Sacrament we feed upon it only spiritually by faith, etc.

And his spleen was so great, that he would not be satisfied till he had driven
him away from the City: Pareus having to hi^ great grief lost his Master,
returned home; yet neither there was he in quiet, some tale-bearers suggesting
to his Father that his Schoolmaster had infected him with his errors; and so
far they prevailed, that his father intended to disinherit him: hereupon Pareus
intended to go into the Palatinate, which his father much disliked, and sought
by all means to hinder, yet at last through Gods mercy, by importunity he gat
his fathers consent, who sent him away with little money in his purse: Thus
forsaking his friends and fathers house, he went to Hirschberge, where he met
with his Master and some of his School-fellowes, and so they traveled together
toward the Palatinate, through Bohemia: by the way his money failing, ^e went
to a Monastery to beg an Alms, and the Abbat pitying of him relieved him:
going from thence to another Monastery, he met with an ignorant Friar, and
asked an Alms of him in Latin, he returned this answer; Nos pauperi fratres,
nos nihil habemus; an piscimus, an caro, an panis, an misericordia habemus:
Thus at length it pleased God to bring him safely to Amberg in the upper
Palatinate: there his Schoolmaster stayed, and sent Pareus with ten more of his
Scholars to Heidelberg, where they were admitted into the College of
Sapience: there he was a diligent hearer of Vrsin, Boquin, Tremelius, Zanchy,
and the other Professors, under whom he profited both in the Arts and Tongues
to admiration: Then he betook himself to the study of Divinity, and having
fitted himself for the work of the Ministry, he was chosen by the Elector to
Preach in a Village within his jurisdiction, which he was then about to
reform: not long after he was called back to Heidleberg, and made a Public
Lecturer, where he continued till the death of Frederick the third, and then by
the Heterodox party, he with the other Professors was driven from thence: but
most of them were entertained by Prince Casimire, who erected a University an
Newstade, appointing Vrsin, Zanch^, Iunius, Piscator and others to be the
Professors in it: he appointed also a Synod, therein to consider how to provide
for the other exiles: Tossan was chosen Moderator, and Pareus the Scribe of it:
in that Synod Pareus gat ^eave to go visit his Country and friends, and so in
three weeks space came safely to them, where he was received with much joy, and
at the request of the Senate, he Preached the Sabbath following upon John 3.16.
And that with great applause and general approbation: his father also was so
well pleased with him, that presently after Sermon, he cancelled the writing
whereby he had di^inherited him: the Senate also d^sired him to undertake a
Pastoral charge in that place; but he chose rather to return into the
Palatinate against and coming to Newstad, he was appointed to Preach in a
Village hard by, where he continued till Prince Casimire (as G^ardian to the
young Prince Elector Palatine) sent for him to be a Preacher in the great
Church in Hiedleberge; and not long after he was made Master of the College of
Sapience in that University: Anno Christi 1587. according to the Statutes of
the College he Commenced Master of Arts, and afterward by the persuasion of
his friends Doctor of Divinity also.

In the year 1594. at a Convention of States at Ra^isbone the Divines of the
Palatinate were accused by the Lutherans, as holding opinions neither consonate
to the Scriptures, Augustines Confession, nor to their own Catechism; but
Pareus at the appointment of the Palatine, easily wiped of those aspersions,
and vindicating the innocence of them: Anno Christi 1596. there brake forth a
great Plague in the University of Heidleberg, whereof the learned James
Kimedonti^s ( Pareus his intimate friend) dyed, and some other Professors also:
and the Students by reason of it were driven away: yet Pareus stayed, and it
pleased God to preserve his College free from the infection: not long after he
was chosen Professor of the Old Testament in the room of Kimedontius, and
presently after Rector of the whole University. A^no Christi 1596. he was
extremely troubled with a Catarrh, insomuch as he dispaired of life, yet it
pleased God after a while to restore him: Anno Christi 1602. upon the death of
Daniel Tossan, he was made Professor of the New Testament: and grew so famous
that many resorted out of Hungary, Borusia, France, England, Scotland, Ireland,
and Germany to see and hear him.

In the year 1615. his wife sickened and dyed, which was a great grief to him:
Anno Christi 1618. the Low Countries being exceedingly endangered by the growth
of Arminianism, the States appointed a Synod at Dort, for the curing of that
di^ease; and amongst other famous Divines, Pareus was chosen by the Elector
Palatine to go to it; but he being grown very old and infirm, desired to be
excused, and so Paul Tossan was sent in his room: February the second, Anno
Christi 1620. as Pareus was coming out of his study, the steps being slippery
with the frost, his foot slipped and he fell down sixteen steps, and yet it
pleased God by a wonderful Providence that he light upon his feet, and
received no hurt by the fall; which made him think of that promise Psalm 91.
He will give his Angels charge over thee, etc. By his Doctrine and Council he
was admirably advantageous to the Church of God in many places: He strongly
asserted the truth of God against it is adversaries: He was a great studyer and
promoter of the Churches peace; laboring that they which agree in the
Fundamentals, should not jar about matters of an inferior nature: He wrote many
^xcellent Works, whereof some were printed by himself, others remained with
his son Philip Pareus, who has since published them to the great benefit of
the Church.

About that time the Spaniapds came into the Palatinate with their Army, which
brought great miseries upon that poor Country, which Pareus foresaw both by
Prodigies and Dreams; then did his friends both in Hiedleberge and other
places, p^rswaded him to retire himself to some other place of safety; to whom
he yielded, that so he might not fall into the hands of those bloody Papists,
whom he had irritated by his writings against them. At his departure he cried
out, O Hiedleberg! O Hiedleberge! but it is better to fall into the hands of God
then of man, whose tender mercies are cruelty: He went to Anvilla where he
spent his time in Prayer, Study and in Miditation, waiting and longing for the
time of his chang: there also he wrote his Corpus Doctrinae; which when he had
finished, he said, Lord, now let thy servant depart in peace because he has
finished that which he desired: Presently after he felt his strength much to
decay, and he fell into a fever; and finding that the air in that place
agreed not with him, he went thence to Neapolis: earnestly begging of God that
if it were his holy will, he might yet return to Hiedleberg, and lay his bones
there: He made his will also finding his former Catarrh to return upon him
again: yet it pleased God by the help of Physicians to recover him; whereupon
he resolved to go to Hiedleberge, and taking his Grandson young Daniel Pareus
with him, whom he loved deerly, he came safely to Hiedleberge, where he was
received with wonderful acclamations of joy; about which time Prince Frederick
came also thither from his Exile: and the Sabbath following they received the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper together with much comfort: But three days
after, his former disease returning, he was sensible of his approaching death:
the Professors and Ministers resorted to him, much bewailing their own loss,
amongst whom was Henry Altingus, to whom he freely opened his mind both
concerning God house and his own, and presently after quietly departed in the
Lord Anno Christi 1622. and of his age 73.

Pareus also of high Germany,
A wreath of Bays deserves most worthily:
A very learned, godly, grave Divine,
Whose precious labors made his fame to shine,
Chiefly those on the Romans. And although
At first, he many straits did undergo:
Both by his Father and his other friends;
Yet God who in deep straits assistance sends,
Made all for his best good t'operate,
And by them brought him to a blessed estate;
For he became abroad, at home renowned,
And was with many honors justly crowned:
Especially at Hiedleberge, where he,
From all earths fears was happily set free.
The Life and Death of Thomas Erpenius, who dyed Anno Christi 1624.
THomas Erpenius was borne at Gorcome in the Low Countries Anno Christi 1584.
of honest Parents: In his childhood he was bred in the School at Leiden, and
admitted into that University at eighteen years old, and in the twenty fifth
year of his age, he commenced Master of Arts: then he fell to the study of
Divinity, and of the Oriental Languages under Joseph Scaliger, who observing
his ingenuity and promptness, often foretold what an eminent man he would
prove in time to come: From thence he traveled in England, France, Italy, and
Germany, in which per^grinations he profited exceedingly both in learning and
prudence.

At Paris he became intimately acquainted with Isaac Casaubone; and went with
him to Samure, where he fell hard to the study of Arabic, and profited so
exceedingly therein that Casaubone had him in great admiration, and estimation
for the same: From thence he went to Venice, where by the help of some learned
Jews and Turks, he learned the Turkish, Persian, and Aethiopick Ianguages:
whereby he gat so great esteem in Italy, that he was proffered a Pension of five
hundred Ducats by the year to employ himself in the version of some Arabic
books into Latin. He spent four years in travel, and was famous every where
for his learning: at Paris, and some other places he bought many Arabic books,
and so returned to Leiden An. Chapter 1612. About which time there was a purpose to
have called him into England, and to have allowed him an honorable stipend, but
the year after he was chosen Professor of the Oriental languages in Leiden:
and presently after he set up (though with extraordinary charges) a Press for
those Languages, whereby he published many ancient monuments, both of his own
and other mens^ and 1616. he married a wife, by whom he left three children
surviving him: An. Christi 1619. he was made Professor of the Hebrew also, and
though he had so many and great employments, yet he went through each of them
with so great exactness, as if he had nothing else to attend upon.

In the year 1620. he was sent by the Prince of Orang, and the States of
Holland into France, to procure Peter Moulin, or Andrew Rivet to come to Leiden
to be the Divinity Professor, and though he prevailed not at that journey, yet
they sent him again the year after to Andrew Rivet and the French-Church, to
obtain of them their consents for his coming; which business he transacted
with so great prudence, that he brought Andrew Rivet along with him to Leiden.
His fame was so great, that the King of Spain wrote to him, making him
exceeding great promises if he would come into Spain to interpret some ancient
writings, which never man yet could do: The King of Morocco also did so
exceedingly admire the purity of his Arabic style in some of his Epistles,
that he showed them to his Nobles and other learned men as some great Miracle:
He was also highly esteemed of, by the Prince of Orang and the States of
Holland, who often made use of his labors in translating the letters which
they received from Princes in Asia, and Africa out of Arabic or other
Languages: But whilst he was thus busily employed in Public and private, it
pleased God that he f^ll sick of the Plague, wh^reof he dyed Anno Christi 1624.
and of his age forty.

Here may we not without much wrong deny,
To this Erpenius honored memory:
Who was most famous in his generation,
A man of exc'llent parts to admiration;
And in the Oriental tongues so rare,
That few or none with him deserved compare:
For th'Arabick and Hebrew tongues likewise,
The Kings of France and Spain did him so prize,
Yea England, Holland, Germany, Italy
Proffered great sums to enjoy his company:
And rare eudowments, deep experience:
At forty years of age death took him hence.
The Life and Death of Abraham Scultetu^, who dyed Anno Christi 1624.
ABraham Scultetus was born at Grunberge in Silesia, Anno Christi 1566. his
Parents were of good rank, who carefully brought him up at School where he
profited exceedingly, and Anno Christi 1582. he went to Vra^islavia where he
for had his fellow-students Pitiscus, Polanus and Pelargus, men who after
proved eminent in the Church of God: Having studied there sometime, he went
thence to Freistade to hear Melancthon, Bucolzer and some others: But his
active spirit could not long be continued within the bounds of his own Couny,
and therefore being assisted by the bounty of a Noble Knight, he went to
Wittenberg and from thence to Dessavia, to acquaint himself with Peter Martyr
and Casper Pucer: Anno Christi 1590. he went to Hiedleberg where he heard
Daniel Tossan and Francis Iunius: there also he read Lectures of Logic,
Oratory and Astronomy to diverse young Noblemen, and the year after Commenced
Master of Arts: then he betook himself to the study of Divinity, thereby to
fit himself for the Ministry, which from his childhood he had devoted
himself to: and Preaching before the Elector Palatin^, he so flowed with
el^quenc^ and (...), that the Prince and all his Courtiers were (...) delight^d
in him^ which caused the El^^to^ to m^k^ hi^ visitor both of the School^ and
Churches: Yea many other Princes made use of his help in reforming their
Churches in Iuli^rs: Brandenburg, and Hanovia: he was also sent to the Synod of
Dort. Anno Christi 1612. the Prince Elector Palatine took him into England with
him, where he was much esteemed and respected by King James, and other learned
men: at his return to Hiedleberg he was made Professor in the University, and
Doctor in Divinity Anno Christi 1618. But about that time grievous Wars
breaking forth (the miseries whereof were dispersed afterward ove^ all (...)
Hiedleberg, and traveled (...) met with many affliction^, (...) long tossed up
and down in (...) the Lord at last provided him a quiet (...) ^here he was
cho^sen a Preacher (...)orn out wi^h travels, (...) Ministry, he quietly (...)
1624. and of his age 58. What admi^able endowments he had, his Works do
sufficiently declare, especially his Medulla Patrum, which is so much esteem^d
by learned men.

Most worthy also is Scultetus grave,
The Palm and prize of praise and fame to have:
W^^ ^^r ^is (...) wit and worth^
His learned labors rare, in print put forth;
Chiefly Medulla Patrum, that choice piece,
Preferred far to Jasons golden fleece,
By all the learned. Had in high request
For's eloquence and diligence expressed;
By our King Jam^s and other Princes great;
Who with most high applause obtained the seat
In Hiedleberg^ br^ve University,
Of the Professor there; and worthily
Made Doctor of Divinity. At last,
Having much trouble with his comforts past;
At Embd^n God him gave a quiet Statio^,
And there by death crowned him with heavens salvation
Robert Bolton, Batchelour in divinity and minister of Gods word at Broughton
in Northamton shire
The Life and Death of Robert Bolton.
RObert Bolton was born at Blackborn in Lancashire, Anno Christi 1572. his
Parents finding in him a great promptness to learning, though they had no
great means, yet they intended him for a Scholar, the rather having an
opportunity of a good Schoolmaster in the town, where he profited exceedingly,
and at twenty years old he went to Lincoln College in Oxford, and was Master
Randa^'s Pupil [afterwards a famous Preacher] there in a short time (being well
grounded before, and industrious) he be^ame an excellent Logician and
Philosopher; at which time his father dying, and his means failing, he took
excessive pains, and wanting books he borrowed of his Tutor and others, read
them over and abridged them: and to perfect his knowledge in the Greek, he
wrote out all Homer with intolerable pains, so that he could with as much
facility dispute in the Schools in Greek, as in Latin, or English. From thence
he removed to Brasen-nose College, the Fellowships there belonged to
Lancashire and Cheshire men: yet for want of acquaintance, he stayed long
without a Fellowship which made him to languish through want; but his deserts
being known, Doctor Bret and some others, together with some small stipends he
had for his Lectures in that House, supported him till he gat a Fellowship,
about the thirtieth year of his Age; then also he Commenced Mr. of Arts, and
being chosen Lecturer, he performed it with such exactness that he grew very
famous: his Disputations in the University were performed with such acuteness
of wit and profound learning, that he was chosen by the Vice chancellor (at
King James his first coming to the University) to be one of the Disputants
before him, and to read natural Phylo^sophy in the Public S^hools: he was
also well studied in Metaphysics, Mathamaticks and School^Divinity; yet all
this while he had nothing in him for Religion: he loved Stage Plays, Cards,
Dice, was a horrible swearer, Sabbath^breaker and boon-companion; he neither
loved goodness nor good men.

He hearing the fame of Master Perkins went to Cambridge at a Commencement that
he might hear him Preach, and h^ving heard him said, That he was a barren empty
fellow, and a passing mean Scholar: but when God changed his heart, he changed
his tune, and said, That Master Perkins was a^ learned and godly a Divine a^
our Church has in many years enjoyed in so young a man. He had familiar
acquaintance with one Master Anderton a good scholar, his Country man, and
formerly his Schoolfellow, but a strong Papist, yea a Priest; he knowing Master
Boulton's good parts and o^tward wants, took that advantage to perswade^ him to
go over with him to the English Seminary at Rome, where he should be furnished
with all necessaries, and have gold enough: this motion he excepted of, and a
day and place was appointed in Lan^ashire, to take shipping from thence and be
gone.

Thither Master Bolton repaired at the time prefixed, but Anderton came not,
whereby escaping that snare, he returned to Oxford, where he fell into
acquaintance with Master Peacock a learned and godly man, whereby it pleased
God to bring him to repentance, but by ^uch a way as the Lord seldom uses,
but upon such strong vessels, as he intends for strong encounters and rare
employments; for the Lord ran upon him as a Giant, taking him by the neck and
shaking him to p^eces, as he did Job; beating him to the ground as he did Paul,
by laying before him the ugly visage of his sins, which lay so heavy upon him
that he roared ^or anguish o^ heart; yea it so affrigh^ed him, that he rose
sometimes out of his bed in the night, for very anguish of spirit: and ^o
augment his spiritual misery, he was assaulted with soul temptations,
Horribilia de D^o, ^er^ibilia de fide, which Luther called c^laphum Satanae:
this continued for many months, but God at last gave a blessed issue, and these
grievous pangs in the New Birth produced two admirable effects in him; an
invincible courage in the cause of God; and a singular de^terity in comforting
afflicted spirits. Hereupon he resolved to enter into the Ministry, and was
accordingly Ordained the thirty fifth year of his Age: and about two years
after, the Parsonage of Broughton in Nor^hamptonshire falling void, Sergeant
Nicols the Patron, pre^^rred him to it: about the fortieth year of his age he
married Mis^ris Ann Bois, of an ancient family in Kent, and to her care
committed the ordering of his outward estate, and applied himself wholly to
his studyes, and the work of the Ministry, and for twenty years together
Pr^ached twice every Lord's Day and Catechized; and in every Holy Day and Friday
before the Sacrament he expounded a Chapter, whereby he went over most of the
Historical books of the Old and New Testament; and therein preparing nothing
for his People, but what might have served a very learned A^ditory. In all his
Preaching, next after Gods glory, he aimed at the Conversion of souls, and God
crowned his labors by making him an instrument to beget many sons and daughters
unto righteou^nesse.

He had an excellent Art in relieving afflicted consciences, so that he was
sought to far and near; yea diverse beyond Sea desired his resolution in
diverse cases of Conscience. Though in his preaching he was a son of Thunder,
yet to those that mourned in spirit, he was a sweet son of Consolation, with a
tender heart pouring the oil of mercy into their bleeding wounds. He had a
singular skill in discovering Satan's sle^ghts, and in battering down his
Kingdom. In all his Sermons he used to discover the filthiness of sin, and to
press hard upon the Consci^nce the duties of Sanctification: yea, he would
spare none, great or small in their sins; yet in reproving sin, he never
personated any man to put him to shame. His life wa^ blameless that he could
not justly be taxed by any, of any scandalous sin. He constantly prayed six
times a day: twice with his family. twice with his wife, and twice in secret:
He kept many days of private humiliation: always before the Sacrament, and
upon the occasions of the miseries of the Church at home and abroad, which he
performed with much ardency of Spirit: and being advised by Physicians for his
healths sake, to break off ^he strong intention of his study, he rejected their
counsel, accounting it greater riches to enjoy Christ by those servent
intentions of his mind, then to remit them for his healths sake.

He was of a comely presence, his countenance was so mixed with gravity and
austerity that it commanded respect from others. He often refused preferment,
that he might not be divorced from that Country where his Ministry found such
entertainment and effect. He was universaly bountiful: but especially he
^xceeded in those public distresses of Germany, France, Bohemia, etc. He
always spent all the revenews of his living (which was of good value) in the
maintenance of his Family, Hospitality and Charity: He fell sick of a Quartane
Ague in Sept^mber An. Christi 1631. whereupon finding his disease to get
strength, and his vigor to grow weaker, he revised his Will, and then wholly
retired himself from the world, and solaced his soul with the Meditation of
the joys of heaven: and having compiled a discourse De qua^uor Novissimis, of
Death, Judgment, Hell and Heaven; having preached over the three former, he
told his people that the next day he would preach of heaven, but the Saturday
before he fell so sick that he never preached after: though his sickness was
long and sharp, yet he bore it with admirable patience: often breathing forth
these speeches, Oh when will this good hour com! When shall I be dissolved!
when shall I be wi^h Christ? Being told that it was better for the Church (if
God would) for him to stay here: He answered, If I shall find favor in the
eyes of God, he will bring me again, and show me both it and his habitation;
and if otherwise, lo here I am, let him do what seems good in his eyes, 2.
Sam. 15.25, 26. And being asked of another, if he could be content to live if
God would grant it him; he said, I grant that life is a great blessing of God:
neither will I neglest any means that may preserve it, and do heartily desire
to submit to Gods will; but of the two, I infinitely more desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ.

To those that came to visit him ^n his sickness, he gave very godly and wise
exhortations. He thanked God for his wonderful mercy in pulling him out of
hell, in ^ealing his Ministry by the Conversion of Souls, which he wholly
ascribed to his glory: a week before his death he called for his wife, and
desired her to bear his Dissolution with a Chris^ian Fortitude; and turning to
his chrildren, he told them that they should not now expect that in regard of
his weakness he should say any thing to them; he had formerly told them
enough, and hoped they would remember it, and he verily believed that none of
them durst think to meet him at the great Tribunal in an unregenerate state.
Some of his neighbors moved, that as he had in his Ministry discoursed to them
the exceeding commforts that were in Christ, so he would now tell them what he
felt in his soul: Alas! said he, do you look for that now from me that want
breath and power to speak? I have told you enough in m^ M^nistry: yet to
satisfy you, I am by the wonderful mercies of God, as full of comfort as my
heart can hold, and feel nothing in my soul but Christ, with whom I heartily
desire to be: Then seeing some weeping, he said, Oh what a deal ado there is
before one can dye? When the very panges of death were upon him, some of his
dear friends coming to take their leave of him he caused himself to be raised
up, and after a few gapings for breath he said to them, I am now drawing on a
pace to my Dissolution: hold out Faith and Patience, your work will quickly be
at an end: then shaking them by the hand, he desired them to make sure of
heaven, and to remember what he had formerly taught; them protesting that it
was the Truth of God, as he should answer it at the Tribunal of Christ, before
whom he should shortly appear: and a dear friend taking him by the hand, ask't
him if he felt not much pain: Truly no (said he) the greatest I feel is your
cold hand: and then being laid down again, no long after he yielded up his
spirit unto God, Anno Christi 1631. and of his age sixty.

He was one of a thousand for Piety and Courage, which were so excellently
mixed with wisdom, that they who imagined mischief against his Ministry, were
never able by all their plottings to do him any more hurt, then only to show
their teeth.

Laus Deo.

Of all the worthyes that deserved so well
And did in parts and piety excel:
And Garlands therefore of just honor have,
None more did merit then this Past or grave.
Renowned Robert Bolton, one well known
For his divine rare parts second to None:
Who though in's youth he seemed a wicked Saul,
In's riper years he proved a precious Paul:
A most renowed preaching Son of thunder,
Yet a sweet Barnabas (even to deep wonder)
To sons of sorrow; and for Gods blessed cause,
Invincible in courage; and from paws
Of Satan's power, who pulled afflicted spirits
By comforts sweet: herein, being of high merits;
And as for's preaching, so for's writings rare,
Extant in print, even almost past compare:
One of ten thousand for his piety,
Constancy, wisdom, learning, gravity;
Who as he lived beloved, so blestly died,
And now his Sainted soul in heaven does bide.
The Life and Death of William Whately, who dyed Anno Christi 1639.
WIlliam Whately was born in Banbury in Oxfordshire, An. Christi 1583. of godly
and religious Parents: his father was often Mayor of that Town: his mother
carefully bred him up in the knowledge of the Scriptures from a child: he was
also trained up in learning in the best Schools in those parts, and being of a
quick apprehention, a clear judgment, and a most happy memory; he profited so
much both in Latin, Greek and Hebrew, that at fourteen years old he went to
Christ's College in Cambridge. There he was an hard Student, and qucikly became
a good Logician and Philosopher, a strong Disputant and an excellent Orator: He
studied also Poetry and Mathematics: He was a constant hearer of Doctor
Chaderton and Mr. Perkins: And his Tutor calling his Pupils to an ^ccount what
they had learned; when any was at a stand, he would say, Whately, what say you?
and he would repeat as readily as if had preached the Sermon himself: being
Bachelor of Arts, his Father took him home, yet there also he followed his
study. Afterward he married a wife, the Daughter of Master George Hunt, an
eminent Preacher, who persuaded him to enter into the Minis^ery: and therefore
going to Oxford, he commensed Master of Arts, and presently after was called to
be a Lecturer at Banbury, which he performed with good approbation for four
years, and then was called to the Pastoral charg^ there, in which place he
continued to his death. He was naturally eloquent, and had words at will^ he
was of an able body and ^ound lungs, and of a strong and audible voice: He was
a B^nerges, a son of Thunder, and yet upon occasion, a Barnabas, a son of sweet
Consolation: His speech and preaching was not in the enticing words of man's
wisdom, but in the Demonstation of the Spirit and of Power. He was an Apollo^,
eloquent and mighty in the Scriptures: he Catechized and Preached twice every
Lords day, and a weekly Lecture besides, yet what he Preached was before well
studied and premeditated: He usual penned his Sermons at large; and if he had
but so much time as to read over what he had written, and to gather it up into
short heads, he was able to deliver it well-near in the same words. His
Preaching was plain, yet very much according to Scripture, and the rules of
Art: He made good use of his Learning, yet without affectation. He used to read
Books most swiftly, and yet not cursorily; being able, when he had don, to give
an account of the substance, and most remarkable passages of what he had read.
And it pleased G^d to put a Seal to his Minis^^y, in the c^nverting,
confirming, and building up many thousands in the course of his Ministry. He
was a diligent visitor of the ^ick under his charge without resp^ct of persons:
he was a great P^ace maker amongst any of hi^ Fl^^k that were at variance: he
had an heavenly gift in prayer, both for aptn^sse and fullness of Confessions,
Petitions, Supplycations, Intercessions and Praises, together with fervency of
spirit to power them out to God in the name of Christ. When he had read a
Psalm or Chap. in his Family, in his prayer he would discover the scope,
meaning, and chief notes of observation, and their use, that his Prayer was an
excellent Commentary thereupon; and this not only in the plainer, but in the
harder Texts of Scripture also. His constant practi^e was (besides
Family Prayer twice a d^y, and sometimes Catechizing) to pray also with his
wife, and alone, both morning and evening. He set apart private days of
Humiliation for his Family upon special occasions, and often for their
preparation to the Lord's Supper; at which times he would exceed himself in
pouring out his soul to God with many tears: He was much in days of private
Fasting, and humbling himself alone before God, which impaired his health, but
made much for the health of his soul. He was very able, and very ready to
confer with, and to resolve the doubts of such as came him: He bare such a
tender love to that great people over which God had set him, that though his
means was small, and he had many offers of great preferment in the Church, yet
he would not leave them. He was daily inquisitive after the affairs of Gods
Church, and sympathized with Gods people, both in their weal and woe.

He was much grieved when he saw that difference in opinions bred strangeness
amongst Christians, that agreed i^ that same Fundamental Truths. He was
judiciously charitable to such as showed the power of godliness in their lives,
though they were not of his judgment in all things. He was glad when any of the
righteous smote him, and would t^ke it well, not from his Superiors only, but
from his Equals and far Inferiors; and would really show more testimonies of
his love to such afterward then ever he did before. He abounded in works of
Mercy, he was a truly liberal man, one that studied liberal things, seeking
out to find objects of his mercy, rather th^n staying till they were offered:
he did set apart, and expend for many years together for good uses the tenth
part of his yearly comings in, both out of his Temporal and Ecclesiastical
means of maintenance^ he entertained some poor Widows, or necessitous persons,
weekly at the least at his Table; and his estate prospered the better after he
took this course; and in his sickness he comforted himself with that promise,
Psalm. 41.1, 2. Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver
him in the time of trouble; the Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of
languishing, etc. His last days were his best days, for then he grew
exceedingly in humility, and in heavenly-mindednesse. And a good while before
his latter end, God gave him victory over his greatest corruptions, which for a
long time kept him in continual exercise. About eight weeks before his death,
he was much troubled with a cough and shortness of breath, which much weakened
him, yet he Preached diverse times, till his increasing weakness disabled him.
In his sickness he gave heavenly and wholesome counsel to his people,
neighbors and friends that came to visit him, exhorting them to labor to
redeem the time, to be much reading, hearing, and Meditating upon the Word of
God; much in prayer, brotherly love, and communion of Saints, and that they
would be careful to hold that fast that he had taught them out of the Word of
Truth, and that whilst the the means of Salvation was to be had, they would
neither spare pains nor cost to enjoy it. His pains toward his end were very
great, yet he bore them patiently. He was much in ejaculations and lifting up
his heart to God in behalf of the Church and State, and for himself also,
wherein he was most frequent, and earnest a little before his death. A godly
friend and Minister praying with him, that if his time were not expired, God
would be pleased to restore him for the good of his Church, or if otherwise,
that he would put an end to his pains, if he saw good; he lifting up his eyes
steadfastly toward heaven and one of his hands, in the close of that prayer
gave up the Ghost, shutting his eyes himself, as if he were fallen into a sweet
sleep, Anno 1639. and of his age 56. God took him away a little before the
Civil Wars began, and before the sad desolations that fell upon the Town of
Banbury in particular.

Renowned William Whately also wins
Like fame with Bol^on, as two equal twins
Of honor and renown; for piety,
And admirable parts in's Ministry:
In Latin, Greek and Hebrew rarely able,
A Disputant also unconquerable.
Of apprehension quick, of judgment clear,
Strong memory; and that which was most dear,
Of a most holy life and Conversation;
Who many souls did win to Christ's salvation:
And Divine-like in Scriptures eloquent;
In Prayer, Preaching faithful and fervent:
Much charity and love, who still expressed
Among his people a Peacemaking blessed:
Pitiful, patient, full of courtesy:
His soul with Christ now reigns most gloriously.
FINIS.

