TRIANA, Or a Threefold ROMANZA Of Mariana. Of Paduana. Of Sabina.
Omne tulit Punctum qui miscuit vtile dulci.

LONDON, Printed for John Stafford, and are to be sold at his House, at the
George at Fleet-bridge. 1655.

To the Reader.
IT is hard to say whether it is worst, to be Idle or ill employed; whilst I
have eschewed the former, I have fallen on the latter; and shall by the severer
sort be censured for mispending my time.

Let such I pray hear my Plea, and I dare make my accusers my Judges herein,
that is not lost time which aims at a good end; Sauce is as lawful as meat,
recreation as Labor, it has pleased me in composing it, I hope it may delight
others in perusing it.

I present not a Translation out of the Spanish, or from the Italian Original;
this is the common Pander to men's fancy, hoping to vent them under that title
with the more applause. These my play-labours never appeared before, and is an
essay of what hereafter may be a greater volume.

Things herein are composed in a general proportion to truth, and we may
justly affirm,

Vera si non scribimus, scribimus very similia, I will not be deposed for the
exact variety of the gravest passages: in the greatest historian a Liberty has
ever been allowed to fancies of this nature, always provided, that they
confine themselves within the bounds of probability.

Thus wishing every faithful Lover Feliciano's happiness, every good wife
Facundo's Love; every true servant, servant, Gervia's fortune, every
Maiden-Lady, Fidelio's constant affection, every faithful friend Vejetto's
success, every clownish fool, Insuls his mishap, and every cruel wanton,
Nicholayo's deserved punishment: I leave thee to the perusal hereof, censure
not so rigidly, lest you blast a budding Writer in the blossoming of his
endeavors.

TRIANA

MARIANA.
IN the City of Valentia, Metropolis of the Kingdom so named, which with many
other Dominions are the tributary ^^ooks discharging themselves into ^e Ocean
of the Spanish Monarchy, ^welt one Don Durio a Merchant of ^^eat repute. For as
yet the envious ^^nds had not (as at this day) ob^^ructed the Haven in the
Valentia, but ^^at it was the principal port in ^^ose parts.

This Don Durio had advanced an ^tate much by Parcimony, more by ^apine, being
half a Jew by his extraction; and more then three quarters thereof by his
Conditions, being a notorious oppressor. But grown very aged, and carrying his
Eyes in his pockett, Teeth in his Sheath, and Feet in his Hands, he began with
remorse to reflect on the former part of his Life with some thoughts of
restitution, to such whom he had most injured.

This his intention he communicated to one Francisco a Friar, and his
Confessor: Francisco was glad to see such a qualme of Religion come over his
heart, and resolved to improve it to the uttermost. He persuades him that
restitution was a thing difficult and almost impossible for one in his
condition, so many were the particular persons by him wronged; the shortest and
sures^ way was for him to consigne his only Daughter Mariana to be a Nun in the
Priory of St. Brigett, and to endow that Covent with all hi^ Lands: which
exemplary piece o^ his liberality, would not only wit^ the luster thereof
outshine all his former faults: but also be a direction to posterity how to
regulate their estates on the like occasion. Don Durio, though flinty of
himself, yet lately softened with Age and sickness, entertaines the motion, not
only with contentment, but with delight, and will not be a day older before
the same be effected.

But there was a material person, whose consent herein must be co^sulted with,
even Mariana his Daughter, who had not one ounce of Nuns flesh about her, as
whom nature had intended not as a dead stake in a hedge to stand singly in the
place* but as a plant to fructify for posterity. Besides, she had assured her
self to one Fidelio, a Gentleman of such merit, that though his virtues started
with great disadvantage, clogged with the wait of a necessitous fortune: yet
such the strength and swiftnes thereof, that he very speedily came (not being
above the years of two and twenty) to the mark of a public reputation; but
these things were carried so closely between them, and all leakes of
superstition were so cunningly made up, that neither friend nor foe, had gained
the least glimps of their intentions.

Don Durio, Francisco being in his presencc, importunes his Daughter (a hard
task) to bury her beauty under a veil, and become a Frigittine. What he
propounded with a fatherly bluntness, Francisco sharpens with the edge of his
wit, heightning the happiness of a recluded Life to the Sky, and above it; A
discourse very unwelcome to Marianaes Ears, racketted between two dangers on
either side If she surrender her self herein to her Fathers will, she is
undone, and wha^ she values above herself, Fidelio i^ ruined: If she deny, she
exposes he^ self to the just censure of disobedience: yea it puts a light
into the hand of her suspicious Fathers thereby to discover her intentions, that
her affections being preingaged, obstructed the acceptance of this Motion. No
time is allowed her to advise, in a moment (almost) she must consult and
conclude, and resolved at last to comply with her Fathers desires for the
present, not despairing, but that courteous time, in the process thereof,
would tender unto her some advantage, whereby hereafter she might make a fair
evasion.

But her Father hurries her in her present attire, (as good enough for a
mortified mind, without allowing her respit of of exchanging) unto the Covent.
Francisco leads the way, Don Durio follows, and Mariana comes last; her
countenance was neither so sad, as to betray any discontent, nor so blithe and
cheerful as to proclaim any likeness therein: but so reduced, and
moderately composed, as of one that well understood both what she was leaving
off, and what she was entering into. And if the falling of a few tears
moistened her cheeks, it was excusable in one now taking her farewell of her
former friends: and her Father beheld the same as the Argument of good nature
in her.

Ringing the Bell at the Covent Gate, the watchful Porter takes the Alarm and
presently opens: for though it was something difficult for strangers to have
excess into the Covent, yet the presence of Friar Francisco, was as strong as
any Petar, to make the sturdiest gate in the Covent pliable to his admission.
Out comes the Lady Abbess, who had now passed Sixty winters, and carried the
repute of a grave and Sanctimonious Matron: A strict discipliner she was of the
least wantonness of any committed to her charge, reputed by most to her
virtuous disposition, but ascribed by others to her envy, driving away those
delights from others which formerly had flowne away from her self.

Francisco with a short speech acquaints her with the cause of their coming*
surrenders Mariana to be a Probationer in their house; whom the Abbess
welcommeth with the largest expressions of love to her, and thankfulness to
her Father, highly commending Don Durio his Devotion, that whereas many Parents
blessed with a numerous issue grudge to bestow the tithe thereof on a
Monastical Life: such is his forward zeal as to part with all his stock, and
store, not repining to confer his sole daughter and heir to a religious
retirement; Then taking their leaves each of other, they depart, leaving
Mariana with the Abbess.

Millescent a Nun of good esteem and great credit, is assigned by the Abbess
to go along with Mariana, and show her all the rooms, walks and rich
untensills of the house; especially she is very careful to read unto her a
large Inventory of all the relics therein, with their several miraculous
operations. The points of St. Rumballs Breeches (among other things) were there
showen, the touching whereof would make barren women fruitful: and many other
seeming toys of sovereign influence. Passing through by the Southeast corner
of the Cloister Mariana cast her eye on an arched vault, enquiring the use
thereof, and whether the same did conduct; Millescent answered, that in due
time her curiosity therein should be satisfied to her own contentment, but as
yet she was not capable of any intelligence therein, which was one of the
mysteries of the house not communicated to novices at their first admission,
but reserved for such, who after some convenient time of abode there, had given
undoubted testimony of their fidelity to that Order. And here we leave Mariana
having more music and less mirth then she had at home.

The news hereof was no sooner brought to Fidelio, but it moved a strange
impression upon him. Were I assured that the Reader hereof was ever sound in
love, and that his breast was ever through warned with chaste fires of a constant
mistress, it would spare me some pains to character Fidelio his sad condition.
For then my work is easily done, only by appealing to the Readers experience,
who out of sympathy is able to make more then a conjecture of Fidelio's sad
estate, daily languishing for the loss of his Love, as dead (whilst living)
unto him.

His Pensive postures, sad looks, silent sighs, affected solitariness,
sequestring himself from his most familiar friends, was observed by Ardalio, by
whom he was intirelv beloved, Ardadalio using the boldness becoming a friend,
examines Fidelio of the cause of his sudden change. Fidelio for a time fences
himself with his own retiredness, and fortifies his soul with resolutions
of secrecy. The other plants the Artillery of his importunity against him, by
the force thereof Fidelio is beaten out of his hold, and won at last to
unbosome his grievance to Ardalio, who had promised, that Midnight sooner
should be found a Tel-tale, and Trust it self become a Traitor, rather then he
would discover any thing prejudicial unto him. Imboldned wherewith, Fidelio
confesses that Marianas restraint in a Nunnery into which she was lately
thrust, by her parents power (as he verily believed) against her own will, and
without his knowledge.

Had she been taken prisoner by the Turk, some hope would have been to
procure her Liberty by ransom, had Pirates surprised her, money might have
purchased her freedom, whereas now no hope of enlargement, it being no less
then Sacrilege accounted by force or fraud to practice her delivery from that
Religious slavery.

Be content (says Ardalio) and I will make you master of a project, which
without any danger shall bring your Mistress into your possession; turn
therefore all your Soul into ears and listen to my discourse, which though
seemingly tedious in the relating, the same will make your attention, not only
a saver, but a gainer by the rich conclusion thereof.

Some twelve years since, when a Friar was buried in the Benedictine Covent
all the Schooleboyes in Valentia (among whom I assure you I was none of the
meanest) invited themselves to be present at the solemnity, now whilst others
were crowded into the Chapel to see the performance of the Obsequies, I know
not what conceit made me a separatist from the rest of my companions. And as I
was walking in a Corner between the Conduit and the Hall, I happened into an
old Room which led me into a Vault lighted only with one squint-eyed Window,
going somewhat further therein, my heart began to fail me with the fresh
remembrance of those Tales of Bugbears wherewith my Nurse had affrighted my
infancy from ponds and places of danger; however taking heart I resolved to
discover the issue of that winding Vault. And here you must forgive me, if I
have forgotten some circumstances herein, my memory which never was very loyal
may be pardoned for betraying some passages after twelve years past: let it
suffice that I remember so much as will make you happy it wisely prosecuted,
this was the result of my adventure, that as our River Anas is reported to run
some miles under ground, and afterward spring up again. So I drowned under
dry earth, (if you will allow the expression) was boiled up again in the
Nunnery of the Bridgitines, you will hardly believe with what amazement the
Nunns beheld me, who had entered their Cloister that unusual way never as yet
(as it seems) traced with boys feet, but by those of more maturity, whose
company might be more acceptable unto them: They loaded me with kisses and
sweet meats, for believe me (Fidelio) how mean opinion soever you may now
have of my handsomnesse, if my picture then taken, and the report of my Mother
may be believed, I was not unhandsome. In fine, they flattered and threatened me
not to discover which way I came thither, which if once I made known, thousand
of Devils would torment. From which day to this it never came into my head; my
memory having now made some amends for its former forgetfulness by this
seasonable suggestion thereof unto me, when it may befriend your occasions. If
therefore you can convey your self by this passage into the Nunnery, I leave
the rest to be stewarded by your own Ingenuity.

But which way said ( Fidelio) shall I contrive my undiscovered coming
thither, show me but a way presenting but half the face, yea but a quarter
face of probability, and I shall kiss that, and thank you for the same.

I will furnish you with all requisites for the Adventure: I have an uncle
living at Lisborne provincial of the Benedictines in Spain; his hand when a
boy I have often ceunterfeited for harmless cheats level with my age, so
livelily, that I have persuaded him to confess it his own, and great the
familiarity between my Uncle and Francisco, who here is the Benedictine Abbot.
I will provide all things for you, and fit you with the habit of their Order,
leaving the rest still to be improved by your own Art and Industry. For where a
friend tenders one hand to draw you out of the Mire, if you assist not to make
up the rest by your own Endeavors, even lie there still to your own shame and
with no pity of mine.

They depart, resolving next morrow to meet, when all necessaries should be
provided. In the mean time, Fidelio goes to the Covent of the Bridgittines,
and walks under a Window thereof, the which (as he was informed and his
intelligence therein not untrue) belonged to the Chamber of Mariana. She
discovers him there, and presently rends out of her legend the first white
leaf which had not blushed (as the rest) for the lies and impudencies which
were written therein; which Paper she imployes for a Let^er, and looking out of
the window, casts the letter down unto him who stood ready beneath to receive
the same, and surely had the Letter been but balanced, with any competent
weight put therein, it had not missed his hands for whom it was intended.

What a pity was it, that Aeolus was never in love, or that the Winds are too
boisterous, or to cold to be melted Affection. Except any will say that a Gale
of wind ambition, to kiss the letter of so fair a hand, and overacted its part
therein.

Sure it is that a small blast thereof blew this Letter over into the Garden of
Albesse, where she was viewing of her Bees. Her Ladyship betakes her self to
her glasseyes, and peruseth the following contents thereof.

Fidelio,
HElp me with thy imaginations, and know me here more miserable then I can
express, here is nothing less then that which is pretended, a chaste mistress
which in due time may be a chaste wife, may stock a hundred Nuns with Virginity;
work my deliverance if thy affections be unfeigned; or I am undone

Mariana.


Short and sweet said the Abbess, the least Toades have the greatest Poison,
and then up she flies winged with anger, (which otherwise could scarce crawle)
to Marianaes Chamber where she so railes on her, that a Purgatory hereafter
might have been spared for having one here.

And because she had defamed the whole Covent, the heaviest pe^nance must be
enjoyed unto her, to be stripped naked to the middle in the Hall at dinner time,
where she was only to be feasted with lashes, each Nun inflicting one upon
her, and then the Abbess to conclude sans number: as many as her own
discretion was pleased to lay on her.

But Mariana partly with grief, and partly with fear, fell so terrible sick
that night that her life came into despair, the only reason (as I take it) why
her penance was put off to another time: till she might be the more able
object of their cruelty. For the Abbess resolved, that what was deferred
should not be taken away, being so far from abating the principal, She
intended Mariana should pay it with interest, and give satisfaction for the
forbearance of this Discipline, when in any tolerable strength to undergo it.

By this time Ardalio had completed Fidelio with all necessaries in the habit
of a Friar, who thus accoutred, advances in his formality to the Covent, where
he is presently brought to Francisco, to whom he delivered this ensuing Letter.

Dear Brother,
I Send you here my self in my friend, who was he as well known to you as to
me, his virtues would command your affections, if not admiration; Our Covent
has this last hundred years, (since the first foundation thereof) been essaying
and endeavoring to make up a complete man, which now in some measure it had
effected in the bearer hereof; when behold envious death repining at our
happiness, had labored to frustrate the same; so that this pearlesse piece of
devotion, was scarce bestowed on us, when almost taken away from us by a
violent sickness, whose abated fury terminated at last, in a long and
languishing quartain ague, which his hollow eyes and thin cheeks do too
plainly express; exchange of Air is commended unto us, for the best if not
only Physic: let him want nothing I pray your house can afford, and burden
him with as few questions as may be, it being tedious to him to talk, and his
infirmity has much disinabled his intellectualls, and know that your
meritorious kindness therein, shall not only oblige me to a requital, but an
engagement on all Lovers of virtue, to whom this our Brother Festucaes worth is
or hereafter may be known.

Your loving Friend PEDRO di RONCA.


Francisco embraces him with all dearnesse, the viands of the house are set
before him, whereof Fidelio took a moderate repast; all the Monks of the house
severally salute him, and demanded of him several particulars of their Covent
at Lisborn, as of the Situation, Indowment, Number, Names, and punctual
observances therein.

To all these Fidelio returned general answers, under the coverts whereof he
might the easier conceal his own ignorance; as for the indowment of the house,
he professed himself a mere stranger thereunto, and that he affected
ignorance therein, as conceiving it resented too much of worldly employment,
whereas his desire was, that better things should engrosse his soul. This
excuse was heard with admiration, increasing the opinion they had preconceived
of his holiness: when they ask him such questions, to which he could return
no answer at all, he would fall into a seeming trance, darting his eyes, and
moving his lips, as in pious ejaculations, as not listening to what was said
unto him, whilst the others out of manerly devotion, let fall their questions,
and would press them no farther, as loath to interrupt his soul in more
serious and sacred employment; besides Francisco gave a strict command that none
should disturb him with needless questions, but leave him to the full
employment of his own meditations.

Some six days after, Fidelio observing the directions of Ardalio his friend,
finds out the foresaid vault, and accordingly went forward therein, till at
last he came to a great Iron Gate, which was shut and obstructed the way: This
Gate was either not set up, or not shut up, when Ardalio made his passage this
way. Fidelio falls a musing, finds all his hopes prove abortive, with no
possibility of further proceeding, when looking seriously on the Gate, which
was enlightened through a small hole, presenting but twilight at noon day, he
discovered an inscription thereon, which he read to himself, with a voice one
degree above whispering.

Fair Portresse of this privy Gate,
If any Sister want a Mate,
Lift up the Bar and let me in,
It shall be but a venial sin.
Instantly the Gate flew open, and Fidelio is left to wonder, what secret
Spell, and hidden Magic, were contained in those verses, that so immediately
they should procure his admittance. But presently the Riddle is unfolded,
finding a Nun behind the door, where she kept her constant attendance, and to
whom these verses were the wonted watchword to open the Gate: recollecting his
Spirit, he accosted the Sister, desiring to be conducted to Mariana, whom he
understood (for the fame thereof had gotten out of the Covent) was very sick,
and he sent from Father Francisco to provide some Ghostly counsel for her, and
what else her present condition should require.

He is carried unto her Chamber, who being at the present asleep, he
entertained himself in the next room by looking on a Picture. Herein Saint
Dennis was set forth, beheaded by Pagan Tyrants, and afterward carrying his
head under his arm seven miles from Paris to Saint Dennis. Fidelio smiling
thereat to himself, thought that Saint Dennis in that posture had an excellent
opportunity to pick his teeth.

Mariana is awaked, Fidelio called in, who claiming the privilege of privacy,
as proper for a Confessor, all avoid the room, then putting off his disguise,
he briefly tells her what dangers he had undergone for her deliverance,
informs her that next morning he would be ready with horses and servants, at
such a corner of the Garden, where without any danger, they had contrived a way
for her escape. Fidelio's presence is better then any Cordial, Mariana
recovereth her spirits, is apprehensive of the motion, promises to observe
time and place, they are thrifty in their language, speak much in little
lavish, no minutes in complements: but are perfectly instructed in each others
designs.

Presently in comes the Abbess: Fidelio (having first recovered his cool)
proceeds in a set discourse of the praise of patience, commending it to Mariana
as the most necessary virtue in her condition; and after some general salutes
to the Abbess, recommendeth his Patient to her care, and takes his own
opportunity to depart, returning to the Covent of the Benedictines as
undiscovered as he came thence.

That night, befriended with the dark, under the mantle thereof, Fidelio gets
out of the Covent, repairs to his friend Ardalio, reports all the particulars
of his success, triumphs in the hopes of his approaching happiness, counts
the time which we generally complain does fly, a Cripple, that crawles, so long
each minuit seems unto him, until ten of the clock next morning should be
accomplished.

Next day Mariana rises from her bed, craves leave of the Abbess to go into
the Garden, which is granted her; So that Millescent a prime Nun were to attend
her. Millescent advises her to wrap her self warm for fear of a relapse, for
the Air (says she) is piercing, and your body weak.

Indeed (quoth Mariana)I am sensible of much strength in a short time, and
believe my self able, to run a race with you, who shall first come to yonder
Corner; done said Millescent, and let the lagg that comes last to the place,
say over her Beads for us both. They start together.

Have you ever heard the Poets fiction of Atlanta's running, when only her
covetousness to get the golden Ball made her lose the race. Alas her
swiftness was nothing in comparison of Marianaes; It seems that Cupid, who had
shot the piles of his arrows into her heart, had tied the feathers or wings
thereof unto her feet.

The wall of the Nunnery was on the one side filled up with Earth, on the
outside there was a descent of some four yards; Fidelio stood ready to
entertain her. What will not fright and love do? Mariana consults not any
danger, nor did she carry a scale in her eye to measure the depth of the wall:
but crossing the Proverb, she leapes before she looks, Fidelio saves her
almost half the way of her journey by catching of her in his arms, and before
the succeeding minut had supplanted its Predecessor, she is mounted by his
servant behind Fidelio, and all speed they make to a Chapel, which might serve
for an Hospital, for it was blind, and the Priest dumb, yet had tongue enough
to tie that knot which none of them was able to undo.

But tired Millescent with much panting had recovered the corner, and seeing
Marianaes escape, cried out, she is gone, she is gone; this gave an Alarm to
the Abbess, who instantly conceived her in a sound; It is, said she, the just
reward of her adventure, that contrary to my Counsel went abroad. Out comes
the whole Regiment of Nuns with hot waters and Cordialls, to tempt her soul,
if not too far departed, to return to her body, they are soon sensible of their
mistake, and behold her almost got out of sight, so that the longer they
looked, the less they saw her, till distance at last made her vanish away. Many
a Nun a Spectator hereof, wished themselves an Actor upon the same terms,
commending her adventure in their hearts, who condemned her most in their
discourse.

Fidelio with Mariana his wife returned to a private house in Lisborn prepared
for this purpose; but oh the quick intelligence that Friars have, sure their
souls all scent, all Eyes and Ears, that discover things so soon, so far off.
They were just ready to sit down at Supper, only expecting the coming of his
dear friend Ardalio, when in comes a man or a Tiger (shall I say) Nature might
seem to intend him for the latter, such his fierce aspect and hairy face, the
terriblenesse whereof was increased with his affected antique attire, by his
place he was the Jailer of the house of Inquisition, and presently he showed a
cast of his office, by seizing them both his Prisoners. Yet might they have had
the happiness to have been sent to the same Prison, it would have afforded
some mitigation of their misery; this would not be granted, though Mariana with
importunate tears requested it; but they were disposed into several Jayles,
where neither of them was sensible of their own condition, being totally taken
up with the mutual bemoaning the one of the other

This is one commendable quality in the Spaniards, Prisoners are not long
delayed to rot in the Jayle, where is life worse then death it self, but are
brought to a speedy trial, either to be condemned or acquitted. Next day they
both are brought before the Judges, and condemned ot die; He for Sacrilege,
for soliciting a Votary out of the house, she for carrying away a golden Medall
wherein was the Picture of Saint Bridget, which she casually borrowed, having
no felonious intention, as meaning to restore it, but surprised on a sudden,
had no leisure to make restitution. All conceived that the rigor of rigors was
extended unto them, and by Francisco the Friar, though not visibly appearing.

Don Durio hearing that his Daughter was to be executed, his Paternal
affections retreated to his heart, and there made a Stand, projecting with
himself how to prevent this mischief. And here I must trouble the Reader, to
go back in reporting an acccident that happened twenty years ago.

It chanced that Philip the second (always wealthy and always wanting) was
forced on a sudden to send forth a great Fleet against the Turk, he borrowed
a considerable sum of money of Don Durio, for the payment whereof Don Durio was
a daily suppliant to the Court, as constant at the gate as the Porter, plying
the King with importunate Petitions, all which ended in delays, which Don
Durio rightly expounded to be denialls. Once the Treasurer told him, that it
was honor enough for the greatest Monarch in Christendom to borrow money of
him, though he never receive it again. Don Durio to make a virtue of necessity
turned his despair into a frollick, and being admitted by friends into the
Kings presence in a Winter morning, cast into the fire his Obligations which
were parcelled up in a pretty bundle, desiring the King to heat his hands
thereat. His Majesty was highly pleased with the conceit, and the rather
because it was more then a conceit, saying, it was the best Faggot he ever saw,
and wished the State of Senua would make him the like Bonefire, swearing by
Saint James (his usual Oath) that if ever Don Durio had need of a Court-favour
at a dead lift, he should not fail in his expectation.

The dead lift, or at least the dying lift was now come, Don Durio posts to the
Madrid, where the Spanish Court was kept, and finds the King hunting of a
Stag The old man attends the sport for a time. The Stag wearied with long
hunting took soil, and ran into a great Pond or dwarff-Lake, he recruited his
strength as old Aeson did in the Bath of Medea, and come forth as fair and as
fresh as when roused in the morning, then setting his Haunces against the Park
pale, (Reader if a Forrester pardon my language if improper) he dared the
Dogs to set upon him whilst the hounds stood disputing with themselves (for
the Kings dogs we know can make syllogisms) whether the honor or the danger
were the greater to adventure on their Foe, and whilst they stood declining the
hazard one to the other, out steps a cowardly keeper, and with a brace of
bullets kills the Stag dead in the place: who could he have borrowed a tongue
from the standers by, first he would have cursed that Friar of Mentz for first
finding out the hellish invention of Gunpowder, and then he would have
bequeathed himself to have been coffined in paste, whilst the King and his
Courtiers should be merry the solemnizing of his Funeral.

The sport being ended, the King returned and retired to his Chamber; Don Durio
makes his address to his Majesty, who at the first had forgotten him, till his
memory was quickened with the effectual token of the Bonds he burnt; welcome
Woodmonger said the King, thy suite is granted in the asking of it, and
presently a large pardon was signed and sealed, which with all possible speed,
he carried along with him to Lisborn.

But so short the day, so long the way, so bad the weather, that he could not
make such speed as he desired, and his friends expected.

The day of execution being come, Fidelio is brought to act his part on deaths
The aier. Mariana, though disjoined from him in Prison to her great grief,
(...) now to her greater grief conjoined with him at the Scaffold. Fidelio
begins with a long speech, which seems no whit tedious to the Auditors, because
done out of a design to gain time, in expectation of a pardon, which all
understood was procured, all Lovers there present could have wished each vowell
long in his speech, the effect whereof was to advise young persons to confine
their affections within some probable compass of their deserts, not to wander
with their extravagant love above the proportion of their merits: he bemoaneth
himself much, Mariana more, taking on himself the guilt of the whole Action,
and protested that she died Loves true Martyr.

Mariana seconded him in this sad discourse, the purport whereof was, to teach
obedience to Children, that they should take heed how they concealed their love
from their Parents, in whose mere disposal they were, and not to conceive that
Age superannuated them, or gave them an acquittance from that debt to which
nature engaged them.

A Post winds his horn, all hear it and welcome, conceiving what indeed it was,
the preface to a pardon. Don Durio follows the Post all in a sweat, it being
almost a wonder that his dried corpse could contribute so much moisture. The
pardon is presented to the Supreme Officer, with much joy and acclamation of
the beholders.

Who would think that Heraclitus could be so soon turned into Democritus? who
could suppose that so great an Army of people could in an instant, Faces about,
it was hard before to find one merry, now impossible to find one sad, as if by
sympathy they had been, condemned with Fidelio, and accordingly pardoned with
him.

The pardon is read, it was large parchment, in character, but apprehended too
narrow in expression, as only for the life of Mariana, whose Father, Don Durio,
neither desired nor endeavored the life of the other whom he perfectly hated,
as conceiving his love a disparagement.

Writers were in a sad condition, if sometimes they might not take upon trust
from their readers more then they are able to pay themselves; how short would
he fall; who would undertake in language to express the general sadness of
the Company, but especially of Mariana for this unexpected accident. The
Executioner proceeds to his work, a handkercher being tied about Fidelio's
Face, as one better prepared to feel then see death, he is readily provided for
the fatal stroke.

In vain did Mariana with much Rhetoric (grief making her eloquent) plead,
that the pardons of Princes are not to be taken in restrictive senses, that in
all things which are doubtful, men are rather to enlarge it with favor then
contract it with cruelty, that though her pardon alone was expressed doubtless
both were intended, that man and wife were but one, the guilt but one committed
by both, and appeals to the judges present, if any spark of mercy were alive
in their breasts (Judges always for the greater solemnity being present at
Executions) to improve the same on so just, so conscientious, so honorable an
occasion, but as soon might a Child have persuaded the Tide at full Sea to
retreat, when enraged also with the wind, as her request find any entertainment.

Ardalio was present thereat, standing close to Father Francisco the great
Actor herein, who spurred on the Judges (whom charity otherwise believed
inclined to mercy, to the greatest and speediest extremity) and he desired a
private work with Francisco what was whispered between them, was unknown, and
men's Fancies variously commented on their discourse, but the truth was he spoke
to this effect.

Sir, you have been the grand Ingeneir of this man's death, whose blood you have
sought, being your self guilty of greater offenses. A word from your mouth may
respit the execution, and reprieve the Prisoner; I protest reveng of my friends
blood, if you do not quickly improve your utmost, three minutes is all the time
I allow you to think or do after I have ended my speech; know you Sir a Vault
and a Door between your Covent and the Nuns, contrary to Canons and Laws
Ecclesiastical and Civil? these things shall be heightened against you with as
much earnestness as my wit and wealth can improve it, intending to bury my
estate in the prosecution of the death of my friend. These things he uttered
with that seriousnes which protosted no passion but a calm soul, and such
people are truest to their resolutions.

Francisco went to the prime Officer, and requested him (Friars requests in
such cases being commands) to put off the execution for one month, until his
Majesty's pleasure therein was more perfectly known; for Ardalio had given him
private information, that the intention of the King was larger then his
expression in the pardon, and the Officer complyeth with him in his desire, and
all the company were dissolved, none being sad at so strange but unexpected an
alteration.

All matters were hushed and stopped; Ardalio embraced and feasted by Francisco,
who bribed his tongue to silence, which the other as ingenuously professed and
faithfully performed. The reprieve of Fidelio ended in a full pardon, and old
Don Durio seeing it to be in vain to forbid that match which providence had
made, was contented that his Daughter was injointred in a true affection,
consented unto their Marriage. Both which lived long, and were blessed with an
happy posterity.

FINIS.
TRIANA And PADVANA.
IN the City of Venice, there flourished a Merchant as large in estate, as
narrow in heart, Mellito Bondi by name, of a Family more ancient then numerous,
and yet more numerous then rich; until Mellito gave the luster thereunto with
the vastness of his estate. One daughter alone he had; Paduana (from the
neighboring place of her birth and breeding) courted by all the
Illustrissimo's and Clarissimo's of that State, as well she might, having the
portion of a Princess in expectation. Yet her wealth was the meanest thing
about her, whose virtues and beauty was such, that fame commonly a Lier in the
excess, was here a lier in the defect, her large report falling short of the
Ladies due deserts.

Paduana solicited to marriage denied all suitors, charging all upon the
account of her steadfast resolutions on virginity; whereas this was but a blind,
more covertly to conceal her affections, and that exchange of hearts which had
passed between her and Feliciano, a sojourner in the house of her Father.

This Feliciano was a proper Gentleman, completely educated, whose enemies
allowed this to be his worst fault, that he had a prodigal to his Father, who
had wasted the large estate of his Ancestors: yet let not old Andrea (for so
was his Father termed) be wholly condemned for an unthrift (the partial cause
of his ruin) seeing losses at Sea, and ill debtors at land contributed to his
speedier undoing; besides our foresaid Bondi if strictly examined, could not
deny his concurrence thereunto, who by usurious contracts, and sinister
advantages spurred him on to destruction, who was running too fast of himself;
hereupon in some commiseration he kept Feliciano his son, as a
gentle-Alms-man, exhibiting diet and some slender accommodations unto him.

The best was, the scant measure of Bondi his allowance, was enlarged by his
daughters bounty, maintaining him in a fashionable equipage: Thus for a time we
leave them to their embraces, so much the sweeter because the secreter, waiting
the leisure of every opportunity, and warily stealing the same.

It happened about this time, that the President of Dalmatia, languished on a
desperate sickness, his death being daily expected: This was an office of
great honor and expense, which could not be discharged creditably without the
annual expending of so many ducats, which amounts to three thousand pounds
sterling of our English money: for though the foresaid President had a pension
from the State, and a certain Intrado from the Gallyes and Garrisons, with some
considerable revenues from the demeanes annexed to the place, yet all his
perquisits and emoluments audited, the foresaid sum was requisite to carry it
forth with any reputation, except some sordid soul was careless of his
credit, and would sacrifice the same to public obloquy.

M^l^ito Bondi was designed by the Duke and Senate of Venice successor in this
Presidentship of Dalmatia: Indeed in Seniority it belonged unto him, and as it
was accounted an injury to baulk so good ground, and pass over a man of merit,
should the State decline his election; So on the other side it would have left
an indeleble shame to Melli^o, if she should have waved the acceptance thereof.

Mellito quakes for fear to be advanced downward to so chargeable a
preferment, his covetousness is above his ambition, and he almost dies for
fear to hear that the President of Dalmatia is dying. The news of the
arriving of a wealthy Ship from Caro, or Constantinople, would be far more
acceptable unto him, then such burdensome honor.

Now he had a confident, part Friend, part servant, Gervatio by name, whose
secrecy he had balkt, and whose tongue he had locked up with many favors
bestowed upon him. To him he presumes to impart his grievance in manner
following.

Gervatio, I rank my servants in a threefold Order, of Slaves; Servants and
friends; of the former I have many fit for servile labor, no ingenious
employment: of the middle sort, I want none, but these love mine rather then
me: of friends servants thou art the chief, I make thy own ingenuity my
judge, whether my carriage unto thee has not rather spoke me a Father to a
Child, rather then a Master to Servant. Thankful natures (among whom I shall
account you till discerning the contrary) will study to deserve favors
bestowed upon them, which begets in me a confidence that I may not only
safely trust the with an important secret, but also crave thy advice therein
for my further direction.

Gervatio made a short, but serious protest of his fidelity herein, professing
himself highly advanced in this trust committed unto him, withal much
commending Bondies ability to advise himself, bemoaning withal his own
insufficiency, who could not harbor so presumptuous a thought, as if the scant
measure of his weak judgment could supply any thing wanting in the rich
Treasure of his Masters experience: how ever he promised that his heart should
make recompense for his head, and the sincerity of his endeavors make some
amends for his other failings and infirmities.

From complements, I fall to the matter in hand, Bon^i tells him his great
desire to decline the costly Presidentship of Dalmatia, which by succession
when vacant, was certain to descend upon him, he voweth that he accounted it
ill husbandry to sell rich Lands therewith to buy empty Air and honorable
titles which vanish with the wearer thereof; whilst his lasting wealth might
probably descend to his posterity, and desires Gervatio to mind him of some
fair contrivance which might not leave the blur of any suspicion behind it,
(much less come within the reach of probable detection) whereby he might wave
that expensive place, though but for a time, until some other should be
settled in the same.

Presently Gervatio his better genius prompted him, that if any person how rich
soever, if totally deprived of any of his senses, was by the fundamental Laws
of that State rendered incapable of the foresaid Presidentship. On this
undoubted foundation, being a most certain and well known truth, he bottomed
his design, persuading Bondi to counterfeit himself stark blind, that this
infirmity cunningly dissembled and generally believed, would secure him out of
the distance of the danger he feared, being not eligible to the place, while
visited with so great a defect.

The plot takes with Bondi, who puts it in present execution. On the Morrow an
entertainment is made, some friends invited to celebrate the anniversary of his
birthday, and Bondi proves himself a perfect Miser, by his over plentiful
cheer: In the midst of their mirth, he complains the Room is dark, commands
the windows to be opened, which was done accordingly. Bondi perseveres in his
complaint, that he sees no more then he did before. (which in some sense was
not untrue) at last all means used to recover light unto him prove in vain,
So that Justice is not phancied more blind by the Philosophers, nor Cupid
feined more eyelesse by the Poets then Bondi was then believed to be.

This accident produced different effects as men stood variously affected unto
him, narrow the number of such who truly loved him, and those few did really
pity and bemone him; more his foes who rejoiced thereat, and made uncharitable
co^structio^s thereof, as if some secret wanton intemperance had deprived him
of his sight, none suspected any fraud or collusion therein. And to make all
the surer Bondi confessed that this was a just punishment inflicted upon him
for his pride and ambition, because he so greedily had desired the
Presidentship of Dalmatia. He acknowledged that he had been no better then a
murderer in his own heart, having often killed the old President of Dalmatia
in his wishes and desire, the sooner to pave the way to his own preferment,
and enoble his posterity with addition of so honorable employment.

Hitherto, Feliciano and Paduana, had managed their affections with all secresy
suffering none to be privy thereunto; But henceforward being ignorant of her
Fathers dissimulation, they abstain not in his presence to pass kisses and
courtesies as confident that he perceived nothing. Whereat the other was
enraged above measure: should his daughter being a fit match for a Prince, for
Parts, Portion and Pedigree, be cast away on the son of a Bankrupt, all whose
maintenance proceeded out of his own purse? he resolved rather to disinherit
Paduana, then endure this affront, though for the present in silence he
digested the same.

The long languishing President of Dalmatia puts an end of peoples expectations
by his death, and made room for one to exceed him in his office. The election
leaves over Bondi by his blindness unqualified for that place, the
concernement whereof required one who should be an Argos both for body and
mind, such is the need of his constant wariness and circumspection. Martino
Carnatio is by general suffrages reputed for the place, legally chosen and
solemnly settled therein; and conducted to Spolato by the Galleys of the State,
where he began his residence, and we meet with no further mention of him.

Soon after the Duke of Venice comes to give Bondi a visit, bringing along
with him a Surgeon, whose skill as it was diffused over all sores, so his
masterpiece was in being an expert oculist. Indeed the eye is a small volume,
but many the leaves (I mean the tunicles) thereof, and much written therein,
the eye alone being subject to more distempers and diseases, then any other
part of the Body, so many and so small the contrivances therein, and no wonder
if little Watches be quickly out of order.

This Oculist (being indeed one of more fame then skill, of more skill then
honesty) at the Dukes desire made an accurate inspection on Bondi's eyes, and
pretended that he discovered in both of them a little speck hindering the sight
thereof* which with a small Instrument, might easily be cut out, with very
little pain: and here he scattered a multitude of hard and long Latin words,
which would serve for the titles of the Gally-pots of an Apothecaries shop,
which much amused his hearers therewith: I spare the pains to relate them,
because questioning the readers skill in understanding thereof, the rather
because I question the Oculist whether he understood himself in them.

Bondi was now put to it, fearing some violence should be offered to his eyes,
where a touch is a wound, such the tenderness thereof, he thanks the
Surgeon much, and the Duke more, for their care and kindness unto him, but
is resolved patiently to bear the affliction laid upon him, which he confesses
himself did justly deserve for his pride and ambition, he hoped his soul should
be the better for the blindness of his body, and in no case would consent that
any experiment should be tried on him for his recovery.

Here the Duke interposed his power and flat command, Signior Bondi said he,
you are not so in your own full and free dispose, but you may and must be
overruled by others for your own good; we take notice of that worth in you
which your modesty will not own in your self, and therefore will not lose the
benefit of so useful a patriot; you are a self murderer, if refusing those
lawful means whereby Art may befriend Nature, against your infirmity: As your
friend therefore I desire you, as your Prince I command you, as both I enjoyne
you without further dispute, to submit your self to this Artist, not doubting
but that his learned endeavors, will be crowned with welcome success.

Wit works in extremity, now or never Bondi play thy prizes, with a composed
countenance he returns.

My Lord, I am ready with all thankfulness to embrace your counsel, and much
admire the extensivenesse of your goodness, and largnesse of your spirit, that
amidst the multiplicity of your State-imployments, your ability is such, and
your goodness so great, as you will reflect on so inconsiderable a thing as my
self: But give me leave to acquaint your grace, I have lately made a vow to my
particular Saint, whose aid I have implored (and whose name for some reasons I
crave leave as yet to conceal) and have received some assurance from him in a
dream, that shortly I shall be bettered by his goodness. I call it a Dream,
but surely it was not such, wherein Fancy commands in the absence of reason;
but certainly my Lord, such was the impression thereof in my soul, that it
carries with it the presage of somewhat more then ordinary; favor me then
only to expect the issue thereof, and if my dream be but a dream, I shall yield
my self wholly up to be ordered by your graces pleasure, and thankfully accept
what course soever shall be prescribed unto me. Hereat the Duke was contented,
and aftar the exchange of some complements, the company departed.

Next day Bondi calls Feliciano, and sends him to the shrine of Saint Silvester
in Anchona, desring that such as attended thereon, would entrust him with any
parcel of that Saints relics, (and if Beggars might be permitted to be
chusers) with his hair-girdle which he did wear next his skin, giving
commission to Feliciano to be bound to what proportion should be required, or
to procure security in the City for the restitution of the said relics in ten
days, and to send along with it some Priest eminent for his devotion, upon
assured confidence, that the virtue of the relic meeting with his prayer,
should produce some strange effects toward his recovery.

Feliciano is proud of the employment, hoping hereby to ingratiate himself, he
makes all possible speed he can to his journey, but first a Saint of his must
be saluted, and the fair hand of Paduana kissed, which done, he sets forth with
such alacrity, as resolved, that expedition and faithfulness should contend in
him, which of them two should share the greatest part, in performance of
Bondi's commands.

The day after his departure, Mounsier Insuls a Frenchman arrives at Venice,
son and heir to Mounsier Opulent, the rich Merchant of Marsel^es, he had
purchased three French Counts out of their Lands, besides a vast bank of money
in Venice, and els-where: The old men some months since, by letters had
concluded the match, between the two sole children and heirs.

Insuls then comes now, not so much to woe as to wed, Portion and Dowry are
both agreed on, and nothing wanting (save that without which all was nothing)
the affections of Paduana. This Insuls was a Poetical fool, an admirer of his
own rhimes, rather then verses, being but one degree above Ballads.

Yet to give him his due, sometimes he would stumble upon expressions which
might have become a wiser and learneder Man. And although herein he was
generally condemned for a Thief, that he had stolen them from others, (his
memory being better, then his fancy) and than confidently vented them for for
his own; yet others were so charitable, that he wore not the Perriwigg of
other men's wits, but was the true Author of his verses, for he that shoots
often at random, may sometimes unawares hitt the mark, and it is impossible
that in a million of blanks, one prize should not happen at last. Besides who
knows not, that the veriest of fools have not their wise intervalls;
sometimes he would utter himself in convenient language, and quick conceit.

To be brief, it was a great question whether Paduana more perfectly hated
him, or more entirely loved Feliciano; but her Tyrannical Father driving that
affection which he should draw, and forcing what he should persuade, vowed by
Saint Silvester his usual oath, that he would disinherit her of all his
estate, and leave the same tO Georgio Bondi his Nephew, in case she made the
least refusal herein.

In this distress Paduana makes her addresses to Gervatio in this manner.

Gervatio, you cannot but be sensible of reciprocal love, between me and
Feliciano, for though my Father be blind, you enjoy the benefit of your eyes,
nor can we pretend to so much secresy, but that one as your self constantly
with us, will observe smoke in a sigh, and sparkles in an eye which have passed
between us; my humble request to you is (and do not Mistresses command when
they request) that you would invent some way to free me from the torture of
this Clown, fool Insuls, and promote my affections where they are bestowed
and deserved.

Who would worship the setting Sun, when the rising Sun does court him? my
Fathers decaying age carries in it a despair of long life, whilst my tender
years promise a longer continuance; build not therefore but on that foundation
which in probability appears the firmest; however I would not disoblige thee
from my father, make your own ends upon him, gain of him what you can, and I
will confirm it: and over and above I will assure thee (so far as my
condition is capable to give assurance) to gratify your endeavors to a higher
proportion, then you can expect. Is not the house, in the suburbs of Padua,
where I was born, a pretty pile of building? do not forty acres of ground
impartially embrace it on every side? Is not the Oil in Lombardy known to grow
there? Know Gervatio, that all these are thine to the reward of thy fidelity;
besides I conceal something to my self, intending to surprise thee with that,
which in my judgment will be considerable in it self, and worthy of thy
acceptance.

Gervatio hereby is made a perfect Convert, he will hold with Bondi, but run
with Paduana, he will look toward the Father, but will row with the Daughter,
and professed his future fidelity unto her with such oaths and imprecations, as
commanded her belief.

It happened at this time, a sourrilous, scandalous Libell, made in verse, was
cast in the Piazza in Venice, other copies scattered in Saint Marks, and other
public places of the City; herein the Duke and Senate were basely abused, and
some lines, some small wit showed in the close thereof, (as who cannot be
ingenious to abuse) spies are set to apprehend the person, with promises of two
hundred Ducketts for his service.

Gervatio, whose brains now beat about nothing but Paduana's happiness,
accosteth Mounsier Insuls, who ever was inquisitive of news, asking him what
was the tidings of the day: Strange news, says Gervatio, an admirable piece of
Poetry (but a little salt and bitter) is found scattered before the Dukes
Palace, and strange it is, that he who had the wit to make it, had not the
wisdom to affix his name to it.

That is no strange thing (says Insuls) for generally the most witty are the
most modest, how many hundred namelesse copies of mine fly about in France, and
Italy, and others perchance claim the credit thereof, it is a passage wherein
I have taken special contentment, to see the impudency and ignorance of those,
who will father the issues of another man's brain.

Gervatio returned, that some hundred Ducats were promised to the Author, and
he believed that he should be Poet Laureat for the State of Venice, and wishing
that he any way might be isntrumental in discovering the composer thereof: And
Mounsier Insuls give me leave to be plain with you, I have a great suspicion
(but to recall the word, for suspicion is only for things that are bad, and
therefore improper at present) I have a strong surmise that you are the Author
thereof. Insuls laughed with an affected guiltiness, and said nothing.

And Sir, (returned the other,) I know you, and none else could do the same:
First, I compare the style and language is like that wherein last night you
courted my Mistress, always full, but not swelling, sometimes humble, but not
flat, the rhyme good, but not affected, teaching it the true distance thereof,
that it must be the vassal not the Master of the Poet, it is neither Virgils
strain, nor Ovids, but both; it comes off with a spring in the close, and
commonly the two last verses of the Stanza, contains the total sum of the
particulars going before; certainly a vast sum of money would be bestowed on
him who was the composer thereof.

What talkest thou to me of money ( replied Insuls) my Father has the three
best seats in all Provence, Crassus and Cressus were both of them beggars unto
him, I only take up this vein of Poetry for my recreation, and to confute the
common observation, that all Poets are Beggars. I am a rich Poet.

After the exchange of some discourse, Insuls showed himself to brook his
name, and barely confessed himself to be the Author of the Poem, adding
withal, that he had made five hundred better in his days: But seeing no one
drinks alike of Helicon at all times, a constant tenure cannot be expected in
wits: I was says he at the penning thereof, not ascending but declining
Parnassus, and good Gervatio make not conjecture of my parts on such
disadvantages, but that I am able to exceed it on the least occasion: I
confess, Mustard is nothing worth unless it bite; I put in little sharpness
to give it a hogo to the palate of the Men of these times.

Out springs two invisible witness whom Gervatio had planted within the reach
of their words) and presently seize Insuls condemned by his own witness. These
Informers, the necessary evils in a State, were encouraged in Venice by the
greatest politicians, conforming themselves to all companies, having a patent
to be knaves that they might discover f^oles; seeing no wise men, though
dissenting from the present power, will lie at so open a Guard, as to carry
their hearts in their tongues.

Insuls is presently hurried to prison; and it is strange to see the sudden
alteration this accident made upon him: he who at best was but half a man,
was now less considerable then a beast, senceless and stupid, scarce able to
write his condition to his Father, so that had not some Frenchmen by accident
visited him, he had certainly died in prison.

Mounsier Opulent hearing of his sons restraint, posts from France to Venice,
the depth of whose judgment could only fathom profit; he was Sapiens quoad
hoc, wise only in the point of wealth: So that by long living and great
sparing he had accumulated much wealth, but take him out of his own Element of
bargaining, he was so simple, that he seemed the true original of his son, as
his son the true transcript of his Father.

To Venice he comes, and with large gifts buys his sons enlargement: the
truth was, his sons simplenes best befriended him, who upon examination
appeared incapable to be author of the Libell, and in the judgment of all
deserved rather to be whipped for a lier (assuming to himself what was none of
her own) then to have any severer punishment inflicted upon him.

Young Insuls now at liberty backed with his Fathers presence renewes his suite
to Paduana; Jointure, and a good estate are the invincible arguments which
Mellito Bondi cannot resist; he engages so far at the matter, that only
three days respit is allowed to his daugther, in which time she must be Insuls
his wife, or else no heir to her Father.

In this juncture of time home comes Feliciano, bringing with him the Girdle of
St Silvester, antic for the shape and fashion thereof, as having steel
buckles, and a rowell at the end thereof; it was generally believed that this
was used by Silvester in the way of disciplining himself, and Father Adrian
exemplary in that Covent for sanctity was sent along with same, seeing so rich
a treasure was not to be trusted in any lay-hand

A solemn entertainment is made in Mellito's house, and most of the
Magnificoes of the State invited thereunto; but this feast had been ushered
with three foregoing Fasts kept in the family of Bondi and his allies for the
better success, and more effectual working of their intended design. After
dinner Father Adrian mumbles many prayers (it being well if he understood them
himself, as confident that none else did in the room) and then ceremoniously
the Girdle is applied to Mellito, but especially the rowell thereof (wherein
most sacredness was conceived to consist) several times rubbed upon his eyes
to so good purpose, that within three hours he so recovered his sight, as to
discern and distinguish the faces of all present.

Some of the beholders began to suspect some fraud in the matter, only on this
account, because the miracle was not instantly done, but successively and by
degrees. Let Drugs, and Herbs, and Minerals, which have a natural virtue
placed in them, proceed softly and slowly to effect cures; whereas miracles
ride Post, and the same moment which begins, does perfect extraordinary
operations: this I say put jealousy in the heads of some present, to doubt the
reality of the cure, and suspect some deceit in the matter.

But they being but few in themselves, were quickly overpowred by the number
and gravity of those on the contrary opinion; for some of them argued, that the
rule is not universally true, that all miracles spring in a moment, seeing some
of them have been of slower growth, and the same pace has not always been
observed in miraculous motions; and seeing the effects conduced much to the
honor of Saint Silvester, every one was suspected for an Infidel, that did
not presently believe: yea to doubt the truth thereof, was to discover a little
Heretic in his bosom that owned the suspicion. Presently Bells and Bonefires
proclaim the cure all over the City; persons flocking from all places to
behold this girdle, the making and fashion whereof, being out of the rode of
common Girdles, caught and kept the fancies of fond people, some admiring at
the matter of it, being they said of a Seal-skine; others at the form, as at
the weight and greatness thereof, being almost as big as one could well lift;
hence some inferred Saint Silvester to be of a Giant-like proportion, above the
standard of other men; others collected the general greatness of men in
former ages, complaining of the decay of nature, and diminution of men in these
days; but the more wiser sort resolved it upon a point of religion, that the
foresaid girdle was worn by way of penance, not so much to strengthen and
adorn, as to lead and mortify the wearer thereof.

As for Bondi in a large oration, he expressed his thankfulness before the
company to his titular St. whose speech is here too large to insert, only this
by the way, to elaborate, not flowing from him freely on the present emergency,
but wrought, studied, and premeditated, which again brought new fuel to their
jealousy, which suspected some fraud, as if this had been composed of purpose,
and conned by heart before hand, and so the scene of the design solemnly laid;
however their budding suspicion was quickly blasted, and beaten down with the
general congratulation of all people, so that now his recovery was universally
believed, so that this miracle gave a super-sedeas to all other discourses in
Italy for a month, and commonly was the third course at all great Tables,
whereon the persons present took their repast.

Next day was the Nuptials of Insuls and Paduana to be solemnized, had not the
seasonable enterposing of Gervatio prevented the matter presently, by his
appointment, in comes two Confidents of Feliciano's, (both disguised in the
habits of Friars) and boldly press into the Parlour, and chambers of Bondi,
looking so scornfully on all accosting them* as if they carried written in
their faces a Patent for their own presumption, and knew themselves to be
empowered with an authority above control. Bondi no sooner recovered himself
out of his amazement which seized him at first, but that he resolutely demanded
of them the cause of their coming, and intrusion at so unseasonable an hour
(it being late at night) They seemed careless to satisfy his demands, as a
thing beneath them, being imploid in matters of higher concernment; and proceed
without any interruption, to draw up an Inventory of the several goods and
utensills in his house.

Imprimis, in double guilt plate 500. ounces. Item, in white plate 1200.
ounces. Item. in etc.

Then command they him without delay, to surrender the keys of his Chests and
Coffers, which the other refused to do, summoning Gervatio, Feliciano, and all
his servants to his assistance, which presently repaired unto him; and though
the two former were privy to the plot, yet they so cunningly concealed it in
their carriage, that no tel-Tale smile, or blab-lock of mirth, betrayed the
least suspicion of their privity thereunto, but composed their faces, with
reduced countenances, speaking much anxiety and suspense, to attend the issue
and event of so strange an accident. Then the elder Friar began, dismiss your
servants presenty, and let them attend in an outward room, it is a favor we
have afforded out of the respect to your place, though not deserved by your
person, that hitherto we have been tender of your reputation (so far as a
crime of this nature was capable thereof) and would not willingly have you
sacrifice the small remains of your credit to ignominy and disgrace; we
honor the silver crown of age on your head, though it deserved to be placed
on better Temples. Bondi is surprised with horror and palsie-strook with fear,
being guilty to himself of deceit, causes the room to be voided of all
company, and meekly and calmly requesteth them to impart unto him his offense,
and their commission.

The other proceeds. Crimes though the same in themselves, are not the same
when committed by several oftendors, but they commence, and take degrees of
heinousness from the circumstances of time, place, and person; a concurrence
of all these have conspired to aggravate and inflame your guilt; you have a
large and plentiful estate, and cannot pretend poverty to your self (that
engine which forces ingenious natures to disingenious actions) prompted you to
so unworthy a practice: the Duke and State have reflected on you in a great
proportion, so that no neglect or discontent received from them could sparre
you forward to so dishonest a design; Charity it self must turn just against
you, and the best rhetoric so far from defending, that it cannot excuse your
offense. What, to counterfeit your self blind, and at the same time to give a
lie both to Heaven, and Earth, abusing both in one act by an offense, that as
former ages will not find an example, so future will scarce afford belief
thereof. But how hard is it to commit one fault, and but one fault, as virtues
are not single Stars, but constellations, so vices straggle not alone, but go
in companies, and grow in clusters: This ground-platform of your dissembling,
must have outward outworks, sconces, and redoubts, to flank, fortify and
defend the same: This mother lie how fruitful has it been in a numerous issue
of Oaths, and perjuries, as if you intended to scale the Throne of justice,
with a series of sin, and draw down revenge on your self: At last to close and
conclude your villainy, you have fathered the same on miraculuos recovery, and
have abused your titulary Saint, by pretending his relics the immediate cause
of your restored sight: but that Saint being rich enough in himself in real
miracles, disdaineth the addition of your sophisticated actions, and will not
be dishonored with false honor, which you hypocritically have fastened upon
him; yet in detestation of your dissimulation, and to manifest how zealously he
disavowethth all falsehood, and forgery, he has been heard at several times in
the night in his shrine with a shrill voice to make discovery of your falsehood;
and now we expect to obtain from his Holiness, and this State, a confiscation
of your goods, in order whereunto we are employed by our superiors to take an
exact list and account of your estate, both in Lands and movables, till we
shall be further informed how the same shall be disposed of.

Bondi looked as pale as ashes, having scarce life enough left to act his limbs
with motion, his guilty conscience was not at leisure to enquire into the
particulars, but took all for granted, and now expected nothing less but loss
of goods, and perpetual imprisonment: For that night the Friars are contented
to repose themselves, and defer the rest of their work till the next morning.

Mean time Bondi and Gervatio passed a sleeplesse night, and it would swell a
volume, to inventory the particulars of their discourse.

Bondi sometimes is silent, and his tears drown his tongue, Gervatio desires to
make his countenance to attend his Masters in all motions, first reads and
writes in his face sorrow and silence alternatly, as directed by his pattern:
At last Bondi breaks forth into the following expressions.

Listen faithful Gervatio to the Testament of thy dying Master, for I am
resolved not to outlive the funeral of my own credit, and estate; I behold my
self only as a shadow, stripped out of all estate, whereof already I have made
the forfeiture, yet it grieveth me not for my self, whose decayed age has
rendered me incapable of much worldly pleasure; it is not considerable with a
solvable man who has it by him to pay a due debt, which will be required a
month or two before the exact date wherein it is due: I behold long life as the
playing out of a desperate game at Tables lost, at the sirsi remove only, it
grieveth me for my daughter Paduana, whose youth might entitle her to much
happiness, and her virtues deserve no less, poor heart, she must now become
the scorn and shame of the City, and as an overgrown flower, wither on the
stalk whereon she grew, for want of a hand to gather a Husband to marry her.

G^rvatio rejoyned, I am utterly unable to give Physic to your other maladies,
but possibly may apply a remedy to this, if servants may take the boldness to
teach their Masters, and to reprove them too, wherein they conceive them
faulty: refuse not an humble reprehension from him, whose good intention and
heart may make out what is wanting in his tongue and expression; I concieve all
this misfortune justly befallen you, for undervaluing the merits of Feliciano,
and crossing the affections of your duaghter; true it is, his wealth is not
considerable, but his extraction, education, abilities, and accomplishment,
does recompense all his other defects, besides, what loving Parent would stop
the affections of his daughter in the full speed and carreere thereof; except
she had be stowed them so unworthily, as to intaile shame and disgrace on his
Family: Now Sir make a virtue of necessity, and before the matter be publicly
known of the confiscation of your fortunes; comply with her affections, and
please him in seeing the marriage between them consummated: you may also by my
hands derive unto your daughter so much of your invisible estate, as is
contrivable in a small room, and may escape the hands of these Harpies: It will
be safe in all tempests to have a secure place for anchorage, nor can you have
any assurance of a better, then with your dear and dutiful daughter. For
suppose (and would it were but a suppsition, for the case is too plain and
pitiful) that all your estate become a prey to their hands, who never let go
what once they lay hold upon: Yet I presume your wealth will be a ransom for
your life and liberty, and that you may be permitted freely to breath the
Venetian air, the short remainder of your days.

Bondi consented to all, as no wonder, for grief had so mollified his heart, it
was capable of any impression which bare with it the least probability of
comfort, and as a sinking man, made an Oak of an Osier, caught at any thing to
support him from present sinking: The Priest was sent for that night, and
though the hour was uncanonicall for marriage (long after sunset) yet the sun
of golden chicqueenes will make the other sun rise at pleasure; and Feliciano
with a largess to the Priest, bought off all irregularity.

Then Gervatio took the boldness to make another motion. Sir, I humbly
conceive that as yet you are not legally convicted, and that there is still
inherent in you a power to make over your estate, for the world as yet takes
notice of these clandestine transactions, you are innocent till such time as
you are made to be otherwise by public conviction; I confess my self as
un-skild in any science as ignorant in Law; but Law being founded upon reason,
me thinks I speak proportionable thereunto besid^, my former Master was a chief
Advcoate, and if my memory, or misapplication thereof fail not, such fragments
of his co^nsell still remain in my brains, which he often gave to guilty
persons in this case, before their public condemnation.

Gervatio's counsel passed for Oracles with Bondi, who in this ecstasy of
fear suspected all his own actions, and relied on any ma^s advice, who would
favor him so far as to bestow it on one so despicable and forlorn as he
conceived himself to be; A Notary is sent for to make a deed of gift of his
estate as fast and firm as his skill would give him leave, and now the same is
settled on Feliciano.

Feliciano next morning repaires to the two pretended Friars, bringing Bondi
along with him, and desires to know, whether or no it were possible to sopite
and suppress the infamy of this Action, and to buy off the slander with a
round sum of money instantly deposited. The Friars confessed the fault great;
but because their Covent had been formerly beholding to the bounty of Bondi,
and because they beheld the fact as of humane frailty and infirmity, to which
all men are subject, it was hitherto their desire and design to conceal the
same, so that their Prior and subprior excepted, none beside themselves were
privy thereunto, who gave their attendance when the foresaid voice made the
discovery: they would, therefore endeavor their utmost, and nothing should be
wanting in them to stop the further proceedings thereof, and doubted not but
their pains would take the desired effect, which accordingly in few days was
performed.

A Banquet is made, to which many of the Venetian Magnificoes were invited, but
Mounsier Opulent and Mounsier Insuls his son, because strangers, were by the
courtesy of Italy preferred to have a prime place among them. There leave we
them feasting themselves with such variety of dainties, that the appetite of
many stood long time neuter, not knowing where to fix it self, courted with
equality of variety.

As for Paduana, it is pity to disturb her any more with our tedious
discourse, leaving her in the embraces of her dear and virtuous Feliciano,
whose name as it has in it some tincture of happiness, so took it not its
true effect till this time, who now was possessed of a large and rich estate.
And Bondi, who formerly starved in wealth through the narrowness of his heart,
fed better a Boarder then a houskeeper, having a son and daughter to provide
plentifully for him, what his covetousness denied to himself, who formerly
possessed, but now began to enjoy his estate. Let Insuls then return into France
and court the Madams there, whilst Paduana rejoices in her choice, and is so
far from measuring her promises to Gervatio with a restrictive hand, that she
out-did his expectations.

FINIS.
TRIANA AND SABINA.
IN the City of Barcellona in Spain, lived a civil Lawyer of great repute,
with a name, fitting his profession, Don Facundo Osorio, whose Office was
parallel to a City Recorder in England. He had a wife whom he highly affected,
and well might she have merited the same, had the Jewel answered the Casket,
and her conditions bore proportion to the rest of her corporal perfections;
but there being some disparity in their ages, (earth rather then heaven making
the marriage between them for wordly respects) her gree^ youth answered not his
gray hairs with a suitable return of affection.

The truth was, she was rather cunning then chaste, and the same was discovered
by the friends of her husband, whereof some took the boldness to advertise
him, that hereafter he might order her with a stricter hand. But I know not by
what fate it comes to pass, that oftentimes their ears and eyes who have
least cause are open to jealousy, whilst those are shut thereunto who have
just cause to enter came it: His friends reap nothing but frowns for their
faithful counsel, Facundo will not believe his wife was otherwise then she
should be, measuring her honesty by his own; yet some score this his good
opinion rather on his policy then charity, knowing what he would not
acknowledge, left it should be a disparagement to his reputation; he saw, but
was pleased to wink at his wifes miscarriages; and because he made the match
against the advice of his friends, of his own wilful inclination, he would
maintain the ground work, and own no error therein, left thereby he should
bring his own discretion into question.

One principal friend Vejeto, had his house looking into the garden of Don
Nicholayo, a great Lord of that City, who bare unto him no goodwill, because
his window hindered his privacy, and was able to tell tales of such passages
which he would have transacted in darkness, without any witness. He informs
Facundo that he had seen some gestures more bold then civil between the Lord
and his wife, but Facundo still persists in his infidelity, and either believes
his wife to be honest, or else acts the belief thereof so lively, that none
could perceive in him, the least suspicion of her loyalty.

Sabina, Facundo's wife, falls now seemingly sick, and personateth a dying
woman to the life; her old Nurse who conveyed intelligence between her and the
Lord, had instructed her for her behavior in a design; strange it is how she
dissembled herein: so that had Esculapius himself beheld her (provided he
neither felt her pulse, nor consulted with her urine) he might have mistook
this his patient to be sick; indeed her husband plies her with Physicians and
Physic, all to no purpose, her malady rather increasing, and the fire of her
distemper growing the hotter for those cooling jewlips which were tendered unto
her.

Don Nicholayo repaires unto her to give her a visit, many good counsels he
lavisheth upon her in a long and tedious discourse, and the more tedious,
because her husband was in the presence, and they two not alone by themselves;
but at last he recommendeth unto her a noted Mountebank, who had commenced
Doctor in the mouths of the vulgar, and had gained to himself much esteem,
for several palliated cures performed by him; avowing, that if she ever
expected health, that, must be the happy hand to reach it unto her.

This Quacksalver had reaped the credit of many learned men's labors, and leapt
into esteem by the advantage of their endeavors; for when by their learned
receipts, some able Physicians in Barcelona had brought their patients to the
point of amendment, and reduced their diseases to terms of easy composition,
this fellow would interpose, and insinuating himself into the sick men's
acquaintance, would prescribe unto them some of his own medicines, more
remarkable for their hard and strange names, then any other virtue therein:
thus carried he away the credit of many cures, and was cried up by the
credulous people for eminency in his art; and although the Spaniards generally
are admirers of themselves, and sleighters of strangers, yet this Mountebank
being an Italian by nation, had gained among them a great reputation, beholding
therein, not so much to his own learning, as the others ignorance.

Seignior Giovanni was his name, who is presently sent for, he comes, views his
patient, and after some short discourse, affirms her disease mortal, except
one herb could be procured for her, which grew but in one place of Italy, and
must be ceremoniously gathered by his and her hand, which bare the truest or
deepest affection to the sick body.

Don Facundo her husband desires the Mountebank to enlarge himself, concerning
the name and nature of the foresaid herb, protesting he would expend the half
of his Estate for his wifes whole recovery.

The other putting on the vizard of a starcht countenance by pretended gravity,
to procure the greater respect to himself, and credit to his words, proceeds
as follows.

Many men are infected with this singular error, that they will believe no
virtue in drugs, further then they themselves are able to render the reason
thereof: whereas nature is rich in many secret qualities, which produce occult
effects, the herb Lunaria may be an instance, which is the greatest pick-lock
in the world, for let it be gathered on Midsummer eve, just at one of the
clock, by one looking south-eastward, and some other essential circumstances
locked up in the breasts of artists, it will make any Iron bolt to fly open. The
herb Stellaria comes not short thereof in virtue, as useful for those
diseases which proceed from hott and dry causes; this grows but in one part
of Italy, some leagues from Lucca, and I can give infallible directions for the
finding thereof: If therefore the Gentlewoman (feigning himself ignorant that
she had a husband) had any confiding friend, which will follow my signature, in
finding and gathering the same (right just at this instant of the year) this,
and this alone will restore her to her former health, and I will pawn my
credit on the same.

Know by the way, that this Mountebank was secretly bribed by Don Nicolayo, by
this design to put her husband to run on one of these two rocks, either to be
censured for want of true affection to his wife, if denying to do any thing in
order to her recovery, or else with great hazard to undertake a long and tedious
voyage by Sea and Land, to seek for a new nothing, whilst his wife all the
while intended to prostitute her self to the amorous embraces of this Lord,
who had made a mine in her heart, and had supplanted her husband in her
affections.

Facundo, that he might be exemplary to all husbands, and that her kindred who
were many and rich, might the more favorably reflect upon him, from whom he
had a fair expectancy of a further fortune, willingly undertakes the voyage,
desiring to be furnished with perfect instructions from Giovanni, for the
finding of the herb, who delivers him a parchment becharactered with barbarous
figures (Nets first to raise, and then to catch the fancy of fools) and some
other informations, which should be as so many signs and tokens, whereby he
should make the hue and cry to attach and apprehend that guilty herb, which
having so much worth and virtue in it self, would rather peevishly wither in a
private cave, then spend it self for the public good.

Facundo was some miles forward on his journey, when Vejeto his former friend
privately posted after him, and persuaded him to return, for he had urged such
unanswerable arguments, and infallible demonstrations drawn from what he
himself had seen out of his own window, that at last he prevailed on the
belief of Facundo, that all was not fair between his wife and Nicolayo; indeed
when many scattered circumstances were carefully put together, and seriously
perused, there needed no Oedipus to read this riddle, which did interpret it
self; that Facundo must be sent a Pilgrimage into Italy, to the shrine of an
unknown herb (the man in the Moon having eaten Stella^ia long before) that so
in the vacancy of his Bed, the other might be made the incumbent thereof.

At last Vej^to advises Facundo to return home in a disguise, and pretend
himself to be a Brother of his, long since employed in the Low Country wars,
and now at last laden with wounds and wants, returned to bequeath his aged
body to his native Country. Facundo consents, hoping by the well management of
this project, either to prevent, or else to discover his wifes unfaithfulness.

Now whilst Vejeto is accommodating his friend Facundo, with all necessaries
(the badges of an old Soldier) all essentialls thereunto could not be so
conveniently procured, but that Infido, Vejeto's servant was employed in
completing his provisions: a crafty fellow, who could steal light from a small
cranny, and light a candle at a little spark, knowing how thriftily to improve
a small discovery to the grea^est advantage. Don Nicholayo paid a yearly
pension to this Infido, to furnish him with intelligence against his Master,
who now revealed all the design unto him, for which he received a considerable
reward, and Sabina is thoroughly instructed to behave her self in the
prosecution of the matter.

Facundo comes to his own house, metamorphosed to a Reformac^o, his clothes
having so ma^y rents in them, as presumed to cover more wounds under them; a
sword by his side which had contracted rust, since the last truce; knocking at
the door, his wife sends forth a lamentable shreek, to evidence the continuance
of her sickness not dissembled, and Facundo (a man of more eloquence then
valor) begins to quake, and condemns his own return; but now he was engaged so
far, past hope of retreating, that he must either march forward with
confidence, or return with shame: being entered into the house, where he
acquaints the servant that he was Strenuo the Brother of Facundo, and is
conducted by his wifes command to her Bedside.

I understand (said she) by my Maid, that you are my Brother Strenuo, whom fame
long since had reported dead, but we will pardon her that good lie which is
better then a truth: I am heartily sorry at your brothers absence, and more,
that my indisposition is the cause thereof; never was poor woman more rich in
the affections of a loving husband, though hitherto I have lived his wife, I
shall hereafter demean my self as his servant, to deserve some part of his
pains in my behalf: no dangers at Land, no tempests at Sea, have deterred him
from undertaking a long journey into Italy, thence to fetch necessaries for my
recovery; but assure your self and here she gave so great a groan, as brake
off the entireness of her discourse, till after the taking of a Cordial, she
began again.

Pardon good brother my unmannerlinesse in my abrupt discourse, sickness
carries with it its own dispensatory for such incivilities, I have almost
forgotten what I said last, but shall never forget the lasting love of my
husband unto me, nor have I any better way to express my affection in his
absence, then by using you with all the respect my present condition can
afford: you are too noble to measure your welcome by your entertainment, and
know full well servants will not be found, where the Mistress is sick; if they
fail of my desire, their duty, or your deserts, in their attendance on you, it
is in your power either to pardon or punish them, to whose sole disposal I
commit the family and command the keys of all the rooms to be tendered unto
you; and now indeed Sir, the more I look on you, the more I like you, the more
I love you: your mother never wronged your father I dare boldly affirm, so like
you are in stature and complexion unto my husband, that were it not for the
difference of your hablt, I should believe you to be the same.

Alas Sister (said he) I am two years older then your husband by age, ten years
by infirmity: read the difference between a gown-man and a sword-man, your
husband sat wrapped in his furrs in his study, I exposed to wind and weather in
the field, he has heard the braules at the bar, I have born the brunts in
the fight; how often lay I perdue in the three years siege of Ostend? how many
ounces of blood lost I at the fight at Newport? On my faith I am not able to
count them: no wonder then if my face be pinkt, where my Brothers is plain, and
if mine be furrowed with age, where his lies smooth and whole: howsoever I
confess there were formerly great resemblances in our features, the ruins
whereof are not so wholly defaced, but that some still remain.

Night came on, his entertainment was hearty, his chamber fully furnished with
nightly accommodations, and nothing out of order therein save himself
desperately pensive at his return, accurses Vejeto with causeless suspicion,
and condemns his own credulity, he railes in his thoughts at the color of
yellow, which never was admitted into the Rainbow, as too earthly and base a
dye, and verily believes, men create causlesse fears to themselves, undeserved
by their wives; nor can he sleep being troubled with his own unworthiness, to
wrong so chaste, s;o spotless so virtuous a wife, with his undeserved suspicion.

Next day Don Nicholayo, comes on a civil visit to Sabina, brings with him a
Spanish Colonel, who had long been an officer in the low country wars, and
sometimes under-Governour of Dunkirk therein; he hearing of Don Strenuo's
coming out of the country, desires to converse with him, requesting him to give
the character of the present state of the Infanta's Court at Bruxels: I desire
also says the Collonell, to rub over and renew my old Dutch language, whereof
I have made no use these last seven years, and am afraid I have partly
forgotten it, and thereupon he enters upon a large Dutch discourse, though
Facundo was so far from answering, that he understood not one word thereof.

Facundo answered in his own tongue. Don Olanzo (for that I understand is your
name) you must excuse me for making any return in the Dutch tongue, whereof I
will give you this particular account: When first I entered into those wars, I
made a solemn vow with my self never to learn or speak a word of that
language, for I conceive it a degrading of my tongue to bow to their low
expressions, and I admire that any Spaniard will offer to dishonor himself by
condescending thereunto; Conquerors ought to impose a language on a country
and not to receive it thence: the valiant Romans never learnt the Gauls
tongue, or the punick language, this consideration hardened me in my resolution,
that my tongue should be dumb in Dutch, a tongue wherein there is such
confluence of consonants, so long, so hard, and so harsh, that it seenreth to
me rather made for conjuring then converse, and fitter for Devils then men to
discourse therein.

Don Olanzo civilly declined more Dutch, and proceeded in his own tongue to
sift Facundo, desiring him to proceed in the present character of the country.

For Ostend says Facundo, the only matter of moment, the siege still
continues, we have built three half Moons, and a Redoubt, between the
windmill and the Key, but the trench from Saint Dominicks to the counter gate
is not yet perfected; the English out of the town exercises us with daily
sallies, and behave themselves very valiantly, the worst can be said of them
they are our enemies: Meat begins to fail them much, and Munition, as we
are credibly informed by the fugitives which daily repair to us out of the
Town; the Count of Aremberg is daily expected with a recruit of two thousand
foot, the Pioneeres out of Luckland are daily expected, and then have at a new
mine for the Castle, when all our forces are completed, we shall put it to a
desperate assault.

Don Olanzo not contented with these general heads, wherewith a man might
furnish himself out of the weekly news-bookes, began to press him to the
particular description of some places in Brabent, and Flanders. Now though
Facundo was well book-learned, so far as Mapps could instruct him, yet was it
impossible that they could inform him in all particulars of places and
buildings: Facundo begins to faulter, the other prosecuted him with the cruelty
of a prevailing coward, and at length breaking into some Choler and passion,
caught hold of his beard, which having no better title to his face then glue
could afford it, presently fell off, and discovered him to be what he was.

Sabina all this while lay in her bed listening to their discourse, which
sometimes she disturbs with her groans and sighs, but now her husbands deceit
being laid open, Facundo laden with grief and guiltiness, falls down on his
knees, and craves pardon of his wife.

Strange it is to see how poor spirits descend beneath themselves? but upon his
submission and acknowledgment of his fault, a pardon is signed and sealed unto
him, upon condition he should reassume his journey, which next day with all
possible speed he undertook, and we leave him making what speed he might to the
place for which he was bound.

The next day Sabina falls truly and really sick, it is ill jesting with
edg-tooles, that which we play with in sport, may wound us in earnest: Don
Nicholayo repaires unto her, with full intent to enjoy his pleasure, and that
nothing but his own moderation should set bounds thereunto, when he meets with
an unexpected repulse, Sabina complaining of the intolerable torture, which
disposed her rather for a Coffin then amarous embraces.

I confess, says Don Nicholayo, were I not privy unto this dissembling, yea
the prime procurer and contriver thereof, I should my self verily believe thee
really sick: O how far your sex transcend ours in dissimulation? we do it so
dully, so improperly, that we are liable to discovery, you exceed your selves
in what you please.

But Sir, returns Sabina, mistake me not (I cannot say by the faith of a
loyal wife, having to my shame and grief, forfeited that title) but by
whatever can be true and dear unto me, I vow and protest my self so sick, that
nature scarce affords me ability to express my own sickness.

You will always be a woman, says Nicholayo, who generally over do or
under-do what they undertake, hardly hitting on a mean, whose souls are either
empty or overflow; it is high time now to put off your vizard, and be what you
are: And with that he offered a familiar violence unto her, as supposing she
expected some acceptable force, to be seemingly pressed to what she desired.

Content your self said Sabina, or my shreeches shall given an Alarm to the
Family: Know Sir, I never loved you so much, as now I loath your looks, and
detest the sight of you, too much to my shame and grief has formerly passed
between us, but now I am resolved not to proceed in that vicious course, but
as much as penitency can make a harlot honest, to unstaine my soul from my
former offenses; my time is short, depart the room, and prevent my sending you
away.

Don Nicholayo stands amazed, who could expect that the wind could blow at
such a point of the compass? a cold wind indeed to nip the heat of his lust;
yet he sees no remedy but to comply with the present occasion, and goes home
with a soul divided between grief, anger and wonder, though the latter may
seem to claim the greatest share in him at so strange and unexpected an
accident. Sabina presently dispatcheth a Servant to overtake her husband,
requesting him by all Loves to return with all possible speed, for she had
some important secrets to unbosome to him, nor could quietly depart this world
before the imparting thereof unto him.

Facundo fears some fraud in the matter, refuses to return: Indeed the
servant accosted him with his Message in that very minut wherein he was taking
Ship; the wind serving fair, and most of his goods shipped already. At last the
servant gave such assurance of his Mistresses sickness, and so impotunately
pressed him with those arguments borrowed from her, that Facundo returns that
night home; the room is voided, when Sabina begins with tears in her eyes,
moistening her words as she uttered them.

What term shall I call you by? husband I am ashamed to style you, the mention
whereof wounds my own heart with the memory of my unworthiness; friend is
too familiar a title; Lord and Master too terrible to me, a false deceitful
servant; style your self Sir what you please, I am your wretched vassal, and
want words to express the foulness of my offense against you: I am ashamed to
speak what I blushed not to do, who have lived in a course of inconstancy for
many years with Don Nicholayo: and with my dissembling have put you to much
trouble and pains Pardon is too great for me to ask, but not for you to give.
I confess they that once have bankrupt their own credit, can give no security
for the future, that they will be responsible to such as trust them; however
Sir know, I place more hope of speeding in in my request, in your goodness
then the Equity of my Petition. If life be lent me, which in my own
apprehension (and every one is best sensible of their own condition) is utterly
unlikely, I shall utterly deserve some part of your kindness; Sir, can you not
see through the chinkes of my broken body, my very heart inditing my words
assure your self -- and there she fainted. Servants were called in, and much
ado with Aqua vitae they courted and wooed her soul not to depart her body,
which was so sullen that it would hardly be persuaded to stay, though at last
prevailed upon

Although the Passages between Facundo and Sabina, were transacted with all
possible secrecy; yet could they not be so privately carried, but that some in
the house overhearing it, it crept through the Family, and went thorough the
City of Barcellona, and at last through the whole Province of Catalonia. And
now Vejeto is found a true friend, and begins to flourish, being formerly so
deprest by the greatness of Nicholayo, that he took no comfort in himself, and
had abandoned his City house, and retired into the Country; but now he returns
to B^rcellona again, falls a building and repairing his house, to outface his
neighbor Nicholayo, making the same both larger beneath with Vaults, and
higher above with Magnificent superstructures.

Don Nicholayo enraged in his mind with the discovery which Sabina had made,
and seeing himself slighted in his reputation: and fearing lest the King of
Spain (the Court having gotten intelligence thereof) should disseize him of his
Governors place of Barcellona, which his Ancestors had for three descents
possessed, almost to make the honor hereditary) resolves on a design, which
present passion prompted unto him, and thus he effected it. Facundo was late at
night, drawing up some conveyances for Land (which the City exchanged with the
Crown in the Town house) and the employment was certain to ingrosse him until
the next morning, which was the last day of the term, assigned for the
completing thereof; All Sabinas servants were by her Nurse (that Pandoras to
her former wantonness, and still an active instrument for Don Nicholayo) sent
upon several errands to places of some distance, and she alone left to attend
her Mistress. In springs Nicholayo with two robustuous servants, and with
violence carries away Sabina muffled in carpets (threatening her with present
death, at the least resistance or noise) to the house of Nicholayo: yet had he
now no design of lust upon her, whose revenge had banished his wantonness; And
bringing her into his Hall about midnight, a stone there is taken up and she
tumbled down into a Vault which I know not whether to call a Dungeon or a
Charnell-house (many innocents having formerly been dispatched in the same
place) Nicholayo conceiving that either she would be killed with the fall, or
else starved to death in the place.

Now there was in Barcellona an Abbot of a Church, Jago Domingo preferred to
that place by Nicholayo; rather by the others favor then his deserts; for
guilt had made Patron and Chaplain mutually great together; they being both
often complicated in the same act of baseness, wherein they served each the
turn of the other; they were nailed together with necessary secrecy: so that
what friendship did act in others, fear acted in them, to contribute their
reciprocal assistance in all designs, seeing the lender to day was the
borrower to morrow; These two plot together, and lay the scene of the ensuing
project. At Matten-service when their Covent was singing together in the Abbots
Church, suddenly their harmony was disturbed by an obstreperous voice which
seemed to proceed from a wall above the Quire: the voice spoke horror and
grief, and pain, shreeking out shrill, and then the noise of rattling of
chains and the chinking of Irons were alternately heard. Which indeed was
nothing else but an instructed Novice placed there by the Abbot in a concealed
concavity to play his part, according to his received directions. The Friars
for fear shorten their service and betake themselves to their Cells in
amazement, as utterly ignorant of the fraud; The Abbot his Novice and Don
Nicholayo being only privy thereunto.

Next day, the Friars meeting at Mattens, the same noise was heard again, but
louder then before, with a clashing and gnashing, speaking a mixture of pain
and indignation; the Friars hardly held out their service, wherein wonder so
spoiled their devotion, that as at other times the lay People knew not what
they said; so now for fear they scarce, understood themselves.

The next day was a public Festival, wherein all the Gentry of Barcellona
met there (save Facundo who went not out of his house, being transported with
grief, and amazement; what should be become of his invisible wife,) the spirit
proceeding as formerly in shriekes; an Exorcist was provided, who by the virtue
of holy water and other trinkets took upon him to catechize and examine the
spirit what he was, conjuring it by the power of his spells to answer the
truth, and all the truth at its own peril, if concealing any part thereof.

I am sorry (said the voice in the wall) the soul of Sabina, justly tormented
in Purgatory, as for my many faults, so chiefly for raising a damnable and
notorious lie on Don Nicholayo, as if he had conversed dishonestly with me. I
had been burried to a worse place, as having nothing to plead in my mine own
behalf; but that I alleged that this scandal was never raised by my own
invention, but put into my mouth by Vejetto, and he the Parent, she only the
Nurse thereof. And here I am condemned to intolerable torment without al
possibility of release, until first some signal punishment be laid on
Vejetto; it being the method of this Court, that the accessory cannot be
released, until the principal first be punished. I am also enjoined to make
public confession of my fault, and to request Don Nicholayo freely to forgive
me, without which my enlargement cannot be procured. And therefore I humbly
request this Covent for sanctity most highly prized, to join with me in my
Petition; that that honorable and worthy Lord would be pleased freely to remit
my fault herein; I am also to desire you to entreat my husband Facundo that he
would be pleased to confer on this Covent his Vineyard, lying on the East side
of the City between the gate and the River Riodulce, that so by the daily
intercession of their suffrages, I may be freed from my torture.

The Exorcist pressed this she Spirit to more particulars, as to know whether
her husband Facundo did not concur with Vejetto to advance the defamation.

The Spirit answered, that never woman was happier in a better husband, and
that she would not add to her fault and pains to belie him, he was utterly
ignorant thereof, and had ever retained a true opinion of her faithfulness,
had not Vejettoes malice rooted it out, with constant and causeless suggestions.

The Exorcist proceeded to demand what was become of her body, seeing the
report had filled the City that it was no where to be found, and a suspicion
was raised, that her husband or her servants were guilty of conveying it away,
after they had offered some violence to her person.

Let me not (said she) wilfully heap punishments on my self, I must acquit my
husband as altogether innocent, nor can I charge my servants (all whose prayers
I humbly desire for the assoiling of my soul) for the least wrong offered unto
me, the truth is, an evil spirit violently took me away, both soul and body,
thou my punishment might be exemplary and unusual, as my fault was above the
proportion of common offenders.

The Exorcist demanded of her, whether any other besides Vejetto had with him
joined in that bad advise?

To which she returned that the time allotted for her imprisoned liberty was
now expired, being assigned but three hours for the begging of the votes of
three several days of mankind to help her in her extremity; that now she must
return as Prisoner, carrying fetters about her to the place of her restraint;
never more to appear or be heard more in this world* and with that giving a
hideous screek, and rattling her fetters, she took a sad farewell of the place,
leaving all that heard it to admiration.

It is strange to conceive how the female sex of Barcellona were affected
hereat; all conclude that Facundo was bound in honor and conscience, to
satisfy her request. And some of her kindred brought Abbot Jago Domingo unto
his house, to move him in conformity to his wives desire, to settle the
Vineyard on their Covent as a reward of their meritorious prayers for his wives
enlargement.

Long had the Abbot cast a covetous eye upon this Vineyard as a little
Paradise; for the pleasure and situation thereof; it might for the distance
from Barcellona be termed the City in the Country, or the Country in the City.
It lay on the side of a Hill which new it own distance to ascend above the
level, yet was not overproud to aspire to a barren height. It beheld the
rising Sun which is apprehended the most cordial, when the Virgin beams
thereof, uninfected with the vapors of the Earth, first enters on our
hemispheare. A wood was in the middle thereof, whereon Facundo had bestowed
much cost, making may Labyrinths and artificial mazes: An Aviary also he made
therein stocking it with Birds from all Countries, So that some thought
(abating only the Phoenix) that the whole kind of Birds, if decayed, might
have been recruited hence. A Rivolet, called Riodulca, slided through the midst
thereof, and seemed to pleased with the same, that loath to depart from so
delicious a place, it purposely lengthned its own journey, by fetching ^any
needless (...), bendings, and windings therein, as if it intended to show that
water could be more wanton then the wood under which it was pussed; A
banqueting house also was made in the middle thereof, with a Fountain and
Statues of Marble; where stones were taught to speak by water works brought by
a device into them.

True it is, many questioned the discretion of Fac^ndo in expending so much
cost on that which severer folk accounted but a chargeable toy, paying many
pieces of eight for every pint of wine that grew therein; others excused him,
that being childlesse, and having a plentiful estate, this was not only
harmless, but a useful evacuation of his wealth; many poor people being used
in the making, as also in the keeping of this Vineyard. But that which most
pleaded for his expensivenesse herein and justly indeered him to the place, and
the place to him, was, that it had been in the name of the Osorio's three
hundred years and upwards; and he had an Evidence in his house not exceeding a
span of Parchment in length, and three inches in breadth (so concise was
Antiquity in conveying of lands) wherein John King of Castile bestowed this
Land on Andrea Osorio for defending the high Tower in Barcellona once against
the French, and twice against the Moors. Pardon Facundo therefore if he loved
this place, or was found thereon, seeing doting on it, (the premises
considered) was excusable; desiring to trasmit this Land to his Brothers Son
whom he intended his heir.

Oh what a brave sweet place would this make for Abot Jago, his Covent did ever
micebite bad cheese, or were ever Friars such fools as to affect base or barren
ground: they will be assured of profit or pleasure, or both, wheresoever they
fix themselves. The Abbot is earnestly set on this place, and will either be
possessed thereof, or else the soul of Facundo's wife should be left tormented
in the place where it was.

Her Kindred assault Facundo with much importunity to estate this Land on the
Covent, which he utterly refused to do; not denying to disburse a competent sum
of money: but pardon him if he will not part with his inheritance; But this or
nothing else will please Iago, so that they parted in some discontent; yet
Sabinaes friends despair not, but in process of time to mould him to the
Abbots desire.

Mean time it would make any honest heart to grieve, though nothing related
unto him, either in Kindred or Country, to see the harsh usage of Vejeto how
he was hurried to the Jaile in most ignominious manner: scarce any in the City
so young or so old, but would adventure to behold so vicious, so wicked a
slanderer (for so he was believed to be) brought to punishment, though his
imprisonment was conceived but a preface and preamble to a greater penalty (if
escaping with death) which would be imposed upon him; Vejeto made all the
beholders to wonder, who did read in his face so much spirit and liveliness,
as if he triumphed in his sufferings, and rather pitied others then himself in
this his condition, yea, his eyes and cheeks had as well mocks as smiles in
them; which made the beholders to conceive, that besides his own innocence he
had some further security, not only to acquit himself, but that his Enemies
should come off with shame and disgrace which made the Jailer to demean himself
unto him with the better respect.

Within three days the Visitor General of the Order was to come to the
Covent, and there in all pomp and solemnity to hear the whole Narration of the
matter.

Now let us look a little backward, to acquaint you with the true cause of
Vejeto his mirth in these troubles, who indeed had sufficient ground thereof. We
formerly told how Vejeto after his return out of the Country, began to
beautify and enlarge his his house; In sinking a Cellar, he stood by the
workmen, partly to encourage them with his presence, partly to behold the
effects of their discovery, the place being concavous, the ruins of some great
structure, formerly level with the ground, though now sunk some yards beneath
the same. But the general report was that it had been a Castle in the time of
Julius Caesar, when Barcellona was a Roman Colonie, and privileged with
municipall immunities. Vejeto had a great fancy in Roman Coins, and would give
any thing to such as could produce him any variety herein; yet his fancy was
not above his judgment, but he was very critical therein, and had an exact
and true eye to discover between true and counterfeits, Casts, and Originalls;
But oh for a Galba, whose short reign made his Coins the greatest rarity; and
Vejeto had a set of Coins with a continual succession of all the Roman
Emperors, Galba only excepted. The workmen find two or three Coins of
Antoninus, the forerunners as Vejeto hoped and expected of more to ensue; but
these poor souls beheld them as Aesops Cock did the pearl, not knowing how to
value them; when Vejeto conceiving these the Vancurriers of an Army, and the
earnest of a greater payment; though truly not so much out of covetousness as
curiosity, dismissed them that night, the night indeed dismissing them (it
being late enough to leave work) and enjoining them to return next morning.

All his servants being asleep, he alone with his eldest Son Speano, turn
Pioneers to dig somewhat deep, and to sift the rubbish therein. It happens that
pierced a hollow place (and hollewnesse being a great friend to the conveying
of a sound) they hear a strange noise, too big for a Child, too small for a man;
this noise was seconded with some light, but so doubtful and glimmering, that
it conquered darkness but one degree, Vejeto with his son enter the Vault,
(what should innocence be afraid of? The Father was ashamed to betray fear in
the presence of his Son, as having more experience, the Son scorned to bewray
fear in the presence of his Father, having his youthful blood and spirit to
support him; together they both so order the matter, that they went into the
Vault, putting out their candle which led them, and resolved in darkness and
silence to expect the Event of the matter.

Down something tumbled, and presently all light vanished, and they for a time,
set still to concoct with themselves, the rawnesse of so strange an accident.

Presently they hear a groan, such as speak the Soul, neither friend nor foe to
the Body, but such a distance between both, as if willing to depart. Vejeto
enjoines his Son as younger and abler to adventure to bring forth whatever it
was, and up it is carried (not knowing as yet how to style it, Him, or Her.) On
the lighting of a Candle this bulk appears a woman, but much maimed, her right
arm and left leg being broken.

What difference is there between the same Body in health, and in sickness,
between the same clothed and naked, when ornaments of Art are used unto it, or
when it is left to the dressing of nature? Vejeto knows no more hereof then
Woman, and never remembers that he had seen the face before; yet they omit not
what art could do, to restore her to life, which succeeded according to their
desire, she is conveyed to a Bed, and no accommodations are wanting which might
tend to the speeding of her recovery. At last he knows her for Sabina, before
she knew her self; wonder not at her Ignorance, who had passed through so
many worlds, it being a greater wonder that she was alive, then that she did
not know where she was or what was become of her self, no Physic nor surgery
is wanting to restore her to her former health.

True it is, Vejeto would not make use of any out of his own doors, for the
better concealing of the matter, but his own wife Oliva, being excellent above
her sex at such perforformances, indeed she had never read Hippocrates, or
Galen, in Greek; yet was she one who by kitchen Physic did many and cheap
cures to poor people, taking only their thanks, (and that only if they were
willingly pleased to give it for the reward) from Physic she proceeded to
surgery, and was no less successeful therein, this made many to hate her, who
were of that profession; whilst she cared the less for their hatred, as
over-ballanced with the love and respect with others, but the poor especially
did bear unto her.

Sabina is privately concealed here for some days, whilst Vejeto as we have
formerly mentioned was carried to Prison, where Oliva daily visited him, and it
was the general expectation of the people, that forfeiture of his estate was
all the mercy justice could afford him.

And now Abbot Iago is busy in preparing entertainment for Padre Antonio,
Bishop of Lerma, and Visitor General of his order, but especially of this
Covent, in Barcellona, which three hundred years since was founded by a Bishop
of Lerma, leaving to his Successors the hereditary power of inspection over the
same; to add, alter, translate Orders and persons therein, as advised by their
own discretion. Padre Antonio was generally hated by the Friars for his
severity and austerity of life, being over rigorous in the observation of the
conformity thereof, he would not abate them any point, but confined them to
the height of observances: only this preserved his reputation with Religious
men, that he used others no worse then himself, practizing in his own person
what he prescribed in others, leaving an example of abstinence to all the
Country.

No wonder if the Trewants shake when the Schoolmaster comes among them; Abbot
Iago is jealous that some flaw will be found in him, to out him of his place,
being conscious to himself of many Enormities: for though he walked by that
rule, if not chastely, yet cautiously, he managed his matters with all possible
privacie; yet he suspected that Gold smiths would not receive that false Coin
wherewith common people are deluded, and the sharp judgment of Antonio
quickly discover that which was invisible to common eyes; wherefore to mollify
him in his visitation, by two Friars he sent him a present of rich plate to the
value of five hundred Crusadoes. Antonio refuses the acceptance, charging the
Friars to return it, adding withal that it Iago had observed the vow of
poverty, according to his order, he could not have achieved so great an
estate.

Three days after the Visitor comes to Barc^llona on foot, unattended save
with one servant alone; forth rode the Abbot to meet him on his Mule, and most
of their Covent in like manner together with the Officers of their house, and
all Dependents of the same, to the number of sixty persons; These expected to
have met the Visitor in so solemn an Equipage, as had been observed by his
Predecessors, and finding their expectation confused, Iago was much discomposed
thereat, and so disturbed in his mind, that he forgot that premeditated Oration
which he had artificially penned for the Visitors entertainment.

Here Iago proffered the Visitor the conveniencie of his Mule, which he refused,
adding with a stern countenance, that so much pomp and state became not men of
his profession; conducted he was into the Covent, where such a supper was
provided for him, as had made provisions dear in the Town; The Visitor
commanded the poor people to be called thither, on whom he bestowed all the
cheer, betaking himself to some mean Viands which he brought with him, and
thereon took a sparing refection.

Next day the Court was kept, and several misdemeanors were presented unto
him. Don Nicholayo complained to the Visitor of the high offense of Vejeto. For
although the power of the Visitor extended only to the Covent, yet lately he
was impoured with a Commission from the Conclave, to take into consideration
all business in the City, which any way related to the late wonder of the
spirit in the wall, and to proceed against all persons concerned therein, as he
should see cause for the same.

Vejeto is sent for out of prison, and his fault iuflamed to the height by the
Rhetoric of a young Advocate, retained by Don Nicholayo, to set forth the
heinousness of the offense; being demanded what he could say for himself, he
requested that one witness might be produced, and her testimony solemnly
taken, which seemed so equal a motion, that it could not any ways be denied.

Presently he brings forth Sabina by the hand (who stood by but disguised and
concealed) tendering her there to the Visitor, to make a Narration of the whole
story.

The Visitor is for a while so taken up with wonder, that his soul was at
leisure to do nothing else but admire, to see one reported dead and carried
away soul and body, alive and in good health; Facundo standing by, requested
the Visitor to favor him, if he transgressed the gravity of that Court, by
bestowing a salutation on his dear wife; being confident that the strangeness
of the accident would sufficiently plead for his presumption therein. Next day
the Visitor proceeds to censure. First Abbot Iago was expelled his Covent, and
condemned to perpetual imprisonment: it is thought it had cost him his life,
had not some reverence and respect to his order mitigated the censure. The
Novice in the wall as yet was but a probationer, and not entered in the orders;
was condemned to be publicly whipped in the market place of Barcellona, being
all the blood that was shed in this Comicall story. The Exorcist pleaded his
own innocence, as not privy to the cheat, and that he only proceeded according
to the rules of his own Art, whose plea was accepted. Don Nicholayo, because a
person of great honor, highly descended and allied, was remitted by the Visitor
to the Kings disposal, and sent Prisoner to Madrid, where he was ordered to
lose his Office, and fined ten thousand Crusa^oes to the King, and five
thousand Crusadoes to Facundo; Vej^to was deputed to succeed Nicholayo in the
Governors place of Ba^cellona; Facundo something to compensate her patience,
was promoted to be Advocate General of Catalonia. The Nurse of Sabina privy to
the plot pleaded the age of seventy, and under the protection thereof, at
Sabina's humble in treaty was pardoned; Infido a cheating servant of Vejeto,
who had oftentimes betrayed his Master secrets, wsa branded in the face with F.
S. false servant. Facundo and Sabina lived many years together in Love and
Credit, and whereas formerly she was issuelesse, made her husband afterward
happy with a numerous posterity.

FINIS. I S


