

GOOD THOUGHTS In Worse TIMES.

Consisting of
Personal Meditations. Scripture Observations. Meditations on the Times.
Meditations on all kind of Prayers. Occasional Meditations.
By THO. FULLER. B. D.

LONDON, Printed by W. W. for John Williams at the Crown in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1647.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
WHen I read the Description of the Tumult in Ephesus, Acts 9. 32. (wherein
they would have their Diana to be Jure Divino, that it fell down from Jupiter)
it appears to me the too Methodicall caracter of our present confusions. Some
therefore cried one thing, and some another, for the assembly was confused and
the more part knew not wherefore they were come together. O the distractions of
our age? And how many thousand know as little why the sword was drawn, as when
it will be sheathed. Indeed, (thanks be to God) we have no more house burnings
but many heart burnings, and though outward bleeding be stanched, it is to be
feared that the broken vain bleeds inwardswhich is more dangerous.

This being our sad condition, I perceive controversiall writing (sounding
somewhat of Drums and Trumpets,) do but make the wound the wider, Meditations
are like the Ministrel the Prophet called for, to pacify (...) 2 Kings. 3 15.
his minda^liscomposed with passion, which moved me to adventure on this
Treatise, as the most innocent and inoffensive manner of writeing.

I confess a Volumn of another Subject, and larger Size, is expected from me.
But in London I have learnt the difference, betwixt downright breaking, and
craving time of their Creditors. Many sufficient Merchants though not Soluable
from the present make use of the latter, whose example I follow. And though I
cannot pay the Principal, yet I desire such small Treatises may be accepted,
from me as Interest or consideration money, until I shall God willing be enabled
to discharge the whole Debt. (...): 3


If any wonder that this Treatise comes Patron-lesse into the World, let such
know that Dedications begin now adays to grow out of fashion. His Policy was
commended by many, (and proved profitable unto himself) who insted of Select
Godfathers, made all the Congregation Witnesses to his Child, as I invite the
World to this my Book, requesting each one would patronise therein such parts
and passages thereof, as please them, so hoping that by several persons the
whole will be protected.

I have Christian Reader, (so far I dare go, not inquiring into the Syre-name
of thy Side or Sect) nothing more to ^urthen thy Patience with. Only I will
add, that I find our Savior in Turtullian and ancient Latin Fathers,
constantly styled a Seque^er.
Sequestrator in the proper notion of the Word. For God and man being at ods,
the difference was Sequestied or referred into Christ's his hand to end and
umpire it. How it fares with thine estate on earth I know not, but I earnestly
desire, that in heaven both thou and I may ever be under Sequestration in that
Mediator for Gods glory and our good, to whose protection thou art committed By

Thy Brother in all Christian Offices. THO. FULLER.

PERSONAL MEDITATIONS.
I. Curiosity Curbed.
OFTEN have I thought with my self, what Dis^ase I would be best con^ented to
die of. None please me. The Stone, the Cholick terrible, as expected,
intolerable, when felt. The Palsy is death before Death. The Consumption a
flattering Disease, cozening men into Hope of long life at the last gasp. Some
sickness besot, others enrage men, some are too swift, and others too slow.

If I could as easily decline diseases as I could dislike them, I should be
immortal. But away with these thoughts. The Mark must not choose what Arrow
shall be shot against it. What God sends I must receive. May I not be so
curious to know what weapon shall wound me, as careful to provide the Plaster
of Patience against it. Only thus much in general: commonly that sickness
seiseth on men, which they least suspect. He that expects to be drowned with a
Dropsy may be burnt with a Fe^vour, and she that fears to be sw^lne with a
Tympany may be shriveled with a Consumption.

II. Deceived, not hurt.
HEaring a Passing Bell, I prayed that the sick m^n might have through Christ,
a safe Voyage to his long home. Afterward I understood that the party was dead
some hours before; and it seems in some places of London the Tolling of the
Bell, is but a Preface of course to the ringing it out.

Bells better silent then thus telling Lies. What is this but giving a false
alarm to men's Devotions, to make them to be ready armed with their Prayers for
the assistance of such, who have already fought the good sight, yea and gotten
the Conquest? Not to say that men's Charityherein may be suspected of
Superstition in Praying for the Dead.

However my Heart thus powered out, was not spilt on the ground. My prayers too
late to do him good, ^ame soon enough to speak my good will. What I freely
tendered God ^airely took, according to the integrity of my Intention. The
Party I hope is in Abraham's and my prayers I am sure are returned into my
own ^osom.

III. Nor full, nor fasting.
LIving in a Country Uillage where a Burial was a rarity, I never thought of
Death, it was so seldom presented unto me. Coming to London where there is
plenty of Funerals, (so that Coffins crowd oneanother, and corpse in the grave
justle for Elbow room) I slight and neglect death because grown an object so
constant and common.

How foul is my stomach to turn all food into bad humors? Funerals neither
few nor frequent, work effectually upon me. London is a Library of Mortality.
Uolumes of all sorts and sizes, rich, poor, infants, children, youth, men, old
men daily die; I see there is more required to make a good Scholar, then only
the having of many books: Lord be thou my Schoolmaster, and teach me to
number my days that I may apply my heart unto Wisdom.

IIII. Strange and True.
I Read in the Rev. 13. 7.
Revelatation of a Beast, one of whose Heads was as it were wounded to Death. I
expected in the next verse, that the Beast should die, as the most probable
consequence, considering

1. It was not a scratch, but a wound.

2. Not a wound in a fleshly part, or out-limbs of the body, but in the very
head, the Throne of Reason.

3. No light wound, but in outward Apparition, (having no other Probe but St.
John's Eyes to sea^ch it) it seemed deadly.

But mark what immediately follows, and his deadly wound was healed. Who
would have suspected this inference from these premises. But (...) not this the
lively Em^lem of my natural cor^uption? Sometimes I conceive that by Gods
Grace I have conquered and killed, subdued and ^laine, maimed and morti^d the
deeds of the ^sh: never more shall I be molested or bufseted, with such a
bosom sin when, alas! by the next ^eturne, the news is, it is r^vived, and
recovered. Thus Tenches though grievously gashed, p^esently plaster themselves
whole by that ^limie and unctious hu^our they have in them; and thus the
inherent Balsam of Badnesse quickly cures my corruption, not a scarre to be
seen. I perceive I shall never finally kill it, till first I be dead my self.

V. Blushing to be Blushed for.
A Person of great Quality was pleased to lodge a nig^t in my House. I durst
not invite him to my Family Prayer, and therefore for that time omitted it:
thereby making a breach in a good custom and giving Satan advantage to
assault it. Yea the loosening of such a Link, might have endangered the
scattering of the Chain.

Bold Bashfulnesse, which durst offend God, whilst it did fear man.
Especially considering that though my Guest was never so high, yet by the Laws
of Hospitality, I was above him, whilst he was under my Roof. Hereafter
whosoever comes within the Doors, shall be requested to come within the
Discipline of my house; If accepting my homely diet, he will not refuse my
home-devotion; and sitting at my Table, will be entreated to kneel down by it.

VI. Alash for Laziness.
Shameful my sloth, that havedeferred my Night-Prayer, till I am in bed. This
lying along is an improper posture for piety. Indeed there is no contrivance of
our body, but some good man in Scripture has hanseled it with Prayer. The
Publican standing, Job Job. ^8.
^ting, Hezeki^h, lying on his bed, (...) Kings (...).
Eli^h with his face between his l^ggs. But of all gestures give me St. Paul's,
Ephesians 3. 12.
For this cause I bow my knees to the Father of ^y L^ Jesus Christ. Kn^ when
they may, then they must be b^nded

I have read a Copy of a grant of liberty, from Queen Mary to Henry R^ffe
Earl of Sussex, giving him Weavers f^n. Mon. p 635.
leave to wear a Nightcap or Co^ in her Maj^sties presence, counted a great
favor because of his Infirmity. I know in case of necessity, God would
graciously accept my devotion, bound down in a sick dressing; but now whilst
I am in perfect health, it is inexcusable. Christ commanded some to take up
their bed, in token of their full recovery; My laziness may suspect, least
thus my bea^ taking me up, prove a presage of my ensuing sickness. But may God
pardon my Idleness this once, I will not again offend in the same kind, by
his grace hereafter.

VII. Root, Branch, and Fruit.
A Poor man of Sevil in Spain, having a fair and fruitful Peare-tree, one of
the Fathers of the Inquisition desired (such Tyrants requests, are commandes)
some of the fruit thereof. The poor man, not out of gladness to gratify, but
fear to offend, as if it were a sin for him to have better fruit, then his
betters, (suspecting on his denial the Tree might be made his own Rod, if not
his Gallows) plucked up tree, roots and all, and gave it unto him.

Allured with love to God, and advised by my own advantag^, what he was
frighted to do^, I will freely perform. God calls on me to present him with
Math. 3.8.
fruits, meet for repentance. yea let him take all, soul and body, powers, and
parts, faculties, and members of both, I offer a sacrifice unto himself. good
reason, for indeed the Tree was his, before it was mine, and I give him of his
own.

Bes^des it was doubtful, whether the poor (...) ^ateriall Tree, being
removed, would grow (...). Some plants, transplanted (especially when old)
become sullen, and do not enjoy themselves, in a ^oile wherewith they were
^nacquainted. But sure I am when I have given my self to God, the mov^ng of my
soul shall be the ^ending of it, he will dress so (...) and (...) John 15.2.
so prune and purge me, that I shall bring forth ^ost fruit in my Age.

VIII. God speed the Plow.
I Saw in seed-time an Husbandman at Plow, in very raining day, askin^ him the
reason, why h^ would not rather leav^ off, then labor in suc^ foul weather,
his answe^ was returned me in the^ Country Rythme. Sow Beans in the Mud And
they will come up like Wood.

This could not bu^ mind me of Psa. 126. 5, 6.
David expression, They that so^ inteares, shall reap i^ joy. He that goes
fort^ and weepeth, bearing pre^cious seed, shall doubtless^ come again with
rejoyceing, bringing his sheave^ with him.

These last five yeare^ have been a wett and ^oeful Seeds time to me, and many
of my afflicted Brethren. Little hope have we, as yet, to come ^gaine to our
own ^omes; and in a literal sense, now to bring our sheaves, which we see
others daily carry away, on their shoulders. But if we shall not share in the
former, or latter harvest here on Earth, the third and last in Heaven, we hope
undoubtedly ^o receive.

IX. Cras Cras.
GReat was the Abundance and boldne^ of the Frogs in Exodus 8. 3.
Egypt, which went up and came into their Bedchambers, and beds, and
kneadingtroughs, and very Ovens. Strange that those Fenndwellers should
approach the siery Region; But stranger, that Pharaoh should be so back ward
to have them removed, and being demanded of Moses when he would have them sent
away, answered, to Exodus 8. 10.
Morrow He ^uld be content with ^eir company one ^ght, at bed and at board,
^ath belike to acknow^dge either Gods justice (...) sending, or power in
^emanding them, but ^ill hoping that they ca^ally came, and might ^sually
depart.

Leave I any longer to ^onder at Pharaoh, and ^en admire at my self. that are
my sins but (...) many Toades, spit^g of venom and spawn^ng of Poison;
croaking (...) my judgment, cree^ing into my Will, and ^rawling into my
affections, This I see, and suffer and say with Pharaoh, t^ Morrow, to morrow I
w^ amend. Thus as the H^brew Tongue, has n^ proper Present-tense, bu^ two
Future-tenses, so a^ the performances of m^ reformation, are only i^ promises
for the time to come. Grant, Lord, I may seosonably drown this Pharoah-like
procrastination in the Sea of repentance, least it drown me in the Pit of
perdition.

X. Green when Gray.
^N September I saw a tree bearing Roses, ^hilst others of the same ^ind, round
about it, were barren; demanding ^he cause of the Gardi^er, why that Tree was
^n exception from the ^ule of the rest, this reason was rendered, because that
alone being clipped close in May, was then hindered to spring and sprout, and
therefore took this advantage by it self, to bud in Autumn.

Lord, If I were curb'^ and Snip't in my younger years by fear o^ my parents,
from those vicious excrescencies, to which that age wa^ subject, give me to
have a godly jealousy over my heart, suspecting an (...)-Spring, least corrupt
nature, (which without thy r^raining grace will have a Vent) break forth in my
reduced years into youthful vanities.

XI. Miserere.
THere goes a Tradition of Ovid, that fa^ous Poet (receiving ^ome countenance
from ^is own co fession De tristibus lib. 2 Eleg. 10.
) that when his Father was about to beat him, for ^ollowing the plea^ant, ^ut
profitles^e study of ^etrie, he u^ correct^on promiss'd his Father, ^ever more
to make a ^erse, and made a Verse, ^n his very Promise. Pro^ably the same in
sense, ^ut certainly more elegant for composure, the^ this verse with common
credulity has taken up. Parce precor, Genitor, posthac non versisicabo. Father
on me pity take Verses I no more will make.

When I so solemnly promise my Heavenly Father to sin no more. I sin in my
very promise, my weak prayer^ made to procure my pardon, increase my
guiltiness, O the dullness and deadness of my heart therein! I say my prayers
as the Exodus ^2. 11.
Jews eat the ^ssover in haste. And ^hereas in bodily Acti^s motion is the
cause (...) heat; clean contra^, the more speed I make in my prayers the
^older I am in my De^otion.

XII. Monarchy and mercy.
^N reading the Roman, (whilst under Consulls) (...) Belgic History of the
^nited Provinces, I re^ember not any ca^itall offender being ^ondemned, ever
forgiven ^ut always after Sentence, follows execution It seems that the ve^
constitution of a mul^ tude is not so inclina^ to save as to destro^ Such
Rulers in Aristocr^ cies or Popular State^ cannot so properly (...) called
GODS, becau^ though having the gre^ Attributes of a Deity^ Power, and Justice,
the^ want (or will not use then (...) god-like property of GODS, clemen^ to
forgive.

May I dye in that Government, under which was borne, where a M^narch does
comman^ Kings where they se^ ^use, have graciously ^anted pardons, to men
^pointed to death; ^rein the lively Image (...) GOD, to whom belongs (...) and
Dan 9 9.
forgive^sse. And, although I ^ill endeavor so to be^ve my self, as not to
^ed my Sovereigns fa^ur in this kind, yet be^use none can warrant ^s Innocence
in all ^ings, it is co^ fortable ^ing in such a common^ealth, where Pardons
^retofore on occasion ^ve been, and hereaf^ may be procured.

XIII. What helps not hurt
A vain thought are in my heart, insta^ly my corruption ^taines it self to be
(...) Advocate for it, plea^ding that the worst the could be said against (...)
was this, that it was Vain thought.

And is not this the b^ that can be said for (...) Remember O my sou^ the Luke
13 7.
Fig tree was char^ed not with bearing no^ous, but no fruit. Yea^ barren
Fig Tree bare (...) fruit of Annoyance, Cut it down why cumbreth it the
groun^? vain thoughts do this ill in my heart that they do no good

^esides the ^ig-tree Pestered but one part of of the Garden, good Grapes might
grow, at the same time, in other Places of the Vineyard. But seeing my Soul is
so intent on its object, that it cannot attend two things at once, one Tree for
the time being is all my Vineyard. A vain Thought engrosseth all the Ground of
my heart, till that be rooted out, no good meditation can grow with it or by it.

XIIII. Always seen, never minded.
In the most healthful times, two hundred and upwards, was the constant
weekly tribute paid to mortality in London. A Large Bill but it must be
discharged Can one City spend according to this weekly rate, and not be
Bankerupt of People? At least wise must not my short be called for, to make up
the reckoning?

When only seven young men and those chosen, Plut. (...) lives in Thesco.
by Lot, were but yearly taken out of Athens, to be devoured by the monster
Minotaure, the whole City was in a constant fright, children for themselves,
and parents for their children. Yea their escaping of the first, was but an
introduction to the next years Lottery.

Were the dwellers and lodgers in London weekly to cast Lotts, who should make
up this two hundred, how would every one be affrighted? Now none regard it. My
security concludes the aforesaid number, will amount of Infants and old folk.
Few men of middle age and amongst them, surely not my self. But oh! is not
this putting the evil day far from me, the ready way to bring it the nearest
to me? The Lot is weakly drawn (though not by me) for me, I am therefore
concerned seriously to provide, lest that deaths Price, prove my Blanke.

XV. Not whence, but whither.
FInding a bad thought in my heart, I disputed in my self the cause thereof,
whether it proceeded from the Devil, or my own corruption, examining it by
those Signs, Divines in this case recommended.

1. Whether it came in incoherently, or by dependence on some object presented
to my senses.

2. Whether the thought was at full age at the first instant, or infant-like,
grew greater by degrees.

3 Whether out or in the road of my naturall^ inclination.

But has not this Inquiry, more of curiosity then Religion? Hereafter derive
not the Pedigree, but make the mittimus of such Malefactors. Suppose a
confederacy betwixt Thieves without, and false servants within, to assault and
wound the Master of a family: thus wounded, would he discuss, from which of
them, his hurts proceeded, No surely, but speedily send for a Surgeon, before
he bleed to death. I will no more put it to the Question, whence my bad
thoughts come, but whither I shall send them, least this curious controversy
insensibly betray me into a consent unto them.

XVI. Storm, steer on.
THe Mariners sailing with St. Paul, bare up bravely against the Tempest,
whilst either Art or industry could befriend them. Finding both to fail, and
that they could not any loner be are up into the wind, they even let their
Ship drive. I have endeavored Act. 26. 15.
in these distemperate times, to hold up my spirits, and to steer them
steddily. An happy peace here, was the port whereat I desired to arive. Now
alas the Storm grows to s^urdy for the Pilot. Hereafter all the skill I
will use, is no skill at all, but even let my ship sail whither the winds send
it.

Noah's Arc was bound for no other Port, but preservation for the present,
(that She being all the Harbor) not intending to sind land, but to sloat on
water. May my Soul, (though not sailing to the desired Haven) only be kept
from sinking in sorrow.

This comforts me that the most weatherbeaten Vessel cannot properly be
seized on for a Wrack, which has any quick cattle remaining therein. My
spirits are not as yet forfeited to despair, having one lively spark of hope
in my heart, because God is even where he was before.

17. Wit-out-Witted.
IOab chid the man, ( unknown in Scripture by his name, well known for his
wisdom,) for not killing Absalon when he saw him hanged in the Tree,
promising him for his pains, ten shekles and a girdle.

But the man, (having the Kings command to the contrary,) refused his proffer.
Well he knew that politic Stats men would have dangerous designs fetched out
of the fire, but with other men's fingers. His G^rdle promised might in payment,
prove an haltar. Yea he added moreover, that had he killed Absalon, Joab
himself 2 Samuel 18. 13.
would have set himself against him.

Satan daily solicits me to sin, ( point blancke against Gods Word,) baiting
me with profers best pleasing my corruption. If I consent, he who last tempted,
first Rev. 12.10.
accuses me. The fauning Spannnell, turns a fierce Lion and roareth out my
faults in the Ears of Heaven. Grant, Lord, when Satan shall next serve me, as
Joab did the nameless Israelite, I man serve him, as the name less Israelite,
did Joa^ flatly refusing his deceitful Tenders.

XVIII. Hereafter.
DAvid fasted and prayed for his sick Sonn^, that his life might be prolonged.
Put when he was dead, this consideration comforted him. I shall Sam. 2. 12. 23.
go to him, But he shall not return to me.

Peace did long lie languishing in this Land. No small contentment that to my
poor power, I have prayed and preached for the preservation thereof. Seeing
since it is departed this Supports my soul, having little hope that Peace here
should return to me; I have some assurance that I shall go to peace
heareafter.

XIX. Bad at best.
LOrd, how come wicked thoughts to perplex me in my Prayers, when I desire and
endeavor only to attend thy S^rvice? Now I perceive the cau^ thereof. at
other times I have willingly entertained them, and now they entertain
themselves against my will. I acknowledge thy justice, that what formerly I
have invited, now I cannot expel. Give me here after always to bolt out such
ill guestes. The best way to be rid of ^uch bad thoughts in my Prayers is not
to receive them out of my Prayers.

XX. Compendium dispendiune.
POpe Boniface the ^th at the end of each hundred years, (...) a Iubilee at
R^me, wherein people, bringing themselves, and money thither had Pardon for
their sins.

Put Centenary years returned but seldom Popes were old before and ^vetuous
when they came to their place. Few had the happiness to fill their Coffers
with Iubilee-Coyne. Hereupon,

Examen. con. Trident. page 736. Colum. 2.
Clement the sixth reduced it to every fifteenth year. Gregory the eleventh to
every three and thirtieth. Paul the second, and Sixtus the fourth to every
twentieth fifth year.

Yea, an Agitation is reported in the Conclave, to bring down Jubilees to
fifteenth, twelve, or ten years, had not some Cardinals, (whose policy was
above their coveteousnes) opposed it.

I serve my prayers, as they their Jubilees. perchance they may extend to a
quarter of an hour, when powered out at large. But some days I begrutch this
time as too much, and omit the ^reface of my Prayer, with some passages
conceived less material, and ^unne two or three Peti^ions into one, so
contracting them to half a quarter of an Hour.

Not long after, this also seems two long; I decontract and abridge the
Abridgement of my Prayers, Yea, (be it confessed to my shame and sorrow that
hereafter I may amend it) too often I shrink my Prayers to a m^nute, to a
moment, to a Lord have mercy upon me.

SCRIPTURE OBSERVATIONS.
I. Prayer may Preach.
FAther, I thank thee ( said our John 11 41.
Sav our, being ready to ^aise Lazar^s, that thou have hea^d me. And I ^now
that thou he (...) me (...), but because of the People that stand by, I said
it, that they may believe that thou have sent me. It is lawful for Ministers
in their public Prayers to insert passages for the Edifying of their
Auditors, at the same time petitioning God and informing their Hearers. For our
Savior glancing his Eyes at the Peoples instruction, did no whit hinder the
stead fastness of his looks, lifted up to his Father.

When before Sermon I pray for my Sovereign and Master KING of great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Def^nder of the Faith, in all causes, and over all
persons, etc. Some (who omit it themselves) may censure it in me for
superfluous: But never more need to teach men the Kings Title, and their own
^uty, that the simple may be informed, the forgetful remembered thereof, and
that the affectedly Ignorant, who will not take Advice, may have all ^cuse
taken from them. Wherefore in pouring forth my prayers to God, well may I
therein sp^inkle some by-drops for the Instruction of the people.

II. The Vicious Mean.
ZOphar the Naamath^te mentions a sort of men, in whose mouths wickedness
is sweet, Job 20.12.
They hide it under their ton^ue, they spare it, and forsa^e it not, but keep
it still in their mouth. This furnishes me with a Tripartite division of men
in the World.

The first and best are those, who (...) sin out, loathing it in their
judgments, and leaving it in their practice.

The second sort, notoriously wicked, who swa^low sin down, actually and
openly committing it.

The third endeavoring and expedient betwixt Heaven and Hell, neither do nor
deny their lusts; neither spitting them out nor swallowing them down, but
rolling them under their tongues, epicurizing thereon, in their filthy fancies
and obscene speculations.

If God at the last day of judgment has three hands, a right for the Sheep, a
left for the Goats, the middle is mos^ proper for these third sort of men. But
both these latter kinds of sinners shall be confounded together. The rather
because a sin thus rolled, becomes so soft and suple, and the Throat is so
short and slippery a passage, that insensibly it may slide down from the mouth
into the Stomach, and contemplative wantonness quickly turns into practical
uncleanesse.

III. Store no Sore.
Job had a custom to offer burnt offerings according to the number of his
Sons, for Job. 1.5.
he said, It may be that my Sons in their feasting have sinned, and cursed
God in their hearts. It may be, not it must be, he was not certain but
suspected it. But now; what if his Sons had not sinned? was Job's labor
lost, and his Sacrifice of none effect? Oh no! only their property was altered;
In case his Sons were found f^ulty, h^s Sacrifices for them were
propitiatory, and through Christ obtained their pardon: In case they were
innocent his offerings were Eucharisticall, returning thanks to Gods
restraining grace, for keeping his Sons from such sins, which otherwise
they would have committed.

I see in all doubtful matters of Devotion, it is wisest to be on the sures^
side, better both lock, and bolt, and bar it, then leave the least door of
danger open. Have thou done what is disputable whether it be well done? Is it a
measuring cast whether it be lawful or no? So that thy conscience may seem in
a manner to stand Neuter, Su^ a conditional pardon out of the court of heaven,
the rather because our self-love is more prone to flatter, then our godly
jealousy to suspect our selves without a cause, with such humilit^ heaven is
well pleased. For suppose thy self over-cautious needing no forgiveness in
that particular, God will interpret the pardon thou prayest for to be the
praises presented unto him.

IIII. Line on Line.
MOses in Gods name did counsel Joshua, Deutronomie 31. 23. Be strong, and of
a good courage, for thou shall bring the children of Israel into the land which
I swear to them. God immediately did command him, Josh. 1. 6. Be strong and of
a good courage, and again v. 7. Only be thou strong and very courageous; and
again v. 9. Have I no^ commanded thee? be strong and of a good courage, be not
afraid, neither be not dismayed, Lastly the Rubenites, and Gadites heartily
desired him, v. 18. Only be strong and of a good courage.

Was Joshua a dunce or a coward? did his wit or his valor want an edge? that
the same precept must so often be pressed upon him, no doubt neither but God
saw it needful, that (...) should have courage of Proof, who was to encounter
both the froward Jew, and the fierce Canaanite.

Though metal on metal, color on color be falfe Heraldry, Esa. 28.10.
line on line, precept on precept, is true divinity.

Be not therefore offended o my soul, if the same Doctrine be often delivered
unto thee by different Preachers: If the same precept (like the Genesis 3.24.
sword in Paradise, which turned every way) does hunt and haunt thee, tracing
thee which way soever thou turnest rather conclude that thou art deeply
concerned in the practice thereof which God has thought fit should be so
frequently inculcated into thee.

V. O the Depth.
HAd I beheld Sodom in the beauty thereof and had the Angel told me, that the
same should be suddenly destroyed, by a merciless Element, I should certainly
have concluded that Sodom should have been drowned led thereunto by these
considerations.

1. It was situated in the Plain of I^rdan, a flat, low, level Country.

2. It was well watered Genesis 3. 10.
every where, and where always there is water enough there may sometimes be
too much.

3. Jordan had a quality in the first month to overflow Chr. 12. 15.
all his banks.

But no dropp of moisture is spilt on Sodom, it is burnt to Ashes. How wide are
our conjectures, when they guess at Gods judgments? How far are his ways
abo^e our apprehensions? Especially when wicked men with the Sodomites wander
in strange sins out of the Rode of common corruption, God meets them with
strange punishments, out of the reach of common conception, not coming within
the compass of a rational suspicion.

VI. Self, Selfe-hurter.
When God at the first day of judgment, arraigned Eve, she transferred her
fault on the Genesis 3. 13.
Serpent which beguiled her. This was one of the first fruits of our depraved
nature. But ever after regenerate men in Scripture making the confession of
their sins, (whereof many precedents) cast all the fault on themselves alone,
yea David when he numbered the People, though it be expressed that 1 Chro. 21.1.
Satan prov^ked him thereunto, and though David pr^bably might be sensible of
his temptation, yet he never accused the Devil, but derived all the guilt on
himself 1 Chro. 21.17.
I, it is that have sinned, good reason for Satan has no impu sive power, he
may strike fire, till he be w^ary, (if his Mal^ce c^n be weary) except man's
corruption bring ^he under, the match, cannot be lighted Away then with that
Plea of Course. THE DEVIL OWED ME ASHAME Owe thee he might, but pay thee he
could not, unless thou were as willing to take his Black money, as he to
tender it.

VII. God, behold a Troop comes.
THe 2 Samuel 1.
Amalakite who brought the Tidings to David began with Truth, rightly reporting
the overthrow of the Israelites, Cheaters must get some Credit, before they can
cozen, and all Falsehood, if not founded in some Truth, would not be fixed in
any Belief. But proceeding he told six lies successively.

1. That Saul called him. 2. That he came at his call. 3. That Saul demanded
who he was. 4. That he returned his Answer. 5. That Saul commanded him to kill
him, 6. That he killed him accordingly.
A wilful Falsehood told, is a Cripple not able to stand by it self, without
some to support it, it is easy to tell a lie, hard to tell but a lie.

Lord, If Ibe so unhappie to relate a Falsehood; give me to recall it or repent
of it. It is said of the Pismires, that to prevent the Growing (and so the
corrupting) of that Corn which they hoord up, for their Winter provision, they
bite off both the ends thereof, wherein the generating Power of the Grain does
confist. When I have committed a sin, O let me so order it, that I may
destroy the Procreation thereof, and I, by a true sorrow, condemn it to a
bles^ed Barrenness.

VIII. Out means in Miracles.
When the Angel brought * Saint Peter out of Prison, the Iron gate opened of
it is own accord. But coming to the House of Mary the Mother of John, Mark
was faigne to stand before the Door, and knock. When Iron gave Obedience, how
can Wood make opposition?

The Answer easy. There was no man to open the Iron-Gate, but a Portresse was
provided of Course to unlock the door, God would not therefore show his
Finger, where men's hands were appointed to do the work. Heaven will not
Super-institute a miracle, w^ere ordinary means we ^formerly in peacea^
possession. But if they (...) depart or resign ((...) confessing (...)
^ufficiency) there (...) succeed in their vacancy.

Lord, if only Wooden obstacles (such as can be removed by might of man)
hindered our hope of peace, the Arm of flesh might relieve us. ^ut alas they
are Iron Obstructions, as come not within human power or policy to take a way.
No proud flesh shall therefore presumptuously pretend to any part of the
praise, but ascribe it soly to thy self, if now thou should be pleased
after seven years hard Apprentiship in civil War^es, miraculously to burn
our Indentures, and restore us to our former liberty.

IX. Military Mourning.
SOme may wonder at the strange incoherence in the Words and Acti^ns. 2 S^m. 1.
17.

And David Lamented, with this Lamentation, ^ver Saul, and over Jona^han his
Son. Also he ^ad them teach the children of Judah the use of (...) Bow.

But the Connection Is excellent. For that is the most Souldier-like-Sor^ow,
which in midst of grief can give Order, for Revenge, on such as have slain
their Friends.

Our general Fast was first appointed to (...) the Massacre of our ^ethren in
Ireland. But it is in vain, to have a Finger in the Eye, if we^ have not also
a Sword (...) the other hand; Such tam^ lamenting of lost friends^ is but lost
lamentation^ We must bend our Bow^ in the Camp, as well as ou^ knees in the
Churches, an^ second our posture of Piety with martial provision^.

X. No stool of wickedness.
SOme times I have disputed with my self, which of the two were most guilty.
David wh^ said in have all men are Psalm. 116 11.
liars, or that wicked man who Psalm. 50. 20.
sat and spoke against his Brother, and slandered his own Mothers Son.

David seems the greater offender; for Mankind might have an action of
defamation against him, yea, he might justly be challenged for giving all men
the lie. But mark David was in have, he spoke it in Transitu, when he was
passing, or rather posting by, or if you please, not David, but David's Haste
rashly vented the words. Whereas the other Sat, a sad solemn, serious,
premeditate, deliberate posture, his malice had a full blow with a steady hand,
a^ the credit of his Brother. Not to say that SAT carries with it the
countenance of a Judicial proceeding, as if he made (...) Session or
Bench-business^ thereof, as well condemnning as accusing unjustly.

Lord, pardon my cursory, and preserve me from sedentary sins. If in haste or
heat of passion I wrong any, give me at leisure to ask thee and them
forgiveness. But O let me not sit by it, ^tudiously to plot, or (...)
mischief to any out of malice prepense. To ^hed blood, in cool ^loud, is
blood with a witness.

XI. By Degrees.
^Ee by what stairs wicked 2 Kings. 16.
Ahaz, did climb up to the height of profaneness.

First he Verse 10
saw an Idolatrous Altar at Damascus. Our eyes when gazing on sinful Objects
are out of their calling and Gods keeping.

Secondly he liked it. There is a secred Fascination in superstition, and our
souls soon bewitched, with the gawdinesse of false service from the
simplicity o^ Gods worship.

Thirdly he made the like to it. And herein * Ver 11.
Vriah the Priest ( Patr^ and Chaplain well me^ was the Midwife to del^ ver
the Mother-Altar of Damascus of a Babe, like unto it, at Jerusalem.

Fourthly He Ver. 13.
sacrificed on it. What else could be expected, but that when he had tuned this
new instrument of Idolatry, he would play upon it.

Fifthly, he commanded the Ver. 15.
People to do the like. Not content to confine it to his personal impiety.

Lastly, he removed Gods Altar away. That venerable Altar, by divine
appointment peaceably possessed of the place, for 200. years and upwards, must
now be violentlyejected by a usurping Vpstart.

No man can be stark naught at once. Let us stop the progress of sin in our
Soul at the first Stage, for the further it goes, the faster it will increase

XII. The best Bedmaker.
When a good man is ill at ease, God promises to make all his Psalm. 41.3.
Bed in his sickness. Pillow, Bolster, Head, feet, sides, all his bed. Surely
that God who made him, knows so well his measure and temper, as to make his
bed to please him. Herein his Art is excellent, not sitting the Bed to the
person, but the person to the Bed, insusing patience into him.

But O how shall God make my Bed, who have no bed of mine own to make? Thou
fool, he can make thy not having a bed, to be a bed unto thee. when Jacob
slept on the ^en. 28.12.
ground who would not have had his hard lodging, therewithal to have his
heave^ly dream? Yea the poor woman in Jersey, Fox Martyr 3. volum.
which in the reign of Queen Mary, was delivered of a child, as she was to be
burnt at the Stake, may be said to be brought to bed in the fire. Why not? If
Gods justice threatened to cast Rev. 2.22.
Jezabel into a Bed of fire, why might not his mercy make, the very flames a
soft bed to that his patient Martyr.

XIII. When begun, ended.
THe Scripture gives us a very short account of some Battles, as if they
were flightes without sights, and the Armies parted as soon as met. as Gen 14.
10. 1 Samuel 31.1 2 Cro. 25. 22.

Some will say the spirit gives in only the sum of the success, without any
particular passages in acheiving it. But there is more in it, that so little is
said of the fight. For sometime the Question of the Victory, is not disputed at
all, but the bare propounding decides it. The stand of Pikes, oftimes no stand,
and the footmen so fitly called as making more use of their feet then their
hands. And when God sends a qualme of fear over the soldiers hearts, it is
not all the skill and valor of their commanders, can give them a cordial.

Our late War has given us some instances hereof. Yet let not men tax their
Armies for cowardice, it being probable, that the badnesse of such as staid at
home of their respective sides, had such influence on those in field, that
Soldiers hearts might be feare-broken, by the score of their sins, who were
no Soldiers.

XIIII. Too late, Too late.
THe Elder Brother laid a I uke 15. 14.
sharp and true charge against his Brother prodigal, for his riot and luxury.
This nothing affected his Father, the mirth, meat, music at the feast, was
notwithstanding no whit abated. Why so? Because the elder Brother was the
younger in this respect, and came too late. The other had got the speed of him,
having first accused himself, (9 verses before) and already obtained his
pardon.

Satan, (to give him his due) is my Brother, and my elder by creation. Sure I
am, he will be my grievous accuser. I will endeavor to prevent him, first
condemning my self to God my Father. So shall I have an Act of indemnity
before he can enter his action against me.

XV. Lawful Stealth.
I find two (husband and wife) both stealing, and but one of them guilty of
felony. And Rachel Genesis 31. 19.
had stolen the Images that were her Fathers, and Jacob stole away unawares to
Laban the Syrian. In the former a complication of Theft lying, sacrilege, and
Idolatry; In the latter no sin at all. For what our conscience tells us is
lawful, and our discretion, dangerous, it is both conscience and discretion to
do it with all possible secrecy. It was as lawful for Jacob in that case
privately to steal away, as it is for that man, who finds the Sunshine too
hot for him, to walk in the shade.

God keep us from the guilt of Rachels stealth. But for Jacobs stealing away,
one may confess the fact, but deny the fault therein. Some are said to have
gotten their life for a prey if any, In that sense, have preyed on, (or if you
will) plundered their own liberty, stealing away from the place, where they
conceived their selves in danger, none can justly condemn them.

XVI. Text improved.
I Heard a Preacher take for his Text, Am I not thy Ass, Number. 2.2.30.
upon which thou have ridden ever since I was thine unto this day, was I ever
wont to do so unto thee? I wondered what he would make thereof, fearing he
would starve his Auditors for want of matter. But hence he observed.

1. The siliest and simplest being wronged, may justly speak in their own^
defense.

2. Worst men, have (...) good Title to their own^ Goods. Balaam a Sorcerer yet
the Ass confesses twice he was his.

3. They who have done many good offices, and fail in one, are often not only
unrewarded for former service, but punished for that one offense.

4. When the creatures formerly officious to serve us, start from their wonted
obedience (as the Earth to become barren and Air pestilential) man ought to
reflect on his own sin as the sole cause thereof.

How fruitful are the seeming Barren places of Scripture. Bad Plow-men, which
make Balkes of such Ground. Wheresoever the surface of Gods Word does not laugh
and Sing with Corn, there the heart thereof within is merry with Mines,
affording, wherenot plain matter, hidden mysteries.

XVII. The Royal bearing.
GOd is said to have brougth the Israelites out of Egypt an Exodus 19 4.
Aeagles-wings. Now Eagles, when removing their Young-ones, have a different
posture from other Foul, proper to themselves (fit it is that there should be
a distinction betwixt Sovereign and Subjects) carrying their prey in their
Talons, but young ones on their backs, so interposing their whole bodies
betwixt them and harm. The Old Eagles body, is the young Eagles-sheild, and
must be shot through, before her young ones can be hurt.

Thus God, in saving the Jews, put himself betwixt them and danger. Surely
God so loving under the law, is no less gracious in the Gospel: Our souls
are better secured, not only above his Wings, but in his body; your life is
hid Colos. 3. 3.
with Christ in God. No fear then of harm, God first must be pierced, before
we can be prejudiced.

XVIII. None to him.
IT is said of our Savior, his Fan Mat. 3. 12.
is in his hand. How well it fits him, and he it? could Satan's clutches snatch
the Fan, what work would he make? He would Fan, as he does I ^ke 22. 31.
winnow, in a tempest, yea, in a Whirle-winde, and blow the best away. Had man
the Fan in his hand especially in these distracted times, out goes for Chafe,
all oposite to the opinions of his party Seeming sanctity will carry it away
from such who with true, (bu^ weak grace,) have ill natures and eminent
corruptions.

There is a kind of darnell, called Lolium Murinum because so counterfeiting
Corn, that even the Mice themselves, (experience should make them good
Tasters,) are sometimes deceived therewith. Hypocrites in like manner so act
holiness, that they pass for Saints before men, whose censures often barn up
the chafe, and burn up the grain.

Well then! Christ for my share. Good luck have he with his honor. The Fan is
in so good a hand, it cannot be mended. Only his hand, who knows hearts is
proper for that employment.

XX. Humility:
IT is a strange passage, Rev. 7.13, 14. And one of the Elders answered saying
unto me, what are these who are arrayed in white robes, and whence came they?
And I said unto him, Sir, thou know. And he said unto me, these are they who
have come out of great Tribulation, etc.

How comes the Elder when asking a question to be said to answer? On good
reason: for his Quaere in effect, was a resolution, He ask't St. John, not
because he thought he could, but knew he could not answer. That John's ingenuous
confession of his ignorance might invite the Elder to inform him.

As his Question is called an answer, so Gods Comm^nds are Grants. When he
enjoynes us, Repent, Believe, it is only to draw from us a free acknowledgment
of our impotency to perform his commands. This confession being made by us,
what he enjoynes he will enable us to do. Man's owning his weakness, is the
only Stock for God thereon to graft the grace of his assistance.

MEDITATIONS on the TIMES.
I. Name-Generall.
HEber had a Son borne in the days when the Genesis 10 25.
Earth was divided. Conceive we it just after the Confusion of Tongues, when
Mankind was parcelled out into several Colonies. Wherefore Heber to perpetuate
the memory of so famous an accident, happening at the birth of his Son, called
him Peleg, which in the Hebrew tongue signifies Partition or Division.

We live in a Land and Age of dissension. Counties, Cities, Towns, Villages,
Families, all divided in opinions, in affections. Each man almost divided from
himself, with fears and distractions. Of all the children, borne in England
within this last five years and brought to the Font, (or if that displeas, to
the Basin) to be baptized, every Male may be called Peleg, and Female, Palgah
in the sad Memorial of the time of their Nativity.

II. Woeful Wealth.
BArbarous is the custom of some English People on the Sea side, to prey on
the goods of poor shipwrack't Merchants. But more divelish in their design,
who make false fires, to undirect Seamen in a Tempest, that thereby from the
right Road, they may be misled into danger and destruction.

England has been tossed with an Hirricano of a civil War. Some men are
said to have gotten great wealth thereby. But it is an ill leap when men grow
rich per saltum, taking their rise from the miseries of a Land, to which their
own sins have contributed their share. Those are far worse, (and may not
such be found?) who by cunning insinuations, and false glosings, have in these
dangerous days trained and betrayed simple men into mischeife.

Can their pelf prosper? not got by valor or industry, but deceit; surely it
cannot be wholesome, when every morsel of their meat is Mummie, (good Physic
but bad food) made of the corpse of men's estates. Nor will it prove happy, it
being to be feared, that such who have been enriched with other men's Ruins,
will be ruined by their own riches. The child of Ten years, is old enough to
remember the beginning of such men's Wealth, and the man of threescore and ten
is young enough to see the ending thereof.

III. A new Plot.
When Herod had beheaded John the Baptist, some might expect that his
Disciples would have done some great matter, in revenge of their Masters Death.
But see how they behave themselves. And his Marti 14 12.
Disciples came and took up the body and buried it, and went and told Jesus.
And was this all? and what was all this? Alas poor men! It was some solace
to their sorrowful Souls, that they might lament their loss to a fast
friend, who though for the present unable to help, was willing to pity them.

Have thou thy body unjustly imprisoned, or thy goods violently detained, or
thy credit causelessly defamed? I have a design whereby thou shall revenge thy
self, even go and tell JESUS. Make to him a plain and true report of the
manner and measure of thy sufferings, Especially there being a great difference
betwixt JESUS then clouded in the flesh, and JESUS now shining in glory, having
now as much pity and more power to redress thy greivances. I know it is
counted but a cowardly Trick, for Boys when beaten but by their equals, to cry
that they will tell their Father. But during the present necessity, it is both
the best wisdom and valor, even to complain to thy Father in Heaven, who
will take thy case into his serious consideration.

IIII. Providence.
MArvelous is Gods goodness, in preserving the young Ostridges. For the old
one, leaves her Job. 39. 14.
Eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in the dust, forgetting that the foot may
crush them, or that the wild Beast may break them. But Divine providence so
disposes it, that the bare Nest hatcheth the Eggs, and the warm'th of the
sandy Ground discloseth them.

Many Parents (which otherwise would have been loving Pelicans) are by these
unnatural Wars, forced to be Ostridges to their own children, leaving them
to the Narrow mercy of the wide world. I am confident that these Orphans (So
may I call them whilst their Parents are a live) shall be comfortably provided
for. when worthy Master Samuel Herne famous for his living, preaching, and
writing lay on his death Bed, (rich only in goodness and children) his Wife
made much womanish lamentation, what should hereafter become of her little
ones, Peace ( sweet heart said he) that God who feeds the Psalm. 147 9.
Ravens will not starve the Hernes. A speech censured as light by some,
observed by others as prophetical, as indeed it came to pass, that they were
well disposed of. Despair not therefore O thou Parent of Gods blessing for
having many of his blessings, a numerous offspring. But depend on his
providence for their maintenance: find thou but faith to believe it, he will
find means to effect it.

V. Coals Pro. 25. 22.
for Faggot.
IN the days of King Edward the sixth when Bonner was kept in Prison, reverend
Ridley having his Bishopric of London would never go to Dinner at Fulham
without the company of Bonners Fox Mar^yrolog. 3. Volum. p. 432.
Mother and Sister; The former always sitting in a chair, at the upper end of
the Table, these Guests, were as constant as Bread and Salt at the board, no
meal could be made without them.

O the meekness, and mildness of such men as must make Martyrs! Active
charity always goes along with passive obedience.

How many Ministers Wives and children, now adays are outed of house and home
ready to be starved, How few are invited to their Tables, who hold the
sequestrations of their Husbands or Fathers benefices? Yea many of them are so
far from being bountiful, that they are not just, denying or detaining from
those poor souls that pittance, which the Parliament has allotted for their
maintenance.

VI. Fugitives over taken.
THe City of Geneva is seated in the Marches of several Dominions, France,
Savoy, Switzerland; Now it is a Fundamental Law in that signiory, to give free
access to all Offenders, yet so as to punish their Offense, according to the
custom of that place wherein the fault was committed. This necessary severity
does sweep their state from being the sink of Sinners, the Rendevouz of Rogues,
and Headquarters of all Malefactors, which otherwise would fly thither in hope
of Indemnity. Herein I highly aprove the Discipline of Geneva.

If we should live to see Churches of several Governments permitted in
England, it is more then probable that many Offenders, not out of conscience,
but to escape Censures, would fly from one Congregation to another, What 1 Samuel
25. 10.
Nabal said snllenly and spightfully, one may sadly foresee, and fore-say of
this Land, many servants now adays will break every man from his Master; many
guilty persons abandoning that Discipline under which they were bred and
brought up, will shift and shelter themselves under some new Model of
Government. Well were it then if every man, before he be admitted a Member of a
new Congregation, do therein first, make satisfaction for such scandalous
sins, whereof he stands justly charged in that Church which he deserted. This
would conduce to the advanceing of virtue and the retrenching of notorious
licentiousness.

VII Both and Neither.
A City was built in Germany upon the River Weser, by Charles the Emperor, and
Vuidekind, First Christian-Duke of Saxony; and because both contributed to the
Structure thereof, it was called Mun^ers cosmog. li. 3. cap. 45c.
MYNETHYNE, (at this day, by corrupt pronunciation Mindin) to show the
joynt-interest both had in the place.

Send Lord, in thy due time, such a Peace in this Land, as Prince and People
may share therein; that the Sovereign might have what he justly calls mine,
his lawful Prerogative, and leave to the Subjects their Propriety. Such may be
truly termed an Accommodation which is ad commmodum utriusque for the benefit
of both parties concerned therein.

VIII. Fed with Fasting.
THe Salmon may pass for the Ridle of the River. The oldest fisherman never as
yet met with any meat in the maw thereof, thereby to advantage his conjecture
on what Bil of fare that fish feeds. It eats not flys with the Perch, nor
swollowes worms with the Roach, nor sucked dew with the Oisters, nor devoureth
his fellow fishes with the Pike, what has it in the water, but the water? yet
Salmons grow great, and very fat in their season.

How do many (exiles in their own country) subsist now adays of nothing, and
wandering in a wilderness of want (except they have Manna miraculously from
Heaven) they have no meat on earth from their own means. At what Ordinary or
rather Extraordinary do they diet? that for all this have cheerful faces,
light hearts, and merry countenances. Surely some secret comfort supports their
souls. Such never desire, but to make one meal all the days of their lives,
on the Pro. 15. 15.
continual Feast of a good conscience. The Fattest Capons yield but sad
Merry-thoughts to the greedy Glutton, in comparison of those delightful
dainties which this Dish daily affords such, as feed upon it.

IX. Bare in fat Pasture.
FOrresters have informed me, that Outlodging Dear are seldom seen to be so
fat as tl ose as keep themselves within the Park. Whereof they assign this
Reason that those Straglers (though they have more ground to range over, more
Grass and Grain to take their repast upon, yet they) are in constant fear as
if conscious, that they are Trespassers, being out of the Protection, because
out of the Pale of the Park. This makes their Eyes and Ears always to stand
Sentinells for their mouths, least the Master of the ground pursue them for
the damage done unto him.

Are there any which unjustly possess the Houses of others? Surely such can
never with quiet and comfort enjoy either their places or themselves. Thy
always listen to the least Noise of News, suspecting the Right owner should
be reestated, whose restitution of necessity inferres the others Ejection, Lord
that though my means be never so small, grant they may be my means, not
wrongfully detained from others, having a truer Title unto them.

X. Much good do you.
ONe Plutarch moralls.
Nicias a Philosopher having his shoes stolen from him, may they (said he)
fit his feet that took them away. A wish at the first view very harmless,
but there was that in it, which poisoned his charity into a malicious revenge.
For he himself had hurled or crooked feet, so that in effect he wished the
Thief to be lame.

Whosoever has plundered me of my Books and Papers, I freely forgive him; and
desire that he may fully understand and make good use thereof, wishing him more
joy of them, then he has right to them. Nor is there any Snake, under my
Herbs, nor have I (as Nicias) any Reservation, or latent Sense to my self,
but from my heart do desire, that to all purposes and intents my Books may be
beneficial unto him. Only requesting him, that one passage in his (lately my)
Bible [namely Ephesians 4. 28.] may be taken into his serious consideration.

XI. The use of the Alphabet.
THere was not long since a devout, but ignorant Papist dwelling in Spain. He
perceived a necessity of his own private Prayers to God, besides the Pater
Nosters, Ave Mary's, etc. used of course in the Romish Church. But so simple
was he, that how to pray he knew not. Only every morning humbly, bending his
knees, and lifting up his Eyes, and hands to Heaven, he would deliberately
repeat the Alphabet. And now (said he) O good God put these letters together
to spell syllables, to spell words, to make such sense, as may be most to thy
glory, and my good.

In these distracted times, I know^ what generals to pray for. Gods glory,
Truth and Peace, his Majesty's honor, Privileges of Parliament, liberty of
Subjects, etc. But when I des^nd to particulars, when, how, by whom I should
desire these things to be effected I may fall to that poorepious man's. A. B. C.
D. E. etc.

XII. The good effect of a bad cause.
GOd in the Leviticall Law, gave this reward, to the woman causelessly suspected
of her Jealous husband, that the bitter water, which she was to drink in the
Priests presence, should not only do her no harm, but also procure her
children, Numb. 5.28.
if barren before. that water (drunk by her to quench the fire of her husbands
jealousy,) proved like the Spaw unto her, so famous for causing fruitfulness.
Thus her innocence was not only cleared, but crowned.

His gracious Majesty has been suspected to be Popishly inclined. A suspicion
like those mushroomes, which Pliny Not. hist. lib. 19 chapter 2.
recounts amongst the miracles in nature, because growing without a Root. Well
he has passed his purgation, a bitter Mornings-Draught, has he taken down
for many years together.

See the operation thereof; his constancy in the Protestant Religion, has not
only been assured to such who unjustly were jealous of him, but also by Gods
blessing, he daily grows greater, in men's hearts, pregnant with the love and
affection of his subjects.

XIII. The child man.
John Gerson the pious and learned Chancelour of Paris, beholding and bemoaning
the general corruption of his Age, in doctrine and manners, was wont to get a
In his life juxta finem.
Quire of little children about him, and to entreat them to pray to God in
this behalf. Supposing their prayers, least defiled with sin, and most
acceptable to heaven.

Men now adays are so infected with (...) alice, that little children are the
best chaplains to pray for their Parents. But O where shall such be found, not
resenting of the faults and factions of their Fathers? Gersons plot will not
take effect. I will try another way.

I will make my address to the Holy child Jesus, So is he styled Act. 4. 27.
even when glorified in Heaven; not because he is still under Age (like Popish
Pictures, placeing him in his Mothers arms and keeping him in his constant
infancy) but because with the strength and perfection of a man he has the
Innocence and humility of a child Him onelywill I employ to interceed for me.

XIIII. Worse, before better.
STrange was the behavior of our Savior, toward his beloved Lazarus, John 11
6.
informed by a messenger of his sickness he aboade two days still in the
place where I was. Why so slow? bad sending him, or to him, on a dying man's
errands. But the cause was, because Lazarus was not bad enough for Christ to
cure, intending not to recover him from sickness, but revive him from Death,
to make the glory of the miracle greater.

England does lie desperately sick, of a violent disease in the Bowels thereof.
Many messengers we dispatch (monthly fasts, weekly Sermons, daily Prayers) to
inform God of our sad condition. He still stays in the same place, yea, which
is worse, seems to go backward, for every day less likelihood, less hope of
help. May not this be the reason that our Land must yet be reduced to more
extremity, that God may have the higher honor of our Deliverance.

XV. All sin, all suffer.
THE Mariners that guided the ship in the Tempest, Acts 27.32. had a design
for their own safety with the ruin of the rest; intending (under pretense of
casting out an Anchor) to escape in a Bo^te, by themselves. But the Soldiers
prevented their purpose, and cut off the cord of the Boat, and let it fall
into the Sea. One and all: all sinck, or all save. Herein their Martial Law
did a piece of exemplary Justice.

Do any intend willingly (without special cause) to leave the Land, so to
avoid that misery which their sins with others have drawn upon it; might I
advise them, better mourn in, then move out of Sad Zion. Hang out the Jo^h. 2.
Scarlet lace at the casement, (eyes made red withsorrow for sin) but slide
not down out of the window without better warrant. But if they be disposed to
depart, and leave their native Soil, let them take heed their Fly-boate meets
not with such Soldiers as will send them back, with shame and sorrow, into the
Ship again.

XVI. Eat worthily.
SAul being in full pursuit of the flying Philistines made a Law, that no
Israelite should Sam. 14.24.
eat until evening. But it was the judgment of Jonathan that the Army if
permitted to eat had done greater execution on their Enemies. For time so lost
was gained being laid out in the necessary refection of their bodies.

Yea mark the issue of their long fasting. The People at night coming with
ravenous Appetites did eat the fles^ with the Verse. 32.
blood, to the provoaking of Gods anger.

Many English people having conquered some stes^ly lusts which fight against
their souls, were still chasing them, in hope finally to subdue them. Was it a
pious or politic design to forbid such the r^ceiving of the Sacrament; their
spiritual food?

I will not positively conclude that such if suffere^ to strengthen themselves
with that heavenly repast, had thereby been enabled more effectually to cut
down their corruptions. Only two things I will desire.

First that such Jonathans, who by breaking this custom have found benefit to
themselves, may not be condemned by others. 2ly I shall pray that two hungry
years make not the third a glutton. That Communicants, two twelve months
together forbidden the Lords Supper, come not, (when admitted thereunto) with
better stomach then heart, more greediness then preparation.

XVII. Devotions Duplicat.
When the Jewish Sabbath in the Primitive times, was newly changed into the
Christians-Lords. day, many devout people, twisted both together in their
Observation, abstaining from servile-Workes, and keeping both Saturday and
Sunday wholly for holy Employments.

During these Civil Wars, Wednesday and Friday Fasts have been appointed by
Different Authorities. What harm had it been, if they had been both generally
observed.

But alas! When two Messengers being sent together on the same Errand fall out
and fight by the way, will not the work be worse done then if none were
employed? In such a Pair of fasts it is to be feared that the divisions of our
Affections rather would increase then abate Gods Anger against us.

Two Negatives make an Affirmative. Days of humiliations are appointed for men
to deny themselves, and their sinful Lusts. But do not our two Fasts more
Peremptorily affirm and avouch our mutual malice and hatred? God forgive us,
we have cause enough to keep ten but not care enough to keep one monthly day
of huiliation.

XVIII. Law to themselves.
SOme 60. years since in the University of Cambridge it was solemnly debated
betwixt the H^ads, to debar young Scholars of that liberty allowed them in
Christmas, as inconsistent with the discipline of Students. But some grave
Governors maintained the good use thereof, because thereby in twelve days
they more discover the dispositions ^of Scholars then in twe ve months
before. That a vigilant virtue indeed, which would be early up at prayers and
Study, when all Authority to punish lay a sleep.

Vice these late years has kept open house in England. Welcome all comers
without any examination. No Penance for the Adulterer, stocks for the drunkard,
Whip for the petty Larciner, Brand for the Felon, Gallows for the Murderer.

God all this time us tries as he did Cro. 2. 32.31.
Hezekiah, that he might know all that is in our hearts, Such as now are chaste,
sober, just, true, show themselves acted with a higher Principle of Piety, then
the ^are a voyding of Punishment.

XX. The new disease.
THere is a desease of Infants (and an In^ant-disease, having ^carcely as yet
gotten a proper name in Latin) cal^ed the Ricketts. Wherein the Head waxes too
great, whilst the Legs, and lower parts waine too Little. Awoman in the West
has happily healed many, by Cauterizing the Vein behind the Ear. How proper
the Remedy for the Malady I engage not, experience oftimes out-doing Art,
whilst we behold the Cure easily effected, and the natural cause thereof
hardly assigned.

Have not many now adays the same sickness in their Souls? their Heads
swelling to a vast proportion, and they wonderfully enabled with knowledge to
discourse. But alas how little their Legs? Poor their Practice, and lazy
their Walking in a godly conversation. Shall I say that such may be cured by
searing the Vein in their Head, not to hurt their hearing, but hinder the
(itching) of their ears.

Indeed his Tongue deserves to be burnt, that tlekes of searing the ears of
others; For faith comes by hearing. But I would have men not hear fewer
Sermons, but hear more in hearing fewer Sermons. Less Preaching better heard,
( Reader lay the Emphasis, not on the word Less, but on the Word better) would
make a wiser and stronger Christian, digesting the Word from his head into his
heart to practice it in his Conversation.

MEDITATIONS on all kind of PRAYERS.
1. Newly awaked.
BY the Leviticall Law, the firstling of every clean Creature which opened the
E^od. 34. 19.
Matrix was holy to God. By the moral Analogy thereof, this first glance of
mine Eyes, is due to him. By the custom of this Kingdom, there accreweth to
the Landlord a fine and Herriot from his Tenant, taking a further Estate in
his Lease. I hold from God this clay Cottage of my Body; (An homely Tenement,
but may I in some measure be assured of a better before outed of this.) Now
being raised from last nights sleep I may seem to renew a life. What shall I
pay to my Landlord? even the best quick creature which is to be found on my
Barren Copyhold namely the calves of my lips, praising him for his Protection
over me. More he does not ask, less I cannot give, yea such is his goodness
and my weakness, that before I can give him thanks, he gives me to be
thankful.

II. Family Prayer.
LOng have I searched the Scriptures to find a positive precept enioyning, or
precedent observing daily Prayer in a Family, yet hitherto have found none
proper for my purpose. Indeed I read, that there was a 1 Samuel 20.^9.
yearly Sacrifice offered at Bethlehem for the Family of Iesse; but if hence
we should infer Household holy duties, others would conclude they should
only be Annual. And whereas it is said, pour out thine indignation on the
heathen, and on the Families which have not called on thy name, the word taken
there in a large acception reproves rather the want of national, then
domestical service of God.

But let not propha^ nesse improve it self, o^ censure Family Prayer for
will-w^rship, as wanting ^ warrant in Gods word. For where God injoyn^th a
general du y as to ^erve and fear him, there ^ll p^rticular means, (wh^reof
Prayer a Principal) t^nding thereun^o are commanded. And ^urely the Pious
House^olds of Genesis 18. 19.
Abraham, Josh. 24. 15.
Io^hua, and Acts 10. 2.
Cornelius, had ^ome holy Exercises to themselves, as broader ^hen their
personal devotion, so narrower then ^he public service, just adequate to
their own private family.

III. Self without Otherselfe.
SOme loving Wife may perchance be (though not angry with) grieved at her
Husband, for excluding her from his Private Prayers, thus thinking with
herself; Must I be discommoned from my Husbands Devotion? what? Several
Closset-Chappells, for those of the same Bed and Board? Are not our credits
embarqud in the same Bottom, so that they swim or sink together? May I not be
admitted an Auditour at his Petitions, were it only to say AMEN thereunto?

But let such a one seriously consider what the Zach 12 12.
Prophet says, The Family of the House of David apart, and their Wives apart;
the Family of the House of Nathan apart, and their Wives apart. Personal
private Faults must be privately confessed. It is not meet, she should know
all the Bosom sins of him, in whose Bosom she lies. Perchance being now
offended, for not hearing her Husbands Prayers she would be more offended, if
she heard them. Nor has s^e just cause to complain, seeing herein Nathans
Wife, is equal with Nathan himself; what liberty she allows, is allowed
her, and may as well as her Husband claim the privilege privately and Apart
to power forth her soul unto God in her daily devotions.

Yet man and wife, at other times ought to communicate in their prayers, all
other excluded.

IV. Groans.
HOw comes it to pass that Groans made in men by Gods Spirit cannot be
uttered? I find two Reasons thereof. First, because those Groans are so low,
and little, so faint, frail, and feeble, so next to nothing; these still-borne
Babes only breath without crying.

Secondly, because so much diversity, yea contrariety of Passion, is crowded
within the compass of a Groan. In it is comprised sorrow for our sins, joy in
Christ, fear of hell, hope of heaven, love of God, hatred of sin. Now as when
many men at the same time pressing out at a narrow Wicket, all stick, and stop
each other, so no wonder if so many passions at the same time, striving to vent
themselves at the na^row Outlet of a Groan, are stayed from being expressive,
and the Groan become unutterable.

How happy is their condition, who have God for their Interpreter? who not
only understands what they do, but what they would say. Daniel could tell the
meaning of the Dream, which Nebuchadnezzar had forgotten. GOD knows the
meaning of those Groans which never as yet knew their own meaning, and
understands the Sense of those Sighs, which never understood themselves.

V. Ejaculations their use.
EIaculations are short Prayers, darted up to God on emergent occasions. If no
other Artilery had been used this last seven years in England, I will not
affirm more souls had been in heaven, but fewer corpse had been buried in
Earth. O that with David we might have said my heart Psalm. 37.
is fixed, being less busied about fixing of Muskets.

The principal use of Ejaculations, is against the fiery Ephesians. 6. 16.
darts of the I evil. Our Adversary inje^s, (how he does it God k^owes, that
he does it we know,) bad motions into our hearts, and that we may be as nimble
with our Antidotes, as he with his poisons, such short prayers are proper and
necessary. In bard H^vens (so choacked up with the envious sands that great
Ships drawing many soote water can not come near) lighter and lesser Pinnasses
may freely and safely arive. When we are time-bound, placebound, or person
bound, so that we cannot compose our selves to make a large solemn prayer,
this is the right instant for Ejaculations, whether orally uttered, or only
poured forth in wardly in the heart.

VI. Their Privilege.
EIaculations take not up any room in the Soul. They give liberty of
callings, so that at the same instant one may follow his proper vocation. The
husbandman may dart forth an Ejaculation and not make a balke the more. The
Seaman never the less steer his ship right, in the dark'st night. Yea the
Soldier at the same time, may shoot out his Prayer to God, and aim his Pistol
at his Enemy, the one better hitting the mark for the other.

The field wherein Bees feed is no whit the barer for their biting, when they
have took their full re past on flowers or grass, the Ox may feed, the sheep
fat on their reversions. The reason is because those little chemists destil
only the refined part of the flower, leaving the grosser substance thereof. So
Ejaculations bind not men to any bodily observance, only busy the spiritual
half, which makes them consistant with the prosecution of any other Imploiment.

VII. Extemporary Prayers.
IN Extemporary prayer what men most admire God least regards. Namely the
volubility of the tongue. Herein a Tertullus may equal, yea exceed Saint. Paul
himself whose 2 Cor. 10.10.
speech was but mean. O, it is the heart, keeping time and tune with the voice
which God listneth unto. Otherwise the nimblest Tongue tires, and loudest voice
grows dumb before it comes half way to heaven. Make it (said God to Moses)
in all Heb. 8.5.
things, like the pattern in the mount. Only the conformity of the words
with the mind, mounted up in heavenly Thoughts is acceptable to God. The gift
of extemporary Prayer, ready utterance may be bestowed on a Reprobate, but the
grace thereof, [religious aflections] is only given to Gods Servants.

VIII. Their causeless Scandal.
SOme lay it to the charge of Extemporary prayers, as if it were a diminution
to Gods Majesty to offer them unto him, because (alluding to David's expression
to 2 Samuel 24. 24.
Ornan the Jebufite,) they cost nothing, but come without any pains or
industry to provide them. A most false aspersion.

Surely preparation of the heart, (though not premeditation of every word) is
required thereunto. And grant the party praying at that very instant
fore-studieth not every expression, yet surely he has formerly labored with
his heart and tongue too, before he attained that dexterity of utterance,
properly and readily to express himself. Many hours in night no doubt he is
waking, and was by himself practicing Scripture phrase, and the language of
Canaan, wl ilst such as censure him, for his laziness, were fast a sleep in
their ^eds.

Supp^ one should make an entertainment for strangers with flesh, fish, foul,
Venison, fruit, all out of his own fold, field, ponds, Park, Orchard, will
any say that this feast cost him nothing who made it? Surely although all grew
on the same, and for the present he bought nothing by the penny, yet he or his
Ancestors for him did at first dearly purchase these home-accommodations, when
that this entertainment did arise.

So the party who has attained the faculty and facility of extemporary Prayer,
(the easy act of a laborious habit) though at the instant not appearing to
take pains, has bin formerly industrious with himself, or his parents with
him (in giving him pious education) or else he had never acquired so great
perfection, seeing only long practice makes the Pen of a ready writer.

IX. Night-Prayer.
DEath in Scripture is compared to Sleep. Well then may my night-Prayer be
resembled to making my will. I will be careful not to die intestate; as also
not to defer my will-making, till I am not Compos mentis till the Lethargy
of drowsiness seize upon me.

But being in perfect memory I bequeath my soul to God; the rather because I
am sure the Devil will accuse me when sleeping. O the advantage of spirits
above bodies! If our Clay-Cottage be not cooled with rest, the Roof falls a
fire. Satan has no such need: the Rev. 12. 10.
Night is his fittest time. Thus man's Vacation is the Term for the Beasts of
the Forest, they move most, whilst he lies quiet in his bed.

Least therefore, whilst Sleeping I be outlawed for want of appearance to
Satan's charge; I committ my cause to him, who neither ^mbers nor sleeps;
ANSWER FOR ME O MY GOD.

X. A Nocturnall.
DAvid surveying the Firmament, brake forth into this consideration, When I
considered the Heavens the work of thy Fingers, the Psalm. 8.3.
Moon and thestarres, which thou have created; What is man etc.

How comes he to mention the Moon and Stars, and omit the Sun. The other
being but his Pensioners, shining with that exhibition of Light, which the
bounty of the Sun alots them.

It is answered; this was David's night meditation, when the Sun departing to
the other World, left the lesser lights only Visible in Heaven, and as the
Sky is best beheld by Day in the glory thereof, so it is best surveyed by
Night, in the variety of the same.

Night was made for man to rest in. ^ut when I cannot sleep, may I with this
Psalmist entertain my waking, with good Thoughts. Not to use them as Opium, to
invite my corrupt nature to (...), but to bolt out bad thoughts, which
otherwise would possess my soul.

XI. Set Prayers.
SEt Prayers are prescript Forms of our own, or others composing such are
lawful for any, and needful for some to use.

Lawful for any. Otherwise God would no^ have appointed the Priests, (presumed
o^ themselves best able to pray) a form of blessing the people. Nor would our
Savior have set u^ his Prayers, which (as the Towne-Bushell is the Standard
both to measure Corn, and other Bushels by,) is both a Prayer in it self, and
a pattern or plat-forme of Prayer, such as accuse Set-formes to be pinioning
the wings of the Dove, will by the next return affirm that Girdles and
Garters made to strengthen and adorn, are so many shackles and fetters, which
hurt and hinder men's free motion.

Needful for some. Namely for such who as yet have not attained (what all
should endeavor) to pray extempore, by the Spirit. But as little children, (to
whom the plainest and evenest Room at first, is a Labarinth) are so ambitious
of going, an-hye-lone, that they scorn to take the guidance of a Form, or
Bench to direct them, but will adventure by themselves, though often to the
cost of a knock and a fall: So many confess their weakness in denying to
confess it, who refuseing to be beholden to a set-forme of Prayer, prefer to
fay nonsense rather then nothing in their extempore Expressions. More modesty,
and no le^e Piety it had been for such men, to have prayed longer with
Setformes, that they might pray better without them.

XII. The same again.
IT is no base and beggarly shift, (arguing a narrow and necessitous heart) but
a piece of holy and heavenly Thrist often to use the same Prayer again.
Christ's Practice is my Directory herein, who the third time said the same Mat.
26. 44.
words. A good Prayer is not like a Stratagem in War to to be used but once.
No, the oftener, the better. The clothes of the Israelites whilst they
wandered forty years in the Wilderness, never waxed old as if made of
Perpetuano indeed. So a good Prayer, though often used is still fresh and fair
in the Ears and Eyes of Heaven.

Despair not then thou simple Soul; who have no exchange of Raiment, whose
Prayers cannot appear every day, at heavens Court, in new clothes Thou may
be as good a Subject, though not so great a Gallant, coming always in the same
suit. Yea perchance the very same, which was thy Fathers and Grandfathers
before thee, (a well composed Prayer is a good Heire-toome in a family, and may
hereditarily bedescended to many Generations,) But know thy comfort, thy Prayer
is well know to he^ven to it, which it is a constant customer. Only add new,
or new degrees of old affections thereunto, and it will be acceptable to God,
thus repaired, as if new erected.

XIII. Mixt-Prayers.
MIxt-Prayers are a methodicall composition, (no casual confusion) of
extempore and Premeditate Prayers put together. Wherein the Standers, still are
the same, and the essential Parts, (confession of sin, begging of Pardon,
craving grace for the future, thanking God for former Favors etc.) like the
Bones of the Prayer remain always unaltered. Whilst the moveable petitions
(like the flesh and Color of thy Prayers) are added, abridged, or altered, as
Gods Spirit advises and enableth us, according to the emergencies of present
occasions.

In the Mid-land-Sea Galleys are found to be most useful, which partly run
on the Legs of Oars, and partly fly with the Wings of Sails, whereby they
become serviceable both in a wind and in a calm. Such the convenience of
mixtprayer, wherein infused and acquired graces meet together, and men partly
move with the brea the of the holy Spirit, partly row on by their own
Industry. Such medley prayers are most useful, as having the stedinesse of
premeditate, and the activity of extemporary prayer, joined together.

XIIII. Take your company along.
IT is no disgrace for such who have the gift and grace of Extemporary prayer,
sometimes to use a set-forme, for the benefit and behoof of others. Iaacob
though he could have marched on a man's pace, yet was careful not to
over-drive the children, and Eewes Genesis
big with young. Let Ministers remember to bring up the R^re in their
Congregations, that the meanest may go along with them in their Devotions.

God could have created the World ex tempore, in a moment, but was pleased (as
I may say',) to make it premediatly in a set-method of six days, Not for his
own, Ease, but our Instruction, that our Heads and Hearts might the better keep
pace with his Hands, to behold and consider his Workmanship.

Let no man disdain to set his own nimblenesse backward that others may go
along with him. Such degrading ones-selfe is the quickest proceeding in Piety,
when men prefer the edification of others before their own credit and
esteem.

XV. Prayer must be Quotidian.
AMongst other Arguments inforceing the necessity of Daily-Prayer, this not the
least that Christ injoynes us to petition for daily Bread. New-Bread we know is
best, and in a spiritual sense, our Bread, (though in it self as stale and
moldie as that of the Gibeonites) is every day new, because a new and hot
blessing (as I might say) is daily begged, and bestowed of God upon it.

Manna must daily be gathered, and not provisionally be hoorded up, God expects
that men every day address themselves unto him, by petitioning him for
sustenance.

How contrary is this to the Common-practice of many. As Camells in
Sandy-Countries are said to drink but once in seven days, and then in
praesens, praeteritum, and futurum, for time past, present, and to come, so
many, fumble this, last, (...) next Weeks devotion all in a prayer. Yea some
defer all their praying till the last day.

Constantine had a conceit that because Baptism washed away all sins, he
would not be baptized till his Deathbed, that so his soul might never loose
the purity thereof, but immediately mount to Heaven. But sudden Death
preventing him, he was not baptized at all, as some say, or only by an Arrian
Bishop as others a^irme. If any erroniously on the same supposition put off
their Prayers to the last, let them take heed, least long delayed, at last they
prove either none at all or none in effect.

XVI. The Lords Prayer.
IN this age we begin to think meanly of the Lords Prayer, Oh how basely may
the Lord think of our Prayers. Some will not forgive the Lords prayer for that
passage therein, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

Others play the witches on this prayer. Witches are reported (amongst many,
other hellish Observations, whereby they oblige themselves to Satan) to say the
Lords prayer backwards. Are there not many, who though they do not pronounce
the syllables of the Lords prayer retrograde (their discretion will not suffer
them to be betrayed, to such a nonsense sin,) yet they transpose it in effect,
desiring their Dayly-Bread, before Gods Kingdom come, preferring temporal
benefits before heavenly blessings. Oh; if every one by this mark should be
tried for a Witch, how hard would it go with all of us. Lamiarum plena sunt
omnia.

XVII. All Best.
AT the siedge and taking of New-Carthage in Spain there was dis^ention
betwixt the Soldiers, about the Crown Murall due to him, who first footed the
Walls of the City, Two pretended to the Crown. Parts were taken, and the Roman
Army siding in factions, was likely to fall foul, and mutually fight against
it self. Scipio the General prevented the danger by providing two Murall
Pluta^k in Scipo's life. page 1807.
Crowns, giving one to each who claimed it, affirming that on the examination
of the prooffes, both did appear to him at the same instant to climb the wall.
O let us not set several kinds of Prayers at varience betwixt themselves,
which of them should be most useful, most honorable. All are most excellent
at several times, Crown Gro^nes, Crown Ejaculations, crown Extemporary, crown
Set, crown Mixed prayer, I dare boldly say, he that in some measure loves not
all kind of lawful Prayers, loves no kind of lawful Prayers. For if we love
God the Father, we can hate no Ordinance, his child though perchance an
occasion may affect one above another.

XVIII. All manner of Prayer.
IT is an ancient Stratagem of Satan, (yet still he uses it, still men are
cheated by it,) to set Gods Ordinance at Variance, (as the Desciples fell out
amongst themselves) which of them should be the greatest. How has the Readers
Pue been clash't against the Preachers Pulpit, to the shaking almost of the
whole Church, whether that the Word Preached or read be most effectual to
Salvation. Also whether the Word pre^ch'd or catechized, most useful. But no
Ordinance so abused as Prayer. Prayer has been set up against Preaching,
against Catech^zing, against it self. Whether public or private, Church or
Closet, Set or Extempore Prayer the best. See how St. Paul determines the
controversy Ephesians. 6. 18.
(...) with all manner of Prayer, (so the Geneva Translation) and supplication
in the Spirit. Preferring none, commending all lawful Prayer to our practice.

XX. To God alone.
AMongst all manner of prayer to God, I find in Scripture neither promise,
precept, nor Precedent to warrant Prayers to Saints. And were there no other
reason, this would encourage me to pray to Christ alone because.

St. Paul struck Elimas blind, Christ made blind Bartemeus See. St. Peter
killed Ananias and Saphira with his Word, Christ with his Word revived dead
Lazarus. The Disciples forbad the Synophaenician woman, to call after Christ,
Christ called unto her after they had forbidden her. All my Saviors Works are
saveing works, none extending to the death of mankind.

Surely Christ being now in Heaven, has not less goodness because he has
more glory, his Bowels still earn on us. I will therefore rather present my
Prayers to him, who always did heal, then to those who sometimes did hurt.
And though this be no convinceing Argument to Papists, it is a comfortable
Motive to Protestants. A good Third, where so good Firsts and Seconds have been
laid before.

OCCASIONAL MEDITATIONS.
I. Love and Anger.
I saw two chil dren fighting together in the street. The Father of the one
passing by, f^rch't his son away and corrected him; the other lad was left
without any check, though both were equally faulty in the Fray. I was half
offended that, being guilty alike, they were not punished alike: But the Parent
would only meddle with him over whom he had an undoubted Dominion, to whom he
bare an unfayned affection.

The wicked sin, the Godly smart most in this world. God singleth out his
own sons, and beats them by themselves: Whom he loves he Heb. 12. 6.
Chasteneth. Whilst the ungodly; preserved from affliction, are reserved for
destruction. It being needless that their hair should be shaved with an
hired Isa. 7. 20.
Rasor whose Heads are intended for the Mat. 3. 10.
Axe of divine Justice.

II. Upwards, Upwards.
HOW large Houses do they build in London on little Ground? Revenging
themselves on the Narrowness of their Room with store of Stories. Excellent
Arithm tick! from the Root of one Floor, to multiply so many Chambers. And
though painful the climbing up, pleasant the staying there, the higher the
Healthfuller, with clearer Light and sweeter Air.

Small are my Means on Earth. May I mount my Soul the higher in Heavenly
Meditations, relying on divine providence; (he that fed many thonsands with
Mat. 14. 5.
five Loaves, may feed me and Mine with the FIFTH PART of that one Loaf, that
once was all mine. Higher my Soul! higher! In bodily Bnilbings, commonly the
Garrets are most empty, but my mind the higher mounted, will be the better
furnished. Let ^severance to Death be my uppermost Chamber, the Roof of which
Grace is the Pavement of Glory.

III. Bew^re wanton wit.
I saw an Indentu e too fairly engrossed; for the writer (beter Scrivener then
Clearke) had so filled it with flourishes that it hindered my reading thereof,
the wantonness of his Pen made a new Alphabet, and I was subject to mistake
his D^shes for real Letters.

What damage has unwarie Rhetoric done to Religion? Many an innocent Reader
has taken Damas^en and Theophilact at their word, counting their eloquent
Hyperboles of Christ's pres^nce in the Sacrament, the exact Standards of their
judgment, whence after ages brought in T^ansubstantiation. Yea from the
Fa^hers elegant Apostraphe'es to the D^ad (lively Pictures by hasty Eyes may be
taken for living Persons) Prayers to Saints took their Original. I see that
truths Secretary must use a set Hand, in wrighting important points of
Divinity. Ill dancing for nimlle Wits, on the Precipisses of dangerous
Doctrines. For though they cscape by their agility, others (encouraged by their
examples) may be brought to destr^ction.

IV. Ill. done Un done.
I Saw one^, whether ^ut of haste, or want (...) skill, put up his Sword the
wrong way; It cut even when it was sheathed, the edge being transposed where
the back should have been: So that, perceiving his error, he was feign to
draw it out, that he might put it up again.

Wearied and wasted with civil War, We that formerly loathed the Mann^ of
Peace (because Common) could now be content to feed on it, though full of
Worms and putrified: Some so desirous thereof that they care not on what
Terms the War be ended, so it be ended: But such a Peace would be but a
Truce, and the conditions thereof would no longer be in force, then whilst
They are in Force. Let us pray that the Sword be sheathed ^he right way, with
Gods glory; and without the dangerous dslocation of Prince and Pe^ples Right:
otherwise it may justly be suspected, that the Sword put up, will be drawn out
again, And the Articles of an i^l Agreement, though engrossed in Parchment, not
take effect, so long as Paper would continue.

V. A Pace a pace.
ROwing on the Thames, the waterman confirmed me in what formerly I had learnt
from the Maps; how that River westward runs so crooked as likely to lose it
self in a Labyrinth of its own making. From Reading to Lon^on, by land,
thirty by water an hundred miles. So wantonly that Stream disporteth it self,
as if as yet unresolved whether to advance to the Sea, or retreat to its
fountain.

But the same being past London (as if sensible of its former Laziness, and
fearing to be checked of the Ocean, the mother of all Rivers, for so long
loytering; or else, as if weary with wandering and loath to lose more way: Or
lastly, as if conceiving such Wildenesse inconsistent with the Gravity of his
Channel, now grown old, and ready to be ^urted in the Sea) runs in so direct
a Line, that from London to Gravesend, the number of the (...) are eq^ally
twenty both by Land and by Water.

Ala^! How much of my life is lavisht away? Oh the Intricacies, Windings,
Wanderings, Turnings, Tergiversations of my dece^full Youth! I have lived in the
midst of a crooked Generation Philip. 2 15.
, and with them have turned aside unto Psalm. 125 5.
crooked wa^es. High time it is now for me to make Straight Heb. 12. 13.
Paths for my feet and to redeem what is past, by amending what is present and
to come. Flux, Flux (in the Germa^ne Tougue; Quick, Quick) was a Mot^o of
Bishop In his Life. p. 10.
Jewels, presaging the approach of his Death. May I make good use thereof, Make
haste, Make haste, God knows how little time is l^st me and may I be a good
Husband to improve the short remnant thereof.

VI. Always the Rising Sun.
I Have wondered why the Romish Church do not pray to Saint Abraham, Saint
David, Saint Hezekiah, etc. as well as to the Apostles, and their Successors
since Christ's time; For those ancient Patriarks, by the confession of Papists,
were long since relieved out of Lim bo (soon out, who were never in) and
admitted to the sight and presence of God, especially Abraham, being Father of
the Faithful, as well Gentile as ^ew, would (according to their Principles)
be a proper Patron for their Petitions.

But it seems that modern Saints rob the old ones of their honor, a Garnet,
or late Bernard of Paris, have severally more Prayers made unto them then many
old Saints have together. New Beesoms sweep clean; new Jer. 2. 13.
Cisternes of fond men's own hewing, most likely to hold water.

Protestants, in some kind, serve their living Ministers, as Papists their
dead Sa^uts. For aged Pastors, who have bor^ the Heat of the Day, in our
Church, are justled out of respect by young Preachers, not having half their
Age, nor a quarter of their Learning and Religion. Yet let not the former be
disheartened, for thus it ever was and will be, English-Athenians, (...) for
Novelties, new Sects, new Schisms, new Doctrines, new Disciplines, new
Prayers, new Preachers.

VII. Charity, Charity,
CHurch Story reports of Saint John, that being grown very Aged (well nigh a
hundred years old) wanting strength and voice to make a long Sermon, he was
wont to go up into the Pulpet, and often repete these Words, Babes k epe your
selves from Idols, Brethren Love one another.

Our Age may seem suffi^iently to have provided against the growth of Idolatry
in England. O that some order were taken for the increase of Charity! It were
Liberty enough, if for the next seven years, all Sermons were bound to keep
Residence on this Text. Brethren Love one another.

But would not some fall out with themselves, if appointed to Preach Unity to
Others. Vindicative S^irits, if confined to this Text, would confine the Text
to their Passion: by Brethren understanding only such of their own Party. But
O, seeing other Monopolies are dissolved let not this remain, against the
fundamental Law of Charity. Let all bend their heads, hearts and hands, to
make up the breaches in Church and State. But too many now a days are like
Pharaohs Magicians, who could conjure up Exodus 8. 7.
with their Charms more new Frogs, but could not remove or drive away those
multitude of Frogs which were there before. Unhappily happy in making more
rents and discentions, but unable or unwilling to compose our former
differences.

VIII. The Sensible Plant.
I Heard much of a Sensible Pl^nt, and counted it a senseless relation (a
rational Beast, carrying as little contradiction) until beholding it, mine
Eyes ushered my Judgment into a belief thereof. My comprehension thereof is
this. God having made three great Stairs [ Vegetable, Se^sible and Reasonable
Creat^res] that men thereby might climb up i^to the knowledge of a Deity, has
placed somethings of a middle nature (as half Paces betwixt the Staries) so to
make the Step less, and the ascent more easy for our Meditations.

Thus this active Plant (with visible motion) does border and confine on
Sensible Creatures. Thus in Afric, some most agil and intelligent Marmasits
may seem to shake (fore feet shall I say or) hands, with the rudest Salvages
of that Country, as not much more then one remove from them, in knowledge and
civility.

But by the same proportion may not man, by custom and improvement of Piety,
mount himself near to an Angelical nature. Such was Enoch, who whilst
liveing on Earth, Genesis 5. 22.
Walked with God. O may our Conversation be in Philip. 3 20.
Heaven. For shall a Plant take a new degree and proce^d Sensible, and shall
man have his Grace Stayed for want of sufficiency, and not vvhilest living
here, Commence Angel, in his holy and heavenly affections.

IX. Christ my King.
I Read how king Edward the first, ingenuously surprised the Welsh into
subjection, proferring them such a Prince as should be

1. The Son of a King.

2. Borne in their own Country.

3. Whom none could tax for any fault.

The Welsh accepted the Conditions, and the King tendered them his son Edward,
an Infant, newly borne in the Castle of Carnarvan.

Do not all these Qualifications mystically Center themselves in my Savior?

1. The King of Heaven says unto him, thou art my Son, Psalm. 2 7.
this day have I begotten thee.

2. Our true Country man, Real flesh, whereas he took not on him the nature
of Angels.

3. Without spot or blemish, like to us in all things, sin only excepted.

Away then with those wicked men, who Luk 19. 14.
Will not have this King to rule over them. May he have Dominion in and over
me. Thy Kingdom come. Heaven and Earth cannot afford a more proper Prince for
the purpose, exactly accomplished with all these comfortable qualifications.

X. Tribulation.
I Find two sad Etymologies of Tribulation. One from (Tribulus) a three forked
Thorn, which (...) that such afflictions which are as full of Pain and Anguish
unto the soul, as a Thorn thrust into a tender part of the Flesh is unto the
Body, may properly be termed Tribulations.

The other, from Tribulus, the Head of a Flail, or Flagell, knaggie and knotty
(made commonly as I take it, of a thick black-Thorne) and then it imports, that
Afflictions, falling upon us as heavy as the Flaile, threshing the Corn, are
styled Tribulations.

I am in a Straight which deduction to embrace, from the sharp or from the
heavy Thorn. But which is the worst, though I may choose whence to derive the
Word, I cannot choose so, as to decline the thing I must * through much
Tribulation, Acts 14. 22.
enter into the Kingdom of God.

Therefore I will labor not to be like a young Colt, first set to Plough,
which more Tires himself out with his own untowardnesse (whipping himself
with his misspent mettle) then with the weight of what he draws; and will
labor patiently to bear what is imposed upon me.

XI. Beware.
I Saw a Cannon shot off. The men, at whom it was levelled, fell flat on the
ground, and so escaped the Bullet. Against such blows, falliug is all the
fencing, and Prostration all the Armor of proof.

But that which gave them notice to fall down was their perceiving of the fire
before the Ordnance was discharged. Oh the Mercy of that Fire! which, as it
were, repenting of the mischief it had done, and the murder it might make,
ran a Race, and outstript the Bullet, that men) at the sight thereof) might be
provided, when they could not resist to prevent it. Thus every murdering
Piece, is also a Warning Piece against it self.

God, in like manner, warnes before he wounds; frights before he fights. Yet
forty days and Ninevegh shall be destroyed. Oh Let us fall down before the
Lord our Maker; Then shall his Anger be pleased to make in us a daily Pass
over, and his Bullets levelled at us shall fly above us.

XII. The first - Fruits.
PApists observe (such are curious priers into Protestants carriage) that
Charity in England lay in a swound, from the dissolution of Abbeys, in the
reign of King Henry the eighth, till about the tenth of Queen Elizabeth.

As if in that age of Ruin, none durst raise Religious Buildings, and as if
the Axe and Hammer, so long taught to beat down, had forgot their former Use to
build up for pious intents.

At last comes * William Lambert, Esqure, and first founds an Hospital See
Cem^dens B^t. in Kent page 327.
at Greenwich in Kent, calling that his Society (like politic Joab, after 2
Sa^. 12, 28.
David's name.) The poor people of Queen Elizabeth. And after this worthy man
followed many, that we may almost dazzle Papists Eyes with the Light of
Protestants Good works. The same Papists perchance may now conceive Charity so
disheartened in our days (by these civil Wars and the consequences thereof)
that no Protestants hereafter should be so desperate as to adventure upon a
public good Deed. O for a LAMBERT. Junior (and I hope some of his Lineage are
left Heirs to his Lands and Virtues) who shall break through the Ranks of all
Discouragements; so that now English Protestants, being to begin a new Score of
good Works, might from him date their Epoche. Such a Charity deserves to be
Knighted for the Valor thereof.

XIV. The Recruit.
I Read how one main Argument which the Apostle Paul enforces on Timothy, To
make full proof of his Ministry is this, 2 Timothy 4 6.
For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand.
Thus the dying Saints, drawing near to Heaven, their mark, is the best spur
for the surviving to make the more speed in their Race.

How many excellent Divines have these sad times hastened to their long home?
(So called in Scripture Eccles. 125.
not because long going thither, but long [ ever] tarrying there.) How many
have been sorrow-shot to their Heart? O that this would edge the endeavors of
our Gen^ration, to succeed in the dead places of worthy men. Pitzeus in vita
Stapletoni
Shall the Papists curiously observe and sufficiently boast, that their
Stapleton was borne on the same day, on which Sir Thomas More was beheaded, (as
if his cradle made of the others coffin,) and shall not our Nurseries of
learning supply the void rooms of our Worthies deceased. No sin I hope to
pray, that our Timothyes come not short of our Paul's, as in time, so in
learning and religion.

XV. The Mongrel.
I Find the natural Philosopher, making a Caracter of the Lions disposition,
amongst other In viros prius qu^ in terminas saevit. Pin. Not. Hist. lib. 8.
cap. 10.
his qualities reports that first the Lion * feeds on Men, and afterward
(if forced with extremity of hunger) on Women.

Satan is a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour. Only he inverts the
method, and in his bill of fare takes the second course first. Ever since he
over tempted our Grandmother Eve, encouraged with success, he has preyed
first on the weaker Sex. It seems He has all the vices, not the virtues of
that King of Beasts, a Woolfe Lion, having his cruelty without his Geuerositye.

XVIII. Edification.
I Read in a learned Physician, how our pro vident Mother, Nature, foreseeing
men (her wan ton children) would be tampering with the edgetooles of Minerals,
hid them far from them, in the bowels of the Earth, whereas she exposed
Plants and Herbs more obvious to their Eye, as fitter for their use. But some
bold Empericks, neglecting the latter (as too common) have adventured on those
hidden Minerals, often times (through want of skill) to the hurt of many, and
hazard of more.

God, in the new Testament, has placed all historical and practical matter
(needful for Christians to know and believe) in the beginning of the Gospel.
All such Truths lie above ground, plainly visible, in the litteral sense. The
Prophe ticall and difficult part comes in the close; But though the Testament
was written in Greek, too many read it like Hebrew, beginning at the end
thereof. How many trouble themselves about the Revelatiou, who might be better
busied in plain Divinity? Safer prescribing to others, and practicing in
themselves, positive Piety; leaving such Mistical Minerals to men of more
judgment to prepare them.

XIX. Mad, not mad.
I Find St. Paul in the same chapter confess and deny madness in himself.
Acts. 26. verse 11. And being exceeding mad against them, I persecuted them
even unto strange Cities, verse 25. when Festus challenged him to be beside
himself, I am not mad most noble Festus. Whilst he was mad indeed, then
none did suspect or accuse him to be distracted; but when converted, and in his
right mind, then Festus taxes him of madness.

There is a Country in Africa, Munster Cosmog.
wherein all the natives have pendulous Lips. hanging down like dogs-eares,
always raw and sore; Here only such as are handsome are pointed at for
Monsters in this Age, wherein polluted and unclean Lips are grown Epidemicall,
if any refrain their tongues from common Sins, alone are gazed at as Strange
Spectacles.

XX. The deepest Cut.
I beheld a Lapidary cutting a Diamond, with a Diamond Hammer and Anvil both of
the same kind.

God In Scipture styled his servants his Malac. 18.19.
Jewels. His Diamonds they are, but alas, rude, rough, unpolished, without
shape or fashion, as they arise naked out of the Bed of the Earth, before Art
has dressed them. See how God by rubbing one Acts 15. 24.
rough Diamond against makes both smooth. Barnabas afflicts Paul and Paul
afflicts Barnabas, by their hot falling out, Hierom occasioneth trouble to
Ruffinus, and Ruffinus to Hierom.

In our unnatural war, none I hope so weak and wilful as to deny many good
men (though misled) engaged on both sides. O how have they scratcht. and raced,
and pierced, and bruised, and broken one another? Behold Heavens hand grating
one Diamond with another; as for all those who un-charitably deny any good on
that Party which they dislike, such show themselves Diamonds indeed in their
hardness (cruel censuring) but none in any commendable quality, in their
Conditions.

FINIS.
Page 57, Line 8. for Such, read Sue.


