A SERMON PREACHED AT THE COLLEGIAT Church of S. Peter in Westminster, on the
27. of March, being the day OF HIS MAJESTY'S INAUGURATION.

By Thomas Fuller, B.D.

LONDON, Printed for John Williams, at the sign of the Crown in Saint Paul's
Churchyard, 1643.

A SERMON PREACHED at the Collegiate Church of S. PETER in WESTMINSTER, on the
27. of March, being the day of his MAJESTY'S Inauguration.
2. SAM. 19.30. Yea: let him take All, forasmuch as my Lord the KING is come
again in peace unto his own House.


IT is as natural for malicious men to backbite, as for dogs to bite, or
serpents to sting; see this in Ziba, who raised a false report on his master
Mephibosheth, and accused him to David (when he departed from Jerusalem) of no
less then high Treason, as if in David's absence he affected the Kingdom for
himself: Well was Ziba studied in the Art of slandering, to charge home, and
draw his arrow to the head; for in heinous accusations, when the wound is
cured, the very scarre will kill, and though the innocence of the party accused
may chance to clear the main debt, yet the arrerages of the suspicion will be
enough to undo him: But I wonder not at Ziba's accusing Mephibosheth, I wonder
at David's believing Ziba, at the first information, of a single witness, and him
a servant against his master, without further proof, as hearing both parties,
to proceed to censure and fine Mephibosheth with the loss of his lands, was a
piece of unjust justice, wherein David cannot be excused, much less defended.
All that can be said for him is this, That not David, but David's distractions
passed this sentence, so that being in fear and fright, and flight, it can
scarce be accounted his deliberate Act: once he said in his have, All men are
liars, and now being on the spur in his speed, he believes Mephibosheth was a
Traitor.

2. But it pleased Gods providence that in this chapter the tide was turned,
and David returned to Jerusalem, where Mephibosheth meeting him, was admitted
to speak in his own behalf, and makes a plain and pithy narration of the
matter: Innocence has so clear a complexion, that she needs no painting, and a
good cause consisting in matter of fact, when it is plainly told, is
sufficiently pleaded: He shows how that violenta detentio withheld him from
attending on David, being no lack of his loyalty, but the lamenesse of his
legs, which might and should have been helped, had not Ziba hindered it on
purpose, in refusing to saddle his Ass; And thus having wronged his master at
home, he then traduced him abroad, transferring his own guile, to make it
become the others guiltiness: Soon did David perceive his error, and to make
amends did order, That the lands should be held in Copartnership betwixt them;
Mephibosheth have one moiety, and Ziba the other; Why speak thou any more of
thy matters? I have said it, Thou and Ziba divide the lands.

3. This did not satisfy Mephibosheth, not because it was too little, but
because it was too much; He now needs nothing, seeing his Sovereign is
returned in safety: and therefore desires that Ziba may have All, according to
David's former appointment; Yea, let him take All. This he did partly perchance
to assert the Honor of David: It should never be said, that David said any
thing, and it was not done; what grants he made, Mephibosheth would make good,
though with the loss of his lands: It bears no proportion to the greatness
of Princes, nor stands with the stateliness of States, to say and unsay, do
and undo, order and disorder again, whose first resolutions are presumed to
be grounded on so good reason, they shall need no revocation. But chiefly he
did it to show the Hyperbole of his happiness, and Transcendency of his joy,
conceived at David's safe return; joy which sweld up him in full measure,
pressed down, shaken together, and running over. Yet lest the least drop of so
precious a liquor as this was (being the spirits of loyalty distilled) should
be spilt on the ground, let us gather it up with our best attention, and pour
it in our hearts to practice it, as it flows from the Text, Yea, let him take
All, etc.

4. The words contain a large Grant, and a just consideration moving thereunto;
The large Grant, let him Take All: wherein observe the Granter, Mephibosheth:
The Grantee, Ziba: and the thing Granted, All. ( i. e.) house and lands and
rents, and profits, and emoluments, and obventions, and hereditaments, with the
appendants and the appurtenances thereunto belonging. What the wariness of
modern men devises in many words, and all twisted together (few enough to hold
in this litigious age, wherein a span of land cannot be conveyed in less then
a span of parchment,) see All these words summed up in this one word All in my
Text, let him take All. Secondly, Here is the consideration of the Granter,
which consists not in any money paid, or service performed by the Grantee, but
only in respect of a general good, which God had bestowed on David, and in
him on all Israel, Forasmuch as my Lord the King is come in Peace to his own
House.

5. In prosecuting which parts, I could desire that my discourse might have
been open and champion to proceed in an even and continued style, but my Text
is encumbered with so many difficulties, that my Sermon must rise and fall into
hills and dales of Objections and Answers, which Answers, as so many fruitful
valleys, shall afford us plentiful store of profitable observations.

6. Object. The first hill which we are to climb is an objection, if not
within the walls, yet surely in the suburbs of my Text. Why? (may some say) me
thinks David does Mephibosheth justice but by halfes; For when his Innocence so
plainly appeared, the slanderer should have been soundly punished: Thou and
Ziba divide the land: He should rather have divided Ziba's head from his
shoulders; Or of all the land, leave him only one Tree, wherein he should be
justly executed, as a landmark to forewarne all deceitful servants how they
tread on so unwarrantable ways. What hope was there he would hereafter prove
faithful to his Prince, that was false to his master? Yea, this was contrary
to the fundamental laws of David's family, Psalm. 101.5. Who so privily
slandereth his neighbor him will I cut off: Whereas Ziba here was so far from
being cut off, that he was both freely forgiven, and fairly rewarded, for the
malicious disservice he had done his master.

7. Resp. I answer, we must consider that Ziba was a considerable man in his
tribe of Benjamin, and probably might make a great impression on the people:
Besides, great was his experience, being an old Courtier of Saul's, greater the
alliance to him, and dependence on him, having fifteen sons and twenty
servants, (All now officiously attending on King David at his return, as it is
in the seventeenth verse of this chapter.) Greatest of all was his will and
skill to do mischef, and therefore no wonder if David was unwilling to offend
him. Secondly, consider David was at this time in the Nonage, (not to say
Infancy) of his new-recovered Kingdom. Wary Physicians will not give strong
purges to little children, and David thought it no wisdom at this time, on
these Terms, as matters stood with him, to be severe in his proceedings; but
rather by all endeerments to tie and oblige the affections of his people the
faster unto him. We may see this in the matter of Shimei, which immediately
concerned David himself; Yea when by Abishai he was urged and pressed to punish
him, Shall not Shimei be put to death for this, because he has cursed the
Lords anointed? Yet David's policy was so far above his revenge, that he not
only flatly rejected the motion, but also sharply reproved the mover, What
have I to do with you ye sons of Zerviah, that ye should this day be
adversaries unto me? shall there any man be put to death this day in Israel?
for do I not know that I am this day King over Israel? He would not have the
conduits run blood on the day of his new Coronation, nor would he have the
first page in the second Edition of his Sovereignty written in red letters, but
rather sought (by all acts of grace) to gain the good will of his Subjects.
Hence we observe,

8. Magistrates sometimes are feign to permit what they cannot conveniently
punish for the present. Thus sometimes Chirurgions leave their ulcers
unlaunch't, either because they are not ripe, or because perchance they have
not all their necessary instruments about them. And indeed, if Statists
perceive, that from the present removing of an inconvenience, a greater
mischief will inevitably follow, 'twere madness to undo a state for the
present, for fear it will be undone hereafter. Perchance the wisdom of our
Parliament may suffer in the censures of such, who fathom mysteries of state
by their own shallow capacities, for seeming to suffer Sectaries and
Schismatics to share and divide in Gods service with the Mephibosheths, the
quiet and peaceable children of our Church: And indeed such Sectaries take a
great share to themselves, having taken away all the Common Prayer out of most
places, and under pretense to abolish superstition, have almost banished
decency out of Gods Church: But no doubt the Sages of our State want not will,
but wait a time when with more conveniencie, and less disturbance (though
slowly, surely) they will restrain such turbulent spirits with David in my
Text, who was rather contented, then well pleased, to pass by Ziba for the
present.

9. Object. Yea, but (may some say) this speech of Mephibosheth cannot be
allowed either in piety or policy: For if he speak true, then he was a fool;
and if he spoke false, then he was a flatterer. If he spoke true, then he was a
fool; for what wise man would at once give away all that he has. Charity may
impart her branches, but she must not part with her root: The wisdom of our
grand Charter has provided, That no offender (though for an heinous fault)
should be so heavily amerced, but always salvo suo sibi contenemento; What
favor is afforded to malefactors, Charity surely should give to its self, as
not thereby to prejudice and impair her own livelihood: I commend the well
bounded and well grounded bounty of Zacheus, Luke 19.8. Behold, Lord, half of
my goods I give to the poor: But with Mephibosheth to give All his goods, and
that not to the poor, but to a couzening cheating servant, was an action of
madness. How would he do hereafter to subsist? Did he expect hereafter to be
miraculously fed with Manna dropped into his mouth? Or in his old age would he
turn Court almes-man, and live on the bounty of others? And grant he could
shift for himself, yet what should Micah his son do, and his future
posterity? If he spoke false, then he was a flatterer; and said it only to
sooth David, when he meant no such matter: But Court-holy-water never quenched
any thirsty soul. Flatterers are the worst of tame beasts, which tickle
Princes even to their utter destruction.

10. Resp. I answer, He was neither fool nor flatterer, but an affectionate
Subject, and at the present, in a mighty passion of gladness: But first we
must know, that it behoved Mephibosheth to do something extraordinary; and in
his expressions to exceed the size and standard of common language; were it
only to unstain his credit from the suspicion of disloyalty Ziba had cast upon
him. Secondly, Mephibosheth was confident and well assured, that whatsoever
David did for the present, yet hereafter, when sufficiently informed of
Mephibosheths innocence, he would make not only competent, but plentiful
provision for him. But lastly and chiefly we must know, that these words of
Mephibosheth were spoken in a great passion of joy, and passionate speeches
must always sue in Chauncery, and plead to have the equity of a candide and
charitable construction allowed them: Let us not therefore be over-rigid, in
examining his words when we knew his meaning, that he was affected with an
unmanageable joy at David's safe return: Rather hence let us learn.

11. Speeches spoken in passion must not be strercht so far as they may be
strained, but have a favorable interpretation; for such is the very nature of
passion, that it can scarce do any thing but it must over-doe. See thou then
the soul of a man shaking with fear, or soaring with joy, or burning in
anger, or drowning in grief, meet his words with a charitable acception of
them, and defalke the extravagancies of his expressions: The wringing of the
nose brings forth blood says wise Agur, Prove. 30.33. And he who shall press
and wrack and torture speeches spoken in passion, may make a bloody
construction thereof; besides, beyond, against the intent of him that spoke it:
But let us content our selves, that we know their meaning, and not prosecute,
(much less persecute) their words too far, as here in my Text, we know the
mind of Mephibosheth was to show, That he was soundly, sincerely, and from the
ground, of his heart glad, when he said, Yea, let him take All, forasmuch as,
etc.

12. Come we now to the consideration of the Grant, Forasmuch as my Lord the
King is come in peace unto his own house. Behold in the words a confluence of
many joys together. First, The King; there is matter of gladness for all
Subjects in general. Secondly, My Lord the King, Mephibosheth was David's
servant in Ordinary; or rather his extraordinary Favorite, and this made his
joy to be greater. Thirdly, Is come again, is come back, is returned, and
therefore more welcome after long wanting: The interposing of the night renders
the arising of the sun more desired: Princes presence after some absence more
precious. Fourthly, To his own house. Why? were not all the houses in Israel
David's houses? Are not Kings always at home, whilst in their kingdom? True,
all the houses in Israel were David's own, not by his private use, but Paramount
Sovereignty over them, whereas his Palace in Jerusalem was peculiarly his own,
by his particular possession thereof, and proper residence therein. Fifthly and
lastly, Come in Peace; in Peace, which is the substance of all earthly
blessings, and the shadow of heavenly happiness.

13. Obj. Yea, but may some say, Mephibosheth does not measure out David's
happiness to the best advantage, nor does he give the true Emphasis to his
honor, for David returned with victory. Had he not gotten a glorious conquest
under the conduct of Ioab, in the forest of Ephraim over all his enemies?
20000. slain by the sword, more devoured with the wood, the rest routed, their
Captain killed, and and all with a loss so little on David's side, that none at
all is mentioned; But Mephibosheth takes no notice of David's Trophies and
Triumphs, but either out of envy, or ignorance, or both, concealing his
conquests, huddles all up under the name of Peace, Forasmuch as my Lord the
King is come to his own house in Peace.

14. I answer, Mephibosheth therefore suppresseth victory, and mentions Peace
only, because victories are not valuable in themselves, but in order and
rendencie, as they conduce to the attaining of Peace. Excellently does the
Apostle argue the distance and dignity of men above women, from the end and
intent of their creation, 1 Corin. 11.9. Neither was the man created for the
woman, but the woman for the man: so Peace was never made for victory, but
victory for Peace; as all Means, even by Indentures drawn by nature, are
bound Apprentices to serve the End their master. Let not therefore the maid
grow so proud as to strive for equipage, much less for priority with her
Mistress, victory does the work for Peace, and therefore Peace alone is
mentioned by Mephibosheth.

15. Resp. Secondly, I answer, If David's conquests had achieved against the
Edomites, Amonites, or Amorites, or Moabites, or Midianites, or Syrians, or
Sidonians, or Egyptians, or Philistines, or any foreign foe, Mephibosheth no
doubt would have made mention thereof to the purpose: But David was thus
unhappy in his very happiness, That this victory was gotten over his own
Subjects. The ribs of Jacob did grate, one against the other, and in that
civill-uncivill war many worthy men lost their lives unworthily. Whose lives
there prodigally spent, had they been thriftily expended in a foreign design,
had been sufficient to have purchased David another Kingdom: Say not that such
as were slain were none of David's Subjects, but Traitors and Rebels, which did
oppose their Prince and resist their Sovereign. For here we must know that
they were David's Subjects, first de jure, they ought to have been his Subjects;
and a joint, though out of joint, is a joint still, though dislocated out of
its proper place. Secondly, some of them were David's Subjects de facto, Two
hundred men went out of Jerusalem to Hebron (chapt. 15.11.) in their
simplicity, and they knew not anything, only their innocence was practiced
upon by the policy of Absalom. Thirdly and lastly, they were all presumed his
Subjects de futuro, when their eyes were opened, and they saw their own
errors, they would either return of themselves, or be easily reduced to their
former obedience: Wisely therefore did Mephibosheth wave the mention of
victory, which very word would have been a sad remembrancer to call to David's
mind the loss of his Subjects; and rather folds up all under the notion of
Peace, as a cover (if less gaudy, surely more pleasing) Forasmuch as my Lord
the King is come in peace to his own house.

16. Pious Princes can take no delight in victories over their own Subjects.
For when they cast up their Audits, they shall find themselves losers in their
very gaining. Nor can they properly be said to have won the day, which at the
best is but a twilight, being benighted with a mixture of much sorrow and
sadness. For Kings being the Parents of their Country, must needs grieve at
the destruction of their children. Who knows the love of a Parent, but a
Parent? Maidens are incompetent Judges of Mothers affections. How does the
affectionate Father when he beats his child, first feel the blows struck
through himself? I dare boldly say, that in that unhappy Aceldama, wherein the
person of our Sovereign was present, A sword did pierce through his own
heart, in the same sense as it is said of the Virgin Mary, Luke 2.35. For
though (thanks be to God) divine providence did cover his head in the day of
battle, as it were miraculously commanding the bullets, which flew about, and
respected no persons, not to touch his Anointed; yet notwithstanding his soul
was shot through with grief to behold a field spread with his Subjects
corpses, that scarce any passage, but either through rivelets of blood, or over
bridges of bodies. And had he got as great a victory as David got in the
forest of Ephraim, yet surely he would have preferred Peace far before it.
Well did Mephibosheth know David's diet, who to please his palate, makes
mention only of Peace, and suppresseth victory, Forasmuch as my Lord the King
is come to his own house in peace.

17. But the maine of Doctrine is this, All loyal Subjects ought to be glad
when their Sovereign is returned in peace. The sweetest music of this
Doctrine is in the close thereof, in peace; for nothing is more woeful then
war. The Lacedaemonians were wont to make their servants drunk, and then to
show them to their children, that they then beholding their frantic fits and
Apish behavior, once seeing might ever shun that beastly vice. Our sins have
made this land, which formerly was our faithful servant, drunk with blood: I
hope our children, seeing the miserable fruits and effects thereof, will grow
so wise and wary by their fathers follies, as for ever to take heed how they
engage themselves in such a civil war again. But why do I compare war to
drunkenness? which far better may be resembled to the Devil himself, seeing
all those symptoms that appeared in the possessed man, Mark 19. show
themselves too evidently in all places where war comes: And wheresoever he
catches him, he teareth him, and he fometh and gnasheth with his teeth, and
pineth away. -- And often times it has cast him into the fire, and often times
into the water to destroy him. Wheresoever war seizes on City, Castle, Town,
or Village he teareth it, making both breaches in the houses with batteries and
fractions in men's hearts with divisions, till the place pine away, having all
the marrow and moisture of the wealth thereof wasted and consumed, often times
casting it into the fire, burning beautiful buildings to ashes, and often times
into the water, drowning fruitful meadows with wilful inundations. Yea, if
these times long continue, one of these two mischiefs will inevitably come to
pass: Either (which is most probable) both sides being so equally poysed, will
do as the twelve Combatants in the field of strong men, 2 Samuel 2.16. thrust
their swords in each other, and so fall down both together; or if one party
prove victorious, it will purchase the conquest at so dear a price as the
destruction of the Kingdom, which will be done before. And what is said,
Matthew. 24.22. of the siege of Jerusalem, is as true of our miserable times, And
except those days were shortened, there should no flesh be saved: Would to God
I could as truly add the words that follow, But for the Elects sake those
days shall be shortened. However in my Doctrine there remains an eternal
truth, that all loyal Subjects ought to be glad when their Sovereign
returns in peace.

18. Yea may some say, David deserved to be welcomed indeed, and at his return
to be entertained with all possible expressions of gladness, for he brought
true religion along with him, and settled Gods service in the purity and
preciseness thereof. But now adays all cry to have Peace, to have Peace, and
care not to have truth together with it. Yea there be many silly Mephibosheths
in our days that so adore Peace, that to attain it, they care not what they
give away to the malignant Ziba's of our Kingdom. These say, Yea, let them take
All, laws, and liberties, and privileges, and proprieties, and Parliaments,
and Religion, and the Gospel, and godliness, and God himself. So be it that
the Lord our King may come to his house in Peace. But let us have peace and
truth together, both or neither; for if Peace offer to come alone, we will do
with it, as Ezechiah did with the brazen Serpent, even break it to pieces, and
stamp it to powder, as the dangerous Idol of ignorant people.

11. I answer, God forbid, God forbid we should have peace, and not truth with
it; but to speak plainly, I would to God men did talk less of truth and love
it more, have it seldomer in their mouths, and oftener, yea always in their
heads and hearts, to believe and practice it. Know then that the word truth is
subject to much Homonymie, and is taken in several senses according to the
opinions, or rather humors of those that use it. Ask the Anabaptist what is
truth, and he will tell you, Truth is the maintaining that the dominion over
the creatures is founded in grace; and that wicked men, (whereby they mean all
such whom they shall be pleased to account and call so) neither use the
creatures right, nor have any right to use them, but may justly be dispossessed
of them. It is truth that all goods should be common, that there should be no
civil Magistrate, that there ought to be no wars but what they make
themselves, for which they pretend inspiration; that children ought not to be
baptized till they could give a reason of their faith, and that such as have
been formerly, must be rebaptized Again. Ask the Separatists what is Truth,
and they will tell you, that the further from all ceremonies (though ancient
and decent) the nearer to God, that it is against the liberty of a Christian to
be pressed to the form of a set prayer, who ought only to be Voluntaries, and
follow the dictate of the spirit, that the Ministers made in our Church are
Antichristian, with many more. Ask the Schismatics of these times what is
Truth, and they will bring in abundance of their own opinions, which I spare at
this time to recite; the rather, because when the wheel of their fancy is
turned about, another spoak may chance to be vertical, being so fickle in
their Tenants, that what they account truth now, will perchance not be counted
truth by them seven years hence.

20. To come close to the answer, I say, that some of their pretended truths
are flat falsities, and others mere fooleries: as it easily to prove in time
and place convenient. Secondly, Grant some of them be truths, yet are they not
of that importance and concernment, as to deserve to imbroyle a Kingdom in
blood to bring them in. David longed for the waters of the well of Bethlehem, 2 Samuel 23.17. but when it was brought him, he checked his own vanity, and would
not drink it, because it was the blood of men that went in jeopardy of their
lives. But with what heart as men, or conscience as Christians, can Sectaries
seek to introduce their devices with such violence unto the Church, when they
know full well that it will cost blood before it be settled, and if it e're be
done, non erit tanti, it will not quit cost, being in themselves slight,
matters of mean consequence. Thirdly, Grant them not only true, but important,
if they be so desirous to have them introduced, the way most agreeable to
Christian proceedings, is to have them fairly debated, freely disputed, fully
decided, firmly determined by a still voice, and not that their new Gospel
should be given as the Law, with thundering and lightning of Cannon, fire and
sword. Fourthly, Be it affirmed for a certain truth, that formerly we had in
our Churches all truths necessary to salvation. Of such as deny this, I ask
Joseph's question to his Brethren, Is your father well, the old man, is he yet
alive? So how fares the souls of their Sires, and the Ghosts of their
Grandfathers? are they yet alive? do they still survive in bliss, in
happiness? Oh no, they are dead, dead in soul, dead in body, dead temporally,
dead eternally, dead and damned, if so be we had not all truth necessary to
salvation before this time. Yea, let these that cry most for the want of truth,
show one rotten kernel in the whole Pomegranet, one false Article in all 39.
Let them show where our Church is deficient in a necessary truth. But these men
know wherein their strength lies, and they had rather creep into houses, and
lead away captive silly women laden with infirmities, then to meddle with men,
and enter the lists to combat with the learned Doctors of the Church.

21. But it is further objected, David brought home a true Peace with him,
which long lasted firm, (the shower of Ziba's rebellion being afterward quickly
blown over.) But we have cause to suspect our Peace will not be a true Peace;
and an open wound is better then a palliate cure. Would you have us put off our
Armor to be killd in our clothes? and be surprised with war on a sudden,
when it will be past our policy to prevent, or power to resist it.

22. Answer, There must at last be a mutual confiding on both sides, so that
they must count the honesty of others their only hostages. This the sooner it
be done, the easier it is done. For who can conceive, that when both sides have
suffered more wrongs they will sooner forgive, or when they have offered more
wrongs be sooner forgiven. For our Kings part, let us demand of his money what
Christ asked of Caesar's coin; Whose image is this? Charls's? and what is the
superscription? RELIGIO PROTESTANTIUM, LEGES ANGLIAE, LIBERTATES PARLIAMENTI,
and he has caused them to be cast both in silver and gold, in pieces of
several sizes and proportions; as if thereby to show that he intends to make
good his promise both to poor and rich, great and small, and we are bound to
believe him. Nor less fair are the professions of the Parliament on the other
side, and no doubt but as really they intend them. But these matters belong not
to us to meddle with, and as for all other politic objections against Peace,
they pertain not to the Pulpit to answer. All that we desire to see, is the
King re-married to the State; and we doubt not but as the Bridegroom on the
one side will be careful to have his portion paid, His Prerogative; So the
Brides friends entrusted for her, will be sure to see her joynter settled, --
the liberty of the Subject.

23. Come we now briefly to apply our Text to the time. And we begin first
with the King, as this day does direct us, and truly he may be called so
emphatically, for his goodness. We may observe in our Savior, Mat. 11.7. that
he spoke nothing in the praise of John Baptist, whilst the Disciples of John
Baptist were in his presence, lest perchance he might have incurred the
suspicion of flattery, to commend the Master before the servants: but the Text
says, as they departed Jesus began, etc. to speak largely in John's
commendation. Seeing now the servants of our Sovereign are generally gone hence
to wait on their Lord, we may now boldly, without danger to make them puffed up
with pride, or our selves suspected for flattery, speak that in praise of their
Master, which malice it self can not deny. Look above him, to his God, how is
he pious? Look beneath to his Subjects, how is he pitiful? Look about him, how
is he constant to his wife, careful for his children? Look near him, how is
he good to his servants? Look far from him, how is he just to foreign
Princes. We may see in our catalogue of Kings that we shall scarce find any,
but besides the common jnfirmities attending on mankind, were branded with some
remarkable eye-sores. WILLIAM, a Conqueror, but cruel. RUFUS, resolute, but
sacrilegious. HENRY the first, learned, but unnatural to his Brother, STEVEN.
stout, but an usurper. HENRY the second, wise, but wanton. RICHARD the first,
undaunted, but undutifull to his parents. John, politic, but a great
dissembler. HENRY the third, of great devotion, but of small depth. EDWARD the
second, beautiful, but deboist. RICHARD the second, well natured, but ill
manner'd. HENRY the fourth, fortunate, but having a false title. HENRY the
fifth, a victorious King, but formerly a riotous Prince. HENRY the sixth,
Saint-like, but very simple. EDWARD the fourth, fortunate, but perjured: to
proceed no further. But let malice it self stain our Sovereign with any
notorious personal fault For to wish him wholly without fault, were in effect
to wish him dead. Besides this, consider him as a King, and what favors has
he bestowed on his Subjects, and then, that his courtesies might not unravell or
fret out, has bound them with a strong border, and a rich fringe, a Triennial
Parliament. When God brought again the captivity of Sion, then were we like
unto them that dream, Psalm. 126. The Jews would not believe their own
happiness, it was so great, so sudden. But when we consider so many favors
conferred upon us by our King in so few years, Ship-mony condemned, Monopolies
removed, Star Chamber it self censured, High Commission levelled, other
Courts regulated, offensive Canons declined, burdensome ceremonies to tender
consciences profer'd to be abolished, Trienniall Parliaments settled, and the
present indefinitely prolonged, we have cause to suspect with our selves, are
we awake? Do we not dream? Do I speak? Do you hear? Is it light? Do we
not deceive our selves with fond fancies? or are not these Boones too big to
beg? too great to be granted? such as our Fathers never durst desire, nor
grandfathers hope to receive. O no, it is so, it is sure, it is certain we are
awake, we do not dream; if any thing be asleep, it is our ingratitude; which
is so drowsy to return deserved thanks to God and the King for these great
favors: And so much for the first, the King.

24. Next to the King, comes my Lord the King, and this peculiarly concerns the
Courtiers, and such Mephibosheths as eat bread at his table, who under God owe
their being to his bounty, and whose states are not only made, but created by
Him. These indeed of all other are bound most to rejoice at their Sovereigns
return, being obliged thereunto by a threefold tie; Loyalty to a Sovereign,
duty to a Master, and gratitude to a Benefactour: except (as some fondly hold,
that a letter sealed with three seals may lawfully be opened) any conceive
that a threefold engagement may the easiest be declined.

25. Next, we insist on his own house, wherein this City is particularly
pointed at. For if London be the Jerusalem of our David, then certainly
Westminster is his Sion, where he has his constant habitation. Here is the
principal Palace of his residence, the proper seat of his great Council, the
usual receipt of his Revenues, the common Courts of Justice, the ancient
Chair of his Enthroning, the Royal ashes of his Ancestors, the fruitful
Nursery of his Children. You therefore the inhabitants of this City have most
reason to rejoice.

26. But alas! what have I done that I should not? or rather what have I to do
that I cannot, having invited many guests now to a feast, and having no meat to
set before you? I have called Courtiers and Citizens to rejoice, and still one
thing is wanting, and that a main material one, the founder of all the rest,
the King is not returned in Peace. Thus the Sun is slipped out of our
Firmament, and the Diamond dropped out of the ring of my Text. I pretended and
promised to make an application thereof to the time, and must I now be like the
foolish Builder in the Gospel, begin and cannot finish? Own house, that is the
bottom of the Text, but this stands empty. My Lord the King, and that is the
top of the Text; but he is far off: and the words which are the side-walls to
join them together, He is come home in Peace. These alas cannot be erected:
In this case there is but one remedy to help us, and that prescribed by our
Savior himself, Ioh. 16.23. Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name, he will
give you.

27. Let us pray faithfully, pray fervently, pray constantly, pray continually.
Let Preacher and People join their prayers together, that God would be pleased
to build up the walls, and make up the breach in the application, that what
cannot be told, may be foretold for a truth; and that our Text may be verified
of Charles in Prophecy, as by David in History. Excellently Saint Austin
advises, that men should not be curious to enquire how original sin came into
them, but careful to seek how to get it out. By the same similitude (though
reversed) let us not be curious to know what made our King (who next to God I
count our original good) to leave this City, or whether offenses given or
taken moved him to his departure; but let us bend our brains, and improve our
best endeavors to bring him safely and speedily back again. How often herein
have our pregnant hopes miscarried, even when they were to be delivered? Just
as a man in a storm swimming through the sea to the shore, till the oars of
his faint arms begin to fail him, is now come to catch land, when an
unmercifull wave beats him as far back in an instant, as he can recover in an
hour. Just so when our hopes of a happy peace have bin ready to arrive, some
envious unexpected obstacle has started up, and has set our hopes ten degrees
backwards, as the shadow of the Sun-diall of Ahaz. But let us not hereat be
disheartened, but with blind Bartimeus, the more we are commanded by unhappy
accidents to hold our peace, let us cry the louder in our prayers. The rather,
because our King is already partly come, come in his offer to come, come in his
tender to treat, come in his proffer of peace: And this very day being the
beginning of the Treaty, I may say he set his first step forward; God guide his
feet, and speed his pace. Oh let us thriftily husband the least mite of hopes
that it may increase, and date our day from the first peeping of the morning
star, before the Sun be risen. In a word, desist from sinning, persist in
praying, and then it may come to pass that this our Use may once be antidated,
and this days Sermon sent as a Harbinger before hand to provide a lodging in
your hearts for your joy against the time, that my Lord our King shall return
to his own house in peace.

FINIS.

