(...) WORDS To give to the Young Man KNOWLEDGE AND DISCRETION.

OR, The Law of Kindness in the Tongue of a Father to his Son.

By Francis Fuller, M. A.

(...). Vox audita perit,
Litera scripta manet.
Prove. 13. 1. A wise Son hears his Father's Instruction. London, Printed by
J. P. for Obed Smith, Bookseller in Daventry in Northamptonshire. 1685.

To my SON.
Dear Son,
A Little while since we parted with our Dear Sam, never to see each other more
until the glorious Day of the Resurrection. Those smart Expressions that
frequently dropped from him (beyond any that I ever yet knew of his Age) were no
small joy to me while he lived, in hope that he might have been eminently
useful when grown up to Years, and shapen'd by Education, and will make him
live to me, tho dead, without carrying any of his Ashes about me (as Iphicrates
did of his dead Son) to perpetuate his Memory. I hope you will not easily
forget him who was (as you usually said) so lovely in your Eye, and so much
beloved by you, much less his latter end; (there was that in it worthy of your
remembrance) and least of all your own Death, so much confirmed by his; he came
last into the World, but is first gone out; as of the two Disciples that ran to
the Sepulcher, the youngest came there first, but the other followed after him.

I made an Epistle Dedicatory long before he died, that contained something
relating to you both; but should I publish it, it might appear as great a
mistake in the excess to dedicate an Epistle to two Sons, when but one is
living, as that of Apollonius was in the defect, when he saluted Decimus by the
name of Quintus, and to my self an act of Cruelty, Mezentius-like, thus to tie
the Living to the Dead; therefore have resolved not to do it.

The time of my Continuance in this World cannot be long, yours may be longer,
but it is best not to think so; and therefore do all the good you can. These
following Directions are given in order to it, and may, if diligently observed,
assist you in it.

I would not be as a Mercury's Statue, to direct only, and not move; nor as the
Crab in the Fable, that advised her young ones to go forward, whilst she her
self went backward; therefore desire to carry them about me, with Antoninus
(...)
his Title things, for my self, and to be a Practicer of what to you I am an
Instructor; that I may say to you, as Gideon to his Soldiers, Look on me, and
do likewise: and hope that will reach Inde pasco, unde pascor, Inde tibi appono
unde ego nivo.
your Heart that comes from the Heart of

Bath, December 8. 1682. Your Affectionate Father, Francis Fuller.

TO Mr. Thomas Scroop. Mrs. Mary Mr. Anthony Wood. Mrs. Joan Mr. Richard
Ridley. Mrs. Sarah Mr. Michael Pope. Mrs. Martha Mr. John Dudelstone. Mrs.
Susanna Mr. John Wickham. Mrs. Esther Mr. William Whitehead. Mrs. Mary Mr.
Henry Gibbes. Mrs. Elizabeth Mr. Godfrey Vanettern. Mrs. Abigail Mr. Thomas
Edwards. Mrs. Jane Mr. Samuel Tyson. Mrs. Mary Mr. Alexander Dolman. Mrs.
Susanna Mr. Henry Lloyd. Mrs. Elizabeth Mr. Edmund Tucker. Mrs. Margaret
Inhabitants in the City of Bristol, and near to it.
CHildren are Parents in a new Edition, and who but they should endeavor to
prevent the Errata, and who (under God) better may, being always with them in
their Minority, and having a Power over them.

They are parts of themselves, therefore should be as much concerned for their
Welfare as for their own.

They are committed to their care, and they as Trustees thereby obliged, not
only to restore them upon demand, but better than when received.

They are begot in their own sinful likeness, and derive that from them which
inclines and disposes them to all Evil; therefore it ought to be matter of
their Sorrow, that it is so, and no less of their care (so far as they can) to
prevent it: Did they behold the filth on their Souls that they bring with them
into the World, they would see as much cause for Sorrow as Joy, and more to
mourn over them, while dead in Si^ than when dead in Nature: a^^ would they
consider how far they have been instrumental to it, they would see as much
reason to prevent the misery that attends it.

Had they contributed nothing to it, yet the hazard and danger of their
perishing being great, as great fear should possess them, lest they should
perish, and as great care that they may not.

The Heathens knew nothing of this; yet many of them made it their first and
principal care, to provide Instructers for their Children in Principles of
Learning, and Rules of Life, wisely preventing Nature by their Discipline,
accompanying their increase of Years with a growth of Virtue, that they might
become men, and good together: and what a shame will it be if the Pagan World
afford better Parents and Children than the Christian.

What at first was principally designed for the good of my Children (viz. my
two Sons born in Bristol) is now dedicated to you for the use of yours; that I
judged necessary as obliged by Duty, and this not improper since ye are all in
a married state, and have Children. It was calculated for my Meridian, but will
serve yours: and that it may, is the sincere desire of

Your Obliged Friend and Servant, F. Fuller.

TO THE READER.
SOlomon says, Fools hate Instruction; viz. not natural, but moral Fools, (for,
Fools in Solomon's Dialect are the Wicked in David's) They, through Impotency,
cannot receive it; these, through Obstinacy, will not. To want Instruction is a
misery; to reject it, a sin; to neglect it, is the sin of Parents; not to
receive it, the sin of Children; they by instructing, secure themselves; and no
less these, by harkening to it. Happy those Parents whose Hearts are so far
turned to their Children as to do it; but more happy, whose Childrens hearts
are so far turned to God as to receive it. If this shall contribute any thing
to either, it will then be as much the Joy, as it is now the Desire of

Your Friend, F. F.

WORDS To give to the Young Man Knowledge and Discretion.
THERE are three Principles in Philosophy owned by some, (viz. Matter, Form,
and Privation) and so there are three principal and prime Truths in Divinity to
be inquired into, and known by all that expect Salvation, viz.

1. Their Misery by Nature. 2. Their Recovery out of it. 3. Their Duty when
Recovered.
1. What they are out of Christ. 2. What they are by him. 3. What they must do,
or how they must walk, when in Col. 1. 27.
him.
All which when believed and understood, may be as the three Deuteronomy. 4. 41. and
19. 23.
Cities of Refuge, for the guilty Posterity of Adam to flee unto as the three
Sons of Noah (after Genesis 9. 18, 19.
the Flood) the Seminary of a new World; or (as the three stretches of the
Prophet Elijah or 1 King. 17. 21, 22.
the Widow of Zarephaths dear Son) a means to put Life into them, who by Nature
are as truly dead Spiritually, as that Child was Naturally.

1. Knowledge of Misery.

Sense of sin, and Misery by i^ alone, will do no good, nor any thing without
it, for the foundation of Happiness is laid in it^ The knowledge of a Disease
make^ way to a Cure, and sense of Misery is the first step to Mercy; we usually
say, it is most miserable to have been happy, but in this it is the happiness
of sinners to know their misery, and their greatest misery if they do not.

2. Knowledge of the way, or means of recovery out of Misery.

None but Sinners need Mercy, and none but sensible sinners will seek for it,
but yet they cannot seek it aright, unless they know the way to it, no more
than they can find it, unless they seek it; the Diseased Woman in the Gospel
Mat. 9. 20, 21, 22.
was sensible of her Bloody Issue before she came to Christ, and came to him
before she was healed by him; it was not barely the apprehension of her
Disease, but the apprehension of her Disease, and of Christ (her Physician)
that cured her: None so fit to seek for Mercy as humbled sinners, and none but
such will; but yet unless they do, they cannot have it.

3. Knowledge of Duty, when redeemed from Misery.

Conversion is a change from one contrary to another, not from one sin to
another (that is Hypocrisy) but from (...) contrary one to another; from the
privation to the habit, from Darkness to Light, and from Death to Life; this
new state calls for a new life, and all that are brought into such a state,
must live sutably to it; they must not be always 1 These. 2. 12. Ephesians. 5. 8. 1.
Pet. 2. 9.
sinners because they were sometimes so, for once is above any Indulgence
granted.

1. Knowledge of Misery.
Sense of Misery is necessary, not to merit Mercy, but to qualify for it; not
to fit the God of Mercy to give it, but the necessitous sinner to receive it.

Now, the misery of all by Nature is best known (as one contrary compared with
another) by considering the happiness of Man in his state of Innocence.

When God had made the World, and richly furnished it with all things for
Necessity and Delight, he then made Man, not in the Image of any inferior
Creature, Genesis 1. 26.
but in his own; which Image was both outward and inward, consisting partly in
his Body, and partly in his Soul.

Partly in his Body, As it was So admirable a Structure, that Galen (a Heathen)
made a Hymn of Praise to God that made it.
an Instrument of Righteousness, and a frame of admirable composure, containing
so many Miracles as Members, so many perfections as parts, and in some degree
resembling the Majesty of God.

Partly and chiefly in his Soul, by an inward resemblance of it to God, not
only in the Spiritual Nature of the Soul, but in the Natural Faculties,
Properties, and Endowments of it, viz. Knowledge, Righteousness, and True
Holiness.

1. Knowledge in his Understanding.

Of all that was needful for his state of Perfection and Happiness, viz. A
knowledge of God and his Excellencies, of himself as to the Nature of every
Faculty of his Soul, and both the temper and use of every Member of his Body,
and of all other Creatures, both as to Nature and Kind, and how to carry
himself uprightly to God and them.

2. Righteousness in his Will.

A Natural Inclination (with a power) perfectly disposed to the whole will of
God, and to every thing that was just, right, and good, without any reluctance,
and of himself to will nothing that was not so.

3. Holiness in his Affections.

Being free from all Disorder, Sin, and Impurity, rejoicing in the love and
bounty of God, loving him as the chiefest good in himself, and as the Author of
all his.

As soon as Adam was made, God planted a Garden in Eden (in Gen 2. 7. 8. and
15, 16, 17.
which was every Tree pleasant to the sight, and good for Food, the Tree of
Life also in the midst of the Garden, and the Tree of Knowledge of Good and
Evil) and put him into it to dress and keep it, and entered into a Covenant of
Life with him (called a Covenant of Works) upon condition Gal. 3. 12.
of perfect Obedience, forbidding him to eat of the Tree of the Knowledge of
Good and Evil, upon pain of Death.

God might have dealt with him in a way of absolute Sovereignty, and required
Obedience from him without any promise of Reward, but he did not, for he entered
into a Covenant with him, containing a Precept, Threatening, and Promise.

A Precept, requiring perfect and perpetual Obedience.

A Threatening, denouncing death if he did not obey it.

A Promise, assuring Life if he did; and though the promise is not so clearly
expressed as the threatening, yet as strongly and truly implied; for if Adam
must die if he disobeyed, he should certainly live, if he did not.

The Death threatened was Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal; the first, in the
separation of the Soul Genesis 2. 17. and 3. 19. (...). In dying thou shall dye,
and all kinds of Death were threatened.
from the Body; the second, in the separation of the Soul from God; the third,
in the separation of the Soul and Body from God for ever; one, from the
presence of his Grace here, the other, from that of his Glory hereafter.

The Life promised implied a continuance of his present Life, and the assurance
of one to come; a confirmation of his present happiness, and a translation (at
last) to a greater and better.

The present Life enjoyed was twofold; one, as a Man and a Creature; the
other, as a perfect and upright Man: The first consisting in the Union of Soul
and Body, the second, in a Union betwixt God and the Soul.

The Life to come, was a perfect, immutable, and eternal happiness both of Soul
and Body with God, through a perfect likeness to him, and an immediate vision
and fruition of him in Heaven to all Eternity.

Adam being a glorious and excellent Creature by Creation, and endowed with a
power and will to obey, stood bound to obey, both by the Law of Nature, and the
Romans 2. 14, 15.
positive Law and Command from God, which obliged him to it.

But being made with a freedom of will (viz. a liberty of its own accord) to
choose, or refuse; to do, or not to do; to stand, or fall, at his own choice,
without constraint or force from any; and being mutably good, his will, though
naturally disposed to good only, yet being mutable and changeable, it might be
altered, and become evil, as it did; for, through the Temptation of the Eccles.
7. 29. (...).
Devil, the persuasion of Eve, and Pride (a desire to be as God) through Luxury
and Sensuality, a disregard of the promise of Life, and a disbelief of Death
threatened, he did eat of the forbidden Fruit, and by it fell from his state of
Innocence and Happiness, into a state of Sin and Misery.

1. Of Sin. In the loss of his Original Righteousness, and the depravation of
his Nature in all Genesis 6. 5. Job 14. 4. and 15. 14.
the faculties of his Soul, and the members of his Body.

2. Of Misery. In the loss of his Communion with God in Pararadise, Genesis 38.
10. and 23. 1.
and subjection (as justly obnoxious) to all the direful effects and
consequents of his wrath in this World, and in that to come.

Adam was not a private, but public Person, the Representative of all Mankind;
and the Covenant Acts 17. 26.
made with him, was not for himself only, but for his Posterity also, that
should by ordinary Generation descend from him: He was the Head of the
Covenant, and they Parties engaged with him by that stipulation, Legally
Parties in that Covenant, Dum punitur aliquis pro peccato primi Parent^, non
punitur pro peccato alterius sed pro peccato suo. Aquinas, quaest. 4. de pec.
orig. Art. 1. Romans 3. 9, 10, 11, 12. and 23. Romans 5. 18. 19. Romans 7. 18* 19.
and as naturally in him (the Head of it) as streams in the Fountain, and
branches in the Root; in his standing, they stood, and in his fall, they fell;
sinning in him, they fell with him, and partake with him both in his sin and
misery.

1. In his Sin. By the imputation of that particular sin committed by him, and
by a communication of that corruption derived from him, whereby they are
indisposed to all good, and inclined to all evil.

2. In his Misery. Being justly Gal. 3. 10. Col. 3. 6. Mat. 13. 42. Rom 2. 5.
Rev. 19. 20. Mat. 10. 28. Mat. 5. 26. Mark 9* 43, 44. 2 These. 1. 9.
liable to all the punishments of sin in this World (both outward and inward)
on their Souls and Bodies, and to those in the World to come, in the sharpness,
universality, and eternity of them.

The Head of Nilus is admired, because it cannot be found out; but the
Springhead from whence the misery of all by Nature arises, may; (viz. from
sin) the Spring is known; but how many, and how bitter the streams are flowing
from it, cannot easily be known; the River that watered the Garden of Eden,
branched Gen 2. 10.
out into four streams only, but the streams flowing from the sin committed
there, are innumerable; broad and deep, a complex misery, as to kind and
degree, Romans 3. 16. and 7. 24.
comprehending both sin and punishment; some are sins, and not miseries, and
some are miseries, and not sins; of both which something may be seen in these
eight following particulars, viz.

1. Filthiness. 2. Enmity. 3. Darkness. 4. Poverty. 5. Nakedness. 6. Bondage.
7. Death. 8. Wrath.
1. Filthiness.

Adam at first (as he came out Ezekiel. 16. 5.
of Gods hands) was pure, without spot or wrinkle, (within and without) but as
he came out of Mat. 12. 45.
the Devils hands, or when by sin that unclean Spirit entered into him, he (and
in him all his Posterity) Isa. 64. 6.
became as an unclean thing.

All that are brought out of this Ezekiel. 36. 25. Heb. 9. 14. and 10. 22. Ephesians. 5.
26, 27.
state, are sprinkled with the Blood of Christ, and cleansed from all their
filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit; but they that are not, though Noble by
Birth, are but (as Naaman) Noble Lepers; tho 2 Kings 5. 1, 2.
Princes by Blood, attainted; yea though Angels for outward Beauty, yet but as
Devils in the sight of God; in his Eyes they are unclean, though not in their
own, and the more when they are not so.

Grace is the Ornament of the Psalm. 16. 3. and 45. 11.
Soul, and all that are adorned with it, have Christ's Beauty upon them, a
Beauty that God greatly desires, and delights in.

But Sin has defiled the whole man, from Head to Foot, not one part only, but
every one, inside and outside, A capite ad calcem. Romans 6. 19. and 3. 13. Genesis
6. 5. Isa. 1. 6. 2 Cor. 7. 1. 1 These. 5. 23. Heb. 10. 22. Tit. 1. 15. Ephesians. 4.
29.
Flesh and Spirit, Body and Soul (the Faculties of one, and Members of the
other) Mind and Conscience, Thoughts and Imaginations, Affections and Desires,
Words and Deeds: All of them in general and especial are become altogether
filthy by it.

Some sins defile the Body, but all Sins defile the Soul, and that with a
filthiness so great, that all the filth in the World (should it meet in one
common sink) cannot Horrenda vox.
equallize the pollution of it.

2. Enmity. viz.

Habitual and actual, inward and outward, in Affection or Action,
Reconciliation offered, implies it; for, there can be no Reconciliation 2 Cor.
^.20.
where there is no Breach, nor any Peace made, before the Enmity is subdued.

Adam at first was in a state of (...). Romans 8.^
Friendship with God, God and he were as nearly conjoined as a Creator and
Creature could be, without sin; but sin made a breach, and separated these
Friends.

All that are brought out of this state, have thrown down their Weapons of
Hostility, are reconciled Romans 5.^
to God, and at Peace with him; but they that are not, are (like David and
Absalom) in open 2 Samuel 1^ 5, 6, 7. 1^
Hostility against him; and as Absalom made all the means he could to stir up
the People in Rebellion against David, so they employ their whole strength of
Soul and Body against God: They are Enemies to him (both actively and
passively) Haters of God, and hateful to him; Haters of him, and hated by him,
as clearly appears (...).
by the terms of Difference on their part, and on Gods.

1. On their part who gave the Offense. They are Strangers to God, and
unacquainted with him, Job 21. 21. Ephesians. 2. 12. ^3, 19. Ephesians. 4. 18.
they are Foreigners, and alienated from the Life of God, without him, afar
off, and at distance from him, they know not God, nor Isa. 1. 3. Job 35. 10.
Mal. 2. 17.
desire it, (for he is not in all their thoughts) they acknowledge no wrong
(say not, What have we Jer. 8. 6.
done) nor repent of their Wickedness; they seek not after God, Romans 3. 11 Joh.
5. 40. Jer. 2. 31. Psalm. 14. 2. Psalm. 10. ^3.
nor for peace with him, nor are willing to come to him for it; they will not
accept of Overtures, Parleys, and tenders of Peace, nor read the Articles of
Agreement, or Covenant of Peace, but Hos. 8. 12.
count it a strange thing; they will not hearken to God's Voice, Jer. 13. ult.
^ 22. 21. ^ 25. 4. Mat. 28. ^7. Psalm. 81. ^1. Psalm. 2. 2.
nor regard it, will not be persuaded, nor gathered to him, but reject and
contemn him, and take Counsel against him. They bid him stand off and depart
(they desire Job 21. 14.
not the knowledge of his ways) abuse his Ambassadors Acts 26. 18. 2 Timothy 2.
26. Psalm. 139. 21. Job. 8. 44.
that are sent to treat of Peace, and List themselves under the Command of Gods
utter Enemy the Devil) and rise up in Arms and open Rebellion against him.

When God is for Peace, they ^re for War.

2. On Gods part.

Who as he is a just Enemy, so ^ver an Enemy to all impenitent ^inners: He is
strange to them, ^eeps at a distance, and with^raws from them, knows them afar
off, and is Angry Isa. 57. 17. Ps. 138. 6. Psalm. 7. 11. Ps. 18. 26. Isa. 1. 11.
and 59. 2. Psalm. 5. 5. and 11. 5. Psalm. 146. 9. Psalm. 1. ult. 2 Cor. 5. 19.
Prove. 15. 8. (...).
with them, Curses their Blessings, rejects their Services, and counts them an
Abomination, hates them, and walks contrary to them, has a Controversy with
them, Proclaims his Hos. 5. 6. Jer. 25. 31. 1 Pet. 5. 5.
Displeasure against them, and re^sts them in open Battle array, turns their
way upside-down, and causes it to perish.

They are Outlawed Enemies.

God had no Friends (among Men) until he made Friends out of Enemies: He was
in Christ reconciling the World unto himself.

3. Darkness.

Adam at first was made a Son of Light (the Candle of the Prove. 20. 27.
Monstrum ingens cui lumen ademptum. Ephesians. 4. 18.
Lord was put into him) but affecting the Tree of Knowledge above that of Life,
he brought Darkness upon himself and all his Posterity.

All that are brought out of this state, are Light in the Lord (they Ephesians. 5. 8.
were blind, but now they see) John 9. 25.
but they that are not, are Darkness Rev. 16. 10.
in the Devil, the Prince of Darkness (whose Kingdom is full of Darkness) they
are not only dim of sight, but stark blind; Children of Darkness, doing the
works of Darkness, which lead to Eternal Darkness.

4. Poverty.

Adam at first was the Rich Heir Rev. 3. 17.
of the World, and Lord possessor of all; but by sin he became a Bankrupt, and
then Justice seized on him (as the Creditor on his Debtor) and turned him the
unjust Minime natus, at maxim dilectus.
Possessor out of all; he was not the firstborn, yet had a double Portion; but
by losing all at one cast, he fell into decay, and became the firstborn of the
Poor: Isa. 14. 30.
He was undone, and all his Posterity had been ruined with him, had not Christ,
the Jewel of the Imperial Crown, been parted with to discharge the Debt.

All that are brought out of this Rev. 3. 18.
state, are Rich, and have all things; but they that are not, are indigent
Beggars (without substance Isa. 40. 20.
or true Riches) having no Oblation to offer unto God, nor any thing of their
own to satisfy that double Debt which they owe, viz. of Obedience, as
Creatures; and of Satisfaction, as Sinners.

5. Nakedness.

Adam at first was arrayed with Ezekiel. 16. 7. Rev. 3. 17.
the resplendent Robe of Righteousness, he wanted neither external nor internal
Ornaments; but sin (the Mother of shame) defiled them both, and the Devil (as a
Conqueror with his Captive in War) stripped him of all those Ornaments, and left
him naked.

All that are brought out of this state, are clothed with the Robes of Christ's
Righteousness, (Solomon in all his Glory was not arrayed Mat. 6. 29.
like one of these) but they that are not, are in the Rags of Nature (filthy
Rags) which as filthy, defile, and as Rags, cannot hide nor cover the shame
of Rev. 3. 18.
their Nakedness.

Sin left us, and Christ found us (as the Man in the Gospel) Naked, and out of
our Wits.

6. Bondage.

Adam at first had perfect freedom, Acts 8. 23.
and was in bondage to none, but Sin brought him, and all his Gal. 4. 4.
Posterity into it; a Yoke, that neither he their Father was, nor they his
Children are, able to bear.

All that are brought out of this state, are made Free by Christ, John 12. 31.
(the Devil is cast out, and Rules not as a King, though sometimes he may as a
Tyrant) but they that are not, are Slaves; not only near to Slavery, but
actually in it; they may say (with the Jews) that they were never in Bondage to
any, but they are, and that in Soul and Body too.

The Moralist says, if the great ones of the World were divested of their
Robes, it would plainly appear what Slaves they were; but all, both great and
small, high and low, with all their outward Ornaments are Slaves; they were so,
before they came out of the Prison of the Womb, and greater when out of it than
when there, to Sin, and the Devil.

1. To Sin.

Not only Pride, but every sin else as a Chain compasses them Psalm. 73. 6.
about; for they are in the Bond of Iniquity, sold under it, and Bond-servants
to it.

So many Lusts, so many Masters, and every one give contrary Commands.

2. To the Devil. John 14. 30. Acts 26. 18. Ephesians. 2. 2. 2 Cor. 4. 4. 2 Timothy 2.
ult.


He is the strong Man, and Prince of this World, that has Snares by which he
takes them Captive, and a Power, by which he Rules over them, as a Tyrant over
his Vassals (from whom he exacts Tribute) as a Master over his Servants (who
are under his Command) as a Conqueror over his Captives (who are led by him at
his will) and as a Father over his Children (from whom he expects Obedience)
they are not only Children of the Devil, but 1 John 3. 10.
Slaves to him.

They are his by possession, though Gods by right.

7. Death.

Adam at first was alive, but when the Devil, the firstborn of Death (as
Prince of Death, and first Condemned to it) devoured Job 18. 13. and 38. 17.
his strength, the Gates of Death (viz. present and certain Death) Temporal on
his Body, and Spiritual on his Soul, were opened to him; and but a step there
was Romans 5. 12.
betwixt him and Eternal Death.

All that are brought out of this Gal. 2. 20. Ephesians. 2. 1. Romans 6. 11. Ma. 8. 22.
Romans 7. 9. Rev. 3. 1.
state, are alive in Christ, alive by him, and alive to him; but they that are
not, are dead, not only sick, weak, or diseased, but dead: They may be indeed
alive as to their own Opinion, (so Paul for a time was) and in the Opinion of
others (so the Church of Sardis was) and may be alive as to sinful works
(living in them, and to them) but this their Life is their Death; for it is not
a Physical Death, which is a loss of the Faculties, but a Moral one, which is a
loss of the goodness of them.

Sin cast Adam and all his Posterity, not into a swoon only, but a Death; and
they are all ever since by Nature not (as Christ said of Lazarus) asleep, but
dead John 11. 11. Luke 10. 30.
in sin; not (as the Wounded Man in the way to Jericho) half dead, but
altogether so, under the sentence of a Natural Death, under the power of a
Spiritual Death, and under the guilt of an Eternal Death.

Sons of Death, for they are all Sententia legis. Psalm. 102. 20.
Condemned.

8. Wrath.

God is Love, and Adam innocence 1 John 4. 8. Quoad effectum non quoad affectum.
found favor in his sight, and was greatly beloved by him; but by sin, his
Anger was kindled, and his wrath waxed hot against him.

All that are brought out of this 1 These. 1. 10.
state, are delivered from wrath (wrath present and to come) but they that are
not, are under wrath, wrath is their Fee-simple, and proper Inheritance, to
them it is due, and to them it belongs, for as Children of wrath they are Ephesians.
2. 3.
born to it.

The Scripture concludes all under Rom 3. 23. Ephesians. 5. 6. Romans 6. 23.
sin, and sin concludes all under wrath; it is sins wages, and God will see
Justice done.

2. Of Recovery out of Misery.
God left not miserable Man thus Luke 10. 30, 31, 32, 33.
fallen (as the Priest and Levite the wounded man in his way to Jericho) but
(with the good Samaritan) had Compassion upon him, and sent his Son to heal
those wounds sin had made, and to recover him from that state of Mal. 4. 2.
Misery, into which by sin he was fallen; by his wounds he healed him, and by
dying, restored him to Life.

Adam was the first man, the Primus foederatus.
Natural Head of all men; Christ, the second man, the Mystical Head of all
Believers: He was the Earthly man, this the 1 Cor. 15. 47.
Lord from Heaven.

The Titles given to him, show (as Remedies do the Disease) the misery of all
by sin on our part, and the happiness of all Believers on his.

He is a Mediator (and the only Mediator) an Advocate, a Heb. 9. 15. and 12.
24. 1 Timothy 2. 5. 1 John 2. 1. Joh. 4. 42. Romans 11. 26. Heb. 1. 3. 2 Cor. 5. 19.
John 1. 12.
Deliverer, Healer, and Purger of Sins, a Reconciler, Savior, and Redeemer; he
is all these in himself, and whatever the necessities of lost and undone
sinners can need, or require; but none of them to any, unless by Faith they
receive him; and therefore, if you expect any help from him, you must by Faith
go unto him, and you need not fear going, if you Mark 10. 49.
see a present and absolute need of him (for, behold he calls you) and this
need you will find, if you consider, that your condition by Nature is no less
than a state of Filthiness, Enmity, Nakedness, Darkness, Poverty, Bondage,
Death, and Wrath.

1. Filthiness.

1. A Filthiness so deep, that it is not only extensive, but intensive, Jer.
2. 22. and 17. 1. Isa. 1. 18. Jer. 13. 23.
compared to marks and brands in the Flesh (which are not easily got out) to
colors of the deepest dye (double dipped in the wool and web) to the spots of a
Leopard, (which are not by way of accidental, or external, but innate
coherence) and to the blackness of an Ethiopian, which cannot be washed off; the
Colliers blackness may be washed off, but not the Ethiopians; and the Lepers
spots may be taken out, but not the Leopards.

A Filthiness so great, that neither the Tears of Repentance, nor the Flames of
Hellfire, nor any thing but the Blood of Christ, can wash, or purge it away;
the sacred Laver, cleansing Jordan, and healing Bethesda, set open for all that
will, to wash in for sin, and uncleanness: The Priests Zech. 13. 1. Rev. 1. 5.
under the Law, cleansed by the Blood of Beasts, but Christ by 1 John 1. 7.
his own Blood; his will is, that you should be clean, and therefore you must
by Faith apply his Blood, that you may be so.

Christ washed his Disciples Feet with Water, but their Hearts with his Blood,
and unless he thus wash you, you can have no part in him; and unless by Faith
you go unto him, you cannot be thus John 13. 8.
washed by him.

2. Enmity.

A degeneracy beneath the brute Beasts, for none of them are at enmity with
God, with us they are, and we may blame our selves for it, for they never
Rebelled, until we Rebelled.

But yet God is willing Isa. 27. 5. By doubling of the Phrase, Make Peace, Make
Peace, as by doubling of the Dream to Pharaoh, it appears a thing certain, and
established by him, Cen 41. 32.
to be at peace, for he commands it, prescribes a way to it, and assures it to
all that like the terms of it, he offers it freely, and sues for it earnestly,
and therefore it highly concerns you to make peace with him; it is not
convenient only, and fit to be done, but necessary, and that which must be,
and if ever, it must be in his way, and at his time.

1. In his way, viz. by Faith in Christ, for the blessing of peace is the
blessing of Faith in him, who as Priest purchased it, as Prophet preached it,
and as King works it, in all that believe in him.

2. At his time, and that is the present time, viz. of Life, and therefore let
not the Sun of your Luke 12. 58, 59.
Life go down upon your Enmity to God, for if you do, terms of peace shall
neither be offered to you, nor accepted from you.

There is no Quarter given in Hell to Enemies.

3. Darkness.

A Darkness that implies a state of evil, both sinful and penal; not of the
Body, but Mind, a Ephesians. 4. 18.
Corruption of the most excellent Faculty, yet not incurable; for, Christ the
Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4. 2. Isa. 42. 6. Luke 1. 78. 79. Luke 2. 32.
the dayspring from on High, was sent into the World as a Light (not only to
all the Types, Prophesies, and dark shadows, but) to them that sat in the
darkness Joh. 8. 12. and 12. 46. Acts 26. 18.
of sin and misery, that from him they might receive the light of Spiritual
knowledge and comfort; and therefore, if you are brought out of this state of
darkness, it concerns you (as the blind Man in the Gospel did when healed by
John 9. 25, 27, 30.
Christ) to appear for him against all that oppose him, to cast off the works
of darkness, and walk Ephesians. 5. 8.
as a Child of light; but if you are not, it concerns you as much, Mark 10. 46.
to go unto him (as blind Bartimeus did for the Eyes of his Body) Omnia extra
Christum tenebricosa, Marlorat. Luke 4. 18. Rev. 3. 18.
that you may receive your sight. Christ is the great Oculist sent from Heaven,
and none but he has the Eye Salve to cure you.

4. Poverty.

So great is the Poverty you are fallen under by sin, and so low are you
brought by it, that all the Creatures on Earth are not able, no, nor all the
Angels in Heaven, to raise you, or set you up again; nothing less than the
Riches of Heaven, and Treasures of a Deity can, and Christ only has them, who
became poor for our sakes, that we through his poverty might be rich, and
therefore to 2 Cor. 8. 9. Rev. 3. 18.
him you must go, that you may be enriched by him: Of other Riches, the promise
is conditional only, but of these, it is absolute, but then you must come and
buy them, and you need not Isa. 55. 1.
fear, for it is a buying without Money, all the price is a will to accept them.

5. Nakedness.

Tamar, when deflowred, rent 2 Samuel 13 18, 19.
her Virgin Robe, and sin by defiling the Soul, rent off the beautiful Garment,
that Virgin Robe of Innocence, with which it was clothed; but Christ is not
only Armor for defense against weakness, an Ornament for Beauty against
Deformity, but a Vesture for covering, against Nakedness; and therefore you
must by Faith put him on, if you would be clothed with Salvation, not for Romans
13. ult.
an outside Garment of Profession only, or in show, but in reality; not as a
covering for sin, but for Righteousness in Justification, and for Holiness in
Sanctification, as a defense against the guilt and power of it, that your
nakedness may not be uncovered, nor your shame seen.

Your own Righteousness (like the curtailed Clothes of David's 2 Samuel 10. 4, 5.
Ambassadors sent to Comfort Hanun) is imperfect, scanty, and too short to do
it, Christ's Righteousness only can, and without it you can never obtain the
Blessing; Genesis 27. 15, 27.
for, as you came Spiritually naked into the World, so if you go out so, you
will be covered Dan. 12. 2.
with everlasting shame.

Only this you must remember, that though Christ's Righteousness is a Garment
large enough to cover you, yet the Rags of Nature must be pulled off before
that Robe will come on, for it will come upon none but a naked Soul.

6. Bondage.

A cruel Bondage, worse than that of the Israelites in Egypt; for it is to (Sin
and the Devil) the worst of Tyrants, and without the least degree of Ease, or
Liberty.

He (in the Gospel) that was Mark 5. 3, 4. Luke 4. 13.
possessed, could break all Chains asunder, but those of the Devil; and from
other Bondage you may be able to redeem your self, but from this you cannot,
either by your self or others, but by Christ only, the Angel of Redemption, 1
Pet. 1. 18, 19.
and great Redeemer, that paid the price of your Ransom.

You are not freeborn, but made so, and by none but by him; John 8. 36.
and therefore you must by Faith go unto him that you may be so; if he make you
free, you shall be free indeed; but unless he do, you must be a Slave for ever:
Other Slaves, after their Service have Freedom, or by Death obtain it, but they
that die in this, are so for ever; their Chains are Jude 6.
everlasting.

You must be either a King to Rev. 5. 10.
God, or Slave to the Devil.

7. Death.

Sin's sickness was to Death, but Christ the Heavenly Physician, came down to
raise the dead in sin to life again; you were killed in the first Adam, and may
be made alive in the second, but not until by Faith you receive him; for, he
that has not the Son of God, has 1 John 5. 12.
not life: It is the life of Heaven in you, that will bring you to that
Heavenly Life; and therefore, without this Life of Grace, you can have no sure
hope of the Life of Glory, the Title to that, is by Christ, and the Title to
Christ, is by this; so that unless here you are Spiritually alive by him, you
John 3. 3.
cannot hereafter live with him.

All that dye in sin, are buried in Hell.

8. Wrath.

Not the wrath of Men, (no, not of the greatest of them) nor of Devils, but of
God; a wrath that cannot be withstood, for it Psalm. 90. 11.
is irresistible, nor endured, for it is intolerable (it cannot be
comprehended, much less endured) nor either avoided, or appeased, but by
Christ, who came to deliver from it, and to be as a shadow 1 These. 1. 10. and
5. 9. Cant. 2. 3.
from the scorching heat of it.

There is no way to Mercy, but by deliverance from wrath, nor any way to that,
but by laying hold on Mercy, nor any way to Quarendus est Deus, in Pradicamento
relationis.
Mercy, but by Christ, for God is the Father of Mercy, as he is the Father of
Christ; and therefore, Luke 3. 7.
if you would flee from this wrath, you must flee to Christ, who appeased it,
and brank that bitter Cup off to the bottom, that you might never taste of it.
Mat. 26. 39.


Nothing but his Blood could quench that flame of wrath.

3. Duty when recovered out of Misery.
All Privileges (whether Temporal or Spiritual, Civil, or Religious) oblige to
Duty, in themselves they are engagements to it, and should be so to all that
are Interested in them.

Spiritual Privileges are (of all) the highest, and most obliging, they are
given to engage to Duty, they afford the best means and advantages to it; they
aggravate sin, and become a Curse instead of a Blessing, where they are not
effectual to it; for, as Mercy abounds, so sin against Mercy abounds also.

A change in state calls for a Nova vita novos mores postulat.
change in Life, and a new condition requires a new conversation.

If then you are cleansed by the Blood of Christ from all sin, keep your self
pure and unspotted from James 1. ult.
sin and the world.

If the Enmity betwixt God and Ephesians. 2. 16.
you (upon the account of sin) is slain by Christ, be subject to Romans 8. 7.
his Laws, and live as one reconciled to him, that all your Services Prove. 15.
8.
may be accepted by him.

He that will not accept a gift Mat. 5. 23, 24.
of one at enmity with his Brother, will much less accept it from any at enmity
with himself.

If you are called out of darkness into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Ephesians.
5. 8.
show forth the praises of him who has called you out of darkness, by walking
as a Child of light.

If through his poverty you are 2 Cor. 8, 9. 1 Timothy 6. 18. Prove. 14. 21.
made rich, be rich in good works, and have mercy on the poor.

If you are released from your spiritual Bondage, stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made you free, and be not entangled again with the Yoke of
Bondage Gal. 5. 1.
to sin, and the lusts of Men.

If by Faith you have received Christ, and put him on, walk in him, and serve
him in Holiness Col. 2. 6. Luke 1. 75.
and Righteousness all the days of your Life.

If he has delivered you from Death, live to him who died for 2 Cor. 5. 15.
you, and by death delivered you from Death.

Thus by living up to your privileges, or doing the Duty of them, you will at
last receive the benefit of them.

It is sad to want privileges, but far worse to abuse, or not improve them.

Make it your great business to secure the salvation of your Soul.

In order unto it,

1. Believe you have a Soul. 2. Believe it is precious. 3. Live to it, as so
believing.
1. Believe you have a Soul.

Every one has a soul, but the Lives of most show, that they do not believe it:
Some live, as if their Bodies were immortal, and worthy of all their care; and
some, as if they had no Souls, or as if they were Mortal, and when once dead,
should never be alive again. The Soul of such Men is of little more use, than
(as Tully says of the Soul of a Swine) to keep the Body from stinking. But be
you established in the belief of this truth, that you have a Soul, and that it
is Immortal. A truth that has been owned by Heathens, and is previous to
Religion, for all Religion is grounded upon it. They did usually say, That to
live, was to dye; and to dye, was to live again.

Potest obumbrari, quia non est Deus, extingui non potest, quia a Deo. Druydes
made the Gauls Valiant, by telling them, that their Souls were Immortal: Caesar
put Gold into his Soldiers Pockets, that the fear of losing it, might make
them so, and the belief of this Treasure within you (enclosed in an Earthen
Vessel, as Manna in an Earthen pot) and the fear of Exodus 16. 33.
losing it, should provoke you to a diligent care about it, that you may not.

A Sadducee in Opinion will soon Acts 23. 8.
be an Epicure in Life.

2. Believe that your Soul is precious.

The same Offering was for the Soul of the Poor, that was for Exodus 30. 15.
the Soul of the Rich (half a Shekel was the Soul-money for both) and the Soul
of both (viz. of a Slave and an Emperor) are alike precious, and (next to that
which is infinite and excellent) most excellent, as will appear,

1. By the Titles given to it. 2. By the care taken of it.
1. By the Titles given to it, viz. The breath of Life (Life is a desirable
good, and the Soul a Genesis 2. 7. Job 2. 4. and 27. 3. Optimus modus cutis.
most precious Being, as it is the breath of Life) Gods Spirit, (God is a
Spirit, and so is the Soul too, not only in respect of its immediate procedure
from him, but in respect of its resemblance to him, a remote Image of God, or
an Prove. 2^. 27.
Image of the Trinity, in a Faculty) the Candle of the Lord (the Sun in the
little World, as the Sun is the Soul of the great one) the hidden man (the
whole man, or the Man of Man, as Athens Animus cujusque est quisque. 1 Pet. 3.
4. 2 Cor. 4. 16. Pars optima nostri. Job 30. 15. Prove. 4. 7 Psalm. 22. 20.
was the Greece of Greece) Man's principal one, (Wisdom is the principal thing,
and the Soul the seat of Wisdom, Man's principal one) Man's Darling (Christ is
Gods Darling, Man is Christ's, and the Soul is Man's) Man's Honor and Excellency;
Glory is the manifestation of Excelcellency, and therefore, that which Nihil
magnum in terra, nisi homo nec in homine, nisi anima. Genesis 49. 6. Job 4. 21.
is his Glory, must needs excel.

Man was the perfection of the Creation, the Masterpiece, and chiefest part of
it, and the Soul the choicest part of Man, as appears by these Titles given to
it by God, who rates every thing according to its kind and worth; and
therefore, set the Crown and Diadem by him put upon it, the Letters Testimonial
sent from Heaven to commend it, make you highly to value and esteem of it.

2. By the care taken of it.

By God and Man, to save it, and by the Devil to destroy it.

By God, viz. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

By the Father, who in his infinite Wisdom contrived Redemption for it,
instituted Sacraments and Ordinances to feed it in this World, provided Heaven
a place of Eternal Rest for it in the World to come, and Angels to guard Heb.
1. ult.
and conduct it safe to it.

By the Son, who in his unspeakable Love laid down his Life as a Psalm. 49. 7,
8. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Ex pretio pretium. 1 These. 5. 23.
Ransom for it, and parted with his most precious Blood as a price to Redeem it.

By the Holy Ghosts powerful Operation in Sanctifying of it, whereby it becomes
as Mount Zion, the Temple of the most High, the Throne of the great King of
Heaven, his Mansion, Ephesians. 3. 17. Isa. 57. 15.
Dewlling Place, and second Heaven.

2. By Men, viz. both good and bad: By good Men, while living, and by bad Men,
when dying; 1 King. 21. 20.
who, though while living, they sold themselves to work Iniquity, and (as by
Will) bequeathed their Souls to the Devil, when dying make void that Will, out
of a desire (for their Souls sake) to die well, though they would not live so.

That which is every ones Money, or bears a price every where, and is by all
(sooner or later) highly esteemed, and to all alike precious, has worth and
excellency in it.

3. By the care taken by the Devil to destroy it. There are two Lions contend
for the Soul; Leo propter fortitudinem advincendum. Leo propter fertitatem
adnocendum. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
Christ, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who seeks to save it; and the Devil,
the roaring Lion, who seeks to destroy it: He is active and diligent, for he
goes about seeking; bloody and cruel, for he seeks to devour: Other Lions prey
on dead Bodies, but this on living Souls: He desired Job's Body for his Souls
sake.

If you do not prize your Soul, the Devil does.

3. Live to your Soul, as believing it is Precious.

God might (and that without any Injustice) have placed you in the lowest
predicament of the vilest Creatures; but since he has stamped his own Image upon
you, and given you a Soul, with which you may converse, not only with Men and
Angels, but with himself; bless him for your Soul, with Psalm. 103. 1. Anim^
debere, is the highest Engagement. Genesis 49. 3, 4.
your Soul, and live to it as a Being most excellent and precious.

It is your Excellency and Honor, let it not then consult its own shame, nor
(with Reuben) lose its Excellency by sin, but be Honorably employed; serve the
living God with this breath of Life, (Life must be served with Life) worship
God who is a Spirit John 4. 24. Numb. 16. 22.
(and the God of the Spirits of all flesh) with this his Spirit in you.

Do not lose your Soul in looking after its Servant the Body (as Shimei lost
his Life in looking after 1 Kings 2. 36, 37. 38, 39. 40, 41. 46.
his) but do your principal work, for this principal one.

All that a man has will he give for his life, but life, and all must be Job 2.
4.
given and laid out for the good of the Soul.

And there is good reason for it, if you consider,

1. That your Soul was given to you that you should take care of it, and every
thing else for the good of your Soul.

Every one has not a Child, nor an Estate to look after, but every one has a
Soul; the poorest Widow has these two Mites, (a Soul and a Body) and the most
indigent Beggar this Treasure: Since then it is every ones (yours as well as
their) possession, it should be yours, and every ones Read animae, quae sua
sunt.
care, to secure the happiness of it, and therefore, give to the soul the
things that are the souls.

2. Christ likes them best, that are most careful of their souls.

Christ, when on Earth, loved them most, who loved their souls more than his
body (Mary's Breakfast was better to him than Martha's Dinner) and much more
then will he love them that love their souls more than their own bodies.

He that would not have you Murder your Body, would much less have you Murder
your Soul.

3. According to the care for your Soul here, so it is like to fare with your
Soul and Body hereafter.

You are daily Traveling to the Land of Souls, (viz. the world of Spirits,
both of the just and unjust) every day you take a step to it, and within a
little while you will be all Soul; and as you live to it here, so it will be
with that, and your Body for ever hereafter; the welfar of your Body depends
upon the welfare of your Soul, and the eternal welfare of that, upon your care
in time about it; and therefore, as by a care for your Soul, you may do two
works at once, (viz. secure the happiness of Soul and Body) so by a neglect of
it, will undo both for ever; at the first death your Rev. 20. 14. and 21. 8.
Soul shall go to Hell, and your Body at the second.

4. The loss of the Soul is the greatest loss; Christ, who best knows the worth
of a Soul, by the price he paid for it, says, that the gain of a whole World
(if Mat. 16. 26.
it could be obtained) with the loss of a Soul, would be a gain without profit,
a loss, rather than a gain, and that not the least, but greatest, as an
irreparable, and irrecoverable loss, a loss that could neither be made up nor
recovered.

All other losses (even of Life it self) may be made up, either in kind or
virtue; but nothing can Habet anima mortem suam cum vita beata caret, quae vera
animae vita dicenda est.
repair, or make up the loss of the Soul; for in this, God is lost; a lost
Groat may be found, lost Time may be redeemed, and a lost Estate recovered by
diligence; but a Soul when gone into Eternity, and lost, will be for ever so;
Heaven it self (salva justitia) cannot redeem a Soul from Hell when once there.

Your Soul is Gods as well as 1 Cor. 6. 20.
your Body, that he has bought, and therefore Glorify him with it, and commit
the keeping of it to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator, of Souls,
as well as of Bodies, that at last it may 1 Pet. 4. 19. Heb. 12. 22, 23.
be taken up to the innumerable Company of Spirits, viz. of Angels created
perfect, and of just Men made so.

Begin the work of Religion early.

Make it the great business of your Life.

Be hearty and sincere in it.

Be true and faithful to it, to the end of your Life.

1. Begin the work early.

1. God commands and expects it. 2. It is the best time for it.
(1.) God commands and expects it.

Cain brought Fruit to God (an Genesis 4. 3. 4.
Offering of the Fruit of the Ground) Abel brought first fruits, (the
firstlings of his Flock) and God had respect to Abel and his Offering, but not
to Cains, and this before the special Law of Exodus 13. 2. and 22. 29. and 34.
26.
first fruits, and firstborn (which were Gods in all) was made, to show (as is
usually observed) that it was not Ceremonial, but Moral and perpetual.

God, or the Devil, will have the use and service of your Life, but God has the
greatest Right to it; and his will is not only for work, but for Day, and
Time, and the first of that (viz. your Eccles. 12. 1.
Youth) he calls for, which shows kindness on his part (in taking any into his
Service before they can well work for him) and should promote Obedience on
yours. God is the fashioner and former, Psalm. 139. 13, 14, 15, 16. Deuteronomy. 32.
18. Psalm. 71. 17. Jer. 3. 4.
the teacher and preserver, the guide and strength of your Youth, all the
parts, Beauty, Strength, and all the other Excellencies of it, come from him,
and ought to be employed for him; and therefore do not give the Devil your
Youth, and God your Old Age; him your Spring, and God your Winter; him your
Vintage, and God your Gleanings; him your Flower, and God your Bran; him the
best, and God the worst; but the best, for he is best, and deserves the best.

Not an old or rotten Sacrifice, Mal. 1. 8, 14.
but the fattest, and fairest must be laid upon Gods Altar.

(2.) It is the best time for it. Eccles. 12. 1. The time of your Choices.
Primum in unoquoque genere est perfect issimum.


As to Ease, Honor, Service, Comforts, and Safety.

1. As to Ease.

Old Age is the best for Advice and Counsel, but Youth the best for Action,
both as to the Natural and Moral frame of the Body and Mind, viz. the parts of
one, and the endowments of the other. Old Age is called the Sickness of Nature,
but Youth is the Health and Strength of it; that is called Eccles. 12. 1.
the evil day (not only in respect of the evil then suffered, but of the
indisposition from that evil, to any thing that is good) but this a good day,
as most fit and proper for work; the Body being most active and vigorous, the
Fancy and Invention most quick, the Memory most strong, the Affections most
smart and lively, the Conscience most pure, the Will most pliable, and the
Heart (as not hardened by Custom in sin) most soft, and so most fit to receive
the impressions of Virtue.

Trees are transplanted, Horses broken, and Cattle accustomed to the Yoke with
ease, when young; and Youth more fit for Instruction, than Old Age, even then,
when it is scarce fit for any thing else.

2. As to Honor.

Piety in Youth will give you Honor with God and Men.

1. With God. 1 Samuel 2. 30. Luke 13. 6, 7.


You are Planted in a Vineyard, and God expects Fruit from you as soon as you
are Planted; he looks for it (in the Spring) and when he finds it, takes notice
of it (as he did of the kindness of Isreal's Jer. 2. 2.
Youth) and is greatly pleased with it (as Christ with the Rich Mark 10. 20, 21.
Man in the Gospel, that from his Youth observed the Commandments) for he loves
to magnify Psalm. 8. 2.
his praise out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings.

The Almond-tree that blossomed Numb. 17. 8.
soonest, was put into the Ark, and John, the youngest Disciple, was most
beloved.

2. With Men.

It was the Glory of Alexander, not so much that he Conquered the World, as
that he did it in his Youth. A Crown (better than one of Gold) on Josiah's
Head, that he was Religious in his tender 2 Chronicles. 34. 1. 2.
Years: The Honor of Moses and Samuel, (they lived and died in Honor) and of
Daniel (therefore Dan. 9. 23.
a Man of desires) because Religious in Youth; and so it will be of all the
Children of Wisdom, when found walking early, as well as late, in the ways of
Wisdom. Fruits early ripe, are by all greatly prized.

3. As to Service.

The most eminent in God's Service were (as is to be seen upon Record) most
early at it.

Joseph, a Religious Child in his Fathers House, was afterward a Religious
Senator in Pharaoh's Court.

Samuel, a Religious Child, was an eminent Prophet, Recorded by David, and by
God himself, Psalm. 99. 6. Jo^. 15. 1.
as one (that if any he) could prevail with God by Prayer.

Josiah, a Religious Child (at 2 King. 23. 25.
eight years old) and a Renowned King, for there was none like to him.

Timothy, a Religious Child, was 2 Timothy 3. 15.
afterward eminent in the Service of the Gospel.

And Christ more eminent than Luke 2. 12, 9.
all, went early about his Fathers business.

So that if you would be useful in Life, you must be Religious in Youth: The
sooner Weeds are pulled up, the better the Corn will grow; and the sooner you
are good, the more good you will do: Therefore, if you would have your Age be
the Harvest, your Youth must be the Seed-time.

The good Figs were soonest Jer. 24. 2.
ripe.

4. As to Comfort.

Timothy, that was Godly from 2 Timothy 2: 22.
his Youth, was bid to flee Youthful Lusts; and surely then it concerns you
(and all that are young) to do so, that you may not lay a Foundation for sin or
sorrow (or for both) in Old Age.

1. For Sin.

Youth, of all the Ages of Life, is most subject, as to Infection in Body, so
to Corruption in Soul.

Solomon beheld a Young Man Prove. 7. 7.
void of Understanding; and it was the younger Brother (not the elder) that was
the Prodigal. Luke 15. 12, 13.


Youth is to this Life, as this Life is to that to come; as this Life is (well
or ill) ordered, so it is like to be with you for ever in that; and as your
Youth is, so the sequel of your Life is like to Mature fias senex. utdiu senex.
Levit. 23. 10, 11.
be; and therefore it concerns you to be good then, that it may (like the
first fruits to the Harvest) Sanctify the remainder of your Life.

All Habits are by so much the more firmly radicated in their Subjects, by how
much the Actions from whence they come, are the more frequently and timely used.

2. For Sorrow.

Impiety in Youth will increase sin in Age (for by Custom it will become
Natural) and that will increase sorrow; for, as bruises in Youth, bring aches
in Old Age; so sins in Youth will bring sorrow then; and therefore give God now
the possession of your Youth, that you may not then (with Job 13. 26. Psalm. 25.
7. Jer. 31. 19.
Job, David, and Ephraim) possess the sins of it.

5. As to Safety, in that,

1. Your time is uncertain. 2. The work (by delay) will be more difficult.
1. Your time is uncertain.

It is true, Old Age will not come presently, nor may not, perhaps, to you at
all; (you are not sure you shall live to be Old) but Death will come sooner or
later; the longer your Glass has been running, the less there is to run, and it
may be out before you are aware, for it is ever running, and there are no stops
in it.

There are young Skulls as well as old ones in Golgotha; and there is a dying
in Youth, as certainly Job 36. 14.
as in Old Age.

2. The work (by delay) will be more difficult.

The longer you defer the work, like the deferring to buy the Sybil's
Prophesies, the dearer (as one observes) every day it will cost you; Dr.
Reynolds on Hos. 14. 2.
the more Tears, the harder Repentance, the deeper sorrows, and the stronger
cries, and thereby become Morally (though not absolutely) impossible; you will
not have less work to do by delay, Jer. 13. 23.
but more work, and less time.

The first Cripple only, that John 5. 4.
went into the Pool of Bethesda after the troubling of the Waters, was healed.

I have read of a Temple (in Spain) Dedicated to Old Age; I wish your Young Age
may be Dedicated Exodus 33. 11.
(as Joshua's) to Gods Temple, and the Service of it.

The glory of Young Men (as Solomon Prove. 20. 29.
says) is their strength, and the glory of that glory, is to give that
strength, the excellency of that Power (as Jacob said of his firstborn Reuben)
to Gods Service. If you begin early, the Genesis 49. 3.
Progress will be happy, and the end comfortable. You cannot begin too soon nor
hold out too late.

2. Make Religion the great business Luke 16. 11. Luke 10. 42. Non reprehendit,
sed distinguit.
of your Life.

Religion is the true riches, the good eminenter part, (Martha's work was good,
but Mary's was better,) the whole Duty of Man, his Form, Being, and Essence,
Eccles. 12. 13. Ps. 111. ult. Totus est perfectus animo homo omne hominis
bonum. and finis homin is. 1 Samuel 15. 22. Semper, and ad semper. Prove 28. 14.
Deuteronomy. 32. 47. Prove, 4. 7. Ephesians. 4. 1. Phil. 2. 12. Jer. 7. 22, 23.
his Wisdom, and principal thing, his Happiness, his Calling, and Work, a Work
most suitable to him, most useful and advantageous (his Interest as well as his
Duty) his chief work (above all Natural, Political, Moral, and Ceremonial work)
the one thing needful, never out of season, but (as Seneca says of Philosophy)
at all times necessary; his Life, and principal end of his Life, other things
are but means to this end; and therefore this must be preferred and set before
it.

The end is more excellent than the means.

Since then it is so in it self, Sapiens semper incipit a fine. 1 Cor. 10. 31.
let it be so to you, mind it as your chief good (the supreme end, and chief
good are one) refer all the general and particular actions of your Life to it
ultimately, (the end makes the means lovely) make all other Finis dat
amabilitatem medis, finis impeliit agentem, finis est sum appetibilis, finis
ultimus dat ordinem and mensuram. Prove. 6. 21. Ps. 63. 8. Numb. 6. 14, 24.
Eccles. 9. 10. Romans 12. 11. 1 Timothy 5. 10. Mat. 6. 33. Psalm. 63. 1.
things subservient to it, and let this as Commander in Chief, give Laws to
all, carry the remembrance of it always in your mind, place it next to your
Heart, and uppermost in your thoughts; be diligent in it, and prosecute the
Interest of it both fully, and earnestly, not as the last and least business of
your Life, but as the first and greatest (viz. in order and dignity) not
secondarily, but primarily, before all other things, and above them.

Two principal ends can never consist together.

Two things may encourage you to this work, and in it.

1. Strength is promised to it. 2. A Reward attends it.
1. Strength is promised to it.

Tripho the Jew, in his Dispute against Justin Martyr, tells him, that those
Precepts Christ left about the Duties of Religion, were so harsh and
burdensome, that he would have but few, if any Disciples; and many there are,
that either through mistake think they find this stumbling block in the way of
Religion, and cannot get over it, or lay it there, and will not; it is true, to
carnal minds by reason of the contrariety of their Nature to Religion, through
Romans 7. 14, 22.
the corruption that is in them, and by reason of custom in sin, which makes
the contrariety stronger, the work's difficult and uneasy; but to them that
are renewed, it is not, or if so at first, yet by use it becomes pleasant and
delightful, for Christ's Yoke by constant wearing, grows easy. Mat. 11. 29.


Grave, dum tollis, suave, cum tuleris. But if it were not so, yet strength
shall be given to it, that will make it so. In the Body, where there is a vein
to convey Blood, there is an Artery to convey Spirits; and in the Scripture,
Deuteronomy. 10. 16. and 30. 6. Phil. 2. 12, 13.
where there is a Command to work, there is a promise of strength to it; what
is a Command in one place, is a Promise in another.

Now, difficult work and easy, are both alike, if a suitable, and
proportionable strength be given Ezekiel. 18. 31. and 36. 26.
to the performance of it.

2. A Reward attends it, viz. Of Honor, Pleasure, Profit, and Peace.

1. Of Honor.

There was no way to the Temple of Honor (among the Romans) Psalm. 45. 9. and
149. 9.
but through the Temple of Virtue; nor is there any coming to Honor now in the
Prove. 13. 5. and 14. 34. 1 These. 4. 4. Romans 6. 21.
broad way of sin, but in the narrow way of Religion; for as the future issue
of sin is Death, so the present fruit is shame.

Indeed the Enemies of Religion (who fetch their Scutcheon out of the Devils
Herald-Office) count sin their Honor, and glory in their shame; but God (who
is the Fountain of all true Honor) Prove. 21. 21.
places it in Righteousness and Holiness, he is Glorious in Holiness, and if it
be his Honor, it may well be esteemed yours; this is John 5. 44.
the only true Honor, and it comes from God only, and if by 1 Samuel 2. 30.
this you Honor him, you shall be everlastingly honored by him; a Spirit of
Glory shall rest on you 1 Pet. 4. 14.
here, and a Crown of Glory be put upon you hereafter.

All seek Honor, and some to Honor calcar babet.
the loss of their Lives and Souls, but none but the Religious truly find it.

2. Of Pleasure.

The Enemies of Religion think, if once they espouse the profession of it, that
all Joy and Mirth must be cast out, (as the Minstrels were by Christ out of the
Rulers House, when he came to raise his Mat. 9. 23, 25.
Daughter to Life) but they are much mistaken, for Christ (the increated wisdom
of the Father) 1 Cor. 1. 24. Prove. 3. 17.
says, that the ways of wisdom have pleasure in them; not the end only, but
the way, and not some one way only, but all the ways, and every step in them,
are, not only pleasant, but pleasantness, yea, pleasantnesses; having all
pleasures that are good, both as to kind and degree in it. The Sheep has
delights as well as the Swine, though it wallows not (with the Swine) in the
mire; and the Religious their pleasures, though none that are vain and sensual.

All look for pleasure in Life, and most think there is no Life without it; but
the Religious only find it.

3. Of Profit.

Religion brings gain, this the Job 1. 9. 10. 1 Timothy 6. 6.
Devil could not deny, when he accused Job of Hypocrisy (now the praise of an
Enemy is, as Aristotle Psalm. 37. 4.
says, a universal good Report) and this God has assured Mat. 19. 28. 29. Mark
10. 29, 30.
to all the sincere Professors and Friends of it, and that no ordinary gain
neither, but an increase greater than the World can promise or secure, for it
is a hundred fold, not ten in the hundred, but a hundred upon ten, a hundred to
one (use upon use) viz. either in kind or virtue in this World, and in the
World to come, Life eternal.

You may lose something for Mat. 6. 33. 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.
Religion, but you shall never lose any thing by it; for, if God be yours, all
things are yours; all things conditionally, if he absolutely.

The Offerings of Old increased 2 Chronicles. 31. 9, 10.
their store.

4. Of Peace.

The Enemies of Religion talk Prove. 3. 7, 17. Psalm. 119. 165.
much of their Peace, but without any Reason, for there is no Peace to them in
that, they are Enemies to the God of Peace, without the Spirit of Peace (and
therefore without Peace the fruit of Isa. 48. 22.
the Spirit) and Fighters against Christ the Prince of Peace, who speaks Peace,
not to his Enemies that commit folly, but to his Subjects Psalm. 85. 8.
that return no more to it.

Joy (as the Philosopher says) is the shadow of all Virtue, (as inseparable
perhaps from it, as the shadow from the Body) and the fruit of Righteousness
(as the Apostle says) is Peace, there is James 3. 18. Romans 3. 17.
no Peace without it, and all true Peace in it, and it is worth the having; for
it abides, not only in Life, but at Death too. The end of the upright is
Peace. Psalm. 37. 37.


Peace in Life is a rare Blessing, but at Death a greater; and was there no
other benefit in this World to be got by Religion, it is enough to make you in
love with it.

3. Be hearty and sincere in the work of Religion.

When you enter upon the work of Religion, let that enter into you, and give
up, not only your Name, but Heart to it; and what Acts 11. 23. Ephesians. 6. 6.
ever you do in it, do it heartily to the Lord.

1. Nothing will be accepted without the Heart. 2. Any thing will be accepted
with it. 3. Your Heart is Gods by right. 4. God calls for it.
1. Nothing will be accepted without the Heart.

The Heart is the Fountain and Principle of Spiritual as well as Natural Life,
and that which gives Life to all. The Tree in the midst Genesis 3. 3.
of the Garden (all of pith) the choice Sacrifice (the Male in the Mal. 1. 14.
Flock) the fat of the Sacrifice that he reserves to himself; the Disciple
beloved above any, and the John 20. 2. Genesis 43. 3.
Benjamin, without which nothing will be accepted; and therefore this must be
the Treasure you Mat. 2. 11.
open, when you bring your Gift unto him.

You know no more than you do in Religion, and do no more, than what you do
with the Heart, for, when things are not true, they are not at all.

Ens and verum connectuntur. 2. Any thing will be accepted with it.

Affections shall be interpreted 1 Kings 8. 18. Psalm. 32. 5.
Actions, and Purposes Endeavors; the will shall pass for the work, imperfect
Duties for perfect (a little, or any thing accepted,) so it be all you have,
and 2 Cor. 8. 12.
the Heart be in them, for the heart is Gods Sacrifice, yea, his Sacrifices,
all, and every one, the Virtue, Psalm. 51. 17.
Power, and Value of all, in one, and that which ingratiates all.

God sometimes accepts the will for the deed, but at all times the will more
than the deed.

3. Your Heart is Gods by right.

It is Gods more than yours, and Mark 12. 17. (...), the Article is doubled. 1
Cor. 6. ult. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Prove. 23. 26.
therefore be just, and give him that which is his own, for he bought it, and
dearly paid for it.

Christ parted with his Heart blood, to have the love and service of yours.

4. God calls for your Heart.

He desires it, wooes, and entreats, wishes and waits for it, Isa. 1 2.
yea, commands it, and not to give it, is to Rebel against him.

God has ever been a giver to you, and now desires to be receiver from you; he
has often given you the desire of your Heart, let him then have from you the
desire of his, and as he desires it, viz.

1. Willingly.

Absalom stole away the Hearts 2 Samuel 15. 5, 6.
of some of the Men of Israel, but God accepts of none but such as (with the
Men of Israel) of a Exodus 25. 2. and 35. 5.
willing Heart give themselves unto him.

2. Fully.

One and the same Temple could not receive the Ark and Dagon; nor can God and
the Devil have 1 Samuel 5. 3, 4.
your Heart at one and the same time, one of them will have it, both at once
cannot, nor God at any time truly, unless wholly; he is but one, and he will be
owned Mat. 22. 37. Aut Caesar, aut nullus. Exodus 29. 18. Psalm. 51. 19.
as one; none must share with him in it (for he admits no Rival) nor must any
part of it be kept from him, for he will have all (a whole Burnt-offering) or
nothing.

Unless all be given, nothing is truly given.

3. Constantly.

You must not give your Heart one day to Religion, and another day to Sin; one
day to Gods Service, and on another to the Devils, but to God only, and to him
for ever.

By thus giving your Heart to God, you will gain his; for he John 14. 21.
that loves him, shall be loved of him.

4. Be true and faithful to Religion, to the end of your Life.

You must not only begin, but proceed in the work of Religion, and not only
proceed, but end in it; and there is good reason for it, in that,

1. The Honor of God and Religion is concerned in it. 2. Your Salvation
depends upon it.
1. The Honor of God and Religion is concerned in it.

Stedfastness in Religion is a credit to Religion, and to God the Master of it,
(he owns it so) but a departure from it, tacitly accuses Religion of
unpleasantness, or the Master of it of injustice, (as if there was Iniquity in
him) it says in effect, that either the work is not good, and not fit to be
done, or the Master not good, and not fit to be served; which is a greater
Reproach to him than if he had never been served. A dishonor that the Heathen
offer not to their Idols Jer. 2. 11.
(for they change not their gods) a sin that grieves him to the breaking of his
Heart; yea, a sin so great, that he looks upon it as impardonable (how shall I
Pardon Jer. 5. 6, 7.
thee for this?) for he hates an Apostate as bad, if not worse, than a Sodomite.

No comlier sight in Gods Eyes, than young Disciples, and old ones, viz. such
as are early and late at his work.

2. Your Salvation depends upon it.

If you are not so Religious as 2 John 8.
others, you shall not have so full a Reward as they; but if you be not
steadfast in it, you shall have Gal. 6. 9. Prove. 1^. 18. Heb. 10. ^5.
none at all It is true, the Reward is both sure and great, but it is promised
to none but them that work, nor to any of them, unless they are unmovable, and
always abounding in it; the penny Luke 9. 62.
is for them, not that enter into the Vineyard, but for them that abide there
until Night; and the Crown for them, not that start well, but that run so, viz.
not to the middle only, but to the end of the Race. And therefore you must be
steadfast, and always abounding in Labor, if you would 1 Cor 15. ult.
not labor in vain; and not (with the Israelites) stand still, nor go Exodus
14. 13.
back, but forward, if you would see the Salvation of God.

Every Grace adorns a Christian, Perseverance only crowns him. Rev. 2. 10.


Now, that you may

1. Consider what the work of Religion is, before you engage in Luke 14. 28,
29, 30.
it.

There is a Cross to be found in the way of Religion, as well as a Crown at the
end of it; and therefore if you unadvisedly enter upon it, without considering
what it is, or what it may cost you, you may meet with a difficulty that will
make way for Apostasy. A thing well resolved is half done, but never well
resolved, unless first considered; and therefore this is the first thing you
must do, fail in this, and you will fail in all.

If an Arithmetician mistake in his first figure, the whole Account will be
wrong.

2. Take not up a profession of Religion to serve your worldly Interest or
Advantage.

Sin upon no man's account whatsoever, (Callisthenes would not pledge Alexander,
to have need of Aesculapius) nor be not Religious upon that score only, (as
Joash was, for Jehoiada's sake, 2 Chronicles. 24. 17, 18.
while he lived) for if that be all, your Religion is little worth, and you may
as quickly lose it, as find it; they that follow Christ for Nunc harum, nunc
illarum partium nullifidus, as Tully of Ant.
Loaves, will leave him when they are spent and gone; and they that are for any
Religion (because in fashion) either are of none, or will easily be so.

It is better to be of no Religion, than of every one.

3. Beware of the least degree of remisness in Religion, either in Judgment or
Affection.

A Gangreen goes on by degrees, (first, one part or Member is infected, and
then another) and so does Apostasy; it begins in the Judgment, and if that
disesteems Religion, the Affections will decline Voluntas sequitur dictamen
intellectus.
and forsake it, the Affections follow the Judgment, and what that lightly
approves of, the other will as coldly and indifferently receive.

He that is careless of little slips, is in danger of a fall.

4. Be much in the use and exercise of the public and private Duties of
Religion.

These are (as one says) the Sphere of Grace, and in these consists the life of
Religion; and therefore, if nothing of them appear in your Life, or if you live
in the neglect of them, or are negligent in them, your pretended Religion will
soon vanish, and come to nothing.

If once you become formal in Devotion, you will quickly be any thing in
Conversation.

5. Be established in the Faith.

It is true, Fear is the Grace that keeps you in your standing, (and Prove. 28.
14. 1 Cor. 10. 12. 2 Cor. 1. ult. Ephesians. 4. 4. Col. 2. 7.
therefore, if you would never fall, you must ever fear,) but Faith is the
Grace by which you stand, for it unites you to Christ, in whom you are
preserved; and therefore, be well rooted and grounded in it.

If you be carried away with 2 Timothy 4. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 5.
every wind of Doctrine, you will at last be true and sted fast to none; but if
you are established in the Doctrine of Faith, and grow in the Grace of Faith;
if you live the life of Faith, and keep the Doctrine of Faith, you will be
safe; for if you keep the Faith, the Faith will keep you.

Of Original Sin.
It is an Ancient Tradition among the Jews, that when Noah sent forth his Sons
to people the World, he gave to every one of them some Relics of Adam; but it
is a more certain and ancient truth, that all the Posterity of Adam have
received, not only some, but all the Relics of his sinful Corruption, a
leaven that has overspread the whole lump of Mankind, for all have corrupted
their ways (viz. all except Christ) Psalm. 14. 1.
and all that is done by them, and all that is in them (viz. all the faculties
of their Souls, all the Members Mat. 15. 18.
of their Bodies, and the Actions of each) are defiled by it. Tria Augustinus
tribuit peccato originali quod sic peccatum, poena peccati, causa peccati.


A Toads poison is but in one place, but this is in all, like a Disease that
has corrupted the whole Mass of Blood.

By this you are indisposed to all good, for there is nothing in the World, but
it will either find as a hindrance to it, or make it so.

When Paul had a will to work, Gal. 5. 17. Romans 7. 18.
he wanted a power.

By this you are inclined to all evil.

There is not a sin in Hell, but has a Root in this; nor any sin so great or
foul, but you would commit, if under the power of it, and left to your self;
for it is virtually all sin.

The new Man (the new Creation) 2 Cor. 5. 17. (...).
is not so much one Grace, as all; and the Old Man (Original sin) is not so
much one sin, as all.

So that here you may see,

1. What cause you have to be humbled under it.

Plato says, if Virtue could be seen with Bodily Eyes, it would Ravish the
Beholders; and if the Corruption in all by Nature could be seen, it would (as
the Schools say) transport them to Madness.

David and Paul were humbled Psalm. 51. 5. Romans 7. 24.
under it, therefore and well may you.

2. Where to lay the blame, when you sin.

Some, when fallen under afflictive Evil, lay all on Providence, and nothing on
Sin that caused it; and when fallen into sin, lay all on the Devil, and nothing
on themselves; and thereby make the Devil (to whom due should be given) worse
than he is, and themselves better than indeed they are; for were there no Devil
to tempt to sin, there is that within them, that both can, and would do it.

Since then the Devil cannot prevail, unless you yield to him, (for his
strength is within you) let the time of Complaint against him, be spent in
resisting of him, that you may not.

It is the Bello^s and fire, that makes fire.

And since you are, when drawn aside, enticed by your own Lusts, James 1. 14,
15.
(the Enemies within you) let all the actions of sin be laid at the door of
your own Heart.

David, though a Man after Gods Heart, sometimes walked 1 Chronicles. 21. 1, 17.
after his own, yet then he laid the blame, not on the Devil, but on himself.

3. What little cause you have to censure any when fallen into sin.

Plato's Advice to his Scholars was, that when they saw any irregular, and
exorbitant in their Lives, they should not rashly censure them, but reflect on
themselves, and consider, if they were not, or had not been such themselves:
And it is the Advice of St. Paul (a greater than Plato) when any are overtaken
in a fault, not to insult over them, but to restore Gal. 6. 1. (...).
them in a Spirit of Meekness, (to set them in Joint) and there is good reason
for it; for though all are not alike evil by practice, yet all being by Nature
so, viz. Aut sumus aut suimus aut possumus esse quod hic est.
seminally, and dispositively the same, they either have done, or may do so.

The worst men's actions show what the best men by Nature are inclined to.

Of your own sin, and of the sins of others.
Of your own sin.
IN every body there is some predominant Humor, and in every one there is a
sin that may properly be called their sin, more than the sin of any other, or
than any other sin, that they themselves are inclined to.

This sin is either,

1. That sin you are most tempted to; the Devil knows the sin that you (and
all) are by disposition (as well as by custom and calling) most inclined to,
and how to accommodate and suit his Temptation to it.

Now, that sin you are most frequently tempted to, that is your sin.

2. The captivating conquering sin, against which you are most weak, and by
which (as Samson by Delilah) you are most easily Romans 6. 12. Ezekiel. 16. 30. Romans
6. 16. 2 Pet. 2. 19.
overcome.

You are most his, who is Master over you, and whose Servant you are.

3. That sin you are most tender of, and indulgent to, that sin you Judges. 6.
31.
defend, and most excuse.

We always take the part of them we love.

4. That sin you make most provision for, for which any thing Romans 13. 14.
shall be given, and to which any thing shall be Sacrificed.

The best Friends are ever best provided for.

5. Or that sin which is most highly esteemed of (viz. as a right Hand, and a
right Eye) that has the Throne of the Heart, and Commands in Chief that which
the thoughts and desires are most busied about, and most approve, affect, and
follow after. Jer. 22. 7. Hos. 4. 8.


The Affections make any thing most our own.

This is a sin against knowledge, (and of all sins the principal) a sin, that
shows, not only the Communion of the Heart with it, but the Union also of the
Heart to it, and the greater because so; for, the more a sin is against
Knowledge, and the more there is of the Heart in it, the greater it is; and
therefore, above all (either great or small) you must resist and oppose it.

David proved his uprightness Psalm. 18. 23.
before God by this, viz. that he had kept himself from his Iniquity; and you
cannot be sincere unless you do so too.

That sin you love most, God hates most.

Of other men's sins.
Merchants can Trade in bottoms that are not their own; and a Trade in sin may
be driven by you, by other men's sins as well as your own; and then it is, when
either you advise, or provoke them to sin, consent to it, or indulge them in it.

Jonadab was guilty of Amnon's 2 Samuel 13. 5.
uncleanness with Tamar, Ahitophel of Absalom's with his Fathers Concubines, 2 Samuel 16. 21, 22.
for they advised them to it; and the Chief Priests and Pharisees were guilty
of Christ's death, John 11. 47, 53.
for they sat in Council about it.

Sapphira was guilty of the sin Acts 5. 1, 2.
of Ananias (for though she kept not back part of the price, yet she was privy
to it) and Saul of Stephen's Death, (for he consented Acts 22. 20. and 26. 10.
to it, and kept the Raiment of them that slew him) and of many others that
were put to Death, for he gave his voice against them.

Jezebel was guilty of Ahab's sin, 1 King. 21. 7, 25.
and of Naboth's Death, for she stirred up Ahab to it. Balaam and 2 King. 17.
21. Numb. 23. 14. and 25. 1. Rev. 2. 14.
Jeroboam were guilty of Isreal's Idolatry, for they provoked them to it; and
Eli, of the sin of his Sons, in that he restrained them not, when they made
themselves vile; a sin so great, that it was 1 Samuel 3. 11, 12, 13, 14.
not to be purged with Sacrifice.

These are some of those many ways by which others have been (and by which you
may be) guilty of the sins of others; and therefore, it concerns you to avoid
them, that you may not.

It is bad to sin of your self, but worse to advise others to it, for it shows
a great ripeness in sin.

Flowers and Herbs, when ripe, shed their Seed.

By consenting to the sin of another, you discover a will to act it, if you had
Opportunity, and are equally guilty with them.

The Receiver is as bad as the Psalm. 50. 18.
Thief.

By provoking others to sin, you will provoke God to vengeance against them,
and your self too.

Jeroboam caused Israel to sin, and it was the Ruin both of him 1 King. 13. 34.
and them.

To defend sin, is a high degree of sinning, and to indulge it, is not the
least.

To indulge the least sin, some say, is as bad as the commission of the
greatest, if not, yet the least sin indulged becomes great.

The non-execution of God's Law against sin, is an open, and evident breach of
it.

He that does not punish sin Qui non prohibet. Jubet.
(when his Duty and Place obliges to it) Commands it.

Therefore, never either secretly, or openly, in will, or in word, by
permission, or approbation, flattery or applause, consent to the sin of
another; nor either allure, or entice, incense, or provoke any to sin, but
either restrain them from it, or reprove them for it, that you may (with Paul)
Acts 20. 26. (...).
be pure from the Blood, and clear from the guilt of the sins of all with whom
you converse.

If any Mischief happened (under the Law) either to Man or Beast fallen into a
Pit, he was guilty, that saw the Pit open, and did not cover it; and so will
you be of the sin of another, though not acted by you, if not prevented by you
(so far as you are able) before it is committed, or not reproved and condemned,
when it is.

Now, that you may not spoil Gods Cause with ill Pleading, nor become an
Advocate for the Devil, when (by the reproof of sin) you appear one for God,
you must do it

1. Seasonably. 2. Speedily. 3. Prudently. 4. Meekly. 5. Boldly.
1. Seasonably.

Reproof is an affirmative Duty, that binds all, (though not all Semper non ad
semper.
alike) but not always, for every time sin is committed, is not a fit time to
reprove it, therefore you must choose a fit season for it.

The best time to strike the Iron is when it is hot and pliant; to Plough, when
the Earth is made soft by Rain; and the best time to reprove sin, is, when the
mind of 1 Samuel 25. 36.
the sinner is prepared to receive it.

There is a time to keep silence, Eccles. 3. 7.
as well as to speak.

2. Speedily.

Take no season that is not fit for Reproof, nor neglect any that is; for
either the person to be reproved Heb. 3. 13.
may be out of your reach, and then it will be impossible, or more hardened in
sin, (for the habit of sin is intended and confirmed by custom) and then it
will be more difficult to reclaim him.

The longer any are the Devils Captives, the stronger are the Chains he binds
them with.

3. Prudently.

All persons are not alike, nor are all sins neither, nor must they be reproved
alike; you must therefore consult, not only the convenience of time and place,
but the Nature of the sin, and both the quality and temper of the sinner, that
your reproof may be received, not as an affront, but as a kindness to him.

Nettles and Thorns must be Ezekiel. 2. 16.
handled in a different manner.

4. Meekly.

If Hatred beget Reproof, and Passion bring it forth, or if Reproof be leavened
with it, it loses its Nature, (for it is not reproof, but railing) and will
miss of its end; for Passion is a short Madness, and one Mad man is never like
to do good to another; you must therefore do it, not in wrath, but with a
Spirit of Meekness, that those you reprove may not be the more confirmed in
their sin, or resolved for it, but reclaimed from it.

The blustering Wind makes the Traveller hold his Coat the faster.

5. Boldly.

Meekly, that the Person reproved may not be offended, and boldly, that God may
not be dishonored; meekly, that your Anger may appear not against him, but his
sin; and blodly, that your Zeal may appear for God.

It is a sinful Modesty to be either afraid, or ashamed to reprove sin, and a
foolish pity, to let any perish in it through a fear of displeasing them.

My Prayer for you, shall be Ab occultis meis peccatis and alienis meis, libera
me Domine. Aug.
that of St. Austin for himself, viz. that you may be kept from your own sins,
and from the sins of others.

Of sins of Omission.
Sins of Omission are the first Psalm. 14. 1. Romans 1. 21, 24. 2 These. 2. 10, 11.
inlets to sin; for the omission of good, is the ground of the commission of
evil.

A sin of Omission is either not doing what is Commanded, or not doing it as it
is Commanded.

1. Not doing what is Commanded.

Every Affirmative Command has something Negative in it; and every Negative
Command has something Affirmative in it; that Command which enjoins Honor and
Service to God, forbids whatever may tend to his Dishonor; and that which
forbids the taking away the Life of any, does also Command an endeavor (so far
as is possible) to preserve that Life, and a neglect, is a sin, because a
breach of that Law.

They that live not Godly, as Titus 2. 12. Ephesians. 4. 25. 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12. Romans
8. 1. Psalm. 34. 14.
well as deny Ungodliness; that speak not truth, as well as put away lying;
that walk not after the Spirit, as well as not after the Flesh; and do not
good, as well as depart from evil, are guilty of a breach of the Law, for it
Commands both.

It is a sin to do what is forbid, Aeque peccat, qui omittit faciends, and
facit omittenda.
and so it is also, not to do what is commanded; and therefore, they sin, that
do not what they should, as they, that do what they should not.

2. Not doing in a right manner what is Commanded.

God Commands both, and abhors all Obedience, that is not formally, as well as
materially good, viz. so as to the manner, as well as to the matter of it.

They are Cursed, that do not Jer. 48. 10.
the work of the Lord; and so are they too, that do it negligently.

Tacitus says of Galba, that he Quod magis erat extra vitia, quam cum
virtutibus. Minus vitiosi.
had rather no Vice, than any Virtue: And Salvian says, that many in his time,
thought themselves therefore good, because not so bad as others: And too many
there are, that think they are therefore good, because they do no evil; Saints,
because not Sinners; but how much they, or you are mistaken by thinking so,
will appear, by considering

That Sins of Omission, as well as of Commission, will

1. Denominate you to be evil. 2. Will bring evil upon you.
1. They denominate you to be evil.

A Garden is bad, if it has not good Flowers, as well as no Weeds; a Tree, if
it does not bear good Fruit, as well as not bad; a Servant, if he does not
preserve his Masters Goods, as well as not waste them; and so are all that
profess Religion, that appear not for it, as well as not against it.

Unrighteousness left, is not Isa. 1. 17, 18.
Righteousness learnt; and therefore, unless you become Righteous, as well as
forsake Unrighteousness; and do good, as well as cease to do evil, you are not
good at all.

Unsavory Salt (in this sense) is no better than Poison.

2. That Sins of Omission will bring evil upon you.

Moab and Ammon were Banished from the Congregation of the Lord to their tenth
Generation, Deuteronomy. 23. 3, 4.
for a Sin of Omission, (viz. for not meeting the Israelites with Bread and
Water in their way out of Egypt.)

Meroz was Cursed for this sin, Judges 5. 23.
(he, for not helping the Lord against the Mighty, as well as they that helped
the Mighty against the Lord.)

Saul lost his Kingdom for this Sin, (viz. for not killing Agag) 1 Samuel 15. 9,
23.
the Fig Tree in the Vineyard was doomed to be cut down for this sin, (viz. not
for bearing Crabs, Luke 13. 7, 8.
but for not bearing Figs;) the foolish Virgins were shut out of Mat. 25. 3, 8.
Heaven for this sin, (viz. not for wasting their Oil, but for not getting Oil
in their Vessels.)

The Invited Guest to the Marriage-Supper, Mat. 22. 11, 12, 13.
was cast into outer Darkness for this sin, (it was not for coming in Rags,
but for coming without a Wedding Garment.)

The unprofitable Servant was Mat. 25. 30.
cast into outer Darkness for this sin, (it was not for being Prodigal, but for
being unprofitable; it was not for wasting his Talent, but for not using it;
nor for not having five Talents, but for not improving that one he had.)

The Rich Man was Tormented in Hell for this sin, (it was not Luke 16. 19, 20,
21, 25.
for being unjust, but for being uncharitable; it was not for hurting Lazarus,
but for not relieving him:) The great Curse of the Gospel (Anathema Maranatha)
1 Cor. 16. 22.
greater than any of the Law, is entailed on this sin, (viz. for not loving of
Christ.)

Present Condemnation is denounced against this sin, (he that Joh. 3. 18.
believes not, is condemned already) and the fatal Sentence (never to Mat. 25.
41, 42.
be repealed) will at last be past against it, viz. not for starving,
stripping, or imprisoning Christ's Members (though those will be punished as
great sins at that day) but for not Visiting, Clothing, and Feeding them.

There are no Neuters in Religion, and therefore, if you are not for Christ,
you are against him.

Of little sins, and of Custom in sin.
Of little sins.
ALL sins (objectively considered) are alike, for they are committed against
God, who is infinite in Power and Goodness; but considered as to their
Circumstances, they are not; for Circumstances put a sensible difference into
one and the same action, and sin, and the aggravation of the Circumstance, is
the aggravation of the sin.

Some think every sin little (but it is the greatness of their sin to do so)
and some think little sins none, but they are; for,

1. Little sins are transgressions of Gods Law. 2. Little sins are Mortal. 3.
Little sins make way for greater.
1. Little sins are transgressions 1 John 3. 4.
of Gods Law.

Thoughts are free from the censure Cogitationis paenas nemo luit* and de
minimis non curas lex.
of Humane Laws, and small offenses are little regarded, or taken notice of;
but the Divine Law reaches to the least sins, and forbids the whole Latitude of
sin, from the beginning, to the end, from thoughts, to deeds, and from the
appearance, to the act; for 1 These. 5. 22. Mat. 5. 28. Heb. 4. 12.
Gods Law (as the Exchequer Accounts) reaches to the least sums and farthings.

Little spots as well as great ones made a Leprosy, as much crookedness may be
in a small line as in a greater, and as much contempt of God and his Law, in
the least sin, as in the greatest.

2. Little sins are Mortal.

The breach of every Law of Earthly Kings is not Capital and Mortal, but all of
the King of Heavens are; for the wages of sin, the transgression of those Laws,
(viz. of sin indefinitely) is Death; they are not all alike great, but all are
Mortal, and will Romans 6. 23.
(without Repentance) bring sure Damnation, though not equal degrees of it;
for, as the promise is annexed to the least Grace, so a curse is to the least
sin.

A little leak unstopt will sink a Ship; a little Sword will kill as surely as
a great one, a little Debt will cast into Prison as well as a great one, and a
little sin unrepented of, will as surely send you to Hell as a greater; and
when once there, it will be but sorry comfort to think what you are there for,
whether for great sins, or small ones.

3. Little sins make way for greater.

David by being Idle, became wanton, and from a wanton glance of his Eye, he
proceeded to Adultery; from lust, to act, and from one act to another, viz.
from Adultery, to Murder.

Solomon, from sensual Lusts went on to Spiritual (viz. to Idolatry:) Judas,
from Covetousness, to Murder, (first, he grudged the costly Ointment bestowed
on Christ, and then betrayed him) and Peter, from Lying, to Perjury; and so
will all, not only Seducers, but all that indulge any sin, wax worse and worse,
and 2 Timothy 3. 13. Jer. 9. 3.
proceed from evil to evil, viz. both as to kind and degree.

Little Wedges make way for greater, little Burdens strengthen for greater,
little Coals kindle greater, the lowest stair helps up Principis obsta.
to the highest, the least figure in Arithmetic increases the Sum, In minimo
esse fidelem, magnum est. Aug.
and in the least sin there is a tendency to the greatest; it is of an
increasing Nature, and will, unless timely prevented, proceed until it is out
of measure sinful.

That sin is ever most dangerous, that is most contemptible.

Of Custom in Sin.
Much might be said as to the evil of Custom in sin, viz. that it will
indispose you to any thing (...). Philo
that is good, and disenable all the Faculties of your Soul to receive it; that
it will put you upon sinning with freedom, facility, pleasure, and delight, and
bring you under a fatal necessity of sinning, whether you will or no, or at
least without any sense of it, like the People of Alexandria, who did not mind
their Earthquakes, because (...), Omne peccatum vilescit consuetudine and fit
quasi nulium qui ad ostia Ni^i vivunt nimium audiendo, nihil audiunt, ex
voluntate perversa facta est libido, dum libidini servitur, facta est
consuetudo, and dum consuetudini non resistitur, facta est necessitas.
they were daily: Or like them that lived at the Cataracts of Nilus, who by
hearing too much, heard nothing at all. A doleful Paradox, but true.

But all that I shall say relating to it, shall be only two things, viz.

1. That nothing provokes God more than Custom in sin. 2. That nothing is more
hardly removed than Custom in sin.
1. That nothing provokes God more than Custom in sin.

Custom in sin, is sin by Multiplication, (for, it is not got by one act, but
by many) and the multiplication of sin, is the great aggravation of it; the
breach of Humane Laws is not lessened, but aggravated, by a frequent repetition
of it, and so is the breach of Divine Laws too; for, as sin has a Power, and a
Law, by which (in some) it reigns, so it is the more heinous when it is so, for
the least sin that reigns is more displeasing to God, than the Romans 6. 12, 16.
greatest that does not.

All Acts, whether good or bad, please or displease, as the good or evil habits
are, from whence they come.

2. That nothing is more hardly removed than Custom in sin.

Evil Habits, as well as good, are got by degrees, and perfected by use, (for
Acts strengthen Habits) and A^io perfecta non recipitur nisi imperfecte primo.
Ab imperfecto ad perfectum consuetudinem vincere, dura pugna.
the stronger they are, with the greater difficulty will they be conquered, and
overcome.

Trees well Rooted, and of some standing, are not easily transplanted; streams
of Water of long continuance, are not easily diverted from their Chanel; the
League of Friendship betwixt Old Friends, is not easily broken; nor sin easily
removed, when habituated by Custom, for Custom is a second Nature, and that is
not without difficulty (if at all) repelled. Naturam expollas furca licet usque
recurrit. Mark 9. 17, 21, 26.


The Devil that possessed the Young Man from a Child, was (of all) with the
greatest difficulty cast out.

The Cretians, when they Curse one another, say, the Devil lead you into an
evil Custom; but my Prayer for you shall be, that God would keep you from it,
that you may not be hardened in sin. Zech. 7. 12. Adamas ne ferro quidem cedit,
nullis seilpris, nullis malleis doma^ilis. Mark 6. 52. and 16. 14.


The stone of the Heart is in all by Nature, and felt by all that are not dead
in sin; your Heart by Nature is a stone, and by custom in sin it will be as an
Adamant, the hardest (as Naturalists observe) of all stones; a greater Misery
than which you cannot lie under, either here, or in Hell; for Hell it self
would be no Hell to any of a tender and broken Heart.

Of Thoughts.
The great Misery come upon all by reason of sin, is, that every Genesis 6. 5.
imagination of the thoughts of their Heart are evil, only evil, and
continually so.

Evil thoughts are all thoughts of evil against God and Man, so called, either
as arising from evil, or tending to it.

Thoughts are known to God. Genesis 6. 16.


The Ark that was made close on every side, had a Window on the top toward
Heaven, as an Emblem of Gods Omniscience, who sees you, not only when in
secret, but the secret within you, for he knows your thoughts (yea your
thought, every single thought) afar off, viz. either Psalm. 139. 2. Ezekiel. 11. 5.
what they will be, before you think them, or what they were, when you have
forgotten them.

They are reserved Cases known to him only, nor can he forget them, for he
requires that which Eccles. 3. 15.
is past.

Thoughts shall be brought into Judgment.

Thoughts (as well as words and actions) are written in Gods Book, and shall be
made known, Eccles. 12. ult. Romans 2. 16. 1 Cor. 4. 5.
when the secrets of Men shall be judged, the counsel of the Heart made
manifest, and the hidden things of Darkness brought into light.

And many whose understandings spoke them Men, and their words Christians, when
on Earth, shall be found (at that day) by their thoughts, to have been worse
than Beasts.

Evil thoughts are sins, and transgressions of Gods Law.

The Laws of Men reach but to words and Actions, but Gods Heb. 4. 12. Prove. 6.
18. and 15. 26. Prove. 24. 9.
Law reaches to thoughts, and forbids, not only evil words and deeds, but all
evil thoughts tending to them. The thoughts of Foolishness is sin, and
therefore, unless you be cleansed from them, Jer. 4. 14.
you cannot be saved.

A dumb Man may be damned for the sins of his thoughts.

There may be sin in the thoughts, inward motions to it, though no outward acts
of it; yea, sin may be reiterated there, when the acts of it cease; and as much
sin may be in the thoughts in a day, as would take up the actions of a whole
Life to complete and finish: There are many ways by which Men can restrain or
punish the acts of sin, but none either to restrain or punish the thoughts of
it; sinful actions are public and open Offenses, sinful thoughts are more
inward and secret, they as the uncleanness of Absalom with 2 Samuel 16. 22.
his Father's Concubines in the face of the Sun and the sight of all Israel;
these, as the Idolatry of the Ancients of Israel, in the dark, in the Chambers
of their Imagery; Ezekiel. 8. 12.
they, the Lusts of the flesh, these, Spiritual wickednesses; they defile the
Body, these more immediately defile the Soul, the seat of the Spirit; they, may
cast you out of the favor of good Men, but these will hinder your Communion
with God; for,

Communion with God in a way of Duty, is had by thoughts more than by words.

Evil thoughts make way for evil actions.

The two first sins committed by the Angels and Adam, began in the thoughts,
(an aversion of their will from God) and they are still the Seed of Sin,
(first, evil Thoughts, and then Murders, Adulteries, etc.) and therefore, if
you would prevent the acts of sin, you must put a restraint upon your thoughts.

The heaviest Chains are put upon the vilest Malefactors.

Here sins Leprosy at first appeared, and as the Leprosy, when it took but a
thread of a woollen, or linen Garment, soon overspread the whole; so these, if
not timely prevented, will influence the whole actions of your Life, and make
them evil. Now, that they may not,

(1.) You must set a strict watch over your Heart.

Thoughts are the inward motions, Proles anima.
and innumerable Operations of the Heart, proceeding as Naturally from it, as
beams from the Sun, and streams from a Fountain; Jer. 17. 9.
the Heart is desperately wicked, the sink of all Corruption, Psalm. 41. 6.
it gathers Iniquity to it self (as an old Sore in the Body draws Prove. 4. 23.
all the ill humors to it,) and sends it abroad upon all occasions; and
therefore you must keep it with all diligence, that it may not; you must keep
the outward Senses (shut those Windows, Claude quinque fenestras, and tota
lucebit domus. Arab. Prove.
that no unclean Birds may enter in) but above all, your Heart, for out of it
proceed evil thoughts.

The Fountain must be kept pure and clean, or else the streams will not be so.

(2.) Let your thoughts be Phil. 4.^. (...).
well employed: Think on the things that are true, and cast out all thoughts of
a Lie, and Hypocrisy, think on the things that (...).
are Honest and Venerable, and abhor all Vanity and Frothiness of Spirit; think
on the things that are just, and let not a thought of fraud, or deceit lodge
within you; think on the things that are pure, and away with whatever is
immodest; think on the things that are lovely, and hate (...).
all peevishness and frowardness of Spirit; think on things of good Report, and
entertain not a thought of any thing that may tend to your dishonor.

Idleness is Fuel to vicious thoughts, and therefore, as it is an axiom in
State, to set active Spirits on work, that they may do no mischief; so here,
you must employ your thoughts about Noble Arguments, and Blessed Objects, if
you would have them (like the Heavenly Bodies) to move orderly, and become, not
foundations of disturbance, but helps to Piety.

(3.) Beg Gods assistance in all.

God has the greatest Government of your thoughts (they are too many, and too
strong for you to rule) and therefore, commit your works to him, that your
Prove. 16. 3.
thoughts may be established, or when they become disorderly, and irregular,
cry out unto him, as Austin did, against sinful thoughts, in the words of the
Psalmist, Save me, O God, for the Psalm. 69. 1.
waters are come in unto my Soul.

And there is good reason for it, for, such as your thoughts are, such are you
in Gods esteem.

We judge of Men's thoughts by their words and actions, but God judges of the
words and actions of all, by their thoughts.

Of Evil Company.
Man is a sociable Creature, and will not be without Company, (...).
good or bad; but they that are wise, will avoid as much as they can the
society of them that are evil; and how much it concerns you so to do, will
appear, if you consider, that,

1. Evil Company will show what you are. 2. Evil Company will make you what you
should not be.
1. Evil Company will show what you are.

The Lacedaemonians judged of the disposition of their Children by their
Company; and Augustus Caesar, of his two Daughters, (Livia and Julia) when he
saw grave Senators conversing with one, and wanton Persons with Noscitur ex
socio, qui non cognoscitur ex se.
the other; and so will the World of yours, for none can be so well known by
themselves, as by their Company. The Fowls of Heaven flock together, and the
Beasts on Earth herd together, according to their kind, and so do wicked men
(the greater Beasts of the two) like Flora, who ever conversed with
ill-favored Women like her self; and if you are frequently found among them
that Inter dispares mores quae potest esse amicitia?
are evil, or are too intimate with them, you will be looked upon as one of
them.

They are none of Gods Friends, that converse familiarly with his Enemies.

2. Evil Company will make you what you should not be.

Dinah (the Daughter of Jacob) Genesis 34. 1, 2.
went gadding abroad to see the Maids of the Country, till she was none her
self. Joseph, Genesis 42. 15.
by being in Pharaoh's Court, learned to swear by the Life of Pharaoh. The
Israelites, though Homo malus telum diaboli.
they hated the Egyptians, yet by living among them, they learned their
Manners, their Lusts, not their Laws; (they that should have Converted them,
were, as one says, perverted by them, and became twice their Slaves, their
Bodies being Conquered by their Weapons, and their Souls by their Vices.)
Solomon, by conversing Neh. 13. 26.
with Idolatrous Women, became Idolatrous: Peter, whilst he warmed himself at
the fire in Luke 22. 55, 56, 57. Fascinus unius, multorum pestis. Salvian.
the High Priests Hall, got cold, and abated in his Zeal; he warmed his Hands,
but cooled his Heart. Evil Company (among other things, as St. Ambrose
observes) helped on to make the Younger Brother a Prodigal:

1. His Portion. 2. His Fathers Indulgence. 3. His Youth. 4. Evil Company.
St. Austin (as he confesses) committed some sins, which he had not before, to
gain Credit and Esteem with his Companions; and there is no good Man (as
Epictetus says) but will either suffer evil, or learn it from them that are
evil.

Pure Streams passing by a corrupt Inficitur terrae sordibus unda fluens.
Aliquod malum, propter vicinum malum.
Soil, contract some of its filth; rusty Metals corrupt the pure, scabby Sheep,
rotten Grapes, and sore Eyes, will infect the sound; and evil Men the good, by
conversing with them: It is seldom found, that the bad are made better by it,
but the good made worse, getting a bane (with Peter) where they could not get a
blessing.

It is odds to be with the Lame, and not to learn to limp.

It is true, sometimes good examples put others upon the practice of that which
is good; when Peter said he would not leave Mat. 26. 35.
Christ, all the Disciples said so too; and Vespatian's Frugality gave check to
the Romans Luxury; but they oftener lead to that which is evil, (Nero's Fiddle
had too many Dancers after it) for all Naturally are prone to be led more by
Example than Precept, and by bad Examples more than good ones; living, not as
they should, Non quo eundum, sed quo itur, non ad rationem, sed ad
similitudinem, Seneca de vita beata. Psalm. 119. 115. Prove. 4. 14. Isa. 6. 5. 1
Pet. 4. 3.
but as they see the most do, and (as beasts) following the drove, or herd,
though it be to their own destruction; and therefore, if you would neither be,
nor do, as they, delight not to be where they are; or when Charity or Necessity
may oblige you to it, be separated from their sins, when you are not from their
persons; and at all times shun and avoid the works of Iniquity, Ephesians. 5. 11.
though sometimes you cannot the workers of it.

Their Hatred is better than Non est perfect bonus, nisi qui cum malus bonus.
their Company.

Of the Spirit.
The Spirit is sometimes taken for the whole Divine Nature, and equally agrees
with any Person of the Godhead, when abstractedly considered.

Sometimes for the Divine Nature Heb. 9. 14. 1 Pet. 3. 18.
of Christ; for as flesh is sometimes taken for his Humane Nature, so Spirit is
for his Divine Nature.

Sometimes for the Holy Ghost (as distinct from the Father and 1 John 5. 7.
the Son) with all its Gifts and Graces, who Sanctifies, Teaches, Quickens,
Guides, and Comforts all in whom he dwells; and therefore it concerns you,

1. To ask God for this Spirit. 2. To do nothing (when given) to grieve it.
Enquire of your self, as Paul Acts 19. 2.
did of the Disciples at Ephesus, whether as yet you have received the Holy
Spirit, (with its Gifts and Graces) and if upon enquiry you find you have not,
then,

1. Ask God for it. 2. Do nothing, when given, to grieve it.
1. Ask God for the Spirit.

God promised at first, that he Joel 2. 28.
would pour out his Spirit upon all flesh, viz. extensively, and Isa. 30. 19.
and 44. 3: and 49. 15. and 55. 1. and 59. 21. and 65. 24. Romans 10. 12. Ephesians. 3.
20. Tit. 3 6. James 1 5.
intensively; not upon the Jews only (to whom it was then confined) but upon
all; and more of that Spirit than formerly was poured out upon them, and since
that, he has promised to give his Spirit to them that ask it; and as an
encouragement to asking, has assured, that he will much more Luke 11. 13.
give it, than Earthly Parents either can or will give good Gifts to their
Children.

They are Earthly, but God is Heavenly; they Fathers of the Flesh, he of the
Spirit; they evil (viz. either simply, or comparatively) but he infinitely
good; a more Rich, Bountiful, Faithful, Cujus p^rticipatione sumus justi, ejus
comparatione sumus injusti.
and a more tender hearted Father, than any of them; and therefore, both can,
and will much more willingly, freely, certainly, compassionately, abundantly,
and constantly give (than they) the Spirit to all that ask him for it.

Since then God is so willing to give his Spirit, be you earnest and
importunate for it; there is good reason you should, for it had been better you
had never received Romans 8. 9
the Spirit of a Man, unless you have this Spirit of God.

And that you may speed in asking, seek it in Christ's Name, Joh. 1. 16. and 3.
34.
who received the Spirit without measure for you, and meritoriously fulfills
the promise of it.

2. Do nothing to grieve the Spirit, when given to you:

There is mention made (in Scripture) of resisting, quenching, Acts 7. 51. 1
These. 5. 19. Ephesians. 4. 30.
and grieving the Spirit.

The first, (as usually said) is proper to Impenitents, the second to
Apostates, and the third to Saints.

Properly, the Spirit cannot be grieved (it being contrary to the Per figuram
non naturam. Quoad effectum, non quoad affectum.
Nature of the Spirit, either to make any sad, or it self to be made so,) but
Metaphorically it may; and then it is, when it appears as one grieved, and then
you may be said to do it, when you do those things that would grieve the
Spirit, if the Spirit was capable of it; and this two ways, viz. either by sins
of Omission, or of Commission.

1. By sins of Omission, or by neglecting the good you should do, viz.

By idleness and slothfulness, by not answering to the calls, and not yielding
to the motions of the Spirit, by not walking in the light and strength, in the
fellowship and communion, in the exercise of the Graces, and Phil. 2. 1.
in the comforts of the Spirit; for it is a sin to oppose the Comforting as
well as the Sanctifying work of the Spirit.

2. By sins of Commission, or by doing that which you should not, viz.

By violating of Truth in any kind (whether Natural or Moral) by inordinate
love to the World (prizing Carnal Comfort above Spiritual) by impurity of
thoughts (which defile the Soul, the place of the Spirits Residence) by
causeless doubts and fears, despondency under troubles (both inward and
outward) in constancy, and in stability in Religion; or deadness, formality,
and Spiritual Pride in the Duties of it.

They are all (one way or another) against the Spirit, either as a Governor,
Guide, Witness, or Comforter, and as such, they grieve it; for by them its
Witness is slighted, its Assistances are rejected, its Influences perverted, or
its Comforts dis-esteem'd, and counted small; and therefore it concerns you to
beware of them, and the more, in that,

By thus grieving the good Spirit, you will please the Devil the evil Spirit;
and by grieving the one, and pleasing the other, you will grieve and displease
your own Spirit at last, for grieving makes way for quenching, and by quenching
the Spirit, you may in time be left to commit that great transgression, the
unpardonable sin against it.

All sins grieve the Spirit, but those that grieve the sinner.

Of Self-examination.
Examination is the Judicial proceeding of a sinner with himself, or the act of
Conscience enlightened, comparing all his actions with the Rule, and accordingly
passing sentence either of Absolution, or Condemnation; for, or against himself.

The Command makes it a Duty, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Gal. 6. 3, 4. Si s^aper hoc quum
op^ est facis semter facus. Bernard in Cant. 58. ^e^m.
and the neglect of it, a Sin.

A Duty at all times, but more especially at some times.

A difficult Duty.

Reflex acts are (by Philosophers) counted most difficult; and this, of all the
Duties of Christianity, is none of the least that is so.

Yet must not be omitted; for they that will do nothing that is difficult in
Religion, have no Religion.

The Persons concerned in it, are 1 Cor. 11. 28. A Man, i. e. every man, so the
Old Translation reads it, and so Beza translates it. (...) quisquis, Erasmus.
not a few only, or many, but all; all, either as Communicants, or Christians,
both real and nominal; for none are too good, or too great for it.

It belongs but to few to examine others, but it concerns all to examine
themselves.

The things to which it relates, are almost infinite, viz. every thing,
thought, spoken, and done, whether good or evil.

Examination is as a petty Sessions to prevent (or the better to prepare for) a
General Assize; Man's Judgment to anticipate Gods, and 1 Cor. 11. 31.
therefore must carry a proportion to it.

God will judge every thing Eccles. 12. 14.
(Morally good and evil) then, and so must every one now.

The Rule by which it is to be guided is the Word of God.

It is not he that others commend, that is approved (for, they 2 Cor. 10. 18.
may think better of him than he is) nor he that commends himself (for he may
be better than others, and better than he himself has formerly been, and yet
Luke 18. 11.
not good, or at least, not so good as he should be) but he whom God
commends, that is approved; and therefore none must examine himself by
another good Opinion of him, nor by his own good Opinion of himself, (for both
may be mistaken) but by the Word of God, by which only the regularity, or
irregularity of his actions will appear, God will hereafter judge you by it;
and therefore, the best course you can take, is to judge your self by it Rectum
est index sui, and ob^iqui.
now; and that you may, you must get a clear and right understanding of it.

By this light you will see light, but unless you have Eyes to see it, it will
be of no more Advantage to you, than the light of the Sun to them that are
blind, and cannot see. A just Judge desires a clear Evidence, a good Cause, a
fair Trial, an upright Heart, a search; and the better any are, the more
willing they will be to know the worst of themselves; not to do it, may add
something to your security, but nothing to your safety: Therefore,

1. Be exact in the examination of your self. 2. Beg Gods Examination upon it.
1. Be exact in the examination Tecum ^a^ua.
of your self.

It must not be superficial and slight, remiss and careless, but strict and
exact, searching every corner of your Heart, and censuring every irregularity
of your Life; seeking, that you may find what is amiss, and until you do; and
with good reason, for, as they are the worst sort of Cheats, that deceive
themselves, so they are the worst of that sort, that deceive themselves in the
concerns of their Soul.

It is far more safe to condemn than to acquit your self without cause. For by
one, your Peace will be lost for a time only, but by the other, your Soul will
be lost for ever.

2. Beg Gods examination upon yours.

Rachel was willing to have any Genesis 31. 34, 35.
place searched for the Idols (she had stole from Laban) but that on which she
sat to cover them; and a Thief may be content, that a blind Man that cannot
see, or his fellow Thief, that will not, should search his House; and
Hypocrites rest satisfied with their own Examination, or of those like
themselves; but they that are sincere, and upright, are desirous that any
should examine them; yea (with David) willing that God should do it, and that
truth should take place, though against themselves.

When David had examined Psalm. 139. 23, 24.
himself, he appealed to God, not as to one that he would have satisfied with
his own Opinion of himself, nor with the Opinion of others concerning him, but
as to one that was the searcher of Hearts, and that he himself would be
searched by; he did not desire that his Life only, but his Heart (the most
suspected place) might be searched, and that not superficially, but thoroughly,
and that the matter might be fully traversed, and pass through all Courts of
Trial, as appears by the multiplying of words, (search, know, try, and see) and
by the extent of it, viz. that not one thought, or way only, but that all his
ways and thoughts might be inquired into; and that if there was any sin that he
did not see, or could not, it might be done away.

And therefore, when you have done all that you can in it, desire God to
examine you and your examination too; and that if there be any sin in you, that
either you do not see, or cannot, that he would show it to you; or if there be
any sin that you would not see, that he would do away that sin, and the
Hypocrisy that would indulge it.

It is only by the light of Heaven, that you can see the Hell that is within
you.

Of Watchfulness.
Watchfulness is a Duty that concerns all (I say unto all, watch) Mark 13. 37.
it is your Duty, and ought to be matter of your great care, in that,

1. There are Eyes upon you. 2. There are Enemies against you. 3. Ruin attends
you, if you do not.
1. There are Eyes upon you.

(1.) Of Men, both good and bad. (2.) Of Angels, both good and bad. (3.) Of
Conscience, which is Gods Deputy, and a strict observer Intimus magister.
of all your ways. (4.) Of God, who is every where by his Power and Essence,
and therefore Omniscient because Omnipresent, and (like the Optic Nerve) sees
all, but is seen of none.
Good Men observe, and will either be pleased or displeased, rejoice, or grieve
at your good and evil actions.

Evil Men observe, and will either reproach you for your sins, or be hardened
in their sins by them.

Good Angels observe, who will minister to you, rejoice over you, Heb. 1. ult.
protect, and defend you, if you do that which is good; or set against you, and
become Enemies to you, if you do not.

Evil Angels observe, who will be as so many Witnesses against you, your
Accusers and Tormentors too, if you yield to those sins that now they tempt you
to.

Conscience observes, either to Acquit or Condemn you.

And God observes, to Judge Eccl. 12. ult.
you.

Live therefore as in open view, and act as one, that has the Eyes of all upon
you.

If you do not watch, you are watched.

2. There are Enemies against you.

Of all which, the Devil and the Flesh are the principal; for all other Enemies
hurt either by his Instigation, or your own corrupt inclination.

1. The Devil, who is strong, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
subtle, and active.

Strong. A weak Enemy is inconsiderable, and not much to be regarded; but this
is strong, not only terrible to affright, but strong to hurt.

Active. A sloathful sluggish Enemy is not much to be feared; Job 1. 7.
but this is active and diligent; he walks his Rounds (he goes about) and is
ever upon his Watch.

Subtle. He prevails more by Policy than by Strength; and therefore, it
concerns you, neither 2 Cor. 2. 11.
to be ignorant of his Devices, nor careless of them.

2. The Flesh, a restless and unwearied Enemy, that acts with vehemence and
constancy, not Gal. 5. 17. James 4. 5.
outward, but inward; an Enemy within you, that makes way for all the other,
and the more dangerous because so.

Since then you can be no where safe, unless watchful; be no where, nor at any
time secure, but watch these watchful Enemies.

3. Ruin attends you if you do not watch.

Saul lost his Spear, and Samson 1 Samuel 26. 7, 12. Judge. 16. 19. 1 These. 5. 3.
his Hair, when asleep; and your Security will be the Enemies Opportunity; and
therefore it concerns you to have all your ways (inward and outward) Railed in
on both sides with Watchfulness Luke 21. 36. Rev. 4. 8.
and Prayer, and to have your Eyes open, to watch against the Corruptions from
within, and the Snares from without.

The weakest when watchful, are more safe, than the strongest when secure.

Of Humility.
Pride is self-exaltation from a Superbia est appetitus propriae excellentiae.
Humilitas est voluntaria mentis incurvatio ex Dei intuitu, and nostri.
vain conceit of Worth and Excellency.

Humility is self-debasement, from a real sense of vileness and unworthiness.

That is the Badge of Antichrist and his followers; this of Christ and his
Disciples; one of the Principles of Practical Divinity (as Privation is of
Philosophy) and both the Garment and Ornament of Christians; and therefore, be
clothed with it, and walk Annibilatio animae Spirituale vacuum. (...), It comes
from a word that signifies a knot, and is of use not only to fasten the Graces
together, but to adorn also.
daily in it, with God, with others, and with your self.

1. With God.

(1.) By a lowly demeanor in all your approaches to him.

The distance betwixt God and you is great (as great as betwixt infinite and
finite) great as you are a Creature, but greater as a sinner; and in all Duties
there is matter for Humility (as well as in sins) for when they appear
brightest, (as the Moon when it shines so) they have their dark spots and
imperfections; and Ezra 9. 6.
therefore the nearer and greater your Communion with God is, the greater your
Humility should be, as Archimedes his Engine, the higher it ascended, the lower
it descended.

All the King of Heavens Service must be on the Knee; so that if you are proud,
or not humble in it, you serve not God, but the Devil. 1 Cor 10. 31.


(2.) By doing all to his Glory. Proud persons think they are Nemini debeo, The
Spiders Motto. Hab. 1. 16. Hos. 10. 1.
beholden to none, and therefore Sacrifice to their own Net, and (with Ephraim)
bring forth fruit to themselves; but do you in all your actions, both Civil and
Religious, make him your End; and in all your ways, at home, and abroad; in
your House as well as in his, and on your days as well as on his, do all to his
Honor, that in his goodness and Soli D^ Glor^.
greatness he may be glorified by you.

An humble sinner is more to Gods mind, and more for his Ends and Glory, than a
proud Saint.

2. With others.

1. By not seeking Honor from them. 2. By not being lifted up when praised;
nor enraged, when defamed, or injured by them.
1. By not seeking Honor from them.

Pride was the Angels sin (it cast them out of Heaven) the first sin in Man,
and the great sin that appears in all by Nature.

Commodus the Emperor would be called Hercules, and show himself to the People
in a Lions skin, that he might be accounted King of Men, as the Lion was of
Beasts.

Alexander would have the Title of Jupiter's Son, and be reckoned one of the
Race of the gods.

Domitian would have the Title of Lord God.

Antichrist, the Man of sin, 2 The. 2. 3. 4.
exalts himself above all that is called God.

And all Men (through the Pride that is in them) Naturally seek Honor in the
World, (as Saul did before Israel) and desire 1 Samuel 15. 30. Aut Caesar aut
nullus.
to be great, or nothing; but do not you seek what is greatest, or highest in
the esteem of the World, but what is fittest and best for you, that you may
have Honor from God, if not from Men; or be humble, and you shall have Honor,
for Humility Prove. 15. 33. Prove. 29. 23. Luke 14. 11. Genesis 14. and 40, 41.
treads the path to it; Pride seeks it, but Humility finds it.

He that humbles himself shall be exalted. Joseph was first in the Dungeon,
and then in the Palace.

2. By not being lifted up, when praised; nor enraged, when defamed, or injured
by them.

Be not lift up in your spirit beyond measure, if praised, nor enraged, if
reviled and reproached, but meekly receive both, as not much concerned for
either; for you cannot be too vile in your own Eyes, nor too much humbled under
it.

A Heathen, when reviled, told the Reviler, that all he said against him was
true, and much more, and so he would say, if he knew that which he did of
himself; and all that are truly humble, either do, or should think better Romans
12. 10. Phil. 2. 3.
of others, than of themselves.

3. With your self.

1. By being content with your condition, whatever it is. 2. By having a low
and mean opinion of your self, under all that you possess and enjoy.
(1.) By being content with your condition.

Some cannot live unless they abound, and therefore murmur and complain when
they do not: Proud Beggars will have the best or nothing; but be you content
with what you have, looking upon Aliud est unde vivas, aliud unde superbias.
every little thing received, as great, and every great thing, as too much.

You cannot have so little as you deserve, and therefore, how low soever your
condition is, let your mind be lower.

(2.) By having a low and mean opinion of your self, under all that you possess
and enjoy.

Indeed there is nothing you can have, that can reasonably afford any matter
for Pride.

Not Riches.

Not Silks and Furrs, the cast Clothes of Worms and dead Beasts; for, as they
are badges of Spiritual Nakedness, and coverings of shame (the fruit of sin)
they afford greater matter of Humility, than Pride.

Not Gold and Silver, the more Ni^idius lu^um.
refined Dirt and Garbage of the Earth; these are the food of Moths and Rust,
and therefore no food for Pride.

Not Knowledge, for Scio quod nescio, Socrates. Nesciendo scire, and sciendo
nescire, Gregory.
it is but imperfect in any; the greatest part of what you know, is the least
part of what you know not; and therefore you should by not knowing, know; and
by knowing, not know the gift that is in you.

It will be from Ignorance of your Ignorance, if you become proud of your
Knowledge.

Not Grace, for it is given to teach Humility; God gives Grace to the humble,
and Grace gives Humility; and the more any have of it, the more humble they
will be.

Moses acknowledges that he was but dust and ashes, (the weakest and vilest
part of the Earth;) Jacob, that he was unworthy Genesis 18. 27. and 32. 10. 1 Timothy
1. 15. 1 Cor. 15. 9. Ephesians. 3. 8. Mat. 11. 29. Exodus 44. 29.
of the least of all those Mercies received: Paul, that he was the greatest of
sinners, the least of the Apostles, and less than the least of all Saints.
Christ, the Lord of Glory, was meek and lowly; and the more real worth any
have, the less they will see it, like Moses, who, when his face did shine, knew
it not; or the higher they are in the esteem of others, the lower they will be
in their own, as the Sun when highest, casts the least shadow, or a Taper,
whilst it gives light to others, casts a shadow before its own station.

A Cipher in Arithmetic, though of no worth in it self, yet gives value to all
that is added to it, and so will Humility.

Of Time, Death, and Judgment.
I Have a Treatise by me of these, that I intend to publish, and therefore
shall only briefly give you my Advice here as to Time, Death, and Judgment.

1. As to Time.
If you would seriously consider how precious a thing Time is, how much it is
(sooner or later) prized by all; how high they are in God's esteem, that
improve their time (for they are highest in his esteem, that make most account
of his Sovereignty) how happy some are while living, in the Comfort they
receive by it? How many, when dying, would give all the World (if they had it
to give, and it would be taken) as a price to redeem the time that in Life they
vainly spent, and trifled away? How many are tormented in Hell (and will be
eternally so) for the neglect and abuse of it? How infinitely short the whole
time of Life well spent, will fall of the Reward that attends it? How much
misspent time there is, and will be in your best spent time? How short and
uncertain your time is, and how strict an account you must give of it, you
would see great reason to take care that no part of it be spent either in sin,
or idleness.

1. Not in sin.

Sin is an evil of the greatest Malignity, and all time spent in it, is lost;
for,

If it is not bewailed, and repented of, it will ruin you; and if it is, yet
the time so spent is lost, in that it might have been better employed, cannot
be recalled (for though Repentance will bring sorrow for sin, yet it can never
bring back the time lost by it) nor ever by you be answered for.

You can never give a good account of a bad matter.

2. Not in Idleness; for,

Idleness is both a sin, and an inlet to any, or all sin.

1. It is a sin.

Idleness was not allowed in Innocence, Genesis 2. 15. Then labor, now labor ad
sudorem.
(for Adam was put into the Garden of Eden to work) much less then is it
allowed in a state of Degeneracy, but forbid; there are no feriae, no idle days
nor hours, as one says, in the Calendar of Heaven, but as to every purpose
there is a time, so to every time a purpose; God having appointed Eccles. 3 1.
(...).
every day and hour to be filled up with something that is either work, or
tends to it.

Maxima pars debitur studio, minor cibo, minima somno, nulla otio. And yet how
many are there, who call themselves Christians, and cannot but say they have
work to do, that trifle away their time as much as Domitian did in catching
Flies, Sardanapalus in Spinning, Caligula in gathering Cockles, Nero (with his
Soldiers) in picking up Pebbles; and are scarce ever so well employed as
Protogenes, who was seven Years Painting a Man and his Dog.

2. It is an inlet to sin.

Empty Stomachs gather Wind, standing Waters putrify, Weeds grow most in a
fallow, and out of Idleness comes not only no good, but all evil; for, by
doing nothing, you will easily be led to do that which is worse than nothing.

Christ called his Disciples Mat. 18. 19. Mark 1. 16, 17. 2 Samuel 11. 2, 3, 4.
(James and John, Simon and Andrew) when busy at their Calling; but the Devil
will call you (as he did David) when idle, and not employed; and therefore be
never so, that you may not be at leisure to hearken to him; if you do not set
your self on work, the Devil will; and therefore at all times do it, that he at
any time may not.

The rolling stone gathers no Moss.

Quanto magis occupatum Diabolus invenit tanto minus occupat. Idleness will
render you displeasing to God, unprofitable to the World, scandalous to them
that are good, and burdensome to your self; be wise therefore (as the Wise men
in Esther) knowing your time, and get understanding Esther 1. 13. 1 Chronicles. 12.
32. The heads of them were two hundred, but there are few or none of that ^ribe
(in this sense) left. Rev. 10. 6.
(with the Children of Issachar) to know what you ought to do, and do it; be
ever doing something for your own good, or the good of others, that you may
with comfort look over into Eternity, and not fear, when the Angel shall stand
on the Earth and lift up his Hand, and swear by him that lives for ever and
ever, that time shall be no more.

God has his Book of Remembrance, and whatever you do in time, is there
Registered for Eternity. Rev. 20. 12.


2. As to Death and Judgment.
How much it concerns you to be in a daily expectation of, and preparation for
them, will appear, if you consider,

1. As to Death.
1. That Death is certain.

All are included in the Statute of Death, (made in primo Adami) Genesis 2. 17.
no Privilege can be obtained against it, nor is there any way to avoid the
Sentence of Heaven given for it,

It is a decree not to be reversed, Heb. 9. 27.
A Statute not to be repealed.

2. That Death may come sooner than you are aware of.

You stand upon dying ground, and know not how soon Death's sith may cut you
down; you are near it in health as well as in sickness, and in a moment Death
may lay his cold hands on your mouth, and stop your Breath.

Since then Death may come in Job 21. 13
a moment, live as expecting it is coming every moment.

3. That Death when it comes will not stay for your Repentance: Venientem nemo
bil aris mortem recipit, nisi quise ad illam diu composueris Seneca.
and if it stay never so long before it comes, it will come too soon if you
have not repented.

Dye when you live, and you shall live when you dye.

(2.) As to Judgment; viz.
1. That it will be certain.

There will be a general, and a particular Judgment; the general, to complete
and perfect the particular, and to manifest and declare the Justice of it;
that, will be at the end of the World; this, at the end of Life; that, at
Doomsday; this, immediately after the day of Death: It may be a long while
before that come, and very likely will, (if the Destruction of Antichrist, the
Conversion of the Jews, a universal Promulgation of the Gospel, a Quan quam in
fine mu^di dominus semel veniet omnibus, tamen singulo cuique venit cum adest
mortis tempus, in dei decretis nulla litura.
Catholic Unity, and Charity among Christians, and the calling in of the
Elect, must precede it;) but this may come before you think of it, or expect
it; it is as sure as Death, and as uncertain; uncertain (as to the time) to
any, and yet most certain (sooner or later) to all; for it is treasured up in
God's decrees, and cannot be recalled.

He that says he comes quickly, Act. 17. 31 Rev. 16. 15 3. 11
may come sooner than you think of; viz. in his appointed, though not in your
exed, time.

2. That it will be impartial. Here, some are too great to 1 Cor. 4. 5. Romans 2.
6 16. Mat. 12. 36. 1 Pet. 1. 17. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Rev. 20. 12.
give an account of their Actions to any; but there, both great and small must
give an account of their Thoughts, Words, and Actions, to God, whether they
will or no; here, some judge, and others are judged; but there, all shall be
judged: for,

The Sentence of Death being past upon all, Judgment (the consequent of Death)
will pass upon them too.

3. That it will (when once past) be irrevocable.

That state you are found in at Death, will be your everlasting state; for,
Judgment (Death's Second) stands at Death's back, and as that leaves you, so
Judgment will find you; and as it finds you, so it will leave you for ever;
for, then your everlasting state and condition will be actually determined, and
finally settled, so as never to be altered.

Judgment is the critical time for Damnation and Salvation.

The particular Time when Matt. 24. 36. 44.
Death and Judgment will come is concealed, that none might presume; but that
it will be, is certainly foretold, that none may be surprised: and that you may
Latet ultimus dies, ut observentu omnes.
not.

1. Keep a Register of your Sins; keep your Book, and God will cross his.

Often reckoning makes friends.

2. Renew Repentance daily.

If you would have that day to Acts 3. 19. Mat. 25. 21 Rev. 7. 17.
be a time of refreshing to you from the presence of the Lord, you must be in
sorrow for your Sins in your day; if then you would enter into Joy, Sorrow must
here enter into you; and if then you would have Tears wiped away from your
Eyes, they must now be found there; for,

None but Mourners shall be Mat. 5. 4.
comforted.

3. Make the Judge your friend. Christ has redeemed you from slavery, that you
might be free for his Service; and therefore 1 Cor. 6. 20.
give him that which he has so dearly bought, and paid for.

It will avail you nothing to Matthew. 7. 22. 23. Luke 19. 27.
call him Lord then, unless you make him your Lord now; for, if here you are
not ruled, you shall then be destroyed by him.

4. Judge your self.

If you judge others, you shall Mat. 7. 1. 2 1 Cor. 11. 31.
be brought to divine Judgment; but by judging your self you will prevent it,
for, Judgment shall not pass in both Courts; what you condemn, Christ will
acquit; so that if yours be a Court of Judgment, his shall be a Court 2 Pet. 3.
10, 11.
of Mercy.

Holiness will give comfort in that day, and a serious meditating on it may be
a means to promote Holiness: live therefore well in your day, or blot out the
belief of this.

If you live to have Children, be careful to bring them up in the Ephesians. 6. 4.
Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.

Some are so far from blessing God for their Children, that they are ready to
say (as Daniel to Belshazzar) his Gifts be to himself, Dan. 5. 16. 17.
and his Rewards to another.

Some count them no Blessings, or but beggarly ones; and some there are, that
make them none; for, through their neglect, they prove Curses instead of
Blessings.

They are anxiously solicitous to get great Estates for their Children, but not
at all concerned, what they are, or should be, to whom they leave those
Estates; they are daily contriving for them, how they may live while here, but
take no care how they shall live, nor where, when they shall die, and live here
no more: they can tell you when dying, what they shall leave for the support of
their Bodies; but nothing of what they did, while living, for the good of their
Souls. Monstrous Parents! that deserve to be writ childless, and to be rased
out of the number of men: for, Jer. 22. 30


If they are worse than Infidels that provide not for the Bodies of their
Children, they are as bad as Devils that starve their Souls. 1 Timothy 5. 8


Make it therefore matter of your great care to promote the Good of their Souls.

(1.) By endeavoring to suppress those evil Inclinations that (by nature) are
in them. (2.) By Praying for them. (3.) By being an Example of Good unto them.
1. By endeavoring to suppress those evil Inclinations, that (by nature) are
in them.

Folly is bound up in the heart of Prove. 22. 15.
a Child (as Poison in a Serpent, and Sap in a Tree) and if care be not taken
to suppress it, it will (like an Imposthume) break forth when ripened by
opportunity.

Corrupt Nature, is as the Soil; evil Examples, as the Showers; and Temptations
as the influence of the Sun; all which help on, and further the Harvest of Sin,
that will quickly come, unless timely prevented, and that cannot be better
done, than by planting good Inclinations and Dispositions in them.

The way to destroy Weeds is to set good Plants in their room.

2. By Praying for them.

They are all base-born (in a spiritual sense) until they are new born;
therefore it concerns you to be in travel of Soul for their second birth, that
Christ may be Gal. 4. 19.
formed in them, and to be earnestly solicitous with God for them, (as Abraham
for Ishmael) Genesis 17. 18.
that they may live, viz. live to him here, and eternally with him hereafter.

Austin's Conversion was the fruit of Monicha's Prayer.

3. By being an Example of Good unto them.

It is true, none are to live by Example, but by Precept; (Paul himself must
not be followed any farther than as he follows Christ) but yet since the
Example of Parents (like the influence of the Moon when joined with a good or
bad Planet) does much good or hurt, it concerns them to have a great regard
unto it.

Cato was more careful of his Behavior before his Children than before the
Senate, and would usually say, he would be as cautions of speaking any
lascivious Words before his Son, as he would if he was before a Vestal Nun; and
it must be your care to behave your self wisely before yours: good Advice will
make little or no impression on them, unless seconded by good Example; and
therefore if you would have them walk in a perfect way, you must walk before
them in it.

Though Children do like Maxima debetur puero reverentia.
Children, yet they that are Parents must not.

There is good reason for it, in that,

(1.) God commands it. (2.) Equity requires it. (3.) Their Good, and your
Happiness, is concerned in it.
1. God commands it.

Nebuchadnezzar commanded that Young Men should be brought up Dan. 1. 3. 4.
for him, Children in whom was no blemish: and God (a greater than he)
commands, that a Child should be trained up in the way he Prove. 22. 6.
should go. Every one has his way, and every one thinks his way best; but it is
not so; and therefore he must be trained up in the way, not in which he would
go, but in Pro. 16. 2.
which he should.

He that says you shall not Exo. 20. 13 Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
murder, says also you shall instruct; and therefore it concerns you to offer
them up to God (as Hannah did Samuel) in their tender 1 Samuel 1. 24. 28.
years.

2. Equity requires it.

They were shapen in Iniquity, Ps. 51.5. Ephesians. 4.1^.
and conceived in Sin, a guilt and defilement they derived from your Loins,
which alienated them from the Life of God, before they had of themselves done
either good or evil. Since then you have been the cause of so much evil to
them, it is but just to do them all the good you can: by being your Children,
they became Children Ephesians. 2. 3.
of Wrath; and therefore in reason and equity, it concerns you to do what you
can to cut off the Entail of Hell, to help them to a happy Being to whom you
have given a miserable one, and to be (so far as you can) an instrument of
Regeneration, as you have been of Generation to them.

It had been better they had John 3. 3.
never been born, unless born again; and that you had never been their earthly
Father, if God be not their heavenly one.

3. Their Good, and your Happiness, is concerned in it.

1. Their good, viz. temporal and spiritual, to this Life and a better.

1. Their temporal good.

They that first seek the Kingdom Mat. 6 33.
of God, and his Righteousness, are by Promise assured, that all things needful
shall be added unto them; and therefore put them early upon it, and endeavor
while they are young to make them good, and then they shall be sure to have
whatever is good for them: no good thing shall be withheld from them; Psalm.
25. 12, 13. 34. 9, 10. 84. 11. Prove. 13. 22.
their Bread and Water shall be sure, and verily they shall be fed, viz. as to
Necessity, if not as to Delight.

If they are of God's household Gal. 6. 10.
(the household of Faith) neither you nor they need fear, for, God will provide
for his Family.

2. Their spiritual Good.

They that are bad when old, were so when young: an old Jade was a Colt ill
broken, or not well manned at first; and an old Devil Ps. 58. 3.
was once a young one.

And they that are bad while young, are like to be so when old; it is not
impossible they should be good then, (rich Wine Quis clarior Themistocle.
is muddy at first) and therefore none should despair of them, but very
unlikely, and therefore none should presume upon it; for, as Trees dead in the
Spring are so in Autumn, and Bruises received in Youth continue in Age,
(Mephibosheth lame by a fall in his 2 Samuel 4. 4. 9. 3.
Infancy was ever so) so Sins indulged in Youth are hardly left in Age. But
those that are truly good in Youth, will be so in Age; a Child trained up in
the way he Prove. 22. 6
should go, will not depart from it when he is old; and therefore it concerns
you to put your Children into that way while they are so.

That which a Vessel is seasoned with, that it keeps, and that way a Twig is
bent, that way it will grow.

2. Your Happiness is concerned in it.

Your Children are God's more than yours, his Children committed Ezekiel. 16. 20.
21. Exodus 2. 9.
to your Care, put out to you to be nursed for him (as Moses was for Pharaoh's
Daughter) and of them you must give an Account Ezekiel. 3. 18, 19.
unto him: it is true, if they (when warned by you) turn not from their Sins,
they shall dye in them; but if they are not warned by you, their Blood will be
required at your hands.

The Jews brought a Curse upon themselves and their Posterity, by crying out,
His Blood be upon us, and our Children; and so will you upon your self and
Children, by your neglect of them.

Do you think you shall not have Sins enough of your own to answer for! that by
your Sin bring the Guilt of theirs upon you! Is there no Devil to tempt them to
sin! or do you think he cannot effectually do it, unless you assist him in it?
Is it a Reproach to be the child of a Whore, and is it none to be a Child of
the John 8. 44.
Devil? Is the Birth of such infamous in the eyes of the World! and should not
the Life of the other be much more so in yours! Is there no hand to murder them
but your own! nor any other way to show your Love to them but by destroying
them and your self too? Are Harlots condemned by all for destroying the Bodies
of their Children, and should not those wicked Parents be so too who through a
neglect of them murder their Souls? Was it an act of Cruelty to drive Children
into the Fire and Water (as the Lev. 18. 21. Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21.
Jews did to Molech, and the Heathen to Saturn) and is it none (by sacrificing
them to the Devil) to drive them into Hell! is there no love but in going to
Hell together! or will it not be enough that they go thither, unless you go too
for company! will it be any pleasure to hear them (when there) telling you,
what a bloody and cruel Father you was to them, in not showing them the evil of
Sin, and the misery that did attend it? If now you cannot well endure to hear
them cry, do but think how much less able you will be to hear it in Hell for
ever! You may then (when too late) with a little Variation complain, and speak
truly (what Lamech did scoffingly) that Genesis 4. 23, 24.
you have slain Children to your wounding, and young Children to your hurt;
therefore, that you may not, be careful to make your Family as a Nursery for
Heaven, Ps. 127. 3.
and educate your Children as God's Heritage, that you may say Genesis 33. 5.
with comfort at the great day, Lord, here am I, and the Children which thou
have graciously given thy Servant.

It is one thing to be blessed with Children, and another thing to be blessed
in them.

THE POSTSCRIPT.
MAny more things I had prepared for you; but the Book being already bigger
than at first I thought it would have been, I shall only here give you the
Heads of some of them.

Life is the Crown of all earthly Blessings, (as Health is the fairest and
brightest Jewel upon that Crown) a Blessing that none but God can give,
(Pharaoh's Magicians Ex. 8. 18.
could not give Life to a Louse) a Blessing that any thing will be given to
secure, when in danger Job 2. 4.
of being lost, (all that a man has will he give for his Life) and that all,
both Good and Bad, Rich and Poor, Young and Old, (sooner or later) greatly
value and unwillingly part with: yet I would not have you (with Herodotus) do
nothing else but attend the Health of your Body, nor be so busy about the good
of a natural Life, as to neglect the Concerns of that which is eternal, nor yet
to neglect it, or willingly to do any thing that may destroy it; for this would
be to sin against your Soul as well as your Body, and to do that (viz. to
please the Devil) at your Death, which all wicked Men do in their Lives.
Therefore Phil. 1. 23. Nec propter vitam, vivendi perdere causam.
neither on the one hand overvalue it, nor on the other hand neglect it, but be
thankful for it, and make good use of it, and this, by living to the end of
living.

Then a temporal Life is well improved, when spent to secure the Life that is
eternal.

There is nothing will make you more useful while you live, than Learning,
(Paul was the most learned of all the Apostles, and God made most use of him)
and there is nothing I desire more as to this world than that you may attain to
an Eminency in it; and that you may, you must diligently seek after it; for, it
will not be got without much labor.

He that would be a good Scholar, must (as Isocrates says) have six Properties;
He must be one of (...).
good Parts, of a strong Memory, a Mover of Doubts, a Listner to the Sayings or
Speeches of others, a Delighter in his Studies, and laborious in it.

All excellent things are fenced about with difficulty.

Plato is said to have brought Vtrumque jungendo perfecisse laudatur.
Philosophy to perfection, by joining contemplative and moral Philosophy
together, (in which Pythagoras and Socrates excelled) and the Philosopher makes
it the most necessary Head, and first Principle of Philosophy, to know how to
use Principles; and it will be your Wisdom, and therefore should be your
Design, in all your Studies, to bring them to practice, that you may not be
upbraided, as the Athenians were by Anacharsis, for using their money only to
count, and their Knowledge only to know.

Practice will be blind unless Idem est non habere and non uti.
it see with the eyes of Knowledge; and Knowledge will be useless, unless it
walk on the feet of Practice, like his Music that was understood by none but
himself.

Make the Stock Learning, and you may graff what you will upon it; but if you
will take my advice, let it be Divinity.

When God sent his Son into the Luke 4. 18.
World, he sent him to Preach; and had I never so many, I should esteem it my
greatest Honor, as well as theirs, if they were qualified for that Office,
truly called to it, and faithful in it.

Two things made Christ a Minister, Isa. 61. 1. Joh. 6. 27.
viz. Unction and Commission; and no less makes one now: for,

None are truly called to it, unless qualified for it; nor though qualified for
it, are any of Christ's Ministers, unless authoriz's to it.

Therefore,

1. Before you enter upon that Office be qualified for it, and called to it.

Gifts qualify for it;

You cannot teach others unless you be first taught your self.

A Call commissionates to it;

Without a Call, you will (like hasty Ahimaaz) run without your 2 Samuel 18. 19,
20. 29.
Errand.

2 When you have entered upon the Office, be faithful in it.

Do not enter upon the Office Sacerdos (...). Sacerdotium otium.
(as of old the Echo sounded) as a Trade to get by, nor through Idleness
neglect it when you have entered upon it; but out of a Zeal Mat. 5. 14. 2 Corin.
12. 15.
for God, and the Good of Souls, be willing to spend, and be spent like a Taper
that consumes it self, by giving Light to others. A good Minister is a Light,
and his Motto must be Lucendo pereo, or that of the Phoenix, Dum pario, pereo.
Qui sibi nequam, cui bonus! Heb. 13 4.


Be a good Minister for the good of others, and a good Man for your own.

Marriage is honorable in all, and Parentage, Parts, and Portion, are good
Ingredients in a Match, but not the principals to guide your choice; let not
therefore your Affections so far bribe your Judgment, as to put you upon the
choice of a Wife, for Money or Beauty only, but for Religion, the best and
strongest Marriage-knot; so strong, that it cannot be cut asunder; for, they
that are thus joined together, neither Life nor Death can part.

Never pawn your Honesty to please your Fancy.

If you marry, and live to have Children, and have any thing to give them, give
them what you can spare while you are alive, or at last they will thank Death
for it, and not you: If you have nothing to give them, (or whether you have, or
have not) leave them under God's Blessing, and you will leave them rich.

A Table, though never so richly (...).
adorned, and furnished with Food, differs (according to the Greek Proverb)
nothing from a Manger: therefore, how meanly soever your Table is furnished
with Food, let it be furnished with good Discourse, that all that come there,
may fare (as of old they did at Plato's Banquets) the better for it afterward.

The Ear trys Words, as the Job 12. 11.
Mouth tastes Meat.

In two things the Philosopher Pythag.
says we are like to God; viz. in speaking the Truth, and in bestowing Benefits.

God is a God of Truth, he cannot lie, and they that are like to Titus 1. 2.
him will not.

God is good, and does good; Isa. 63. 8. Ps. 25. 8. Exo. 34. 6.
he is abundant in it; and the more any exceed in Bounty, (which is Goodness
enlarged) the more like to him they are.

Therefore,

When God enlarges his hand in Bounty to you, do you enlarge yours in Bounty to
others. Charity may begin at home, but it must not end there.

Dr. Taylor's Advice to his Son was, that if God did bless him with the things
of this World, he should count it his chiefest Riches, to be rich in Alms; and
it will be your Wisdom to believe so: some indeed think it is the next way to
be undone; for, what is thus given, they conclude is thrown away; but they are
mistaken that think so: for it is a way, not only to secure what you have, but
to increase it, in that, whatever you thus give, you lend, and that not Prove.
28. 27.
to a Bankrupt, but to God, who has all the Riches of Heaven and Prove. 19. 17.
Earth, and stands Principal in that Bond which secures the payment back again
of what you thus lend in this Life, and of something better in the Life to come.

I had rather you should want an Estate, than a heart to be charitable; a
Capacity this way to do good, than a Will or an Inclination to it.

The holy Scriptures contained in the old and new Testament, are the Word of
God, the Statutebook 2 Timothy 3. 16.
of Heaven, the Will of your heavenly Father, the Advice of Christ your
heavenly Physician, the Counsel of him your Advocate, Phil. 2. 16. Act. 13. 26
Rom 10. 8. 2 Timothy 3. 15. Ephesians 1. 13.
the Word of Life and Salvation, the Word of Faith and Truth: therefore,

Believe it firmly;

Here let the Ark of your Faith rest.

Read it daily and diligently.

That you may find Christ the rich Treasure in this Field.

Hear it attentively:

The more heed you give to Act 16. 14. Heb. 2. 1.
what you hear, the more you will remember.

Love it sincerely:

There is no Love like that to God and his Word; and such as your Love is to
his Word, such is your Love to him.

Meditate on it constantly: Psalm. 1. 2.


The Blessing is entailed upon them that meditate on it day and night.

Contend for it earnestly:

It is the Word of Faith, and Jude 3.
you must be a Defender of it.

Obey it faithfully:

You neither read, hear, understand, nor believe aright, any more than what you
practice.

Action is the best part of Jam. 1. 22, 23.
a Christian, and there is no doing, like to that of the Word.

The Work of Creation being (...) Genesis 2. 2. 3. He sanctified it, or set it
apart, and appointed it to be a holy rest for his Worship.
ended on the seventh day, God rested on that day from all his Work which he
had made, and blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it.

He sanctified it by Institution, that the Jews might sanctify it by
Observation; he, by setting it apart to a holy use, that they might by keeping
it so.

Now as the first day on which the work of Creation was finished was
consecrated, and set apart for a holy Sabbath to God; so the first day on which
the work of Redemption was perfected, was set apart as a holy rest unto him:
that was (as Athanasius says) the end of the first Creation, and this the
beginning of the second Creation: and as that was kept holy to God, so this (as
appears by the Act. 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 12. Rev. 1. 10.
practice of the Apostles, and by the universal Practice of the Christian
Church) has ever since for many hundred Years been kept holy to him in the
Christian Church, both by converted Jews and gentile Christians.

And I can assure you, from my own Observation, I never yet knew any, but, the
more strict they were in the profession of Religion, the more strict they were
in the Observation of this day.

Besides, there are two reasons to oblige you to the keeping of this day, that
the Jews had not to oblige them to the keeping of their Sabbath; viz.

The Resurrection of Christ John 20. Luke 24.
from the dead on this day: and, The Descension of the Holy Ghost.

Since then there are such Reasons to enforce the practice of it, let it be
your great care to sanctify this day, and that,

1. By ceasing

From all evil Works, which are Sins on other days, and double Sabbatum Satana.
Sins on this.

From all Works of Recreation Sabbatum Aurei Vituli.
or Pleasure; viz. such as are not natural and necessary, but voluntary and
needless.

From all Works of Labor, that Sabbatum Tyri.
are not Works of Necessity, Piety, or Mercy, nor tending thereunto.

2. By doing all the Works of Piety, both public and private, which are the
proper Works of this day; and not barely doing of them, but by doing of them
with Exactness, Constancy, and Delight.

The Sacrifices of old were double Number. 28. 9
on the Sabbath Day, and God requires more Service on this day than on others,
and an extraordinary exercise of Grace in them.

The whole day is his, and unless works of Necessity and Mercy Mat. 127.
(relating either to Man or Beast) intervene, it must be wholly denoted to him.

The Duties of the day are not all of a sort, but various; there are all the
means and ways of Communion with God on this day, to take off Tediousness and
promote Delight in them.

If you come with rejoicing, Ps. 122. 1.
you will go away so.

Christ's coming in the Flesh was the fulfilling of the Law, the coming down of
his Spirit on this day was the fulfilling of the Gospel; then he took our
Nature; on this, we were made Partakers of his; when he died, he shed his Blood
effectually for our Justification; on this, he shed abroad his Spirit
abundantly for our Sanctification; on this day he arose, and then his Spirit
quickened his natural Body; on this day his Spirit descended, and quickened his
mystical Body; when he ascended he carried our Nature up to Heaven; and on this
day he sent down his Spirit to us. Now my Prayer for you shall be,

That the same Spirit that descended this day may sanctify you, that you may
sanctify this day, and that you by it may be made holy, that you may keep this
day holy to God that made it so, that keeping this day of rest here, you may at
last be taken up into his Rest that remains for ever hereafter. Heb. 2. 9.


Live to the Honor of that worthy Name in which you were baptized, and by
which you are Jam. 2. 7.
called.

Baptism is a sacred Flood, sent, not to drown, but to save the World; but then
you must be in Christ, (the Ark) and walk worthy 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12.
of him, that, as you are in the Bond of the Covenant, you may be also under
the Blessing of it.

The outward Baptism of Water, will avail you nothing, Mat. 3. 11.
without the inward Baptism of the Spirit.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was instituted by Christ, and appointed as a
standing Ordinance Matthew.
to the end of the World, for the commemoration of Christ's Death, and his great
Love in it, and for the Confirmation of all those Blessings obtained by him, to
them that believe in him.

They only that are in the Covenant, have a right to the Seal of it.

Some seldom receive it, some never, (living in a wilful breach and contempt
both of God's Law and Man's) and some are careless and negligent when they do
receive.

But do you,

(1.) Duly attend upon it. (2.) Come worthily to it.
1. Duly attend upon it.

While you live in the neglect of it, you reject, not only motives, but
instituted means, to subdue your Corruptions, and strengthen your Graces;
question God's Wisdom, as if he had ordained a needless and superfluous thing;
contemn Christ and his Love, as if they were not worth the remembering, and live
in disobedience to a Gospel Command, and thereby become liable to the Wrath of
God.

He that came to the Feast Mat. 22. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 13.
without a wedding garment was destroyed, and so were they too that did not
come.

2. Come worthily to it.

The Sacrament is a Feast, the Souls Exceedings; if you come not to it, you
will starve your Soul; if you come unworthily you will poison it, eating
Damnation as surely as you eat Bread, and 1 Cor. 11. 29.
drinking a Cup of Wrath instead of a Cup of Blessing; and therefore do what
you can to come in a worthy manner; viz.

With hungring and thirsting after Righteousness.

Unless you come empty, you Mat. 5. 6. Luke 15. 3.
will be sent away so.

With Faith, without which, Christus fide digerendus.
though you eat, you will never be nourished.

You may touch the Body, but you will receive no Virtue from it.

With inflamed Love to God for giving Christ to you; and to Christ, for
offering up himself for you.

He is the Founder of the Feast, and died to make it.

With a Heart deeply humbled for Sin, that you may not crucify him afresh, but
mourn over him, Heb. 6. 6.
who was crucified for you, and by you.

A broken Savior must be received with a broken Heart.

With Humility, and lowliness of mind, as unworthy of the Crumbs that fall from
his Table, much more as a Guest to sit there.

The more humble the more welcome.

With Praise and Thanksgiving.

The Feast is all of free-cost, and you can do no less than take the Cup of
Salvation, Ps. 116. 13
and bless him for it.

In the Sacrament Christ's death is shown forth, and in a holy Conversation his
Life; now, when in that you have shown forth his Death, go and show forth his
Life in the Holiness of yours, that it may appear, you have an interest in the
Power of his Cross, as well as in the Merit of it.

Sin is an Impostor, it comes of a cheating kind, by the Fathers and Mothers
side (viz. the Devil and your Heart, he is the Incubus and that the Womb.) The
first Sin (by which you may judge of all the rest) came into the World by a
cheat, and all (whether Angels or Men) that ever had any thing to do with it,
have been deceived by it; your great wisdom Pro. 11. 18
therefore will be to understand the deceitfulness of Sin, and Heb. 3. 13.
to watch against it.

Our first Parents expected Genesis 3. 5, 6, 7.
to be as Gods, but they became as Devils.

Unbelief is a Sin:

That gave life to the first actual Sin, and ever since gives life to Genesis 3.
all, and maintains the life of them; in the Judgment, as in a Castle; in the
Heart, as in a Closet; and in the Life, as in a Trade.

All Grace acts in the strength of Faith, and all Sin in the strength of
Unbelief.

A Sin that puts God in the Devils place, and the Devil in God's: for,

By dis-believing God, you believe the Devil.

A Sin that binds the Guilt of all other Sins fast upon you, they deserve
Punishment, but this binds you over to it.

Hell seems to be prepared on purpose for Unbelievers, and Hypocrites as the
chief of Sinners.

I hope you have so much Faith Heb. 3. 12. Quanto magis a Deo recedimus, tanto
minus sumus.
as to believe this, that you may take heed, and beware of an evil Heart of
Unbelief, in departing from the living God.

By going from a living God, will go to a killing Devil.

Pambo was thirty years (as he says) learning how to rule his Tongue, and yet
had not perfectly learned that Lesson: and Saint James tells us, the Tongue is
an unruly Member, not easily tamed; yet an endeavor to do it is not more
difficult than necessary, for, without it your Religion is Jam. 3. 8. 1. 26.
vain.

The Sins of the Tongue are many; but I shall here only advise you in an
especial manner to beware of three; viz.

Of Swearing. Of Censuring. Of Lying.
1. Swearing.

The Tongue of Man is called Ps. 57. 8. 108. 1.
his Glory, not only as it is one of the Excellencies and Prerogatives of Man
over other Creatures, by this to express his mind; but as it is an Instrument
ordained for the setting forth of Gods glory. When thus employed, it is his
Honor; but when in cursing and swearing; it is a Shame and Reproach unto him,
and a Dishonor to God, who has by this put such an Honor upon him above all
earthly Creatures.

I hope you will never meet with a Temptation to this Sin, nor much need any
caution from me against it: but since you live in an Age in which this Sin is
as common as it is notorious and abominable, you will do well to remember the
Threatenings denounced by God against this Sin, and the Judgments inflicted upon
them that have been guilty of it; how vile and contemptible it will make you in
the Eyes of all that are sober and virtuous; that it will by this manifestly
appear, that you are rotten at the heart; (for out of the abundance of the
Heart the Mouth speaks) that Luke 6. 45.
your Mouth is full of deadly Poison (an unlikely place, one would think, to
look for Poison in) and Jam. 3. 8.
that your Tongue is set on fire of Hell, that sends forth a stench worse than
that of the Fire and Brimstone there, and will at last for ever torment you
there: for, Rev. 14. 10.
as rich men by frequent swearing, may, by the Laws of Man (if duly executed)
swear themselves into Beggary; so both Rich and Poor will, by the Law of God,
swear themselves into Hell.

Every Swearer loses his Soul for nothing: other Sins have some Pleasure or
Profit attending them, but this has neither.

2. Censuring.

Many (as Seneca complained in his time some did) make more use of Spectacles
than Looking-glasses to behold others Faults more than their own. They read men
(as they read Books) only to espy out their Faults; they feed (like flies) not
on their sound, but sore part, and make their Sins either matter of their
Triumph or Censure: but it is great Folly for you (or any) so to do; for, did
you but consider how liable you are to the same, or worse Temptations, and how
much by nature you are inclined to yield to them, you would not.

God's Judgment begins at his own House, but yours must begin at your own
Heart; there it must begin, and there it must end too: be not therefore (as the
Lamiae) quick-sighted abroad to see the Faults of others, and blind at home,
not to see your own; but behold your own more than theirs; or rather, your own,
and not theirs; that you may not (with the Pharisee) accuse them, but (with the
Publican) condemn your self.

The better any are, the less severe they will be to others, and the more to
themselves. Matthew is called Levi by all the other Evangelists; but he calls
himself, Matthew the Mat. 10. 3.
Publican.

3. Lying.

A Liar (as one says) is one that defies God, and shrinks at Man, but hated of
both. Therefore,

Do not lie at any time:

For though Truth is not to be spoken at all times, yet there is no time for a
Lie.

Do not lie upon any account:

No not in jest; for, (as Solon said to one lying in jest) if you approve and
practice it in jest, you will soon find it in earnest in all your Actions.

Do not lie for any thing, no not for the greatest Advantage.

Austin professed, he would not tell a Lie to gain Heaven.

Do not lie to any one;

No not to the Devil, to whose Nature it is most suitable.

Do not lie for any one:

Not for a Friend; for it is Magis amica veritas.
no true Friendship, to be false to the Truth for a Friends sake.

Not for Truth it self; for Truth can never be upheld with a Lie.

No not for the God of Job. 13. 7.
Truth; for it is a Sin to speak wickedly for God himself.

But ever speak the Truth of Veritas entis, mentis.
your Mind, though you may not at all times be able to speak to the Truth of
Things; that it may appear you are a Child of God (the Deuteronomy. 32. 4
God of Truth) and not of the Devil, who is the Father both of Joh. 8. 44.
Lies and Liars.

By Perjury you exceed the Devil, and by lying you imitate him.

Plato wrote over his School, Let none enter in here that is not a (...).
Geometrician; and Christ admits none into his, but such as deny themselves: a
bare Profession of Matt. 16. 24.
Christ is not enough, unless you follow him; nor following him, unless you
deny your self for him. If therefore, you either profess, or desire to be a
Disciple of Christ, you must live in the daily exercise of self-denial, viz.
both of righteous and sinful self; the first in respect of Dependence, the
latter in Philip. 3. 8, 9. Ephesians. 5. 11.
respect of Communion; one comparatively, the other absolutely.

If the Foundation be not good, whatever you build upon it will fall to the
ground.

Macrobius honored Hippocrates with this Title, That he could neither deceive,
nor be deceived; but you live in an Age, wherein you will find many skilful in
the art of Deceiving; and your tender Years, and want of Experience, may not be
Armor of Proof against their Wiles: therefore, try your seeming Friends before
you trust them (as some do their Vessels, first with Water, and then with Wine)
and never expect much from them, and you will never be deceived by them.

Trajan advised his Master to tell him of his Faults; saying, He would not be
angry with him for it, but with himself for deserving it. Alexander turned away
a Philosopher for not doing of it, as Aut errores non intelligis, and
insipiens, aut si intilligis, adulator, quia non reprebendis.
one that was either a Knave or a Fool. And if you rightly understand your
self, you will esteem them as your best Friends, that are Enemies to your Vices.

It is better (according to the Greek Proverb) to fall among Crows than
Flatterers; for, they will not eat you until you are dead, but these will eat
you up while you are alive.

There are but two ways by which you are ever like to hear of your Faults; viz.
either by the Reproach of a biter Enemy, or the Reproof of a faithful Friend;
confute the first by your Life, and make him a Liar; be thankful to the other,
and receive it as a kindness.

A Friend loves at all times, Ps. 141. 5. Pro. 17. 17
but never more than when reproving.

When you hear of any Commendation given you, enquire who they were that
praised you; if Virtuous, make good their Words; if Vicious, suspect your self.

What Evil have I done, said Socrates, that this bad man commends me?

The Rabbis have a Saying, that we must fly to Mount Gerizim, but creep up to
Mount Ebal; that is, we must be swift to Mercy, and slow to Anger: and it will
be your Wisdom to do so.

Passion is a short Madness; it may pass through a wise man's Heart, but rests
no where but in a Fool's.

What is one man's Duty, may be another man's Sin; and what is lawful at one
time, may not be Pr. 26. 4, 5
lawful at another; it will be your Wisdom therefore, to understand your Duty,
the proper season of it, and to do it.

Duty must be done, though Safety be hazarded by it.

Make that out of Question that ought to be matter of the greatest Question;
viz. Whether Christ 2 Cor. 13. 5.
be in you; if Christ is not, the Devil is; but if Christ is, then 2 Cor. 5. 1
you are a new Creature.

Then Christ is formed in you, when you are conformed to the Image of Romans 8. 29
him.

There are some that pray, but Prove. 28. 9
turn away their Ear from God's Law; and some that never pray (they turn away
both Ear and Mouth from God) the first are Hypocrites, the latter Atheists:
Mat. 23. 14.
none are good that do not pray, nor any, that do no more; for, Hypocrites
pray, though not always: therefore neither neglect Job 27. 10
Prayer, nor trust in it; be not false to your Profession of Religion by living
without Prayer, nor false to your Prayers, by living contrary to them; but own
that Domine fac me in iis consequendis operam colloeare, pro quibus obtinendis
soleo ad te orare. Sir Thomas More's Prayer.
in your Life that you do in your Prayers; for, Prayer is not only a means to
get good, but an Engagement to be so.

Daily Prayer is as necessary for your Soul, as daily Bread for your Body.

Some live as if there was no Heaven, and some, as if they desired no other
Heaven but what is here, (no Paradise, but an earthly one;) but do you live in
the belief of it, and have your Conversation there while you are here, Phil. 3.
20.
that you may be there when you shall be here no more.

A heavenly Conversation Joh. 14. 23 Heb. 12. 14
will at last bring you to a heavenly Habitation.

Some believe there is no Hell, some think there is none but a guilty
Conscience, (and if it were true, that will be bad enough,) some fear no other
Hell but Poverty, and some will not think of Hell, lest melancholy Thoughts
should drive them to Despair; but do you ever fear Hell, that you may never
feel it.

Christ's own Disciples Mat. 10. 28.
were bid to fear Hell, and did good; and bad think more of it; both might be
better.

Do nothing against Conscience truly enlightened. Quicquid sit contra
conscientiam aedificat ad gebennam.


You cannot have a better Friend (next God) than Conscience, nor a better Jury
to acquit you; therefore keep that your Conscientia est animae paedagogus, ante
peccatum froenum, post peccatum flagellum.
Friend whoever is your Enemy; Peace there, though you have none any where
else; if you do not, you may want a Friend when you will most need him: for,

At the day of Judgment, when the Mouth of Conscience shall be open, yours will
be shut. Matt. 22. 12.


You live in a World full of Job 5. 7.
Troubles; and there is but little (if any thing) else, that you can be sure
of; it will be your Wisdom therefore to expect them, and prepare for them
before they come, and patiently to bear them when they do.

If you fly the Cross, you may lose the Crown.

The things of this World are requisite, that none should under-value them; but
momentary, that none should over-prize them: 1 Cor. 7. 30, 31.
love them therefore as if you did not love them, and live above them while you
live in the Enjoyment of them.

It is Folly to love any thing much, that you cannot love long.

Be established in the Truth, that you may not be blown about with every Wind
of Doctrine. Ephesians. 4. 14.


Distraction of Mind is sad, but Distraction of Judgment is worse.

Engage not in any thing in which you cannot expect God's Blessing; nor ever
expect any Blessing from him in any thing, in which you are not first
counseled by him.

In all your ways acknowledge Pro. 3. 6.
him, and he will direct your Paths.

Be just to all, and deceive none; if you do, you will deceive your self most
of all.

Honesty is the best Policy.

Patiently bear Reproaches. At the day of Judgment there will Luke 6. 22, 23.
be a Resurrection of Names as well as of Bodies, and then all Jude 15.
things shall be set right.

Heartily forgive Injuries; if Mat. 18. 35.
you do not, you will do a greater Injury to your self. It is no Pride to
refuse to act below your self: you ought therefore to be sensible of them, and
to make them, whoever they are, sensible of their Evil, that have injured you;
but you must not revenge it: not to be sensible, is brutish; to revenge is
devilish.

A wise Man will make better use of his Foes, than a Fool can of his Friends.

Never forget a Kindness you receive, nor remember any you have done to another.

The first is Ingratitude, Haec beneficis inter duos lex est, Alter obtinisci
debet dati statim, alter accepti nunquam.
the latter is a (...).
Merchandise rather than a Gift.

Be more afraid to be evil, than to be seen to be so; and more ashamed not to
do good, than to Bona agere and mala pati, regium est.
be reproached for doing of it.

You may deprecate Shame, and complain of it too, (David did both;) but you
must not, either Ps 119. 31 Ps. 6^. 19 20.
shun, or fly from Duty, to avoid it.

Live the Life of Faith here, if you would live the Life of Sight hereafter,
and evidence your Faith by your Works; for, it is no more, without them, than
Jam. 2 ult.
Fire is without Heat and Light.

They are none of Abraham's Children, that do Job 8. 29.
not Abraham's Works.

Live above the inordinate love of Life, and sinful fear of Death; and that you
may, make all sure before you die; that when you come to dye, you may have
nothing else to do, but to dye.

Pulchra res est, consummasse vitam ante mortem.

Constantine gave it as his chiefest Instruction to his Children, that they
should prefer the Knowledge of God, and his holy Religion, above worldly
Wealth, yea above the Empire; and it will be your Wisdom to value it above all
the Riches and Honors of this World: certainly there is great Excellency in
Religion, in that, the Enemies of it so often put on a form of it, its Friends
(notwithstanding all hazards) so much own it, and appear for it, and God (who
is glorious in Holiness) so much commends it, and approves of it; let your
esteem therefore be of all Persons, for the Tantus quisque est, quantus apud
Deum.
Religion you find in them; if God does so, well may you do it too.

It is Religion, more than Blood, that ennobles; for, The Righteous is more
excellent than his Neighbor; viz. Pro. 12. 26
indefinitely, whether rich, or poor.

The Fear of the Lord is the beginning Ps. 111. 10
of Wisdom, the Foundation of all Religion, a good Solicitor to Devotion, and
a great help against Formality in it; a Custos Innocentiae.
Preserver of Innocence, and an especial Remedy against hardness of Heart;
(Fear, in a natural Isa. 60. 5.
sense, contracts the Heart; but in a spiritual sense, enlarges it) a Grace
like the sense of touching, that (as the Philosopher says) is Ortu primus usu
maximus duratione ultimus.
first in being, of greatest use, and of longest continuance.

Servile Fear arises from Hatred to God; filial Fear arises from Love to him;
they that fear God, and do not love him, hate him Nemo melius diligit quam qui
maxim veretur offendere. Salvian.
because they fear him; but the more any love God, the more they reverence and
fear him.

God is to be feared, as well as loved and praised for his Goodness; and your
Duty is as much Hos. 3. 5.
to fear him, as to rejoice and Ps. 76. 11.
trust in him.

His Mercy is from everlasting Ps. 103. 17.
to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his Curse against them that do
not; so that if you are above his Fear, you are under his Curse; and if here
you do not tremble before him with an obediential Fear, you shall hereafter, to
all eternity, with a devilish one.

Fear God, and you need not fear any thing but him, and for him.

Choose God for your Portion, and you can never want.

You are proud, and think too well of your self, if you cannot be content in
any condition with him; and of a low and base Spirit, if you can be satisfied
with a whole World without him.

More you need not, and less will not do.

Renew your Repentance before him daily, and beg Pardon and Remission of all
your Sins, (as to Kind, Degree, and Aggravation) that, as the Morning Cloud,
they may soon vanish and disappear; beg the powerful Aid and Assistance of his
Grace, which is sufficient for you, that Bounds may be set to the raging Sea of
Sin, that it may never overflow your Banks, and a daily increase of Grace from
him (who is the God of all Grace) that your way may be as the Morning-light
shining more and more unto the perfect day. Pro. 4. 18.


You were never good, if you think you are good enough; nor have any Grace, if
you think you want none.

Live up to that Profession you make of God, to that Communion you have with
him, and those Duties you perform to him, that it may appear you have Truth in
the inward parts, and are sound at the root. Ps. 51. 6. Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Jer. 5. 3.


He is a God of Truth, and his Eyes are upon the Truth.

Let a Zeal for his Glory be writ upon your Heart, that you may honor him in
all your ways to him, and acknowledge him in all his ways to you both, of Mercy
and Judgment, with Thankfulness and Humility.

Do his Will cheerfully, and bear it patiently; bless him for what you have,
and depend upon him for what you want; live upon him as your happiness, and to
him as your end; thus living to him here, you will live for ever with him
hereafter.

This is the Advice of your earthly Father, from his, and your heavenly Father,
and if diligently observed by you, though you may lose me your earthly Father,
you will never be without the teaching Guidance, Counsel, Care, and Blessing of
God, your heavenly Father.

Non est orphanus, cui mortuus Ps. 27. 10.
est parens, sed qui scientiam Arab. Pro.
non habet, nec mores.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
THE three last lines in page 38. should have been the three first in page 39.

The two last lines in page 39. should have been in a Parenthesis two lines
above.

Eminenter in the fourth line of page 59. should have been set in the Margin.

Page 68. line 12. for connectuntur, read convertitur.

Page 79. line 2. leave out And.


