A COMMENT ON The eleven first Verses of the fourth Chapter OF S. Matthew's
Gospel, Concerning CHRIST'S TEMPTATIONS.

DELIVERED In XII. SERMONS, at St. Clements Eastcheap, LONDON: By THO. FULLER,
B. D. and Minister of Waltham-Abbey in ESSEX.

LONDON, Printed by Ia: Cottrel, for George Eversden, at the golden Ball in
Aldersgate Street. 1652.

To the Right Honorable, and truly religious, The Lady ISABELLA, Countess of
Northampton.
MADAM,
SOme, at the first sight, may much admire what JACOB meant, Genesis 53.11.
in sending so mean a Present to so mighty a Person as Joseph, the Governor of
Egypt: A little balm, and a little honey, spices, and myrrh, nuts, and
almonds. For, as the quality of most of them was not costly, so their quantity
(a little of either) was not considerable.

The same exception lies against my presenting this small Treatise to your
Hohonour. Zoar, Is it not a little one? and the composure thereof so plain and
homely, that it is not worthy the notice, much less the Patronage of your
Ladyship.

But for Jacob, all is answered in three words: They were the BEST FRVITS of
the land. Indeed, as Canaan was a Country plentiful with provisions for
self-subsistence; so it was but barren of Barter with Foreign Lands; chiefly,
because God intended it for an entire place in it self, and not to mingle
either Merchandise or Manners with other Nations.

The same in effect I allege in mine own excuse, that this is the best
expression of Thankfulness, that my present condition can afford; and my
meanness is not capable in any other way to deserve the least of those many
favors which your Honor has conferred upon me.

And as Jacob sent so small a quantity of each kind (not because he grutched
greater proportion thereof, but) conceiving a greater bulk would rather be more
wearisome to the Bearers, then welcome to the Receiver: I, in like manner, (who
could have more, not better ware in this Work) to avoid tediousness, have
purposely shortened the same.

And although your Honor shall not (as in Jacob's Present) find Honey here,
(which was never offered to God in any Sacrifice) I mean, though in this
Treatise there be no luscious, and palate-pleasing Wit and Eloquence, yet I
assure your Ladyship (if daigning to read it) that you will meet with Balm (and
that of the best kind, from Gilead) therein; the true comfort and consolation,
which we may gather to our selves in all our Temptations, from Christ's here
triumphing over Satan in the wilderness. Be pleased therefore, Madam,
favorably to accept the fruits of my weak endeavors.

But why speak I of the the fruits, whilst I remember a pleasant passage, acted
by the simplicity of a poor Spaniard? When a Father of the Inquisition sent
unto him for some Pears growing in his Hort-yard, poor man presently plucked up
the tree, fruit, root, and branch, and presented it unto him. What, sudden
fright, and servile fear, to prevent danger, made him to over-do, in his
willing unwilling compliance with that churlish and cruel Inquisitor; that, my
real respect, and cordial gratitude, does cheerfully perform, in my addresses
to your Honor, one of the most civil of your Greatness, as Courtesy is the
truest badge of ancient Nobility. I desire, that not only the leaves, buds,
blossoms, green, ripe fruit I can bear, be presented to your Ladyship, but
could wish that the whole tree were worthy of your Honors acceptance.

The good Lord of heaven crowd all happiness on your Self and noble Lord in
this life, and crown you both, with that hopeful posterity which in due time he
may bestow upon you, with eternal happiness hereafter. The daily prayer of

Your Honors,in all Christian service, THO. FULLER.

To My constant AUDITORS AT St. CLEMENTS Eastcheap.
IT is spoken of Noah in the plural, (what is said in the singular of others)
that he was perfect in his GENERATIONS; Acts 13.36.
Genesis 6.9.
because he lived in one generation before, and another after the Flood.

A Sermon preached, serves but an Auditory; a Sermon printed, Auditories; and
(if pious in it self) not only the present, but ensuing Age, may partake of
the profit thereof.

It was the wish of Job, Oh that my words were printed in a book! meaning the
ancient Printing, (opposite only to speaking) which is a Maiden, sole, and
single, useful chiefly for the continuance of the Original: But had the Mystery
of modern Printing, (opposed also to Writing) which is a Mother, fruitful with
the propagation of many copies at once) been extant in his age, Job no doubt
would have enlarged his wish thereunto, as not only the surest means to keep,
but swiftest to communicate his mind and meaning to Posterity; the main
motive, with me, to publish my present pains: hoping, in some degree, they may
prove not unuseful to such as peruse them.

If any say, These are not the Sermons you preached unto us, because there is
much contracted in the Press, of what you enlarged in the Pulpit; let them
know, The Hand, when the fist is closed together, is the same with the same
Hand, when the fingers were stretched forth, and palm thereof expanded.

Indeed Satan is justly taxed in this Page 103
Treatise, for curtailing Scripture, and leaving out words of consequence in
his alleading thereof: But I cannot be justly censured, if omitting, inserting,
transposing, altering, and chiefly abridging what I preached (making a
Decoction of Sermons into a Comment, and therefore boiling them down to a fifth
part) for, being mine own, I may order them as I am advised for my best
convenience.

Yet why call I them Mine, which formerly were God's, and yours, as now they
are the whole world's? God's, by whose assistance they were composed, on whose
Word grounded, at whose glory aimed. Yours, as first intended for your
instruction, delivered to your attention, digested (I hope) by your meditation,
and now published for your further edification.

To conclude: It is as generally as confidently reported of the ancient British
(now the Welsh) Nation, that they never ran away in Battle, till their General
or Leader first forsook them. Oh that we might demean our selves valiantly in
our Christian warfare, until Christ, our Captain, desert us; which will never
come to pass, seeing we have both his faithful promise of assistance, and
cheerful precedent of his valor, foiling of Satan in this his remarkable
combat. To the protection of which blessed Savior, you are commended, by

Yours to his power, THO. FULLER.

CHRIST'S First Temptation to DESPAIR. SERMON I.
MATTHEW. 4.1. Then Jesus was led of the spirit into the wilderness, to be
tempted of the devil.


THE eleven first verses of this Chapter contain the most glorious Combat that
ever was fought on earth, if we seriously consider,

1. The eminency of the persons; Generals seldom fight Duels as here* the
Prince of Peace against the Prince of Da^kness.

2. The spaciousness of the place, the Wilderness, where they were not pent and
confined by intruding spectators, but had Rehoboth* elbow-room, each of them to
exercise their activity to the utmost.

3. The concernment of the Cause, no less then the salvation or damnation of
the Elect. Had Satan worsted Christ in this combat, he had defeated the
salvation of mankind.

4. The length and fierceness of the Fight, Luke 4.2.
forty days; long battles are seldom hot, hot battles are seldom long; This
was both.

Lastly, The clearness of the conquest; the success of some fights has been in
such a twilight, that after the battle ended with the swords of soldiers, they
have been begun with the pens of Historians, disputing who got the better; so
equally has the Victory been divided betwixt them: But here the Devil was
quite routed, forsook the field, and after left our Savior sole Conqueror, and
the Angels hitherto the invisible spectators of the fight, were afterward
witnesses of his victory, yea attendants on his triumph; They ministered unto
him.

We will take the words of the Text as they lie in order.

Then.
Then? When? Immediately after the ending of his Baptizing, and immediately
before the beginning of his Preaching, verse. 17. Then began Jesus. In spiritual
feasts, it is no bad manners for the entertainer to cut for himself before he
carve for his guests.

The first Doctrine concerns Ministers. Such as intend to enter into the
Ministry, Doct*
must expect temptations.

It is an expression reported and approved by Master Perkins, That four things
make a Divine, (to the first three I concur cheerfully and willingly; to the
fourth and last I consent fully, but sadly) namely, Reading and Meditation,
Prayer and Temptation.

The second Doctrine is general to all Christians.

Doct.
After a more then ordinary elevation of thy Soul in grace, suspect and expect
a sudden Temptation.

As sure as the Valley attends on a hill in nature; so after an height of
holiness in thy soul (too fine ware to have much measure of) beware a
depression, concavity, and hollowness of a Temptation. I speak not this to make
any good Christians fearful, but all watchful; not any to despair, but all to
be discreet.

Object.
You Ministers speak much of temptations, it is a great Topic in your Sermons:
but for my part (says many a man) I never had temptation as yet, and know not
what belongs thereunto.

Answ.
It is too too suspicious, that the great work of conversion is not as yet
sincerely wrought in thy heart, and Satan needs not besiege that soul with
temptations, which is already in his peaceable possession; But if thou be
truly converted, how old soever, thou art young enough to be tempted. A
Countryman riding with an unknown traveller (whom he conceived honest) over a
dangerous plain; This place (said he) is infamous for robbery: but for mine own
part, though often riding over it early and late, I never saw any thing worse
then my self. In good time, replied the other; and presently demanded his
purse, and robbed him. Brag not that thou never have had a temptation; it may
surprise thee in that very instant wherein thou boastest that thou were never
tempted. Wherefore, be not high-minded, but fear.

Was led into the wilderness.
Let this qualify the harshness of the phrase, Mark 1.12. The spirit drives
him; but how? not as a ship is driven by a tempest, not as the horses and
chariots driven by Iehu, furiously: but, to join Matthew and Mark together, he
was led-driven, by a mixed motion: led, there is willingness; driven, a kind of
violence: led, there is freedom; driven, there is force.

The sum is this: an efficacious impression from the spirit met in Christ with
a voluntary condescension thereunto, and susception thereof.

I see then no cause of cavil, that Effectual Grace, when it works irresistibly
on the soul of a Convert, must needs prejudice and destroy the liberty thereof.
I may say in such a case, A man is led-driven to repent, led-driven to believe:
parallel whereunto, I may say, He does come-drawn to repent, according to
Christ's expression, ( Ioh. 6.14.) No man comes unto me, except the Father,
who has sent me, draw him. Sic ^uvat trabi: a pleasing force entertained by
man's freenes; led and driven.

The Doctrine is this:

The Doctrine.
Such as do not rashly run themselves into a temptation, but are led into it by
divine providence, may with Christ confidently expect a comfortable issue out
of it.

Now they run into a temptation, who leave their Calling to meet it: They are
led into a temptation, who go on in their vocation, and a temptation encounters
them; so that (because they may not go back in their Calling) they must either
go over it, or under it, or through it. Now a man in his Calling, is twice as
strong to resist the temptation, as one out of it. A Fish is twice as strong in
the water, as on the shore; but a four-footed beast is twice as strong on the
land, as in the water. The reason is, because the water is the proper element
of the one, and earth of the other. Thy Calling is thy element, wherein thou
art most able to resist temptation. When Esau came against him, ( Genesis 32.9.)
Jacob with two excellent arguments importuned Gods protection: One from Gods
command, Thou said unto me, Return into thy country: the other from his
promise; Thou said unto me, I will deal well with thee. Both these reasons
may thou enforce upon God to preserve thee, when a temptation assaults thee
in thy calling: His Command, Six days shall thou labor; his Promise, That he
will keep thee in all thy ways, (whereof thy Calling is, next the serving of
God, the highest:) And thou may comfortably presume that he will either
remove the temptation, or make thee victorious over it.

Use.
Use 1. To confute such who on the proud opinion of their strength hollow in
the ears of a sleeping temptation, and tempt it to tempt them; dealing
therewith as Asahel with Abner, (2. Sam. 2.) Abner would willingly have
declined the fighting with Asahel; but the other prosecuted, yea persecuted him
to fight, and was slain by him. Some temptations may be said to have no mind
to meddle with us, but that our pride and business must be tampering with them.
We should not be so forward, if we considered how hard a thing it is to get out
of a temptation. We usually say, Such a man is run into debt: but if afterward
he hap to pay his engagements, we say not that he is run out of debt, but he is
crept out of debt. Swift may the motion be into a temptation, but slow the
recovery out of it.

Into the wilderness.
I observe,

Solitariness is most advantageous for the devil to tempt us. Doct.
Therefore Christ sent always his disciples by two's, when to preach, Luke
10.1. when to fetch the colt, Matthew. 21.1. when to bespeak the room for the
Passover, Mark 14.13. And this perchance was one reason why Christ in the
choice of his Apostles and Disciples pitched on an even number, Twelve of the
one, and Seventy of the other; that if he should have occasion to sub-divide
them, they should fall out into even couples, and no odd one to lack a
companion. However, no place comes amiss to the devil to tempt in: Paradise,
where he tempted our first parents: A Palace, where he tempted David with
pride, in numbering his people: An upper room, where he tempted Judas to betray
Christ: The Congregation, (the Apostles being present) where he tempted Ananias
and Sapphira to tell a lie. But Satan is in his throne, most potent and
powerful in a solitary place, in the wilderness.

Quest.
What was the Devils design in tempting of Christ?

Answ.
He had a double design.

1. If possible* to wound him with sin, which if he had effected, he had
frustrated the salvation of mankind, Satan knowing he could not save others,
who sinned himself.

Object.
Seeing Satan must needs know already that Christ was the Son of God, why would
he adventure on a labor in vain, seeing it was impossible to make him sin?
Iam. 1.13.) God cannot be tempted with evil. Now Satan must needs know that
Christ was the Son of God, by what he had seen and heard; He had heard Gabriels
salutation to the Virgin Mary ( Luke 1.35.) That holy thing which shall be born
of thee, shall be called the Son of God: The Angels singing to the Shepherds (
Luke 2.11.) To you is born a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. The prophecy
of Simeon ( Luke 2.34.) plainly describing him for a Savior; yea, Satan had
seen the Spirit of God descending on him as a Dove ( Mat. 3.16.) and God owning
him from heaven, for his welbeloved Son. All these observed by Satan, must
needs infallibly inform him that Christ was the Son of God, and therefore it
was a wonder that the devil would tempt him.

All these did only amount to vehement suspicions, Answ.
whereby Satan might probably conjecture, but could not certainly conclude him
the Son of God. I mean, thus he could not hereby collect, That Christ was the
second Person in the Trinity incarnated, assuming man's flesh and nature upon
him. He knew him to be the Son of God by grace and adoption, such an one as
David and other men were, and a most eminent person in piety and holiness: He
knew also that he was the Redeemer of Israel, such as Moses, Joshua, and the
rest of the Judges were: all of them Saviors of their people by temporal
deliverances from their enemies: But he knew not certainly (though he shrewdly
suspected) that he was the only Son of God by eternal generation, and who by
his death and Passion should save mankind from their sins. Wherefore the devil
did not wholly despair, but tempted Christ with some probability of success.

This first design, I may call it the devils forlorn hope, which he himself
(almost) despaired would take effect.

The second was his Reserve, which was to vex our Saviors soul with suffering
an affliction. If righteous Lot (2 Pet. 2.8.) dwelling among the Sodomites, in
seeing and hearing, vexed his soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds;
surely it not only grated the ears, but grieved the heart of Christ to hear the
devil lie so impudently, blaspheme God so presumptuously, quote Scripture so
perfidiously, and apply it so mischievously.

What was Gods intent in leading Christ to be tempted? Quest.


That he gaining an experimental knowledge of Temptations, Answ.
might sympathize the more affectionately with us in our temptations, Heb.
4.15. For we have not such an high Priest who cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted as we are, yet
without sin. Why did God suffer Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 1.8, to fall into a
desperate sickness and escape it, but chiefly that he might, verse 4. comfort
others in trouble, by the comfort wherewith himself was comforted in God? And
for the same reason suffered Christ to be tempted.

I wonder why Papists assign such and such diseases, to such and such Saints
to cure them: as soar eyes to Saint Blaze, the toothache to Saint Appollonia.
Was it not because (perchance we shall give a better reason for the Papists
therein, then they can give for themselves) these Saints when living were
affected with these infirmities? which makes them more compassionate to such as
suffer the same maladies. But whatsoever thy pains be, make thy application by
prayer to Christ, who will experimentally pity thy condition. Art thou hungry?
he was hungry, Mat. 4. Thirsty? he was thirsty, Ioh. 4. Weary? he weary, Mat.
27. Tempted? he was tempted, as in the text.

By a barbarous and ancient custom, all the goods of shipwrackt men were
escheated to the Crown, and so the poor Merchant was stripped out of the rags of
his estate, which the modesty of the winds and waves had left him.

But when King Richard the first himself had been on the Sea near Sicily, like
to be drowned, he recalled those Customs, making provision that the propriety
of those goods should still be preserved to the right owner.

Christ has been tossed in a Tempest of Temptation, and knows what belongs to
the trouble thereof.

Let us pray to him with confidence in all our distresses, assured that out of
the bowels of his experimental compassion, he will have the more mercy upon us.

CHRIST'S First Temptation to DESPAIR. SERMON II.
MATTHEW. 4.2. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was
afterward an hungry.


IT was the constant practice of our Savior, after some eminent act was
performed by him, or extraordinary honor conferred on him, presently to cloud
himself in obscurity. He had in such cases, three general retreating places. 1.
A Mountain. 2. A Ship. 3. A wilderness. When he had fed five thousand with
five loaves, Mat. 14.23. he went up into a mountain alone to pray. When he had
fed four thousand with seven loaves, Mat. 15.39. then he sent away the
multitude and took ship. When he had raised Lazarus to life, Ioh. 9.54. he went
thence into a country near to the wilderness. If importunate popularity would
press after Christ, it should clamber up a Mountain with pains, or sail on
the Sea with peril, or seek him in a Wilderness with difficulty.

How contrary is this to the practice of most men! when they have done any
thing which they conceive fine and gallant, above the standard of ordinary men,
then they love to appear in public, and present themselves to the view of
others.

As to eclipse himself was Christ's custom, when any eminent act was done by
him; the same was his practice when any extraordinary honor was conferred on
him: thus lately dignified to the eyes and ears of the beholders with a sight
and voice from heaven, he pr^sen^ly retreated into the wilderness, Where when
he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an hungry.

The words contain the through-fast of Christ.

Wherein observe,

1. The depth thereof, a total abstinence: Luke says he eat nothing. Some
critics will carp hereat, How could a negative terminate an act? But the
meaning thereof is this; he eat not at all.

2. The breadth thereof; he fasted Days and nights: hence we gather Christ
watched all night; otherwise it is senseless to say those fast that sleep,
seeing none can eat and sleep together. And no wonder if Christ watched by
night, being to do with the Devil, who, R^v. 12.10. accuses us before God day
and night.

3. The length of his fasting, forty days and nights, in imitation of Moses
and Elias fasting as long; the one at the institution, the other at the
restitution of the Law, as Christ at the beginning of the Gospel.

Four principal Reasons may be assigned of Christ's fasting.

First, Because he was in a solitary place, where no food was afforded.

Secondly, Because as Adam began man's ruin with eating, Christ would begin
man's repairing with abstinence. Physicians commonly cure by the contraries, and
prescribe fasting to surfets.

Thirdly, Because Christ was immediately to begin his Ministry; and fasting
was the solemn initiation into that Office. Thus when Paul and Barnabas were
separated for the work of preaching, Then fasted they, and prayed, and laid
their hands on them, and let them go, Act. 13.3. And I understand, so much the
Presbyters retain of the primitive customs, That they observe a fast on their
day of ordination of Ministers.

Fourthly, Because Christ was to cope with and encounter one of the subtillest,
sullenest, and stubbornest of all devils; Whereof there is a kind, Matthew.
17.21. A kind that goes not out but by fasting and prayer.

Whether is the Popish Lent fitly founded on the imitation of Christ's fasting
forty days? Quest.


No: Answ.
Christ's actions as God, and as God-man (such was this his fasting) are for our
instruction, not imitation; only his example as mere man, must be followed by
us: Thus, Mat. 11.29. Learn of me (not to still the winds and waves with a
Word, not to cure diseases and cast out devils, not to fast forty days, but) to
be meek and lowly in heart.

2. Christ's fast was a total abstinence from meat; The Popish Lent is only an
Exchange of the shambles for the fish-market; They abstain from flesh, and
feed on fish; which fish is also termed flesh in the Language of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 15.37. Another flesh of fishes. And be it reported to palate-men, whether
such fishes which approximate most unto a carneous matter, be not more
pro^ocative to wantonness then flesh it self.

3. Christ's fasting was done in all humility, whilst the proud opinion of
Merit is annexed to their Lent: which Lent how it first came and afterward
increased, is worth our observation.

First, The Primitive Church kept but one day in commemoration of Christ's
fasting.

Secondly, The Montanists, being heretics, first mounted it to full fourteen
days fast.

Thirdly, The Orthodox Christians (disdaining that they should outdo them in
point of abstinence) brought it up to forty days.

Fourthly, the Clergy afterward, to reach a note above the rest, hightned it
to fifty days.

Fifthly, The Monks, to have a querk above their fellows, swelled it to sixty.

Sixthly, The Friars, to appear above all, made it seventy.

Lastly, there was a design of some to make it eighty, (such would not follow
Christ's example, but outrun him) had not the Pope in policy retrenched them,
and fixed it on forty days.

However, though the Popish Lent be not justly founded on Christ's example, yet
on this occasion we may naturally raise this Doctrine;

Christians ought to set aside some seasons for Fasting. Doct.


Physicians, by rules of Health, will persuade a natural fast: Politicians, by
reasons from Wealth, a civil fast: Divines, by arguments from Piety, a
religious fast. And if a threefold cable will not hold you, what will prevail
on your practice?

First, the Physician. Tell me, ye Londoners, since Suppers have generally been
disused in this City, I mean with such whose work only is to over-see,
(otherwise the hard labourer is worthy as of his hire, so of his supper) cannot
you ride as fast, run as far? Are not your faces as clear, your feet as strong,
your whole body as able and active for all purposes and intents, as ever before?

Secondly, the Politician. Consider the situation of our Country: Zebulun's
blessing agrees unto it; It is a haven for ships. Mariners and Fishermen must
be maintained as well as others. Indeed, one Scripture says, The earth is the
Lords, and the fullness thereof: but another says also, The sea is his, and he
made it; and we may and must feed on what it affords. Besides, Statists by such
Fasts preserve the stock of Flesh. By the Levitical Law, in a birds nest the
young ones were not to be killed with the dam: But, should not some such Fasts
be seasonably observed in England, Pigs would be killed with Swine; Calves with
Kine; Lambs with Sheep; the new Store destroyed with the old Stock; to the
great loss of the Commonwealth.

Thirdly, The Divine persuades a religious Fast; that men with S. Paul, 1 Cor.
9.27. may beat their bodies down, and keep them in subjection; that so the body
being subject to the soul, soul and body may the better be subject unto God in
religious duties.

But in the great variety of Ages, Climates, and Constitutions, it is
impossible to give Rules how long men should fast. Take this general Direction:
So diet the Steed, that it may neither kick and cast the Rider, nor tire under
him in going his journey. Romans 13.14, Take no thought for the flesh, to fulfill
the lusts thereof; but take order to fulfill the labor thereof.

Now let thy Fasting have these three Qualities;

Sincerity, Humility, and Moderation.

1. Sincerity,

It is a Mock-fast, to abstain from Meat, and not from Sin; to scruple the
eating of a crust, and in the mean time ( Psalm. 14.4.) by oppression to eat up
Gods people as if they were bread: Arrant hypocrisy, to be squeamish to
swallow a crum, and in the mean time to devour widows houses: Not to taste a
drop of wine, and yet in the mean time ( Rev. 17.2.) to be drunk with the wine
of fornication.

Secondly, Humility; otherwise Popish superstitious Fasts are good only to
fill the bowels with wind, and the heart with pride.

Lastly, Moderation. This (will some say) might well be spared; seeing you have
seen amongst Protestants as few fair faces spoiled with overmuch Fasting, as
silk Stockings worn out at the knees with Praying.

I confess the accident rare, but sometimes it happens; and I could name a
noble Lady, whose religious life is lately printed, who some hours before her
death, being in perfect mind and memory, called for a cup of wine, and spoke
to her kinswoman, If God (said she) restore me to my health again, I will never
mascerate my body so much, to disable it, as I have done with my fasting.
Moderation therefore must be used therein.

Before we come to Christ's being an hungered, observe a second Miracle in the
text: As it was a wonder that for forty days Christ eat nothing; so was it,
that during that time nothing eat Christ, considering the company he had, Mark
1.13. And was tempted of Satan; he was also with the wild beasts. Now what was
it kept Christ from their violence? even his Innocence, and that character of
Sovereignty which God had stamped on him: Bucephalus could be backed by none
but by Alexander, to whom the horse willingly submitted himself, and whence
Philip his father presageth that his son would become Monarch of the world.

The wild beasts owned Christ for their Lord and Master, Dominum cognoscite
vestrum; and therefore offered no injury to him. Thus afterward, the ass-colt
whereon never man sat before, Luke 19.30. quietly carried our Savior.

If therefore the creatures start from their wonted obedience unto thee,
reflect on thine own sins as the principal causes thereof.

One who had been undutiful to his father, complained of the badness of his own
son: None (says he) has had so graceless a child as my self. To whom his
son, with more truth then wit, more wit then grace, replied, Yes, my
grandfather had.

When thou complainest that never master had such undutiful servants in the
creatures as thou have, such barren earth, such unwholesome air, such cursed
kine, such resty horses; might not these dumb creatures (if borrowing a man's
voice) return unto thee, Yes, thy Master has? God has as rebellious a servant
in thy sinful self.

Sure I am, Christ's innocence commanded the wild beasts into obedience; muzled
the Bears mouth, brake the Tigers teeth, blunted the Boars tusks, pared the
Lions paws; only the Devil, that lion, after forty days fasting, adventured
to seize on him.

And afterward he was an hungered.
Three principal reasons may be alleged for Christ's hunger.

First, because he was now to leave the Wilderness, and come into a Country
that afforded plenty of food: God therefore, who had formerly tied up his
appetite, now let it loose again.

The second Reason, to show you the truth of his Humility. His fasting so long,
spoke him God; his being hungry afterward, spoke him Man: His fasting, and
being an hungry afterward, spoke him God-man, and a fit Mediator.

The third Reason, to toll on the devil to tempt Christ with some hope of
success, that so Satan's shame and confusion might be the more, when overcome.
Christ's being an hungry in some sort tempted the devil to tempt him, and
inspirited Satan with some probability of conquest: for Satan before was almost
out of heart at the long miraculous fasting of Christ; only one thing
comforted him, that Moses and Elias fasted as long, and yet were but mere men,
Iam. 5.17. subject to like passions as we are. This, I say, kept Satan in
heart, that notwithstanding Christ's long fasting, he might be subject to sin;
and when he found him an hungry, his hope was doubled, that all was his own;
which made him tempt Christ with the more confidence.

From Christ's hunger at last, after so long fasting, we conclude,

Doct.
Men cannot conclude the constant tenure and continuance of their souls, from
some extraordinary acts by them performed.

Men sometimes are enabled by God to go beyond themselves, and are raised in
some kind of performances to so high a pitch, that they can never reach it
afterward. But if this good temper should stay with them some term of time,
he cannot thence truly infer a perpetuity of that condition. One may be chaste
forty days together, and not feel the least motion to lust; yet afterward be
wanton. One may be patient forty days together, and not find the least
provocation to passion; yet afterward be immoderately angry. God's Spirit may
vigorously quicken thee for a time, and then leave thee to thy self: I say, He
may then leave thee to thy Natural and Moral, as here he left Christ to his
Natural infirmity; who, after forty days fasting, was afterward an hungry.

CHRIST'S First Temptation to DESPAIR. SERMON III.
MATTHEW. 4.3. And when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the Son of
God, command that these stones be made bread.


BEfore we come to the words, three Questions must first be propounded and
answered.

1. How could Satan be properly said to come, Quest.
at the end of forty days, when Christ ( Luke 4.2.) was all that time tempted
by him?

Answ.
Satan discharged at Christ to and again, haunting him like the fits of an
intermitting Ague; alternately and frequently iterating his coming, departure,
and return: but now at last he came with a witness to give him three
parting-thrusts with all his skill and strength.

Quest.
2. In what visible shape did the devil appear? because the text says, He came;
which properly signifies some corporal access.

Answ.
Indeed Divines collect so much from that word; but perchance they lay more
weight thereon, then it can well bear: for we read, Mat. 13.19, Then comes the
wicked one, and catches away that which was sown in their hearts: yet Satan in
no bodily shape, but by inward suggestions, steals the Word from us. Such as
conceit the devil tempted Christ in the shape of a Pharisee, Ess^^ an* or some
strict (pretended holy) mortified Order amongst the Jews, have only Fancy for
their foundation. But we must be contentedly ignorant in what bodily shape
Satan made his approach, seeing God has not acquainted us with the certainty
thereof.

3. How came Satan to know Christ was an hungered* Quest.
If I be an hungered I will not tell thee: It being utterly improbable that
Christ made any complaint of his hunger to the devil.

Man's natural imperfections are easily discovered by his prying eyes, Answ.
who being an excellent Anatomist, knew all inward and outward symptoms of
hunger, by the sudden change in his bowels, stomach, face, looks, etc. happily
confirmed by Christ's outward gestures, seeking to find some food in that
place; whence Satan took the hint of his temptation.

1. Satan knows how and when to lay his baits for the best advantage. Doct.


How for the manner, 1 Pet. 5.8. He walks about, seeking whom he may devour.
Walks about, not only in relation to the whole world, which he compasses,
Job 1.7. but also in respect of the particular person whom he tempts. An
Enemy, before he besieges a City, surroundeth it at distance, to see where the
wall is the weakest, best to be battered; lowest, easiest to be scaled; ditch
narrowest, to be bridged; shallowest, to be waded over; what place is not
regularly fortified; where he may approach with least danger, and assault with
most advantage. So Satan walks about, surveying all the powers of our souls,
where he may most probably lay his Temptations: whether our Understandings are
easier corrupted with Error, or our Fancies with Levity, or our Wills with
Frowardness, or our Affections with Excess, etc.

He knows also when to lay his baits, Ier. 8.7. The stork knows his
appointed time; and the turtle, and the crant, and the swallow, observe the
time of their coming; namely, when most seasonable for their advantage: but
Satan, this Vultu^e, or Bird of prey, is more knowing then all of them in this
kind. What month in the year, week in the month, day in the week, hour in the
day, it is best to bring his Tem^pt^tion. Indeed, those four birds divide the
year betwixt them; the Swallow coming in the Spring, the S^ork (as I take it)
in the Winter, etc. whilst this wild Ha^py comes all times of the year; no
season is unseasonable to him, wherein he can get advantage.

Let us be careful to fortify our selves against the assaults of Satan; Use.
especially let us watch against that time unknown to us, when ( Luke 22.53.)
the hour and power of darkness shall meet together. How many people are there,
servilely and superstitiously afraid of this following Eclipse! they afright
themselves with fear, what dismal effects are portended thereby: But where is
that man truly affected with the taking notice of, and making defense against
the time, when the devils temptations taking advantage of our sins, shall hide
the sunshine of Gods favor from our apprehensions?

Now chiefly provide against two times.

First, after thou have been guilty to thy self of totally omitting, or
perfunctorily performing of Prayer: for then Satan discovers a breach in thy
soul, and will assault it.

Secondly, at the hour of death, when his rage is the greatest, because his
reign is the shortest: who like a bad Tenant, having a Lease ready to expire,
without impeachment of Waste, cares not what havoc he makes, because not tied
to Reparations.

The tempter.
Doct.
The Devil is the tempter paramount.

There be other tempters, The World, the Flesh, Wicked men; but all these are
subservient to Satan, who in them and by them drives on his design of
Temptation. But this Tempter never before nor since took such a task in hand,
as here to tempt Christ. Fiery darts (Ephesians. 6.16.) can make no impression where
they meet not with combustible matter: Granado's, if cast on a Castle all
strongly arched over with stone, do small execution: so here, Satan's
temptations took no effect in Christ, because finding no party to comply with
him. Ioh. 14.30. The prince of this world comes, and has nothing in me.
Though Christ was All in all, yet Satan found nothing in him, namely for his
purpose; no Corruptions to be tinder to his fiery Temptations.

If thou be the Son of God.
Some conceive that Satan herein dissembled his knowledge, (as Joseph, who did
know, and would not know his brethren) though assured Christ was the Son of
God. Such a sort of people we meet with, 2 Pet. 3.5. For this they are
willingly ignorant of.

But cui bono? For what conceived good to himself should the devil disguise his
knowledge herein?

Others conceive, that as an angry dog bites a stone out of mere madness,
though knowing he shall sooner break his teeth, then batter the stone: so
Satan's malice so far transported and blinded his judgment, that he tempted
Christ, though (knowing him for the Son of God) his temptations would prove in
effectu^l.

But I rather cast the grain of my opinion into the Seal of those Divines, who
conceive the devil unsa^isfied in this point; and therefore his of thou be the
Son of God proceeded from his desire of more perfect information therein.

Hence we learn,

Doct.
Satan has a limited and confined knowledge, and is ignor^nt in many things.

He knows not the secrets of our hearts, nor future contingencies reserved to
God alone; the reason why he returned such ridling Oracles, merely to palliate
his own ignorance. In such things he speaks warily, with an if; not that he is
conscientious, not to tell a lie; but cunning, not to be caught with a lie,
that by pretending of truth, he may keep up his credit, and deceive with the
less suspicion.

Secondly, from this if we collect also,

It is Satan's masterpiece, Doct.
to make Gods children first doubt of, and then deny their sonship. (For, had
Christ entertained this temptation, at the next return, Satan would have turned
si into non; this his conditional particle, into a pure negation.)

This he does by two devices.

First, by insinuating a si, a suspicion of doubt, into the most positive and
pregnant promises of God. Where God says, Call upon me in the time of trouble,
and I will hear thee; Satan infers, if he will hear thee. Where Christ says,
Mar. 16.16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; Satan suggests,
if he shall be saved. In a word, the devil endeavors to alter the property of
all Gods promises for the worst, substituting a supposition for Gods position:
as, where God had lately said, Matthew. 3.17, This is my beloved Son; the devil
spoils a direct text, with a doubting gloss, If thou be the Son of God.

Secondly, by heightning the afflictions of Gods servants, to be so great, as
inconsistent with their sonship: as here he would persuade, Christ's hunger
argued him no Son of God, except he could presently relieve himself. So he
tempts Gods children to believe, that their poverty, infamy, captivity, and
other tribulations, plainly prove them no sons of God, unless they can
presently rid themselves of them.

Gratify not Satan in the deepest of thy afflictions, with a confession
against thy self. Acknowledge thy self a prodigal; but yet a child, no
bastard: a wandering sheep; but yet a sheep, no goat: sanctified afflictions
being evidences of Gods love, not hatred unto thee.

Remember and apply to thy self Gods three GIFTS.

The first, good: The second, better. The third, best of all.
The first, general; Ioh. 3.16. He GAVE his only Son, that whosoever believes
in him, etc.

The second, particular; Ephesians. 5.25. loved the Church, and GAVE himself for it.

The last and best, more particular still; Gal. 2.20. who loved me, and GAVE
himself for me.

Take heed to pleasure Satan, by renouncing thine own sonship; and apply this
grand Gift of Christ, with a particular faith, unto thy self.

Command that these stones be made bread.
Doct.
Even by the confession of Satan himself, The Son of God by his mandate can
instantly transubstantiate stones into bread.

Indeed, men by the help of a figure may in some sort be said to do so. Such
who in the West country turn solid Lime-stones into Compost, whereby they
manure their Tillage, and make their grain wonderfully to increase, may by a
Metonymie be said to turn stones into bread. But this is done with a tedious
going about; whereas Christ's Miracles are presently and perfectly performed:
Immediately his leprosy was cleansed, Matthew. 8.3. Immediately their ^y^e
received sight, Matthew. 20.34. Immediately the fever left her, Mark 1.31.
Immediately her issue of blood was stanched, Luke 8.44. God only can instantly
and perfectly (with such as act by commission under him, as Moses did) turn the
substance of one thing into another.

See we here, That Jannes and Jambres, the Egyptian inchanters, did their
Miracles but seemingly. Had Christ rejoyned, My turning of stones into bread
will n^ argue me the Son of God, seeing the Egyptian Magicians, Exodus 7.12,
turned their ^ods into serpents; how quickly would the devil have
distinguished, that these things were done quoad (...) tudinem, non quoad
^^ritatem? disclaiming his own deed, because Aaron's rod swallowed up theirs;
that is, it lasted and con^^^^ed, when the others vanished away.

Three good things appear in this temptation of Satan.

1. Truth, allowing Divide Omnipotency.

2. Temperance, that stones should not be turned into variety of dai^ties,
provocatives of wantonness; but only into bread, for necessary sustenance.

3. Tenderness, counselling Christ to support his own life and health.

But as the Lo^^^ls ( Rev. 9 7.) bad faces like the faces of men, but (...)
like unto scorpions: so here Satan's temptation had much of humanity and
Philanthropia in the complexion and visage thereof, (and no wonder he can make
himself look like a man, who can (1 Cor. 11.14.) transform himself into an
angel of light) but a sting in the tail, to put Christ on the preposterous
working of a miracle, to the distrust of his Fathers providence.

Use.
Learn we from hence, to fear all discourse with Satan, and suspect all that he
says, as having a reach beyond our discovery. Metuas Satanam, vel vera
loquentem. Some will say, Let Satan but speak the truth, and let him do his
worst. Ex veris possunt nil nisi vera sequi. By the necessity of Logic, truth
must inevitably follow from the truth he speaks. But know, his sophistry can
grast a lie suddenly on the stock of truth, so artificially, so invisibly, that
thine eye cannot discern the same.

Lastly, be jealous of Satan's best temptations, which (as here to Christ)
pretend most courtesy and kindness in them. Stinks are not so dangerous for
men's healths, whose offensiveness makes them easy to be avoided, as those
faint and luscious smell, which, complying with man's nature, insensibly steal
into the nostrils: such is the smell of May-flowers, mellow apples, and, they
say, of the Plague it self: But of all sents, the least suspected, and
therefore most malignant, is the stink of a Goal Lord Bacon in his Natural
History.
, which is somewhat akin to man, arising from the corruption of his flesh and
sweat. Take heed especially of those temptations of Satan which have some
mixture of humanity in them, as this in the Text, when he persuaded our Savior
by sin to preserve himself. Studiously avoid such Temptations, which in some
manner claim kindred of us, lest by their pretended alliance to our natural
preservation, they surprise our souls into a sudden consent unto them.

CHRIST'S First Temptation to DESPAIR. SERMON IIII.
MATTHEW. 4.4. But he answered and said, It is written, Man shall not live by
bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.


THere is a received fancy, as old as common, false as either, having no
footing in Scripture, but founded partly on that license which Painters assume
to themselves, partly on the pretended apparitions of ignorant Monks, That the
devil is horned.

The best moral I can make of so fond a conceit, is this: The devil's
temptations are horned, or forked, bicornea argumenta. So that choose which you
will, he hops to gore the soul: Thus in the last verse, to our Savior, If
thou be the Son of God, etc. One the one side, Satan hoped to make Christ
renounce his sonship; there is one born: or else to work a needless Miracle;
there is the other horn: and with such Dilemma's he uses daily to assault Gods
children.

But what says David? (Psalm. 75.12.) I will break the horns of the ungodly:
which here was truly performed by Christ, who found out a medium betwixt the
two extremities; namely, that a man without bread might support himself, by a
faithful and patient dependence on Gods promises. Hunger (says our English
Proverb) will break through stone walls: and Satan hoped that Christ's hunger
should transport him so far, as to turn those stones miraculously into bread.
When, contrary to his expectation, Christ turns a place of Scripture (being the
bread of life) into a stone, wherewith he hit, wounded, and repelled Satan: He
answered and said, Man shall not live by bread alone, etc.

Observe therein,

First, what Christ did not do: he did not work a Miracle to gratify Satan.

Secondly, what he did say: he fenced himself, and foiled his foe, by
alleging of Scripture.

Most of the difficulties in this text will be explained, if we but propound
and expound one wonder which we meet with, of Christ's working in the Gospel.

The Wonder is this, that Christ afterward ( Ioh. 2.) turned water into wine
at a Wedding, and would not now turn stones into bread in the Wilderness. For,

1. Both were equally easy, and both required an infinite agent.

2. Wine is but a mere superfluity, but bread is of absolute necessity to man's
life: yea, men may quench their thirst from water, when they cannot satisfy
their hunger from stones.

3. Wine, at that time and place, was a superfluity of a superfluity; it
appearing by the text, Ioh. 2.10. they had well drunk. Understand it, not so
excessively, but still there was a plus ultra for honest mirth, or otherwise
our Savior would not patronize drunkenness.

Lastly, that miracle he did to gratify guests; but here he was concerned for
his own support; and yet refused to work it.

The reason of all this, is; He did that miracle in Cana for the converting of
unbelievers to the faith, and the confirming of weak believers in the faith.
The text says, Ioh. 2.11. This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of
Galilee, and manifested forth his glory; and his dis^iples believed on him.

Now here he refused to turn stones into bread, because,

1. It was unnecessary: Christ now being to leave the wilderness, might either
buy, or else request food elsewhere.

2. It was unseasonable to do it at Satan's suit and soliciting, who would be
ready to brag that he had Christ at his command, to practice miracles at his
pleasure: wherefore neither Satan nor his Imps, Herod, Luke 23.8. and the
Pharisees, Matthew. 16.1. could prevail with Christ to show them a sign, when
either out of curiosity, wantonness, or craft, they required the same.

3. It was unprofitable, there being no hopes of Satan's conversion. The blind
man (being pressed often to repeat the manner of Christ's curing him) said
bluntly to the Pharisees, Ioh. 9.27. Wherefore would ye hear it again? will ye
also be his disciples? Why should our Savior work a wonder Satan being
present? would he also be Christ's convert? He could not, he would not believ
to salvation

Lastly, it was unlawful to tempt God to work a needless miracle, when there
were other ways to subsist without it.

Which leads our meditations to observe,

Doct.
Christ and his Apostles wrought their miracles with a public spirit, for Gods
glory.

They never used their healing or sanative Miracles for their own relief; nor
their hurting or destructive Miracles in their own revenge.

For the first: It is well known how near and dear Timothy was to Saint Paul,
whom he called Tim. 1.2.
his son; yet he would not cure those frequent infirmities wherewith Timothy
was troubled. Paul that cured the cripple at Lystra of his lameness, Acts
14.10. healed the father of Publius principal man in Melita of his fever, Acts
28.8. raised Eutiches to life when killed with a fall, Acts 20.12. Why should
not he presently heal Timothy, but only prescribe him a more liberal diet? 1 Timothy 5.23. Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomachs sake,
and thine often infirmity? Yea, why did not he cure himself of that acute
disease, 2 Cor. 1.8 when he received in himself the sentence of death? The
reason of both is this: They were stewards, not owners of their miraculous
power, and might not ingross it for their own good, but dispense it, for the
behoof of others, and principally for the converting of unbelievers.

Nor were their destructive miracles employed in their own revenge. Alexander
the copper-smith, says S. Paul, (2 Timothy 4.14.) has done M^ much evil: the
Lord reward him according to his works. Some will say, Had I been in Paul's
place, I would never have sent him to God for his reward, but would presently
have paid him my self, and smote him (as he did Elymas) with blindness. But
Paul would not be judge in his own cause; it being probable, that Elymas his
fault was more public, not only committed against Paul, Act. 13.8. but also
against Sergius the Deputy, seeking to turn him away from the faith; whilst
Alexander's insolence was more particularly aimed at Paul's person, and
therefore the Apostle (for fear of pa^tiality) refers him to Divine punishment.

This will put a Touchstone into our hands, thereby not only to suspect the
truth, but detect the falsehood of many Popish Miracles, having so many private
ends and self-interests in them.

Thus Not S. Augustine the ^^mous Fa^h^r, and Bishop of ^ippo; but ^ later Monk.
Austin is reported, when preaching here in Dorsetshire, being afflicted with
his companions for want of water, to have struck his staff into the earth, and
to have fetched forth a Crystal fountain. Whereas Christ himself was fain (when
thisty) to go to the well, and beg water ( Ioh. 4.) of the Samaritane woman.

They report also of Saint Flores ^ancto^^m.
David, the Welsh Saint, that when multitudes of people pressed to his
preaching, with a word he commanded a mountain to stand out of the earth, that
so his person might be more visible, his preaching more audible to the
Congregation. Whereas Christ himself, Matthew. 5.1. preaching to as great a
confluence, did not create, but climb up; did not make, but made use of a
mountain; not easing himself by miracle, but taking pains in his own person to
travel to the top thereof. Christ, I say, who out of a public spirit healed
others, but was hurt himself; fed and filled others, but was hungry and empty
himself, when he returned this answer in the text: It is written, Man shall not
live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

It is written.
Where? Quest.
In what Book, Chapter, and Verse?

For the later, Answ.
Chapter and Verse, they are not Iure Divino, but of humane and late
institution. Indeed the Psalms, both for number and order, were anciently
divided and martialled; Act. ^3.33. It is written in the second Psalm. But
Chapters are of a far later institution. Let it suffice the place was betwixt
the first of Genesis and the last of Malachi. And Satan knew full well it was
no forged text, but truly to be found, Deuteronomy. 8.3.

Doct.
Gods Word is the best weapon for our spiritual warfare.

Military men have much troubled themselves advantagiously to compound
offending and Defending in the same Weapon. This, if effected, would both save
portage, and one Weapon would be eminently two, for all purposes and intents.
Hence grew the invention of making short pikes in the bosses and middle of
shields, that the same may both hide the soldier, and hurt his adversary. This
is perfectly performed in the Scripture, both sword and shield against the Ephesians.
6.16
fiery darts of the devil. And well are his temptations resembled unto darts,
for their swiftness, for their sharpness: they come the quicker, and pierce the
deeper, according to the might and malice of the arm enforcing them.

To confute the Papists, Use.
who disarm Gods people, and leave them naked against the assaults of Satan, by
locking up the Word in an unknown Tongue.

Whether the translating of the Norman Laws into English, will make men more
knowing, or more wrangling; more intelligent, or more litigious, the present
age can only ghess, the next will certainly conclude. But out of all question
it is, the Laws of God cannot, without breach of Christian liberty, and the
apparent injury of Gods servants, be hid him from them in a strange language,
so depriving them of their best defense against Satan's temptations.

Gods faithful servants, Doct.
in the time of famine, can make a feast unto themselves out of the promises in
Scripture.

They take the first course out of the Old Testament, Psalm. 34.10. The lions do
lack and suffer hunger; but they that fear the Lord, shall want no manner of
thing that is good. The second course is out of the New Testament; Matthew. 6.33.
But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you. Yea, he may make a Convivium dubium, a doubtful
feast, wherein the appetite is suspended betwixt the variety of equally-dainty
dishes; and he shall leave as good as he takes, so copious is the Scripture
therein.

Come we now to consider the several ways whereby God wonderfully supports
them, who in want feed on his promises. Some will say, Words are but wind: but
God's are real words, such as fill and fat those that depend upon them.

First, he can make a little go far, as Matthew. 14.21. when about five thousand
were fed with five loaves and two fishes.

Secondly, he can (as extend the quantity) so improve the quality of meat, that
coarse diet shall cause strength and health as well as dainties; as in the case
of Daniel's pulse. Show me not the meat, but show me the man, says our English
Proverb. When I behold the children of poor people, I perceive a Riddle, and
contradiction between their fare and their faces: lean meat, and fat children;
small beer, and strong bodies; brown bread, and fair complexions. Nor can I
attribute it to any other cause but this, That the rich folk generally make
long meals and short Graces, whiles poor men have short meals and long Graces;
I mean that they rely more upon Gods blessing then their own provisions.

Thirdly, by strange and unexpected ways, he can furnish them with food in the
greatest of their necessities. Whereof we will make only a fourfold instance.

In the year of our Lord 1555, when a general Famine was over all England,
Master Cambden in his Page 466.
Britannia reports that at Alborough in Suffolk, on the seacoast, there grew
on the Rocks such plenty of Pease which came to perfect maturity, that they
abated the prizes of the market, and saved the lives of many poor people.

When the City of M. Fox his Martyrs.
Rochel was besieged, 1572, and by famine reduced to great extremity, God sent
into their Haven such a shole of fishes, (of a sort never seen there before or
since) which relieved the people till the Siege was broken up.

When the wife and children of banished Melchior Adamus in his Life.
Musculus begged bread of him (no welcome music to a tender father, who had
not wherewithal to relieve them) to divert his care, he fell a making of verse:
Est Deus in coelis, qui providus omnia curat,
Nunquam credentes destituisse potest.


I confess the Verses none of the most, excellent; but I question whether a
better Poet would not have made worse on the same occasion, seeing the tears of
starving children are but a bad Helicon to quicken his fancy. Now no sooner
were his Verses ended, but a neighbor of his brought him a loaf, which made
him a feast for his family.

Lastly, M. Dyke in his Comment on this text.
in the Massacre at Paris, one Merlin some fortnight together was nourished
with one egg a day, laid by an hen that came constantly to that Hay-mow where
he lay hid from danger. To teach all in time of extremity to depend on him, who
has written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God.

CHRIST'S Second Temptation to PRESUMPTION. SERMON V.
MATTHEW. 4.5. Then the devil takes him up into the holy city, and sets him
upon a pinnacle of the temple.


WHen the army of Bennahad was routed by Ahab, Benhadad's servants said unto
him, 1 Kings 20.23. Their gods are the gods of the hills, therefore they are
stronger then we: but let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we
shall be stronger then they. They conceited that change of place would bring
change of success. The devil may seem in my text (as crafty as he is) to befool
himself with the same conceit. Though Christ had worsted him in a low, flat,
level, private wilderness; he hoped to be more happy in a high, lofty, public
place; which made him (though acting the same part) to lay a new Scene. Indeed,
in this verse he perfects nothing, but provides and prepares all things for the
ensuing temptation, and in this text only tunes the Instrument. Now whereas
routed once, he here ^allies his forces, we learn,

Doct.
Satan, though f^iled at first, will not finally forsake us, but renew his
temptations.

Some impute it to his valor; I ascribe it rather to his malice, conceiving it
to proceed not so much from his sprightfulness in himself, as his spightfulness
against us.

There is a generation of people, which, Satan-like, triumph to trouble where
they cannot conquer; such, whilst Sophisters in the Schools, make abominable
wranglers, and defenders of Paradoxes: cunning men in the Country, i^ getting a
smack of the Law, they prove Barettors, troublesome to themselves and their
neighbors: But if they pretend also to Divinity, then they turn, if not
Heretics, to the destruction of themselves, yet Schismatics, to the
destruction of the Church.

This will give us truly to understand those words, James 4.7.
Resist the devil, and he will fl^e from you; that is, he will so flee from
you, as he will again flee to you. It is said of Marcellus the Roman General,
He could not be quiet nec victor nec victus* neither conquered nor conqueror.
Yea, it is said of the Parthians, that their flight was more to be feared then
their fight, having a slight to shoot their arrows over their back, whereby
they galled their pursuing enemies. Suspect Satan even departing: for it is
animo revertenai* he will never let thee alone whilst thou art alive.

Object.
But it is said ( Mark 9.25.) by Christ to the dumb and deaf spirit, I charge
thee come out of him, and enter no more into him. It seems (contrary to your
Doctrine) this man had a Quietus est, or a Writ of ^ase, never more to be
troubled with temptations.

Neither did our Savior speak, nor Satan understand these words in this sense.
The man had a Supersedeas only from possession, but not from temptation; to
which he was subject, as long as he lived, as well as others.

Here take notice of our Saviors goodness, who in the case of a friend (this
poor oppressed man) would discover his Deity, and totally and finally banish
the devil from possessing him: But in his own cause (though, no doubt, if he
had thought fit, he could have confounded Satan, and confined him to hell) he
still remained mere man, suffering Satan to recruit his forces against him in
his temptations.

Will Satan return again in tempting? Use.
Then if thou have got any advantage against him, improve it to the utmost:
Give no fair quarter to his foul temptations. Kindness to him, is Cruelty to
thy self. He is incapable of courtesy, and his thanks will be in destroying
thee. Deal not with him as Ahab did with Benhadad, out of fond pity to spare
him, 1 King. 20.42. lest he deal with thee as Benhadad did with Ahab, be thy
final ruin and destruction.

The devil takes him. Luke says, brought him
Has Satan such power over Christ's Body, Quest.
to hale and draw him at pleasure, to any place? This is cold comfort to
Christians: The disciple is not above his Master: If he served Christ thus, how
cruel will he be to us!

He has no power of himself over Christ's or our bodies: which plainly
appears, because he does not daily exercise the same. Had he any such power,
Scholars should not stay still in their studies, nor Lawyers stand quietly at
the Bar, nor any sit undisturbed at meals: none should ever walk unmolested
when waking, nor lie undisquieted when sleeping. It is not from store of pity,
but want of power in Satan, that he does not daily hackney and harase out the
bodies of Gods Saints till they become skeletons, and more wasted then
Pharaoh's lean kine.

Expect not here that I should speak any thing of Witch-bridles, fondly
believed by many; as if a witch can bestride any thing into a steed, and mount
whither they please on such a Pegasus. I am thus far for Witch-bridles, that
God bridles all Witches, and the devil their master, with a confined power. And
as for Witches pretended a^ry travels, they are generally delusions of their
fancies in dreams, whilst their head never traveled from their pillows; if
they be so well stored (as commonly being most poor) to sleep upon them.

But to return to the text: the words he takes him, imply not any force,
seeing the Original, (...) is used Matthew. 2.21. And Joseph arose, and took the
young child and his mother. The same is used, Matthew. 17 1. Jesus takes Peter,
and James, and John, when he was to be transfigured; who freely went along with
him, at his motion. Nor does (...), he brought him, Luke 4.9. import any
violence, seeing we read, Act^ 5.26. (...), They brought them, but without
violence. The sum of all is this: As a chalenger may be said to have took and
brought such a one to fight with him on Calice-sands, that i^, by mutual
consent, the other being as willing to go, as the chalenger to have him: so
Christ confident of his cause, innocence, armor, and Gods assistance, went
willingly with the devil, refusing no place of his profering. However, our
Divines generally conceive, that God for the present gave Satan power over
Christ's body to transport it: which may be maintained without any absurdity.
For if the Imps of Satan, the Soldiers and Priests Officers, had power to
carry him from the garden to Annas, from Annas to Caiaphas, from Caiaphas to
Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, from Herod to Pilate, from Gabbatha to Golgotha;
no wonder if Satan himself might have commission to carry him, and Christ show
submission to be carried by him. In a word, as when Pilate boasted what great
matters he could do, Ioh. 19.11. Jesus as humbly as sharply returned, Thou
could have no power against me, except it were given thee from above: So
Satan could have no power over Christ's body, except God, for his own greater
glory, had permitted it unto him.

Into the hely city.
How can a material city, Quest.
being but an heap of houses, be accounted holy?

As there is none good but one, Answ.
God himself; so none holy but he, by original inherent holiness: none holy but
Angels and Men, with derivative inherent holiness But a relative holiness
belongs to places and things, consecrate or set apart, from civil or profane,
to religious or pious uses.

But how could Jerusalem now be accounted holy, Quest.
seeing the complaint, Isai. 1.21. was now truer then ever, How is the faithful
city become an harlot! What, an holy Harlot? Matthew. 28 37. O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest, etc. What, an holy
Murderer? Abominable corruptions swarmed therein. The High Priesthood, which,
Iure Divino, ought to have been for term of life, was by a fundamental
innovation made annual, Ioh. 11.49. Caiaphas being high priest that same year.
Traditions were advanced, not only to make void, but to check the written Word
of God. The Pharisees made the strength of God's Laws to leak with their carnal
and restrictive gloss: and could this be still the holy city?

Answ.
It was so; because, notwithstanding these corruptions, the vitals of Gods
service and man's salvation were therein still continued. There was the holy
Altar, (the heart of Religion:) holy, because it held the holy Sacrifices: and
they holy, because they were Types of Christ, the Truth, the holy One of God.
Separation therefore may be made from the corruptions, not from the
fundamentals of a true, though sick Church (such as Jerusalem now was) much
depraved, but still the holy city of God.

Doct.
Satan is not deterred from tempting, by the holiness of any place.

For here was a Triplicity of holiness centred together. Holy land, Zech. 2.12.
In this holy land, Jerusalem, termed the holy city in the text, as also so
called, Matthew. 27.53. In this holy city, the holy temple, Psalm. 5.7. I will
worship toward thy holy temple. A fourth may be added, the Pinnacle, which
though not the holiest, yet the highest place of the Temple, in a local
position. But all these nothing frighted the devil from tempting.

Some have admired at the impudence of those thieves who durst cut purses in
Prayer time, in the Kings Chapel, his Majesty being present, and under the
Cloth of State. All this is nothing to Satan's boldness, who catches away that
which was sown in the heart, Matthew. 13.19. in the Church it self, where the
King of heaven is graciously present. And since he tempted Christ on the
Temple, fears not to tempt Christians in it, for all the holiness of the place;
To tempt the Preachers in the Pulpit to affect popular applause, bow Scripture
to his own ends; tempt the Reader in the Desk to have his mind roving, whilst
his tongue is reading the Word: tempt the People in their Puts to carp and
cavil at the Sermon, and to come thither rather to see and be seen, then to
learn and practice.

In a word, no holiness of place d^ters Satan from tempting.

See here the folly of the Papists, who conceive holy water, holy relics,
holy rags, will drive Satan away; when holy land, holy city, holy temple,
heavenly pinnacle, did not fright him from tempting our Savior.

Pinnacle of the temple.
Understand a Battlement: otherwise Josephus informs us that the Broches of
metal on the top of the Temple, were pointed as sharp as a needle, purposely to
prevent birds sitting and defiling upon them.

Two things make a Pinnacle: 1. Height. 2. Narrowness.
Both which here met together.

Let those then, first, beware, who stand upon the pinnacle of a doubting
conscience, and who adventure on those things, the lawfulness whereof is
questioned both by themselves and others. Such as use Pastimes on the Lords
day, which, for their violence and obstreporousness, seem labor rather then
exercises; these stand on a pinnacle. Such as being divorced from their wives
for adultery proved in them, and marry again, their wives yet surviving, stand
on a pinnacle. Such as marry their Cousin-german (which I confess not forbidden
in Scripture) by reason of their vicinity are conceived by some Divines to
stand on a pinnacle. And as I wish all such as have taken their station there,
firm footing, (unwilling to cast scruple into their consciences;) so it will
not be amiss to advise those whose affections are unengaged, and that have the
wide world before them, not to adventure on such a pinnacle.

Secondly, Let those beware of temptations, who stand upon a pinnacle of
Distress, as David did, 2 Samuel 24.14. I am in a great strait; when choose
betwixt Famine, Flight, and Pestilence. Time was, when he boasted, Psalm. 31.8.
Tho have set my feet in a large room; but see into what straits sin has now
reduced him!

Thirdly, let them beware temptations, that stand on the pinnacle of Dignity. 1.
Because their falls are more conspicuous. 1 King. 1.20. Bathsheba said to
David, The eyes of all Israel are upon thee. 2. Because their fall would be
more dangerous: ^olluntur in altum ut lapsu, graviore ruant. Now for their
comfort, let such examine themselves, whether God ^et them on the pinnacle, or
whether they clambered up themselves. If the former, he that placed them there,
will protect them there; he that set them there, will save them there. What
makes Tylers* Plumbers, Masons, and Carpenters, adventure themselves so boldly
on the tops of houses? Two things, namely, their Calling and Custom, begets
their Confidence. If God has called thee and used thee in the height of
honor, he will preserve thee therein. But Adonijah, who exalted himself to the
pinnacle, 1 Reg. 1.5. must beware a downfall: and they who climb up to Greatness
by a ladder of their own sins, commonly make but one step in their falling
down, from the top to the bottom.

Let me give also this counsel to those who stand on the pinnacle of Dignity;
Always look upward (not with proud eyes, to contemn your inferiors, but) with
thankful eyes to God that gave thee that honor. This will keep thy head
steady, and thy brains from being turned with a Vertigo of Pride. Take heed of
looking downward, I mean, to find out a reason of thine advancement in thine
own merit and desert; but say always with David, What am I, or what is my
fathers house, that thou have brought me hither, to this Pinnacle of preferment?

CHRIST'S Second Temptation to PRESUMPTION. SERMON VI.
MATTHEW. 4.6. And says unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down:
for it is written, etc.


AMongst the many titles of Satan, this is not the least, Ephesians. 2.2. The
Prince of the power of the air. Having therefore now gotten Christ on a Pinnacle
in the Air, in his own Dominion and Principality, Satan presumed on success:
but being beaten on his own ground, comes off with greater shame to himself,
and greater glory to our Savior.

Observe in the Text,

The Hook, the worst of Works; and The Bait, the best of Words.

The Hook, in general, the sin of Presumption: in particular, Self-homicide.

The Bait, Scripture it self, cited by Satan, who had great hope Christ would
bite at it. David says, Psalm. 119.133. Thy words are sweeter then honey to my
mouth. Surely they were sweeter unto Christ then to David, as having a more
high gust, and more perfect taste; and therefore the Hook thus besmeared with
Honey, Satan hoped would be swallowed; but in vain, as by the sequel will
appear.

Now seeing the former temptation of Satan was to Despair, this next to
Presumption, we learn,

Doct.
The devil will endeavor to make men ^eel from one Extremity to another.

The possessed man, Matthew. 17.15. often fell into the fire, and often into the
water. (Satan's world has no Temprate climate, but either Torrid or Frozen
Zone.) Sometimes he casts men into the fire of ill-tempered Zeal, sometimes
into the water of Acedia, or a carelessness what becomes of their souls:
sometimes into the fire of over-activity, to do nothing just; sometimes into
the water of too much idleness, to do just nothing.

Thus we read, Romans 2.22. Thou that abhorrest idols, do thou commit
sacrilege? Thus the incestuous Corinthian husband to his mother, and son to
his wife, (1 Cor. 5.1.) turned so violently from his Profaneness, that there was
danger he would have been swallowed up with overmuch sorrow, (2 Cor. 2.7) if
S. Paul's prudent counsel had not prevented Satan's subtilty. Rev. 2 6, Thou
hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans* which I also hate. Now Ecclesiastical
Histories inform us, that this Nicolas (one of the Deacons, Acts 6.5.) had a
wife as virtuous as beautiful, whose Chastity he causlesly suspected. Now being
reproved for his fauls, to clear himself from Jealousy, he prostituted his
wife to any wanton man's embraces. Such therefore are Nicolaitans, who so
indiscreetly shun one sin, that they fall foul into the opposi^e thereunto.
Thus the Jews in the Old Testament, under-kept the Sabbath with profaness, the
constant complaint of the Prophe^s, not only before, but after the C^^ptivity,
Nehem. 13.13. Who, in the New Testament, over-kept it with superstition;
conceiving deeds o^ charity ( Ma^k 3.2.) done on that day, a brea^h thereof.
Thus* some shunning the Heresy of One Will, maintained the opposite of Two
Persons in Christ. Thus the modern Ranters were formerly conceived (if guilty)
to offend on the right hand, using too much Praying and Preaching, even to the
neglecting of their Calling; and now they are come (be it spoken and heard with
sorrow) from living above Ordinances (as themselves term it) to live against
Ordinances; accounting B^asphemy, Adultery, Sabbath-breaking, etc. no sins.
Opposite are they to the man ( Matthew. 12.44) out of whom the unclean spirit
being gone, retu^ned to an h^us^ sw^pt and garnished: whereas these leaving an
house swept and garnished, return to the unclean spirit. The worst I wish such
is, To practice the precept prescribed, Revel. 2.5. Remember whence thou art
fallen, and repent, and do thy first works. And let us avoid sin, not only at
a great distance, but also with good discretion, lest we sin in the other
extreme.

Cast thy self down.
I observe in the words, God's Goodness, Satan's Weakness, Man's Freeness.


1 God's Goodness; who, to prevent casualties of men's falling from the top of
their houses, himself turns Architect, and gives the Jews instructions how to
build, Deuteronomy. 22.8 When thou buildest a new house, then thou shall make a
battlement for thy roof, that thou bring not blood upon thine house, if any man
fall from thence. Indeed, we call those Gods gifts, or Deodands, which are
escheated to him by such casualties; anciently (when not reserved by Charter to
the Lord of the Manor) given to the Almoner, to bestow on pious uses. It seems
therefore God delights not to enrich himself by such revenues, desiring no not
the temporal death of a sinner, but seeking to prevent their falling down, by
enjoining a border of battlements.

2. Satan's Weakness. Why could could not he thrust Christ down, standing now
on so ticklish terms as the top of a pinnacle? One shove with his shoulder, nay,
one touch with his hand, might have done the deed. Oh, it was past his power!
Sooner might he have removed the earth from the center thereof. Even the hairs
of your head are numbered. And, as Satan could not cast Christ down, so he
could not make Christ cast himself down, except wilfully he would do it, on his
own accord: which leads us to the third thing,

3. Man's ^reeness.

Whence we learn,

Satan may fl^tter and fright, Doct. 1.
but he cannot force us to commit sin.

Indeed he may by his instruments compel us to the outward act; (witness Amnon,
2 Samuel 13.14. ravishing Tamar, being stronger then she, forced her, and lay
with her) but cannot command the consent of our souls. Thus the Pagans in the
Primitive Church might make Christians bend their knees and hold up their hands
to Idols, but could not constrain their hearts to adore them. Satan may
commend, he cannot command sin unto us.

This discovers the vanity of their excuse, Use.
who having committed some great sin, plead for themselves, The devil has long
ow^d me a shame, and now he has paid it me. And owe thee he might (to use
thine own phrase) till the day of thy death, and his confinement to hell, had
not thou enabled him with ^hine own money, and put him into a capacity to pay
thee therewith.

It is observable, that amongst the many Confessions of good men in S^ripture,
no one of them (abate only Eve, transferring her fault on the serpent)
charge their sins on Satan, but take them on their own a^count^, as
ultimately revolved to their free consent. David, of of all men, had most right
to make this plea for himself, when he numbered the people; it being expressly
s^id, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. And Satan stood up, and provoked David to ^umber them. And
though David, no doubt, was sensible of S^tans temptation; yet he takes all on
his own score, verse. 17. It is I^ that have sinned, and done evil indeed: as
excusing his subjects, so not accusing Satan, as knowing he could not
necessitate him to sin, without his own consent.

It is a notorious sin, Doct. 2.
for a man, whilst himself, to destroy himself.

Why insert you these words, Quest.
whilst himself? Open but that window, and it will be in vain for you to shut
any doors. Every self-homicide will plead, That he was beside himself, with
Fear, or Love, or Grief, or Anger.

God is not mocked. Answ.
I only count such besides themselves, who are not compo^es mentis; but
visit^d with a distraction from Gods hand, and not wilfully contracted by their
own vicious Intemperance. In such a case, ut ad insaniam ita adjudicium, as men
fall into madness, so are they brought to judgment, and all their mediate
intervening actions are beheld by Divine Justice as none of theirs, because
wanting the royal assent of their Reason. For any other to destroy themselves,
is an heinous offense against Nature; self-preservation being the first Article
in the grand Charter thereof. 2. Against Reason; Ephesians. 5.29. No man ever yet
hated his own flesh. No man; he must be a beast, or a devil, that does it. 3.
Against Scripture: Thou shall not kill. Say not, No law is particularly made
against man's killing himself. Perchance it was purposely omitted (as the Law
against Patricides amongst the Grecians) partly, because Charity would presume,
none could be so wicked; and partly, lest man's corruption should abuse the Law,
sins punisher, to be sins remembrancer. But whereas it is said, Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self; love of our selves is the original, love of our
neighbor the copy. If therefore the killing of our neighbor, much more of
our selves, is forbidden.

Miserable are the pretenses men make for this sin.

First, To prevent or remove pain. This proceeds from the ignorance of the
Scriptures, and the unbelief of the torments of hell: Otherwise it is not the
removing, but the increase and exchange of pain; where the worm dies not, and
the fire is not quenched.

Secondly, To shan shame. Both these motives to Self-murder met in Saul, 1 Samuel 31.3, 4. He was sore wounded of the archers; there was pain: and he feared
le^t the uncircumcised come and abuse him; there was his shame. Yet twist both
together, and they would not make one Reason strong enough for him to kill
himself. This was not the way to avoid, but increase shame. Of him shall the
Son of man be ashamed, Mark 8.38.

Thirdly, To procure Praise; which cannot be only, when it is purchased by the
breach of God's Law. Say not, Samson did the same, whose faith is praised, Heb.
11. Do thou as Samson did, and it shall be forgiven thee: Pluck down at once
two fundamental pillars of a Church. His action shows his commission
extraordinary, and is no warrant for others to drown, stab, poison, murder
themselves.

Use 1.
To confute such as are guilty of Self-homicide. But be this first pr^m^sed.

Those who being Preachers, look with the severest on this sin, can as private
men look with the most pitiful eyes on their persons. They that fall on their
own sword, stand or fall to their own Master. I will not say the men are
damned; but I will say the deed is damnable. Who knows but that the l^st groan,
which divorces their souls from their bodies, may marry their souls unto God^^
so that the pangs' of temporal death, may prove the pains of their spiritual
birth.

Now Self-homicide is twofold:

Either of Omission, or Commission.

Omission, by neglecting the means of food and Physic, which God has
appointed for the preservation of their lives, and which come within the
compass of their estates to procure. Christ says, Mark 3.4. Is it lawful on
the Sabbath day to save life, or to kill? making the forbearance of curing
another man (when he had power to do it, and the other faith to have it done)
equivalent to the killing of him. How more strongly then does the argument hold
in our selves, that it is Self-murder to omit the means of our preservation!

Self-homicide of Commission, is, when men actually murder themselves?

Let such as have entertained thoughts to destroy themselves, Use 2.
and are yet kept alive, Be doleful for what is past, thankful for what is
present, watchful for what is to come.

Peter said to S^mon^s Magus, Act. 8.22. Pray God if perhaps the thoughts of
thine heart may be forgiven thee. Some conceive Magus his fault within the
luburbs of the sin against the Holy Ghost; and therefore Peter warily inserteth
perhaps, speaking conditionally, not positively; as uncertain of his pardon.
But I may certainly say to such who have harbored thoughts of Self-homicide,
Pray, and without any perhaps the thoughts of thine heart shall be forgiven
thee. The rather, because the best of men in their passions have been tempted
with such thoughts: Job 7.15. So that my soul chooses strangling and death,
rather then life. Beza confesses, that when a youth, being tortured with a
scurfie head, he intended to have drowned himself from off the Millers bridge
in Paris, had not the coming in of his uncle interrupted him.

And let such as have lodged thoughts of Self-murder, be watchful for the
future in their prayers to God. Let them beg of him, to bind their souls in
the bundle of life; to secure them (in the best acceptance of the word) from
themselves; to hide their life (as well temporal as spiritual, Col. 3.3.) with
Christ in God; that it may not be found out, either when Satan seeks to devour
them, or they to destroy themselves.

Amen.
CHRIST'S Second Temptation to PRESUMPTION. SERMON VII.
MATTHEW. 4.6. For it is written, He shall give his angels charge concerning
thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash
thy foot against a stone.


COme we now to the Bait under which the Hook was hid, God's Word.

We will consider it,

1. As indicted by the best;

2. As abused by the worst of spirits. Or, As written by David, as wrested by
the Devil.

Of the first:

We find the words, Psalm. 91.11, 12. Wherein three things are considerable.

1. God's Injunction. 2. Angels Attendance. 3. Man's Protection.
First, God's Injunction, Shall give his angels charge. This solemn charge
proceeded not from the least distrust God has of Angels performance, but from
the great desire he has of man's protection. A word being enough to the Wise.

Secondly, Angels Attendance; Thou shall not dash thy foot against a stone. An
expression which alludeth to what befell Balaam, when a (not protecting, but
prosecuting) Angel, so withstood him, ( Number. 22.25.) that his ass crushed his
foot against the wall. The foot (we know) is not only the extremest, but
meanest part of the body; and shows the extensiveness of Angelical protection.
If the foot be kept, surely the head shall not be hurt; but Christ shall be
preserved cap-a-pe, with an universal safety.

Thirdly, Man's Protection. I say, Man's Protection. The words being spoken
principally of Christ as a person, and secondarily of him and his, as they make
up one mystical Body, whereof Christ is the Head. In which sense, it will fall
to the share of the meanest sincere Christian, to come within the compass of
this Angelical protection: conceive him but the last joint of the least toe of
Christ's foot, yet is he a lively member thereof, and by the promise in the
Text to be secured.

Angels are very handy to preserve Gods servants from danger. Doct. 1.


Psalm. 34.7. The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him,
and delivers them. Matthew. 18.10. In heaven their angels do always behold the
face of my Father which is in heaven. Their Angels, that is, deputed to their
protection. Thus such Pages, and servants, which wait on the young children of
great persons, are commonly called the childrens men, and the childrens maids,
though their parents hired them, and pay them meat, drink, and wages. Angels
are God's angels, as he employeth them; our angels, as employed about us.

Object.
How then comes it to pass, that many of Gods servants have such mischances,
even in their feet? Mephibosheth, a child of five years old, (therefore the
more innocent) son to a good father, and afterward a good man himself, 2 Samuel
4.4. was lame of his feet, by a fall from the arms of his fleeing nurse.
Reverend Doctor Willet, with a fall from his horse, Anno 1621, returning from
London to his house, so bruised his foot, that it hastened his death. Are the
Angels of good men absent, or impotent, or sullen, or sleeping, when such
mischances betide them?

Answ.
No mischances can befall the godly. Not chances, because all things are ordered
by divine Providence not mischances, because all things work for the good of
Gods children. Know then, that all promises of temporal preservation run with
this tacit reservation in Gods bosom (always provided that He in his infinite
wisdom conceives not the contrary more conducing to his own glory, for reasons
best known to himself.) For this cause sometimes God countermands Angelical
protection, and orders that those heavenly spirits should in some cases
suspend their attendance on men.

What shall we return to the Angels, Quest.
in recompense of their attendance about us, seeing omne beneficium requirit
officium; All favors received, require some duty returned? Let not God's
servants be ever found unthankful.

No worshipping of them, Answ.
which they themselves disavow, Rev. 22.9. See thou do it not. No praying to
them; whereof no promise, precept, nor precedent in Scripture. But first, make
honorable mention of them; give them their titles. It is uncivil to speak of
Gentlemen, Knights, Lords, Dukes, Kings, without the additions of Worship,
Honor, Grace, Majesty. So, name Angels with their due Epithets; Good angels,
(contrary to evil angels, Psalm 78.49.) Excelling angels, Psalm. 103.20. Holy
angels, Matthew. 25.31. Angels of light, 2 Cor. 11.14. Elect angels, 1 Timothy 5.21.
Such honor have all his Angels.

Secondly, Learn Humility by them. No better thanks can be given the Angels,
then if thou be made the better by them. Much was the condescension of
Maximilian the Germane Emperor, when at the Siege of a City he served in daily
pay under our King Henry the eighth. Hence that in the Grammar, Meruit sub rege
in Gallia, understand Belgica. But the distance is not so great between an
Emperor and a King, as between Angels and Men: yet they, without any regret,
attend on the servants of God.

Lastly, Be thankful to God for them. David knew as well as we, what service
the Angels performed for us; yet it never troubled him, what he should do in
requital thereof, whose thoughts were taken up to deserve an higher engagement,
Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward
me? I will take the cup of salvation. Amongst which benefits, Angels protection
was a principal. Serve God, and thou shall satisfy the Angels for all their
attendance about thee.

Come we now to behold the words as abused by Satan.

Here some will tax the devil for mis-citing the text, because, whereas David
said, Lest thou dash thy foot; Satan inserts, Lest [ at any time] thou dash.
But, though Satan accuses us, we will not accuse him without cause. An
Indefinite is equivalent to an Universal. At any time, though not literally
expressed, is vertually employed in the words. His grand fault in mis-alleadging
the words, is this, That as Hanun (2 Samuel 10.4.) cut off the beards and
clothes of David's Ambassadors in the middle; so Satan cites this Scripture
by halfs. I confess, not for number of words, but for the sense thereof, he
leaves out a moytie of the text, the most effectual and operative words
therein, which were not only of the Commission at large, but the Quorum, viz.
in all thy ways. God promising his protect^on on no other terms, but whilst men
confine themselves to their Vocation.

Doct. 2.
Satan is an excellent Textuary, and most knowing in Scripture.

He knows every Book, Chapter, Verse, Word, Syllable, Letter, in the Old and
New Testament, even in the Original Languages wherein they were written. He
needs no Concordance alphabetically to find out places, who has them all ad
unguem. But it is observable, that in all the Scripture, from Genesis to
Revelation, Satan knows not one text which tendereth comfort unto him. Many
are unto him doleful messengers of despair; as that, Heb. 2.16. He took not on
him the nature of angels. That, Jude verse. 6. And the angels which kept not
their first estate, but left their own habitation, he has reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day. Many
texts present him with sadness, partly from his incapability of salvation, for
want of a Savior; partly from his impossibility to repent, because of his
implacable and invincible malice. How far more happy is the poorest soul, who,
though not book-learn'd, has only a magazine of some select places, and
promises in Scripture (gotten not only by heart, but in his heart) whence he
may apply consolation to his soul! Satan may be cunning in Scripture, but the
Scripture cannot be comfortable to him.

It is not enough to hear Scripture alleged, Doct. 3.
in point of faith or fact; but, with the Bereans, we must examine whether the
things be so.

Five things herein must be enquired after.

1. Is the thing alleged, in Scripture, or no? It is strange, that many
things, by vulgar error, and common credulity, pass for current to be in
Scripture, when no such matter is to be found therein. Many things are taken up
by content, without either weighing or telling them. Ye have heard it has been
said, Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy, Matthew. 5.45. But,
where is it said, Thou shall hate thine enemy? Surely nowhere in Gods Word,
though some silly Jews might ignorantly suppose it there.

2. If it be in Scripture, Is it just so as they cite it? Is it not alleged
defectively, with Adoni-bezek, cutting off a thumb, or a toe? or redundantly,
with the Giants of Gath, 1 Chronicles. 20.6. with a finger or a toe too much? Is it
exactly and adequately, as by them quoted?

3. If just so, Is it truly printed? This is quickly discovered, by comparing
one Bible with another of a different impression. Here (be it spoken to the
shame of careless Correctors) it may be said, It is printed, where it could
never be said, It was written; dangerours errata's unrecall'd, unconfess'd,
having crept into many Editions.

4. If just so, and rightly printed, Is it truly translated? I speak this in
opposition only to the Rhemish Testament, so full fraught of affected
falsehoods in favor of Popery; and in honor of our last Translation under King
James, performed (by the confession of forraigners unconcerned therein) usque
ad orbis invidiam.

Lastly, Whether that Scripture, if there, so there, truly printed, rightly
translated, be not unproperly applied? The Papists have a good stroke herein
(especially in the point of the Pope's Primacie, wherein the Scripture of it
self is silent.) As these words were abused by the devil; so the next in the
same Psalm, ( Psalm. 91.31. Thou shall tread upon the lion and adder, the young
lion and the dragon shall thou trample under feet) were blasphemously profaned
by Pope Alexander, when he trod on the neck of Frederick the Emperor. The
precept to Peter in a vision, Acts 10.13. Rise, kill and eat, was produced by
the Pope, to warrant his war against the Venetians; though the same words
obliged him to eat their corpses, as well as to slay them. But, devil-like, he
could leave out what was against him, and make use of the rest. Those words of
the same Apostle, Behold, here are two swords, Luke 22.38 are abused to prove
the Pope's double power, Temporal, and Spiritual.

More instances might be added, but are better forborne. For, though alleged by
us, not with the least approbation, but reprehension, and detestation of such
blasphemies; yet they can hardly be told, or heard, without leaving in our
hearts some diminution of the Majesty of God's Word (the dignity whereof all
ought to maintain) and therefore it is ill trusting of our corruptions with the
bare reporting of such Scriptures abused, for fear of the bad effects our
badness may make thereof.

Lastly, Hence we observe, Gods protection cannot rationally be expected of
them, who wilfully run out of their Vocation. Out of thy Calling, out of God's
keeping.

What is thy profession? A Carpenter? An honest Calling: Christ's reputed
father was of the same. Fell timber, frame fabrics, build houses, thou art in
thy ways; God and his angels will keep thee.

What is thy Calling? A Weaver? A necessary Calling, without which we could
neither be warm, nor clean. Cast thy Shuttle truly, (the swiftness whereof is
the lively emblem of the shortness of man's life, Ioh 7.6) labor faithfully,
God and his Angels will keep thee; thou art in thy ways.

Art thou a Soldier? Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be
content with your wages. March, Charge, Retreat, do Duty according to Command,
God shall cover thy head in the day of battle: for, thou art in thy ways.

But, if thou invad'st the Ministerial Office, presuming to preach, who never
was sent; look to thy self; thou can not, without usurpation, pretend to
God's keeping: for thou art out of all thy ways. Nor do I fear the frowns of
any, if offended hereat, and reproving me for giving this just reproof. I am
sure I am in my Calling, in my ways; and therefore, with comfort and
confidence, may rely on God and his Angels protection.

To conclude, though the Angels may be instrumental to keep our feet from
dashing against a material stone, that is, to keep us from temporal danger; yet
there is a stone that passes their power to preserve men from being hurt
thereby; viz. the stone mentioned by Matthew, Chap. 21.44. Whosoever shall fall
on this stone, shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind
him to powder.

Let our prayers be to the God of these Angels, That he (who only can) would
keep us from stumbling at that which should stay us, and from taking dangerous
offense at our Savior, the only preserver of our souls.

Amen.
CHRIST'S Second Temptation to PRESUMPTION. SERMON VIII.
MATTHEW. 4.7. Jesus says unto him, It is written again, Thou shall not tempt
the Lord thy God.


I Am no superstitious observer, or ceremonious affecter of mystical numbers:
But I say, Seven remarkable observations discover themselves in the Text. More
may, fewer cannot be raised, without leaving, and losing, what is natural, from
the words; and necessary, for our selves.

Now, whereas the devil in the very last verse, had ill cited, and worse
ap^lied Gods Word, and yet our Savior still continues to allege Scripture
in his own behalf, we learn,

Doct. 1.
We must not leave off using of Scripture, because of others abusing it.

What if some wolves come in sheeps clothing, must the sheep therefore flea off
their fleeces, and strip themselves out of the Livery of their innocence? What
if thieves make their swords the instruments of Robbery, must honest men ride
on the high ways without any weapons?

What if the Indians (as much as lay in their power) darkened the sun with their
Idolatry; shall we therefore refuse to be guided by the light thereof? O let it
not put us out of conceit with S. Paul's Epistles (yea, and generally with the
whole Scripture) because some unlearned and unstable (2 Pet. 3.16.) have
wrested them to their own destruction. Some meats (fenced with shells) may be
eaten after the most sluttish Cooks; and that place, Psalm. 91. lately ill
served up by Satan, (with many more, daily ill dressed and dished by the
unclean hands of profane persons) may notwithstanding, without any danger, yea
with great comfort, be tasted, swallowed, and digested, by the holy and hungry
servants of God.

The place cited by our Savior, (as generally, part of the Canonical
Scripture; so particularly) is parcel of the Law in Deuteronomie; commending
unto us this:

Christ, Doct. 2.
and all Christians, ought to order their actions by the direction of the Law.

Indeed we read, Gal. 5.18. If ye be led of the Spirit, ye are not UNDER the
Law. Understand it, not under the curse, malediction, and condemnation thereof.
Romans 8.1. There is therefore no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus,
who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Christ, by his death, (as
he did fulfill, so he) did destroy the Law thus far forth, that it cannot bind
over any Believer to damnation. Yet all are under the guidance, government, and
direction of the Law; yea, Christians ought especially to apply all legal
threatenings to their flesh, old creature, and unsanctified half, thereby the
more effectually to subdue and mortify the lust thereof.

The woman of Samaria, Joh. 4.12. said tartly and tauntingly to our Savior,
Art thou greater then our father Jacob, who gave us this well, and drank
thereof himself? But, may we not say seriously and sadly to the modern proud
and peevish Antinomians, Are ye greater then Christ himself, who [as God] gave
us the Law, and [as man] drank himself thereof; and because made under the Law,
Gal. 4.4. made the Law the the Square, whereby he regulated his actions?
alleging the same to deter himself here from Presumption: It is written
again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

Now whereas Moses, Deuteronomy. 6.16. has it in the plural, Ye shall not tempt the
Lord your God; and our Savior assesseth it in the singular, Thou shall not
tempt, etc. we learn,

General precepts, Doct. 3.
promises, and threatenings in Scripture, must be particularized to every
person;

In Precepts.

Psalm. 27.8. When thou say, Seek YE my face; my heart said unto thee, Thy
face Lord will I seek.

Proportionably whereunto, In Promises.

Matthew. 11.29. And ye shall find rest for YOUR souls. Our heart should say*
And I shall find rest for MY soul.

In Threatenings.

Romans 8.13. If YE live after the flesh, ye shall die. Our heart should say, If
I live after the fresh, I shall die.

This serves to discover the vanity of the Popish cavil, Use.
That single persons have no particular promise to bottom their faith upon.

It is confessed: nor is it necessary, seeing Gods promises run all in general
terms: Ho everyone that thirsts, come ye to the waters, Isai. 55 1. Whosoever
believes on him, shall not perish, Joh. 3.10. Well then may a man, by a lively
faith, enclose these common promises to himself, and bring his bucket to that
fountain, which is opened for Judah and Jerusalem.

Now (that my sword may cut on both sides) as causlesly does T. C. carp at the
practice of our English Church, for saying to every particular Communicant,
Take, and eat, when Christ said it but once to all his disciples. As if we may
not as warrantably pronounce the words to every single Receiver, as our
Savior, in my Text, changed Ye into Thou; a general, into a personal precept
to his own soul.

Now whereas Christ countermined Satan, with alleging Gods Word, I observe,

Doct. 4.
Though Scripture cannot be brought against Scripture, to cross it; it may and
must be brought unto Scripture, to clear it.

I say, cannot be brought. For God is the God, 1. of Unity, and therefore will
not indite Discord and Con^tradiction: 2. of Verity; and therefore will not
affirm a falsehood: and such must one of the Propositions be of necessity, in
all real and direct Contradictions.

I confess, some seeming contradictions (not casually scattered, but)
designedly placed, by Gods providence in his Word;

First, To what and exercise our diligence and industry.

Secondly, To raise the reputation of Scripture; seeing (through man's
corruption) Intellecta ab omnibus, sunt neglecta a plurimis; What all
understand, many undervalue.

Thirdly, To render the profession of the Ministry necessary, were it but to
reconcile those contradictions to the capacities of their people.

For these and other Reasons, some seeming contrarieties appear in Scripture;
but directly and diametrically, Gods Word cannot be brought against his Word,
to cross it; though it may be brought unto it, to clear it.

Use.
Compare Scripture with Scripture, and one place will receive light from, and
return it to another.

Many have written excellent Comments on the 91 Psalm; both Fathers, Papists
and Protestants. But give me, Moses on David: (who, though writing before him,
wrote both with the same Spirit, to which there is neither Before, nor After.)
How excellently is David's promise expounded by Moses's precept? That all
assurance of Angelical protection must not thrust us on unnecessary dangers,
for fear of temptiug the Lord.

Doct. 5.
It is tempting of God, to do that per saltum, with a leap, which He will have
done by degrees.

Now suppose one on the top of an high wall or hill, there are three ways for
his coming down:

1. Ordinary, by the stayrs, from the wall, and from the hill, by surrounding
the sides thereof, where it is least steep and precipitous.

2. Industrious. Understand ye hereby, by, a way out of the common road,
unusual; but neither unlawful, nor miraculous; acquired by men's pains and
brains, in case of extremity. Thus, when Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 11.33. had his
life way-layed for by King Aretas, in the City of Damascus, his way from the
wall, by the stayrs, was obstructed, where soldiers were set to surprise him.
What then? did Paul presently vault from the wall, and cast himself desperately
into the embraces of a miracle? Oh no. The brethrens brains being at a loss,
beat about, and (according to the promise, Matthew. 10.19.
It shall be given you in the self-same hour) discover an expedient, and let
him down through a window in a basket.

3. Miraculous, when all other ways fail. Thus our Savior, Luke 4.29. being
brought to the brow of an hill, whence the Nazarites intended to cast him down
headlong, passed (but which way, God knows) through the midst of them. Thus when
the disciples were in danger of drowning in a tempest, there being a necessity
of Christ's coming to comfort them, and no ship at hand to waft him over unto
them, he miraculously did walk on the water, Matthew. 14.25. who in my text
refused to fly through the air, though both motions we^e equally easy unto
him. Chiefly, because now the way lay open for his safe and easy descending,
by the stayrs of the temple.

Use.
It serves to confute the pride, impatience, and laziness of such, who will not
go pede-tentim, fair and softly, in the path and pace of Gods appointing, but
(offended at the pretended tediousness thereof) embrace more compendious
courses of their own devising, which in fine prove farthest about, and never
lead, with comfort, to their desired ends.

We meet with a Speculative Stayr-case of Gods own Architecture, (reaching from
heaven to earth, and then from earth to heaven again) Moreover, whom he
predestined, them be also called; and whom he called, them he also justified;
and whom he justified, them he also glorified, Romans 8.30. Now such who will
leap instantly from Predestination to Glorification, without treading on the
intermediate steps betwixt them, may be well assured to miss of their desired
mark.

There is also a Practical Stayr-case recommended unto us, 2 Pet. 1.5. Add to
your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to
temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly
kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity. Let us thus add grace to grace,
and raise our souls to heaven by those degrees which God has appointed. The
Proverb is most true in this, Haste makes waste; whereas, He that believes
makes not haste, but leasurely and treatably goes on in the way of salvation.

Let not us Pastors begrutch our pains to our People, in teaching them, as we
find them capable to learn. God has designed unto us herein, certain stayrs
and steps: Isai. 28.10. Precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept,
line upon line, here a little and there a little. We must not think to do all
at once; Christ in my Text would not leap down from the Temple, but go down by
the Stayrs: and it is folly in us to think, to leap up in the edifying of Gods
spiritual Temples, (to inform them in an instant in all fundamental matters)
which requires much time, and must be done by degrees.

The Lord.
Doct. 6.
It is height of Madness, to tempt so great a Majesty as the LORD.

Abner dissuaded Asahel from pursuing him, 2 Samuel 2.21. Turn thee aside to the
right hand, or to the left, and lay hold on one of the young men. If you must
needs be tempting, be trying conclusions, be making experiments; let men meddle
with their matches, and tamper with those which are equal with themselves; but
forbear chalenging one infinitely above us. 1 Cor. 10.22. Do we provoke the
Lord to jealousy? What, are we stronger then he? What king (Luke 14.31.) going
forth to war against another king, does not first sit down, and consulteth
whether he be able with ten thousand, to meet him who comes against him with
twenty thousand? I confess here is a possibility implied, that one may manage a
Defensive war, with hope of success, though the enemy be two to one against
him; namely, where the lesser number are better armed, disciplined, victuall'd,
fleshed with success, have the advantage of the time and place, not to speak of
the goodness of the Cause. But will any tempt the Lord, and not first consider
with himself, Can thy folly mate his Wisdom, thy Weakness his Strength? thy (I
say not ten, his twenty thousand, but) cipher, his infinite millions? O tempt
him not; he is the Lord.

Thy God.
It is the height of Badness, Doct. 7.
to tempt so good a Majesty as Thy GOD.

Christ said unto the Pharisees, Ioh. 10.32. Many good works have I showed you,
for which of those works do you stone me? So may the God of heaven say to us
sinful men, Many benefits I load you with daily, Psalm. 68.19. (Whilst we, vile
wretches, as it is Amos 2.13. press him with our sins, as a cart is pressed
under sheaves) for which of those benefits do you thus tempt me, and constantly
rebel against me? Is it because God gave thee plenty and freedom, in the penury
and captivity of others, that therefore thou do tempt him? Is it because God
has endowed thee with many natural abilities above thy fellows, that therefore
thou do tempt him? Or because he has conferred on thee many spiritual gifts
and graces, that therefore thou do tempt him? Joseph, when solicited by his
Mistress to uncleanness, brought an argument to dissuade himself from wronging
his Master, fetched from the many favors he had heaped upon him, Genesis 39.9.
There is none greater in this house then I, neither has my master kept, etc.
The same seriously considered, and sincerely applied to our hearts, would keep
us from committing many sins against him, who has endeared us unto him with
many mercies, and who is not only The Lord, but Thy God.

CHRIST'S Third Temptation to IDOLATRY. SERMON IX.
MATTHEW. 4.8. Again the devil takes him up into an exceeding high mountain, and
shows him all the kingdoms of the world.


ONe cannot proceed with any Christian comfort, and necessary confidence, on a
Text, whilst it remains encumbered with doubts and difficulties. We will
therefore endeavor, first to remove two of the greatest importance.

Quest.
What made Satan shift his place, seeing the Pinnacle of the Temple, (whereon he
stood before) was as proper to his purpose (by reason of the elevation thereof)
thence to render a veiw of the Glory of the world? For the Temple was a stately
structure, founded no mount Moriah, 2 Chronicles. 3.1. and the Pinnacle, being on the
top thereof, afforded a convenience to survey round about at great distance.

Answ.
Not so: all the City (and the Temple therein) was seated (though on an Hill) in
an Hole, surrounded with higher mountains on all sides: Psalm. 125.2. As the
mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people.
Olivet on the East, Zion on the South, Gihon on the Southwest, Calvary on the
Northwest. Satan therefore chose a larger Horizon, where the Sight was not so
circumscribed, and removed from the Pinnacle to a Mountain. Not to say that the
Devil desired to put his new poison into new bottles, and to make his new
temptation the more taking and pleasant, with the novelty of another place, to
which he adjourned it.

But the next knot is far harder to untie, consisting indeed of a quaternion of
difficulties all complicated, and twisted together.

The first, ex part loci, drawn from the place. Grant it (...) a mountain,
(...) high, (...) exceeding high, whereon Satan took his station, yet was it
too low, thence to take the prospect of the whole world.

Tenariff in the Canarie Islands, is believed the highest mountain of the
yet-known world, yet is not conceived to be perpendicularly above fifteen miles
high; too low a Pedestal for one thereon to stand, to overlook the whole world.

The second, ex part objecti, from the thing to be seen, all the world. Abate
(...) [the world adorned with creatures] according to Saint Matthew, and
confine it only with S. Luke to (...) [the part thereof inhabited by men] and
it was not visible at one view, with all the glory thereof For, much of it lay
buried in the bowels of the earth, in mines, and minerals; much was concealed
in Coin, in the Coffer of Misers, bolting out the beams of the Sun from the
sight thereof.

The third, ex part organi, from the Eye, the instrument of sight. It is true,
Matthew. 6.22. If the Eye be single, the whole Body shall be full of light. And
we must allow our Savior a single Eye, naturally quick and clear (except
weakened with weeping for our sins;) yet finite was the sphere of the activity
thereof; nor so extensive, as with one view, to visit all the Diocese of the
world.

The last, ex part temporis, from the time; Saint Luke allowing no longer term
then a moment, for all this performance. Now no considerable impression could
be made on Christ's affections, to like or loath, in so short a time. As good
never a whit, as never the better; and in effect, it was never shown, which was
so soon r^moved.

The first answer to these difficulties comes unto us recommended by the
authority of Saint Chrysostom, affirming, that the Devil did show, that is, by
his gesture and pointing demonstrate to Christ the glory of the world (which
might easily be done in a moment) and afterward Satan at his leisure did
largely comment on his foresaid manual Indication, hightning and advancing
worldly wealth, power, and pomp, to the greatest advantage, with that
flattering Rhetoric and fallacious Logic, wherein that lying spirit does
excel. So that we have only the Rubric, and Breviate of Satan's oration set
down in text, without the embellishments, and amplifications thereof, wherein
he enlarged himself to our Savior.

The second answer is of such, who conceive Satan chose out a select parcel of
ground, probably in Asia and the Eastern parts (where Nature is most triumphant
and orient in pleasure and treasure) within the compass of Christ's sight, and
presented it as a sample unto him, whence he might ghess the glory of all the
rest. And I see no cause to the contrary, but that Satan might make his
election in Palestine it self; which Country, not in relation to its spiritual
advantages, but merely for the outward fruitfulness thereof (as appears in the
text) is twice terme^, viz. Ezekiel. 20.6. and 15. the GLORY of all LANDS.

A third sort answer, that the glory of the world was not really shown, but
only seemingly, and in appearance, represented by Satan (the master-Iugler in
all delusions) to the sight of our Savior. So that all worldly wealth, being
(in comparison of an eternal and stable good) but a shadow, this Pageant was
but the shadow of a shadow, quickly vanishing away. Either because the brittle
constitution thereof would abide no long continuance, or that Satan purposely
withdrew it presently, to make Christ more e^gerly to desire it, as meat is,
tyrannically shown to, and taken from hungry stomachs, to increase their
appetite after it.

I will not interpose my opinion, which answer to prefer; but conceive, if all
three be compounded together, enough may be collected out of them, to give a
modest and sober mind convenient satisfaction.

Showed him all the Kingdoms of the world.
Observe, Kingdoms are generally the Governments wherein most earthly glory and
gallantry is visible and conspicuous. Yet I believe there want not those who
dare maintain, that though Pomp may be more in Kingdoms, Pride may be as much
in Commonwealths.

Now seeing the whole Text is but a Dumb show, wherein nothing is spoken, but
only all things presented to the sight of our Savior, we learn,

The Eye is the principal Broker to make up the bargain betwixt sin and our
soul. Doct.


I say, principal; the other senses being also active to the same ill end, but
in an inferior degree.

We will not stir a step out of the first book of the Bible, to give four
plain and pitiful instances thereof.

Genesis 3.6. When the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and pleasant to
the Eyes, etc. Herein, in some sort, her eye was taster to her mouth; she
presumed (before she tried) it would be delicious to the palate, it was so
delightful to the look.

Secondly, Genesis 6.2. When the sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they
were (what? wise? virtuous? religious? oh no) fair, they took them to their
wives. And we know what a graceless brood of Giants, was the issue of such
equivocal marriages.

Thirdly, Genesis 13.10. When Lot lifted up his eyes (not in prayer to God, to
direct him in a choice of such concernments, but) to behold the plain of
Jordan, that it was well watered everywhere; which made him unadvisedly fix his
habitation there, to his great disturbance, and, without Gods greater mercy,
final destruction.

Fourthly, Genesis 19.26. When Lot's wife looked back to Sodom, and was severely
punished, though Abraham did the same (in the very next verse save one) without
either sin or suffering; partly because no such prohibition was laid upon him;
partly because Abraham had better tempered eyes, not to look (as too probably
she did) with lusting after the wealth therein.

Let us all pray with David, Use.
Psalm. 119.73. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity.

Which way shall we turn away our faces from beholding vanity? Object.
which, as it is so bad, we should not look on it: so, it is so common, we
cannot look beside it. If we turn our eyes from the right hand to the left; if
from before our face, to behind our backs, we do but exchange one vanity for
another; seeing Solomon says, Eccles. 1.1. Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity.

There is a fourfold cast of the eyes, Answ.
wherewith men behold worldly vanity: the first necessary and lawful, not to be
avoided; the two next, useful and laudable, highly to be praised; the last,
(but most commonly practiced) sinful and dangerous, justly to be condemned.

The first, to behold vanity with a transient eye, as a passenger, who rides
post through a Country, and sees men, buildings, meadows, fields, woods, but
can give no account of them, as minding their own business all the while.

Ahim^az being asked about Absalom's death, 2 Samuel 18.29 purposely concealed
his knowledge, in that his slight and general answer; I saw a great tumult, but
I knew not what it was. But should a Saint of God be seriously examined upon
Interrogatories, concerning such a fond fashion or fantastic mode, what he
knows thereof, all the intelligence he would return is this; He saw a great
busling, and huddle, and hubbub amongst men in the world, but he took
particular notice of nothing, as beholding worldly vanities with a transient
Eye.

The next, and that commedable, beholding worldly vanities, is with a
contemning and disdaining look, slighting the poverty and emptiness thereof.

The third, still more to be praised (as speaking a greater degree of grace) is
with a pitying and bemoaning eye, (not to the things themselves, but) to souls
of men so delighting in, and doting on them, that they, for whom Christ shed
his precious blood, should undervalue themselves so unworthily, as to set their
affections on so useless, yea dangerous objects.

But to behold worldly vanities with an admiring and almost adoring eye, as the
Disciples, Luke 21.5. gazed on the fabric and furniture of the Temple, is much
to be condemned in all Christians.

Now whereas Satan shows our Savior, all the glory of the world, but
suppresseth all the sorrows thereof, and concealeth the cares of the world,
mentioned Matthew. 13.22. we observe,

The Devil discovers what is pleasant, Doct.
hides what is painful, in all his allurements to sin.

He was suspicious, had he really represented the world, with all the vexations
inevitably appendant thereunto, it would have disheartened our Savior from the
acceptance thereof.

Believe it, they have not the soundest sleeps within them, who lie on the
softest beds beneath them, and have the finest Curtains about them. Might one
be but admitted to listen to the pillow of great persons (seemingly swimming in
all outward felicity) he would be witness to strange sighs, and sobs, and
moanes, and groans, music little suspected to come from such mouths; daily
and hourly fearing to be depressed by their superiors, justled by their
equals, undermined by their inferiors.

The Scholar who reading to his Master in haste mistook THORN for THRONE,
committed an ingenious fault; and the woeful experience of some, will justify
that his Error was too true an Anagram: and therefore the craft of Satan
concealed the grievances, shows only the glory of the world.

Let us look as well, Use.
on the bitterness in the end, as on the present pleasantness of sin; and eye
Iaels nail and hammer, as well as her butter in a Lordly dish.

Now if one mark these opera preparatoria of Satan in the text, and consider
their tendency whereunto, one may observe a darker comple^tion, and more of
hell, likely to be in this, then in both the former temptations.

Satan will reserve his worst assaults for the last. Doct.


Of the three, this Bait was far most pernicious; If we consider, 1. The sin to
which he tempted, was more damnable. 2. The means whereby he tempted, were
most plausible.


The outward Court of Solomon's Temple, was Holy, the middle Holier; but the
third, or innermost, the Holy of Holiest.

But in the hellish method of Satan's Temptations, the first to Despair, was
profane; the second to Presumption, was profaner; the last to Idolatry,
profanest of all.

Now we will insist on three reasons, why Satan keeps the worst always for
the last.

First, because he is of the nature of a serpent, That old serpent called the
devil, Rev. 12.9. and that beast is sufficiently known to carry his worst
poison in his hindmost parts.

Secondly, because he always delights to be one of the Antipodes in
opposition to Gods proceedings, who (being the Author of concord) makes ever
the sweetest music in the close, as the other the worst jarring therein.
Christ, John 2.10. kept the best wine unto the last, Satan in this his
Temptation, reserved to the last the dregs and lees of his sowrest and sharpest
vinegar.

Thirdly, because morsus ferarum morientium dirissimi, the bites of dying
beasts are the sharpest; and when Satan must depart (a death to him) and leave
off to tempt us, he will badger-like, make his teeth meet, and take his leave
with leaving a deep impression.

Beware the last last Temptation of Satan, on the day of our death. Then, he
will (as we say) make a bolt or shaft of it, put it to the push, either lose
himself, or gain thy soul.

We read John. 7.37. In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood
and cried, etc. But how loud will the Devil that Lion roar, in the great and
last day of thy life, when it is with him, the last time of tempting! either
now conquer, or let him hereafter for ever hold his peace.

This is sad tidings (will the weak Object.
Christian say) to all in my condition. Alas, the Devil too often prevails
against me in my strength and health; I shall certainly then be foiled, when,
being weakened with long sickness, I shall be assaulted with death, and the
Devil, both at the same instant.

Be not dejected, Answ.
God will keep thee unto the end, and in the end, and will not suffer thee at
the last gasp, for any pains of death, to fall from him. Comfortable is the
expression, Psa. 68.20. Unto God the Lord belong the ISSUES from death.

Wherein observe, first, Death is not a total and final extinguishing of men's
being, but there is an emergency, an Issue out of it.

Secondly, In the Plural, there be Issues, two Exits out of death: Mat. 25.4.
And these shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into
life eternal.

Thirdly, These issues are not in the power of man or angel, to order and
dispose of. Alas, were it in the power of some men to order them in this
uncharitable age, so full of fractions and factions; those of an opposite
judgment unto themselves, would hardly find a favorable Issue from death.

Lastly, and most to our comfort, these Issues are only in the sole disposing
of God himself, who of his mercy will make us conquerors over Satan's
temptations; by whose gracious ^ssistance, Psa. 91.15. the Lion and the Dragon
(two names of the Devil in Scripture) shall at the minute of our death, be
trampled under our feet. Amen.

CHRIST'S Third Temptation to IDOLATRY. SERMON X.
MATTHEW. 4.9. And says unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me.

Or as it is more large, Luke 4.6.7. And the devil said unto him, All this
power will I give thee, and the glory of them; for that is delivered un^o me,
and to whomso^ver I will, I ^ive it, If thou therefore wilt worship me, all
shall be thine.


THese words contain a bargain, and sale endeavored, though not effected.

Wherein observe,

First, The Seller, Satan. For, though he boasts himself for a giver, Will I
give thee; it was not donum, but excambium, wherein he desired to have quid pro
quo, yea an over-valuable consideration. Thus Simoniacal Patrons boast, how
frankly and freely they give their Livings, when indeed they sell them to
unworthy Incumbents, either by retention of tithes, or receiving of money.

Secondly, The things to be sold. Lawyers charge their Deeds with words enough,
seemingly to the same purpose, though certainly the Learned know a necessary
difference in them: Profits, Emoluments, Hereditaments, Obventions, Appendants,
Appurtenances, etc. The Devil compriseth them in one word, All; but afterward
brancheth it into two parts, (...), and (...), power, and glory.

Thirdly, The sellers power to make a good state: Nihil dat quod non habet;
Nothing can give to another, what it has not it self, formally, or vertually.
Satan herein pretends conscience; he would not deceive our Savior by felling
him a cracked title, but shows his evidence, how he came possessed of the same:
All these things are delivered unto me.

Fourthly, The condition: Satan would not give Christ the world in
Frank-almonage, but on the price of being worshipped: Yea his worship must be
performed according to the best fashion, with all state, solemnity, and
ceremony thereof, with falling down. Observe the Devils subtilty, he will
trust nothing, but to make sure work, would have all paid him, before he would
part with any thing; No worship first, no worldly wealth for it.

Lastly, One thing is wanting (and that a material one) to strike up the
bargain, viz. a chapman; and we have him half in the text, one desired and
sought for; but not found out, and obtained. For Christ refused Satan's terms,
which marred his market, seeing no indented Deed can be perfected, without full
consent of both parties.

How comes Satan now to Quest.
omit that preface general, u^ed by him in both his former Temptations, viz. If
thou be the Son of God.

Answ.
Is there not a cause? Satan out of design suppressed it, as sensible that now
it made as much against, as formerly for his advantage. For, should Christ
seriously consider, that he was the Son of God, he would never ask a blessing
at the hands of him, who was his Fathers professed Enemy.

Observe,

Doct. 1.
Christians consulting their divine extraction, would disdain to do many many
base sins which now they commit.

He that is born of God, commits not sin, 1 John 3.9. that is, makes it not
his work, especially whiles remembering his Princely pedigree.

Quest.
Is it a truth, or falsehood that Satan here affirms, that the glory of the
whole world was delivered unto him?

A noto^ious falsehood, Answ.
God only being the true proprietor thereof.

And because it is a point of right, we will prove it both by record and
practice.

First, by Record, Psalm. 24.1. The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof;
the world, and they that dwell therein. Now, let Satan produce the Patent, with
witnesses attesting the same, when, where, and for what consideration, God
passed away this power unto him. For fond is all flying to poetical fiction,
which makes Pluto, the God of hell, the giver and governor of wealth.

2. By Practice. Had the Devil had the disposing of this world, never had just
Job got wealth, chaste Joseph gained honor, holy David become a King, pious
Mordecai been a favorite: The Devil would have blasted their preferment in the
bud, and with his negative voice had hindered their election to honor, had he
had the ruling of rule and riches in this world.

But the Devil may seem the undoubted Object.
patron of all worldly advancement, because (though sometime some good men slip
into preferment) his Chaplains chiefly are presented thereunto. Thus Psalm. 17.
and Psa. 73. David largely bemoaneth the prosperity of the wicked, that it
almost made him to despair.

Answ.
Consult the Psalm first cited, verse. 14. where David discribeth the outward
happiness of wicked men; and speaking of them to God, he says, Whose bellies
THOU fillest with THY hid treasure. THOU; It is God that fills them: THY; it
is out of Gods wealth, that the wicked are filled; though under him, Satan is
instrumentally active to confer riches upon them.

Object.
But Christ himself seems to consent to Satan's sovereignty over the world, when
stiling him thrice, namely, Ioh. 12.31. and 14.30. and 16.11. Prince of this
world.

Quest.
The Devil is Prince of this world, not by Gods creation, and legal investing
him therein, but partly by his own usurpation, and partly by Gods toleration,
permitting him (for some reasons known to us, and more concealed unto himself)
to do those ill offices, which good Angels neither can, nor will perform. Now
the Devil mis-interprets Gods permission, for a commission; Gods connivence at,
for Gods conveyance of worldly rule unto him: but Gods silence herein is not
consent, as the wicked mistake, Psalm. 50.21.

Besides, the Devil lied ab^minably when he said, he could give (...) power, or
properly, authority: for, Romans 13.1. (...). for, there is no authority but from
God. The devil, by Gods permission, might give him (...), power, (such as a
thief has over an honest man when he robs him) but authority truly founded
and bounded, Satan could not bestow upon him.

Wherefore, though in his first temptation to Despair, Satan affirmed no
falsehood, yet in his second to Presumption, he suppressed some necessary truth,
in all thy ways; and in this last to Idolatry, vented a most impudent and
abominable lie, when boasting, for that is delivered unto me; and to whomsoever
I will, I give it.

Doct 2.
It is a dangerous thing to accept worldly wealth as the devils donative.

Now wealth is the devil's gift, when achieved by unwarrantable ways; wrong,
and robbery; fraud, and flattery; corruption, and bribery; extortion, and
cruelty.

What said Abraham to the King of Sodom? Genesis 14.23. I will not take any thing
that is thine, le^t thou should say, I have made Abraham rich. But let it
never be said, that the devil has made us rich. Such wealth of his giving,
will never prove prosperous at last.

We read, 2 Kings 12.9. how I^hoiada bored an hole into the lid of a chest,
into which the Free-offerings for the Temple were put. But God bores an hole,
not in the lid, but bottom of those chests, wherein ill-gotten goods are laid
up. They put them, ( Hag. 1.6.) into bags with holes, through which insensibly
their wealth leaketh out. The deceitfulness of riches (Matthew. 13.22.) is
pronounced of all wealth in general: even well-gotten goods are deceitful in
this; they promise that contentment which they cannot perform: but ill-gotten
goods have a double deceitfulness; in their getting (like bread of deceit,
Prove. 20.14.) and in their event, they will prove deceitful to them that rely
upon them.

The devil at last will be found a grand impostor in all his promises. Doct. 3.


Sometimes not performing them at all. One Darius a Persian Prince, infamous
for never-performed promises, is syrnamed Darius Doso, or, Darius I will give.
The evil spirit in my Text may be named The devil Doso; all in the future
tense, nothing presently paid and perfected. Sometimes he performs them, but in
a sense clean contrary to the expectation of him with whom he contracted.

Henry Huntington.
It is reported of King Canutus, that he promised to make of him the highest man
in England, who should kill King Edmund Iron-side, his corrival: which, when
one had performed, and expected his reward, he commanded him to be hung on the
highest Tower in London.

Satan, who loves the sin, but hates the sinner, will find some such trick,
querk, or equivocation, thereby to frustrate and defeat those who depend on his
promises; as he deceived Eve, Genesis 3. with the fallacy of knowing good and
evil.

Use.
Trust then rather the Lord of heaven, whose promises are,

First, truly propounded. Satan (as was before said) deals falsely in his
Propositions, shows only the best, the glory; conceals the worst, the
grievances of the world. God in his profers truly states things; tells us what
to trust to, Mark 10.30. Shall receive an hundred fold, houses, and children,
and mothers, etc. WITH PERSECUTIONS. He acquaints us as well with the trials we
must expect, as with the triumph we shall obtain.

Secondly, ever performed, All Gods promises in Christ being Yea and Amen, 2
Cor. 1.20.

Thirdly, They are over-performed: 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has
prepared for them that love him.

Fall down, and worship me.
The fig tree would not forsake his sweetnese, olive tree his fatness, vine his
wine (whereby he cheareth the heart of God and man) when the bramble (fitter to
make a fire then a king of) accepted of the Sovereignty of the trees of the
wood, Judge. 9*

When the good Angel that appeared unto Manoah, Judge. 13.16. would not accept
of a burnt-offering: when the good angel, Revel. 19.10. would not accept of
Saint John's Worship: and when the good angel, Revel. 22.9. refused the same;
the Devil desires divine worship to be given unto him. Asperius nihil est
humili cum surgit in alium. Set the devil on Gods throne, and whither will he
mount?

Now, seeing Satan would have the copy of his, agree with the original of
God's adoration, in all particulars, and expressly in the posture of
prostration* Fall down, and worship me; we gather,

Doct. 4.
Outward bodily reverence is necessary in divine worship.

Now the body of man can scarcely be contrived into a decent posture, which in
Scripture has not been hanselled by some good man or other, with Gods worship
therein.

The humble Publicane prayed standing, Luke 18.13. Sick Hezekiah lying upon his
bed, 2 Kings 20.2. Aged Jacob, leaning on his st^ff. Heb. 11.21. Devout Saint
Paul, kneeling on his knees, Ephesians. 3.14 Valiant Joshua, flat on his face,
Josh. 7.6. Faithful Elijah, with his face between his knees, 1 King. 18 42.
when he prayed for rain. To show how humbly importunate we ought to be, when
we pray for so necessary a creature. The said Elijah elsewhere, namely, 1 Kings
19.4. prayed sitting under a juniper-tree; but it was, when his mind was vexed
with passion, and his body wearied with travel. Otherwise it is a posture
fitter for attention, then devotion, as partaking so much of ease, and repose,
inconsistent with the reverence required in Gods worship.

The result of all is this, being ignorant of men's particular infirmities, and
occasions, we cannot constantly con^ine them to one posture in Gods worship.
But let them use that, which expresses most reverence, with their present
convenience, and God will accept it, though no posture but falling down, would
please Satan's palate here in my text.

Quest.
Such Parents as expect their Children should crave their blessing on their
knees, Whether do they not assume to themselves too much Reverence, and therein
entrench upon Divine Honor?

Answ.
No: Such Genuflection being only a Civil posture to express their Humility;
and is performed to Princes and Parliaments, by their Petitioners: and
therefore may be required by Parents, Monarchs over their own Children.

For my own part, should my sons knees (how old soever) be too stubborn to beg
my Blessing, I believe mine arm would be too stiff to reach out Maintenance
unto him.

CHRIST'S Third Temptation to IDOLATRY. SERMON XI.
MATTHEW. 4.10. Then says Jesus unto him, Get thee hence Satan: for it is
written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.


IN the former verse, Satan had rapt out two notorious lies. (As indeed it is
hard to tell one lie, and but ONE Lie.) The first, Assertory, respecting the
Time past, affirming that all the power and glory of the world, were in his
absolute disposal, as delivered unto him. The second, Promissory, relating to
the time to come, promising (when he meant nothing less) to invest and estate
Christ, in the full and peaceable possession thereof.

Now, it is observable, that our Savior in his answer to Satan, takes notice
of neither Lie, so as to reprove and confute them. Not that his Silence herein
was Consent, to Satan's falsehood; but partly, because, had He spoken truth
therein, it signified nothing, as to the matter of Christ's acceptance of his
profer, which he heartily detested and defied: partly, because Christ made all
convenient speed to come up to the Point, and to close with his Adversary about
the main issue of the matter, the utter unlawfulness of Idolatry on any terms.
To teach us, that the most compendious way to end any controversy, is, not to
stand pidling and pelting away our spiritual artillery, against the ou^^works,
and less-important limbs thereof, when we may safely and speedily b^tter down
the Citadel, and ought to bend all our forces against it. Just as two Muskets
make no audible report, when at the same time and place a full Cannon is
discharged; so our Savior was not at leisure to listen to the two crackings
lies Satan had uttered, being totally taken up and engrossed with the loud
roaring abminable Blasphemy, vented by him, to which alone he shapeth his
answer in the Text: Then says Jesus, etc.

Observe in the words, 1. Christ's Refusal of, 2. His Indignation at, 3. His
Refutation of Satan's temptation.


From his Refusal, we collect,

All worldly wealth, is no effectual, Doct.
Allurement to Sin, unto a Sanctified Soul:

What says Saint Paul? Gal. 7.14. By Christ the world is crucified to me, and
I unto the world.

Now who is crucified? namely He, who after a long lingering torment, at last
expires, and is stark Dead. Such, Saint Paul was, and such was Christ, in a
more eminent and transcedent manner. His affections were crucified, before his
Person was crucified in some sense; crucified from his Cradle, yea crucified
before he was born, as deaded to all carnal delights; the cause why Satan's
profer made no impression upon him. For, tender the softest Persian Silks to a
dead man's touch, and it nothing affects his fingers; reach the the sweetest
Indian Spices to his nostrils, they work not on his smell; present the
pleasantest wine of Helbon, ( Ezekiel. 27.28.) to his taste, it moves him to no
delight; as here our mortified Savior was unconcerned with all worldly
vanities.

Get thee hence Satan.
Object.
But S. Luke says, Chap. 4.8. Get thee behind me Satan; whereas it is a
dangerous posture for one to have so fierce a Foe behind his Back. Let me
always have my enemy in mine eye, that I may mark and observe his motions.
Especially Satan being of a Serpentine nature, which, Genesis 3.15. bruiseth the
Heel, it is suspicious to suffer him to come in the rere, behind us, for fear
he practices some treachery against us.

Luke's get thee behind me Satan, Solut.
must be expounded by Matthew's Get thee hence Satan, both being in sense and
substance the same: That is, Avaunt, away, get thee out of my sight, as a
detestable and odious object. Besides, there is no danger of the Devils being
behind the backs of our Bodies, when at the self-same time, the Eye of our
souls may with all caution be fastened upon him.

But because we have mentioned Satan being behind us, I will describe a
Christian, in what posture his soul ought to stand in all relations. He must
have God before him, always eying and observing his will and his word: Satan
behind him, detesting and defying his temptations: the World be^e^th him,
neglecting and contemning the wealth thereof: Grace within him, entertaining
and treasuring it up in his heart: and Glory above him, ascending and aspiring
thereunto in his affections and endeavors.

Now whereas our Savior seems in some sort out of Patience, and filled with
holy Indignation or Satan, Observe,

Doct.
The most Lambs in their own cause, are the Most Lions in Gods Quarrel.

We find the Character of Christ's mildness, Matthew. 12.9. He shall not strive,
nor cry. Yet we hear him very loud in my Text, when striving with Satan. And
just cause he had, when his Fathers honor was so deeply concerned.

Here let us recount how often we find Christ angry in Scripture.

This was the first time in my Text; and Satan had the good Hansel, or
first fruits of Christ's anger, bestowed deservedly upon him. And as Satan had
the top, and beginning of Christ's anger, so shall he have the last, and the
close thereof, yea be-forced to suck out the very ^ees and dregs, of his
Indignation.

Secondly, Christ was angry, John 2.15. when with a scourge of cords he drove
the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple; but then it was in his Fathers
quarrel, whose house of Prayer they had turned into a Den of Thieves.

Thirdly, Mark 3.5. when he had looked round about on the people with anger,
(but for what? for any personal Injury they offered him? O no, but) for the
hardness of their hearts.

Lastly, When offended with Peter, Matthew. 16.23. he said unto him, Get thee
behind me Satan, giving Peter worse language for dissuading then ever he did
Judas, for contriving his passion, whom indeed he once called Devil, but never
bid him, Get thee behind me.

I will not be over-positive and confident; but perchance Christ may be found
once again angry in Scripture: but this I dare presume to affirm, It is not
then in his behalf, but (like meek Moses, Numb. 16.15. very worth in the case
of Korah) when his Fathers honor or our good was interested therein.

It is written.
What, more Scripture still? Enough, and too much (will some carnal Palate say)
of the Manna of Gods word: now a little of the fleshpots, of Man's Traditions
and Inventions, were it but for novelty and variety sake. O no: Christ still
keeps himself to his Scripture. No wise Soldier will change a tried sword, of
whose metal and temper he has had experience, yea which has proved successful
and victorious unto him, for a new blade out of the sorge; and our Savior
would not quit the sword of the word, wherewith he had twice foiled Satan, for
any new weapon; but the third time makes use thereof.

Doct.
Scripture, is good to begin with, and good to continue with, and good to
conclude with.

Some meats are said to be Gold in the morning, Silver at noon, but Lead at
night. But Gods Word is Gold in the Morning, Gold at Noon, Gold at Night; yea,
the more precious, the more it is used.

Yea it is remarkable, Christ took all the three places wherewith he repelled
Satan, out of one book of Deuteronomy, and two of them out of one (the sixth)
chapter thereof. Now if the opening of one Box afforded Christ three Antidotes
against Sat^ns poison, how many Cordials may the whole Scripture yield us,
especially since the happy addition of the New Testament thereto!

But as the Devil had formerly cited the text defectively (leaving out in all
thy ways) so our Savior quotes the same redundantly, Object.
inserting the word Only, (whereon all the hinge of the controversy did
depend) which if the Original be consulted with, Deuteronomy. 6.13. appears not at all
in the Text; contrary to the heavy curse, denounced Rev. 22.18. on such as add
any thing to Gods Word.

Answ.
Though Only be not expressed, it is employed in the Text, and may be supplied
from the context: For it followed in the next verse, Deuteronomy. 6.14. Ye shall not
go after other gods. Is not this the same in effect, You shall serve God only?
So when it is sad, Exodus 20.3. shall have no other Gods but me; it amounts to
this, that we shall serve God only.

Doct.
Explaining of the text, by the context, is no adding to the text.

If we Ministers, (especially in the heat and height of our preaching) cite not
Scripture Syllabically or verbatim, but faithfully render the life and sense
thereof (some perchance out of the preceding, some from the following verses)
we cannot justly be taxed for fallacious alleging thereof.

Use.
This will arm us against the unjust cavil of Bellarmine, traducing all
Protestants, and Luther by name, for adding to Scripture, in maintaining that
faith ALONE justifies.

We find this Alone, though not formally, yet equivalently in Gods word.

Here we will not, with some Protestant Divines, lay too much stress on that
place, Luke 8.20. when Christ said to Iairus, Believe ONLY, and she shall be
made whole; because it relates not properly and directly to the justifying of
Iairus his soul, but only to have that miraculous reviving bestowed on his
Daughter. But we find Faith ALONE justifiing, tantamountingly in Scripture,
when we read, Ephesians. 2.8. By grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of
your selves, it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast.
Here, (as in many other places) the total excluding of Works, fixes
justification in Faith Alone; and Saint Hillary, on the 8 of Matthew (so false
is Bellarmines slander, that Luther first made the expression) has the
proposition in terminis, Fides sola justificat.

God is not only to be worshipped eminently above all, Doct.
but also exclusively, none besides himself.

Two things are impatient of a Corrival: The Throne, and the Marriage Bed. God
in Scripture shadoweth himself unto us, under both these Relations. Psalm.
89.18. The holy One of Israel is our King. Jer. 3.14. Turn, O backsliding
children, says the Lord: for I am married unto you. Dream not therefore of
conjoyning any other in Worship with him.

Here some of Solomon's fools, though carnally wise, might conceive, (had they
been in Christ's place) that they had an advantage to enrich and advance
themselves, cozen and delude Satan, and withal, please and preserve God their
friend, save and secure their own conscience.

Namely, thus.

With their bodies, they would fall down, and worship Satan; and so, by the
plentiful performance of the condition, gain worldly wealth and glory to
themselves. Mean time, they would reserve their hearts, (which Satan, not
knowing the secrets thereof, could not discover) to God alone; yea, send up an
ejaculation to Him, in the midst of their corporal prostration to Satan.

But God is a jealous God, and will not thus be abused. Should a wife, being
found in the wanton embraces of another, pretend for her self, that still her
heart was loyal to her husband, He should be as very a fool to believe it, as
she an impudent harlot to affirm it.

Assure your selves, the wise God of heaven will not be abused by such vain
palliations: nay, him only shall thou serve:

To confute such, Use.
who introduce a Mongrel-medly-Religion; as the Colonies substituted in the
room of the ten tribes carried away into captivity, 2 King. 17. And a
seeming-contradiction (but easily reconciled) is remarkable in three verses.

Verse. 32. They feared the Lord. Verse. 33. They feared the Lord, and served
their own gods. Verse. 34. They fear not the Lord.
All is easily reconciled. They feared the Lord SEEMINGLY: but because they
feared him JOINTLY with their Idols^ they feared him not TRULY, nor ACCEPTABLY.

Such are they who serve God and Venus, their Wantonness; God, and Bacchus,
their Drunkenness; God, and Ceres, their Gluttony; God, and Mars, their furious
Revenge; God, and Mercury, their Fraudulent and Deceitful dealing.

Secondly, It confutes the practice of Saint-worship amongst the Papists, so
derogatory to the glory of God.

Nor let them hope to evade, by coining the Distinction, (which with a broken
cistern, Jer. 2.13. will not hold water) that God is only to be worshipped
with the worship of (...), but Saints may be worshipped with the worship of
(...).

As if where God says, Thou shall not steal, man should plead, Indeed I may
not take away my neighbors goods by way of stealing; but I may take them away
by way of lurching, or filching.

But God, though he be in fact mocked, is not in fine mocked; (though men
multiply distinctions till their Fancies be weary, calling the same sin by
different names) but will avenge himself on such as abuse him by their vain
Inventions.

Again, (...), to unbyassed judgments, does in the natural notion of the word,
import more low, submiss, and servile adoration, then (...) it self; and in
Scripture is given to God himself.

Thus S. James, Chap. 1.1. styles himself (...), The servant of Jesus Christ.
And although Saint Paul, (to note that by the way) Gal. 1.19. entitles him, for
the more outward honor, James the brother of the Lord; yet the humble Apostle
(being to speak of himself) waves all carnal relation to Christ, and only
calls himself (...), The servant of Jesus, as a title of highest spiritual
honor, and which speaks his lowest service unto our Savior; (...), in the
criticism thereof, being appropriate to our God alone.

Lastly, though the Learned Papists may plead for themselves, that they serve
the Saint in the Image, and God in the Saint; yet it is to be feared, that the
Ordinary people terminate their Worship in the very Image it self.

CHRIST'S Third Temptation to IDOLATRY. SERMON XII.
MATTHEW. 4.11. Then the devil leaves him* and behold, angels came and ministered
unto him.


WE may observe in the words, Purgatory, Hell, Earth, and Heaven.


1. Purgatory: But not in the modern sense of the Papists, for a Purgatory to
come; but one past already, in the word Then; that is, after Christ had been
sifted, and fanned, and tried, and purged; coming off with his own honor, and
his enemies confusion.

2. Hell, the devil.

3. Earth; so may I safely term the humanity of our Savior.

4. Heaven, the Angels, those celestial spirits, which, upon Satan's dep^rture,
ministered unto him.

Quest.
How came Satan now to leave our Savior, rather then before? As if his last
answer was more effectual then his former. Twice before, he had refused the
profer, and refuted the reasons of the devil; and now he did no more.

Answ.
First, negatively. It is not to be attributed to any latent operation, or
mystical efficacy of the number of Three, as if the third resistance drove the
devil away (thrice crossing, thrice sprinkling of water, etc. folly, with
Papists, to fix any force either in the thing, or the triplication thereof) or
as if Satan would tempt us only three times, who will do it more then thirty
times three. But Satan left him,

First, Because he (who long had looked for that which he was loath to find,
viz. whether Christ was the Son of God) was now, to his great sorrow,
sufficiently satisfied in the affirmative, that he was so; and therefore
desisted from farther inquiry therein.

It is observable, how much Satan's knowledge was (I will not say bettered, but)
increased in one Chapter ( Mark 1) within the compass of eleven verses. For,
verse 13. he tempted Christ, namely, to try whether he was the Son of God; and
verse 24. he confesses him: I know thee (with deare-bought knowledge, to his
own confusion) who thou art, the holy One of God.

Secondly, Satan could not go higher, and therefore he would not go lower in
his Temptations. Ecquid aliquid altius? Was there any act worse then Idolatry;
or greater temptation thereunto, then the wealth and glory of the whole world?
It stood not with the state of Satan's malice, to present our Savior after
this, with some petty allurement to a puny sin, and therefore he thought
fittest for the present to desist.

Thirdly, Satan went away, to save his credit, being on the matter driven away.
Christ spoke, Get thee hence, as a Commander with authority; and his words were
(for the time) a Mittimus to dispach the Devil out of that place; who,
beholding Christ his holy anger, now raised up to an height, presently with
shame sneaked and slunk away.

The Devil leaves him.
Doct.
Holy Indignation is an excellent exorcism to drive Satan away.

The surest way to fright the fiercest Lion, (that of the crowing of a Cock,
being denied by many, doubted of by most) is by shaking of a firebrand before
his face. Satan, that Lion, fears the flame of holy and heavenly anger (such
as here sparkled out in our Savior) so that the climat grew too hot for him;
he could dwell no longer therein. But we must be sure, that ours be holy
Indignation, otherwise the strange fire, of common and carnal anger, does
allure, not affright the Devil; yea the light thereof gives him aim the more
steddily to direct his temptations at our souls. Yea when his fiery darts meet
with our fiery passions* oh how unquenchable (without Gods mercy) is the
combustion!

Now Saint Matthew says absolutely, The devil leaves him; but Saint Luke
gives us the Limitation thereof; he departs from him, for a SEASON. And
seeing departing, and coming are relative terms; we find Satan afterward
re-assaulting our Savior, John 14.30. The Prince of this world comes, and
has nothing in me.

Whence Learn,

Satan though he leaves us, Doct.
will never leave us, till life leaves us.

Of the three grand enemies of our soul, One begins long before the other
two, but all end and expire with us, at the same instant. The flesh starteth
first, not only from our birth, but being and conception: Psalm. 51.5. Behold,
I was born in inquity, and in sin has my Mother conceived me.

The World and the Devil come after, namely when a child (sooner or later
according to his capacity) is able, with the consent of his reason and will, to
commit an actual sin. But all three determine in and at the same moment, namely
just at the time of our death: till then, be sure Satan will not leave thee.

Yet let none be disheartened at Satan's never leaving to tempt them, but, in a
comfortable opposition thereunto, let them consider that Gods protection will
never finally leave to preserve them. Indeed, for some time (especially to the
apprehension of a wounded conscience) he deserteth his servants, who complain
with Christ, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Yet we have the certain
promise of constant assistance; which he will infallibly perform: Heb. 13.5. I
will never LEAVE thee, nor forsake thee.

Here under favor, I conceive that though our Savior was afterward often
tempted with the Devil, yet the notion and nature of his future, much differed
from his former temptations. His former were chiefly for Satan's information,
and the other were only for Christ's vexation; the former partly to try, the
later solely to trouble our Savior; the Devil then knowing full well, that he
was the Son of God.

And Angels.
Solitary Men (such as Christ in the wilderness) have always the company of
Angels or Devils. Doct.


Three things are herein observable.

First, Man's soul (chiefly when alone) admits of no vacuitie: Anima Plena. The
avoidance of one, is always the Induction of another incumbent.

Secondly, it is impossible that good and bad Angels should be reconciled at
the same time, in the same subject. 2 Cor. 6.14. For what agreement is there
betwixt light and darkne^s? Those Stars of sweet light, and the Star Wormwood,
Revel. 8.11. are of so opposite Horizons, the elevation of the one,
necessitates the depression of the other.

Thirdly, the intrant of the Angels is in the very instant after the Exit of
Satan; and so reciprocally, when Satan's sets, then Angels arise. Thus in Saul,
1 Samuel 16.14. The Spirit of the Lord departed from him, and an evil spirit from
the Lord troubled him. And as, Genesis 27.30. Jacob was scarce gone out from the
presence of Isaac his Father, when Esau his brother came in* so, plain, and
pious, and profitable thoughts are no sooner departed our solitary souls, but
presently rough, hairy, cru^l, wild, and wicked cogitations succeed in their
room.

Seeing melancholy persons will have some (and it is to be fea^ed bad) company,
Use.
let them avoid loneness, and associate themselves with such as are godly and
religious.

Ministered unto him.
Angels on all occasions were very officious in their attendance on Christ.
Doct.


First, at his conception, Luke 1.26. An Angel, Gabriel by name, first brought
the blessed tidings thereof.

Secondly, After his birth Angels, Luke 2.10. both celebrated the same with
their singing, and imparted to shepherds the first intelligence thereof.

Thirdly, In his Infancy, Mat. 2.19. An Angel gave notice to Joseph of Herod's
death, and that now Christ might safely return into his own Country.

Fourthly, In his Temptation, here in my text.

Fifthly, At his Passion, when his Agony began in the Garden, Luke 22.43. There
appeared an Angel unto him from Heaven, strengthening him.

Some will say, Seeing it is the general opinion of Divines that the blessed
elect Angels are established and strengthened in Christ, how comes one of them
to strengthen Christ at this time? But let such know, it was the humane nature
of Christ, (which is less and lower then the Angelical) which here received
strengthening from him. Besides, the Angel being then in a calm, and Christ in
the Tempest of an Agony, no wonder if a meaner might minister comfort and
support to one otherwise and at other times far his superior.

Sixthly, At his Resurrection, Mat. 28.2. when an Augel (which rolled away the
stone from the Grave) attested the same.

Lastly, after his Ascension, Act. 1. 10. when two Angels declared the manner
of his return unto Judgment.

Nor is this Angelical attendance confined to Christ alone, but extended also
to all Christians in some degree, as Page 99.
formerly we have largely declared, and here intend no repetition thereof;
where also we have proved, that in compensation of their service (though other
civilities be due to Angels) no worship may lawfully be tendered unto them.

What then is the reason of the inequality of Angels demeanor in Scripture,
Quest.
that though sometimes they refuse adoration, as Judges 13.16. Rev. 19.10, 22,
9. otherwhiles they accept thereof, as may appear by Abraham's so solemn
praying unto an Angel, Genesis 18.23. for the sparing of Sodom?

We may observe that those three Angels mentioned in that Chapter, Answ.
appeared in three distinct capacities or representations.

First, They are all three called MEN, Genesis 18.2. Three MEN stood by him;
because they took on them the shape and Bodies of men.

Secondly, two of them are termed ANGELS, Genesis 19. and all three promiscuously,
Heb. 13.2. so called) because of their beauty and luster, power and strength,
surpassing Humanity wherein they did appear.

Thirdly, one of them Abraham styles my Lord, JEHOVAH (who alone, stayed
behind, whilst the other two, as his servants, were sent to S^dom) and terms
him, Genesis 18.25. The Judge of all the earth. To him only (as not a mere Angel
of God, but the very Angel-God) is Abraham's adoration tendered, and therefore
it makes nothing for the Popish worship of common and created Angels.

Conclusion.
Being now for some time to take my leave of this Auditory, and having the
seasonable mention of the Ministration of Angels in my Text; I know how, if one
of the Romish persuasion were in my place, he would particularly consigne you
to the tutellage of such Guardian angels which he conceives most proper for
your several professions. For instance; Are there any martial men that hear me
to day? such he would bequeath at this his departure, to the Military angel,
Exodus 33.2. And I will send my Angel before thee, etc. namely, the same who
drove out the seven Nations of Canaan, before the face of the Israelites. Are
there any here, which trade in Merchandise on the Seas? such would he commend
to the protection of the Angel of the waters, Rev. 16.5. to preserve them and
their estates. Are there any here, who stand on their preferment, as we term
it, I mean single persons who in due time intend marriage? such he would commit
to the guard of the Matrimonial Angel, Genesis 24.7. He shall send his Angel
before thee, the same which provided a gracious wife for Isaac.

But to avoid all exception, shun all shadow of Superstition, and to be best
assured of protection, I commend all qualities and conditions of People, to the
Tuition of the God of these Angels; Taking my farewell of this Auditory with the
words of Saint Paul to the Ephesians, Act. 20.32. And now brethren, I commend
you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to
give you an inheritance amongst all them that are sanctified. Amen.

FINIS.

