A SERMON OF Contentment.

By T. F. a Minister of Gods Word.

Phillip. 4. 11. I have learned in whatsoever state I am therewith to be
content.



LONDON.

Printed by J.D. for John Williams at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.

1648.

TO THE HONORABLE and truly noble Sr. JOHN D'ANVERS Knight.
Sir,
THis small Sermon may well be termed Zoar, for is it not a little one? Yet it
bears good proportion to the short text; on which it discourses; little
auditory for which it was composed, and your private Chapel wherein it was
delivered. As it is small, so it desired to be secret, and intended no
appearance in public. Good was the counsel which Iaash gave Amaziah. 2 Cro.
25. 19. Abide now at home, especially in our dangerous days, when all going,
is censurable for gadding abroad without a necessary vocation.

But seeing such was your importunity, to have it Printed, that all my excuses
to the contrary, which I could allege with truth, and the delays, which I
could make with manners, might not prevail: I have chosen rather to be
accounted undiscreet then uncivil, and have yielded to your desire. Surely Sir,
Heaven can never return a denial to your requests whom I presume, (by
proportion of your earnest desiring so small a matter) to be zealous in your
desires of hier concernment, that nothing but a grant can give you satisfaction.

But the mainest motive, next your importunity, which put me on this public
adventure, was the consideration of my engagements to your noble bounty, above
my possibility of deserving it. The Apostle with it is part of the duty of a
good servant, Tit. 2. v. 9. (...), not answering again. I must confess my
self your Servant, and therefore it ill beseemed me to dislike or mutter
against any thing you was pleased I should do. Thus desiring the continuance
and increase of all spiritual and temporal happiness on your honor. I commend
you to the Almighty.

T. F.

1 TIMOTHY 6.6. But godliness with contentment is great gain.
IN the foregoing I.
verse, St. Paul sets down the worldlings prayer, creed, and commandments;
which is their daily desire, belief and practice, and all contained in three
words; Gain is Godliness. Now in my text St. Paul counter-mines their opinion,
or raises our antiposition to batter down their false conceit, most elegantly
crossing and inverting their words; But Godliness with contentment is great gain.

Take notice of the unaffected II.
elegancy of the Apostle, how clearly and naturally with a little adtion, he
turns the worldlings Paradox into a Christian truth. Though Sermons may not
laugh with light expressions: yet it is not unlawful for them to smile with
delightful language: Always provided, that the sweetness of the sauce spoil
not the savourinesse of the meat The Eccles. 12. 10.
Preacher sought to find out acceptable or pleasant words, that so his sound
matter might be more welcome to his auditors.

Well, here we have III.
two contrary opinions set on foot together, (...) is godliness, faith the
worldling, whose Gold is his god, looking and telling thereof, his saying of
his prayers. Godliness is great gain, says God himself, by the mouth of the
Apostle. Now as Peter Acts 4. ^9.
in another case, whether it be right to hearken unto man more then unto God,
judge ye.

The text presents us IV.
with a Bride.

2 A Bride-maide. 3 Her great portion. 4 The present payment thereof.
1 The Bride Godliness. We need not enquire further into her Pedigree and
extraction, she carries her Father in her Name; and relates to God the Author
thereof.

2. The Bride-maid. The Virgin her companion that follows her, or her
inseparable attendant, Contentment. Godliness with contentment.

3 Her great Portion, Wherein observe the rich ware, Gain; The large measure,
Great gain.

4 The present payment. Not in expectances or reversions; but down on the
nail, presently deposited, is. Godliness with contentment is great gain.

We begin with the Bride, and in the first place let us put it to the
question. What godliness is? To which quere, several answers will be made
according to men's several affections. Ask some Friar observant, What godliness
is, and he will tell you, the wearing of ashirt of hair, girdle of hemp, fasting
so often in the week, praying so often in the day with such like Canonical
devotions. Ask the tenacious maintainer of some new upstart opinion, what
godliness is? And he will answer, It is the zealous defending with limb and life
of such, and such strangetenets, which our fathers perchance never hard of
before; yea which is worse, such a person will presume soto confine Godliness to
his opinion, as to ungodly all others who in the least particular dissent from
him. Oh, if God should have no more mercy on us, then we have charity one to
another, what would become of us? Indeed Christ terms his own a little
flock, Fear not little Luke 12. 32.
flock. But if some men's rash and cruel censures should be true, the number of
the godly would be so little, it would not be a flock.

5 It is a true but sad consideration how in all ages, men with more vehemence
of spirit have stickled about small and unimportant points then about such
matters as most concern their salvation. So that I may say (these sorrowful
times having tuned all our tongues to military phrases) some men have lavished
more powder and shot in the defense of some slight outworks which might well
have been quitted without any loss to Religion, then in maintaing the main
platform of piety, and making good that Castle of Gods service and their own
salvation. Pride will be found upon serious enquiry the principal cause hereof.
For when men have studied many weeks, months or years about some additionall
point in Divinity, they contend to have the same essential to salvation,
because it is essential to their reputation, least otherwise their discretion
be called into question, for taking so much pains in vain, and spending so much
precious time about a needless matter. Hereupon they labor to inhance the
value of their own studies, and will have all those mines gold, which they have
discovered; yea, all their superstructures must be accounted fundamental: All
their far fetched deductions and consequential results must bereputed tobe
immediate and essential to godliness; yea, the very life of godliness must be
placed in the zealous asserting the same.

6 But it will be the safest way for us to take adescription of godliness from
a pen infallible, impartial, and unconcerned in our modern distractions. Even
from Saint James himself. Pure James 1.27.
religion (or godliness) and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspoted from the world. This sets forth the practical part of Religion,
and, as I may term it, the heat of godliness. To which if the speculative
part, the light of Godliness be added, to know the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom he John 17. 3.
has sent, then godliness is made complete. And godliness thus defined admits
of a latitude, so that it may consist with some errors in judgment, and
infirmities in practice; Provided that the godly person persists in Faith, Hope
and Charity, which hold out the sum of Religion as to the necessary part
thereof. As for all particular forms of Church Government, Ceremonies and
outward manner of divine worship, most of them admitting of alteration upon
emergencies, and variation according to circumstances of time, place, and
persons, (though these be more or less ornamentall to godliness, as they
nearer or further off relate to divine institution) yet it is erroneous to fix
or place the life or essence of godliness therein. Act. 10. 34.
We conclude this point with the words of Saint Peter Of a truth I perceive
that God is no respecter of persons; But in every nation, he that fears him
and works righteousness is accepted with him: Yea, in one and the same nation,
he that fears him and works righteousness of what Sect, Side, Party,
Profession, Opinion, Church, Congregation soever he be is accepted with him, as
having true godliness in his heart which with contentment is great gain.

7 Come we now to the Brid-maid attending her, Contentment. Contentment is a
willing submission of ours to Gods will in all conditions. I say willing; for,
if it be patience perforce, what reward have you? What do you more then
others? Do not even the Publicans and Sinners the same? Yea, what do you more
then Mules and Horses which being kept with Bit and Bridle quietly carry their
ryders which they cannot cast off; In all conditions, patient in adversity,
humble in prosperity, thankful in both; looking neither above our estates with
the ambitious man to have it higher; nor beyond it, with the covetous man to
spread it broader; nor besides it with the envivous man, repyning at the estate
of others: but directly on the Portion God has given us, and fully satisfied
with the same. Even justifying Gods proceedings unto us, though we receive
from him what flesh and blood would count hard measure, namely, if his Divine
wisdom should so appoint it, That with Eccles. 7. 15.
just men we perish with our righteousness, whilst wicked men prolong their
lives in their wickedness.

8 Here we must take notice of the conjunction copulative, with. Godliness with
contentment. Which furnishes us with two profitable observations, 1.
Wheresoever there is true godliness there is contentment. 2. Wheresoever there
is true contentment there is godliness.


Like Saul and Jonathan, 2 Samuel 23
lovely and pleasant in their lives and in their deaths they are not divided.
These twin graces always go together; True it is, that Gods children may often
have their fits and qualms of coffeehouse, as Eliah 1 Kin. 19 4.
and Jonah had: But this Jonah 4.1
proceeds from the imperfections of grace in them; They are not discontented as
they are godly, but as they have a principle of ungodliness in them the
remnant of carnal corruption.

9 On the other side, no wicked man whatsoever he pretends, can have true
contentment.

Remarkable it is that in the same chapter we find two brethren laying claim
to the grace of contentation, but on different; yea, contrary titles.

Esau said, Genesis 33. 9 I have enough my brother, keep that thouhast unto thy
self. Jacob said, Genesis 33. 11. God has dealt graciously with me because I
have enough. Now Esau's enough was indeed not enough, being only a proud and
vainglorious brag, scorning and disdaining at the first (till importunity
altered him) to receive a gift from his younger Brother, as if it were a
disgrace and disparagement to his greatness to admit of any addition or
accession of his estate from his inferior. Jacobs enough was a true and real
acknowledgement of Gods goodness to him, resting satisfied with that portion
divine providence had allotted him, such contentment always gos with godliness,
and is great gain.

10 Come we now to the Dowery; and before we descend to the particulars
thereof, take notice in general of Gods bountiful dealing with his servants.
God might command us to work and give us no wages, and most justly enjoyne us
to labor all day in his Vineyard, and give us no penny at night; Very good
reason. Why should we expect to receive profit by him, who return no profit to
him. When ye have done all those Luke 17.10.
things which are commanded you: say, We are unprofitable servants, we have
done that which was our duty to do; Saul did not give but take a dowry with
his 1 Samuel 18 25.
daughter, and it is observable that 100 of foreskins only were required of
David, but he gave 200 for her. Such was the super-errogation of his valor;
love and loyalty especially when joined together, never give scant measure: God
in like manner might expect that we should give him a portion for the
attaining of godliness; All we can do all we can suffer is too little to
purchase so precious a grace. Yet see the goodness of God, who knowing he is to
deal with such dull workmen, who will take pains no longer then they are paid,
whets us on with reward in his service.

11 Here I deny not but it is lawful to look on those blessings and benefits
which God reaches out to us for his service; Moses himself had respect unto
the recompense of reward. Hebr. 11.26.
But two things we must take heed of; First that we receive this reward in
notion and nature of a mere gratuity, not exactly merited by the condignity of
our performances, and only due unto us by the virtue of Gods free promise and
not our deserts. Secondly, that as we look on the reward, so we look through
and beyond it. It being a good Inn for our desires to bait at, but a bad home
for them to lodge in; Let us labor to divest our souls of mercenary thoughts,
and learn to serve God for himself; Active was the affection of Sechem to
Dinah, as appears Genesis 34.11, 12
by his request to Jacob and his sons. Let me find grace in your eyes, and
what ye shall say unto me, I will give. Ask me never so much dowry and gift,
and I will give according as ye shall say unto me: But give me the Damosel to
wife. Oh, that our hearts were but wrought to this holy temper, that we should
desire godliness on any terms, undergo any hardship, though there were neither
Hell to punish, nor Heaven to reward. However great is Gods goodness, who
knowing whereof we are made, and remembering that we are but dust, is pleased
to spur us on in the raze of piety with a reward propounded, godliness with
contentment is great gain.

12. So much in genenerall, That there is a Dowry; Now in particular what is
the dovvry of godliness. It is great gain.

Great gain, of what? Let Object.
Saint Paul himself, who wrote this Epistle tell us, when he cast up his audit,
what profit he got by the profession of Piety. In labors more abundant, in
stripes above measure, in prisons 2 Cor. 11 23.
more frequent, in deaths often. Where is the gain, all this while? Perchance
it follows, We will try another verse. In journying often, in perils of waters,
in perils Verse. 26.
of Robbers, in perils by mine own Countrymen, in perils by the Heathen, in
perils in the City, in perils in the Wilderness, in perils in the Sea, in perils
amongst false brethren. Where is the gain all this while? you will say, these
were but the Apostles adventures, his rich return (slow but sure) will come at
last. Once more we will try. In weariness (...) 27.
and painfulnesse, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often,
in cold and nakedness. The further we go, the less gain we find, Cushai said
unto David, May all the Enemies of (...).
my Lord the King be as the young man Absalom is. But if this be gain, May all
the enemies of God and goodness have plenty thereof. It will never sink into a
worldlings head that godliness is gain, whilst the grandees of piety are
found so poor, Eliah begging food of a Widow, Peter without gold or silver;
Our Savior himself not having where to lay his head.

It is confessed that the Answ.
doctrine in the text, can in no wise be made good according to the principles
of flesh and blood. Our Savior said unto Pilate, My kingdom is not of John
18.36.
this world. So the sense and interpretation of my text is not of this world,
is not carnal but spiritual, not temporal but eternal. This will plainly
appear, if these two particulars be well weighed.

1 What the world counts gain, is loss. 2 What the world counts loss is
gain.
What the world counts gain is loss. For what will it profit a man if he win
the whole world, and loose his own soul. Most poor is the condition of those
who have plenty of worldly wealth, and are not rich toward God; Country Luke
12.21.
people having a piece of light gold use to fill the Indentures thereof with
dirt, so to make it the heavier; But wisemen will not take dirt for gold in
payment. It seems in like manner that wicked men being sensible that they want
weight in the scales of the sanctuary, Dan. 5.27.
( Tekel thou art waighed in the balance and found too light) of set purpose
load themselves with thick clay. But Hab. 2.6
all will not make them current in Gods sight, for riches avail not in the day
of Prove. 11.4.
wrath. They are long in getting with much pains, hard in keeping with much
care, quick in loosing with more sorrow. Wherefore as the Apostle mensions
Science falsely 2 Timothy 6.20.
so called, so this is gain falsely so called by men.

13 Secondly, They nicke-name that loss which is gain in very deed, such were
all those sanctified afflictions which Saint Paul suffered. It is confessed that
thorns and thistles had never grown in the world, had Adam stood in his
integrity, yet some of them since man's fall cannot well be wanted; Holy thistle
(we know) has a Sovereign virtue, and sweet bryer has a pleasant scent. All
tribulations are thorns to flesh and blood (the word imports as much) yet as
Sanctified to Gods children in Christ they become of excellent use, increasing
their grace here and glory hereafter; Lynnen new washed though it may dry more
by day time, is observed to whiten more in a fair night; Adversity sanctified
to a Christian soul does more improve the same in purity and piety, then the
constant enjoying of a prosperous condition.

14 But we need go no further for the proof of the great profit gotten by Gods
service, then to the words of the Apostle. Godliness has the promise 1 Timothy
4.8.
of the life which now is, and of that which is to come. It is reported of
Alexander that having conquered the World, he wept because there was no more
left for his valor to overcome: But least Gods children should have any cause
of coffeehouse, that their joy may have room enough to dilate it self in,
see a life and a life, a world and a world, one here and another hereafter,
one in possession, another in reversion allotted unto them.

15 Come we now to the present payment, is, Even at this present instant, God
has done great things for us already, whereof we rejoice. Excellent is the
expression of the Apostle. Or things present, or things to 1 Cor. 3. 22.
come, All are yours. Here some carping curious Critics may challenge St. Paul
of impropriety of language; yea, find both falls Grammar and Logic in his
words, false Tense, to say future things are, falls Logic, for how can things
to come be ours, which be not, But know St. Paul spoke with languages 1 Cor. 14
18.
more then them all, and had no need to learn the congruity of construction
from any other. It is good in law to say, This reversion i mine because the
reversioner is in present possession of the right to it, though not of the
profit by it; yea, heaven on earth is actually ours already; the possession of
a clear conscience, and the spirit of adoption signs and seals unto us the
favor of God, then which, no greater gain.

16 And now as the Eunuch said to Philip, See here is water, what does hinder
me to be baptized, so say I. Act. 8.36
Behold, here is a Bride, Godliness, ready provided; A bride maid, Contentment,
ready prepared. The great portion presently to be paid. What hinders now but
the marriage may instantly proceed, that so we may be wedded and bedded
together. But what answered Philip to the Eunuch? If thou believe with all
thine heart, thou may be Acts 8. 37.
baptized. So say I. If thou love this Bride with all thy Soul, counting
nothing too dear to obtain her, the marriages solemnities may instantly go on.
Oh that I had persuasive eloquence effectually to advance this match, the best
is, what is vvanting in me the spokesman, is plentifully supplied in her the
bride.

17. But two things we must beware of. Take heed you mistake not the shadow
for the substance, the picture for the person. Saint Paul tells us of some, who
have the 2 Timothy 3. 5.
form of godliness, but deny the power thereof. The Poets tells us of many who
at first were suitors to Penelope the Mistress, but at last were married to
the Maids which attended her. It is to be feared that many who pretend to love
godliness it self, fall at last a courting and woeing of the form, the mere
outside and garb of Religion, and content themselves with the same: wherein an
hypocrite may equally, yea exceed the sincerest Saint and servant of God.

Lastly, Beware least thy coveteous heart rather love the Portion then the
Person, have more mind to the gain then the godliness. We find how the next
kinsman was very ready to redeem the parcel of Naomies land which was his
brother Elimelechs. But as soon as withal he heard, he must take Ruth to
Ruth. 4. 6.
wife, he fell back from his promise and purpose; Many there be which are very
forward to wed the gain, but are utterly unwilling to have the godliness with
it. Such a suitor was Balaam himself: O that I might aye the death of Number.
23.10.
the righteous, and let my last end be like his, who was careless to live the
life of the righteous. But let us labor to have the substance and sincerity of
Piety in our hearts, knowing that we are to deal with such a God who prefers a
dram of integrity before a pound of profession; And if we acquit our selves
upright in his presence, godliness with contentment is great gain unto us. I
say godliness in general not restrictively Engrossed to some particular
party, but extended according to the dimension of charity to all persons
agreeing in the essentials to salvation; In my fathers house there be many
Mansions, as Joh.14.2
if God had provided several repositaries of happiness for such as differ in
smaller opinions, vvhilest all agreeing in general godliness, may meet in one
grand Heaven and place of eternal Felicity,

Amen.

