THE UNLAVVFULNESSE Of the New COVENANT, Briefly manifested in a Letter from H.
F. at OXFORD, To his worthy Friend T. A. at Cambridge.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1. March 1643.

A Letter, etc.
SIR,
THat I may give you my Resolution concerning the Covenant: It is to be
considered, that as in all Covenants, so in this; he that enters Covenant,
approves and allows something, and undertakes something: He approves and
allows the design, and intentions of those he enters Covenant with, and
undertakes or binds himself to do and pursue that, for which the Covenant is
made and imposed.

In particular; He that enters this Covenant, does before Almighty God profess:

I.
That he does in conscience allow and approve the Scots Discipline and
Government, and withal binds himself to endeavor the advancement of the
same, by bringing this Kingdom to an Uniformity with them. For that is the
notorious and known meaning and intention of the Imposers of this Covenant in
the first Artic. and its a known and received Rule, that Oaths and Covenants
are taken, not according to the reserved meaning of him that takes them, but
according to the known and notorious meaning and intention of them that impose
them.

II.
That he does in conscience allow and approve of the extirpation of
Episcopacie, and that he will endeavor really and constantly the same, Artic.
2.

III.
That he does in conscience account and esteem those that adhere to the King
(for those are there meant by them that require the Covenant) to be
Indendiaries, Malignants, and common Enemies, and binds himself to discover
unto them all such, that they may be brought to condign punishment, Artic. 4.
and elsewhere.

IIII.
That he allows and approves the assisting and defending of all that enter
into this Covenant, approves the maintaining and pursuing of this Covenant
against all opposition and lets whatsoever; which is, by force of Arms to
compel the King to the Reformation pretended herein, for that such is the
meaning of assisting and defending, of maintaining and pursuing the Covenant
against all opposition, is known and notorious by the arms which they and the
Scots have taken, and used in this pursuit* and still we must remember, that
Oaths and Covenants are taken in the known meaning of those that impose them.
Also as such an one by taking the Covenant allows and approves of such
maintenance and pursuit of this Covenant; so he binds himse^fe, to the utmost
of his endeavor, to such assistance and pursuit, Artic. 6. and elsewhere.

Now for such Gentlemen as by entering this Covenant do hope to be freed of
prison, I would desire them to consider in what a toil they are, far worse
then the prison: for what will they do should they have their liberty? will
they sit quiet at home? No, they bind themselves expressly in this 6. Artic.
not to give themselves over to a Neutralitie in this Cause, and there they call
it a thing detestable. What then? will they assist the King? No, they bind
themselves not to make any defection to the contrary part; and assuredly all
such as do take the Covenant, shall be made to know they have bound themselves
to ^ssist and proceed as f^r as their Masters (who impose it) do or shall
think fit to proceed, and upon default they will be used not only as
Malignants, but as perjured persons. Now ^lthough this Covenant, if taken, does
not indeed bind to performance, yet does it bind to a grievous Sin, in swearing
to do against that, which a man cannot in conscience perform.

V.
He that enters this Covenant, does profess before Almighty God, that he
allows and approves all this as that which much concerns the Glory of God, the
good of this Kingdom, the honor, dignity, the power and greatness of the
King. Artic. 6. and elsewhere.

Now as no Subjects can with good conscience approve this and bind themselves
to the pursuit of it (especially it being without and against his Sovereigns
Command) so much less can he that abhorres these designs and proccedings,
swear and Covenant before Almighty God, that he allows them and binds
himself to the pursuance of them with the utmost of his power.

I marvel much at the Resolution which was given to this purpose, That a
Clergy man might not take this Covenant, but a Layman might. A Resolution
which as it concerns only one Article, the extirpation of Episcopacie, so
does it not satisfy in that particular; For though a Clergy man has more
obligations upon him; yet would I ask: Can any Layman, being a Subject of
this Kingdom, Covenant with other Subjects, and bind himself to do or
endeavor notorious injustice to others? that is, to extirpate a company of
men, whose calling, power, and privileges, are as ancient as the Kingdom?
also to spoil them, or a Church rather, of possessions and interests assured
to them, by as good Law as any Liberty or possession is enjoyed by other
Subjects? much less can Subjects Covenant to force their Sovereign to consent
to such an extirpation and spoiling, from which he is bound by Oath, and cannot
be released of it, but with their consent to whom he makes it, viz. those that
here must be extirpated and spoiled.

As in this particular, so in all other purposes of this Covenant, no Subject
without casting off all conscience of that which is just and right, can bind
himself to sincere and constant pursuance of them according to the true
intention of this Covenant, which he that takes it, does undertake to do in
the presence of Almighty God: but he will rather say to his own soul in the
Psalmists words, Will thou have any thing to do with the stool or seat of
wickedness, which imagines mischief as a Law? Psalm. 94. Or as Jacob in
reference to the Brethren of cruelty. Oh my soul enter not thou into their
secret, Genesis 49. 6.

After the resolution of conscience, it is needless to stand upon outward
motives, to wit, the evil consequences which they threaten to bring upon
Families, Inheritances, etc. yet know, that Houses and Families continue by the
providence and blessing of God, not by the will of cruel and blood-thirsty
men, who (as the Psalmist threatens them) shall not themselves live out half
their days; The Lord direct you, strengthen you, comfort you. A good
conscience is a continual Feast.

FINIS.

