Fullers Comment on Ruth; with two Sermons on special occasions.

TWO Sermons:

The first, COMFORT IN CALAMITY, teaching to Live well.

The other, THE GRAND ASSIZES, minding to Dye well.

BY THOMAS FULLER, B. D.

LONDON, Printed for G. and H Eversden, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Greyhound in Paul's Chur^h-yard. 1654.

TO The Right Worshipful, and deservedly Honored, the Lady ELIZABETH NEWTON,
of CHARLETON in KENT.
MADAME,
SAint Paul in the first to the Thessalonians, chap. 2. verse. 18. says unto
them, I would have come unto you once and again^, but Satan hindered us. I may
make use of the former part of his Expression, applying it to my frequent
Intentions to visit the Place of your Abode, and bestow some Spiritual pains
therein.

But I must not play Satan with Satan, be a false Accuser, to charge on him the
frustrating of my Design, (though generally he be a Back-Friend to all good
Desires) but must justly impute it to my own manifold avocations.

May your Ladyship now be pleased to see what you expected to hear, and read
what I intended to speak. The first of these Sermons was designed for your
Fore-Noones, the latter for your After-Noones Repast.

I am confident you will not measure my respect to you to be the less, because
the benefit to others may be the greater by publishing thereof; and request you
to accept hereof, not as intende^ a full payment for my many Obligations unto
you, but as tendered in consideration of your forbearance, till I am enabled to
express my Gratitude in a greater proportion.

The Lord bless you in your Self, daily sanctifying your rare natural
Endowments with his choicest Graces; bless you in your Self divided, your
Worthy Husband; in your Self multiplied, your hopeful Son; and slowly, but
surely, terminate your Prosperity here with endless happiness hereafter: The
hearty desire of

Your Ladyships boundant Orator, THOMAS FULLER.

COMFORT IN CALAMITY.
A Sermon preached upon a special Occasion in S. Clements Church in London,
near East-cheap.
PSALM. 11. 3. If the Foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?
WE may observe, that David is much pleased with the Metaphor in frequent
comparing himself to a Bird, and that of several sorts: first, to an Eagle,
Psalm. 103. 5. Thy youth is renewed like the Eagles: Sometimes to an Owl, Psalm.
102. 6. I am like an Owl in the Desert: Sometimes to a Pelican, in the same
Verse, Like a Pelican in the Wilderness: Sometimes to a Sparrow, Psalm. 102. 7.
I watch, and am as a Sparrow: Sometimes to a Partridge, as when one does hunt a
Partridge. I cannot say, that he does compare himself to a Dove, but he would
compare himself, Psalm. 55. 6. Oh that I had the wings of a Dove, for then I
would flee away, and be at rest.

Some will say, How is it possible, that Birds of so different a feather should
all so fly together, as to meet in the Character of David? To whom we answer,
That no two men can more differ one from another, then the same servant of God
at several times differs from himself. David in Prosperity, when
commanding, was like an Eagle; in Adversity, when contemned, like an Owl; in
Devotion, when retired, like a Pelican; in Solitariness, when having no
company, like a Sp^rrow; in Persecution, when fearing too much company [of
Saul] like a Partridge.

This general Metaphor of ^ Bird, which David so often used on himself, his
enemies in the first Verse of this Psalm used on him, though not
particularizing the kind thereof: Flee as a Bird to your Mountain; that is,
Speedily betake thy self to thy God, in whom thou hopest for succor and
security.

Quest. Seeing this counsel was both good in it self, and good at this time,
why does David seem so angry and displeased thereat? Those his words, Why say
you to my soul, Flee as a Bird to your Mountain, import some passion, at
leastwise a disgust of the advice.

It is answered, David was not offended with the counsel, but with the manner
of the propounding thereof. His enemies did it Ironically, in a gibing jeering
way, as if his flying thither were to no purpose, and he unlikely to find
there the safety he sought for. How-ever, David was not hereby put out of
conceit with the counsel, beginning this Psalm with this his firm
resolution, In the Lord put I my trust, how say ye then to my soul, etc.

Learn we from hence, when men give us good counsel in a jeering way, let us
take the counsel, and practice it, and leave them the jeere, to be punished
for it.

Indeed, Corporal Cordials may be invenomed, by being wrapped up in poisoned
Papers; not so good Spiritual Advice, where the good matter receives no
infection from the ill manner of the deliverie thereof. Thus when the chief
Priests mocked our Savior, Math. 27. 43. He trusted in God, let him deliver
him now if he will have him. Christ trusted in God never a whit the less for
the fleere and flout which their profaneness was pleased to bestow upon him,
Otherwise, if men's mocks should make us to undervalue good counsel, we might
in this Age be mocked out of our God, and Christ, and Scripture, and Heaven;
the Apostle Jude, verse 18. having ^ore-told, that in the last times there
should be mockers, walking after their own lusts.

The next Verse presents an unequal Combat betwixt armed Power, advantaged
with Policy, on the one side, and naked Innoc^nce on the other.

First, Armed Power: They bend their Bows, and make ready their Arrows,
being all the Artillery of that Age.

Secondly, Advantaged with Policy: That they may privily shoot, to surprise
them with an ambush unawares, probably pretending amity and friendship unto
them.

Thirdly, Naked Innocence: If Innocence may be termed Naked, which is its own
Armor; at the upright in heart.

And now in due order succeedes my Text, which is an Answer to a tacit
Objection which some may raise; namely, That the Righteous are wanting to
themselves, and by their own easiness and unactivitie, (not daring and doing
so much as they might and ought) betray themselves to that bad condition. In
whose defense David shows, that if God in his wise will and pleasure sees it
fitting, for Reasons best known to himself, to suffer Religion to be reduced
to terms of extremity, it is not placed in the power of the best man alive to
remedy and redress the same. If the Foundations be destroyed, what can the
Righteous do?

My Text is hung about with Mourning, as for a Funeral Sermon, and contains,

First, A sad Case supposed, If the Foundations be destroyed.

Secondly, A sad Question propounded, What can the Righteous do?

Thirdly, A sad Answer employed; namely, They can do just nothing, as to the
point of re-establishing the destroyed Foundation.

Note by the way, that in Scripture, when a Question is propounded, and let
fall again, without any Answer returned thereunto, that it generally amounts
to a Negative. Thus says Thamar, 2 Samuel 13. 13. And I, whither shall I cause
my shame to go? that is, Nowhither: neither City, Court, or Country, will
afford me any shelter to cover my shame, or recover my reputation. Prove. 18.
14. But a wounded spirit who can bear? that is, no mere man by his sole
self, without Gods gracious assistance. Math. 16. 26. What is a man profited,
if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own s^ule? that is, nothing at
a^l; when he casts up his Audit, he shall find himself a great loser by the
bargain. If the Foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do? that is,
they can do just nothing; bemoane and bewayl^ they may; restore and re-build
they cannot, what is so destroyed.

Before we go any further, it will be worth our pains to enquire into the
time and occasion of this Psalm. But here we are left at a loss* and cannot
of our selves recover any certainty, nor meet with others to direct us. The
Title of the Psalm is speechless, as to the date and occasion thereof: Nor
makes it, with Zachariah, any signs when, or why composed; only we may be
confident, David made it when the Church was in some great affliction, and
reduced to a doleful condition.

For (under favor) I conceive, that the destroyed Foundations mentioned in the
Text, relate not so properly to the Civil State as to the Church in Israel.
Had this destruction* been principally of Temporal concernment, David would
have said, What can the valiant Champion, or what can the Politic Statesman
do? But seeing the Question is confined to the Righ^eous, it probably
intimates, that the desolation complained of, concerned chiefly the Cause of
the Church, Religion, and Religious persons therein.

If one may offer to make a modest conjecture, it is not improbable this Psalm
might be composed on the sad murder of the Priests by Saul, 1 Samuel 22. 19.
when after the slaughter of Ahim^le^h the High Priest, Doeg the Edomite by
command from Saul, slew in one day fourscore and five persons which wore a
Linen Ephod. I am not so carnal, as to build the Spiritual Church of the
Jews on the material walls of the Priests City at Nob, (which then by Doeg
was smitten with the edge of the sword) but this is most true, that knowledge
must preserve the people, and Mal. 2. 7. The Priests lips shall preserve
knowledge: and then it is easy to conclude, what an Earthquake this Massacre
might make in the Foundations of Religion.

There is some difference in the Translations, even as much as is betwixt the
Praeter and Future Tense.

The Old Translation What have the righteous done?

The New Translation What can the righteous do?

We embrace the latter, as confident that those Worthy Translators were led
thereunto by sufficient Reasons from the Original, seeing Sextinus Amama, a
learned Foreign Critic (but so long living in Oxford, that he perfectly
understood the English Tongue) professes that Translation was done usque ad
orbis invidiam. And now we proceed to a Paraphrase upon the words of the Text.

If.
It is the only word of Comfort in the Text, that what is said is not
Positive, but Suppositive; not Theticall, but Hypotheticall. And yet this
Comfort, which is but a spark, (at which we would willingly kindle our hopes)
is quickly sadded with a double Consideration.

First, Impossible Suppositions produce impossible Consequences. As is the
Mother so is the Daughter. Therefore surely Gods holy Spirit would not suppose
such a thing, but what was feasible, and possible, but what either had, did, or
might come to pass.

Secondly, the Hebrew word is not the Conditional Im, si, si forte, but Chi,
quia, quoni^m, because, and (although here it be favorably rendered If) seems
to import more therein, that the sad Case had already happened in David's days.

I See therefore, that this If, our only hope in the Text, is likely to prove
with Jobs friends, but a miserable Comforter. Well, it is good to know the
worst of things, that we may provide our selves accordingly: and therefore let
us behold this doleful Case, not as doubtful, but as done; not as feared, but
felt; not as suspected, but at this time really come to pass.

The Foundations.
Positiones, the things formerly fixed, placed, and settled: It is not said, if
the Roof be ruinous, or if the side Walls be shattered, but If the Foundations.

Fo^ndations be destroyed.
In the Plural. Here I will not warrant my skill in Architecture, but conceive
this may pass for an undoubted Truth: It is possible, that a Building settled
on several entire Foundations (suppose them Pillars) close one to another, if
one of them fail, yet the Structure may still stand, or rather hang, (at the
least for a short time) by virtue of the Complicative, which it receives from
such Foundations which still stand secure. But in case there be a total Rout,
and an utter Ruin of all the Foundations, none can fancy to themselves a
possibility of that Buildings subsistence.

What can the Righteous?
That is, he that would be Righteous, that desires it, that endeavors it, that
in Gods acceptance through Christ, is interpreted to be Righteous. Otherwise,
take the word in the high sense and strict acceptance thereof, for such a one
whose Righteousness is of proof against Gods sharpest and strongest Justice,
and then the Question will not be, What can the Righteous do? but, Where can
such a Righteous man be found?

What can the Righteous?
The Righteous indefinitely, equivalent to the Righteous universally; not only
the Righteous as a single Arrow, but in the whole Sheafe; not only the
Righteous in their personal, but in their diffusive capacity. Were they all
collected into one Body, were all the Righteous (living in the same Age wherein
the Foundations are destroyed) summed up and modelled into one Corporation, all
their joint Endeavors would prove ineffectuall to the reestablishing of the
fallen Foundations, as not being man's work, but only Gods work to perform.

What Can the Righteous?
Know here, that the Can of the Righteous is a limited Can, confined to the
Rule of Gods Word, they can do nothing but what they can lawfully do, 2 Cor.
13. 8. For we can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth: Illud
possumus, quod jure possumu^. Wicked men can do any thing; their Conscience,
which is so wide that it is none at all, will bear them out to act any thing
how unlawful soever, to Stab, Poison, Massacre, by any means, at any time, in
any place, whosoever stands betwixt them and the effecting their Desires. Not
so the Righteous; they have a Rule whereby to walk, which they will not, they
must not, they dare not cross. If therefore a Righteous man were assured, that
by the breach of one of Gods Commandments he might restore decayed Religion,
and re-settle it statu quo prius, his hands, head, and heart are tied up, he
can do nothing, because their damnation is just who say, Romans 3. 8. Let us do
evil that good may come thereof.

Do.
It is not said, What can they think? It is a great Blessing which God has
allowed injured people, that though otherwise oppressed and straightened, they may
freely enlarge themselves in their Thoughts. Surely, if Tyrants might have
their will, as the Persian King made a Law, Dan. 6. 7. That none should ask a
Petition of any God, or man, save of Darius, for thirty days; so they would
enact, That none should think a good thought of any but of themselves; and
every Cogitation against their Proceedings should be Actionable and Punishable.

But blessed be God, thoughts are free in the Courts and Consistories of Man,
be they never so bad; no Informer can accuse them, no Person can indite them,
no Jury can be empanelled upon them, no Judge can condemn them, no Sheriff
can execute them. God has made Rehoboth, he has given room, he has allowed
this liberty to his Servants, to spread forth their thoughts (as Hezekiah did
Sennacheribs Letter, 2 King. 19. 14.) before the Lord the only searcher of
hearts. Think they may; But what can the Righteous do?

Do.
It is not said, What can the Righteous say? surely they could say something if
it might be heard, Acts 19. 39. (...), In a lawful Assembly, four things
concurring to the making thereof.

1. A free place where is no fear of a forcible surprise.

2. A competent and convenient time to ^it and furnish themselves to make their
just defense; for Gods ordianry Servants dare not (for fear of tempting him)
rely upon the extraordinary promise (proper to the times of the Primitive
persecution) Matt. 10. 19. It shall be given you in the same hour what ye shall
speak: No, now adays, Gods best Saints pretend not so much Spirit, but that
they must help themselves by premeditation.

3. An unpartiall Judge, not one An^nias -like, Acts 23. 2. which will command
Innocence when beginning to plead, to be smitten on the mouth. Truth has often
sought Corners, not as suspecting her Cause, but as fearing such Judges.

4. A silent, docible and unbyassed Auditory; not such as come hither with full
intent to carry away the same judgment (how ^rroneous soever) that they
brought hither, misreporting whatso^^er makes against them.

If the Righteous in an ^ssembly thu* constituted, may be heard for themselves,
they could plead something for their dear Clients the destroyed Foundations.
Otherwise alas, what will it boot the Lark to plead for its life in the claws
of a Kite; what will it benefit a Lamb to traverse his innocence in the paws
of a Lion, where the foresaid necessary requisites to freedom cannot be
obtained? But all they can say (and give loosers leave to speak) though it
might conduce much to the easing of their own, and perchance the convincing of
their enemies hearts (if not over-hardned,) yet it contributes nothing to the
undestroying of the Foundations, in which case, What can the Righteous do?

Do.
It is not said, What can the Righteous suffer? This is the honor of
Christians, that when they cannot find Hands lawfully to Act, they will find
Shoulders patiently to Bear. The ancient Lutherans before Luther, were called
Paterenians, a word that will hardly be reconciled to good Lati^e, as being
barbarous in the Grammar and Extraction thereof. Yet ^ believe I may make it
Latin sooner then make it English; justify the Etymology of the word, sooner
then persuade the the practice thereof, to make it free Denison of our Nation.
They were such people whose backs were Anvils for their Enemies Hammer to smite
upon. We must not suffer the honor of passive Obedience herein to be dead and
buried, at least wise we must be mourners at the Funeral thereof. The Righteous
can, will, and shall suffer much; but alas if the Foundations be destroyed,
What can the Righteous do?

But now we are met with a Giant Objection, which with Goliath must be removed,
or else it will obstruc^ our present proceedings.

Is it possible that the Found^tions of Religion should be destroyed? Can God
be in so long a sleep, yea, so long a Lethargy, as patiently to permit the
Ruins ^hereof? If he looks on, and yet does ^ot see these Fou^dations when
de^troyed; where then is his Omnisciency? ^f he sees it, and cannot help it*
where then is his Omnipotency? If he sees it, can help it, and will not,
where then is his Goodness and Mercy? Martha said to Jesus, Joh. 11. 21. Lord,
if thou had been ^ere, my Brother had not dyed. But many will say, Were God
effectually present in the World with his aforesaid Attributes, surely the
Foundations had not dyed, had not been destroyed.

We answer Negatively* that it is impossible that the Foundations of Religion
should ever be totally and finally destroyed, either in relation to the Church
in general, or in reference to every true and lively Member thereof.

For the first, we have an express promise of Christ, Math. 16. 18. The Gates
of Hell shall not prevail against it. Fundamenta tamen stant inconcussa
Sionis. And as for every particular Christian, the second of Timothy, 2. 19.
Nevertheless, the Foundation of God stands sure, ^aving this seal, the Lord
knows them that are his.

How-ever, though for the Reasons aforementioned in the Objections, (the
inconsisten^ie thereof with the Attributes of G^ds Omnipotency, Omnisciencie,
and Goodness) the Foundations can never totally and finally, yet may they
partially be destroyed, quo^d gradum, in a fourfold degree, as follows.

First, in the desires and utmost endeavors of wicked men, They bring their
1. Hoc velle, 2. Hoc agere, 3. Totum posse.


If they destroy not the Foundations, it is no thanks to them* seeing all the
World will bear them witness they have done their best, (that is, their
worst) what their might and malice could perform.

Secondly, in their own vain-gloriou^ imaginations: They may not only vainly
boast, but also verily believe, that they have destroyed the Foundations.
Applyable to this purpose, is that high Rant of the Roman Emperor, Luke 2. 1.
And it came to pass in those days, that there went out a Decree from Caesar
Augustus, that all the world should be taxed. All the world ^ Whereas he had,
though much, not all in Europe, little in Asia, less in Africa, none in
America; which was so far from being conquered, it was not so much as known
to the Romans. But Hyperbole is not a Figure, but the ordinary language of
Pride: because indeed Augustus had very much, he proclaims himself to have
all the world.

Thus no doubt Herod, Math. 2. was confident he had killed all the Infants in
and about B^thleem, and so had sped and dispatched the Jewish King amongst the
rest, when he safely had escaped his fury.

Thus the persecuting Emperors conceited themselves to have destroyed all the
Bibles in the world, whereof so many were surrendered up unto them by the hands
of the Traditores (in plain English Traitors) deputed by the Church to
preserve and keep that Treasure; and yet* bl^ssed be God, a Remnant was left,
from which the Christians at this day have plentifully recruited themselves.
Thus Tyrants please themselves, in reporting that they have destroyed all the
Foundations of Religion, when happily unhappily they have partly ruinated some of
them.

In such a case, no wonder if Fame (the Parasite-Generall of Gre^tnesse)
trumpets forth the Triumphs of Tyrants in the largest dimensions. Absalom is
said to have killed all the Kings sons, 2 Samuel 13. 30. when indeed only
Amnon was slain. Thus Flattery will make the most of Furies achievements,
and by a Synecdoche of the whole for a part, all the Foundations shall be
reported to be destroyed.

Thirdly, the Foundations may be destroyed as to all outward visible
illustrious apparition. The Church in Persecution is like unto a Ship in a
Tempest; down go all their Masts, yea, sometimes for the more speed, they are
forced to cut them down: not a piece of Canvas to play with the Winds, no
Sails to be seen; they lie close notted to the very Keele, that the Tempest
may have the less power upon them: though when the Storm is over, they can
hoise up their Sails as high, and spread their Canvas as broad as ever before.
So the Church in time of Persecution feared, but especially felt, loses all
gayness and gallantrie which may attract and allure the eyes of beholders, and
contenteth it self with its own secrecy. In a word, on the Work-d^yes of
Affliction she wears her worst Clothes, whilst her best are laid up in her
Wardrobe, in sure and certain hope that God will give her a holy and happy
Day, when with joy she shall wear her best Garments.

Lastly, they may be destroyed in the jealous apprehensions of the best Saints
and servants of God, especially in their Melancholy Fits: I will instance in no
Punie, but in a Star of the first magnitude and greatest eminency, even
Elijah himself complaining, 1 Kings 19. 10. And I, even I only am left, and
they seek my life, to take it away.

Where had Elijah lived? Did his intelligence or intellectuals deceive him, to
be thus mistaken? His intelligence! So conversant with Gods servants, as to
know none of them, but merely to conceive, that the whole species of Gods
people was conserved only in his individual self? Surely, the fault was
rather in his intellectuals, and that only for the present his passion at this
time imposed on his judgment, and betrayed him to mistake. The clearest
apprehension may lose its way, in the midst of excessive Joy, Love, Grief,
Fear, both the last meeting in Elijah. Still God had seven thousand hearts
belonging to him, whose knees never bowed unto Baal: probably some of them
might be known to Elijah, but for the present forgotten by him.

Whence we observe, first, that no under-Officer (such as Elijah was) in the
Army of the Church Militant, knows the List of all the Names of those, who
at the same Time, and in the same Place, serve therei^, but only God the
General, and Christ the Lieutenant-Generall of the Army.

Secondly, as concealed Lands belonged anciently to the King, so many a close,
secret, and unsuspected Christian (especially in times of Persecution) belongs
only to the God of Heaven.

But some will say, Why does God suffer the Foundations to come so near to be
destroyed? Is it not at the best some diminution and abatement of his
Goodness? Why will he not prevent this graduall destruction of the
Foundations, which so much grieveth the godly, and gives occasion to the
wicked to triump^? I answer, this is done for several Reason^ concealed in the
Breast and Bosom of Divine Providence, and for some Reasons known and
communicated to men; three whereof in humility and modesty are here presented
unto us.

First, to give occasion to Christians to exercise their Winter^Graces; I count
some Summer-Graces in their hearts, namely such, the principal use whereof is
in the time of their Prosperity, as Humility, Moderation, etc. others are
Winter-Graces, as Patience, Contentmen^, etc. I confess, that Thankfulness
is seasonable Summer and Winter, Ephesians. 5. 20 Giving of thanks always for all
things: like Holly and Ivy, green all the year long, it is constantly in the
prime thereof. How-ever, that the aforesaid Winter Graces, and especially
Patience may have her perfect work, James 1. 4. no whit abortive in the time,
or defective in the members thereof, God in his wisdom will permit that the
Foundations may be gradually destroyed.

Secondly, God permits the enemies of Religion to atchieve such a
destruction, that plumped up with their own success, they may at the last be
the fuller Sacrifice to his Justice. For as he feeds himself daily on the
punishment of lean and common Offenders, so his Justice sometimes takes state
to feast it self as King Solomon, 1 Kings 4. 23. on faited Foul, on men
larded with thriving and batling in their own villainies, Psalm. 119. 70. Their
heart is as fat as grease. Abel offered to God, Genesis 4. 4. of the fat of his
Flock. God in like manner sometimes is delighted to offer to himself the
fattest Malefactors, fed in the Stall of succeeding wickedness.

Thirdly, God permits the Foundations to be destroyed, because he knows he
can un-destroy them; I mean re-build them in what minute and moment he
pleases himself. It is no Policy for men to suffer growing evils to increase,
because suddenly they may start past help and hope. Thus it is not good to
dally with danger, and delay with Diseases; Venienti occurrite morbo; it is no
wisdom for men to suffer a House to run long to ruin, lest it prove past
repair. But nullum tempus occurrit Deo, all times are equally easy for God to
recover his Right, and sometimes are more for his Honor, namely, when he
interposeth his Power to his greater Honor and Glory, in that seasonable
minute and moment, when men say it is past hope, and give up all for desperate,
yea, for lost and destroyed.

Come we now to that Point which we conceive both pertinent to the Text, and
profitable for our Times, namely, to give advice how people should behave
themselves, if God should for their sins condemn them to live in a Time and
Place wherein the Foundations of Religion (so far as they are destroyable)
should be destroyed.

Be it here premised, that nothing herein is spoken out of reflection to the
present Times, to fill the heads or hearts of people with Jealousies of any
Design as if intended at the present to blow up the Found^tions of Religion.
And yet give me leave to say, that some months since had we gone on the same
pace we began, a f^w steps farther would have brought all to a sad Condition;
so that the Lawyers might even have dr^wne up the Will of expiring Divinity,
and the Divines performed the Funerals of dying Law in this Nation. But blessed
be God, that since that time Con^usion is conf^unded, and some hopes given of a
better Condition. In a word, if Religion be no whit the nearer to the making,
in all probability it is something the farther from the undoing thereof.

How-ever, grant Religion were in never so peaceable and prosperous an estate,
yet the sad S^bject we now in^ist on, could not be unseasonable. All Spiritual
Me^t is not to be bought up, and brought in, for our present spending and
feeding thereon, but (as good Husbands) we are to powder up some for the time
to come. And seeing none of us know what is to come, and all of us deserv^ the
worst that may be, it will not be amiss to arm our selves with Counsels and
Cautions, in case God should give us to live in an Age wherein the Foundations
are destroyed.

First, Enter a Silent Protestation in the Court of Heaven, of thine own
Integrity, as to this particular, That thou have not willingly consented to
the destroying of the Foundations of Religion.

I say, Silent.
IT is David's counsel, Psalm. 4. 4. Commune with your heart upon your Bed, and
be still. There may be danger in making a loud Protestation; it may be
interpreted, to be the Trumpet to Sedition.

Secondly, it may be quarrelled at, as tasting of the Leven of the Pharisees,
which is Hypocrisy, for men to make a public confession of what may seem to
tend to the sinful praising (though indeed it be but the needful purging) of
themselves.

A Silent Protestation.
Nothing more difficult, then in dangerous Times for Innocence it self to draw
up a Protestation with all due Caution, so as to give her Adversaries no
advantage against her. If it be laid too low, the Protestor destroys his own
innocence, and may be accessarie to the robbing himsel^e of his due, and so may
die Felo de se* of his own integrity. If it be drawn^ up too high, with
swelling expressions, the Protestor may expose himself to just Censure, as a
Libeller against that Authority before which he enters his Protestation. We
cannot therefore be too wary and too cautious* in the making thereof* to
observe the Golden Mean betwixt both extremes. For the better effecting
whereof, we will weigh every word in the Counsel propounded.

In the Court of Heaven.
And that for a double Reason: First, because it is a standing Court, no danger
that it will ever be put down: secondly, because it is a just Court, no
suspicion that any Corruption can ever prevail therein.

Of thine own Integrity.
He that hates Suretiship is sure, says Solomon, Prove. 11. 15. Break not thy
self, by undertaking more then what thou art able to perform. Man may have
not only a charitable opinion (due from us to all, of whom the contra^ie does
not appear) but also a confident presumption of the goodness of such with
whom they have had a long and intimate familiarity. Yet all this amounts not
to that certainty, to embolden one to undertake a Protestation in their
behalf, which he ought to confine to himself, of whom alone, and that
scarcely too, (by reason of the deceitfulness of man's heart above measure) he
can have any competent assurance, Thine own Integrity.

As to this particular.
Confess thy self in other things a notorious sinner, guilty of sins of
Omission, Commission, Ignorance, Knowledge, Presumption, Despair, against God,
thy Neighbors, thy self, in thought, in word, in deed. We read of the
Daughters of Zelophe^ad, that they pleaded before Moses, and gave this
Character of their dead Father, Numbers 27. 3. Our Father died in the
Wilderness, and he was not amongst the assembly of them that were assembled
against the Lord, in the company of Korah, but died in his sin. Meaning,
that he was none of those Mutineer, not eminently notorious for Rebellion;
only being a sinful man, as all are, he was mortal with the rest of his
kind.

What a comfort will it be, if one can truly avouch it in his Conscience to the
searcher of hearts; Lord, I acknowledge my self a grievous sinner, yet I
appeal to thee, that I have not been active in the destroying of the
Foundations of Religion, but opposed it as much as I might; and when I could
do no more, was a Mo^rner in Sion for the same?

That thou have not willingly consented.
Where know to thy comfort, that God keeps a Register in Heaven of all such
who do, or do not consent to any wicked action: And if we may prosecute the
Metaphor after the manner of men, we may say, On the one side of the Book are
set down the Names of such who concurred and consented to Wickedness. On the
other side such are recorded, who were on the Negative, and by their suffrages
did dissent from the same.

Thus we find it written, to the eternal commendation of Joseph of Arimathea,
Luke 23. 51. He did not consent to the counsel and deed of them who betrayed
our Savior.

Not willingly.
Be it here observed, that men's Bodie^ may be forced to countenance that with
their corporal presence, which their Souls does both reluctate at, and
remonstrate against. One eminent instance whereof we have, Ierem. 43. 5. For in
the foregoing Chapter, Iohanan the son of Kareah came to Jeremiah,
pretending desire of advice from him, and promising to conform himself to his
Counsel in that great Question of importance, Whether he with the Remnant of
Israel should go down into Egypt? Jeremiah disswades them from that Journey,
as contrary to the will of God, and threateneth them, in case they undertook
the same.

How-ever, we read in the next Chapter, verse 4. That this Iohanan, the son
of Kareah, and all the Captains of the Forces, were not content to carry down
the Remainder of the Captivity into Egypt, but also they took Jeremiah the
Prophet, and Baruch the son of Neriah, along with them, for the more credit
of the matter, to wear them for a countenance of their wicked Design.
Captains of the Forces indeed they were; and here they showed a Cast of their
Office, violently to force two aged persons, contrary to their own intentions
and resolutions.

Egregiam vero laudem and spolia amplae refertis.
Go Cowardly Tyrants, erect Trophies to your own Victories, make Triumphs of
your own Valor: A great matter of Manhood, a Noble Conquest, to compel poor
Ierem^ah the Prophet, and painful Baruch his Scribe (each of them by
proportionable computation, above sixty years of age) to return into Egypt,
whilst their Minds, with a contrary motion to their Bodies, went back to (or
rather never removed from) the Land of Israel. An eminent Instance, that men's
Bodies may sometimes be forced to do that which their Souls do detest.

Secondly, we except such (from willing consenting) as have been fraudulently
circumvented instrumentally to concur to the destroying of Foundations,
clean contrary to their own desires and intents, as erroneously conceiving
they supported the Foundations, when really they destroyed them. This commonly
comes to pass, by having men's persons in admiration, Jude 16. So that
possessed with the opinion of their Piety, they deliver up their Judgments as
their Act and Deed, signed and sealed ^o them, to believe and practice, without
denial, doubt, or delay, whatsoever the others shall prescribe. Yet, upon the
confession of the faults of such seduced people, God will forgive them, taking
off the Load from them, and laying it upon their seducers, pitying those
innocents who charitably counted others better then they were, and punishing
such hypocrites who really were worse then they seemed.

We read, Deuteronomy. 21. 1. If a man be found slain in the Land, lying in the
field, and it be not known who slew him; the Elders of the next City what
should they do? (It is not said, they should all meet together, and lay their
hands on the dead Corpse, and it should bleed when the Murderer approached unto
it. This sometimes happens, but is not (especially alone) to be relied on;
scarce a Presumption, no Demonstration.) But after the offering of a solemn
Sacrifice, these words were to be pronounced by them: Our hands have not shed
this blood, neither have our eyes seen it. Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy
people Israel, whom thou have redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto thy
people of Isreal's charge, and the blood shall be forgiven them. In like manner
we are confident, that God in his goodness will remit their guilt (on their
prayers, and pleading the Merits of Christ sacrificed) which merely have been
drawn in instrumentally to destroy the Foundations, and have not willingly,
wittily, or wilfully had a hand in the killing thereof.

Secondly, Keep up the destroyed Foundations in thine own House.

It was a worthy Resolution of Ioshuahs, Josh. 24. 15. But as for me and my
house, we will serve the Lord.

Some will say, What is meant here by House?

I answer; the fourth Commandment, Exodus 20. 10. will expound it: Thou and thy
S^nne, and thy Daughter, thy Manservant, and thy Maidservant (Cattle being
irrational, belong not hereunto) and the stranger that is within thy gates.
Stranger? He that partakes under the Roof of thy Protection, must submit to
the Rule of thy Devotion.

It may be objected, Why no mention of the Wife herein?

It is answered, The Wife is part of the Husband, comprised in him, as a
parcel of Thou. Genesis 1. 27. So God created Man in his own Image, in the Image
of God created he Him, male and female created he Them. Why Him and Them? Why
is the Number altered? It is a sad Family, wherein this Doubt is not daily
cleared. Man and Wife (though plural in persons) are in affection one flesh;
and being but one, good reason why the Result of them both should be styled
Him, and not Her, denominated from the more Noble Gender.

But to return to Joshua and his worthy Resolution, I and my House will serve
the Lord; namely, Himself, his Wife, his Children, his Servants: Surely, he
had all these his Relations, and all these his Relations had real Piety in
them, at leastwise they seemingly pretended it, and Joshua charitably believed
it: yet I confess we meet not in Scripture with any of their Names; whereas we
hear often of Judas in the Gospel, and daily of Pontius Pilate in the Creed.
How far better is it to have our Names written, Philippians 4. 3. in the
Book of Life, then to be but barely recorded in the outward letter of the
Scripture!

Thirdly, If thou can not keep it up in thine own House, keep it up in
thine own Chamber.

It is said, Nehemiah 3. 30. wherein several persons re-edified the walls of
Jerusalem, after him repaired Meshullam, the son of Berechiah, over against
his Chamber. It is probable, that this Meshullam was no Housekeeper, but only
a Lodger; yet repairing his part, facilitated the whole. Let every own
endea^our at leastwise to keep up the Foundations in his own Chamber, betwixt
himself and other self.

Fourthly, If thou can not keep it up in thine own Chamber, keep it up in
thine own Conscience.

The Prophets Counsel must be practiced, Micah 7. 5. Trust ye not in a Friend,
put ye not confidence in a Guide, keep the doors of thy mouth from her that
lies in thy Bosom.

Fifthly, Remember the days of Gods Right Hand, and feed upon the comfortable
memory of what is past.

He that has not hot Meat to feed upon, may make cold Meat, well hea^,
wholesome nourishment* If the present Times afford us not contentment, let us
with comfort ruminate on those days of Gods Right H^nd; namely, wherein he
has vigorously and effectually discovered himself for his own Honor and his
peoples Comfort. Psalm. 77. 1. I will remember the years of the Right Hand of
the most High: David being then in an Agony, and ready to despair.

Sixthly, Pray heartily and trust faithfully in the Power and Providence of the
God of Heaven.

Here it will not be amiss to insert a memorable Story, applyable to our
occasion.

There were at the same time two Princes in Germany, neighboring in their
Dominions, and of the same Name, though much different in their Power and
Puissance; namely, Frederick, Duke of Saxony, of the greatest Command of any
next the Emperor. Frederick, Bishop of Magdenburgh (inferior to few Prelates
in Germany) but utterly unable, without his apparent ruin, to contest with
the foresaid Duke.

Now, as Luther in his Comment on the 228 Psalm, briefly summeth up the
matter to this effect:

The Duke pretended a Ti^le to some Towns in the Bishops possession, denounced
War against him next Spring, in ^^se Resti^ution was not made before that
time. Withal he sent a secre^ Agent to mark the Bishops motions, and what
pre^arations he made for his defense.

The Agent cunningly wrought himsel^e into the Bishops acqu^intance, and
wondering to see him make no Warlike Provision against the time appointed,
presumed at last to enquire of him the reason of so great neglect.

The Bishop returned this Answer, That he never intended any Martial
resistance, counting it madness to fight against him, where is no human
probability to conquer; Mustering of men in this case, was but casting away so
many into the Gaghs of Death. This he was resolved on, to Pray, to Preach, to
visit the Churches in his Dioces, leaving the event of all to God, to defend
the innocence in his Cause.

Politicians, I know, will censure his Design as silly and weak, which others
will behold under a better notion of honest and pious: sure I am, it is most
applyable to our purpose. When the godly sadly behold the Foundations of
Religion destroyed, (so far forth as they are destroyable) they make no
provision of themselves to set them up again, as sufficiently assured it is
past their power, above their strength, it will cost more, so that they must
let it alone for ever. Only this they do, they will faithfully, and
fervently, and constantly pray to God, (whose Glory is concerned in the C^use
as much, and more then their Good) in his own due time to work out his own
Honor, and settle the Foundations on their true Basis again.

Lastly, Reflect with Comfort upon the words that follow my ^ext, wherein there
is crowded as much Consolation, as the scantling of so few words can receive,
Verse 4. The Lord is in his holy Temple.

The Lord.
Notwithstanding all these Distempers and Disasters, God is not un-Lorded: He
is not degraded from his Dignity, but remains still in full Possession, and
Power, what he was before.

The Lord is.
Say not, he was, which all must confess; or will be, which the godly do
hope: but the Lord IS in actual being. But, where is He, say some? Surely, in
some mean and obscure place, where he maintains no Majesty or Magnificence.
O no; He is in his Temple, the eminent place of his Residence. But this his
Temple is profaned and unhallowed, levelled in the Dignity thereof to
ordinary places. Indeed, if some men might have their will, it should be so:
but He is in his holy Temple. In a word, God is not un-Lorded, this Lord is not
un-Templed, this his Temple is not unhallowed; and notwithstanding all wicked
men's endeavors to destroy the Foundations, the Lord is in his holy Temple.

FINIS.
THE GRAND ASSIZES.
A Sermon preached at Saint Mary's in Cambridge.
REVEL. 20. 12. And the Books were opened.
THere is not in all the Scripture a more lively representation of the last
Judgment, then in this and the parallel Chapter of the Prophecy of Daniel*
Four grand Observables present themselves therein.

First, Verse 11. I saw a great white Throne: Throne, there is Majesty; Great,
there is Magnificence; White, there is Integrity; no spot of Injustice, no
spark of Partiality shall stain the Purity of that Days Proceedings. God
grant, that this Throne, White in it self, and White in relation to him that
sits thereon, may prove White to us, that our innocence thereat in Christ
may be cleared, and our souls with joy comforted and completed. Otherwise,
though the Throne be White, the Day will prove to guilty Offenders, as it is
described, Joel 2. 2. A Day of Darkness, and of Gloominesse, a D^y of Clouds,
and of thick Darkness.

Secondly, The Earth and the Heaven fled away from his face that sat on the
Throne: Wherein had the harmless Heaven and innocent Earth offended, that
should cause the flight? What if the Heathen had superstitiously worshipped the
Host of Heaven? the Heavens purely passive therein had never consented
thereunto. What if the Earth had brought forth Thorns and Thistles? she did it
not willingly, but cursed and commanded by God, Genesis 3. 18. so to do. Alas,
both Heaven and Earth were conscious to themselves of comparative impuritie,
and fled like Dross from his Face who is a consuming fire. See here how poorly
the wicked are helped, when they Petition the Mountains to fall upon them and
cover them. Fall upon them; that is Improbable. Cover them; that is Impossible.
Ill are the Mountains able to protect them, when the whole Earth cannot defend
it self; cannot make good it is own Station, but flies away.

Thirdly, John saw the Dea^, Small and Great stand before God. Here the
extremes, Small and Great, are expressed, whilst those of middle seized
condition betwixt them are employed. Men's Nets commonly are so cast* the great
Fishes break through the Threads, and little Fishes creep through the holes;
whilst Gods Drag-net is so large, so strong, so advantagiously cast, neither
Great nor Small can escape it. I saw the Dead, Small an^ Great.

But why is there here no mention of the Living? our Creed, according the
Analogy of Faith, teaching us that God shall judge the Quick and the Dead.

I Answer, S. John only took notice of them who were most numerous, and that
which was most miraculous. Most numerous, the living at the last day being
inconsiderable in number to the dead, as being only the product of one
Generation. Most Miraculous. It is usual and ordinary to see the living
arraigned every Assizes and Sessions; but for the Dead to appear before the
Judges, is most strange, and therefore only noted by the Apostle.

The Fourth Observable in the words of my Text; And the Books were opened.

We read of King William, called the Couqueror, that he caused a Survey-Booke
to be made of all the Demesne Lands in England, which he no l^sse proudly and
profanely then falsely termed D^omesday-Booke; yet was not the same unparti^lly
performed, some Lands being rated above, and others beneath the true value
thereof. Behold here the true Doomsday Books, done without fear or favor,
wherein all men's actions were unpartially recorded; And the Books were opened.

The words are a Metaphor borrowed, say some, from Mercatorie transactions
betwixt Buyer and Seller, where the Debt^ are Booked: taken, say others, from
Judicial Proceedings, where the Indictments of Malefactors are written and
read before the Judge; and this bears best proportion with the Context.

Take notice herein of the low condescension of the high God of Heaven,
speaking after the manner of men. Should God speak of himself as he is, his
expressions would be as incomprehensible as his Essence. What then is to be
done in this case, to make man capable of Gods discourse? Either man must be
mounted up to Heaven, a perfection in this Life unattainable, or God of his
goodness may be pleased to stoop unto Earth, which by him is graciously
performed. Let us not therefore think the lower of his Greatness, but the
higher of his Goodness. Let no Preachers count it a diminution to their
Learning, a degrading to their Language, to humble themselves to the Capacities
of their Auditories, having so good a Precedent; God the Father, as I may say,
incar^ating himself in his humane expressions: And let people listen the more
attentively to Gods language herein. When the Jews heard, Acts 22. 2. that S.
Paul spoke in the Hebrew (that is, in their own) Tongue unto them, they kept
the more silence: Seeing God descends to our Dialect, let us attend with the
more earnestness to what is spoken; And the Books were opened.

All Metaphors in Scriptures must tenderly be touched, lest (as the wringing of
the Nose brings forth blood) they ^e ^ortured to speak beyond and against
their true intention. But Metaphors from Gods mouth, speaking (...), must be
handled with much moderation, lest in the prosecution thereof we come into the
suburbs of Blasphemy. Where Discretion advises us to be cautious in others,
Devotion c^mmands us to be timorous in following such Metaphors. How-ever, we
may safely tread in the steps of the Scripture, and use such phrases as we
find^ therein.

In the words we may observe five Doctrines; all which, like the Linkes in a
Chain, depend one upon another.

First, God writes down and records (...) actions of me^ on Earth.

Secondly, Actions thus written are not trusted in loose Papers, but bound up.

Thirdly, Actions thus bo^nd up, (...) not only to one, but make many Books.

Fourthly, Books thus made are not presently opened, but for a time kept
secret and concealed.

Fifthly, Books thus concealed shall not be concealed for ever, but in due
time shall be opened.

I intend not a particular prosecution of all these parts; only I will make a
Decoction of them all, so to make them more Cordial into one Staple Doctrine,
when first we have explained something necessary thereunto.

God his writing down of the actions of Earth, proce^deth not from his want of
Memory, as if he intended to make use of his Notes for the benefit thereof.
There be two expressions like in sound, yet so different in sense, that applied
to God, the one imports Blasphemy, the other sound Divinity, namely,
Ancient, and Old. God is termed in Daniel, The Ancient of Days, expr^ssing his
everlasting continuance from all Eternity: But Old he cannot be termed, as
appropriated ^o Creatures, (they wax old, as does a Garment) and carrying in it
more then an (...) of impairing and decay. God has all the perfections of Age,
Knowledge, Gravitie, Wisdom, without the infirmities thereof, Weakness,
Frowardness, Forgetfulness.

Wherefore he recites down men's Actions, not out of any necessity to help
himself to remember them, but partly out of State, (as Joseph made use of an
Interpreter, though understanding his Brothers language) partly, that the
producing the ^ame in Evidence at the Last Day, may silence and confound the
more impudent Malefactor.

These Actions thus written, amount to many Books, and we find seven several
Books mentioned in the Scripture.

First, the Book of Life, whereof frequent mention in Gods Word, Phil. 4. 3.
Whose Names are in the Book of Life. This contains a Register of such
particular persons, in whose salvation God from all Eternity determined to
have his mercy glorified, and for whom Christ merited Faith, Repentance, and
Perseverance, that they should repent, believe, and be finally saved.

Secondly, the Book of Nature. This mentioned by David, Psa^. 139. 16. Thine
eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect, and in thy Book all my members
were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none
of them.

Thirdly, the Book of Scripture, and here behold it; and happy were it for
us, could we but as zealously practice it in our hearts, as we can easily hold
it in our hands.

Fourthly, the Book of Providence, wherein all particulars are registered, even
such which Atheists may count triv^all and inconsiderable, Math. 10. 30. But
the very hairs of your head are all numbered: And where is their number summed
up? Even in the Book of Gods Providence.

Fifthly, the Book of Conscience. This Book is Gods, as the tr^e Owner and
Proprietarie thereof; yet so, as he lend^th it to man in this Life, to make use
thereof.

Sixthly, the Book of men's Actions. Hence that frequent expression in
Scripture, Psalm 51. 9. And blot out all mine iniquities: intimating, that all
our ill deeds are fairly written, til God in Christ does cross or delet^
them. And if our ill deeds be registered, surely our good deeds be recorded; God
not being like those envious and ill-natured persons; who only take notice of
what is bad, pass by and neglect what is good in another.

Seventhly, the ^ooke of men's Afflictions. Some account this only a distinct
Tome, or Volume, of the former Book; others, an entire Book of it self,
Psalm. 56. 8. Thou (...) my s^ittings, put my tears into thy Bottle; are no^
all these things written in thy Book? And if the white tears of Gods servants
be botled up, surely the red tears are not cast away; but their innocent blood
causelessly shed, shall (though ^lowly) yet surely and severely be punished on
the causers thereof.

These Books are for a time concealed, and not opened till the Day of
Judgment. First, because some of them are not finished and completed till
that time; Finis is not as yet affixed unto them: and it is absurd, that a
Book should be published before it is perfected. The generations of mankind
continuing till the Day of Judgment, such Vol^mes as concern the Quick at
that Day, are not ended till that Day. Secondly, God conceales them for a
while, until the Day of Iudge^ent, that then his own Honor may be the more
advanced, and his enemies the more confounded at the unexpected opening of
these Books.

The maine Doctri^e is this: All men must at the Last Day be tried, so as to be
saved or condemned by the Books. The truth hereof will appear, by an
induction of all mankind, which fall under a general Division of Pagans and
Christians.

Be it here premised, That all Mortality shall be tried by one of these two
Statutes, either the Statute of Infidelity, or the Statute of
Inconsionableness. The former we have set down, Mark 16. 16. He that
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be
damned. By this Statute shall no Heathen man be tried, because God is not so
austere, (how-ever others may accuse him) to reap where he did never some.
Invincible Ignorance shall so far excuse them, that it shall never be charged
on their Account, that they never believed, who never had the means conducing
thereunto.

The second Statute, is the Statute of Inconsionableness, expressed Romans 2.
14, 15. For when the Gentiles, who have not the Law* do by nature the things
contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves.
Which show the works of the Law written in their hearts, their consciences
also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else
excusing one another. Now b^ this Statute shall all Heathen be tried, that they
have been wanting to that light of Nature bestowed upon them.

In proof whereof, we divide the Heathen into Heathen Heathen, and Civilized
Heathen. By the former we understand those pure-impure Pagans, who are merely
wild, without any Art or Learning, to cultivate or instruct them. The
Southern point of Africa is known to Mariners passing thereby, by the Name of
the Cape of Good Hope, which in relation to the Natives inhabiting thereabouts,
may more truly be termed the Cape of sad Despair; for they are but one Degree,
or Remove, from brute* beasts. Yet even these have more Light then they have
Heat, and their Natural Understanding dictates unto them many clear and
straight Rules, from which their dark and crooked practice does swerve and
decline. For although the Moral Law may be said to be written in them, (to use
the phrase of a Critic) literis fugi^ntibus, in dull and dim Characters;
partly, because in a great measure obliterated at the first by Original
Corruption, at the Fall of Adam; partly, because defaced since, and ^retted out
with the Rust and Canker* of Barbarism, (contr^cted by l^ng Cust^me in
several degenerating G^nerations:) Ye^ still so much of the Moral Law
remains legible in their hearts, as may convince their practice to be
contrary thereunto. In a word, though they come farr^ short of other refined
Heathen in knowledge, yet their knowledge (as little as it is) goes far
beyond their performances: so that justly they may be condemned, when the
Books are opened, on the Stat^te of Inconsionableness.

Civilized Pagans succeed; such, who by Art and Education (as anciently the
Grec^ans and Romans, and at this day the Persians and Chinois) have scoured
over the dim inscription of the Moral Law, that it appears plain unto
them. Such were Socrates the Pagan Martyr, (put to death for asserting one God)
Diogenes the Heathen Hermit; Plato, their Moses, who saw the back parts of God
in the Doctrine of his Id^^'s; Regulus, their Abraham, so famous for his Faith
(though but a Moral one) kept with the Carthaginians; Titus Vespasian, their
Josiah, who wept at the consideration of the sins of the Jews, and Gods
seve^itie at the sacking of the Temple in Jerusalem. Verily I say unto you, I
have not found so much civil performance, no, not amongst many professing
themselves to be Christians: Such wise Sovereigns, such loyal Subjects; such
valiant Generals, such ^orthie Soldiers; such loving Husbands, such dutiful
Wives; such provident Parents, such obedient Children; such equal Masters,
such faithful Servants; such constant Friends, such courteous Neighbors; that
they discharged all Moral Relations, to the admiration, yea, envy of all
Beholders.

Yet even the best of these, in the strictness of Gods Justice, may be
condemned when the Books are opened. For, grant that in some particular
actions they may be said morally to supererogate, even over-doing in goodness
what was required at their hands, yet in other things they were defe^tive, and
fell short of the just measure of Gods Commands, according to the Moral Light
manifested unto them. That servant does not his Masters will, who being
commanded to shut all the doors in the house, does latch, bolt, lock, bar,
and barricado up one or two of them, leaving the rest standing open. So, though
some of these Heathens may seem in some particular acts to surpass
themselves, and to be better then the Law enjoyneth them, yet in other things
they were deficient, and justly condemnable for the same, seeing Gods final
Sentence shall be passed, not according to some eminent performance of persons,
but according to the constant drift, scope, purpose, and tenor of their
conversations.

Besides, some grand Vices (though not so visible to humane eyes) infected the
transcendiaries of their highest achievements.

First, V^ine-glory, and Popular Applause, the Pole-St^rres by which they
steered all their actions. Had Pride been the Weapon whereat a Duel had been
fought betwixt Alexander and Diogenes, probably the Conqueror of the World had
been worsted by a poor Philosopher.

Secondly, Hypocrisy set a Tincture and Dye on all their Actions. Who has
more golden Sentences then Seneca against the Contempt of Gold? Yet (if Tacitus
and other of his Contemporaries may be credited) none more Rich, none more
Covetous then he; as if out of Design he had persuaded others to cast away
their Money, that he himself might come and gather it up again.

Thus these Heathens, for ought we can find in Scripture, are left in a
d^mnable, but far be it from me to say, in a damned condition. When men of my
Profession were formerly admitted into the Commission of the Peace, it was
fashionable for them to go off the Bench at the Assizes, after the Jury had
Cast, and before the Judge did pronounce the Sentence of Condemnation on
Malefactors: To show, that we of the Clergi^ ought to be Men of Mercy, taking
no delight in the sad, though necessary part of Punitive Justice.

Give me leave so far to remember this ancient Custom, that I may make an
improvement thereof for the present occasion. We find these Heathen men Cast
by the Verdict of the Scriptures, let my Sermon therefore depart in silence,
and proceed no further in this Point, as to any determining of their final
condition.

When Haman, Esther 7. 8. fell into the displeasure of King Ahasuerus, it is
said, they covered his face, as of a man that lost himself at Court, and no
pleasing spectacle for others to behold; it being a ghastly sight to look on a
(though living man, yet) dying, y^a, dead favorite. Let us cover the faces of
these Heathen men, as from any further discoursing of their condition, whose
sad Case may thus briefly be drawn^ up, They are left under the Wrath of God,
and weight of their sin, and without any ordinary ^ay to a Savior.

I say, ordinary. I confess it is a Gospel Truth, That in the Name of Jesus
only Salvation is to be expected; and it is a Maxim no less sound then
generally received, Extra Ecclesia^^ nulla salus, Out of Gods Church no hope to
be saved; if both be confined to common Dispensations, and the regular known
way of Gods manifesting of himself. But how far forth it might please God to
reveal^ Christ to such Heathens on their Deathbeds, by peculiar favor, out of
the Rode of hi^ com^on kindness, and how far fo^th God, as an Universal
Creator, may be pleased to indulge unto some ^minent Heathen persons, is
curious for man to enquire, and imp^ssible to determine. Leave we the^
therefore to stand, or fall, to their own Master; only adding this, That it
will be far better at the Last Day of Judgment for these Christian Pagans,
as I may term them, then for many Pagan Christians amongst us now-adayes, who
are worse under the Sunshine of Grace in the Gospel, then they by the dim
Candlelight of Nature.

Come we now to Christians; where the difficulty is the less to prove, that
they all shall be arraigned, and may justly be condemned, when the Books are
ope^ed: which will plainly appear on the serious perusal of the following
particulars.

First, That to all persons living within the Pale of the Church, Christ has
really and cordially, sine fuco and dol^, without any fraud or deceit, been
tendered unto them, under the Conditions of Faith and Repentance, That whosoever
believes o^ him should have everlasting life: And this will appear when the
Books shall be opened.

Secondly, that even the worst of men living under the Light of the Gospel have
at one time or another their heads filled with good notions, and their hearts
with good motions; Grace illuminating, wooing, and courting them, as I may say,
to lay hold on God in his Promises: on the truth whereof, their own
Consciences will be deposed; and so this will appear when the Books are
opened.

Thirdly, that God stands ready, on man's good improvement of the aforesaid
illuminating Grace, (though not for the merit of man's performances, but for his
own mere mercy and promise sake) to Crown their Endeavors* with the
addition and accession of farther degrees of Grace, even such as infallibly
accompany salvation. For I shall never be of their Opinions, who parallel Gods
proceedings with those of Adonib^zek, Judge. 1. 7. who put seventie Kings under
his Table, there to gather up Crummes, which probably did very plentifully fall
down unto them; whereas he beforehand had taken order that their Thumbes were
cut off: Their Thumbes I say, which alone of all the fingers are of the Quorum,
to the gathering or grasping of any thing; and whose effectual correspondencie
with the rest of the Hand, is absolutely necessary to the taking up of any
small thing, especially if ^ying in plano, on a Floor, or ^^at place. I say, I
must dissent from those who make God such a Tyrant, as sportingly and
^pightfully to proffer Grace to wicked men, when by a previous act, without any
^ault or refusal of theirs, he has rendered them incapable of the acceptance
of that which he offers unto them. No surely, God does no way beforehand
maime or ^isable them from enjoying the benefit of ^race tendered unto them; but
on the other side, is prepared to increase their ^^ore, and add to them, which
use the ut^ost of their power to increase those Ta^nts which they have already
received. and this will appear to be true, when the ^ookes shall be opened.

Fourthly, No man has made that improvem^nt of Grace offered which he ought,
and might. Many a time he has stayed at home, when he should have been at
Church: Many times he has been at Church either sleeping, or not attending
there: ^any a time he has attended, yet afterward forgotten what he heard:
many times he has r^membred it, and it has been his Remembrancer, yet he has
quenched the heat in his Heart, and Light in his Understanding. And all this
will appear true, when the Books shall be opened.

Fi^thl^, Upon our not improving Gods Grace ^ffered us in his Word, God qui non
des^rit, nisi deseratur, who leaves none unless he be first left by them, is
not bound to add more Grace: yea, he may justly withdraw what he has given;
and which is more, may judicially harden those from whom his Grace is
withdrawn, for making no better use thereof when tendered un^o them. And all
this shall appear, when ^he ^ookes shall be opened.

In a word, the transactions of that Day will be a perfect Comment on those
words of the Prophet Hosea 13. 9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but
in me is thine help. All such who are condemned, shall cast the blame thereof
on themselves; whilst those whom God shall be pleased to save, will in their
Consciences confess they might most justly be damned, when the Books shall be
opened. And seeing a Savior has by his Death purchased for them Repentance,
Faith, and Perseverance to the end, (because he would not trust the
perverse-freedome of their will with the acceptance or refusal of Grace) they
shall for ever sing Hallelujahs to the praise of the undeserved mercy and
goodness of God in their salvation.

But some will say, How shall God proceed against Infants at the Last Day of
Judgment, when the Books shall be opened; namely, such Infants of Christian
Parents, who dye in so happy a juncture of Time, as the intervall betwixt
their baptizing, and before it is possible for them to commit actual sin?
For will some say, The Books, when opened, are effectually not opened in
relation to them; all the Books will be but Blankes and White Paper, as
containing no Charge against them. For first, for Original sin some hold,
that that in Baptism is washed away; and all the world will be their
Compurgators, that such Infants neither have nor can commit actual
transgression: and therefore how can God with Justice proceed to the
condemnation of such Innocents? This Argument has prevailed so far with some
Learned and Religious Divines, as to make them charitably judgemented of the
final estate of all such Infants.

Give me leave to stand Neuter in this Point: only this I will add, If God in
the Last Day should be pleased to condemn some of such Infants, he will render
such a Reason thereof, Romans 2. 5. in that Day of the revelation of the just
judgment of God, as shall appear satisfactorie to Angels, Men, and Devils, to
the admiration of the good, and confusion of the bad, who shall be present
thereat.

And here give me leave to discover dange^ous Error, lurking in the breasts of
most men* We are generally jealous, that God at the Last Day will not come off
with that Credit which we could wish and desire: We suspect, that his Name will
haerere ad metas, that his Justice will not appear so clear as we both desire
and expect, if he should condemn such and such persons whom we in our narrow
apprehensions conceive uncondemnable, according to the proportion of Justice,
as we do measure it. But know, that this suspicion has a double mischief
therein.

First, The owners thereof are jealous over God with an ungodly jealousy,
fearing where no fear is; and it proceeds from a Principle of Atheism,
seeing it springs from the same Root, to deny a God, and doubt, that God
will appear just in manifesting his own Proceedings.

Secondly, This takes off men's thoughts, to take care for themselves, what they
shall plead in their own behalf, and how they shall manage their own Defense
at the Last Day, and makes them employed where they ought not, troubling
themselves about that wherein they are not concerned. If it be a heinous
offense, and punishable by the Laws of man, 1 Pet. 4. 15. to be a busie-body
in other men's matters, how great is the offense, to be busy in the Mysteries
of the God of Heaven? Let us leave it to him to act his own part; Look every
man on his own things, Phil. 2. 4. God grant, we may but come off so well at
the Bar, as God does at the Bench, and appear righteous by God in Christ,
whilst God will appear so of himself in himself.

And here let me advise men to be modest with sobriety, and not to be
overprying into the Mysteries of Gods Proceedings.

The Chronicler of the City of London (Stow in his Survey of London, page
137.) tells us a remarkable Story of one Sir John Champneyes, Alderman and
Major of London, who built a fair House, with an high Brick ^ower, in
Tower-street Ward, the first that ever was built in any private man's house, to
over-looke his Neighbors in the City. For before his time, there were no
Towers in that City, but such as belonged as Steeples to Churches and Covents,
or else pertained to the Kings Palace. But his ambition herein, says our
Author, was pub^iquely pu^ished, falling blind some years before his death:
so that he who would see more then all, saw less then any of his Neighbors.

Take heed of Towering Thoughts and Aspiring Inquiries, to mount up, if
p^ssible, into Gods Mind, there to seek and search the Causes of his secret
Will and Pleasure: Such Curiosity is commonly severely punished, it being just
with God to deprive them of that Light they have, who affect Knowledge above
the bounds of Sobriety: Such professing themselves to be wise, often become
fools, and forfeit the Eyes of their Souls, for their immoderate prying into
forbidden Mysteries.

Use 1.
Are all then to appear before God, when the Books are opened? This serves
in the first place to confute such who conceive God will hold Malefactors
guiltless, because he does not presently inflict his Judgments upon them,
Ecclesiastes 8. 11. Because Sentence against an evil work i^ not executed
speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is ^ully set in them to d^e
evil. These men proceed upon a dangerous mistake, namely, they conceive the
Books to be cancelled, which are only con^ealed: and because God forbeares,
they mistake him, to have forgot to do Justice.

There was lately a Judge in England, whom I need not be ashamed to name, as
the honor of his Robe and Profession, viz. justice Dodderidge, whom they
commonly called the sleeping Judge. Indeed, he had an affected drowsy posture
on the Bench, insomuch, that many persons unacquainted with his Custom
therein, having Causes of Concernment to be tried before him, have even given
all for lost, as expecting no Justice from a Dormant Judge: when he all the
while did only retire himself within himself, the more seriously to consult
with his own Soul about the validity of what was alleged and proved unto
him; as appeared afterward by those Oracles of Law which he pronounced.

Wicked men, in like manner, erroneously conceive God to be a sleeping God,
chiefly on this account, because of the long impunitie of notorious offenders.
David himself may seem in some sort guilty of the same vulgar error, Psalm.
44. 23. Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord? arise, cast us not off for ever. But
God in due time will soundly confute men's mistake herein, and appear what he
is, a slow, but sure Revenger of Malefactors, in the Day when the Books shall
be opened.

Use 2.
Are we all to be tried in the Day when the Books shall be opened? Let us then
labor to get these Books cleared (so much as relates to our particular
Accounts) and crossed by the Blood of Jesus Christ, before that Day does
approach; and let us not despise the committing of small sins, knowing that
many of them quickly swell our Accounts. It is a true Maxim, Qui negligit
minima nunquam ditescet, He that neglects small things, shall never make a Rich
man* Who would think, that a Penny a day should within the compass of a year
amount to more then thirty shillings? It is incredible, how insensibly many
small sins greaten and inflame our Reckonings, and therefore let us beware
thereof.

The Italians have a Proverb, It is good to go to Bed without supping, and to
rise in the Morning without owing. If Physicians will approve the former part
for healthful, good Husbands will justify the latter part for thriftie. But
especially it is good Divinity, in relation to our spiritual Accounts; Happy
he who this Night, by the effectual pleading of Christ's Merits, gains of
God, before the closing of his eyes, the clearing of his sins, that so to
Morrow Morning he may arise dis-engaged and un-indebted for his former Offenses.

Lastly, let this teach us to be wary what we do on Earth, as knowing and
believing, that a Memorial is kept in Heaven, of whatsoever we act here below.

There is still a Project propounded on the Royal Exchange in London, wherein
one offers (if meeting with proportionable encouragement for his pains) so
ingenuously to contrive the matter, that every Letter written, shall with the
same pains of the Writer instantly render a double impression, besides the
Original; each of which Inscript (for Transcript I cannot properly term it)
shall be as fair and full, as lively and legible as the Original. Whether
this will ever be really effected, or whether it will prove an Abortive, as
most Designs of this nature, Time will tell. Sure I am, if performed, it will
be very beneficial for Merchants, who generally keep Duplica^tes of their
Letters to their Correspondents.

What here is propounded, is already performed, in relation to our actions, in
Gods presence. Whatsoever we do, good or bad, at the acting thereof reflects
(beside the Principle) a double representation of the same.

One, in the Book of our Conscience. The woman of Samaria s^id to her
^ellow-Citizens, John 4. 29. Come see the man that told me all things that ever
I did. Herein Hyperbolicall was her expression: Christ told her not all, but
many things, and one thing too much for her, (without her serious repentance)
namely, her unlawful conversing with him who was not her Husband.

But this is most true of our Conscience; it will really represent unto us
whatsoever we have done, either accusing or excusing us therein. And as Sores
and Wounds do throb and ache the more in infirm persons, the nearer it draws
to Night; so the older men grow, and the nearer they approach unto their Death,
the more frequent, constant, and acute will be the prickings and the pinchings
of their Consciences.

The second Copy of all our Actions is kept in Heaven, recorded in Gods Book.
Let all therefore, but especially men in places of Legal Proceedings, (whether
Judicial or Ministerial officers therein) be minded of integrity in their
carriage from my Text, and the occasion thereof, THE GRAND ASSIZES. Let
Diligent Attorneyes so faithfully Solicit, let Painful Solicitours so
honestly Agitate, let Trusty Sheriffs so truly Impannell, let honest
Iurie-men so conscionably give their Verdict, let faithful Witnesses so
sincerely Depose, let the Honorable and Learned Judges so unpartially pass
their Sentence, as knowing they must give an Account thereof to GOD in the Day
when the Books are opened.

AMEN.
FINIS.
A Comment ON RUTH: BY T. F. B. D.

LONDON, Printed for G. and H. Eversden, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1654.

TO The Right Worshipful, the Lady ANNE ARCHER, in the County of WARWICK.
THE Apostle to the Philippians, chap. 4. v. 15. gives them this high
commendation, None communicated with me concerning giving and receiving, but ye
only* Should I apply the same in relation of my self to your Ladyship, I
should be injurious to the Bounty of many my Worthy Benefactours. How-ever
(not exclusively of others, but) eminently I must acknowledge you a Grand
Encourager of my Studies. In public testimony whereof, I present these my
Endeavors to your Ladyships Patronage.

Indeed they were Preached in an eminent Place, when I first entered into the
Ministry, above twenty years since, and therefore you will pardon the many
Faults that may be found therein. Nor were they intended for public view,
till understanding the Resolution of some of my Auditors to Print them (to
their Profit, but my Prejudice) by their imperfect Notes, I adventured on this
seasonable prevention.

The Lord make his Graces flow plentifully from the Head of your Family, your
Religious Husband, to the lowest Skirts thereof, the last and least of your
Relations,

Your Ladyships in all Christian Offices, THOMAS FULLER.

A Comment ON Ruth.
CHAP. 1. Verse. 1.
Now it came to pass in the days when the Judges Ruled, that there was a
Famine in the Land,
BEfore we enter into these words, something must be premised, concerning the
Name, Matter, End, Author of this Book. It has the name from Ruth, the most
remarkable person in it, to whom God vouchsafed his Grace, not only to write
her name in the Book of Life in Heaven, but also to prefix her name before a
Book of Life in Earth. The Matter may be divided into these two Parts: The
first Chapter shows, That many are the troubles of the right^^us; and the
three last do show, That (...) them out of all. One of the Ends is to show the
Pedigree of our Savior* otherwise Genea^ogers had been (...) a loss, for four
or five Descents in the deducing thereof: Another End is, under the conversion
of Ruth the Moabitesse, to typifie the calling of the Gentiles, that a^ he took
of the blood of a Gentile into hi^ body, so he should shed the blood out o^ his
body for the Gentiles, that there might be ^ne Shepherd, and one Sheepfold The
Authors name (probably Samuel) i^ concealed, neither is it needful it should
be known: for even as a man that has ^ piece of Gold that he knows to be
weight and sees it ^^amped with the Kings Imag^ cares not to know the name of
that man wh^ minted or coined it: So we, seeing this Book to have the
superscription of Caesar, the stamp of the Holy spirit, nee^ not to be curious
to know who was the Penman thereof. And now to the words.

Now it came to pass in the days when the Judges Ruled, that there was a
Famine i^ the Land.
Observe in the words; What? a Famine: Where? in the Land: When? In the time
that the Judges judged; the time being set down for the better certainty of the
History.

Quest. Is this the Land whereof it is said, Genesis 49. 20. Asher his bread shall
be fat, and afford dainties for a King; which is called, Deuteronomy. 8. 7. A good
Land of Wheat and Barley, Vineyards and Fig Trees, Oil, Olive and Honey, which
is commended, Ezekiel. 20. 6. ^o be a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, the glory
of all Lands. How comes it to pass, that thy Rivers of Oil are now dammed
up? thy ^treams of Wine drained dry? that there is no bread found in Bethlem,
the house of bread?

Answ Israel has sinned, a fruitful Land makes he barren, for the sin of
the people that dwell therein. The peoples hard hearts were rebellious to God,
and the hard earth proved unprofitable to them: their flinty eyes would afford
no tears to bemoan their sins, and the churlish Heavens would afford no
moystur^ to water their earth: Man proved unfaithful to God his Maker, the
Earth proved unfruitful to Man her Manurer.

Obser. Famine is ^a heavy punishment, wherewith God ^fflicteth his people ^or
their sins: that it is an heavy punishment appears, because David, 2 S^^.
24. 14. chose the Pestilence before it; for even as Zebah and Zalmunna, Judge.
8. 21* chose rather to fall by the hand of Gideo^, then by the hand of Iether
his Son, because the Child's want of strength would cause their abundance of
pain: so better it is to be speedily dispatched by a violent disease, then to
have ones life in ^ Famin^ prolonged by a lingering torture. That it is
inflicted for their sins, is showed, Lev. 26. 19. Deuteronomy. 28. 23. 1 King. 8.
37. and these sins most especially procure Famin^. 1. Idolatry, 1 King. 17.
1. 2 King 4. 36. 2ly. Abuse of plenty, the prodigal Child, Luke 15. from the
keeping of Harlots, was brought to the keeping of Hoggs. It is just with God to
make men want that to supply their necessity, which they have mispended in
their nicetie. 3ly. Shedding of Innocent blood, 2 Samuel 21. 1. 4ly. Oppression
of the poor, Amos 4. 16. And no wonder if men, to grind the faces of poor
people make money, to which God gave no natural fruit, to bring forth a
monstrous increase, if God cause the earth which naturally should be fruitful,
to become barren and afford no profit.

Use 1.
It may serve to confut ^ such, that when God does scourge them with Famine*
(as blind Balaam fell a beating of his dumb beast* when he himself was in
fault) they vent their spite in cursing and railing on the poor Creatures,
whereas indeed were the matter well weighed* they might say of all Creatures as
I^dah did of Thamar his daughter-in-law, they are more righteous then ^e: for
locusts, mildew, blasting, immoderate drought, and moisture, are the means by
which man's sin is the cause, for which Famine is inflicted. And yet in
prosperity, we are commonly like Hogs feeding on the mast, not minding his hand
that shakes it down; in adversity, like Dogs biting the stone, not marking
the hand that threw it.

Use. 2.
If any desire to prevent or remove a Famine, let us prevent and remove the
causes thereof. First let us practice that precept, 1 I^h. 5. 21. Babes keep
your selves from Idols. 2ly. Let us be heartily thankful to God for our
plenty, who by the seasonable weeping o^ the Heavens, has ^aused the
plentiful laughter of the Earth, and has sent the former Rain to perform the
part of a Midwife, to Deliver the infant Corn out of the womb of the parched
Earth; and the latter Rai^e to do the duty of a Nurse* to swell and battle the
Grain. Let us not sees the Kid in the Mothers Milk* let not our want on
Pallats spoil wholesome Meat, before it comes to the just Maturity; neither
let us cast away any good food, but after our Saviors example, Let us cause
the Fragments to be basketted up that nothing may be lost. 3ly. Let us pray
with David, Psalm. 51. 14. Deliver us from blood guil^inesse O Lord: and let us
seek that the hoary hairs may not go down to the Grave in peace of such as
have shed Innocent blood, (...) lea^t the personal offense of a priva^e Man
remaining unpunish^d, become the National sin of a Kingdom^) bu^ upon the
Kin^* and upon his Seed* and upon his House, and upon his Throne shall be Peace
fo^ever from the Lord.

Lastly, Let us be pitiful, and liberal to relieve the distresses of the
poor; for why should our dead Tables groan under the weight of needless feast
upon them* whil's^ Gods living Temples gro^n under the want of necessary food
within them* The Atheni^n women had a custom to make a Picture of Famine every
year, and to drive it out of their City with these words: Out Famine, in Food:
out Penury, in Pl^nty: but let us say in word, and second it in deed; Out Sin,
in Sanctity: Out Propha^esse, in ^iety: and then we shall see, that as long as
our King Reig^eth, there shall be no Famine in our Land.

But however God shall dispose of us for outward blessings, I pray God keep us
from that ^^^le Fami^^, mentioned ^^os 8. 12. that w^ living under the Nor^hern
Heavens should wander to the East, and run to and fro to seek the Word of the
Lord, and should not find it; but may the light of the Gospel remain with us
on Earth, as long as the faithful witness endures in Heaven.

And a certain man of BethlehemJudah went to sojourne in the Country of Moab,
THese words contain a Journey or Removal, wherein observe; Who went; a
certai^ Man: Whence? from Bethlehem-Iudah: Whether? to sojourn^ in Moab. We
shall have a fitter occasion to speak of the party removing hereafter. I begin
with the place from whence he went, Bethlehem-Iudah.

This w^^ the place, nigh to which ^^chel as she was traveling fell into
Travail* and ended her journey to Heaven, in the* midst of her journey on
Earth: there was* another of the same name in Z^bulo^, (...) 19. 15. and
therefore Iu^^h is added for* difference and distinction.

Observe.
The Holy spirit descends to our capacity, and in S^ripture does multiply words
to make the matter the plainer: let thi^ teach the Sons of Levi, when they
deliver one doubtful and ambiguous Doctrine, which may admit of several
constructions, so that there is danger (...) that people may mistake their
meaning, to de^ur a while on such a point, and not to be niggardly of their
words, till they have blotted all doubt and difficulty out of it. Herein they
shall follow God for their pattern, who least Bet^lehem i^ my T^^^* should be
confounded with Bethlehem in Zab^lon, adds for distinction BethlehemI^dah.

Went to Sojourne in Moab.
The Prodig^ll Child complained, Lu^. 15. How many hired Servants of my Father
have bread enough, and I die for hunger: So here we see that the uncircumcised
Moabites, Gods slaves and vassalls, had store of plenty, whilst Israel, Gods
Children (but his prodigal Children, which by their sins had displeased their
heavenly Father) were pinched with penury.

Observe.
Hence we gather, God oftentimes denies outward blessings to his Children, when
as he vouchsafes them to the wicked: the wicked man's eyes start out with
fatness; David's bones scarce cleave to his flesh: Ahab has an Ivory House,
the Godly wander in Dens and Caves of the Earth; the Rich Glutton fares
deliciously every day, whilst the Godly, Psalm. 107* ^ere hungry and thirsty,
their s^ul fainted in them: H^ was clothed in purple and fine linen, whilst
the Godly wander up and down in sheep skins; and well may they wear their skins
without them, that carry their innocence within them; and the reason thereof
is, Because judgment begins at the house of the Lord, whilst the wicked have
their portion in this world.

Use.
Let us not judge according to outward appe^rance, but judge righteous
judgment, least otherwise we condemn the Generation of Gods Children, if we
account outward blessings the signs of Gods favor, or calamities, the
arguments of his displeasure: neither let the afflicted Christian faint under
Gods heavy hand, but let him know to his comfort, God therefore is angry in
this world, that he may not be angry in the world to come, and mercifully
inflicteth temporal punishment, that he may not justly confound with eternal
torment.

But here arises a question, Whether Elimelech did well to go from
Bethlehem-Judah, into the Land of Moab? for the better satisfaction whereof, we
will suppose a plain and honest Neighbor thus dissuading him from his
departure.

Dissw^sion.
Give me leave Neighbor Elimelech to say unto thee, as the Angel did to Hagar,
whence come thou? and whether go thou? will thou leave that place where
Gods worship is truly professed, and go^ into an Idol^trous Country? Woe is
the^ that must dwell in Moab, and be an inhabitant amongst the w^rshippers of
Melchom: Indeed our Father Abraham came out of Vr of the Chaldees, an
idolatrous Country, to come into the Land of C^n^an; but why should thou go
out of the Land of Canaan into an idolatrous Country* where thou shall have
neither Priest nor Pr^phet, nor Passover. Yea, what most is to be feared, your
frequent conversing with the People of the Country, will at length bring you
into a love and liking of their Superstitions, and so draw Gods anger against
you; wherefore reverse your intent of removing, least while thou seek 'st to
store thy Body, thou starve^t thy Soul; rather venture the breaking of the
Casket, then the loosing of the Jewel, and go not from Bethlehem-Iudah, unto
the Land of Moab.

Answer.
To this Elimelech might answer; your disswasion does somewhat move me, but not
remove my resolution; I do not forsake my Country, but am forced from it; God
has withheld the Wine and the Winepresse, and if I stay, I am likely to
starve; I conceive it therefore to be my bounden duty to provide the best means
for my Family, and following the examples of Isaac's going into Gerah, and
Jacobs going down into Egypt in the time of Famine; I intend to remove to Moab.
And though I shall be divided from the visible Congregation of Israel, yet
shall I with my Family still remain the lively Members of Gods true Church. For
first I intend to carry with me the ^ive books of Moses (they will be no great
burden, being comprised in so small a Volum) and according to my poor ability,
out of them will I instruct my Family, whilst my dear wife Naomi, and dutiful
children* Maclon and Chilion, will be diligent to hear and practice what I
propound unto them: I confess we shall have no outward sacrifices, (because I
am not of the Tribe of Levi) yet may we offer unto God prayers and praises,
which God no doubt will as graciously accept, as of a Bullock that has Horns
and Hoofes: thus hope I to have a little Church in mine own House; and I know,
where two or three are met together in the name of God, there he will be in the
midst of them. Whereas you object, I should be in danger of being defiled with
their Idolatry, I will be by Gods grace so much the more wary, watchful and
vigilant over my ways; we see the flesh of fishes remains fresh, though they
always swim in the brackish waters, and I hope that the same God who preserved
righteous Lot in the wicked City of Sodom, who protected faithful Joseph in
the vicious Court of Pharaoh, will also keep me unspotted in the midst of Moab,
whether I intend speedily to go, not to live, but to lodge; not to dwell, but
to soj^urne; not to make it my habitation for ever, but my harbor for a
season, till God shall visit his people with plenty, when I purpose to return
with the speediest conve^iency.

Thus we see Elimelech putting the dangers of his removal in one scale, the
benefits thereof in another; the beam of his judgment is ju^^ly weighed down
to go from Bethlehem-Iudah, into the Land of Moab.

Observe.
It is lawful for Men to leave their Native Soil, and to travel into a
foreign Country, as for Merchants, provided always, that while they seek to
make gainful Adventures for their Estates, they make not sheepwrack of a good
Conscience.

2ly. For Ambassadors, that are sent to see the Practices and Negoci^tions in
foreign Courts.

3ly. For private persons, that travel with an intent to accomplish themselves
with a better sufficiency to serve their King and Country; but unlawful it is
for such to travel, which Dinah like, go only to see the Customs of several
Countries, and make themselves the L^ckie^ to their own humorou^ curiosity:
henc^ comes it to p^sse, when they return, it is justly questionable,
whether their Clothes be disguised with more foolish fashions, or bodies
disabled with more loathsome Diseases, or souls defiled with more notorious
vices; having learned Jealousy from the Italian, Pride from the Spaniard,
Lasciviousness^ from the ^rench, Drunkenness from the D^tch; and yet what need
they go so far to learn so bad a lesson, when (God knows) w^ have too many
Schools, where it is taught here at home.

Now if any do demand of me my opinion concerning our Brethren, which of late
left this Kingdom to advance a Plantation in New England; surely I thin^, as
St. Paul said concerning Virgins, He had received no comma^dment from the Lord:
so I cannot find any just warrant to encourage men to undertake this removal;
but think rather the counsel best that King Ioash prescribed to Amaziah, tarry
at home: yet as for those that are already gone, far be it from us to
conceive them to be such, to whom we may not say, God speed, as it is in 2 Ioh.
verse. 10. but let us pity them, and pray for them, for sure they have no need
of our mocks, which I am afraid have too much of their own miseries: I
conclude therefore of the two Englands, what our Savior says of the two
wines, Luke 5. 39. No man having tast^d of the old, presently desires the new;
for he says the old is better.

He, and his wife, and his two sons.

Verse. 2.
And the name of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wife, Naomi, and
the name of his two sons, Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of Bethlehem-Judah,
and they came into the Country of Moab, and continued there.
THese words contain; first, The principal party that undertook the journey.
2ly. His company, described by their relations; his Wife, and Children, and by
their names, Naomi, Mahlon, and Chilion. 3ly. The success of his journey; When
he came into the Land of Moab, he continued there.

Now whereas Elimelech took his Wife and Children along with him: from his
practice we gather this Observation.

Observe.
It is the part of a kind Husband, and of a careful Father, not only to
provide for himself, but also for his whole Family. Genesis 2. 24. A man shall
cleave to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh, Ephe. 5. 25. Husbands love
your wives -- for no man as yet hated his own flesh, 1 Timothy 5. 8. If any one
provideth not for his own Family, he denies the faith, and is worse than an
Infidel: this made Abraham to take with him at his removal, his meek Sarah;
Isaac, his wife Rebecca; Jacob, his fair Rachel, and fruitful Leah; and
Joseph, Mat. 2. took with him Mary, his espoused wife, and our Savior, his
supposed Son. And when Pharaoh, Exodus 10. 9. offered Moses with all the men
of Israel to go out of Egypt, but on condition, they should leave their Wives
and Children behind them; Moses refused the proffer: he would either have them
all go out, or else he would not go out at all.

Use.
It confuteth such cruel Husbands and careless parents, who if so be with
Jobs Messengers, they only can escape alone, they care not though they leave
their wives and children to shift for themselves; like the Ostridge, Job. 39.
14. who leaves her Eggs in the sand, and so forsakes them. Surely the two Kine
which drew the Ark of God out of the Land of the Philistines to Bethshemesh, 1 Samuel 6. 12. shall rise up at the day of Iudement and condemn such cruel
Parents: for it is said of them, That as they went along the high way, they did
pitifully low by that querulous ditty, as nature afforded them utterance, with
witnessing and expressing their affection to their Calves shut up at home: O
that there should be such humanity (as I may term it) in Beasts, and such
beastliness in many men. Remember this you that fit drinking and bezzling wine
abroad, whilst your Family are glad of water at home, and think thus with your
selves, To what end is this needless wast, might it not have been sold for
many a penny, and have been bestowed on my poor Wife and Children.

Observe.
Secondly, Whereas we find Naomi and her Sons going with Elimelech, we gather;
It is the duty of a dear Wife, and of dutiful Children, to go along with their
Husband and Parents, when on just cause they remove into a foreign Country. It
was an unmanly and cowardly speech of Barak to Deborab, Judge. 4. 8. If thou will go with me, then will I go; but if thou will not go with me, then will I
not go: but it would be a gracious resolution of a grave Matron and her
Children; Husband, if you be pleased to depart, I will be ready to accompany
you; Father, if you be minded to remove, I will attend upon you: but if you be
disposed to sta^, I will not stir from the p^ace where you abide: otherwise if
^he wife refus^th to go along with her Husband, what Abraham Genesis 24. 8. said
to the Servan^ in another case, is true in this respect; but i^ the Woman will
not be willing to follow thee, then thou shall be clear from thine Oath; if the
wife be so peevish and perverse, that she will not go along with her Husband,
who propounds lawful means unto her to relieve her wants; then is he
acquitted from the Oath he made her in Marriage, when he plighted his troth
unto her, in sickness and in health, to maintain her.

Question.
But methinks I hear the Widows and Orphants crying unto me, as the Soldiers
to John Bapti^^, But what shall we do? Luke 3. It is true, says the Widow,
that kind Husbands a^e to provide for their Wives, but alas we have no
Elimelech's to carry us into a foreign Country in the time of Famine; indeed
says the Orphant, it is the Fathers duty to provide for his Children; but my
Parents are dead long ago, I have not as Samuel had, a Mother Hannah every year
to bring me a new Coat; what shall we do in this our distress.

Answer.
Answer, Use the best means you can, and for the rest, rely on Gods
providence, who is said, Psalm. 10. 20. To help the fatherless and poor to
their Right, Psalm. 68. 5. To be a father to the fatherless, and to defend the
cause of the Widow, even God in his holy habitation: who will deal with thee
as he did with David, When my Mother and Father forsook me, the Lord cared for
me.

So much for Elimelech's company described by their relations: we should come
now to speak of their names, where we might take occasion to speak of the
Antiquity, and use of Names, but that hereafter we shall have better
convenience to treat thereof, in those words, Call me not Naomi, but call me
Marah: We come therefore to the success of Elimelech's journey;

And they came into the Country of Moab, and they continued there.
The meaning is, That the Moabites afforded them harbor without any
molestation.

Observe.
From whence the Observation is this; We ought to be Hospital and courteous to
receive strangers. First, Because God in several places of Scripture enjoyneth
it, Exodus 23. 9. Levit. 19. 33. 2ly. Because God apprehends all courtesy
done to a stranger as bestowed on himself; He that receives you, receives
me, etc. I was a stranger and ye harbored me, Mat. 25. And then if we
entertain strangers, it may be said of us not only as it is of Lot and
Abraham, Heb. 13. 2. That we entertained Angels, b^t that we entertained God
himself unawares. 3ly. Because it spiritually considered, we our selves are
strangers with the Patriarks, Heb. 11. We have here no abiding City, but seek
one from above, whose b^ilder and maker is God. I beseech you as Strangers and
Pilgrims, 1 Pet. 2. 11. Lastly, Because of the uncertainty of our own estates,
for thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth, it may be we that now
relieve strangers, hereafter our selves being strangers may be relieved by
others.

Use.
Let us not therefore abuse strangers and make a prey of them, making an
advantage of their unskilfulnesse in the language, and being unacquainted with
the fashions of the Land; like Laban that deceived his Nephew Jacob in placing
Leah for Rachel, and to cloak his cheating, pleaded it was the custom of the
Country: wherefore rather let us be courteous unto them, least the Barbarians
condemn us, who so courteously entreated S. Paul, with his shipwrackt
companions, and the Moabites in my Text, who suffered Elimelech when he came
into the Land, to continue there.

Verse. 3. 4. 5.
And Elimelech Naomies Husband dyed, and she was left, and her two Sons, etc.
IN these words we have two Marriages ushered, and followed by Funerals: I
will begin there, where one day all must make an end, at Death;

And Elimelech Naomies Husband dyed.
I have seldom seen a Tree thrive that has been transplanted when it was old,
the same may be seen in Elimelech, his aged body brooks not the foreign Air;
though he could avoid the Arrows of Famine in Israel, yet he could not shun the
Darts of Death in Moab: he that lived in a place of Penury, must die in a Land
of Plenty: Let none condemn Elimelech's removal as unlawful, because of his
sudden death, for those actions are not u^ godly which are unsuccessfull, nor
those pious which are prosperous, seeing the lawfulness of an action is not to
be gathered from the joyfulnesse of the event, but from the justness of the
cause, for which it is undertaken.

Observe. 1.
Hence we observe, that God can easily frustrate our fairest hopes, and defeat
our most probable projects, in m^king those places most dangerous, which we
account most safe and secure, causing death to meet us there, where we think
furthest to fly from it.

Observe. 2.
2. We see that no outward plenty can privilege us from death; the sand of our
li^e runs as fast, though the Hourglass be set in the sunshine of
prosperity, as in the gloomy shade of affliction.

And she was left and her two Sons.
Here we see how mercifully God dealt with Naomi, in that he quenched not all
the sparks of her comfort at once; but though he took away the stock, he left
her the stems; though he deprived her as it were of the ^se of her own legs,
by taking away her Husband, yet he left her a staff in each of her hands, her
two Sons to support her. Indeed afterward he took them away, but first he
provided her a gracious Daughter-in-law: whence we learn, God powers not all
his afflictions at once, but ever leaves a little comfort, otherwise we should
not only be pressed down, but crush't to powder under the weight of his heavy
hand.

And they took them wives of the women of Moab, etc.
Here we see the fashion of the world, mankind had long ago decayed, if those
breaches which are daily made by Death, were not daily made up by Marriage. But
here arises a question, Whether these matches were lawful? for answer
whereof, we will suppose Naomi dissuading her Sons on this manner.

Disswasion.
What, my Sons? and what, persons of my womb? and what, the Sons of my
desire? give not your strength to strange women, and your ways to that that
destroyed men. It is not for you O Mahlon and Chilion, it is not for you to
marry Moabites; nor for the Sons of an Isra^lite t^ marry the Daughters of
the uncircumcised. Remember my Sons what God says by the mouth of Moses,
Deuteronomy. 7. 3. Thou shall not make Marriages with them, thy Daughter shall thou
not give to his Son, nor take his daughter to thy Son, for they will turn
away thy Son from following me, to serve strange Gods, so will the anger of the
Lord be kindled against thee to destroy thee suddenly. Take he^d therefore
least long looking on these women, you at length be made blind, least they suck
out your souls with kisses, and Snake-like, sting you with embraces: curb your
affections until you come into Canaan where you shall find variety of wives,
who as they come not short of these for the beauties of their bodies, so they
far go beyond them for the sanctity of their souls.

Answer.
To this disswasion, thus might her Childeren answer: We thank you dear Mother
for your carfulness over our good; but we must entreat you not to interpret
it undutifulnesse, if upon good reason we dissent from your judgment herein.
In the place by you cited, Marriages are forbidden with such strange women as
are of a stubborn obstinate and refractory nature, such as are likely to seduce
their Husbands; whereas you see the mild, towardly, and tractable disposition
of these women we mean to make our wives; we hope to plant these wild branches
in Gods Vineyard, to bring these straggling sheep to his fold, to make them
Proselytes to our Religion: Besides, this Marriage will be advantageous for us,
thereby we shall endeare our selves into the Moabites affections, they will use
us the more courteously, when we have married one of their own kindred.

^ut methinks my tongue refuses to be any longer the advocate of an unlawful
deed, and my mouth denies to be the Orator of an unjust action: when I have
said what I can for the defense of their Marriage, I shall but make a plaster
too narrow for the sore, the breach is so broad I cannot stop it, though I may
dam it up with untempered mortar. Nothing can be brought for the defense of
these matches, something may be said for the excuse of them, but that fetched
not from piety, but from poliey; not certain, but conjecturall; yet here may
we see the power and providence of God, who made so good use of these Men's
defaults, as hereby to bring Ruth, first to be a retainer to the family of
Faith, and afterward a joyful Mother in Israel. This is that good Chymick
that can distill good out of evil, light out of darkness, order out of
confusion, and make the crooked actions of men tend to his own glory in a
straight line, and his Childrens good.

I speak not this to defend any man's folly in doing of evil, but to admire
Gods wisdom, who can bring good out of evil: and surely he that will turn
evil to good, will turn good to the best.

And they dwelled there about ten years.
Here we have the term of Naomi's living in Moab, and the Families lasting in
Israel, ten years: we read of a Famine for three years, 2 Samuel 21. of three
years and a half, 1 King. 17. of seven years, Genesis 42. as also 2 King. 8. but
this ten years Famine longer then any; seven years which Jacob served for
Rachel, seemed to him but a short time; but surely those ten years seemed to
the afflicted Israelites, and to the banished Naomi, as so many millions of
years.

Observe.
God does not presently remove his rod from the back of his Children, but
sometimes scourges them with long-lasting afflictions: the reason is, because
we go on and persist so long in our sins; and yet herein even mercy exalts
her self against judgment: for if God should suffer the fire of his fury to
burn, so long as the fuel of our sins do last, Lord, who were able to abide?
were the days of our suffering, appor^ioned to the days of our living, no
flesh would be saved, but for the Elect sake, those days are shortened.

Use.
Bear with patience light afflictions; when God afflicts his Children with
long lasting punishments; mutter not for a burning F^aver of a fortnight, what
is this to the woman that had a running Issue for twelve years; murmur not for
a twelve months quartain Ague, 'is nothing to the woman that was bowed for
eightteen years; nor seven years Consumption, to the man that lay thirty eight
years lame at the Pool of Bethezda.

And Mahlon and Chilion died also b^th of them.
It was but even now that old Elimelech was gone to bed; see, his Sons would
not sit long up after the Father; only here is the difference, He like ripe
fruit fell down of his own accord; they like green Apples, were cudgel'd off
the Tree.

Observe.
Even young men in the prime of their age, are subject to death; the Sons of
Jacob when they came to the Table of Joseph sat down, the eldest according to
his age, and the youngest according to his youth; but Death observes not this
method, she takes not Men in seniority, but sometimes sends them first to the
burial that came last from the birth, and those that came last from the womb,
first to their winding sheet. There were as many Lambs and Kids sacrificed in
the old Testament, as Goats and old Sheep; but surely more there be that die in
infancy and in youth, then of those that attain to old age.

Use.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth: you whose joints are knit with
sturdy sine ws, whose veins are full of blood, whose arteries are flush't with
spirits, whose bones are fraught with Marrow; Obediah-like, serve God from your
y^uth, put not the day of death far from you; think not your strength to be
armor of proof against the darts of Death, when you see the Corslet of Mahlon
and Chilion shot through in the left; so Mahlon and Chilion died both of them.

And the woman was left of her two Sons and of her Husband.
Before we had the particular losses of N^omi, now we have them all reckoned up
in the total sum; a Threefold Cable, says Solomon, is not easily broken, and
yet we see in Naomies threefold cable of comfort twisted of her husband and her
two sons, broken by Death: of the two Sex, the woman is the weaker; of women,
old women are most feeble; of old women, widows most woeful; of widows, those
that are poor, their plight most pitiful; of poor widows, those that want
Children, their case most doleful; of widows that want Children, those that
once had them and after lost them, their estate most desolate; of widows that
have had Children, those that are strangers in a foreign Country, their
condition most comfortless: yet all these met together in Naomi as in the
center of sorrow, to make the measure of her misery pressed down shaken
together, running over. I conclude therefore, many Men have had affliction,
none like Job; many women have had tribulation, none like Naomi.

Verse. 6.
Then she arose with her Daughters in law, that she might return from the
Country of Moab: for she had heard in the Country of Moab, how that the Lord
had visited his people, in giving them bread.
THese words contain two general parts.

1. Gods visiting his people with Plenty.

2. Naomies visiting of her people with her person.

I begin with the first in the Order of the words, Then she arose with her
Daughters in law, etc.

Observe.
We must tarry no longer in an Idolatrous Land, when God offers us an
occasion to return into our own Country: for so long as we tarry in an
Idolatrous Land on a just cause, so long we are in our vocation and in Gods
protection: but when God opens us a Gap to return, and we will not through
it, we are neither in our calling, nor Gods keeping, but must stand on our own
adventures; and who knows not how slenderly we shall be kept, when we are left
to our own custody: let not therefore Joseph with his Wife and Son, tarry any
longer in the Land of Egypt, when he is dead that sought the life of the Child.

Examples we have o^ those, which in the days of Queen Mary, fled beyond the
Seas; though they were not in a Paganish, only in a foreign Country, Mr.
Scorey, Cocks, Whitehead, Grindall, Horn, Sandys, Elmore, Gest, Jewel; if fear
lent them feet to run when they went away, joy gave them wings to fly when they
came home again: let none therefore pretend in needless excuses to linger in
the Land of Egypt, when they may return into the hony-flowing Land of Canaan.

For she had heard in the Country of Moab.
I suppose when any Messenger arrived in M^ab, out of the Land of Canaan,
Naomie did presently repair unto him, and load him with questions concerning
the estate of her Country: How do the Jews my Countrymen? How faireth it with
the Bethlehemites my Neig^bours? with Boaz my Kinsman? What is the rate of
Corn? What the price of Oil? What the value of Wine? if there be no
performance for the present, what promise is there for the future? though
things be bad now, what hope is there, but they will be better hereafter: Alas
he answers little; and from his silence and sorrowful looks, Naomi gathers a
denial; but as Elijah sending his servant toward the Sea, to see what ^igns
there were of Rain, 1 King. 18. 43.
for six several times together he returned this answer, There is nothing: but
at the seventh time, he brought him the tidings of a Cloud rising out of the
Sea; so though for nine years Naomi had no news but of want and scarcity; yet
the tenth year there came a man (probably he was a good man that brought these
good tidings) who brought her word that the valleys began to laugh and sing
with plenty; and so though the hope that was deferred was the fainting of the
heart, yet when it came, it was the Tree of life. Perchance because the
coveto^s Jews had made nine parts great for their own profit, and the tenth
small to cozen God of his portion: God quite contrary, gave them nine years of
scarcity and want, and at length made the tenth of store and plenty.

Observe.
The fame of remarkable Accidents will fly into foreign Countries; for if it
be bad news, the wicked will be sure to tell it in the Gates of Gath, and
publish it in the streets of Askelon: if it be good, the godly will proclaim it
in the Courts of Zion, and disperse it within the walls of Jerusalem; whether
good or bad (if it be of moment and importance) it will not be covered nor
concealed.

Question, Is it lawful for us to lissen, hearken, and enquire after matters
of foreign Countries?

Answer, Though I would not have men to be like the Athenians, to hear or tell
some new thing; yet it is both lawful and laudable for them to enquire after
foreign affairs, whereby they express the desire that they have of the
welfare of their distant Brethren, the Members of the same mystical body:
Example, Nehe. 1. 2. And yet would I have men (though they lend their ears) not
to bestow their belief on every groundless report which is blazed abroad.

1. Because Fame is often untrue, ^^lating 2 Samuel 13. That all the Kings Sons
are killed, when only Amnon is slain,

2. Because many there be which with the Soldiers, Mat. 28. do nothing but
invent and disperse lies to gull over-credulous people: And as many a benighted
Traveller has wandered out of his way, whilst he followed for his lanthorn the
Meteor of foolish fire; so many a man has been deceived by embracing of lying
relations, instead of true news. Yet in case that Cushai and Ahimaaz confirm
the same thing, that variety of Messengers from diverse places of sundry sides
and several factions, all agree in material and substantial points; we ought
not to be like unbelieving Thomas, to trust no more then our eyes have seen,
but may rely on the truth of such relations, and ought accordingly to be
affected with sorrow if the news be bad, or joy, if the tidings tend to the
Churches good and Gods glory.

That God had visited his People.
This was the privilege of the people of the Jews, that they were styled Gods
people, but now Ammi is made Lo-Ammi, and Ruchama, Lo-ruchama; and we the
Gentiles are placed in their room, let us therefore remember the words of St.
Paul; Romans 11. 21. Be not high minded, but fear, for if God spared not the
natural branches of the Olive, fear that he will not spar^ thee also.

O that he would be pleased to cast his eye of pity upon the poor Jews, which
for 1500. years and upwards have wandered without Law, without Lord, without
Land, and as once they were, so once again to make them his people.

In giving them bread.
By Bread, is meant all sustenance necessary for the maintaining of our lives,
whereof bread is the chiefest. As the Temple of Dagon principally leaned on two
Pillars, and fell to the ground when Sampson took them away, so the buildings
of our bodies chiefly relyes on bread and water for outward sustenance, which
being taken away, cannot but presently decay: let others therefore wish those
dishes which curiosity has invented, rather to increase then satisfy hunger,
which are more delightsome to the eye, then pleasing to the pallat; yet more
pleasing to the pallat, then wholesome to the stomach; let us pray, Give us this
day our daily bread.

Bread is a dish in every Course, without this can be no Feast, with this can
be no Famine.

Observe.
Gods punishments though they last sometimes long, yet always they end at
last: and yet sometimes for the manifestation of his power, and trial of his
Childrens patience, he suffers them to be brought into great extremities:
Abra^ams hand shall be heaved up to slay Isacc, before the Angel shall catch
hold of it: Lazarus shall be three days dead before Christ will raise him; the
Ship ready to ^inke, before our Savior will awake; Peter must be drencht in
the water, before our Savior will keep him from drowning; S. Paul must be in
the Lions mouth, before he shall be delivered out of it; the Famine must last
ten year, before God will give them Bread.

An example hereof, we have in our Neighboring Churches of Germany, which
long have been afflicted under the Tyranny of their Oppressors; and now at
length, a Sun is risen out of the North; and after a long Night, ^he Morning
begins the Day: And thou Swethland shall not be counted the meanest amongst
the Kingdoms of Europ^; for out of thee did a Prince arise, who has delivered
the distressed Protestants; who at his first Landing, seemed to his Enemies an
Obect fitter of their scorn then opposition; They thought our youthful David
too unequal a Match to coape with their General, who had bean a Man of War
from his Youth. But as Verity consists not in the plurality of Voy^^s, so
Victory stands not in the multitude of Soldiers; but God so ordered it,
that he that had the best Cause, had the best succ^sse. I dare boldly say, that
all the Protestant Princes and States of Germany will be ready truly to say
of him what Tertullus spoke ^latteringly of Felix, Act. 24. 2 Seeing that by
thee we enjoy great quietness, and that very worthy deeds are ^one unto this
Nation by thy providence, we always* accept it, and in all places, most noble
Prince, with all thankfulness. But let us turn our praises of him into
prayers for him, That he who has conquered his Foes, may subdue himself* not
to be puffed up with his good su^cesse. So let all thine enemies perish, O
Lord; but let all them that love thee, be as the Sun when he goes forth in
his might: And as ever I have earnestly desired, so now do I steadfastly hope
to see the Day, when our Naomi (our worthy Naomi, more fruitful in Miseries
then in Children, and in Virtue; then in both) shall arise, to return out of
the Land of Holland, with her Prince and Progeny, when she shall hear, that
in the Land of Holland God has visited the Palatinate, and given them rest.

Verse. 7, 8.
And she went out of the place where she was, and her two daughters in law with
her, and they went on the way, to return into the Land of Judah.
And Naomi said to her daughters in law, Go, return each of you to her mother.
THese words contain the continuation of Naomies return; wherein we may
observe,

First, the company that went with her, her two daughters in law.

Secondly, the discourse she had with this company, consisting of a Precept in
the Text, Go, return each of you to her mother: and of a prayer, in the words
following.

Now, whereas her daughters in law did not take their farewell of Naomi at the
threshold of their house, but went part of the way with her, we gather,

Observation.
That all offices of kindnesses and courtesies ought to be betwixt the mother
in law and the daughter in law, I mean her sons Wife. And yet look into the
world, and ye shall commonly find enmity betwixt them, as says Terence in
Hessera; Neque declinatam mulierem reperias ab aliarum ingenio; ita adeo uno
omn^s animo socrus oderunt nurus: And their fallings out chiefly proceed from
these two causes:

First, they contend which should have the greatest right and interest in the
Man, who is Son to the one, Husband to the other. Judah and Israel contested
(2 Samuel 19. 43.) which should have most part in King David; the former claiming
it, because he was bone of their bone; the latter pleaded they had eleven parts
in him, to Iudahs single share. Thus mother in laws and daughter in laws use
to fall out; the mother, because her son is flesh of her flesh, and bone of
her bone, pleades it is right, that he should side and second with her; the
daughter in law, because he is her Husband, and therefore one flesh challenges
that he should rather take her part: so betwixt them they fill the Family with
all discord.

Secondly, they fall out about the managing of the matters in the Household,
after whose mind they should be ordered: but as S. James said in another case,
Beloved, these things ought not to be so; both these brawles may be easily
ended. The first may be taken up by the wisdom and discretion of the son in
law, who ought so indifferently to poyse his affections betwixt them both, with
such dutifulness and respect to the one, such love and kindness to the other,
that neither may have just cause to complain. And the second controversy may
thus be decided: If the mother has the state still in her hands, good reason
it is she should rule the Affairs, and that the daughter in law should wait
till her mother in laws natural death has paved the succession to the
governing of the Family: but if the old woman has resigned her estate, and
confined her self to an yearly pension, then ought she not to intermeddle
with those matters, from which she had willingly sequestered her self. Were
this observed, there would not so many daughters in law rejoice, when the day
of mourning for their mother in law is come; some whereof say as the wicked
said of David, O, when will she die, and her name perish?

Now to come to the discourse she had with them:

Go, return etc.
Where arises a question, Whether Naomi did well, in perswadiug her daughters
to go back unto Moab? For the satisfaction whereof, I will set down, first,
what may be said against; secondly, what may be brought for her defense.

Accusation.
Why Naomi, Why did thou quench the zeal of thy daughters, which proffered
themselves so willingly to go with thee? Oh, rain them not backward with
disswasions, but rather spur them forward with exhortations; and strive to
bring them out of an Idolatrous Land, to a place where Gods Worship is purely
professed: Say unto them, Hearken O daughters, and consider, incline your ears,
forget also your Country, and your own Mothers house; so shall the Lord your
God have pleasure in you: true it is* ye have a Mother in Moab, but what of
that; care not for your Mother, but care for your Maker: care not for her that
Conceived you, but care for him that Created you: tarry not with them, no not
so much as to express your last love in performing their Funerals; rather let
the dead bury their dead: those that are dead spiritually, let them bury such
as die naturally, and come go ye along with me to the Land of Canaan: Thus
Naomi ought thou to have said, and then had performed the part, done the
duty of a Mother; if whilst thou had traveled with them on the way, thou
had traveled with them till God had been formed in them; then should thou
shine as a double Sun in heaven for saving of two souls, whereas now thou art
in a manner accessory to their ghostly murder in sending them back to an
idolatrous Country.

Defense.
To this accusation Naomi might justly answer; It is my hearts desire and
prayer go God, that I may be an instrument of my Daughters in laws conversion;
but the wisdom of the Serpent, as well as the innocence of the Dove is to be
used in all our actions, least we draw needless danger upon our selves. True
it is, my Daughters in law proffer to go with me, but here is the question;
whether this is done out of courtesy and complement, or out of singleness and
sinceritye. Now should they through my persuasions, go into the Land of Canaan,
and there live in want and penury, they will be ready to rail on me another
day. We may thank Naomi for all this, we had plentiful provisions in our own
Country, but she must have us hither; she by her restless importunity must
wring a constrained consent from us to come into Canaan; all these miseries are
befallen upon us through her default. Yea, I am afraid, that finding want,
that they again will return into their own Country to my shame, the scandal of
our Religion, and the deeper punishment of their own souls. Wherefore without
their minds would I do nothing, that their going might not be as it were of
necessity, but willingly. To which end I will put them to the touchstone, to
see whether their forwardness be faithful or feigned, sound or seeming,
cordial or counterfeit; I will weigh them both in the balance, hoping that
neither shall be found too light.

Upon these Grounds learned men have acquitted Naomi from any fault in managing
this matter, she doing it only with an intent to try them.

Whence we may observe, That Pagans that proffer themselves to become Converts,
are not without proof presently to be received into the Church.

And here we may take occasion to digress a little, to show how Christians
ought to behave themselves in the converting of Infidels.

First, They must strive in their mutual conversing with them, to season them
with a good opinion of their honesty and upright dealing, otherwise their
Doctrine will never be embraced, whose manners are justly mislik't.

Secondly, Having possessed them with th^s good esteem, they ought as occasion
is offered, to instruct them in the Rudiments of Christian Religion; and to
begin with such as are plain and evident by the light of nature, and so in due
time to proceed to matters of greater difficulty.

Lastly, They are to pray to God to give his increase to their planting and
watering: for, as Athanasius says, ^t is a divine work to persuade men's souls
to believe.

But as for the using of tortures and of torments thereby to force them, we
have no such custom, nor as yet the Churches of God: for though none come to
Christ but such as his Father draws by the violence of his effectual grace;
yet ought not men to drive or drag any to the pro^ession of the Faith: yet
notwithstanding, if after long patience and forbearing with them, and long
instructing them in the points of Religion; if still these Pagans continue
refractary and obstinate, then surely the civil Magistrate who has the
lawful dominion over them, may severely, though not cruelly, with Josiah,
compel them to come to Church, and to perform the outward formalities of Gods
worship.

Go then ye bloody Jesuits, boast of those many millions of Americanes whom
you have converted, who were not converted by the sword of the mouth, gained by
hearing the Gospel, but compelled by the mouth of the sword, forced by feeling
your cruelty, witness those 70000 which without any catechizing in the points
of Religion, were at once driven to the Font like so many Horses to a watring
Trough. Indeed I find my Savior, John ^. driving the Merchants out of the
Temple with a whip of cords, but never before did (...) of any which against
their wills drove or instructed Pagans to the ^ont to be baptized.

Each to her Mothers house.
Here we see Widows if poor, are to be maintained by their Parents if they be
able. These widows, 1 Timothy 5. 16. were not to be burdensome to the Church, but
^o be relieved by their own Country, let Parents therefore take heed how they
bestow their Daughters in Marriage: for if they match them to Unthrifts and
Prodigals, will it not be bitterness in the end? the burden will fall heavy
on their backs, when their poor Daughters with their Children must be sent
again to their Fathers to maintain them.

House.
Widows are to contain themselves within the house, not like the Harlot, Prove.
7. 12. always in the streets; but like meek Sarah in the Tent: whereby they
shall sooner gain the love and esteem of others; for let base and beggarly
fellows buy that rascal ware which is hung out at the doors and windows of
Shops and Stalls, whilst men of quality and fashion will go into the Shop to
cheapen the worth of those merchandise as are therein kept secret and
concealed. And so surely all discreet and grave men will have the highest
esteem, and bear the best affection to such Women which do not gad abroad to be
seen, but with Ruth and Orpah being Widows, keep themselves in their Mothers
house.

Verse. 8, 9. ^
The Lord show favou^ unto you, as ye have done with the dead, and with me.
The Lord grant you, that you may find rest, either of you in the house of her
Husband.
NAomi being ready to take her leave of her daughters, feign she would leave
them something, for which they might be the better after her departure* But
Gold and Silver she had none, yet such as she had she freely gave unto them
(hearty prayers.) Whence we learn, It is the best expression of a grateful
mind, to pray to God for the welfare of those, at whose hands we have received
greater courtesies then we can requite.

As ye have done.
Hence we learn, God in the rewarding of the good deeds of his servants,
deals with them accordingly as they have done with others. Yet far be it
from us to suppose, that in our stained and imperfect works there is any
meritorious virtue, which deserves, that God should proportion a Reward unto
them: but this freely proceeds from Gods favor; who to encourage us in
well-doing, will not suffer a Cup of cold water to pass without its reward.
Do we desire then to have dutiful Children, and faithful Servants hereafter?
let us be dutiful to our P^rents, faithful to our Masters. On the other side,
has God afflicted us with Zibahs to our Servants, and with Absalons to our
Sons? let us reflect our eyes on that which is past, and call our selves to
account, whether we formerly have not been unfaithful to our Masters,
undutifull to our Parents: no doubt, we may then take up the Confession of
Adoni-bezek, As I have dealt with others, so the Lord has done to me.

With the dead.
Question.
Here arises a Question; How can one show favor to the dead, who being past
sense, are not capable of kindness or cruelty?

Answer.
The Papists (who leave the souls of most men departing from hence, like
Absalon's body, hanging betwixt Heaven and Hell) expound it, that these Women
did fast and pray for ^he souls of their deceased Husbands, that they might be
delivered from torments, and in due time brought to happiness in Heaven. For
the confutation of which erroneous exposition, I need say no more, then that
the Scripture makes no mention of any such middle place, wherein the souls of
the godly should be detained before they go into Heaven; and in matters of
Faith, every Christian may safely say, Except I see in the Bible the print
thereof, or can feel it deduced out of it by undeniable consequence, I will not
believe it.

It is strange to see what impertinent places are produced by Bellarmine, to
prove praying for the dead; as James 5. 16. Confess your faults one to
another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed; the effectual
fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much. Then he endeavors to prove,
that the dead pray for the living, from the Parable of Dives, Luke 16. 27. I
pray thee therefore Father etc. where Dives was charitably sollicitous for the
good of his surviving Brethren: But let the first place in S. James be perused
by impartial Judgments, and it obliges mutually the dead Saints to confes^e
to us, as well as we to them; which being impossible, directs us to confine
the words only to reciprocal confessing and praying to and for the living.

Some will say, Bellarmine having sufficiently proved Purgatory before, (which
necessarily infers prayers for the dead) he might be the briefer in that
subject. It is confessed, many arguments are alleged by him to that intent,
though to small purpose; as Psalm 66. 22. We went through fire and through
water, but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place. We answer; first, the
living there speak de praeterito, we went; not de futuro, we shall go.
Secondly, it was literally meant of the Children of Israel; they went through
the fire, when envassalled to work in the Egyptian Brick-kills; and through
water, when miraculously they passed through the Red Sea. Again, they went
through fire, when preserved from the stinging of the fiery, they beheld the
Brazen Serpent. Thirdly, if from fire in this Text any can kindle a Purgatory,
others will quench it from the word water, seeing no Papists ever fancied a
watered Purgatory.

They urge the place, Matthew. 5. 26. Thou shall by no means come out from
thence till thou have paid the uttermost farthing; importing, say they, a
possibility on satisfaction to be freed thence, that is, from hell fire.

Answer: Until there, is not taken terminatively, but extensively; equivalent
to never, or not at all; paralleled to that place, Psalm 57. 1. In the shadow
of thy wings will I make my refuge, until these calamities be over-past. What,
would David depart from God, after his deliverance? Would he use him as
Travelers a Bush? come under it in a storm, and leave it in fair weather? No
surely, David would trust in God until that time, and at that time, and in
that time, and after that time, and at all times. Parallel also to that place
of Matthew 1. 25. And knew her not till she had brought forth her firstborn
Son: it being the constant Tradition of Antiquity, according to the
Proportion of Faith, and embraced by the Papists themselves, that Christ's
Mother lived and died a spotless Virgin.

Much stresse he lays on that passage of the Apostle, 2 Corinthians. 3. 15. He
himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire. This place, says Bellarmine, is
locus utilissimus and difficillimus, most profitable and most hard.

We answer, first, in general; seeing by the Iesuit's confession it is so hard
a place, it is utterly improbable, that Purgatory (being of so high
concernment to every soul as Papists would persuade us) can be therein
intended: For all matters necessary for men to know and believe, wherein the
safety of every single soul is interessed, (such as Purgatory is pretended
to be) is by the confession of all Divines expressed in plain and pregnant
Texts of Scripture; for want whereof, Bellarmine is feign to shroud and shelter
himself under the most obscure places, alleging a Text most dark and
difficult, by his own confession.

Secondly, that fire there meant by Saint Paul, is affliction in this life. As
for such Fathers who expounded it de igne conflagrationis, of that fire which
should burn up all things at the end of the world; it makes nothing for the
patronizing of Purgatory, in the Popish notion thereof.

Come we now to find an Office, and make an inquiry, how many things a dying
godly man leaves behind him in this world: His Soul is sent before him; and
Revel. 14. 13. From henceforth blessed are the dead that die in the Lord. He
leaves behind him,

First, his Body; to which we must be kind, by Burial and ^amentation.

Secondly, his Estate; to which we must be kind, by careful and faithful
Administration.

Thirdly, his Children, Friends, or Kindred; to whom we must be kind, by Love
and Affection.

Fourthly, his Faults and Failings; to which we must be kind, by Silence and
Suppression.

Fifthly, his Memory and Virtues; to which we must be kind, by
Congratulation, ^ommemoration, and Imitation.

Of these in order: For although these words, Ye have been kind to the dead,
are capable of this ^ound sense, You have been kind to your Husbands, who now
are dead, whilst they were living* yet because more seems imported therein,
we will prosecute the aforesaid Particulars.

I say, first, his Body; to which there is due Burial and Lamentation:
Burial, and that according to the quality and condition wherein he lived. We
read of King Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32. 33. They buried him in the chiefest (in
the Hebrew, in the highest) Sepulchers of the sons of David. It must be
allowed, that the Sepulcher of David his Father, was higher then his; and next
David, Hezekia^s. O that height might be but measured by true holiness! There
was an Officer amongst the Greeks, whose place it was to measure Monuments
according to the Standard of the men's merits therein interred: Such Officers if
used in England, would pare off great parcels from some Tombs, more
proportioned to the parties Wealth then Virtues. But nothing could be abated of
Hezeki^h his Monument, all the Dimensions whereof were due to his Devotion.

And Lamentation* Surely, of all the godly that ever departed this Life, Gods
servants had the least cause to bewayl the death of S. Steven: For first,
whereas there is a threefold degree of certainty of salvation; first, that of
Hope, which as the least and lowest, scarce deserves to be styled Certainty;
secondly, that of Evidence, whereby the person clearly in his soul
apprehends Gods favor; thirdly, that of Vision, peculiar to this Steven
alone, antedating his happiness with his bodily eyes, being in Heaven before
he was in Heaven: so that as many gates in his wounded body stood open to let
out his soul, he beheld alive the Heavens opened to receive it.

And yet we read, Acts. 8. 2. And devout men carried Steven to his Burial,
and made great Iamentation over him. Observe; it was not said, they made great
Iamentation for him, but over him; they knew him in a happy condition: It was
themselves they bemoaned in his death, the sight of his Corpse sharpening their
sorrow, that the Infant-Church had lost one of her best swadlin^g-clothes.

Secondly, his Estate; to which we must be kind, by careful and faithful
Administration. Heb. 9. 17. For a Testament is of force after men are dead.
Gal. 3. 15. Though it be but a man's Covenant, or Testament, yet if it be
confirmed, no man disanulleth or adds thereto. NO MAN? He must either be
less then man in knowledge, a mere Beast; or more then man in malice, a mere
Devil. By Testament I understand not only the very words thereof, but also
what appears to be the Testator his Will to the Conscience of the Executor.
How many in this kind are cruel to the dead? So that some of the Legacies
bequeathed by them, have had a Thumb or a Toe, yea, some an Arm or a Leg
cut off from them. Many Legacies which came sound forth from the Testator,
before they could get through the Executors have been more lame, and maimed,
then the Criples in the Hospital, to whom they have been bequeathed.

Thirdly, his Children, or (because Mahlon and Chilion had none of them) his
Kindred or Friends; to whom the living must be kind, with Love and Affection.
Remember the Character of the good Wife, Proverbs 31. 12. She will do her
Husband good, and not evil, all the days of her life. We have many Wives
only negatively good, pleasing and praising themselves in this, that they do
their Husbands no hurt. This will not do the deed, they must be positively
profitable. Nor is it said, all the days of his life, but all the days of her
life. What if he dies, her obligation to him is not cassated or nulled, (as
many Wives generally conceive) but still continues all the days of her life.
True it is, she is set free so far, as she may marry again in a competent
time, without the least shadow of sin; yet so, as still obliged to do good
all her life time to the Friends, to the Children (if any) of her dead Husband;
and he, if surviving her, reciprocally engaged to do the like.

Fourthly, the best men leave Faults and Failings behind them; to these the
living must be kind, by Silence and Suppression.

First, of those of whom thou can say no good, say nothing.

Secondly, of those of whom thou can say some good, say no bad.

David is a most excellent instance hereof, 2 Samuel 1. 24. Who could more, or
more justly have inveighed against Saul then David? O ye Daughters of Israel,
rejoice for the death of so great a Tyrant, who killed Ahimelech the High
Priest, and fourscore more of Gods Priests, whose souls were as clear from
Treason as the white Linen Ephod they wore were from spots: Twice I had him at
my mercy, once in the Cave, once when asleep; yet he (notwithstanding all his
fair promises to the contrary) was the more cruel to me for my kindness to
him. No such matter; David conceales what was bad, remembers what was good in
(...), at leastwise what would make his memory acceptable with the weaker Sex;
namely, his making of Gallantrie fashionable amongst them: Ye Daughters of
Israel weep over Saul, who clothed you in Scarlet, with other delights, who
put on ornaments of Gold upon your apparel.

Fifthly, Memory of his Virtues: To which three things are due, to make thee
kind thereunto.

First, Congratulation. I will touch this string but tenderly; not so much
because fearing mine own fingers, (as if the Lesson should be false I play
thereon) but expecting other men's ears as ill-disposed with prejudice. It is
no Popery, nor Superstition, to praise God for the happy condition of his
servants departed; the ancient Patriarchs, the inspired Prophets, the holy
Apostles, the patient Martyrs, the Religious Confessors. When the Tribe of
Ruben, Gad, and half Manasses, erected the Altar ED at the pas^age over
Jordan, it startled all the rest of the Tribes, as if under it they had hatched
some superstitious design; whereas indeed, the Altar was not intended for
Sacrifice, but was merely an Altar of Memorial, to evidence to posterity,
that these two Tribes and an half (though divided from the rest by the River
of Jordan) were conjoined with them in the worship of the same God. In like
manner, when some Ministers thank God for the departure of his servants, some
people are so weak, and some so wilful, to condemn such for passages of
Popery, as if superstitious prayers were made for their departure: whereas,
indeed, such Congratulation, on the contrary, speaks our confidence on their
present bliss and happiness, and continues the Church Militant with the
Church* Triumphant, as the completing one entire Catholic Church of Jesus
Christ.

Secondly, Commemoration is due to the Memories of the deceased. Hence the
an^ient custom of Funeral Orations continued in our modern practice, both to
the honor of the dead, and profit of the living.

Thirdly, Imitation of their Virtues. It has been a great Question amongst
such who desire to express themselves thankful to their dead Ancestors, of
what Metal, or Matter to make their Monuments so as they may be most lasting
and permanent. Wise men have generally decryed Silver and Brass; not so much,
because too costly, (such may be the worth and wealth of the Executors and
party deceased) but too tempting to Sacrilege to demolish them. Brass is
generally subject to the same mischief, and Marble Touch and Alablaster, are
generally used for that purpose; but the Monument less subject to Casualtie,
is, to imitate the Ver^ues of our dead Friends: in other Tombs the dead are
preserved; in these, they may be said to remain alive.

When we see a Child very like to the Father and Mother thereof, we use to say,
Thy Father will never be dead as long as thou live. Thus it is the best
remembrance of our dead Progenitors, to follow their Virtues. S. Paul cannot
look upon Timothy, but presently calls to mind his Mother Eunice, and his
Grandmother Loi^, though the latter no doubt long since departed.

The Lord grant, that you may find rest, each of you in the house of her
Husband.
Here we may observe, first, that it is the part of pious Parents to pray to
God for the good success of their Children, especially in the matter of their
Marriage: example in Abraham, Genesis 24. 7. Secondly, hence we may gather, that
the Life of married persons meeting together in the fear of God, is Rest.

Objection.
How then comes it to pass, that many men and women may take up the words of
Rebecca, Seeing it is so, why am I thus? Genesis 25. If the married Life be. Rest,
how comes it to prove my Purgatory, my Hell, my cause of restless I orment?
Men and women were joined in Marriage, Genesis 2. to the end to be a mutual help
one to the other, but many prove such helpers as the King of Ashur did to Ahaz,
2 Chronicles. 28. of whom it is said, he distressed him, but helped him not.

Answer.
Who can hinder it, if men of their Girdles and Garters make Halters to hang
themselves? If those things which should be for their strength and ornament, be
through their own default turned to their utter undoing; the estate of
Marriage is not herein to be blamed, but the folly of such who out of some
sinister ^nds undertake it. Happily some choose their Wives like as our
Grandmother Eve did the Apple, because they are pleasant to the eyes to be
looked upon: others out of a love of their Wealth, saying of their Wives what
the Sichemites did of the sons of Jacob, Shall not all their Herds and
Gattell be ours? Whereas i^ Grace and Piety were principally respected in
their Choice, (other outward accommodations in their due distance not
neglected) they would find the truth of our observation, that a married Life
is Rest* For though some petty Brawles may happen amongst the most sanctified
Couple, which may move their anger, yet shall it not remove their love, if one
with Christian discretion bears with the infirmities of the other. Ioab made
this compact with his Brother Abishai, 2 Samuel 10. 11. If the Aramite be
stronger then I, thou shall help me; but if the Ammonites be too strong for
thee, I will come and succor thee. Thus ought Man and Wife to make a Bargain
with their best Council to, and prayers for each other, to ^ssist themselves
mutually against their sundry weaknesses and infirmities, which otherwise would
turn their Rest of their Life into unquietness.

Verse. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
And when she kissed them, they lift up their voices, and wept.
And they said unto her, Surely, we will return with thee, unto thy people.
But Naomi said, Turn again my daughters: for what cause will you go with
me? Are there any more sons in my Womb, that they may be your Husbands?
Turn again my daughters, go your way, for I am too old to have an Husband:
If I should say, I (...) h^pe; and if I had an Husband this night; yea, if I
had borne sons:
Wo^ld you tarry for them while they were of age? Would you be deferred for
them from taking of Husbands? Nay my daughters, for it grieveth me much for
your sakes, that the hand* of the Lord is gone out against me.
And when she kissed them.
KIsses was the ordinary salutation of the Jews at the meeting of
acquaintance, men with men, women with women, men with women; provided, that
then they were of near kindred, to avoid all suspicion of unchastitie.

And they lift up their voices, and mept.
The observation here, may be the same which the Jews collected, John 11.
which when they saw our Savior weep for Lazarus, they said, Behold how he
loved him. So these tears in this place were the expression of their
affection. Sorrow like the River of Jordan, 1 Chronicles. 12. in the first month
did overflow the banks, and streamed water down their che^k^s.

But Naomi said, Turn again my daughters, etc.
In these words, she disswadeth her daughters in law from returning with her;
the strength of her Reason, contained in three Verses, may thus be set down,
as if she had said: Happily daughters you have heard, that it is the custom in
the Land of Canaan, for Childlesse Widows to marry their deceased Husbands
Brothers; But if your return be grounded hereon, know, that you build your
hopes on a false foundation, it being impossible for me, by the course of
Nature, to have any more sons. Who will look, that Water should ^low from a
dry Fountain, Grapes grow on a withered Vine, Fruit flourish on a dead
Fig Tree? Though Sarah at 90 was made a Mother, though Aar^n's Rod did bud
and blossom when it was dry; I my self should be a Miracle, if I should
expect such a Miracle: and therefore know, that there are no more sons in my
Womb.

Doctrine.
Now whereas N^omi deals thus plainly with her daughters, not feeding them
with false hopes, it teaches us this: We ought not to gull our friends with
the promises of those things that neither will nor can come to pass. Otherwise
we shall both wrong our friends, who the higher they are mounted upon the Hill
of seeming hopes, at length the deeper they will be cast into the Dale of real
despair; and also we shall wrong our selves; when Time, the Mother of Truth,
shall unmaske us, we shall prove our selves to be no better then Liars and
Cheaters.

Use.
Let us labor to be Nathanaels, true Israelites, in whom there is no guile;
and as John Baptist, when as the Pharisees asked him, whether he was the Christ,
or no? John 1. 20. he confessed, and denied not, and said plainly, I am not the
Christ: So if we neither mean to do, nor know, that such things cannot be
done which our friends request of us; let us confess, deny not, and say
plainly, that their suites cannot, shall not be granted; and by such
downright dealing, we shall at last get more favor from them, then they who
flatter them with their tongue. Let not the Physician, when he reads in the
Urinall those dismal symptoms, which are the Ushers of Death, still promise
Life and Health unto his Patient; but plainly tell him, that there is Mors in
ol^a; that so he may fly unto the Physician of the Soul, for a better Life,
when this shall fade. Let not the Lawyer, when he knows the Case is desperate,
feed his Clyent with false hopes to recover it, that so from ^im he may be fed
with Money; but rather let him advise him to agree with his adversary while he
is in the way; that though he cannot get the Conquest, yet he may have the
easier Composition.

For I am too old to have a Husband.
Here arises a Question.

Question.
Is there any Age so old, wherein a man or woman may not marry?

Answer.
Naomies meaning was not simply and absolutely, that she was too old to marry,
but she was too old to have a Husband, and by a Husband to have Children, and
that those Children should grow up, and make fit Husbands for Orpah and Ruth.
Yet by the way, I would advise such who are stricken in years, especially if
impotencie be added unto Age, and that it may stand with their conveniencie, to
refrain from all thoughts of a second Marriage, and to expect that happy day,
when Death shall solemnize the Nuptial betwixt their Soul and their Savior.
For when Barzillai has counted 80 years, he has even had enough of the
pleasure and vanity of the world; let him retire himself to a private life,
and not envy his son Cimcham to succeed to those delights, of which his Age
has made his Father incapable. Yet if any ancient persons, for their mutual
comfort and society, (which is not the least end for which Marriage was
ordained) are disposed to match themselves herein, they are blameless;
especially, if they have a care to observe a correspondenci^ of Age with those
to whom they link themselves. Otherwise, as our Saviou^ notes, when the old
Cloth was joined to the new, it made no good medley, but the Rent was made the
worse: So when the Spring of Youth is wedded to the Winter of Age, no true
comfort can arise from such unequal Yokes, but much jealousy and suspicion
are caused from the fame.

Would ye tarry for them?
That is, you would not tarry for them; or if you should tarry for them, you
should wrong your selves, and do unadvisedly; because in the mean time
refraining from the using of Gods Ordinance, you expose your selves to the
Devil, to tempt you to incontinencie. Therefore S. Paul's council is good
which he prescribes in 1 Timothy 5. 14. I will therefore that the younger Women,
etc.

While they were of age.
Note from hence, that Children are not to be married in their Nonage, before
they are arrived at years of discretion: Than^ar Genesis 38. is to wait till
Selah be grown up. Those Parents are therefore to be blamed, who out of
by-respects, match their Children in their infancy. Whence it comes to
pass, that as their age does increase, their mind does alter: so what
formerly they did like, afterward they do loath, such Marriages proving
commonly most insuccessfull.

N^y, my Daughters: for it grieveth me much for your sakes.
As if she had said* It grieveth me much that you are already plunged into
poverty; but it would add more to my sorrow, if you should increase your
calamities by returning home with me; for mine own part, my misery troubles me
not so much, because the Sun of my life is ready to set, and it mattereth not
though the Ship be scanted of Victuals, when it is hard by the Harbor; all my
care is for you who are young women, and stand upon your own preferment; it
grieveth me much for your sakes.

Doctrine.
See here, Such is the ingenuous nature of Gods Children, that they sorrow more
for others that are inwrapped with them in a common calamity, then for
themselves. Example in Elias, 1 King. 17. 20. Put then it goes nearest to
their heart, when others are not only afflicted with them, but also for them,
when they themselves are the principal Malefactors for whose defaults others
are punished, as in David, 2 Samuel 24. 17.

Uses.
It may confute the devilish nature of such, who being in Trouble, care not
though they pawn their dearest friends in their stead, so be it they
themselves may escape. And it may also serve to comfort those that are in
distress, when God only lays his punishments on them alone, and does not
involve others together with them. Art thou afflicted with poverty? Comfort
thy self, that though thou be poor, yet thou have undone none by
Suretiship for thee. Art thou in sickness? Be glad that thy Disease is not
infectious, and that thou have not derived the contagion to others. Does God
punish thee for thy sin with a personal punishment? Be glad that thou
bear the weight of thine own offense, and that thou art not the Jonah, for
whose private sin a whole Ship of Passengers is endangered to be cast away;
for then their case would grieve thee more then thine own calamity.

That the hand of the Lord.
Naomi here takes especial notice, that her Losses proceeds from no other
bycauses, but from the hand of God. As David therefore asked the Widow of
Tekoah, 2 Samuel 14. Is not the ^and of Joab with thee in all this? So when any
affliction befalls us, let us presently have recourse unto God, and say, Is
not the hand of the Lord the principal cause hereof? And not with the Priests
of the Philistims say, It was a chance that happened us.

Is gone out against me.
Observe.
Hence we may observe, every Saint of God, in a common calamity, is to think,
that God aimed at his punishment, and intended his reformation in particular.
The hand of the Lord was gone out also against Orpah and Ruth, in taking away
their Husbands; yet Naomi appropriateth the stroke to her self, Is gone out
against me.

How contrary is this to the practice of the world? Men in a public and a
general affliction, each shifteth it off from themselves, and no one man will
be brought to confess that his sins are punished, or his amendment intended
in particular, if the Scourge be universal. As the Philistims, 1 Samuel 5.
posted the Ark of God from Ashdod to Ekron, from one place to another, and none
would receive it: So, in a common Calamity, none will acknowledge, that he
himself is especicially interested in it, but plead, What is that to us? Let
others look unto it. O, says the people, God has justly sent this Plague for
the corruption of the Magistrates; It is justly in^licted, says the
Magistrate, for the disobedience of the people: Herein, says the poor man,
God has met with the oppression and extortion of the Rich; Herein, says the
rich man, God has paid home the muttering and the repining of the Poor: Now,
says the prodigal, God punishes the covetousness of Old men; Now, says the
old m^n, he scourges the prodigality of such as be Young. Far otherwise
Naomi, who though the Arrows of God did glance and rebound, to the wounding of
Orpah and Ruth, yet she thought she her self was the Mark at whom God did
level his Shafts; The hand of the Lord is gone ^ut against me.

Verse. 14.
And Orpah kissed her mother in law, but Ruth clave unto her.
THese words contain two general parts:

First, A blazing Meteor falling down out of the Air; And Orpah, etc.

Secondly, A fixed Star fairly shining in the Heaven; But Ruth, etc.

And Orpah kissed her mother.
Is this she which even now was so promising in her words, and so p^ssionate in
her weeping? See how soon a forward Professor may turn to a fea^efull
Apostate: Though she stands or falls to her own Master, yet as the Psalmist
says, I am horribly afraid for those that forsake thy Law; so have we just
cause to suspect the fearful final estate of Orpah.

Kissed her mother.
That is, gave her this last salutation of her departure. Here we see, that
those who want grace and true sanctity, may notwithstanding have manners and
good civil^tie. Now had Orpah changed the corporal Kiss she gave to her
mother, into a spiritual Kiss to her Savior, Psalm. 2. Kiss the Son, lest
he be angry, her case had been as happy as now it may seem to be hopeless.
But leaving her, we come to our selves, and gather this Doctrine.

Doctrine.
Those who at the first were forward in Religion, may afterward altogether fall
away, 1 Timothy 1. 20. Heb. 6. 4. Matthew. 13. 20. It may therefore serve to abate
the proud carriage of such, who as if it were not enough to be sure, will also
be presumptuous of their salvation, and thereby take leave and liberty to
themselves to live more licentiously.

Objection.
But as once one of the Children of the Prophets cried out to Elisha, Oman of
God, there is Death in the Pot; so may the weak Christian complain against
this Doctrine: O it is a deadly and dangerous one, containing much matter of
despair, too bitter for the pallat of a poor Christian to taste, or his
stomach to digest, it quenches all the sparks of my comfort, and hacketh
asunder all the sinews of my hope; I fear, lest Orpah-like, I also should
fall away: what shall I do, that I may be saved?

Answer.
Let not the smoking Flax be dismayed, which in time may be a blazing flame;
nor the bruised Reed be discouraged, which may prove a Brazen Pillar in the
Temple of God: That therefore thou may finally persevere, observe these
four Rules.

1 Rule.
First, utterly renounce all sufficiency in thy self. Who but a mad man will
now adays warrant the Paper-Shields of his own strength, that knows that
Adams complete Armor of Original Integrity, was shot through in Paradise.

2 Rule.
Secondly, place all thy confidence on the undeserved mercy of God:
Perseverance comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor as yet from
the South; but God suffers one to fall, and holds up another. The Temple of
Solomon had two Pillars; one called Iachin, sounding in Hebrew, The Lord will
stablish; the other Booz, signified, In him is strength: So every Christian (
the Temple of the HolyGhost) is principally holden up by these two Pillars,
Gods Power, and Will, to support him. Wherefore in every distress let us cry
out to God, as the Disciples did to our Savior, in the midst of a Tempest,
Help Master, or else we perish.

3 Rule.
Thirdly, use all those means which God has chalked out for the increase of
grace in thee; as Prayer, Meditation, reverent receiving the Sacraments,
accompanying with Gods ^hildren, Reading, Hearing the Word, and^.

4 Rule.
Fourthly, always preserve in thy self an awful fear, lest thou should
fall away from God: Fear to fall, and Assurance to stand, are two Sisters; and
though Cain said, he was not his Brothers keeper, sure I am, that this Fear
does watch and guard her Sister Assurance: Tantus est gradus certitudinis,
quantus sollicitudinis: They that have much of this Fear, have much
certainty; they that have little, little certainty; they that have none, have
none at all. It is said in Building, that those Chimneyes which shake most, and
give way to the wind, will stand the longest: The Moral in Divinity is true;
Those Christians that shiver for fear by sins to fall away, may be observed
most courageous to persist in Piety.

Comfort.
To those that diligently practice these Rules, I will add this Comfort:
Encourage thy self, that God will keep thee from Apostasy unto the end,
because already hitherto he has preserved thee: For Gods former favors are
pawnes and pledges of his future love. David's killing of a Lion and a Bear,
were the Earnests of his Victory over Goliath. Thus S. Paul reasons, 2 Cor.
1. 10 Who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver; in whom we
trust that he will yet deliver us. When Rachel bare her first son, Genesis 30.
she called him Joseph, and said, The Lord shall add to me another son. So,
when God has already blessed us and supported us for the time past, let us
say with Rachel, Joseph, the Lord will add: he will not stay, or stint, or
stop here; but as he has kept me from my mothers womb, and ever since I was
borne, so I trust he will not forsake me when I am aged, and full of gray
hairs.

But to return to her which returned again to Moab: We read in 2 Samuel 20.
that the people which passed by the Corp^ of murdered Amasa, being moved with
such a hideous and uncouth a spectacle, they stood still: But when we read
this Book of Ruth, and come to Orpahs Aposta^ie, there let us a while pause
and demurre, to read in her fall a Lecture of our own infirmity. For if we
stand, it is not because we have more might in our selves, but because God has
more mercy on us. Let us therefore work out our salvation with fear and
trembling: ever trembling, lest we should be cast to Hell; ever triumphing,
that we shall come to Heaven: ever fearful, lest we should fall; ever
certain, that we shall stand: ever careful, lest we should be damned; ever
cheerful, that we shall be saved. Concerning Ruths perseverance, we intend to
treat hereafter.

Verse. 15.
And Naomi said, Behold, thy sister in law is gone back unto her people, and
unto her gods; return thou after thy sister in law.
IN these words, Naomi seeks to persuade Ruth to return; alleging the
example of Orpah, whom she says was gone ba^k to her people and to her gods.

Observation.
Where first we find, that all the Heathen, and the Moabites amongst the rest,
did not acknowledge one true God, but were the worshippers of many gods; for
they made every Attribute of God to be a dis^inct D^itie. Thus in stead of that
At^^ib^te, the Wi^dome of God, they fained Apollo the god of Wisdom; in stead
of the Power of God, they made Mars the god of Power; in stead of that
admirable Beauty of God, they had Venus the goddess of Beauty. ^ut no one
^ttribute was so much abused as Gods Providence: For the Heathen supposing that
the whole World, and all the Creatures therein, was too great a Diocese to be
daily visited by one and the same Deity; they therefore assigned sundry gods
to several creatures. Thus Gods Providence, in ruling the raging of the Seas,
was counted Neptune; in stilling the roaring Winds, AEolus; in commanding the
Powers of Hell, Pluto: yea, Sheep had their Pan, and Gardens their Pomona: the
Heathens then being as fruitful in faining of gods, as the Papists since in
making of Saints.

Doctrine.
Now, because Naomi used the example of Orpah as a Motive, to work upon Ruth
to return, we gather from thence; Examples of others set before our eyes, are
very potent and prevalent arguments to make us follow and imitate them: Whether
they be good examples; so the forwardness of the Corinthians to relieve the
Jews, provoked many: or whether they be bad; so the dissembling of Peter at
Anti^ch (...) Barnaba^, and others, into the same fault. But those examples, of
all others, are most forcible with us, which are set by such who are near to
us by kindred, or gracious with us in friendship, of great over us in power.

Use 1.
Let men in eminent places, as Magistrates, Ministers, Fathers, Masters, and
the like, (seeing that others love to dance after their Pipe, to sing after
their Tune, to tread after their Tract) endeavor to propound themselves
patterns of Piety and Religion to those that be under them.

Use 2.
When we see any good example propounded unto us, let us strive with all
possible speed to imitate it. What a deal of stir is there in the World for
Civil Precedencie, and Prioritie? Every one desires to march in the
Forefront, and thinks it a shame to come lagging in the Rere-ward. Oh, that
there were such an holy Ambition and heavenly Emulation in our hearts, that as
Peter and John ran a Race, which should come first to the Grave of our Savior;
so men would contend, who should first attain to true Mortification. And when
we see a good example set before us, let us imitate it, though it be in one who
in outward respects is far our inferior. Shall not the Master be ashamed to
see that his Man, whose place on Earth is to come behind him, in Piety
toward Heaven to go before him? Shall not the Husband blush to see his Wife,
which is the weaker Vessel in Nature, to be the stronger Vessel in Grace? Shall
not the elder Brother dye his cheeks with the Color of Virtue, to see his
younger Brother, who was last borne, first re-borne by Faith and the
Holy Ghost? Yet let him not therefore envy his Brother, as ^ain did Abel; let
him not be angry with his Brother, because he is better then himself; but let
him be angry with himself, because he is worse then his Brother; let him turn
all his malice into imitation; all his fretting at him, into following of him:
Say unto him as Gehazi did of Naaman, As the Lord lives I will run after him:
And though thou can not overrun him, nor as yet over-take him, yet give not
over to run with him; follow him, though not as Az^hel did Ab^er, hard at the
heels; yet as Peter did our Savior, afar off: that though the more slowly,
yet as surely thou may come to Heaven: and though thou were short of him
whilst he lived, in the Race, yet thou shall be even with him when thou art
dead, at the Mark.

Use 3.
When any bad Example is presented unto us, let us decline and detest it,
though the men be never so many, or so dear unto us. Imitate Michaiah, 1 Kings
22. to whom when the messengers sent to fetch him, said, Behold now the words
of the Prophets declare good to the King with one mouth: let thy word
therefore, I pray thee, be like to one of them; Michaiah answered, As the Lord
lives, whatsoever the Lord says unto me, that will I speak. If they be never
so dear unto us, we must not follow their ^ad practice. So must the son
please him that begat him, that he do not displease him that crea^ed him; so
must the Wi^e follow him that married her, that she does not offend him that
made her. Wherefore as Samson, though bound with new Co^ds, ^^apt them asunder
as Towe when it feels the fire; so rather then we should be led by the lewd
examples of those which be near and dear unto us, let us break in pieces all
Ties, Engagements, Relations whatsoever.

Question.
Yea but one may say, What if I find in the Scripture an action recorded,
whose doer is known to have been a godly and gracious man; may I not, without
any further doubt, or scruple, follow the same?

Answer.
For the better satisfying hereof, I will rank the actions of godly men,
registered in the Scriptures, into nine several ranks, and will show how far
forth we may safely proceed in the imitation of them.

1. We fide some actions set down which are extraordinary, the doers whereof
had peculiar strength and dispensation from God to do them. Thus Samson slew
himself and the Philistims in the Temple of Dagon; Elias caused fire to
descend on the two Captains, and their ^ifties; Elisha cursed the Children of
Be^hel. Now these are recorded rather for our instruction, then imitation: For
when the sons of Thunder would have been the sons of Lightning, and have
had sire from Heaven to burn the Samaritans, which refused to receive our
Savior, after the example of Elias Christ checked their ill-tempered Zeal,
and told them, You know not of what spirit you are of.

2. Some examples are set down which are founded in the Ceremonial Law, as the
eating of the Paschall Lamb, the Circumcising of their Children the eight day:
Now the date of these did expire at the death of Christ; the substance being
come, the shadows are fled, and therefore they may in no wise still be observed.

3. Such examples as are founded in the Judicial Law, which was only
calculated ^or the elevation of the Jewish Commonwealth, as to put Men to death
for Adultery. Now these examples tie us no farther to imitate them, then they
agree with the Moral Law, or with those Statutes by which every particular
Country is Governed.

4. Some there be founded in no Law at all, ^ut only in an ancient custom by
God tolerated and connived at, as Polygamie in the Patriarks, Divorces in the
Jews upon every ^light occasion; from these also we must in these days
abstain, as which were never liked or allowed by God, though permitted in some
Persons, and Ages, for some special reasons.

5. Doubtful examples which may so be termed, because it is difficult to decide
whether the Actors of them therein did offend or no; so that should a Jurie of
learned Writers be empannelled to pass their verdict upon them, they would be
puzzled whether to condemn or acquit them, and at length be forced to find it an
Ig^oramus, as whether David did well to dissemble himself frantic, thereby to
escape the cruelty of Achish King of Gath. Now our most advised way herein, is
altogether to abstain from the imitation of them, because there is a deal of
difficulty and danger* and our judgments may easily be deceived.

6. Mixed examples, which contain in them a double action, the one good, the
other bad, both so closely couched together, that it is a very hard thing to
sever them: thus in the unjust Steward, there was his wisdom to provide for
himself, and his wick^dnesse to purloyne from his Master: the first God did
commend, we may imitate; the latter he could not but loath, we may not but
shun. In the Israelitish Midwives, Exodus 1. there was fides mentis and fallacia
mentientis: the faith of their love, and the falsenesse of their lying: the
first God rewarded, and we may follow; the latter he could not but dislike, and
we must detest. Behold here is wisdom, and let the Man that has understanding
discreetly divide betwixt the Dross and the Gold, the Chafe and the Wheat in
these mixed examples, that so they may practice the one, eschew and avoid the
other.

7. Those which be absolutely bad, that no charitable Comment can be fastened
upon them, as the drunkenness of Noah, the incest of Lot, the lying of Abraham,
the swearing of Joseph, the adultery of David, the denial of Peter: Now God
forbid we should imitate these; far be it from us with King Ahaz, to take a
pattern from the Idolatrous Altar of Damascus: the Holy Spirit has not set
these sins down with an intent they should be followed; but first to show the
frailty of his dearest Saints, when he leaves them to themselves; as also to
comfort us when we fall into grievous sins, when we see that as heinous
offenses of Gods servants stand upon record in the Scripture.

8. Actions which are only good as they are qualified with such a circumstance,
as David's eating of the Shew^bread, provided for the Pries^s, in a case of
absolute necessity. These we may follow, but then we must have a special eye
and care that the same qualifying circumstance be in us, for otherwise the deed
will be impious and damnable.

9. Examples absolutely good, as the faithfulness of Abr^ham, the
peaceablenesse of Isaac, the painfulnesse of Jacob, the chastity of Joseph,
the patience of Moses, the valor of Ioshuah, the sincerity of D^vid, these it
is lawful and laudable with our best endeavors to imitate: follow not the
Adultery of David, but follow the chastity of Joseph; follow not the
dissembling of Peter, but follow the sincerity of Nathaniel; follow not the
testiness of Jonah, but follow the meekness Moses; follow not the apostasy of
Orpah, but follow the perseverance of Ruth, which cmes in the next Text to be
Treated of.

Verse. 16, 17.
And Ruth answered, Entreat me not to leave thee, nor to depart from thee; for
whither thou go, I will go; and where thou dwell, I will dwell: thy
people shall be my people, and thy God my God.
Where thou die, will I die, and there will I be buried; the Lord do so to
me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me.
HEre we have the resolution of Ruth portrayed in lively Colors: so that if we
consider her Sex, a Woman; her Nation, a Moabite; one may boldly pronounce of
her what our Savior did of the Centurion; Verily I say unto you, I have not
found so great faith, no, not in Israel.

Entreat me not to leave thee.
Some read it, Be not thou against me, as it is in the Margent of the New
Translation. Where we see, that those are to be accounted our Adversaries, and
against us, who dissuade us from our Voyage to Canaan, from going to Gods true
Religion. They may be our Fathers, they cannot be our Friends; though they
promise us all outward profits and pleasures, yet in very deed they are not
with us, but against us, and so must be accounted of.

Where thou lodgest, I will lodge.
A good Companion, says the Latin^ Proverb, is pro viatico, I may add also,
pro diversorio: Ruth* so be it she may enjoy Naomies gracious company, will be
content with any Lodging, though happily it may be no better then Ia^ob had,
Genesis 28. And yet we see how some have been discouraged even from the company of
our Savior, for fear of hard lodging* witness the Scribe, to whom when our
Savior said, The Foxes have their holes, and the Fowls of the air have
nests, bu^ the son of man has not where to lay his head: This cold comfort
presently quenched his forward zeal, and he never appeared afterward; whereas
he ought to have said to our Savior as Ruth to Naomi, Where thou lodgest will
I lodge.

Thy people shall be my people.
Haman being offended with Mordecai, as if it had been but lean and weak
revenge to spit his spite upon one person, hated all the Jews for Mordecai's
sake; the mad Bear stung with one Be, would needs throw down the whole Hive.
But clean contrary, Niomi had so graciously demeaned her self, that Ruth for
her sake is fallen in love with all the Jews. Farewell Melchom, farewell
Chemosh, farewell Moab; welcome Israel* welcome Canaan, welcome Bethlehem: all
of a sudden she will tur^e Convert, she will turn Proselyte.

Observation.
The godly carriage of one particular person may beget a love of that Country
and People whereof he is, even in a stranger and forreiner. Do we then desire
to gain credit to our Country, praise to our People, honor to our Nation,
reput^ to our Religion? Let us dep^rt and behave our selves graciously, if we
live amongst strangers. On the other side, the base and debauched manners of
some one man is able to make his Country stink in the nostrils of those
forreiners amongst whom he lives: Ex uno discite omnes; in one faithless Sinon
one may read the Treachery of all the Grecians.

Thy God shall be my God.
Iehosaphat when he joined with Ahab, 1 Kings 22. said unto him, My people is
as thy people, and my horses are as thy horses; that is, he would comply with
him in a Politic League: but Ruth goes further to an unity in Religion, Thy
God shall be my God. Yea, but one may say, How came Ruth to know who was the
God of Naomi? I answer: As God said of Abraham, I know that Abraham will
instruct his children; so may one confidently say of Naomi: I know that Naomi
had catechized and instructed her daughter in law, and often taught her, that
the God of the Israelites was the only true God, who made Heaven and Earth,
and that all others were but Idols, the works of men's hands* Yet as the
Samaritans believed our Savior first upon the relation of the woman that came
from the Well, John 4. 42. but afterward said unto her, Now we believe, not
because of thy saying; for we have heard him our selves, and know that this is
indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world. So happily Ruth was induced first
to the liking of the God of Israel, upon the credit of Naomies words; but
afterward her love of him proceeded from a more certain ground, the motions
of Gods holy Spirit in her heart.

Where thou die will I die.
Here Ruth supposes two things: first* that she and her mother in law should
both die; It is appointed for all once to die: secondly, that Naomi, as the
eldest, should die first; for according to the ordinary custom of Nature, it
is most probable and likely, that those that are most stricken in years should
first depart this Life: Yet I know not whether the Rule or the Exceptions be
more general, and therefore let both young and old prepare for death; the
first may die soon, but the second cannot live long.

And there will I be buried.
Where she supposes two things more: First, that those that survived her,
would do her the favor to bury her; which is a common courtesy, not to be
denied to any: It was an Epitaph written upon the Grave of a Beggar, Nudus
(...) vivus, (...) ecce tegor. Secondly, she supposes that they would bury
her, according to her instructions, near to her mother Naomi.

Observation.
As it is good to enjoy the company of the godly while they are living, so it
is not amiss, if it will stand with conveniencie, to be buried with them after
death. The old Prophets bones escapt a burning, by being buried with the other
Prophets; and the man who was tumbled into the Grave of E^isha, was revived by
the virtue of his bones. And we read in the Acts and Monuments, that the body
of Peter Martyr's Wi^e was buried in a Dunghill; but afterward being taken up
in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, it was ho^ourably buried in Oxford, in the
Grave of one Frideswick, a Popish shee-Saint; to this end* that if Popery,
which God forbid, should overspread our Kingdom again, and if the Papists
should go about to un^ombe Peter Martyr's Wives bone^, they should be puzzled
to distinguish betwi^^ this woman's body and the Reliqu^s of their Saint. So,
good it is sometimes to be buried with those who some do account pious, though
perchance in very deed they be not so.

The Lord do so to me, and more also.
To ascertaine Naomi of the seriousness^ of her intentions herein, Ruth backs
what formerly she had said with an Oath, lined with an execration.

Observation.
Whence we may gather, it is lawful for us to swear upon a just cause: but
then these three Rules must be warily observed.

First, that we know that the thing whereto we swear be true, if the Oath be
assertorie; and if it be promissorie, that we be sure that it is in our intent,
and in our power, God blessing us, to perform that which we promise.

Secondly, that the occasion whereupon we use it, be of moment and consequence,
not trifling and trivial.

Thirdly, that we swear by God alone, and not by any Creature. Swear then
neither by the Heaven, nor by the Earth, nor by Ierusal^m, nor by the Temple,
nor by the Gold of the Temple, nor by the Altar, nor by the Sacrifice on the
Altar, but by God alone; for he only is able to reward thee, if that thou
affirmest be true; he only is able to punish thee, if that thou avouchest be
false. Yet this does no ways favor the practice of many now adays, who make
Oaths their language. Our Savior said to the I^mes; Many good works have I
showed you from the Father; for which of them go you about to stone me? So may
the Lord say to many riotous Gallants now adays; Many good deeds have I done
to thee, I created thee of nothing, I sent my Son to die for thee, by my
providence I continually protect and preserve thee; for which of these deeds
do thou g^e about by Oaths to blaspheme me?

Now whereas Ruth does not say, God damn me, God confound me, I would I might
never stir; but shrowds the execration under general te^mes, God ^oe so to
me, and more also: we learn, it is not good to particularize in any kind of
punishment when we swear, but only to express the Curse in general terms,
leaving it to the discretion of God Almighty, to choose that Arrow out of his
Quiver which he shall think most ^it to s^oot at us.

If ought but death.
See here the large extent of a Saints love, it lasts till death; and no
wonder; for it is not founded upon Honor, Beauty, or Wealth, or any other
sinister respect in the party beloved, which is subject to Age, or
Mutabilitie, but only on the Grace and Piety in him; which foundation because
it always lasts, that Love which is built upon it, is also perpetual.

Part thee and me.
Death is that which parts one friend from another: Then the dear Father
must part with his dutiful Child, then the dutiful Child must forgo his
dear Father; then the kind Husband must leave his constant Wife, then the
constant Wife must lose her kind Husband; then the careful Master must be
sundred from his i^dustrious Servant, then the industrious Servant must be
severed from his careful Master. Yet this may be some comfort to those whose
friends Death has taken away, that as our Savior said to the Disciples, Yet a
little while and you shall not see me, and yet a little while and you shall see
me again: so yet a little while, and we shall not see our friends; and yet a
little while, and we shall see them again in the Kingdom of Heaven; for, non
mittuntur, sed praemittuntur, we do not forgo them, but they go before us.

To conclude: we see many women so strangely disguised with fantastic
fashions, as if they desired to verify the nickname of the Philosopher, and to
prove themselves in very deed to be very Monsters; yea, many of them so affect
Man-like Clothes and shorn Hair, it is hard to discover the Sex of a Woman
through the Attire of a Man. But we see in my Text, worthy Ruth taking upon
her, not the Clothes, but the Courage; not the Hair, but the Heart; not the
Attire, but the Resolution of a Man, yea, and more then of a Man, wi^n^sse her
worthy speech, Entreat me not to depart etc.

Verse. 18.
And when she saw that she was steadfastly minded to go with her, she left off
speaking unto her.
ORpah and Ruth may be compared to two strong Forts, Naomi to one that b^sieged
them, who made three^sore As^^^^ts upon them: The first, in the eighth Verse;
which Assault both of them resisted with equal constancy: The second, in the
eleventh Verse; to which Orpah basely yields, and accepts terms of
Composition: The last, in the fifteenth Verse; which Ruth most valiantly
defeated, and stood upon terms of Defiance to the mention of any return. Now
as ^ouldiers when they have long besieged a City with the loss of Time,
Money, and Men, being hopeless to take it, they even sound a Retreat, and
retire home, without accomplishing their desire: so Naomi perceiving that all
her arguments which she used to conquer Ruth, like Water in the Smiths ^orge
cast on Coals, did more intend the heat of her constancy, gives over in my
Text, And when she saw etc.

Which words do probably persuade what formerly we affirmed, namely, that
Naomi dissuaded her daughter, only to search and sound her sincerity, not
with any true desire she should go back to Moab. For even as it is plain,
that the Replyer in his Disputation aims not at the suppressing, but at the
advancing of a Truth, who surceaseth and cavills no longer, when he sees the
neck of his argument broken with a sufficient answer; so it appears that
Naomi, what she had said formerly, spoke it only to try her daughter, because
having now had sufficient experience of her constancy, she so willingly
desisted. God wrestled with Jacob, with a desire to be conquered; so Naomi no
doubt opposed Ruth, hoping and wishing that she her self might be ^o^led.

And when she saw that she was steadfastly minded.
The Hebrew reads it, that she strengthened her self; that being their phrase
to express an Oath.

Observa^ion.
Where we observe, Oaths taken upon just occasion, are excellent Ti^s and Bands
to strengthen men in the performance of those things to which they swear. The
greater pity it is then, that a thing in it self so sovereign, should be so
daily and dangerously abused. Witness Herod, who by reason of a rash Oath,
cast himself into a worse Prison then that wherein he had put the Baptist,
m^king that (which being well used might have confirmed in Piety) to be a
means to enforce him to Murder.

Use.
Let this ^each us, when we find our selves to lagge and ^aulter in
Christianity, to call to mind that^ solemn Vow, Promise, and Profession,
which our Godfathers in our Name made for us at our Baptism, To forsake the
Devil and all his works, the vain pompes and vanities of this wicked world,
and to fight valiantly under Christ's Standard. Let us remember from whence we
are fallen, and do our first work. We need not make a new Vow, but only renew
the old, and so settle and establish our selves in the practice of Piety, as
Ruth in my Text by an Oath strengthened her self.

She left off speaking unto her.
She saw she had now enough expressed and declared her integrity, and
therefore she would not put her to the trouble of any farther trial.

Observation.
Hence the Doctrine is this: After proof and trial made of their fidelity,
we are to trust our Brethren, without any farther suspicion. Not to try before
we trust, is want of wisdom; not to trust after we have tried, is want of
charity. The Goldsmith must purify the dross and oar from the Gold, but he
must be wary lest he makes waste of good Metal, if overcurious in too often
refining. We may search and sound the sincerity of our Brethren, but after
good experience made of their uprightness, we must take heed lest by
continual sifting and proving them, we offend a weak Christian. Christ tried
the woman of Syrophaenicia first with silence, then with two sharp answers; at
last finding her to be sound, he dismissed her with granting her request, and
commending of her faith. When he had said to Peter the third time, Love thou
me? he rested satisfied with Peter's answer, and troubled him with no more
questions.

Use.
It may confute the jealous and suspicious minds of such who still think that
their Brethren are rotten at the heart, hypocritical, dissemblers, though they
have made never so manifest proof of their uprightness. Thomas would not take
his Masters Resurrection on the Credit of his fellow-Apostles relation; his
faith would not follow, except his own sense was the Usher to lead it the way:
so these men are altogether incredulous, and very Infidels in the point of
their Brethrens sincerity, though it be never so surely warranted unto them on
the words of those whom they ought to believe. Hence oftentimes it comes to
pass, that they scandalize and offend many weak Christians, whose Graces are
true, though weak; Faith unfeigned, though feeble: Yea, it makes weak Saints
to be jealous of themselves, to see others so jealous of them. But we must be
wonderful careful how we give offense to any of Gods little ones. When Esau,
Genesis 33. 13. would have persuaded Jacob to drive on faster, Jacob excused
himself, saying, That the Children were tender, and the Ewes big with young,
and if they should be overdriven one day, they would die. Thus if any would
persuade us to sift and winnow, and try the integrity of our Brethren, after
long experience of them, we may answer, This is dangerous to be done, because
smoking Flax and bruised Reeds, tender Professors, may utterly be discouraged
and dis-heartened by our restless pressing and disquieting of them. Wherefore
Naomi having now seen the Realitie of Ruths Resolutions, left off from any
further molesting of her.

Verse. 19, 20, 21, 22.
So they went both until they came to Bethlehem, and when they came to
Bethlehem, all the City was moved at them, and they said, Is not this Naomi?
And she said, Call me not Naomi, but call me Marah, for the Lord has dealt
bitterly with me.
I went out full, and the Lord has caused me to return empty; why call you
me Naomi, sithence the Lord has testified against me, and the Almighty has
afflicted me?
So Naomi returned, and Ruth the Moabitesse; her Daughter in law with her, when
she came out of the Country of Moab; and they came to Bethlehem in the
beginning of Barley Harvest.
THe holy Spirit mentions not what discourse ^hey exchanged by the way; yet
no doubt they were neither silent, nor bu^ied in unprofitable talk.

And all the City was moved, etc.
See here, Naomi was formerly a woman of good quality and fashion, of good
rank and repute; otherwise her return in poverty had not been so generally
taken notice of. Shrubs may be grubb'd to the ground, and none miss them, but
every one marks the felling of a Cedar. Grovelling Cottages may be evened to
the Earth, and none observe them; but every Traveller takes notice of the ^all
of a Steeple. Let this comfort those to whom God has given small Possessions.
Should he visit them with povetie, and ^ake from them that little they have,
yet their grief and shame would be the less: they should not have so many
fingers pointed at them, so many eyes staring on them, so many words spoken of
them; they might lurk in obscurity; it must be a Naomi, a person of eminency
and estate, whose poverty must move a whole City.

And they said, Is not this Naomi?
Remarkable it is, that so many people should jump in the same expression; but
as Abraham laughed, and Sarah laughed, both used the same outward gesture, yet
arising from different causes; his laughter from joy, here is from distrust: so
all these people might meet in the same form of words, yet far dissent in
their minds wherewith they spoke them. Some might speak out of admiration,
strange, wonderful is this she who once was so wealthy? how quickly is a
River of Riches drained dry? she that formerly was so fair, (...) one can
scarce read the ruins of ^eauty in her face: Is not this Naomi? Some out of
exprobation; See, see, this is she that could not be content to tarry at home
to take part of the Famine with the rest of her fellows, but needs with her
Husband and Sons, ^ust be gadding to Moab: see what goo^ she has got by
removing, by changing her Country, she has changed her Condition: Is not this
Naomi? Some might speak it out of Commiseration: Alas, alas, Is not this that
gracious woman, that godly Saint, which formerly by her Charity relieved many
in distress? how soon is a full clod turned into parched earth? one that
supplied others, into one that needs to be supplied by others: Is not this
Naomi?

And she said, call me not Naomi, but call me Marah.
Naomi, signifies Beautiful; Marah, Bitter, Exodus 15. 23. where we see, that
the Godly in poverti^ are unwilling to have Names and Titles, disagreeing and
disproportioned to their present estates, which may confute the folly of many,
which being in distress, and living little better then upon the alms of others,
will still stand upon their points, bear themselves bravely on their* birth,
not lose an inch of their place, not abate an ace of their gentry; far
otherwise was Naomi affected, being poor, she would not be overnamed, or
Title-heavie: Call me not Naomi, but call me Marah.

Observe.
Here also we may see, that it was a custom of great Antiquity in the World,
that Men and Women should have several names whereby they were called, and
that for these three Reasons.

1. That they might be differenced and distinguished from others.

2. That they might be stirred up to verify the meanings and significations of
their names: wherefore let every Obadiah strive to be a servant of God, each
Nathaniel to be a gift of God, Onesimus to be profitable, every Roger quiet and
peaceable, Robert famous for counsel, and William a help and defense to many;
not like Absalon, who was not a Father of Peace, as his name does import, but a
son of Sedition; and Diotrephes, not nursed by God, as his name sounds, but
puffed up by the Devil, as it is 3 John 9.

3. That they might be incited to imitate the virtues of those worthy persons,
who formerly have been bearers and owners of their names. Let all Abraham's be
faithful, Isaac's quiet, Jacobs painful, Joseph's chaste, every Lewis pious,
Edward confessor of the true faith, William conqueror over his own corruptions.
Let them also carefully avoid those sins for which the bearers of the Names
stand branded to posterity. Let every Jonah beware of frowardness, Thomas of
distrustfulnesse, Martha of worldliness, Mary of wantonness. If there be two
of our names, one exceedingly good, the other notoriously evil, let us decline
the vices of the one, and practice the virtues of the other. Let every Judas
not follow Judas Iscariot, who betrayed our Savior, but Judas the brother of
James, the writer of the general Epistle; each Demetrius, not follow him in
the acts who made silver shrines for Diana, but Demetrius 3 John, who had a
good report of all men. Every Ignatius not imitate Ignatius Loiola the lame
Father of blind obedience, but Ignatius the worty Martyr in the Primitve
Church. And if it should chance through the indiscretion of Parents and
Godfathers, that a bad name should be imposed on any; oh let not folly be with
them, because Nabal is their name; but in such a case, let them strive to
falsify, disprove, and confute their names; otherwise if they be good, they
must answer them.

In the days of Q. Elizabeth, there was a Royal Ship called the Revenge,
which having maintained a long fight against a Fleet of Spaniards, (wherein
eight hundred great Shot were discharged against her) was at last feign to
yield: but no sooner were her men gone out of her, and two hundred fresh
Spaniards come into her, but she suddenly sunk them and her self; and so the
Revenge was revenged. Shall livelesse pieces of Wood answer the Names which men
impose upon them, and shall not reasonable souls do the same? But of all
Names, I pray God that never just occasion be given, that we be Christened
Icca^od, but that the glory may remain in our Israel so long as the faithful
Witness endures in Heaven. And so much of those words, Call me not Naomi, but
etc.

For the Lord has dealt bitterly with me.
Afflictions relish sour and bitter even to the pallats of the best Saints.

Observation.
Now bitter things are observed in Physic to have a double operation: first,
to strengthen and corroborate the Liver; and secondly, to cleanse and wipe away
Choler, which cloggeth the stomach: both these effects afflictions by their
bitterness produce; they strengthen the inward Vitals of a Christian, his
Faith and Patience, and cleanse Gods Saints from those superfluous excrements
which the surfeit of Prosperity has caused in them. It may therefore serve to
comfort such as groan under Gods afflicting hand, Hebrews 12. 11. The Book
which S. John eat, Rev. 10. 10. was sweet in his mouth, but bitter in his
belly: clean contrary, afflictions are bitter in the mouth, but sweet in the
belly; God by sanctifying them, extracting Honey out of Gall, and Sugar out of
Wormwood. And let it teach us also, not t^ wonder if the Children of God winch
and shrug, and make sour faces, when afflicted: Wonder not at David, if he
cries out in the anguish of his heart; at Job, if he complains in the
bitterness of his soul; at Jeremiah, if he lamenteth in the ^xtremitie of his
grief: For even then they are swallowing of a Potion, which is bitter unto
flesh and blood.

I went out full, and the Lord has caused me to return empty.
Here may we see the uncertaintie of all outward wealth.

Observation.
How quickly may a Crassus, or Crosu^ be turned into a Codrus; the richest,
into the poorest of men! Whom the Sunnerising sees in wealth, him the
Sunnesetting may see in want. Set not up then your horns so high, neither
speak presumptuous words, ye wealthy men; for God, it it pleases him, can in
a moment dispossess you of all your Riches. And let us all not lay up
Treasures here on Earth, where Rust and Mothes do corrupt, and Thieves break
through and steal; but lay up your Treasure in Heaven, where Rust and Moth do
not corrupt, and Thieves do not break through and steal.

Why call you me Naomi, sithence the Lord etc.
The mention of their former Wealth is grievous to the godly, when they are in
p^esent Poverty.

Observation.
When the Children of Israel are Captives in Babylon, it cuts them to the heart
to be twitted with the Songs of Sion. And it may teach this point of wisdom to
such as repair to give comfort to men in affliction, not to mention that
tedious and ungrateful subject, what happiness that party formerly enjoyed.
Sum not up to Job in distress, the number of his Camels, tell not his
Sheep, reckon not his Oxen, read not unto him an Inventorie of those Goods
whereof he before was possessed, for this will but add to his vexation; rather
descend, to apply solid and substantial comfort unto him.

^ithence the Lord has testified against me, and the Almighty has afflicted
me^
Every affliction is a witness that God is angry with us for our sins.

Observation.
Who then is able to hold out Suit ^ith God in the Court of Heaven? For God
himself is both Judge and Witness, and also the executor and inflicter of
punishments. It is therefore impossible for sinful man to plead with him; and
it is our most advised course, as soon as may be, to come to te^mes of
composition with him, and to make means unto him through the mediation of our
Savior. Now that all afflictions are immediately inflicted by God, we have
showed formerly.

And they came to Bethlehem in the beginning of Early Harvest.
The Jews had two distinct Harvests of Wheat and Barley, and Barley was the
first, 2 Samuel 21. 9. So here we see the providence of God, in ordering and
disposing the Journey of Naomi, to end it in the most convenient time. Had she
come before Harvest, she would have been straightened for means to maintain her
self; if after Harvest, Ruth had lost all those occasions which paved the way
to her future advancement. God therefore, who ordered her going, concludes her
Journey in the beginning of Harvest.

And thus have we gone over this Chapter. Now as Samuel in the first Book,
chap. 7. verse. 12. erected an Altar, and called it Eben-ezer, for, said he,
Hitherto the Lord has helped us: so here may I raise an Altar of Gratitude
unto God, with the same inscription, Eben-ezer, Hitherto the Lord of his
goodness has assisted us.

CHAP. II. Verse. 1. 2.
And Naomi had a kinsman of her Husbands, a mighty man of wealth, of the Family
of Elimelech, and his name was Boaz.
And Ruth the Moabitesse said unto Naomi, I pray thee let me go into the field,
and gather ears of Corn after him, in whose sight I find favor: and she said
unto her, go my Daughter.
THis first Verse presents us with two remarkable things.

1. Poor Naomi was allied to powerful Boaz.

2. Boaz was both a powerful man, and a Godly man.

Of the first. Poor people may be allied and of great kindred to those that
are wealthy; and those that be wealthy, to suuh as are poor. Joseph, though
Governor of Egypt* had poor Jacob to his Father, and plain shepherds to his
brethren. ^sther, though Queen to Ahashuerus* has poor Mordecai for her
Uncle.

Use 1.
Let this confute such as having gotten a little more thick clay then the rest
of their Family, the getting of new wealth and honor makes them to lose their
old eyes, so that they cannot see and discern their poor kindred afterward.
When Joseph was Governor of Egypt, it is said, that he knew his brethren, but
his brethren knew not him; b^t now adays it happens clean contrary. If one
of a Family be advanced to great honor, it is likely that his kindred will
know him, but he oftentimes comes to forget them. Few there be of the noble
nature of the Lord Cromwell, who sitting at Dinner with the Lords of the
Council, and chancing to see a poor man afar off which used to sweep the Cells
and the Cloisters, called for the man, and told the Lords; This man's Father
has given me many a good meal, and he shall not lack so long as I live. [ Fox
Page 1188.]

Use 2.
Let it teach those who are the top of their kindred, the best of their House,
to be thankful to Gods gracious goodness who has raised them to such a
height. He has not dealt thus with every one, neither are all of their kindred
so well provided for outward maintenance. And also let them learn to be
bounti^ul and beneficial to their kindred in distress. Mordecai said to Esther,
Esth. 4. 14. Who knows whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time?
namely to deliver her Countrymen the Jews from that imminent danger.

So who knows whether God has raised thee up, who art the best of thy
kindred, to this very intent, that thou ^ightest be the Treasure and the
Storehouse to supply the want of others which are allied unto thee? But if one
should chance to be of so wealthy a stock, as that none of his alliance stood
in need of his charity; let such a one cast his eye upon such as are of kindred
unto him by his second birth, and so he shall find enough Widows, Orphans, and
poor Christians, to receive his libe^alitie.

Notwithstanding, let poor people be wary and discreet, that through their
idleness they be not a burden to wealthy men of their alliance. When a
Husbandman claimed kindred in Gro^ted Bishop of Lincoln, and would fain on the
instant turn a Gentleman, and to this end requested his Lordship to bestow an
Office upon him: the Bishop told him, that if his Plough were broken, he would
mend it; if he wanted a ^lough, he would make him a new one; telling him
withal, that he should by no means leave that Calling and Vocation wherein God
had set him. So ought all poor people industriously to take pains for
themselves, and not to give themselves over to ease, relying and depending for
their maintenance on their reference and relation to a rich kinsman.

Come we now to the second Observation, That the same man may be godly, and
also mighty in wealth like Boaz. Behold your Calling; not many wise, yet some
wise, as Solomon, and Sergius Deputy of Cyprus; not many rich, yet some rich,
as Abraham, Job; not many noble, yet some noble, as Theophilus. For it is not
the having of wealth, but the having confidence in wealth; not the possessing
it, but the relying on it, which makes rich men incapable of the Kingdom of
Heaven: otherwise Wealth well used is a great blessing, enabling the owner to
do God more glory, the Church and Commonwealth more good.

Use.
Let all Wealthy men strive to add inward grace unto their outward greatness.
Oh it is excellent when Ioash and Iehoiada meet together; when Prince and
Pri^st, Power and Piety are united in the same person; that so Greatness may
be seasoned and sanctified by Grace, and Grace credited and countenanced by
Greatness; that so Kings may be Nursing-Fathers, and Queens Nursing-Mothers
to Gods Church. Contrary to which, how many be there, that think themselves
privileged from being good, because they are great? Confining Piety to
Hospitals; for their own parts they disdain so base a Companion. Hence as
Hills, the higher, the barrenner; so men commonly, the wealthier, the worse;
the more Honor, the less Holiness. And as Rivers, when content with a small
Channel, run sweet and clear; when swelling to a Navigable Channel, by the
confluence of several Tributarie Rivulets, gather mudde and mire, and grow
salt and brackish, and violently bear down all before them* so many men, who
in mean Estates have been Pious and Religious, being advanced in Honor, and
enlarged in Wealth, have grown both empious and profane toward God, cruel
and tyrannical over their Brethren.

And Ruth the Moabitesse said unto Naomi, I pray thee let me go into the
field, and gather ears of Corn etc.
Herein two excellent Grace^ appear^ in Ruth.

First, Obedience; she would not go to gleane, without the leave of her Mother
in law. Verily I say unto you, I have not found so much duty, no, not in
natural Daughters to their own Mothers. How many of them now-adayes, in
matters of more moment, will betroth and contract themselves, not only without
the knowledge and consent, but even against the express Commands of their
Parents?

Secondly, see her Industry, that she would condescend to gleane. Though I
think not, with the Jewish Rabbis, that Ruth was the Daughter to Eglon, King
of Moab; yet no doubt she was descended of good Parentage, and now see, feign
to gleane. Whence we may gather, that those that formerly have had good birth,
and breeding, may afterward be forced to make hard shifts to maintain
themselves. Musculus was forced to work with a Weaver, and afterward was
feign to delve in the Ditch, about the City of Strasburgh; as Pantalion in his
Life. Let this teach even those whose veins are washed with generous blood,
and a^teries quickened with Noble spirits, in their prosperity to furnish,
qualify, and accommodate themselves with such Gentile Arts, and liberal
Mysteries, as will be neither blemish nor burden to their birth, that so if
hereafter God shall cast them into poverty, these Arts may stand them in some
stead, toward their maintenance and relief.

And Naomi said, Go my Daughter.
See here how meekely and mildly she answers her* The discourse of Gods
Children, in their ordinary talk, ought ^o be kind and courteous: So betwixt
Abraham and Isaac, Genesis 22. 7. betwixt Elkanah and Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 23. Indeed
it is lawful and necessary for Jacob to chide Rachel speaking unadvisedly,
Genesis 30. 2. for Job to say to his Wife, Thou speak like a foolish Wife. But
otherwise, when no just occasion of anger is given, their words ought to be
meek and kind like Naomies, Go my Daughter.

Verse. 3, 4.
And she went, and came and gleaned in the field after the Reapers, and it
happened that she met with the portion of the field* of Boaz, who was of the
family of Elimelech.
And behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the Reapers, The Lord be
with you; and they answered him, The Lord bless thee.
FOrmerly we have seen the dutifulness of Ruth, which would not leave her
Mother until she had leave from her Mother: Proceed we now to her industry,
and Gods providence over her. As the Star, Math. 2. guided the Wisemen to
I^dea, to B^thlehem, to the Inn, to the Stable, to the Manger: so the rays
and ^eames of Gods Providence conducted ^uth, that of all Grounds within the
compass and confines, within the bounds and borders of Bethlehem, she lighted
on the field of Boaz.

And it happened.
Objection.
How comes the holy Spirit to use this word; a profane term, which deserves
to be banished out of the mouths of all Christians? Are not all things ordered
by Gods immediate Providence, without which a Sparrow lights not o^ the
ground? Is not that sentence most true, God stretches from end to end
strongly, and disposes all things sweetly? Strongly, Lord, for thee; sweetly,
Lord, for me: so S. Bernard. Or was the Providence of God solely confined to
his people of Israel, that so Ruth being a stranger of Moab, must be left to
the adventure of hazard? How comes the holy Spirit to use this word, Hap?

Answer.
Things are said to happen, not in respect of God, but in respect of us;
because oftentimes they come to pass, not only without our purpose and
forecast, but even against our intentions and determinations. It is lawful
therefore in a sober sense to use these expressions, It chanced, or, It
fortuned, Luke 10. 30. Nor can any just exception be taken against those words
in the Collect, Through all Changes and Chances of this mortal life: Provided
always, that in our forms of speech we dream not of any Heathen Chance. It
is observed, that (...) is not used in all the Works of Homer; but sure S.
Austine in the first of his Retract. complains, that he had too often used
the word Fortuna; and therefore in the Pagans sense thereof, we ought to
abstain from it.

Observation.
Now whereas Ruth by chance lights on Boaz his field, we may observe;
Admirable is the providence of God, in the ordering of contingent events, to
his glory and his Childrens good. The Scripture swarmeth with Presidents in
this behalf, which at this time I surcease to recite, and conclude with the
Psalmist; O Lord, how wonderful are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them
all, the Earth is full of thy Riches. To which I may add; Oh that men would
therefore praise the Name of the Lord, and show forth the wonderful works
that he does for the children of men!

And behold Boaz came unto his Reapers.
He had a man over them, yet himself came to over-see them.

Observation.
Where note; it is the part of a thriving Husband, not to trust the car^ of his
affairs to his servants, but to over-see them himself. The Masters eye makes
a fat Horse: and one asking, what was the b^st compost to Manure Land, it was
answered the dust of the Masters feet; meaning his presence to behold his own
business. Hushai would not council Absolon to let Achitophel go with his
Army, but advised him; Thou shall go to battle in thine own person. However
he herein had a secret intent, yet thus far the proportion holds: Things
thrive best, not when they are committed to Surrogates, Deputies, Delegates,
and Substitutes: but when men themselves over-see them. Let Masters therefore
of Families, carefully attend on their own business; and let the Daughters of
S^rah, whom the meekness of their Sex has privileged from following without
doors affairs, imitate the wise woman, Proverbs 37. 15. 27. She rises whiles as
yet it is night, and gives her meat to her Household, and their portions to her
Maids: She looks well to all the ways of her Household, and eats not the
bread of idleness. And such servants which have careless Masters, let them
look better to their Masters estate, then their Masters do to their own: let
them be neither idle nor unfaithful in their place, knowing, that though their
earthly Master be negligent to eye them, yet they have a Master in heaven who
both beholds and will punish, or reward them according to their deserts. And as
for the Sons of the Prophets, let them feed the Flock over which they are
placed, and not think to shuffle and shift off their care to their Cura^es and
Readers in their own unnecessary absence; and yet how many ar^ there, that
Preach as seldom as Apollo laughs, once in the year: Indeed Eliah fasted
forty days and forty nights in the strength of one meal; but surely these
think that their people can hold out fas^ing a twelve-moneth. Well, let them
practice Boaz example, as they have Curates, so had he one to care for his
affairs, and yet behold in person, he comes forth unto his Reapers.

And said unto them, The Lord be with you.
Observe, Courteous and loving salutations beseem Christians: indeed our
Savior Mat. 10. forbade his Disciples to salute any in the way, but his
meaning was, that they should not lag or delay, whereby to be hindered from the
service wherein they were employed; and S. John in his second Epistle, says,
That to some we must not say God speed, lest we be made partakers of their
evil deeds; but that is meant of notorious sinners, which have discovered
their impious intents. It is commonly said, that the Small Pox is not
infectious until it be broken out, so that before the time one may safely
converse, eat, drink, lie with them; but after the Pox is broken out, it is
very dangerous: So we may safely salute, and exchange discourse with the most
wicked sinners, whiles yet they smoother and conceal their bad designs; but
when once they declare and express them, then it is dangerous to have any
further familiarity with them; for such Marsions, the first born of the Devil,
and the eldest Son of Satan, are salutations good enough.

Use.
Those are justly to be reproved, which lately have changed all hea^y
expressions of love into verbal Complements, which Elymologie is not to be
deduced a completione mentis, but a complete mentiri. And yet I cannot say,
that these men lie in their throat, for I persuade my self, their words never
came so near their heart, but merely they lie in their mouths, where all their
promises Both birth and burial in a breath they have;
That mouth which is their womb, it is their grave.


Yea, those words which S. Paul to the Corinthians, thought to be the most
affectionate expression of love, is now made the word of course, commonly
bandied betwixt superficial friends at the first encounter, YOUR SERVANT; worse
then these are the ambitious Saluters, like Absolon, 2 Samuel 15. 4. who at the
same time, by taking his Fathers Subjects by their hands, stole away their
hearts; and the lower his body did couch, the higher his mind did aspire.
Worst of all is the treacherous salutation of Judas and Ioab, who at one
instant pretend lip-love, and intend heart hatred; who both kiss and kill,
embrace another with their hands, and imbrew their hands in his blood whom they
embrace.

And they answered him, The Lord bless thee.
When one offers us a curt^^ie, especially being our superior, it is fitting
we should requi^e him. It is a noble conquest for to be overcome with wrongs;
but it is a sign of a degenerous nature, to be out-vied with courtesies; and
therefore if one begin a kindness to us, let us (if it lie in our power)
pledge him in the sam^ nature.

Verse. 5, 6, 7.
And Boaz said unto the serv^nt which was appointed over the Reapers, Whose is
this Maid?
And the servant which was appointed over the Reapers, answered and said; This
is the Moabitish Maid, which came with Naomi from the Country of Moab,
Which came and said, Let me gather I pray among the sheaves after the Reapers;
and so she came and stayed here from morning until now; only she tarried a
little in the house.
And Boaz said unto the servant which was appointed over the Reapers*
HEre we learn, that it is a part of good Husbandry in a numerous Family, to
have one servant as Steward, to over-see the rest. Thus Abraham had his Eliezer
of D^mascus, Potiphar his Joseph, Joseph his man which put the Cup into
Benjamin's Sack; Ahab his Obadiah, Hezekiah his Eli^kim, the son of Hilkiah.

Observation.
Let Masters therefore, in choosing these Stewards to be set above the rest,
take such as are qualified like Iethro's description of inferior Judges, Exodus
18. men of courage, fearing God, dealing truly, hating covetousness. And
how-ever they privilege them to be above the rest of their servants, yet let
them make them to know their duty and their distance to their Masters, lest
that come to pass which Solomon fore-telleth, Prove. 29. He that brings up
his servant delicately in his youth, will make him like his son at the last.
Let Stewards not be like that unjust one in the Gospel, who made his Masters
Debt^rs write down fifty measures of Wheat, and fourscore measures of Oil,
when both severally should have been an hundred; but let them carefully
discharge their Conscience, in that Office wherein they are placed: whilst
inferior servants, that are under their command, must neither grieve nor
grudge to obey them, nor envy at their honor: But let this comfort those
underlings, that if they be wronged by these Stewards, their Appeal lies open
from them to their Master, who if good, will no doubt redress their gri^vances.

Now if Stewards be necessary in ordering of Families, surely men in
autho^itie are more necessary, in governing the Church, and managing the
Commonwealth. If a little Cock-Boat cannot be brought up a Tributarie Rivulet,
without one to guide it; how shall a Car^van, a Gallioun, or Argosie, sailing
in the vast Ocean, be brought into a Harbor, without a Pilot to conduct it? Let
us therefore with all willingness and humility submit our selves to our
Superiors, that so under them we may live a peaceable life, in all godliness
and honesty.

Whose is this Maid?
Boaz would know what those persons were that gleaned upon his Land; and good
reason: for we ought not to pros^tute our liberality to all, though unknown;
but first we must examine who, and whence they be; otherwise, that which is
given to worthless persons, is not given, but thrown away. I speak not this
to blunt the Charity of any, who have often bestowed their benevolence upon
Beggars unknown and unseene before; but if easily and with conveniencie (as
Boaz could) they may attain to know the qualities and conditions of such
persons, before they dispose their liberality unto them.

And the servant which was appointed.
He herein performed the part of a careful servant, namely, fully to inform
his Master. Servants ought so to instruct themselves, as thereby to be able to
give an account to their Lords, when they shall be called thereunto, and give
them plenarie satisfaction and contentment in any thing belonging to their
Office, wherein they shall be questioned. Now, whereas he does not derogate or
detract from Ruth, though a stranger, but sets her forth with her due
commendation; we gather, Servants when asked, ought to give the pure character
of poor people to their Masters, and no way to wrong or traduce them.

Which came and said, Let me gather I pray.
See here Ruths honesty; she would not presume to gleane before she had leave.
Clean contrary is the practice of poor people now-adayes, which often times
take away things not only without the knowledge, but even against the will of
the owners. The Boy of the Priest, I Sam. 2. 16. when the Sacrifice was in
offering, used to come with a flesh-hooke of three teeth, and used to cast it
into the fat of the Sacrifice, making that his Fee, which so he fetched out; if
any gain-say'd him, he answered, Thou shall give it me now; or if thou will
not, I will take it by force. Thus poor people now-adayes, they cast their
hook, their violent hands (gleaning the lean will not content them) into the
fat, the best and principal of rich men's Estates, and breaking all Laws of
God and the King, they by maine force draw it unto themselves. Not so Ruth; she
would not gleane without leave.

And stayed here from morning until now.
See here her constancy in Industry: Many are very diligent at the first
setting forth, for a fit and a gird, for a snatch and away; but nothing
violent, is long permanent: They are soon tired, quickly weary, and then
turn from labor to laziness. But Ruth continued in her labor from the
morning till now; till Night, till the end of the Harvest. O that we would
imitate the constancy of Ruth, in the working out of our salvation with fear
and trembling! Not only to be industrious in the Morning, when we first enter
into Christianity, but to hold out and to persevere even to the end of our
lives.

Only she ^arried a little in the house.
No doubt some indispensable business detained her there; and probable it is,
that a principal one was, to say her Mattins, to do her Devotions, commend
her self with fervent prayer unto the Lord, to bless her and her endeavors
the day following. A whet is no let, says the Proverb; Mowers lose not any
time, which they spend in whetting or grinding of their Sythes: our prayer to
God in the Morning, before we enter on any business, does not hinder us in our
days work, but rather whets it, sharpens it, sets an edge on our dull souls,
and makes our minds to undertake our labors with the greater alacrity.

And here may I take just occasion to speak concerning Gleaning. Consider
first the antiquity thereof, as being commanded by God, Levit. 19. 9. and 23.
22. Secondly, consider the equity thereof; it does the Rich no whit of harm,
it does the Poor a great deal of good. One may say of it as Lot of Zoar; Is
it not a little one, and my soul shall live? Is it not a petty, a small,
exile courtesy, and the hearts of poor people shall be comforted thereby?
Reliquiae Danaum, atque immitis Achillis; the Remnant which has escaped the
edge of the Sythes, and avoided the hands of the Reapers. Had our Reapers the
Eyes of Eagles, and the Claws of Harpeyes, they could not see and I snatch
each scattered Ear which may well be allowed for the Relief of the Poor.
When our Savior said to the woman of Syrophaenicia, It is not good to take the
Childrens Bread, and cast it to the Dogs: She answered, Ye^, Lord, but the Dogs
eat of the Childrens Crummes that (...) from their Table. So, if any Misers
(...), It is not meet that my Bread should (...) unto poor people, to gleane
Corn upon my Lands; yea, but let them know, that poor people (which are no
Dogs, but setting a little thick Clay aside, as good as themselves) may eat the
falling Crummes, the scattered Ears, which they gather on the ground.

Use.
It may confute the Covetousness of many, which repine that the Poor should
have any benefit by them; and are so far from suffering the Poor to gleane,
that even they themselves gleane from the Poor, and speak much like to
churlish Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. 11. Shall I take my Wheat, my Rye, and my Barley,
which I have prepared for my Family, and give it to the Poor, which I know not
whence they be? Yea, some have so hard hearts, that they would leave their
Grain to be destroyed by Beasts and Vermin, rather then that the Poor should
receive any benefit thereby. Cruel people, which prefer their Hogs before
Christ's Sheep, Mice before Men, Crow^s before Christians.

But withal, Poor people must learn this Lesson, to know the meaning of
these two Pronoun^s, Mine and Thine; what belongs to their rich Masters, and
what pertaines to themselves. The Sheep which had little spots, those were
Jacobs Fee; so the little spots, the loose straggling and scattered Ears,
those are the Poores: but as for the great ones, the handfulls, the arme-fulls,
the Sheaves, the Shocks, the Cocks, these are none of theirs, but the ^ich
Owners; and therefore let the Poor take heed how they put forth their hand^ to
their n^igh^ours goods.

Motive.
One forcible Motive to persuade the Rich to suffer the Poor to gleane, may be
this: Even the greatest, in respect of God, is but a gleaner. God, he is the
Master of the Harvest; all Gifts and Graces they are his, in an infinite
measure; and every godly man, more or less, gleanes from him. Abraham gleaned
a great gleane of Faith; Moses, of Meekness; Iosh^ah, of Valor; Samson, of
Strength; Solomon, of Wealth and Wisdom; S. Paul of Knowledge, and the like.
Now, if we would be glad at our hearts, that the Lord would give us free leave
and liberty, ^or to gleane Graces out of his Harvest, let us not grudge and
repine, that poor people gleane a little gain from our plenty. To conclude,
when God has multiplied our five Loaves, that is, when of our little Seed he
has given us a great deal of increase, let poor people, like Ruth in the
Text, be the twelve Baskets which may take up the fragments of gleanings which
are left.

Verse. 8, 9, 10.
Then said Boaz unto Ru^h, Hear thou, my Daughter, go to no ^ther field ^o
gather; neither go from hence, but abide here by my Maidens.
Let thy eyes be on the field which they do reap, and go after the Maidens.
Have I not charged the servants, that they touch thee not? Moreover, when thou
art thirsty, go unto the vessels, and drink of that which the servants have
drawn.
Then she fell on her face, and bowed her self to the ground, and said unto
him; Why have I found favor in thy eyes, that thou should know me, since I
am a stranger?
MOthers and Nurses are very careful, tenderly to handle Infants, when they
are but newly borne. So Ruth; Christ was newly formed in her, a young Convert,
a fresh Proselyte: and therefore Boaz uses her with all kindness, both in
works and words; Hear thou, my Daughter?

Observation.
Aged persons may term younger people their Sons and Daughters, 1 Samuel 3. 6.
And if they were persons in Authority, though they were well-nigh equal in
age, they used the same expression. Thus Joseph to his Brother Benjamin, Genesis
43. 29. God be merciful to thee, my Son. Let young people therefore
reverently observe their duty and distance to their Seniors in Age, and
Superiors in Authority: Yet I am afraid, men keep not the method of Jacobs
Children, the eldest sitting down according to his Age, and the youngest
according to his Youth; but fulfill the Complaint of the Prophet, The young
presume against the aged, and the base against the honorable. Let aged persons
strive to deserve their respect, by demeaning themselves gravely, and striving
to add gracious hearts to gray hairs: otherwise, if they discover any
lightness, looseness, wantonness in their carriage, young men will hereupon
take occasion, not only to slight and neglect, but also to contemn and
despise their paternall distance, and Father-like authority. Now as for young
Ministers, they have not this advantage, to speak unto young people in the
phrase of Boaz, Hear thou, my Daughter? but must practice S. Paul's Precept,
1 Timothy 5. 1. Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a Father, and the younger
men as Brethren; the elder women as Mothers, the younger as Sisters, in all
pureness.

But abide here by my Maidens.
Observation.
Hence we g^ther, it is most decent for women to associate and accompany
themselves with those of their own Sex: Miriam, Exodus 15. 20. with a feminine
Quire, with Timbrels and D^nces, answered the men; and the Disciples wondered,
John 4. 27 that Christ t^lk^d with a woman: sh^wing hereby, that it was not his
ordinary course to converse alone with one of another Sex: For herein the
Apostles Precept deserves to take place, namely, to avoid from all appearance
of evil.

Have I not commanded the servants, that they should not touch thee?
Boaz had just cause to fear lest some of his servants might wrong her; to
prevent which, he gave them strict charge to the contrary.

Observation.
Here we see, that servile natures are most prone and proclive to wrong poor
strangers. Indeed, generous spirits disdain to make those the subjects of
their cruelty, which rather should be the objects of their pity: but it
complyes with a servile disposition, to tyrannize and domineere over such poor
people as cannot resist them. Like petty Brooks pent within a narrow
Channel, on every dash of Rain they are ready to overflow, and wax angry at
the apprehension of the smallest distaste. The Locusts, Revel. 9. 10. had tails
like Scorpions, and stings in their tails, which by some is expounded, that of
those people which are meant by the Scorpions, the poorest were the proudest;
the meanest, the most mischiveous; the basest, the bloodiest. And surely he
that reads the story of our English Martyrs, shall find, that one Alexander a
Iaylor, and one drunken Warwick, an Executioner, were most basely and
barbarously cruel to Gods poor Saints.

Secondly, From these words observe; That it is the part of a good Master not
only to do no harm himself, but also to take order that his Servants do
none, Genesis 12 20. and 26. 11. When Elisha would take nothing of Naaman, 2 Kings
5. 20. Gehazi said; As the Lord lives, I will run after him and take something
of him. Thus may base Servants (if not prevented with a command to the
contrary) wrong their most right and upright Masters, by taking Gifts and
Bribes privately. The water (though it arises out o^ a most pure Fountain)
which runs through Mine^alls of Lead, Copper, Brimstone, or the like, has
with it a strange taste and relish in the mouth. So Justice, which should
run down like a stream, though it arises out of a pure Fountain, out of
the breast of a sincere and incorrupted Judge; yet if formerly it has passed
through the Mines of Gold and Silver, I mean, through bad Se^vants, who have
taken Bribes to prepossesse the Judge their Master with the prejudice of false
informations, Justice hereby may be strangely perverted and corrupted. Many
Masters themselves have been honest and upright, yet much wrong has been done
under them by their wicked Servants. It is said of Queen Mary, that for her
own part, She did not so much as bark; but she h^d them under her, which did
more then bi^e; such were Gardner, Bonner, Story, Woodrooffe, Tyrrell: Now she
should have tied up these Bandogs, and chained and fettered up these
Bloodhounds from doing any mischief. Camden in his Elizabetha, in the year
1595. writes thus of the then Lord Chancellor of England; Ob sordes and
corruptelas famulorum in beneficiis Ecclesiasticis nundinandis ipse vir integer
ab Ecclesiasticis haud been audivit. He ought to have imitated the example of
Boaz, not only to have done no harm himself, but also to have enjoined the
same to his servants: Have I not commanded my servants, that they should not
touch thee?

Thirdly, in these words Boaz does intimate, That if he gave a charge to the
contrary, none of his servants durst presume once to molest her.

Observation.
Where we see, Masters commands ought to sound Laws in the ears of their
servants, if they be lawful. Indeed, if Absolon (2 Samuel 13. 28.) says to his
servants, Kill Amnon, fear not, for have I not commanded you? This command did
not oblige, because the thing enjoined was altogether ungodly. Otherwise, men
must imitate the obedience of the Centurions servants; who said to the one.
Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to his servant,
D^e this, and he does it.

Coroll.
Now, if we ought to be thus dutiful to our Earthly Masters; surely, if the
Lord of Heaven enjoyneth us any thing, we ought to do it without any doubt, or
delay. Were there no Hell to punish, no Heaven to reward, no Promises
pronounced to the godly, no Threatenings denounced to the wicked; yet this is a
sufficient reason to make us do a thing, because God has enjoined it; this a
convincing argument to make us refrain from it, because he has forbidden it.

Then she fell on her face, and bowed.
Qu^stion.
Was not this too much honor to give to any mortal Creature? And does it not
come within the compass of the breach of the second Commandment, Thou shall
not bow down and worship them? Especially seeing godly Mordecai refused to
bend his knee to H^m^n.

Answer.
Civil honor may and must be given to all in Authoriti^, according to the
usual gestures of the Country: Now such bowing was the custom of the
Eastern people, Genesis 33. 3. As for Mordecai's instance, it makes not against
this; he being therein either immediately warranted by God, or else he refused
to bow to Haman as being an Amalakite, betwixt which c^^sed Brood and the
Israelites, the Lord commanded an eternal enmity.

Coroll.
Now, if Ruth demeaned her self with such reverent gesture to Boaz, how
reverent ought our gesture to be, when we approach into the presence of God.
Indeed, God is a Spirit, and he will be worshipped in Spirit and Truth; yet so,
that he will have the outward decent posture of the body to accompany the
inward sincerity of the ^ou^e.

And said, Why have I found favor.
As if she had said: When I reflect my eyes upon my self, I cannot read in my
self the smallest worth, to deserve so great a favor from thy hands; and
therefore I must acknowledge my self exceedingly beholden to you. But
principally I lift up my eyes to the providence of the Lord of Heaven; men's
hearts are in his hand as the Rivers of Water; he turns them whither he
pleases: He it is that has mollified thy heart, to show this undeserved
kindness unto me. Here we see Ruths humility. Many now-adayes would have made
a contrary construction of Boaz his Charity, and reasoned thus: Surely he
sees in me some extraordinary worth, whereof as yet I have not taken notice
in my self; and therefore hereafter I will maintain a better opinion of my
own deserts. But Ruth confesses her own unworthiness: And from her example,
let us learn to be humbly and heartily thankful to those which bestow any
courtesy or kindness upon us.

Since I am a stranger.
She amplifies his favor, from the indignity of her own person, being a
stranger.

Coroll.
Oh then, if Ruth interpreted it such a kindness, that Boaz took notice of
her, being a stranger; how great is the love of God to us, who loved us in
Christ when we were strangers and aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel? As
the never-failing foundation of the Earth is firmly fastened for ever fleeting,
yet settled on no other substance then its own ballasted weight; so Gods love
was founded on neither cause nor condition in the Creature, but issued only
out of his own free favor. So that in this respect, we may all say unto God
what Ruth does unto Boaz in the Text; Why have we ^ound fav^ur in thine e^es,
that thou should^st take know^edge of us, seeing we were but strangers?

Verse. 11, 12.
And Boaz answered and said unto her, It has fully been showed me, all that
thou have done unto thy Mother in law since the death of thine Husband; and how
thou have left thy Father and thy Mother, and the Land of thy Nativitie, and
art come unto a people which thou knew not heretofore.
The Lord recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of the Lord God
of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust.
It has been fully showed me all.
MOre then probable it is, that Boaz had received his intelligence immediately
from N^omi.

Observation.
How-ever, here we may see, the virtues of worthy persons will never want
Trumpets to sound them to the world. The Jews were the Centurions Trumpet to
our Savior, Luke 7. 5. And the Widows Dorcas her Trumpet to S. Peter, Acts 9.
39. Let this encourage men in their virtuous proceedings, knowing that their
worthy deeds shall not be buried in obscurity, but shall find tongues in
their lively colors to express them. Absolon having no Children, and desirous
to perpetuate his Name, erected a Pillar in the Kings Dale; and the same is
called Absolon's Pillar unto this day. But the most compendious way for men to
consecrate their Memories to Eternity, is to erect a Pillar of virtuous Deeds;
which shall ever remain, even when the most lasting Monuments in the World
shall be consumed, as not able to satisfy the Boulimee of all-consuming Time.
And to put the worst, grant the envious men with a Cloud of Calumnies should
eclipse the beams of virtuous Memories from shining in the World, yet this may
be their comfort, that God that sees in secret, will reward them openly.
Moreover, it is the duty of such who have received Courtesies from others, to
profess and express the same as occasion shall serve; that so their
Benefactors may publicly receive their deserved commendation. Thus surely
Naomi had done by Ruth; from whose mouth no doubt, though not immediately, her
virtues were sounded in the ears of Boaz. It has been fully showed me all.

Here now follows a Summarie, reckoning up of the worthy Deeds of Ruth;
which, because they have been fully discoursed of in the former Chapter, it
would be needless again to insist upon them: Proceed we therefore to Boaz his
Prayer.

The Lord recompense thee.
As if he had said: Indeed, Ruth, that courte^ie which I afforded thee, to
gleane upon my Land without any disturbance, comes far short both of thy
deserts, and my desires. All that I wish is this, That what I am unable to
requite, the Lord himself would recompense: May he give thee a full reward of
Graces internal, external, eternal; here, hereafter; on Earth, in Heaven;
while thou live, when thou die, in Grace, in Glory, a full reward.

Where first we may learn, that when we are unable to requite peoples des^^ts
of our selves, we must make up o^r w^^t of works with good Wishes to God (...)
them. Indeed, we must not do like those in the second of S. James, verse 16.
who only said to the Poor, Depart in peace, warm your sel^es, and fill your
bellies, and yet bestowed nothing upon them: We must not both begin and
conclude with good Wishes, and do nothing else; but we must observe Boaz his
method: first, to begin to do good to those that being virtuous, are in
distress; and then, where we fall short in requiting them, to make the rest
up, with hearty Wishes to God for them.

Observation.
But the maine Observation is this; There is a recompense of a full reward upon
the good works of his servants, Genesis 15. 1. Moreover, by them is thy servant
taught; and in keeping them, there is great reward, Psalm. 19. 11. Verily* there
is a Reward for the Righteous; doubtless, there is a God that judges the
Earth; Godliness has the promises of this Life, and of the Life to come.

Use 1.
It may serve to consute such false Spies as raise wrong Reports of the Land of
Can^an, of the Christian Prof^ssion, saying with the wicked, Mal. 3. 14. It is
in vain to serve God; and what profit is it that we have kept his
Commandments, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of Ho^sts?
Slanderous Tongues! which one day shall be justly fined in the Star Chamber
of Heaven, Ob scandala magnatum, for ^landering of Gods noble servants, and
their Profession, for indeed, the Christian Life is most comfortable; for we
may both take a liberal Portion, and have a sanctified use of Gods Creatures:
besides, within we have peace of Conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost in some
measure; one Dram whereof is able to sugar the most wormwood affliction.

Use 2.
When we begin to feel our selves to lagge in Christianity, let us spur on
our affections with the meditation of that full reward which we shall in due
time receive; with our Savior, let us look to the Joys which are set before
us; and with Moses, let us have an eye to the recompense of Reward: Yet so,
that though we look at this Reward, yet also we must look through it, and
beyond it. This medita^ion of the Reward, is a good place for our souls to
bait at, but a bad place for our souls to lodge in: we must mount our minds
higher, namely, to aim at the glory of God; at which all our actions must be
directed, though there were no Reward propounded unto them. Yet since it is
Gods goodness, to propound unto us a Reward, over and besides his own Glory;
this ought so much the more to incite us to diligence in our Christian calling:
For if Othniel, Judges 1. behaved himself so valiantly against the enemies of
Israel, in hope to obtain Achsah, Calebs Daughter, to Wife; how valiantly
ought we to demean our selves against our spiritual enemies, knowing that we
shall one day be married unto our Savior in eternal happiness? And this is a
full Reward.

Objection.
But some may say, These terms of Recompense and Reward may seem to favor
the Popish Tenent, That our good works merit at Gods hand.

Answer.
Reward and Recompense unto our good works are not due unto us for any worth
of our own, but merely from Gods free favor and gracious promise. For, to
make a thing truly meritorious of a Reward, it is required, first, that the
thing meriting be our own, and not another; now our best works are none of
ours, but Gods Spirit in us: secondly, it is requisite that we be not bound of
duty to do it; now we are bound to do all the good deeds which we do, and
still remain but unprofitable servants: thirdly, there must be a proportion
between the thing meriting, and the Reward merited; now there is no proportion
between our stained and imperfect works, (for such are our best) and that
infinite weight of glory where with God will reward us. It remains therefore,
that no Reward is given us for our own inherent worth, but merely for Gods
free favor, who crowns his own works in us.

Under whose wings thou art come to trust.
A Metaphor; it is borrowed from an Hen, which with her clocking summons
together her straggling Chickens, and then out-stretcheth the fan of her wings
to cover them. Familiarly it is used in Scripture, and amongst other places, by
our Savior, Math. 23. How often would I have gathered thee together, as an Hen
gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not? And just it was with
God, because the foolish Chickens of the Jews would not come to Christ, the
Hen, calling them, to suffer them to be devoured by the Eagle, the Imperial
Army of the Romans.

Observation.
Gods love and care over his Children, is as great as an Hen's over her
Chickens. Now the Hen's wings do the Chickens a double good.

First, they keep them from the Kite; so Gods providence protecteth his
servants from that Kite, the Devil: For as the Kite uses to fetch many
Circuits, and Circles, and long hovers and flutters round about, and at length
spying her advantage, pops down on the poor Chicken for a prey; so the
Devil, who as it is Job 1. 7. compasses the Earth to and fro, and walks
through it, and at length spying an opportunity, pitcheth and setleth himself
upon some poor Soul, to devour it, if the wings of Gods providence (as the
City of Refuge) do not rescue him from his clutches.

Secondly, the Hen with her Chickens broodes her Chickens, and makes them
thereby to thrive and grow. In Summer her wings are a Canopie, to keep her
Chickens from the heat of the scorching Sun; and in Winter they are a Mantle,
to defend them from the injury of the pinching cold: So Gods providence and
protection makes his Children to sprout, thrive, and prosper under it: in
Prosperity, Gods providence keeps them from the heat of Pride; in
Adversity, it preserves them from being benumbed with frozen Despair.

Use.
Let us all then strive to run, to hide our selves under the wings of the God
of Heaven. Hark how the Hen clocks in the Psalms, Call upon me in the time
of trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall praise me: How she clocks in
the Canticles, Return O Shulamite, return, return, that we may behold thee:
How she clocketh, Math. 7. 7. Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find,
knock and it shall be opened unto you: How she clocks, Math. 11. Come unto me
all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you. Let not us now be
like fullen Chickens, which sit moaping under a rotten Hedge, or proating under
an old Wood-pile, when the Hen calls them. Let not us trust to the broken
Wall of our own Strength, or think to lurk under the tottering Hedge of our
own Wealth, or winde-shaken Reeds of our unconstant Friends; but fly to God,
that he may stretch his wings over us, as the Cherubi^s did over the
Mercie-Seat. And as always in Daytime, so especially at Night, when we go to
Bed, (for Chickens when going to Roost, always run to the Hen) let us commend
our selves with prayer to his Providence, that he would be pleased to preserve
us from the dangers of the Night ensuing; trusting with Ruth in the Text, under
the wings of the Lord God of Israel.

Verse. 13, 14.
Then she said, Let me find favor in the sight of my Lord; for thou have
comforted me, and spoken comfortably unto thy Maid, though I be not like to one
of thy Maids.
And Boaz said unto her, At the meal time come thou hither, and eat of the
Bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. And she sat beside the Reapers, and
he reached her parched Corn; and she did eat, and was sufficed, and left
thereof.
BOaz had formerly called Ruth Daughter; now Ruth styles him, Lord. When great
ones carry themselves familiarly to meaner persons, meaner persons must demean
themselves respectively to great ones. Indeed, with base and sordid natures
familiarity breeds contempt; but ingenuous natures will more awfully observe
their distance toward their Superiors, of whom they are most courteously
entreated. And if great Personages should cast up their accounts, they should
find^ themselves not losers, but gainers of honor, by their kind usage of
their Inferiors. Those Stars seem to us the greatest, and shine the
brightest, which are set the lowest. Great men, which sometimes stoop, and
stoop low in their humble carriage to others, commonly get the greatest luster
of credit and esteem in the hearts of those that be virtuous.

And spoken comfortably unto thy Maid.
In Hebrew, have spoken unto the heart. A comfortable speech, is a word spoken
to the heart.

Meditation.
Oh that Ministers had this faculty of Boaz his speech; not to tickle the
cares, teach the heads, or please the brains of the people, but that their
Sermons might s^^ke and sink to the root of their hearts. But though this may
be endeavored by them, it cannot be performed of them, without Gods special
assistance. We may leave our words at the outward porch of men's ears, but his
Spirit must conduct and lodge them in the Closet of their hearts.

Though I be not like to one of thy Maids.
Meaning, because she was a Moabitesse, a Stranger and Alien, they Natives of
the Commonwealth of Israel; in this respect, she was far their inferior.

Observation.
The godly ever conceive very humbly and meanly of themselves; Moses, Exodus 4.
10. Gedeon, Judge. 6. 15. Abigail, 1 Samuel 25. 41. Esaias 6. 5. Jerem. 1. 6. John
Baptist, Math. 3. 11. 1 Timothy 1. 15. And the reason hereof is, because they are
most privy to and sensible of their own infirmities; their Corruptions, which
cleave unto them, are ever before their eyes. These black feet abate their
thoughts, when puffed up with Pride for their painted Train of other Graces.
On the other side, the wicked set ever the greatest price on their own worth;
they behold their own supposed Virtues through magnifying Glasses, and think
with Haman, that none deserves better to be honored by the King, but
themselves.

Use.
Let us endeavor to obtain humility with Ruth; a virtue of most worth, and
yet which costeth least to keep: Yet notwithstanding, it is both lawful and
needful for us to know our own worth, and to take an exact survey of those
Graces which God has bestowed upon us. First, that we may know thereby the
better to proportion our thanks to God: Secondly, that we may know how much
good the Church and Commonwealth expects to be performed by us. And lastly,
that if any should basely insult and domineer over us, we may in humility
stand upon the lawful justification of our selves, and our own sufficiency,
as S. Paul did against the false Apostles at Corinth; always provided, that we
give God the glory, and profess our selves to be but unprofitable servants.

And Boaz said unto her, At the meal time come thou hither, and eat of the
Bread.
Two things herein are commendable in Boaz, and to be imitated by Masters of
Families.

First, That he had provided wholesome and competent food for his own
servants; so ought all house-holders to do. And herein let them propound God
for their President, for he maintains the greatest Family; all creatures are
his servants, and he gives them meat in due season, he opens his hand, and
fills with his blessing every living thing.

Secondly, As Boaz provided Meat for his servants, so he allowed them certain
set convenient Times wherein they might quietly eat their Meat. But as the
people of the Jews pressed so fast upon our Savior, ( Mark. 3. 20.) that he
had not so much leisure as to eat Bread, and take necessary sustenance: so,
such is the gripple nature of many covetous Masters, that they will so task
and tie their servants to their work, as not to afford them seasonable Respite
to feed themselves.

And dip thy morsel in the vinegar.
Observation.
The Fare of Gods servants in ancient time, though wholesome, was very homely:
Here they had only Bread and Vinegar, and parched Corn. For a thousand five
hundred and sixty years the World fed upon Herbs, and the Scripture makes
mention since of mean and sparing Fare of many godly men. It may therefore
confute the Gluttony and Epi^urisme of our Age, consisting both in the
superfluous number of Dishes, and in the unlawful nature of them. We rifle the
Air for dainty Foul, we ransack the Sea for delicious Fish, we rob the Earth
for delicate Flesh, to suspend the doubtful Appetite betwixt variety of
Dainties. As for the nature of them, many are mere needless Whetstones of
Hunger, which in stead of satisfying do increase it. And as in the Spanish
Inquisition such is their exquisite Cruelty, that having brought one to the
door of Death by their Tortures, they then revive him by Cordials; and then
again re-killing him with their Torments, fetch him again with comfortable
things; thus often re-iterating their Cruelty: So, men having killed their
Appetite with good Cheer, seek with Dishes made for the nonce to enliven it
again, to the sup^rfluous wasting of Gods good creatures, and much endammaging
the health of their own bodies. But leaving them, let us be content with that
competent Food which God has allotted us, knowing, that better is a Dinner of
Herbs with peace, then a stalled Ox with strife; and God, if it p^easeth him,
can so bless Daniels Pulse unto us, that by mean Fare we shall be made more
strong and healthful, then those who surfeit on excess of Dainties.

And she did eat and was sufficed.
It is a great blessing of God, when he gives such strength and virtue to his
creatures, as to sati^^^^ our hunger; and the contrary, is a great punishment:
For as, (1 Kings 1. 1.) when they heaped abundance of Clothes on aged King
David, yet his decayed body felt no warmth at all; so God so curses the Meat
to some, that though they cramme down never so much into their bellies, yet
still their hunger^ increases with their Meat, and they find, that Nature is
not truly contented and satisfied therewith.

And left thereof.
Hence we learn, the overplus which remains after we have ^ed our selves,
must neither be scornfully cast away, nor carelessly left alone, but it must be
thriftily kept: Imitating herein the example of ou^ Savior; who, though he
could make five Loaves swell to sufficient food for five thousand men, yet
gave he command, that the fragments should be carefully basketted up.

Verse. 15, 16, 17.
And when she arose to gleane, Boaz commanded his servants, saying, Let her
gather among the sheaves, and do not rebuke her;
Also let fall some of the sheaves for her, and let it lie, that she may gather
it up, and rebuke her not.
So she gleaned in the field until Evening, and she threshed that she had
gathered, and it was about an Ephah of Barley.
BEfore I enter into these words, behold an Objection stands at the door of
them, which must first be removed.

Objection.
One may say to Ruth, as our Savior to the young man in the Gospel, One thing
is wanting. Here is no mention of any Grace she said to God either before or
after Meat.

Answer.
Charity will not suffer me to condemn Ruth of forgetfulness herein: She who
formerly had been so thankful to Boaz, the Conduit-Pipe, how can she be
thought to be ungrateful to God, the Fountain of all favors? Rather I think
it is omitted of the holy Spirit to be written down; who, had he registered
each particular action of Gods Saints, (as it is John 21. 25.) the world would
not have been able to contain the Books which should be written.

Let none therefore take occasion to omit this duty, because here not
specified; rather let them be exhorted to perform it, because in other places
it is both commanded by Precept, and commended by Practice, Deuteronomy. 8. 10. 1 Cor.
10. 31. Yea, in the 27. of the Acts, the Mariners and Soldiers, (people
ordinarily not very Religious) though they had fasted fourteen days together,
yet none of them were so unmannerly, or rather so profane, as to snatch any
Meat, before S. Paul had given Thanks. Let us not therefore be like Esau, who
in stead of giving a Blessing to God for his Pottage, sold his Blessing to his
Brother for his Pottage: but though our haste or hunger be never so great, let
us dispense with so much time, as therein to crave a Blessing from God, wherein
his creatures are sanctified; as no doubt Ruth did, though not recorded.

And when she arose to gleane.
The end of feeding, is to fall to our Calling. Let us not therefore with
Israel, sit down to eat and to drink, and so rise up again to play; but let
us eat to live, not live to eat. It Is not matter, we need not make the
Clay-Cottage of our Body much larger then it is, by immodera^e feasting; it is
enough, if we maintain it so with competent food, that God our Landlord may
not have just cause to sue us for want of Reparations.

Boaz commanded his servants, saying, Let her gather among the sheaves, and do
not rebuke her.
Observation.
It is lawful for us, according to our pleasure, to extend our favors more to
one then to another. Ruth alone, not all the gleaners, was privileged to
gather among the sheaves uncontrouled. Give leave to Jacob to bequeath a double
Portion to Joseph, his best beloved son; for Joseph to make the Mess of
Benjamin five times greater then any other of his Brethren; for Elkanah to
leave a worthier Portion to Hannah then to Peninnah: the reason is, because
there can be no wrong done in those things which are free favors. I am not
less just to him, to whom I give less; but I am more merciful to him, to
whom I give more. Yet in the dealing and distributing of Liberality, let those
of the Family of Faith be especially respected; and of these, those chiefly
which, as the Apostle says, are worthy of a double honor.

Corollarie.
Shall it not therefore be lawful for the Lord of Heaven to bestow Wealth,
Honor, Wisdom, effectual Grace, Blessings outward and inward on one, and
deny them to another? You therefore, whom God has suffered to gleane among
the Sheaves, and has scattered whole handfulls for you to gather; you that
abound and flow with his favors, be heartily thankful unto him; he has not
dealt so with every one, neither have all such a large measure of his
Blessings. And ye common gleaners, who are feign to follow far after, and
glad to take up the scattered ears, who have a smaller proportion of his
favor, be neither angry with God, nor grieved at your selves, nor envious at
your Brethren; but be content with your condition: it is the Lord, and let him
do what is good in his eyes; shall not he have absolute power to do with his
own what he thinks good, when Boaz can command, that Ruth, and no other, may
gleane among the sheaves without rebuke?

Had the servants of Boaz, without express warrant and command from their
Master, scattered handfulls for her to gleane, their action had not been
Charity, but flat Theft and Robbery; for they were to improve their Masters
goods to his greatest profit. On the other side, it had been a great fault* to
withold and withdraw any thing from her, which their Master commanded them
to give. Yet, as the unjust Steward in Luke made his Masters Debts to be less
then they were; so many servants now-adayes make their Masters gifts to be
less then they are, giving less then he has granted, and disposing less
then he has directed. Men commonly pay Toll for passing through great Gates,
or over common Bridges; so when the Liberality of Masters goes through the
Gate of their servants hands, and Bridges of their ^ingers, it is constrained
to pay Tribute and Custom to their servants, before it comes to those Poor
to whom it was intended. Thus many men make the augmentation of their own
Estat^s, from the diminution of their Masters Bounty.

Question.
But some may say, Why did not Boaz bestow a quantity of Corn upon Ruth* and
so send her home unto her Mother?

Answer.
He might have done so, but he chose rather to keep her still a working. Where
we learn, that is the best Charity which so relieves peoples wants, as that
they are still continued in their Calling. For as he who teaches one to
swim, though happily he will take him by the Chinne, yet he expects that
the learner shall nimbly ply the Oars of his hands and ^eet, and strive and
struggle with all his strength to keep himself above water: so those who are
beneficial to poor people, may justly require of them, that they use both
their hands to work and feet to go in their Calling, and themselves take all
due labor, that they may not sink in the Gulf of Penury. Relieve an
Husbandman, yet so, as that he may still continue in his Husbandry; a
Tradesman, yet so, as he may still go on in his Trade; a poor Scholar, yet
so, as he may still proceed in his Studies. Hereby the Commonwealth shall be a
gainer, Drones bring no Honey to the Hive, but the painful hand of each private
man contributes some profit to the public good. Hereby the able poor, the
more diligent they be, the more bountiful men will be to them; while their
bodies are freed from many diseases, their souls from many sins, whereof
Idleness is the Mother. Laziness makes a breach in our Soul, where the
Devil does assault us with greatest advantage; and when we are most idle in
our Vocations, then he is most busy in his Temptations. A reverend Minister
was wont to say, that the Devil never tempted him more then on Mondayes, when
(because his former Weeks Task was newly done, and that for the Week to come
six days distant) he took most liberty to refresh himself.

Since therefore so much good comes from Industry* I could wish there were a
public Vineyard, into which all they should be sent; who stand lazing in the
Marketplace till the eleventh hour of the day. Would all poor and impotent
were well placed in an Hospital, all poor and able well disposed in a
Workhouse; and the common Stocks of Towns so laid out* as they thereby might
be employed.

So she gleaned in the field until evening.
The Night is only that which must end our labors: only the Evening must beg
us a Play, to depart out of the School of our Vocation, with promise next
Morning to return again; Man goes out to his labor until Evening. Let such
then be blamed, who in their working make their Night to come before the Noone,
each day of their labor being shorter then that of S. Lucy; and after a spurt
in their Calling for some few hours, they relapse again to laziness.

And she threshed what she had gathered.
The Materials of the Temple were so hewed and carved, both Stone and Wood,
before that they were brought unto Jerusalem, that there was not so much as
the noise of an Hammer heard in the Temple. So Ruth fits all things in a
readiness, before the goes home: What formerly she gleaned, now she threshed;
that so no noise might be made at home, to disturb her aged Mother. Here we
see Gods servants, though well descended, disdain not any homely, if honest,
work for their own living: Sarah kneaded Cakes, Re^eccab drew Water, Rachel
fed Sheep, Thamar baked Cakes. Suetonius reports of Augustus Caesar, that he
made his Daughters to learn to spinne; and Pantaleon relates the same of
Charles the Great. Yet now-adayes, (such is the pride of the World) people of
far meaner quality scorn so base employments.

And it was about an Ephah of Barley.
An Ephah contained ten Omers, Exodus 16. 36. An Omer of Mannah was the
proportion allowed for a man's one day meat. Thus Ruth had gleaned upon the
quantity of a Bushel; such was her Industry, in diligent bestirring her
self; Boaz his Bounty, in scattering for her to gather; and above all, God
his Blessing, who gave so good success unto her. Ruth having now done
gleaning, did not stay behind in the field, as many now-adayes begin their
work when others end; if that may be termed work, to filch and steal; as if
the dark Night would be a Veyle to cover their deeds of Darkness: but home
she hasteneth to her Mother, as follows.

Verse. 18, 19.
And she took it up, and went into the City, and her Mother in law saw what
she had gathered: also she took forth, and gave to her that which she had
reserved, when she was sufficed.
Then her Mother in law said unto her, Where have thou gleaned to day? And
where wroughtest thou? Blessed be he that knew thee: And she showed her Mother
in law with whom she had wrought, and said, The man's name with whom I wrought
to day, is Boaz.
And she took it up.
SEe here, the shoulders of Gods Saints are wonted to the bearing of Burdens:
Little Isaac carried the Faggot, wherewith himself was to be sacrificed; our
Savior his own Cross, till his faintness craved Simon of Cyrene to be his
successor. Yet let not Gods Saints be dis-heartened: if their Father has a
Bottle wherein he puts the tears which they spend; sure he has a Balance,
wherein he weighs the Burdens which they bear; he keeps a Note, to what
weight their Burdens amount, and (no doubt) will accordingly comfort them.

Those are to be confuted, who with the Scribes, Math. 23. 4. bind heavi^
burdens, and grievous to be borne, and lay them on the backs of others, but
for their own part they will not so much as touch them with one of their
fingers: Yea, some are so proud, that they will not carry their own Provender,
things for their own sustenance; had they been under Ruths Ephah of Barley,
with David in Saul's Armor, they could not have gone under the weight of it,
because never used unto it.

And her Mother in law saw what she had gathered.
Namely, Ruth showed it unto her, and then Naomi saw it. Children are to
present to their Parents view all which they get by their own labor;
otherwise do many Children now-adayes: As Ananias and Saphira brought part of
the Money, and deposed it at the Apostles feet, but reserved the rest for
themselves; so they can be content to show to their Parents some parcel of
their gains, whilst they keep the remnant secretly to themselves.

Also she took forth, and gave to her.
Learn we from hence; Children, if able, are to cherish and feed their
Parents, if poor and aged. Have our Parents performed the parts of Pelicans to
us, let us do the duty of Storkes to them: Would all Children would pay as
well for the partie-coloured Coats which their Parents do give them, as Joseph
did for his, who maintained his Father and his Brethren in the Famine in Egypt*
Think on thy Mothers sickness, when thou wast conceived; sorrow, when thou
wast borne; trouble, when thou wast nursed: She was cold* whilst thou wast
warm; went, whilst thou layd'st still; waked, whilst thou slept'st; fasted,
whilst thou fed'st: These are easier to be conceived then expressed, easier
deserved then requited. Say not therefore to thy Father according to the
Doctrine of the Pharisees, Corban, it is a gift, if thou profitest by me; but
confess that it is a true Debt, and thy bounden duty, if thou be able, to
relieve them: so did Ruth to Naomi, who was but her Mother in law.

Which she had reserved when she was sufficed.
Observation.
We must not spend all at once, but providently reserve some for afterward; we
must not speak all at once, without Jesuitical reservation of some things
still in our hearts; not spend all at once, without thriftie reservation of
something still in our hands. Indeed our Savior says, Care not for to morrow,
for to morrow shall care for it self: but that is not meant of the care of
providence, which is lawful and necessary; but of the care of diffidence,
which is wicked and ungodly. Those are to be blamed, which as Abishai said to
David concerning Saul, I will strike him but once, and I will strike him no
more. So many men, with one act of Prodigality, give the bane and mortal
wound to their Estates, with one excessive Feast, one costly Suit of Clothes,
one wastfull Night of Gaming, they smite their Estates under the fifth Rib,
which always is mortal in Scripture, so that it never reviveth again. But
let us spare where we may, that so we may spend where we should: in the seven
years of Plenty let us provide for the seven years of Famine; and to make
good construction of our Estates, let us as well observe the Future as the
Present Tense.

Then her Mother in law said unto her, Where have thou gleaned to day?
These words were not uttered out of Jealousy, as if Naomi suspected that Ruth
had dishonestly come by her Corn; (for Charity is not suspicious, but ever
fastens the most favorable Comments upon the actions of those whom it affects)
but she did it out of a desire to know who had been so bountiful unto her. Yet
hence may we learn, that Par^nts, after the example of Naomi, may and ought to
examine their Children, how and where they spend their time: For hereby they
shall prevent a deal of mischief, whilst their Children will be more
watchful what Company they keep, as expecting with fear at Night to be
examined. Neither can such Fathers be excused, who never say to their Children,
as David to Adoniah, Why do thou so? But suffer them to rove and range at
their own pleasure. Am I, say they, my sons keeper? He is old enough, let
him look after himsel^e.

Now, as for those Ioashes, whose Iehoiada's are dead, those young men whose
Friends and Fathers are deceased, who now must have Reason for their Ruler, or
rather Grace for their Guide and Governer; Let such know, that indeed they have
none to ask them as the Angel did Hagar, Whence come thou, and whither
go thou? None to examine them, as Eliab did David, Wherefore art thou come
down hither? None to question them, as Naomi did Ruth, Where wroughtest thou
to day? But now, as S. Paul said of the Gentiles, that having no Law, they were
a Law unto themselves: so must such young persons endeavor, that having no
Examiners, they may be Examiners to themselves, and at Night, accordingly as
they have spent their time, either to condemn or acquit their own actions.

Blessed be he that knew thee.
1 Kings 22. The man shot an Arrow at unawares, yet God directed it to the
Chinke of the Armor of guilty Ahab: ^ut Naomi does here dart and ejaculate
out a prayer, and that at Rovers, aiming at no one particular Mark; Blessed be
he that knew thee: Yet, no doubt, was it not in vain; but God made it light on
the head of bountiful Boaz, who deserved it.

Learn we from hence, upon the sight of a good deed, to bless the doer
thereof, though by Name unknown unto us: And let us take heed that we do not
recant and recall our prayers, after that we come to the knowledge of his Name;
as some do, who when they see a laudable Work, willingly commend the doer of
it; but after they come to know the Authors Name, (especially if they be
prepossessed with a private spleen against him) they fall then to derogate and
detract from the Action, quarrelling with it as done out of ostentation, or
some other sinister end*

And she showed her Mother in law with whom she had wrought.
Children when demanded, are truly to tell their Parents where they have been;
rather let them hazard the wrath of their earthly Father, by telling the Truth,
then adventure the displeasure of their heavenly Father, by feigning a Lie. Yet
as David, when Achish asked him, where he had been? (1 Samuel 27. 10.) told him,
that he had been against the South of Judah, and against the South of the
Jerahmeelites, and against the South of the Kenites; when indeed he had been
the clean contrary way, invading the Geshurites, and ^ezrites, and the
Amalekites: So many Children flap their Parents in the mouth with a Lie, that
they have been in their Study, in their Calling, in good Company, or in
lawful Recreations, when the truth is, they have been in some Drinking-School,
Tavern, or Alehouse, mis-spending of their precious time. And many serve
their Masters as Gehezi did the Prophet; who being demanded, answered, Thy
servant went no whither, when he had been taking a Bribe of Naaman.

The man's Name with whom I wrought to day, is Boaz.
We ought to know the Names of such who are our Benefactors. Those are counted
to be but basely borne, who cannot tell the Names of their Parents; and surely,
those are but of a base nature, who do not know the Names of their Patrons and
^enefactors. Too blame therefore was that lame man cured by our Savior, ( John
5. 13.) of whom it is said, And he that was healed knew not the Name of him
that said unto him, Take up thy Bed* and walk. Yet let not this discourage the
charity of any Benefactors, because those that receive their courtesies,
oftentimes do not remember their N^mes; let this comfort them, though they are
forgotten by the living, they are remembered in the Book of Life. The A^henians
out of Superstition erected an Altar with this inscription, Unto the unknown
God: but we out of true Devotion, must erect an Altar of Gratitude to the
memory, not of our once unknown, but now forgotten Benefactors, whose Names we
have not been so careful to preserve, as Ruth was the Name of Boaz; And the
man's Name was Boaz.

Verse. 20.
And Naomi said unto her Daughter in law, Blessed be he of the Lord, for he
cease not to do good to the living, and to the dead. Again Naomi said unto
her, the man is near unto us, and of our affinity.
THese words consist of three Parts. 1. Naomies praying for Boaz. 2. Her
praising of Boaz. 3. Her reference and relation unto Boaz. Of the first:

Blessed be he of the Lord.
The Lord is the Fountain from whom all blessedness flows. Indeed Jacob
blessed his Sons, Moses the twelve Tribes, the Priests in the Law the people;
but these were but the instruments, God the principal; these the pipe, God the
fountain; these the Ministers to pronounce it, God the Author who bestowed it.

For he cease not.
Observation.
Naomi never before made any mention of Boaz, nor of his good deeds; but now
being informed of his bounty to Ruth, it puts her in mind of his former
courtesies. Learn from hence, new favors cause a fresh remembrance of former
courtesies. Wherefore if men begin to be forgetful of those favors which
formerly we have bestowed upon them, let us flourish and varnish over our old
courtesies with fresh colors of new kindnesses, so shall we recall our past
favors to their memories.

Use.
When we call to mind Gods staying of his killing Angel* Anno 1625. let that
mercy make us to be mindful of a former; his safe bringing back of our (then
Prince) now) King from Spain; when the pledge of our ensuing happiness was
pawned in a foreign Country: let this blessing put us in mind of (...) former.
The peaceable coming in of our Graciou^ Sovereign of happy Memory, when the
bounds of two Kingdoms were made the middle of a Mo^archy: Stay not here, let
thy thankfulness travel further; call to mind the miraculous providence of
God in defending this Land from Invasion in 88. On still; be thankful for Gods
goodness in bringing Queen Elizabeth to the Crown, when our Kingdom was like
the Woman in the Gospel, troubled with an issue of blood (which glorious
Martyrs shed) but stanched at her ariving at the Scepter: we might be infinite
in prosecution of this point; let present favors of God renew the memories of
old ones, as the present bounty of Boaz to Ruth made Naomi remember his former
courtesies: For he cease not to do good to the living and the dead.

He cease not.
Our deeds of Piety ought to be continued without interruption or ceasing; some
men there be, whose charitable deeds are as rare as an Eclipse, or a
Blazing-Starre; these men deserve to be pardoned for their pious deeds, they
are so seldom guilty of them: With Nabal, they prove themselves by excessive
prodigality at one Feast; but he deserves the commendation of a good
housekeeper, who keeps a constant Table, who with Boaz cease not to do
good.

To the dead.
The meaning is, to those who now are dead, but once were living; or to their
Friends and Kindred. Whence we learn, Mercy done to the Kindred of the dead,
is done to the dead themselves. Art thou then a Widower, who desire to do
mercy to thy dead Wife; or a Widow, to thy dead Husband; or a Child, to thy
deceased Parent? I will tell thee how thou may express thy self courteous:
Has thy Wife, thy Husband, or thy Parent any Brother, or Kinsman, or Friends
surviving, be courteous to them; and in so doing, thy favors shall redound to
the dead: Though old Barzillai be incapable of thy favors, let young Kimham
taste of thy kindness: Though the dead cannot, need not have thy mercy, yet
may they receive thy kindness by a Proxy, by their Friends that still are
living.

Mercy then to the dead, makes nothing for the Popish Purgatory; and yet no
wonder if the Papists fight for it. It Is said of Sicily and Egypt, that they
were anciently the Barnes and Granaries of the City of Rome: but now-adayes
Purgatory is the Barn of the Romish Court, yea, the Kitchen, Hall, Parlour,
Larder, Cellar, Chamber, every Room of Rome. David said, 2 Samuel 1. 24. Ye
Daughters of Israel, weep for Saul, which clothed you in Skarlet with
pleasure, and hanged ornaments of Gold upon your apparel: But should
Purgatory once be removed, weep Pope, Cardinals, Abbots, Bishops, Friars; for
that is gone which maintained your excessive pride. When Adonijah sued for
Abishag the Shunamite, Solomon said to his Mother, Ask for him the Kingdom
also. But if once the Protestants could wring from the Papists their
Purgatory, nay, then would they say, Ask the Triple Crown, Crosse-Keyes, S.
Angelo, Peter's Patrimony, and All: in a word, were Purgatory taken away, the
Pope himself would be in Purgatory, as not knowing which way to maintain his
expensivenesse.

The man is near unto us, and of our affinity.
Naomi never before made any mention of Boaz; some, had they had so rich a
Kinsman, all their discourse should have been a Survey and Inventorie of their
Kinsmens goods, they would have made an occa^ion at every turn to be talking
of them. Well, though Naomi did not commonly brag of her Kinsman, yet when
occasion is offered, she is bold to challenge her interest in him.

Observation.
Poor folks may with modesty claim their Kindred in their rich alliance: Let
not therefore great Personages scorn and contemn their poor Kindred. Cambden
reports of the Citizens of Cork, that all of them in some degrees are of
kindred one to the other: but I think, that all wealthy men will hook in the
Cousin, and draw in some alliance one to other; but as they will challenge
Kindred (where there is none) in rich folks, so they will deny Kindred where
it is, in poor; yet is there no just reason they should do so: All mankind
knit together in the same Father in the Creation, and at the Deluge; I know not
who lay higher in Adams Loins, or who took the Wall in Eves Belly. I speak
not this to pave the way to an Anabaptisticall paritie, but only to humble and
abate the conceits of proud men, who look so scornful and contemptuous over
their poor Kindred.

Use.
Let such as are allied to rich Kindred, be heartily thankful to God for them;
yet so, as they under God depend principally on their own labor, and not on
their reference to their Friends; and let them not too earnestly expect help
from their Kindred, for fear they miscarry. A Scholar being maintained in the
Universitie by his Uncle, who gave a Basilisk for his Arms, and expected that
he should make him his Heir, wrote these Verses over his Chimney; Faller is
aspectu Basiliseum occidere, Plini,
Nam vitae nostrae spem Basiliscus alit.


Soon after it happened that his Uncle dyed, and gave him nothing at all;
whereupon the Scholar wrote these Verses under the former. Certe aluit, sed
spe vana; spes vana venenum;
Ignoscas Plini, verus es historicus.


So soon may men's expectations be frustrated, who depend on rich Kindred: Yea,
I have seen the twine-thred of a Cordial Friend hold, when the Cable-Rope of
a rich Kinsman has broken.

Let those therefore be thankful to God, to whom God has given means to be
maintained of themselves, without dependence on their Kindred: better it is to
be the weakest of Substances, to subsist of themselves, then to be the bravest
Accidents, to be maintained by another.

Verse. 21.
And Ruth the Moabitesse said, He said unto me also, Thou shall keep fast by my
young men, until they have ended all my Harvest.
He said unto me also.
RVth perceiving that Naomi kindly resented Boaz his favor, and that the
discourse of his kindness was acceptable unto her, proceeds in her relation.

Doctrine.
People love to enlarge such discourses, which they see to be welcome to their
audience.

What makes Tale-bearers so many, and their Tales so long, but that such
persons are sensible, that others are pleasingly affected with their talk?
Otherwise, a frowning look, Prove. 25. 23. will soon put such to silence. When
Herod saw, Acts 13. 3. that the killing of James pleased the Jews, he
proceeded farther, to take Peter also. Detractors perceiving that killing of
their Neighbors Credits is acceptable to others, are encouraged thereby to
imbrew their Tongues in the murdering of more Reputations.

Secondly, Whereas Ruth heartily confesses what favor she found from Boaz, we
learn, we ought not sullenly to conceal the bounty of our Benefactors, but
express it to their honor, as occasion is offered. The Giver of Alms may
not, but the Receiver of them may blow a Trumpet.

This confuteth the ingratitude of many in our Age; clamorous to beg, but
tongue-tyed to confess what is bestowed upon them. What the sin against the
Holy Ghost is in Divinity, that Ingratitude is in Morality; an Offense
unpardonable. Pity it is, but that Moon should ever be in an Eclipse, that
will not confess the beams thereof to be borrowed from the Sun. He that
has a Hand to take, and no Tongue to thank, deserves neither Hand nor Tongue,
but to be lame and dumb hereafter.

Observe by the way, that Ruth expresses what tends to the praise of Boaz, but
conceales what Boaz said in the praise of her self. He had commended her,
Verse 11. for a dutiful Daughter in law, and for leaving an Idolatrous Land.
But Ruth is so far from commending her self in a direct Line, that she will
not do it by reflection, and at the second hand, by reporting the
commendations which others gave her.

Doctrine.
Let another praise thee, and not thine own mouth.

How large are the Penmen of the Scripture, in relating their own faults: How
concise (if at all) in penning their own praises.

It is generally conceived, that the Gospel of S. Mark was indicted by the
Apostle Peter; and that from his mouth it was written by the hand of John
Mark, whose Name now it bears; if so,

Then we may observe, that Peter's denying of his Master, with all the
circumstances thereof, his Cursing and Swearing, is more largely related in the
Gospel of S. Mark, then in any other: But as for his Repentance, it is set
down more shortly there, then in other Gospels:

Matthew 26. 75. And he went out and wept bitterly.

Luke 22. 62. And Peter went out and wept bitterly.

But Mark 14. 72. it is only said, When he thought thereon, he wept.

So short are Gods servants in giving an account of their own Commendations,
which they leave to be related by the mouths of others.

Thou shall keep fast by my young men.
Objection.
Here either Ruths memory failed her, or else she wilfully committed a foul
mistake. For Boaz never bad her to keep fast by his young men, but Verse 8.
Abide here fast by my Maidens. It seems she had a better mind to
Male-companie, who had altered the Geneder, in the relating of his words.

Answer.
Cond^mne not the Generation of the Righteous, especially on doubtful
evidence. Boaz gave a Command, Verse 15. to his young men to permit her to
gleane: she mentions them therefore in whom the authority did reside, who
had a Commission from their Master, to countenance and encourage her in her
extraordinary gleaning, which Privilege her Maidens could not bestow upon her.

Verse. 22.
And Naomi said unto Ruth her Daughter in law, It is good, my Daughter, that
thou go out with his Maidens, that they meet thee not in any other field.
And Naomi said unto Ruth, her Daughter in law.
Doctrine.
IT is the bounden duty of Parents, to give the best counsel they can to
their Children: As Naomi here prescribes wholesome advice unto her Daughter in
law.

It is good.
That is, it is better: it is usual both in the Old and New Testament, to put
the Positive for the Comparative in this kind. Luke 10. 42. Mary has chosen
that good part, that is, the better part. It is profitable for thee that one of
thy members perish, and not thy whole body, Math. 5. 29. Profitable, that is,
more profitable: and as it is expounded, Math. 18. 8. Better. It is good for a
man not to touch a woman* 1 Cor. 7. 1. that is, it is better; it is more
convenient, and freer from trouble, in time of persecution. It is good for
thee, that thou go out with his Maidens, that is, it is better.

Doctrine.
Maids are the fittest company for Maids; amongst whom, a chaste Widow, such as
Ruth was, may well be recounted: Modesty is the Lifeguard of Chastity.

That they meet thee not in any other field.
Here she renders a Reason of her Council, because Ruth thereby should escape
suspicion, or appearance of evil.

Objection.
What hurt or harm had it been, if they had met her in another field? She
might have been met there, and yet have departed thence as pure and spotless
as she came thither.

Answer.
It is granted. Yet being a single woman, slanderous Tongues and credulous
Ears meeting together, had some color to raise an ill Report on her
Reputation. Besides, being a Moabite, she ought to be more cautious of her
Credit; lest, as she was a stranger, she might be taken for a strange woman, in
Solomon his sense. And therefore Nimia cautela non nocet; in some ears it is
not enough to be honest, but also to have testes honestatis; many a Credit
having suffered, not for want of clearenesse, but clearing of it self,
surprised on such disadvantages.

Verse. 23.
So she kept sast by the Maidens of Boaz, to gleane unto the end of Barley
Harvest and of Wheat Harvest, and dwelt with her Mother in law.
So she kept fast by the Maidens of Boaz.
HEre was good Counsel well given, because thankfully accepted, and carefully
practiced.

Doctrine.
It is the duty of Children to follow the advice of their Parents.

We meet with two Examples in wicked persons, which in this respect may
condemn many undutifull Children of our days. The one Ismael; who, though he
be charactered to be a wild man, Genesis 16. 12. His hand against every man, and
every man's hand against him: yet it seems his hand was never against his
Mother Hagar, whom he obeyed in matters of most moment; in his Marriage, Genesis
21. his Mother took him a Wife out of the Land of Egypt.

The second is Herodias, of whom no good at all is recorded, save this alone,
That she would not beg a Boon of her Father Herod, until first she went in to
her Mother Herodias, to know what she should ask. How many now-adayes make
Deeds of Gift of themselves, without the knowledge and consent of their Parents?

Unto the end of Barley Harvest.
Commendable is the constancy and the continuance of Ruth in labor. Many
there are who at the first have a ravenous appetite to work, but quickly they
surfeit thereof. Ruth gleanes one day, so as she may gleane another; it is the
constant pace that goes farthest, and freest from being tired: Math. 24. 13.
But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.

And dwelt with her Mother in law.
It was Christ's counsel unto his Disciples, Math. 10. 11. to abide in the
place wherein they did enter, and not to go from house to house. Such the
setlednesse of Ruth; where she first fastened, there she fixed: She dwelt with
her Mother. Naomi affords Ruth House-roome, Ruth gains Naomi Food; Naomi
provides a Mansion, Ruth purveyes for Meat; and so mutually serve to supply the
wants of each other.

If Envy, and Covetousness, and Idlenesses were not the hindrances, how
might one Christian reciprocally be a help unto another? All have something,
none have all things; yet all might have all things in a comfortable and
competent proportion, if seriously suting themselves as Ruth and Naomi did,
that what is defective in one, might be supplied in the other.

FINIS.

