Mr. FVLLER's APPEAL TO Both Houses OF PARLIAMENT, WITH LETTERS, Relating to
Sir JOHN FENWICK, and Himself.

By WILLIAM FVLLER, Gent.

Accusatum, fuisse, and postea Excusatum esse, dat Accusato and Fidem and
Famam. LONDON: Printed for the Author. 1697.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
SIRS,
I Hope the World does not believe me so vain, as to love Writing for the
Ambition of being the Talk of the Town, or to have my Named bawld along the
Streets; In short, I hate Writing: But I find now an absolute necessity in my
own Defense; the Parliament not being at leisure to hear the Manifestation of
what I humbly proposed, I am constrained to answer the malicious Malcontents
of this Kingdom, in this manner, for the Present; and really wish, I were
permitted to do it more Authentickly; which I have great Reason to hope, I
shortly shall.

I would willingly oblige all Mankind, though I get nothing by them; and once
more I do positively Affirm, That I will maintain the Truth of my last
Narratives, and prove it against all Opposers.

The Adherents of King James are indeed mightily transported, by Reason my
Letter was not Read in the House of Commons; and have the good Assuranee (which
they seldom want) to affirm, That consequently, and most certainly, all my
Narrative of their Dear sham Prince of Wales, must be false.

How partial they are in their Sentence against me, in this Case, (as they have
been in most others) I leave to the Judgment of my Impartial Readers, that
shall peruse the following Relation.

To all that Love the present Government, I am a most Faithful Servant,

W. Fuller.

Mr. FULLER's APPEAL TO Both Houses OF PARLIAMENT, etc.
MY last Three Books having occasioned some Disputes in the World, which I
hoped to have finally decided this Session of Parliament; and having intimated
as much in my Narratives, I think it highly concerns Me, at this time, to let
the World know, That I have not been negligent on my part; to perform every
particular of my Promise, both as to what relates to the Confirmation of the
Discoveries that I made, of the Designs of the Enemies of the Government, in
the Years 1690. and 1691. as also the proving of the Suppositious Birth of the
pretended Prince of Wales; and that he was the real Son of Mrs. Mary Gray, by
which Name she was called, whilst I knew her; and her Brother, as she called
him, the Secular Priest, lives yet at Callis, by the same Name.

How far I have urged for Leave to demonstrate the Truths of both these weighty
Matters, you will plainly find by the following Letters, and Petitions, which
were all delivered, though it was my Misfortune to present them at a Time, when
Both Houses of Parliament were taken up with more weighty Affairs; and these
Proposals of mine would have taken so much of their Time, in the particular
Examinations, as might have been Prejudicial to the King's Affairs, to which I
shall ever have a due regard; and nothing but the intolerable Wrongs I have so
long groaned under, and the Tyrannick Insults of the Jacobites of this Kingdom,
could possibly have induced me to trouble the Parliament at such a time: Nor
shall I desist to sue for Justice, and a fair Hearing on both sides, when I may
possibly (without any Inconvenience to the Public) obtain so great a Blessing.

For, I solemnly decIare to all the World, That, to be permitted to clear my
Reputation, and to prove the Truths of all I have PubIish'd, is my greatest
Ambition. And it has pleased Almighty God to enable me so Plainly and fully to
prove it, when required, that I do not fear, even now the High Court of
Parliament is Sitting, to engage to forfeit my Life, in case of failure: Such
Sacred Truths can fear no Factions, nor Parties whatever; nor can I ever,
though hourly threatened by those poor Senseless, and Moneyless Animals, that
call themselves Protestants, that wish for nothing so much as a French
Government, and the Diversion of swimming in Troubled Waters; in which they
hope by others Ruins to mend their own Condition.

I confess, in answer to Me, they may very justly affirm, That I have not got
so much by the Government, as to boast of my Riches, or any thing else, unless
in my Sufferings: I must ingeniously own, my hard Usage was not very agreeable
to Flesh and Blood; but no power on Earth should make me Disloyal to King
William, or unfaithful to the Interest of England.

I am in Charity with all Mankind; yet I confess, it has been some satisfaction
to me, to see my greatest Enemies, who unjustly Lorded it over me, fall from
their Stations, and into Disgrace, by the same Measures that they made use of
to ensnare me; and I have much Reason to bless God, for the good King's, and my
Country's Sake: And that God will, I hope, as He has begun, deliver His
Majesty, this Kingdom, Scotland, and Ireland, from all our Bosom Enemies,
which heighten our Divisions, and are the greatest Curse we groan under; since
from them, I may say, (almost alone) the French Tyrant receives those Hopes,
(which have often failed him) that have occasioned the Continuance of the War
some time; nay, the French King's harsh Usage to the late King, and all with
him, is a plain Demonstration, That he has no extraordinary Zeal for his Cause,
only by Flattery from England.

Amongst our Zealous Protestant Jacobites, I would fain know, what Reward those
Gentlemen think to have, who have been so earnest for a French Power, that they
took the Oaths to King WILLIAM, to make themselves serviceable to King James,
as they pretended; and had the Assurance to write to King James and his Queen,
to tell them so. I am very certain that King James kept some of their Letters
to this effect: And others of the same kind I thought good to secure in
England, which with a great many more, had e're this time been published to the
World, only I was ambitious to have had them before the Parliament first: At
least I hoped and prayed in my Petition, (as you may see) That I might have
Leave of either of the Houses, to have published all I knew of that kind; which
I shall yet endeavor to obtain.

I cannot omit making some Remarks on what happened upon my sending a Letter to
the Speaker of the House of Commons, the Right Honorable Paul Foley, Esquire It
was, as you will also find, relating to Sir John Fenwick; not that I had any
Prejudice against the Person of Sir John Fenwick, but an Abhorrence to his most
detestable and barbarous Crimes. For the first two Years after the late King's
Abdication, every time that I came to England, from St. Germains, I brought
Letters to Sir John Fenwick, and was daily with him and other Gentlemen of the
late King's Party, at their Meetings, to consult for to carry on their Designs
against the present Government: And in those Unhappy Errors, Sir John Fenwick
was as much involved as most of the same Pretenders, and gave the late King,
and the French King, very large Promises of the wonderful effects of his
Interest in the North of England; which was proposed to be joined with many
others, and to make a considerable Army, near Scotland, where Sir John Fenwick
was to act as Lieutenant General, for which I brought him a Commission from the
late King; who has often declared at St. Germains, That Sir John Fenwick was a
good Horse-Officer, but had no extraordinary Opinion of his Management in other
Cases, that required a firm Resolution and a serious Conduct.

It had been Sir John's Misfortune very often to promise the French Court much,
and perform nothing to their expectation; yet neither Sir John nor his Party
ever omitted, by new Engagements, to atone for the Disappointments, which they
often excused, by laying the Blame on some Roguish underhand informing Brother;
affirming to King James, That the Discovery was sent from his Court; which made
his late Majesty and his Queen very often jealous of all about them; and
really, to speak truth of the Court of St. Germains, there is almost as many
Factions as there is People; so that even King James's small Government there,
is attended with much Difficulty.

During my Correspondence with Sir John Fenwick, on the late King's account, I
was once in company with him and three others, at a Tavern in the City of
London, where Sir John and the rest signed an Address to the French King, which
was signed elsewhere by many others, and sent to France; the Contents were, to
assure Lewis the Fourteenth, That they would remain faithful and loyal Subjects
to King James, and his Successor the Prince of Wales; and that they would be
ready, on any occasion, to join and assist the French Arms with their Lives and
Fortunes, in England, against the Prince of Orange. They also paid all possible
Thanks and Acknowledgments to the French King, for his great Kindness, in
succouring their most distressed Prince, and for raising him above the Malice
of his Enemies.

And one of Sir John Fenwick's Letters to K. James, soon after the Revolution,
was, to advise him to inform the French King, That then there was an
Opportunity for him to place many for his Interest in the Service of the Prince
of Orange, there being a great many Places to be sold, etc.

This is what I knew, and could justly depose, against Sir John Fenwick. And
having long since informed the King and the House of Commons of this matter, I
thought it my Duty to offer to attest the same Face to Face with Sir John, at
the Bar of the House of Commons, which occasioned my writing to the Speaker.

It Is true, Sir John Fenwick is now indicted for a much later Conspiracy
against the King and Government, (which is of the same kind, and plainly proved
by Captain Porter, etc.) and I dare presume to say, that there is no
intelligible man, that is not partial in the matter, but what in their own
Consciences does believe Sir John Fenwick really guilty. I must confess, in my
own Opinion, there was no occasion of my being called, or any greater Proof
than the Honorable House of Commons had before them; for which reason my self
was not called.

Give me Leave to make one Observation more of my own Knowledge, which is, That
Sir John Fenwick has often, in my Company, exclaimed against the Persons he
lately pretended to accuse, with the greatest Reproaches and Hatred imaginable;
and I cannot hear of any body that ever knew him conversant with any of those
Lords or Gentlemen since. And what is yet more strange to me, is, That Sir John
Fenwick has not so much as mentioned (as I have been informed) the Names of one
of those, who to my certain Knowledge, were actually concerned with him for
King James 's Interest, as they term it; no, he has not discovered* any of
those that signed the Address with him How Sir John was prevailed on to be
guilty of so great a piece of Folly, God knows. Only I must beg his Leave, with
others, to believe it an Action very much unbecoming a person of his Rank, much
less a Christian in his circumstances, and one that has so long owed his Life
to the great Clemency of the present Government. I hope he will consider it
himself, and remembering what he is, may, before it is too late, discharge his
Conscience faithfully toward GOD, King William, and his Native Country; for, I
presume, there is little Comfort in dying for a bad Cause: And for them at St.
Germains, and those in England, of the French Interest, which wish him hanged
with all their Hearts, and are impatient for it, as they have often been on the
same account.

I presume, the late King's desire of the death of such, was not merely to
increase the number of his Friends in Heaven, that is impossible; for King
James, that believes all Protestants are damned, cannot so much, after their
Deaths, as have one Twelve-penny Mass said for their Souls. Therefore if King
James have any Remorse, it must be the Subject of many Confessions, and cause
of much Sorrow, to think, as his Faith obliges him, how many Souls are gone to
Hell by his Engagement in a very bad Cause. I hope and pray, that no true
Englishman, though never so much engaged in the Interest of the present
Government, will presume to judge so uncharitably of any of our greatest
Enemies, that have died most justly, for endeavoring to murder the best of
Kings, and to involve the Nation into Slavery and Misery.

By this the late King and the French Court show little Charity; no, they are
barbarous and inhuman, by engaging Protestants, nay, even by receiving them
into their Service, with a design to expose their Lives, and so consequently
their Souls.

This Argument truly weighed, (and a Thousand more there is to the same
purpose) should, I think, be sufficient to dissuade any Protestant from any
manner of Engagement on the late King's or French Court's account.

Having thus given you a short and true Account of the Reasons of the delay of
my Business, and of my Purpose, by God's Blessing, and by the Permittance and
Justice of the Great Wisdom of the Nation; and also an impartial Relation of
what I know of Sir John Fenwick, whose Oversight and Obstinacy I much
commiserate; I shall proceed to give you the true Copy of my Petition and
Letters, as follows.

To the Right Honorable, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal; and to the
Honorable the Commons of England in Parliament Assembled: The Humble Petition
of WILLIAM FULLER,
Shows,
THAT your Petitioner has long groaned under intolerable Misfortunes,
occasioned through the Immaturity of his Judgment, which was too easily imposed
on, by the Perfidiousness of Coll. Thomas Dalleval, and Mr. George Hayes; for
whose Appearance your Petitioner engaged to the Honorable House of Commons,
(intentionally for the Nation's Service, though the Event proved contrary) and,
for their Failure, incurred the Displeasure of the same.

Your Petitioner humbly presumes, That most in the House of Commons were
present, when his Information was read; as also the Lord Preston's, and Mr.
Crone's Confessions; which did Both Confirm, what your Petitioner Assirm'd;
particularly Mr. Crone asserts it upon Oath.

Your Petitioner submissively flings himself on the Justice and Wisdom of Both
Houses, now Assembled in Parliament; humbly conceiving, That he can have no
Redress from the Wrongs he suffers, but by your Wise Examination of the Whole
Management of the Affair, into which your Petitioner was so cunningly ensnared,
by the Artifices of the French Court, and their private Adherents in this
Kingdom; by whose subtle Device, the Ho^ourable House of Commons (as well as
your Petitioner) was abused; It being, at that time, the greatest Design, and
most for the Interest of the French Court, and their Friends in England, to
stifle whatever Discovery should be then made: For, the April following they
purposed an Invasion; and accordingly provided all necessary Provisions at la
Hogue, etc.

And, forasmuch as your Petitioner can plainly prove, That Dalleval and Hayes
did come over; and the Method of their whole Intrigue in this base Design, in
which they had great Assistance in this Kingdom; as also the manner of their
Going-off.

Your Petitioner, with entire Submission, most heartily wishes, (for the
Nations Present, as well as Future Security) That, of your great Wisdom, you
will examine into the Management of the whole Intrigue; which cost the French
Court so much Pains and Money.

By this Inspection it will be plainly proved, who They are that have so long
betrayed, and part of them yet continue to betray His present Majesty's
Council, and this Kingdom in general.

That your Petitioner was the First, which discovered to King William Colonel
Parker's and Chevalier Granvil's Design of Assassinating His Most Sacred
Majesty, your Petitioner can fully prove.

And, That his former Informations were a true Narrative, even of the last
intended Invasion and Conspiracy, in most Particulars: And, That those Former,
and these Latter Designs were much alike managed by the same Conspiring Hands
and Hearts; will plainly appear on the Perusal of the said Information.

Your Petitioner, after all this, has been reduced to the most extreme
Miseries, and suffered Public Disgrace, occasioned by Others Villainies; and
has also been exposed to several hard Shifts and Extremities.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly Prays,
That (for the Nation's Good, as well as for his Vindication from the
intolerable Injuries your said Petitioner has so long groaned under) He, your
Petitioner, may have some Redress, by Your Mature Consideration of his Unhappy
Case; That Justice, and Truth, may appear on every Side; and, That such
necessary Provision may be made for your Petitioner, (who left his Friends,
Interest, and Employ in France, to Serve this present Government) as to Your
Highly judicious Wisdoms shall seem expedient: -- Your Petitioner further
prays, That he may have Leave to publish a full and perfect Account of all he
knows, relating to the former Conspiracies against the present Government.

And your Petitioner, as in Duty bound, shall ever Pray, etc.
LETTER I.
To the Right Honble, Paul Foley, Esquire Speaker of the House of Commons:
May it please Your Honor,
With the enclosed, I present You with my Petition to the Honorable House of
Commons; which I humbly pray, may be Read in the House.

I am very well assured, that my former Services, and continued Fidelity to the
present Government, have exposed me to the most Extravagant Malice of too many
in this Kingdom; I mean, the Bosom, as well as public Enemies of the same; the
former being as much concerned in Invalidating me, as the latter by their
assisting and permitting my Ruin; even to the great prejudice of the Government
at that time, thereby to Lull the Kingdom into a Lethargy of Security; so that
my Wrongs can bear no Comparison with the many Evils England has, and yet
suffers by the persidiousness of those ungrateful Traitors to the Government.

The late House of Commons was by their Endeavors, Imposed on, through my
unhappy Credulity: Therefore, how much it concerns the present House to Detect
them, I humbly commit to their Great Wisdom.

All I beg for my self, is Justice, in the Examination of that weighty Affair;
and if I prove not my Wrongs, may I be (by the Censure of the House) Condemned
for ever:

I therefore fling my self entirely on the Impartiality of the Honorable
House, now Sitting:

I am, Sir, Your Honors most Humble and Obedient Servant, October. the 26 th.
1696 W. FULLER.

LETTER II.
[Being the Substance of the Letter, which was offered to the Honorable House
to be Read; it being put to the Question, passed in the Negative.]
To the Right Honorable Paul Foley, Esquire etc.
SIR,
I Never was desirous to be an Evidence against any Person, but in a Just
Cause, where I might discharge my Duty faithfully to my Sovereign, and all
Mankind. I formerly charged Sir John Fenwick, That I had brought several
Letters from the Late King James, his Queen, and Others, at St. Germains to
him; and that I had carried several Letters from Sir John to the Late King and
Queen again: That I also brought Sir John Fenwick a Commission from the Late
King: And was once present, when the said Sir John Fenwick, with Three others
Signed an Address to the French King: And therefore, I humbly presume, that no
Person, in the Interest of the present Government, can Inform the House more
justly of Sir John Fenwick's Intrigues, than my self.

Therefore, if the Honorable House thinks fit to permit me the Justice of
being heard at the Bar of the House, when Sir John Fenwick is present, I doubt
not, but I shall plainly Demonstrate the Truth of my Charge against him, to the
Satisfaction of all Impartial Men.

I am, Sir, Your Honors most Humble, and Obedient Servant, November. the 19th
1695. W. FULLER.

LETTER III.
To the Right Honble, Sir John Summers, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal; and
Speaker of the House of Lords.
MY LORD,
THe Artifices of the French Court, and the Immaturity of my own Judgment, have
so exposed me to the Displeasure of the House of Commons, and consequently to
the severe Censure of all good Men, That, I hope, the Right Honorable the
House of Lords will pardon me, for presuming to trouble Them; and be Graciously
pleased to Receive my humble Petition, which I have sent with this enclosed to
Your Lordship; Begging, that it may be speedily presented.

My Lord, All I beg is Justice, (and that without Favor) which I hope, will
show the Integrity of my Cause, and the Intolerable Wrongs I have so long
groaned under; and until the be done, I cannot presume to Appeal to the King
for any Mercy or Favor: Therefore I humbly fling my self on the Great Wisdom of
the Parliament; Mine being a Case that concerns the Present, as well as Future
Interest of the King and Government.

My Lord, I am not now, nor ever was fond of being an Evidence, only for His
Majesty's Service; but for as much as I did formerly Charge Sir John Fenwick,
That I had brought and delivered to him several Letters from the Late King
James, his Queen, and others; as also, a Commission; That I had likewise
carried Letters from Sir John Fenwick to the Late King and Queen, at St.
Germains; and, That I was once in Company with the said Sir John Fenwick, and
Three others, when they Signed an Address to the French King, etc.

My Lord, This, I am ready to Prove, if Their Lordships think fit to hear me. I
am,

MY LORD, Your Lordships most Dutiful Servant, November. the 16th 1695. W. FULLER.

LETTER IV.
To the Right Honorable, the Earl of Stamford.
MY LORD,
I Hope, the Merit of my Cause, and Your Lordships Zeal for the Preservation of
the present Government, will, in part, Plead my Excuses for this Presumption.

With this Enclosed, I have sent Your Lordship a Copy, both of my Petition to
the House of Lords, and the Letter I purpose to send with it to morrow morning,
to the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal.

My Lord, I humbly presume. that no person has endeavored to serve the
Government, more than I have done; if I may have Leave, I shall fully prove
what ever I have offered in my Petition, or Letter, to the entire Satisfaction
of the World: I therefore most humbly entreat Your Lordship, to speak to my
Lord Keeper about this matter, and that it may not be Delayed: I am,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's Most Humble, aad Obedient Servant, November. the 27th
1606. W. FULLER.

LETTER V.
To the Right Honorable, the Earl of Monmouth.
MY LORD,
With this Enclosed, I have sent Your Lordship a Copy of my Petition to the
Right Honorable the House of Lords; and also a Copy of the Letter, which I
purpose to send with the said Petition to my Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, to
morrow morning: And I do assure Your Lordship, that I am ready to Prove the
Contents of both, by my self and others, if the Justice and Wisdom of the
Nation thinks fit to hear me. I am,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's Most Obedient Servant, November. the 27th 1696. W.
FULLER.

LETTER VI.
To the Right Honorable, the Lord Lucas.
MY LORD,
IT is my greatest Endeavors, to lay hold of all Helps, that may promote an
entire overthrow to the wicked Designs of His Present Majesty's, and His
Kingdoms Enemies. Enclosed I have sent Your Lordship the Copy of My Petition to
the House of Lords, and the Letter I sent with it to my Lord Keeper.

My Lord, As I desire nothing but common Justice, so I hope to find King
William's Loyal Subjects, and every true Englishman my Friend, in a Cause that,
I am sure, so nearly concerns them.

My Lord, I have been abused sufficiently by the malicious Endeavors of the
Malcontents of this Kingdom; and I doubt not, but there will be fresh
Endeavors made by some of that Party, to oppose me now: Therefore, I humbly
fly to the Great Justice and Wisdom of the House of Lords; and hope, your
Enemies will find it impossible to baffle me a second time.

I beg Leave to wait on Your Lordship suddenly, that I may inform You, as I
have done Others, how plainly I shall make good my Assertions in my Petition
and Letter.

I entreat Your Lordship's pardon, for this presumption. I am,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's Most Humble Servant, November. the 28th 1696. W. FULLER.

LETTER VII.
To the Honble Anthony Bowyer, Esquire a Member of Parliament.
Honored SIR,
I Humbly presume, that every Freeborn Subject of England, has a Right to the
Justice of his Country; and I hope few, but my self, have cause of Complaint to
the contrary: How I have deserved it, I cannot imagine, since I know of no
other Fault, but my want of cautionary Advertency, when I Engaged for Dalleval,
and Hayes, which was Imposed on me by the Artifices of the French Court, and
the late King James's Friends in England, as I have offered to prove by
sufficient Witnesses, before the Parliament; and also, that the Management of
that Affair cost the French King many Thousand Pounds, in order to invalidate
me; which rendered my Case very hard, and a cruel Oppression; when even the
very Enemies of the Government are allowed to Expose me, because I betrayed
their wicked Designs; and I am denied leave to prove my wrongs.

It was to serve King William, and these Kingdoms, that I went to France, after
my first Discovery, and even into the French King's Closet, Exposing my Life to
the Wheel, forsaking my nearest and dearest Friends, Interest, and Employ, to
serve the present Government, from those great Dangers that seemed to threaten
it: This is, Sir, what I am sure, you very well know; and also, that my
Informations were Confirmed by the Lord Preston's, and Mr. Crone's Confessions.

You were, Sir, of the Committee, Ordered by the House to Examine me, when
Hayes and Dalleval went off* And you have been often pleased to express, how
very hard you thought my usage was, on that account: My Sufferings have been
more than I can Express; and my Concern is greater for my unhappy Country, than
for my self; and if not for mine, yet for the Public Good, I pray the House of
Commons to Examine my Cause, that you may plainly know, what England has, and
may suffer by those Devices and Instruments of the French Court: And if the
House pleases to appoint a Committee to Examine me, and those I shall produce
on this Account, to prove what I offer, I am confident, it will be extremely to
the Nations Satisfaction and Interest: And if not, be pleased, Sir, to move the
House, that I may have leave to print my Case, and the Copies of all the
Letters I brought from France, etc. For, since I was Voted against, by the
former House, and an Address presented to the King, to Order the Attorney
General to prosecute me, I dare not Appeal to His Majesty, (who is the best of
Kings,) until I have Honorably convinced the world, how much I am wronged and
misrepresented, by the subtle devices of King James's Adherents, who so easily
imposed on my Judgment, and so Exposed me to the Displeasure of the Honorable
House.

In a word, Sir, if I have done the King and Nation any Service, I hope my
Request will be granted: And, if I have not, I desire to be Hanged.

I have given my Original Petition to Colonel Thomas Doare, in hopes he will
present it to the Honorable House; as I beg you will This.

I am, Sir, Your Most Humble Servant, December the 2d. 1696. W. FULLER*

ADVERTISEMENT.
THese Three (...)ing are Written and Published by WILLIAM FULLER, (Page of
Honor to the (...) in France) Author of this Book, viz.

I. A Brief Discovery of the True Mother of the Pretended Prince of Wales*
known by the Name of Mary Gray. To which is Added, A further Discovery of the
late Conspiracy against His Majesty 's Sacred Person, and Government, etc. As
laid before the King, etc. and Deposed to a Committee of Parliament. By WILLIAM
FULLER, Gent. sometimes Page of Honor to the late Queen in France.

Price, Six Pence.

II. A further Confirmation, That Mary Gray was the True Mother of the Prince
of Wales. Together, with an Account of the Private Messages, and Letters sent
by the French King, King James, the late Queen, and other Persons of Quality,
to their Agents in England. Published by WILLIAM FULLER, Gent. who was privy to
the whole Management. To which is added, the Author's Vindication of Himself,
from the Malcontents of this Kingdom.

Price, Six Pence.

III. Mr. FULLER's Third Narrative, containing New Matters of Fact, Proving the
pretended Prince of Wales to be a Grand Cheat upon the Nation. With an Answer
to some Reflections cast upon Him.

Price, Six Pence.


