A SERMON TO THE Clergy AT STONY-STRATFORD In the County of BUCKS, October. 27.
1670.

St. James. The Wisdom that is from above is first Pure, then Peaceable. (...).
By Ignatius Fuller.

LONDON, Printed by Evan Tyler, and Ralph Holt, for R. Royston, Bookseller to
the King's most Excellent Majesty. 1672.

Mark 9. 50. Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another.
FOR the better understanding of these words, we must open the 49. Verse. For
every one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted with
salt.

The particle For, intimates their connection with the precedent words; and that
they have the same sense, will appear by the sequel of this Discourse; viz.
That some part of the Body perish, that the whole may be preserved: which our
Lord illustrates by an allusion to the twofold Oblation, or the (...) in the
(...).
first and second of Leviticus, the (...) and (...), the burnt-Offering and the
Meat Offering; the first was all burnt upon the Altar, in the second the (...)
only, or the memorial, which was Lev. 2. 2 (...) Lev. 2. 13.
(...), a sweet savor unto the Lord: of this chiefly did the Law provide;
Every Oblation of thy meat offering shall thou season with Salt, neither shall
thou suffer the Salt of the Covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy
meat offering; and then adds; With all thy Offerings thou shall offer Salt:
which former words the LXXII. translate thus. (...), and from them St. Mark,
with respect to the sense, (...), i. e. Every gift of Sacrifice, or every
Sacrifice, shall be salted with Salt. So that two things our Lord says; 1.
Every one shall be salted with fire, that is of them of whom he was speaking,
who should indulg their vicious and depraved affections. They (...).
should be salted with fire, i. e. with both their eyes, and hands, and feet
should be confined to the Worm that does not dye, and the Fire that is not
quenched. A plain allusion to the perpetuity of the (...) v. 45. (...). Philo
of them that offer sacrifice. p. 851. Paris 1640.
fire upon the Altar of the burnt-offerings; for Philo observes, it was a Law
of the exterior Altar, Fire shall burn incessantly upon the Altar: and though
he makes that sacred Flame a Symbol of our incessant Gratitude; yet our Lord
refers to the consuming quality of it: and in respect to the great Act of his
Justice, God himself is called a Consuming Fire. And indeed (...) signifies as
well to be consumed, as to be salted. So the Prophet; the Heavens shall vanish
as Heb. 12. 29. Deuteronomy. 4. 24. (...). Esai. 51. 6. Sym. Aqui. Comminuetur, in
salis modum conterentur. Nobil. Jer. 38. 11. Vim consumendi.
Smoke. (...). Hence (...) are (...), old rotten rags which Abedmelech supplied
the Prophet with, to save his body from the Cords, by which he designed to take
him out of the Dungeon. And in that respect Salt is like to Fire; that it has
a faculty of consuming as well as fire, with this difference; it consumes but
part, whereas Fire, to use Philo's words, (...) consumes the whole.

Every Sacrifice shall be salted with Salt; here our Lord takes the word in its
proper signification, and intimates that every one who would be an acceptable
Sacrifice unto God, must refine and preserve himself pure from all evil and
corrupt Affections, as the Sacrifice is by Salt from all putrefaction. The Sum
is this. Every man must by all means suffer some or other consumption; either
by way of Salting, or by way of burning. This is the Vicious person, who will
not mortify, nor crucify his sinful Lusts and Affections; he shall be salted
with Fire, like the (...) shall be wholly burnt up, and consumed, i. e. go
whole into a state of perdition.

The other is the Virtuous Man, the true and real Christian, who is contented
to part with Hand, or Foot, or Eye, or whatsoever else shall stand in
competition with his obedience to his dear Lord and Master Jesus Christ. He
like the (...) is salted with Salt, a part of him only is consumed; and he
enters maimed into a state of life.

The Holy Scriptures frequently allude Es 34. ^, 6. Jer. 46. 10.
to both these Sacrifices: To the first; My Sword shall be bathed in Heaven;
behold it shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse to
judgment; the Sword of the Lord is filled with blood, etc. For the Lord has a
Sacrifice in Bozra, and a great slaughter in the Land of Idumea.

To the second; I beseech you by the mercies of God, that you present your Romans
12. 1. (...).
Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
Service.

So St. Peter: We are an holy Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 5. (...).
to offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable unto God. Such as are (...);
Prayers and Eucharists offered up by worthy persons; these are (...) J. Martyr.
(...), as the holy man speaks; the only perfect and acceptable Sacrifices unto
God. In allusion hereunto St. Paul Col. 4. 6.
would have our speech always seasoned with Salt, i. e. defecate and refined
from every thing that is putrid, corrupt, and rotten. The former words of this
Verse are thought to be loco non suo, however may be shut up in a Parenthesis,
and so we are at the Text. -- Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with
another.

But here I cannot but observe another quality of Salt, viz. its Vnitive, or
Henotic. 'Twas of old a Symbol of (...). Eustath.
Union and friendship, which is never more seasonable, than in our approaches
to that God who is One. Of its use in holy things, our Books abound with
instances.

Immunis aram si tetigit manus
Non sumptuosa blandior hostia Salientem micam salis granum intellige, quod
saliat cum in ignem missum sit. ^orphyr. Far pium is mola salsa, which Greeks
call (...). Schol. on Homer. Barley mingled with salt.

Mollibit aversos penates
Far pio, and saliente mica. [i. e.]
An innocent life, with a little Mola salsa, shall propitiate your Household
Gods, sooner than whole Hecatombs without it. So Tibullus.

-- Omnia noctis
Far pio placant, and saliente sale.
A little flower and salt expiats all the errors of the night. So likewise of
its use in civil conversation; hereto Aeschines refers when he tells us we
ought highly to esteem the salts of the City, and the public table.

Hither also must we refer the Symbol of Pythagoras, salem apponito, set on the
(...). Laertius in vita Pythag. p. 222. edit. Land. 1664. (...). Reverentia
mensae.
salt, by which he would that we should not dissolve friendship; because salt
preserves every thing from putrefaction, and is made of the most pure, and
liquid things, viz. Water, and the Sea, as Gyraldus observes: So salem, and
mensam ne praeterito, despise not the salt and table; whence the Reverence of
the table was put for the law of friendship, as Juvenal, Claudian, Euripides in
Hecuba and Theccritus in Hyla use it, and for that reason the Ancients were
wont to set it before their Guests before all other meat. But I shall end this
observation with one ancient and one modern testimony of this custom.

The first is of Origin speaking of Judas In his Comments of St. Matthew.
the Traitor. Neque salis ejusdem, neque mensae, neque panis communicati memor:
That he was mindful neither of the same salt nor table, nor the bread which our
Lord communicated to him.

The second is of Baron Sigismond who reports the Czar has no greater
expressions of his kindness than to send from his table bread and salt, idque
maximi honoris loco habetur, which is esteemed a very great honor, which he
himself received when Ambassador both from Maximilian and Ferdinand to
Basilius. He was also invited to dine with the Prince, with these words,
Sigismunde comedes sal and panem nostrum nobiscum; Sigismund you shall eat our
bread, and salt with us: And to this custom it is not unlike but our Lord
alludes in these words, Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with
another.

He had observed that envy and ambition had moved that question, verse. 34.
(...), which of them should be the greatest? and therefore in order to the
latter it is no wonder he referred to the former of these symbolical qualities;
I mean that in order unto peace that he referred unto purgation. For only by
Prove. 13. 10.
pride comes contention. So that you may please to take this Paraphrase of the
words. Let the doctrine of the Gospel corrode and eat out all the corruptions
of your souls, and minds, and oblige you to all amity and peaceableness one
with another; of the latter of which I shall choose to entreat chiefly, and of
the former only in order thereunto.

Where you must not expect a tedious harangue in praise of peace: For, Quis
unquam Herculem vituperavit? whoever dispraised it? but rather a severe
stricture and reflection upon the want of charity in the Christian World, with
a proposal of some causes of that defect. Such as is,

1. The non-purgation of all vicious and depraved affections. 2. The mistaking
the true notion of the Christian Religion. 3. The overvaluing of opinions. 4.
The advancing doctrines which have no good influence upon our lives. 5. The
taking up the sense of late men, without inquiring after the good old paths,
wherein the Fathers of the first and best Ages walked; and such like.
And if peace was the last Legacy our Lord left us before he dyed, and the
first blessing with which he did salute us after he rose again; how is it that
that innocent dove has so many Ages since taken her flight, and Terram (...)
reliquit? Of old in the multitude of believers Acts 4. 32.
there was (...), one heart, and one soul; and their mutual charities, did
notam nobis inurere, did signalise us, says Tertullian: See, say they, how
Christians love one another, and are ready to die for one another. 'Twas
Lucian's observation in his peregrinus, Vide inquiunt ut invicem se diligunt;
ut pro alterutro mori sint parati; Tertul.
who speaking of his imprisonment, tells us it is incredible what zeal, and
celerity the Christians expressed in visiting and relieving of him; in such
cases Christians were wont to spare for (...).
nothing; nay they enriched him, and assigning the reason hereof, he says,
(...) Lucian page 996. Edit. Par. 1615.
(...), i. e. Their chief Lawgiver persuaded them they would become mutual
Brethren.

So the City Prefect in the passion of Deridiculi causa.
Vincentius calls Christians by way of scorn Fratres, Brethren. But whosoever
shall take a view of the Christian Churches from the beginning of the Fourth
Century down to this very day; must needs suffer some kind of commotion even
for Religions sake; where he shall find no footsteps of that Primitive charity,
though it may be, now and then a good man in vain calling for it.

Of old the Church was all one body compacted by the Literae formatae even from
the Rhene to Nilus; from the British Ocean to and beyond Euphrates: but now
every little spot of earth has (God help us) a several Church Catholic: Nay
ever since the opening of the Springs of Controversies, and the determining of
unnecessary Questions, the Church has suffered a deluge of Opinions, and
Schisms, with which at this day it is overrun, and which is the saddest effect
of all, since we are become anathema Dum alter alteri anathema esse coepit,
prope save nemo est Christi St. Hyl.
to one another, almost no man is found closely to adhere to Christ. The
dissentions of Christians are the disgrace of Christianity. Witness the woeful
effects of the Alexandrian controversy, wherein we have seen Council
condemning Council, and one Prelate another.

Whom would it not grieve to see the Mitre and the Crosier strangely converted
into the Helmet, and the Partizan; and such ingenious cruelties practiced upon
one another, as quite out-did the bloody Pagans? So that a Heathen complained,
Nullae infestae hominibus bestiae ut sunt sibi ferales plerique Christianorum,
Ammian. Marcel.
No Wolves nor Tigers, nor beast of prey are so hurtful to man as very many
Christians are to one another. What Ingenuous Christian is not troubled to hear
Julian bespeaking dissenting Christians. Audite me quem Alemanni audierunt, and
Franci, i. e. hear me whom the barbarous Nations have heard: To hear Marcus
Antoninus; O Marcomanni, O Quadi, O Sarmatae tandem alios vobis inquietiores
inveni; at length I have found some others more seditious and more unquiet than
your selves: So that a Parisian massacre, a Guisian league, or a
Powder Treason, and that too for Religion's sake (the more's the pity) is no
great wonder in the World. But O tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the 2 Samuel 1. 20.
streets of Ascalon, lest the Daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the
Daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

The Great Eusebius complained that (...).
the forementioned Alexandrian division caused the venerable divine doctrine to
undergo the impure scorns and ludibries even of the Pagans in the midst of
their Theaters. And how much Religion suffers in these late days by these means
amongst weak men, who cannot, or will not distinguish betwixt humane passions,
and divine revelations, I need not now remember. What devastation the holy
house, the Sambanite, and the fatal pile have they made in the World! We have
seen Princes unthroned, Prelates unchaired, and people over run with fire and
sword, and all for Religion.

Tantum Relligio potuit suadere malorum?

For Religion did I say? no St. James has better resolved that question, (...),
whence are wars and fightings? are they not from your pleasures? by a Metonymy,
i. e. for the desires of things rather pleasurable than necessary for humane,
or divine life.

Divitis hoc vitium est auri, nec bella fuere Ex cupiditatibus odia dissidia,
discordiae, seditiones, bella na scuntur, Ci^. 1. de Fin.

Faginus adstabat cum scyphus ante dapes.
When men drank in a treen dish, there were no wars.

Our hatred, dissensions, discords, seditions, our holy and unholy wars are
from our lusts, our envy, our pride, our avarice, and our ambition: So that a
great part of our sufficiency for these things is a cordial endeavor after an
universal purity of heart, and life.

And therefore the best Philosophers do frequently discourse of their (...),
purgative virtues as necessary to preserve the soul for the knowledge of the
most excellent, and useful truths. For into a malicious soul wisdom shall not
enter, nor dwell in the body that is subject Wis. 1. (...).
unto sin. Wickedness is destructive of principles; and this notion is
agreeable to the sense of all mankind.

Amongst the Gentiles before a man could be imbued with the discipline of the
Eleusinia Sacra, or the holy things of the Magna Matter, he must by certain
degrees, and definite intervals of time be purged from the pollutions of this
life, and the sordes of his sins.

They had their (...), and then their (...), and their (...), and at length
their (...), their public purgations, their more recondid, their aggregations,
initiations, and then their visions: So we read no man could be consummate in
the mysteries of Mythra, unless having passed through many degrees of
punishments, (...), (...).
(...), i. e. he present himself holy, and unhurt. He must go through fire and
water, hunger and thirst, great travels and such like, 80 in number: First,
(...), and then the (...), The lighter, then the more laboursome, (...), so the
Candidate is consummate.

So the Primitive Christians always caused the Via purgativa to precede the via
illuminativa, from whom the mystical Divines had it. So the pretended Dionysius
distinguishes the operation of the sacred Mysteries into three actions (...).
divided by their proper rites and seasons, purgation, initiation, and
perfection.

The like we may observe in the whole procedure of the ancient Church, either
concerning such as were to be made Christians, or were to be restored to the
communion of the faithful; and the first must go through the state of
Catechumens, then of competents, before they could be fideles. But touching
(...).
their lapsed, their discipline was very severe; They were to go through (...),
four places of punishments, which they rarely underwent in less than twelve
years. So true it is that the wisdom which is from above is first pure, then
peaceable. James 3. 17.


The restoration of which Discipline Res Deo gratior absque dubio quam de
fides dogmatis subtiliter disputare extra scripturas; and omnes dissenti^ntes
ferro and flamma prosequi; in quo hodie summus pietatis apex ponitur, Isa.
Casaub.
in the Church would be doubtless more acceptable to God Almighty than our
extrascriptural, and subtle determinations of Articles of our Faith, and the
prosecution of all Dissenters with fire and sword; which at this day is the
height of some men's Religion; faith the Great Casaubon. Which yet St. Paul
places neither in circumcision nor uncircumcision, but in the new creature, i.
e. in faith that works by love; or in the keeping of the 1 Cor. 7. 19. Gal. 5.
6. 6. 15. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
commandments of God. And which will most evidently appear, if we consider that
the great end, and design of Religion, is to entitle us unto, and invest us
with a Life after Death, and a blessed Immortality.

Now let us consider first what it is that secludes us from that State; Saint
Paul will tell you it is unrighteousness, Galat. 5. 19.
Fornication, Idolatry, Adultery, Effeminacy, Sodomy, Theft, Covetousness,
drunkenness, Reviling, Extortion, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Witchraft,
Hatred, Variance, emulation, Wrath, strife, Sedition, Heresies, Envyings,
Murders, Revellings, and such like; I have told you before, and I tell you
again, says the Apostle, That they that do such things shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God.

What is it then that admits into that Kingdom? our Lord will answer that
question. How read thou, says he to Luk^ 10. 26.
the Lawyer, who had asked him what he must do to inherit Eternal life. Thus I
read, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart etc. (which is no
otherwise exemplified, than by keeping his Commands) and thy Neighbor as thy
self; this do and thou shall live, says Christ.

Herein also did the ancient Church place the Essence of Christian Religion,
whereof I will give you assurance from Witnesses Domestic and Foreign.

J. Martyr; If you shall observe any (...). J. M. 2. Apolog.
to live not as our Lord has taught, (...), Let all the World know they are no
Christians, although they make never such Orthodox Confessions of their Faith.
So Athenagoras; No Christian is a wicked man, unless (...). Athen. leg.
he be such an one as does dissemble his profession. So Tertullian; You would
have us renounce the name of Christian; we are excluded if our lives be as the
lives Excludimur, si fa^i mus quae faciunt non Christiani.
of such as are not Christians. And upbraiding to the Gentiles, that their
Prisons, Mines, and Beasts were daily cloyed with Malefactors, he tells them;
There is not a Christian amongst them, Nemo illic Christianus, nisi plane
tantum Christianus, aut si and aliud, jam non Christianus.
unless he be there for his Christianity only; for if he be upon any other
account, he is no Christian. And again; You will say even some of ours do
swerve from the Rule of our Discipline, then they cease to be accounted
Christians amongst Desinunt tum Christiani haberi apud nos. Apol. Haec non
admittet omnino qui natus a Deo fuerit, non futurus Dei filius si admise^it.
Devestro numero carcer exaestuat; Christianus ibi nullus nisi aut reus sua, etc.
us. And in another Treatise, having enumerated very many of the works of the
Flesh; he says, He that is born of God will by no means commit these things;
for if he should commit them, he would be no longer the son of God.

So Minucius Felix; Your Prisons are crowded with your own number, but not a
Christian amongst them, nisi aut reus suae Religionis aut profugus, unless
guilty only of his Religion, or a Runagado from it.

So Lucian in his Peregrinus tells us, They worshipped their crucified Sophist,
(...). Ep. 97.
and lived according to his Laws. So Pliny to Trajan tells us, speaking of
Christians, They were wont to convene on a set day before it was light, and
there Carmen Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invicem. Ne furta, ne latrocinia,
ne adulteria committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne depositum appellati
abnegarent. Ad capiendum ^ibum premiscuum, tamen and innoxium. Mic. 6. 8. James
1. 27.
to sing alternatly an Hymn to Christ, as if he were God, and to bind
themselves by oath to no wickedness; but that they would commit no Thefts, nor
Robberies, nor Adulteries, nor break their faith, nor betray their trust: which
done, they were wont to depart, and to meet again to eat bread in common, but
very innocently. Agreeably hereunto does the Prophet Micah reduce Religion to
Righteousness, Mercy, and an humble Piety; and Saint James places true and
genuine Religion in Beneficence and Purity of life. So that if Christians will
contend as such, there remains to them only a laudable Ambition to excel in
Meekness and Humility, in Mercy and Charity, in Purity and Peaceableness; and
not in multiplying Articles of Faith, and then like foolish Builders, making
all of them of the foundation, whereof St. Hilary does gravely complain to
Constantius, That after the Council of Nice, Christians did Conscii nobis
invicem sumus post Niceni Conventus Synodum, nihil aliud quam fidem scribi.
little else but write Creeds.

Nor in determining fruitless and indeterminable Questions; which all
Christendom may truly say, is Fundus nostrae Calamitatis, the Ground of all our
Schisms and Divisions. Had the Tridentine Fathers had a right notion of
Christianity, they would have spared their Anathemata, and Geneva their, Fires,
and Dort their Wagons; had they considered that such and only such Articles are
necessary, without the explicit knowledge of which, we could not perform the
conditions of the new Covenant. That is, Believe in God and Christ, and observe
their Precepts, (this entitles us to the Promises.) They would rather have
spent their Zeal in preaching The worthy Author of Causes of the decays of
Christian piety has one chapter of the mischiefs arising from disputes.
St. Paul's Doctrine of Repentance from dead works, and the exercise of
Charity. For I would the Proud Disputer, and the whole Polemick Rabble should
know, that necessary Articles are neither many, nor obscure.

Not many. How succinct was that Creed upon which our Lord built his Church. We
believe and are sure that Matthew. 16. 19.
thou art the Son of the living God; and this was Marthas Creed, and Salvation
John 11. 27.
was particularly promised to it. This was the end of writing St. John's
Gospel, that we might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that
John 20. 31.
believing we might have life through his name. That Jesus Christ was the Son
of Acts 8. 37.
God, was the Eunuchs Creed. So St. Paul; Romans 10. 8, 9.
This is the word of Faith which we preach, that if thou shall confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart that God has raised him
from the dead, thou shall be saved. And this simplicity did the ancient Church
retain. Irenaeus, who when he had recited that Creed, which then was not so
long as now it is, adds, (...), Not the most eloquent of all the (...),
deminorabit traditionem. Iren. l. 1. 23.
Prelates in the Church (...), believes any more, and the most simple Idiot
believes no less: the Faith being one and the same. They who have the greatest
plenty of words do not exceed it, and they who have the fewest do not diminish
it.

So Tertullian tells us, the Rule of Faith is only one, stable and unalterable.
Regula fidei una omnino est sola, immobilis, irreformabilis. Arbitratur Rex
rerum absolute necessariarum ad salutem non magnum esse numerum.
So that it is no wonder that excellent Prince, in his Answer to Perrone,
thinks the number of things necessary to Salvation is not very great. And
further, his Majesty thought there was no more expedite way to Peace, than
diligently to separate Necessaries from Non-necessaries, and that we might all
agree in Necessaries; in non necessariis Libertati Christianae locus detur, in
unnecessary Articles let Christian liberty take place. The King further says,
That if we made use of this distinction for deciding of Controversies Videsis
responsionem ad Epist. Card. Per. Londini 1612
at this day, there would be neither long nor fierce Contention amongst Pious
and Modest men, about Articles absolutely necessary; Nam and pauca illa sunt,
and fere ex aequo ab omnibus probantur, i. e. That they are both few, and upon
the matter received by all who would be accounted Christians. Nay that learned
and pacifick King does so much value this distinction, for the lessening of
Controversies, which exercise Gods Church, that he judges it the Duty of all
that are studious of Peace, diligentissime hanc explicare, urgere, docere, most
diligently to explicate, urge, and teach it.

And this is but the breathing of that Spirit which influenced the first and
best Ages of the Church. How else shall we understand Justin Martyr, who
answering that objection of Trypho, That Christ should be God before the (...).
World was, and be made man and be born, and yet not be born according to the
manner of men; (...): i. e. (says Trypho) it seems to me not only incredible,
but also foolish. The holy man answers, If I cannot demonstrate that he did
pre-exist, the Son of him that made the Universe, and was a Man born of a
Virgin; herein only 'twas sit to say I was mistaken; but not to deny that he
was the Christ, if it should (...). Videsis Just. Mart. p. 63. Edit. R. Steph.
(...). Cyril p. 101. (...).
appear that he was a Man born according to the manner of men, and be
demonstrated that he was made the Christ by Election: For there are some
friends, quoth he, of our Profession, who do confess him to be the Christ, yet
do affirm him to be a man born according to the manner of men.

So Cyril of Jerusalem. That God has a Son, that you are to believe; but be
not so curious as to enquire into the Modus of that Filiation; for if you seek
it you shall not find it. Do not fly too high, lest you fall, but attend to
those things alone which he has commanded you. And a little after he tells
(...) etc. It is sufficient to assist thy Piety to know that God has but one
Son.

So Gregory Nazianzen, speaking of the holy Spirit, tells you. There are that
do depress him into the degree of a Creature and they he says, are injurious,
and bad, (...). Nazianz. Orat. 44. page 709.
and the worst of servants; There are that think him God, and they are Divine
Spirits, and of clear, and bright understandings. There are that name him so,
if it be in presence of men of good judgment. They are noble souls; but if in
presence of weak Christians, they are not wise dispencers of the word: It Is all
one as to cast a pearl into the dirt to object the voice of So the Greeks if
they believed the procession of the holy Ghost from the Son, yet did not
condemn those of Heresy, who did not. See the Judicious and Learned Doctor
Stilling. in his Rational Account, page 10, 11, 12, 13.
Thunder or the brightness of the Sun to a weak ear, or eye, to give solid meat
to him that needs and uses milk.

And to these excellent men I shall subjoyn a worthy Prelate of our own See
relation of a conference, p. 25.
Church, who considering the proceedings of Rome, in the Article Filioque
concludes, it is hard to add and to anathematise too. All which passages cannot
For the modus of that Procession. See Cyril late Patriarch of Alexandria to the
Pious and Learned Vtenbogard. (...). Epipham. Ego me refero ad illas scripturae
voces, quae jubent invocare Christum, quod est ei honorem divinitatis tribuere,
and plenum consolationis est, (...). Melancthon, Ep. 140. p. 708.
be understood without that Royal distinction of necessary Articles and
non-necessary. And so we see what stress holy and good men laid upon the
niceties of the Christian Faith.

Yet all this notwithstanding the boutefeues and incendiaries of Christendom,
suppose, nor Creed, nor Scripture sufficient to make up an Orthodox Christians
Confession of Faith. To all such superfine wits, I shall oppose Tertullian;
What is Athens to Jerusalem, or the Academy Quid ergo Athenis and Hierosolumis,
quid Academiae and Ecclesiae, quid haereticis and Christianis. Viderint qui
Stoicum and Platonicum and dialecticum Christianismum protulerunt. De
Praescript. C. 7, 8. Nobis curositate non ^st opus post Christum Jesum, nec
inquisitione post evangelium. Cum credimus nihil desideramus ultra credere. Hoc
enim prius credimus, non esse ultra quod credere debeamus.
to the Church, or Heretics to Christians. Let them see to it who have
introduced a Stoical, Platonic, or a subtle Christianity. What needs any
curiosity after and beyond Christ Jesus, or farther disquisition after we have
received the Gospel. So soon as we believe we desire nothing farther than to
believe: for this we first of all believe, that there is nothing further that
we ought to believe.

In vain I say did he adore the fullness of the Scripture, and provoke the shop
Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem. Advers. Herm. c. 22.
of Hermogenes to show where the matter in controversy was written, if not to
bid him fear, that woe which is denounced against all such as add to, or
detract from the Sacred Scriptures. In vain did (...). Euseb^us l. 5. c. 16.
Apollinaris fear to write against the Heresy of Miltiades, lest he should
seem to some men to make additions to the Doctrine of the New Testament. To or
from which he may neither add nor substract who would institute his life
according to the precepts of the Gospel. They who think they can speak more
properly than the Wisdom of God has spoken, let them reconcile themselves to
Athanasius, who avers the Sacred and Divinely inspired (...). Orat. cont.
gentes.
Scriptures are abundantly sufficient for the declaration of the truth: and to
Saint Basil who makes it without all doubt a (...) a manifest falling from the
Faith and a most certain proof of pride (...), either to reject any thing De
vera fide, p. 251. J, 10.
that is written, nor to introduce any thing that is not written; Our Lord
having said my sheep will hear my voice, and a stranger will they not follow,
but will flee from him; for they know the voice of strangers. And again,
enquiring of what mind the (...) ought to be, he says he would have them
always to fear lest he should affirm or determine any thing besides the Will of
God (...), Regul^ brevior. 98.
without controversy laid down in the Sacred Scriptures, lest he be found a
false witness of God. And again he tells us it is the property of a faithful
minister to preserve entire and without the adulterate mixtures of any other
Doctrines, that which was concredited to him by his (...). de Ver. fid. p. 249.
merciful Lord to be communicated to his fellow servants, and he assigns
irrefragable reason; because neither our Lord, nor the Spirit of God spoke from
themselves: Nay a little after he tells us, he would spare to use such terms
and (...). de ver. fid. p. 25.
words, which in so many syllables are not found in the divine Scriptures,
though they did retain the same sense; and assigns this reason for it; such
kind of terms and words, besides their novelty, (...), are apt to innovate the
sense of things, and were never found used by holy men heretofore; These I have
by all means declined, (...), as strange and foreign to the holy Faith.
Nothing can be more concluding, unless I should end this observation with that
voice out of the Cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
Mat. 17. 5.
pleased, Hear ye him.

Nor Obscure. Though some men think Shades, Cette parole contient nettement and
clairement, tout ce qui est necessaire pour former la Foy and pour regler le
Culte, les Moeurs, says the learned Claude in his Answer to Arnaud. lib. 1. c.
4. speaking of God's Word. Nay he further adds these excellent words; Il est
aise mesme aux plus simples, de juger si le Ministere sous le quel nous vivons
peut conduire au salut, and per consequent si nostre Societe est la veritable
Eglise.
and therefore introduce their divine notions like Homer's Deities, always
clothed with Cloud. They represent our Lord as another Sphynx, that they might
be reputed the only Oedipus's in the World; but can we think that he, who was
disclosed from the bosom of that God, who dwells in inaccessible light; he
whose name is (...) the East or the Morning; he who is the Sun of
Righteousness, (...) the true and genuine Light, who was clothed with Light
upon Mount Tabor, and in that Garment appeared unto the persecuting Saul; he
who brought Life and Immortality to light, and whose Disciples are the light of
the World; that he discourses Aenigmata, Mysteries and Darkness. We find him in
his famous Sermon upon a Mountain indeed, but below the Clouds. Can we think it
that that God who appeared in a pillar of Fire under the Economy of Moses,
appears only in a pillar of Cloud under the dispensation of Christ? Is there no
light in the Sun that fountain of Light, because the blind man does not see it?
No, no, to the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according Esaias 8. 20.
to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Tell me not there are
(...), 2. Pet. 3. 16. Homil. 3. in 2 Thessalonians.
some things hard to be understood. St. Chrysostom solves that, (...), all
necessaries are clear and manifest. So Hilary; Almighty God does not Non per
difficiles nos Deus ad beatam vitam quaestiones vocat, nec multiplici
eloquentis facundiae genere solicitat. In absoluto nobis ac facili est
aeternitas. Jesum suscitatum a mortuis per Deum credere; and ipsum esse dominum
confit^ri. De Trinitat. lib. 10. p. 231. Am. Marcel. 21 Religionem Christianam
absolutam and simplicem anili superstitione confund^ns. 1 Timothy 6. 3. Tit. 1. 1.
(...) significat id quo tenditur Grotius in loc. In id enim datur and fides and
cognitio ut pie vivatur.
invite us to a blessed Immortality by hard questions, nor does he solicit us
with any great variety of a copious Eloquence; but propounds Eternity to us
upon plain and intelligible terms, when this is all, even to believe that Jesus
was raised from the dead by God, and to confess him to be the Lord. And a
heathen Historian does complain of Constantius, That he did perplex the
Christian Religion, a Religion plain and intelligible enough, with superstition
and dotage.

For in the first and best Ages of the Church, Religion did not consist of
Systems of abstruse and difficult Speculations, nor dry and barren Opinions;
but there was a special care had that their Theological notions were (...) such
as tended to a virtuous and pious life, and did not directly contradict the
conditions of that Covenant by which we claim eternal happiness; such as are
the fatal pre-determinations of men's eternal states, and the servitude of
humane minds; which pair of Dogmata, like Hippocrates his Twins, laugh and cry,
live and die together. If there be any that are virtuous and consequently happy
(...), naturally and fatally such. Such an one I would esteem an Hero sprung ex
stirpe Deorum;

-- (...)
(...).
You Would think him not born of Mortal parents, but to be of divine extraction.
But that a Good and Righteous God has decreed from all Eternity, to bring into
being innumerable myriads of Souls, who let them do what they will and can, are
irreversibly determined to unspeakable torments; so great and so exceeding,
that all the racks and tortures the witty cruelties of enraged Tyrants could
ever invent or execute, would be ease and pleasure in comparison of them, and
that these pangs should remain fresh upon them for ever and for ever; this
says a learned and pious person Videsis Mist. of Godl. (...). c. 2.
is the representation of that sour Dogma, which he justly accuses of being
contradictious to Reason, and blasphemous of God; and after tells you a great
truth, That the serious and imperious obtrusion of such a dismal conceit as
this, for one of the greatest Arcanums of Religion, is enough to make the free
spirit, and over inclinable to profaneness, to question the whole frame of it.
And that this should be done by men who pretend they would advance virtue,
piety and prob^^y in the World, is a great argument that they So Suetonius
tells us of Nero he was Religionum negligentior, quia persuasionis plenus
cuncta fato agi. Ac vide seculi furores, Certamina Allabrogica de stoica
necessitate tanta sunt, ut carceri inclusus sit quidam qui a Zenone dissentit,
says Melancthon to Joach. Camerarius. Ep. 796 p. 923. The same Melancthon to
Gaspar Peucer relating the same passage, cries out, O rem miseram! doctrina
salutaris obscuratur peregrinis disputationib us
understand not the consequence of their own Dogmata so well as the Tragedian
did.

Solvite mortales animos, curisque levate,
Totque supervacuis animu^ deplete querelis;
Fata regunt orbem, certa stant omnia lege.
Cast away your cares, and forbear your fruitless complaining, for Fate governs
the World, and nothing can fall out otherwise than it does.

And to introduce the Servitude of humane minds, does necessarily subvert all
Law, Discipline, and Religion, the sum whereof is contained in the Precepts of
Obedience, the Promises of Rewards, and the Threatenings of Punishments; but he
that acts from an inevitable necessity, is incapable of a commandment; that
which could not be otherwise neither merits the praise of obedience, nor the
reproach of disobedience. We praise not the Sun that he rises upon us, and
spreads his comfortable beams in our hemisphere; nor the Clouds that they drop
fatness. We know they can do no otherwise; It Is so with Man under these
Adamantine bonds of Fate: ^^ud est nocens quicunque non sponte est nocens.

And now could I account for the Degeneracy of Christendom from any other
cause, I would have considered no other Opinions. When I look into the Roman
Communion; the multitude of their Indulgences, and Pardons, their slight and
superficial Penances, their easy Promises of security to careless sinners,
must needs be acceptable to such a kind of people as have a mind to enjoy this
World as well as that to come, and so that part of the wonder ceases: But,

Iliacos intra muros peccatur and extra. The Reformation is faulty too; which
makes me think some bad doctrines do too much influence their lives. Such as De
Justitia Christi imputata nobis, quasi eam omnem praestitissemus, and dc fide,
quae illam justitiam sic imputatam amplecti debeat, nullum est verbum in sacris
literis. Grotii Votum ad Articulum IV.
an imaginary Righteousness, an empty Faith, no necessity, no possibility of
keeping the Commandments of Christ. What should they do with a righteousness of
their own, who do expect to be made as perfectly righteous as the holy Jesus
the Son of God, by the imputation of a righteousness not their own? Why should
they not set up their rest in a Faith prescinded from Charity, who vapor to
the World, Quam dives sit homo Christianus sive baptizatus, qui etiam volens
non potest perdere suam salutem, quantiscunque peccatis, nisi nolit credere.
And what necessity, what possibility of keeping the Commands of Christ, when
St. Paul is carnal, sold under sin, does not the good he would, and does the
evil he would not.

And so according to these men's Divinity, the measure of St. Paul's Virtue and
Obedience, and of every Regenerate man shall be the same with the Pagan's in
Lactantius, Medeas in Euripides, and Lesbonicus's in Plautus. Volo equidem non
peccare, sed vincor; indutus sum enim carne fragili and imbecilla: haec est
quae concupiscit, quae irascitur, quae dolet, quae mori timet; itaque ducor
invitus, and pecco, non quia volo, sed quia Cogor; sentio me and ipse peccare,
sed necessitas fragilitatis impellit, cut repugnare non possum l. 4. c. 24.


The Pagan, Volo equidem non peccare, sed vincor, etc. In good truth, I would
not sin but I am overcome, I am clothed with frail and weak flesh, it is that
which lusts, grievs, and fears to die; therefore I am led unwillingly, and I do
sin, not that I would, but I am compelled. I do perceive I do sin; but that
frailty whereto I cannot resist does necessarily enforce me to it.

So Medea;

(...),
(...).
I very well understand the horrid Crimes
I am about to accomplish; but my passion is too hard for my reason.
So Lesbonicus;

Scibam ut esse me deceret; facere non quibam miser.
Ita vi Veneris vinctus miser, otio captus in fraudem incidi.
I know what becomes me, but wretch that I am, I cannot do it; I am so taken
with lust and idleness, it is that deceives me.

But to this place I say no more, but only observe that memorable accident
which befell the famous Nicolas Zitinius, who was put up by a Synod of the
Reformed to explicate that Paragraph of St. Paul, agreably to the modern sense
of our Genevensian Masters; and he did, says a noble Author, eo Concilio rem
strenue aggredi, briskly undertake the design: but at length coming to those
words, I thank God through our Lord Jesus Christ, haesit attonito similis, was
astonished. But after he had recollected himself, he broke out into these
words: Ecqua vero est ista liberatio? What deliverance Ecquod beneficium illud
quod tantas Apostolo grates expressit? an quod in tanta eum peccati servitute
detineri necesse fuit? hoc vero mihi equidem probari nullo pacto potest. Ego
igitur, inquit, pariter ingentes patri luminum ago gratias, quod mihi nunc ab
errore liberato veritatis suae lucem adoriri voluit.
is that? What benefit is that which drew so great thankfulness from him? was
it that he was necessarily detained under so great bondage unto sin? I can by
no means think so; therefore, quoth he, I give all possible thanks to the
Father of Lights, who has now caused the light of truth to arise upon and
deliver me from my error.

But whilst Zealots and high pretenders to Religion, do against the sense of
first and best Ages of the Church, depretiate and vilify moral honesty, and
obtrude such falsehoods as are pure contradictions and impossibilities, and that
Qui innocentiam colit, Domino supplicat; qui justitiam, Deo libat; qui
fraudibus abstinet, propitiat Deum; qui hominem periculo surripit, optimam
victimam caedit. Haec nostra sacrificia, haec Dei sacra sunt. Sic apud nos
religiosior est ille qui justior. Min. Fell.
with the same gravity, authority, and importunity as they do the holy Oracles
of God, it will startle prudent and conscientious men; but gratify the
profane and atheistical Spirit, who willingly takes this advantage against the
whole frame of Religion, as if there were no truth in it.

But in vain do I object unreasonableness to these men, who disclaim the use of
their most noble Faculty in their affairs of greatest importance; and that they
may be always like themselves, they think they have reason so to do. As Mist
Godl. p. 495.
if they had never read, Try all things; hold fast that which is good; believe
not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God or no; be ready to
render a reason of the hope that is in you. Thus St. Paul. If the blind lead
the blind they both fall into the ditch: Why of your selves do you not judge
that which is right, says our Lord? All which speeches, if they do not advise
men to make use of their Reason in the choice of their Religion, says an
Excellent person (dulce Mr. Chillingworth. p. 97.
Decus and Praesidium nostrum, the strength and ornament of our Church) I must
confess my self to understand nothing. It was indeed the saying of Apelles in
Eusebius (...), Eusebius. l. 5. 19.
we must by no means examine the Faith. But Ludovicus Vives tells Alfaquinus a
L. Viv. de Ver. fid lib. 6. 1. p. 546. Lugd. Bat. 1639.
great truth. Tutissimum mentiendi genus est nolle rationem eorum quae dicas
reddere: It is the safest way of lying, to refuse a reason of what you do
affirm, and to entitle God to your dreams. And the great Hugo Grotius says,
Merito suspecta Lib. 6. de verit.
merx est, quae hac lege obtruditur ne inspici possit; you may justly suspect
such wares as are sold unto you upon condition you may not look upon them. And
a famous Prelat of our own Church, would have Bp. Laud Rel. p. 76.
no man think the Mysteries of Faith contradict reason, or the principles
thereof. And a worthy person now living, has plainly told the World that That
Religion is certainly false at the bottom, that will not suffer it self to be
enquired into by Reason.

And this was also the sense of other men, who are in reputation for wisdom.
Melchior Canus; Faith is not repugnant Fides sane eum natura non pugnat, sed
consentit; nec dissident humana and divina ratio, sed cohaerent. Vtraque verum
est, nec verum vero adversatur. Vtraque est a Deo, nec sibi contrarius est
Deus. Melc. Can. C. C. fol. 358, 359. Col. Agrip. 15^4.
unto Nature but agreeable unto it, nor does humane and divine reason dissent
but accord. Each is true, and one truth is not opposite to another; each of
them is from God, and God is not contrary to himself. And further he tells us;
It is the custom of unlearned men, such as are Saracens, Pagans, Heretics, ut
coeca and temeraria Sectae suae Dogmata sine judicio amplectantur, and quae
disquisitione egent maxim, sine ulla disquisitione recipiant; that they
swallow down without any judgment every foolish and temerarious Dogma of their
own Sect, and receive without any disquisition those doctrines that most of all
need it: And after he has most excellently perstringed this folly, he opposes
the divine method to it, and tells us, the Wisdom of God homines humano more
instituit and erudit, i. e. rationales rationibus, institutes and instructs men
after the manner of men; that is, reasonable creatures with reasons. But I
shall end this with the testimony of Athanasius, whose reason is as great as
his authority, he has a little Tract on purpose against such as would have men
believe (...). i. e. absolutely, and never consider what is or is not fit to be
believed; and in the body of that discourse, there is one passage which I
cannot but exscribe. (...) Athan. Tom. 2. p. 325. Ed. Par. 162.
(...), i. e. Must I believe without all reason? must I not enquire whether the
notion be possible, useful or decorous? whether it be grateful to God,
congruous to Nature, and consonant to Truth? whether it be consequent from the
Text, agreeable to the Mystery, and worthy of Piety? (...); What profit is
there in a Scheme of unintelligible things? or like a Parrat or an Echo to
reverberate a sound empty of mind and sense?

But this Novelty, amongst the rest, minds me of the Precept of the Prophet;
Stand in the ways, and see, and Jer. 6. 16.
ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall
find rest for your Souls.

And here let me mind you my Brethren of the Clergy, of a Canon of our own
Church, yet in force, speaking of Preachers.

Imprimis vero videbunt ne quid unquam doceant pro concione quod a populo
religiose teneri and credi velint, nisi quod consentaneum sit doctrinae veteris
aut Novi Testamenti, quodque ex illa ipsa doctrina catholici patres, and
veteres Episcopi collegerint. A Canon which I read many years since; but never
resented its worth, until by an inspection into ancient divinity I found how
different it was from that which now reigns in our Pulpits and Presses. And
here let me observe for the service of my younger Brethren, whose reading
reaches not beyond Geneva; that those Apples of strife couched under the
Quinquarticular question, as they are apt to determine them, are as perfect a
piece of Novellism as any other notion we contemn under that name at this day.

He that thinks the liberty of humane minds is injurious to God's Grace, or
prejudicial to the faith and comfort of Christians, accuses those famous
Martyrs Ignatius, Irenaeus, Justin and Cyprian, together with Athanasius,
Basil, Nyssen, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Ambrose, and Jerome of the same crime.

And farther, let me mind you of the Anathemata of the Synod of Arles. Let
Anathema illi, qui per Dei praescientiam in mortem hominem deprimi dixerit.
Anathema illi, qui dixerit illum qui periit, non accepisse unde salvus esse
posset. Anathema illi, qui dixerit Vas contumeliae non posset assurgere ut sit
vas in honorem. Anathema illi, qui dixerit quod Christus non pro omnibus
mortuus sit, nec omnes homines salvos esse velit.
him be Anathema who shall say that the divine Prescience does cause any man's
death. That he who perished had not grace enough to be saved. That a vessel of
dishonor could not rise to be a vessel of honor. That Christ did not die for
all men, and would have all men to be saved.

I might farther instance in the novel sense of that famous Paragraph to the
Romans, which as a great man observes, no man takes up but he that has a Lust
to serve; and could easily show you that the ancient Church were all for a
Metascematismus in the words; and that St. Austin himself, when he understood
it worst, understood it better than his pretended followers now do. And thus
have I imperfectly pointed out the causes of the decay of Christian Charity in
the World, and the fomes of those scandalous discords which vex Christendom at
this day, ridente Turca, nec dolente Judaeo.

And now I shall end with a succinct Paraenesis to you that have vouchsafed
your presence and patience. And first to you my Brethren of the Clergy.
Methinks I hear our Lord and Master Christ like another Joseph bespeaking his
Brethren, going to their Father to Canaan, See that you fall not out by the
way. Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another. St. Paul
propounds a great Question (...); Who is sufficient for these things? The
Psalmist thought to wash the hands in innocence was an excellent preparation to
compass the Altars of God; and no doubt but it would prepare for that wisdom
also, which would make us meet to wait in the Sanctuary. My Brethren, much of
the peace and prosperity of God's Church depends upon our virtuous and prudent
conduct of those affairs concredited to our trust. We are constituted the
Guides of Souls; and in a sense to bear the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; but
whilst it suffers violence and the violent take it by force, let us see to it,
that we our selves be not shut out.

Let us remember the Age we live in, it is nice: Many will not drink the waters
of life, if offered to them in an unclean Chalice; they will not take the most
medicinal dose, if it be prepared with foul hands. It is Philosophical and
Rational; Absurdities will not go for Mysteries; weak and indemonstrable
Propositions will not pass for supernatural Verities; nor humane Presumptions,
for divine Revelations. Let our Discourses be strong and useful, that no
profane wit may say of our Exercises, as Gallen reproached the doctrine Nihil
tradatur populo nisi quod and indubitatum est, and ad fidei negotium
necessarium, and ad pie vivendum conducibile, says the great Erasmus Epist.
lib. 24. Epist. 1. (...).
of Moses and Christ; it was (...), They are indemonstrable. I could not read
without great affection an Observation of the learned Dr. Andrews (in his
Concio ad Clerum in a Provincial Convocation) of some men who did involare in
hunc locum, hoc divinae sapientiae Solium, and what does he here? hic ad
Clepsydram (...) cohaerentia, non cohaerentia, scabra, putida, insulsa, nec
cocta, nec condita, praecipitare ad nauseam usque, and hoc scilicet concionari
dicitur; This is to preach forsooth; too too lively a Character of many a
Preacher in these days. Let Us for Christ sake see our Doctrine and our lives be
pure and pacifick. If our Doctrines be doubtful and litigious, and our Lives be
careless and scandalous, (but I Will rather use the words of the pious Author) Si
Doctrina ludibrium, si Vita scandalum, fortasse non momento uno, non ictu
oculi; sed sensim tamen senescet, evanescet, tendet ad interitum Ordo vester
(...). Nay I Will add a few words more of that good Man from the same Paragraph.
Enimvero nisi vos vobis hac part caveatis, optimi Principis gratia, Procerum
favor, Legum terror diu vobis cavere non poterunt. But (...). Well, you see
Purity and Peace is in the precept of our Lord; the best method I know to
derive it into our hearts and lives, is laid down in this sudden discourse;
especially in that observation of the Learned King, who would have us
distinguish between Necessaries and Non-necessaries, and tells us the duty of
every peaceable Divine is to explicate, to urge, to teach that distinction.

And for your divertisement, now and then if you spent some time in Nazianzen's
Apology, Chrysostom de Sacerdotio, and the 81. Paragraph of Mr. Hooker's
Ecclesiastical Polity; as you would have no cause to repent your pains, no more
should I that have put you in remembrance so to do.

And now my Brethren of the Laity, let me speak to you in a few words, You are
concerned in the Text as well as We. Purity and Peaceableness becomes you, if
you will comport with the precept of our Lord: have you any pride that
extimulates and provokes you sometimes, (to use the Prophet's expression) to
strive with the Priest; and, which is worse, to run from the Communion of that
Church which bore you on her knees, and nourished you with her breasts? have
you any Avarice, which when you fled from Idols praecipitated you into
Sacrilege? these would be salted out. Well, Peaceableness you see is your duty,
and Purgation in order thereunto. Schism is the direct contradiction to my
Text; and you perceive how little reason any one has, so to requite the
Prudence and the Charity of that Church, wherein we have had the happiness to
be educated.

Are the conditions of her Communion sinful? Or are you obliged to profess that
which you believe is false, or practice that which you know is sinful? Let me
request in her behalf, that you would not make the Sentiments of every angry
Son of hers the measures of her Charity: or if you spy the tokens of Avarice,
or Ambition on other of her Sons, you would not make them the measures of her
Piety.

What is it that frights you from her Communion? It must certainly be reduced
to her Doctrine, or her Manners. Does she teach any suspected Doctrines? what
then? she disclaims infallibility: though it may be she is nearer it than those
that talk loudest of it. She gives you leave to suspect; nay designs by her
subscriptions (which yet are not required from you) but an Instrument of peace;
if the best, and most learned Bps. Laud, Bramhall, Sanderson.
of her Sons do know her mind. Does any of her Doctrines destroy salvation?
Indeed they of Rome say Protestancy unrepented destroys salvation; but I think
neither you nor we have cause to believe them. Well then, if Salvation may be
had with us, Take heed you don't run the hazard of it by an unnecessary
Separation from them here, whom (if ever you come to heaven) you must accompany
hereafter. But are her manners defective? what do you mean? She teaches you to
believe by the Apostles Creed, to pray by the Example of her Lord, and to live
by the Precepts of her Savior.

But you see some indications of carnality upon her Children; like enough; and
so you might in the Children of Apostolic Churches, and may in the most
confident pretenders to the most primitive Reformation. I have done. Methinks
you should grant me, that even in our Communion you may be as holy and as
humble, as meek and as merciful, as pure and as peaceable, as perfect
imitatours of the Divine Nature, as ardent lovers of God and your Neighbor as
will comport with the Commandment, and entitle you to the Promise, which is
ETERNAL LIFE.

Now to the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only wise God be Honor and
Glory for ever and for ever. Amen.


