A COLLECTION OF SERMONS.

1. The best Employment. 2. A Gift for God alone. 3. The true Penitent. 4. The
best Act of Oblivion.
Together with NOTES upon JONAH.

By Thomas Fuller.

Mat. 13. 52. An householder brings forth out of his treasure things new and
old. LONDON, Printed for John Stafford, and are to be sold at the sign of the
George near Fleet-bridge. 1656.

THE BEST EMPLOYMENT.

Mat. 15. 30. And great multitudes came unto him, having with them those that
were lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and cast them down at Jesus
feet, and he healed them. By Thomas Fuller.

LONDON, Printed for John Stafford in George-yard near Fleet-bridge. 1656.

To my worthy friends of S. Bridgets (commonly Brides) Parish in London. The
Blessings of this and a better life.
JAcob, when sending his Son into Egypt, advised them to carry Genesis 43. v. 11.
to the Governor thereof, (their unknown Brother) a Present, a little balm,
and a little honey, spices, and myrrh, nutts, and almonds. Herein both the
quality and quantity of the gift is considerable:

The Quality: alas! look on them in themselves, and they were but mean. Egypt
(to give it it is due) excelled Palestine in many Commodities which were better
to barter with foreign Nations, as wicked men in all Ages surpass the
servants of GOD in outward accommodations.

The Quantity, but a little of each. To carry much would have been but the more
burden to their Cattle which carried it, and perchance less acceptable to him
that received it.

However, one thing much commended this present, because (as the Text says)
they were the best fruits of the Land; and no rational person can expect
better than what is best. Some conformity there is betwixt their Present, and
this my Dedication; none is more sensible than my self of the meannesse
thereof: Besides Zoar, is it not a little one? yet is it the best that my
barren condition can for the present afford, on which account I comfortably
presume it will be as kindly taken as it is cordially tendered.

All I will add is this; The Holy Spirit compares good Council Eccles. 12.
v. 11.
nails fastened. In prosecution of which Metaphor, I hope that these nails
which were entered into your hearts at the preaching of them, shall now be
rivetted into them by the printing thereof; which is the hearty desire of

Your servant in Jesus Christ, THO: FULLER.

ACT. 10. 38. Who went about doing of good.
1. THe Text is parcel of that heavenly Sermon S. Peter preached at the
conversion of the Centurion, and it is worth our inquiry into the Character of
that Convert. Know then three Essentials did constitute a Centurion. 1. He must
be a Soldier. 2. The Captain of an hundred men (whence his name Centurion.) 3.
He must be a Gentile by extraction. For at this time the Romans Emperor had took
the Militia out of the hands of the Jews, who politiquely would not trust that
peevish and rebellious people with the sword in their hands, insomuch that
there was a Castle, Acts 22. 24. which overawed the Temple.

2. Now it is generally complained of Soldiers, that they are cruel, and (
Luke 3. 4.) too prone to do violence. It is charged on Officers, that they are
proud and insolent in improving their places, and Gentiles are accused of
ignorance toward God, and wickedness in their conversations. All which
observations are crossed in the Centurion in my Text. I v. 1


3. Instead of taking away, and invading the Propriety of others, He, ver. 2.
parted with what was his own in much alms to the poor. Instead of being proud
toward others, in much humility he macerated himself with fasting ( v. 30.)
Instead of being guilty of Ignorance and Profaneness, he feared God with all
his house. Let none hereafter envy this Centurion the height of his place, or
repine at his power, ruling over a hundred, seeing he was a man of a thousand.

4. Let not any look on the Military profession, as on such a Gentile, out of
which no Prophet; as on such a Nazareth, out of which no Good can arise. Let
them not conceive the principles of fearing of God, and fighting with Men so
opposite, that they cannot meet in the same person. Seeing on enquiry it will
appear, that all the Centurions in the New Testament were either good men, or
less bad than many of more peaceable professions.

1. The faithful Centurion (Mat. 8.) preferred for the same by our Savior
above those in Israel. 2. The Centurion glorifying God, and justifying Christ
at his Passion: Luke 23. 47. Certainly this was a righteous man. 3. The just
Centurion, who rescued S. Paul ( Acts 22. 26.) from scourging, because a Roman.
4. The serviceable Centurion, who at S. Paul's entreaty conveyed the young man
to a Captain, whereby the Apostle escaped the conspiracy of his enemies. 5.
The civil Centurion, who kept S. Paul, Acts 24. 23. forbidding none to
minister unto him. 6. Julius the courteous Centurion, who saved S. Paul at his
shipwreck, Acts 27. 42. when the Soldiers had a desire to kill him.
But beyond all, and above all, the Centurion in this chapter, whose piety may
be a perfect pattern for all Christians to imitate.

5. Obj. If this Centurion was already so good, what needed S. Peter to be sent
to him for his further conversion? What was this but actum agere, to do what
was done before, seeing no further addition or accession could be made to his
goodness, which already was so complete in the kind and degrees thereof.

6. I answer, The Centurion was already in the state of Grace, but on the
principles of a Jewish Proselyte: he looked for salvation by a Messiah, as yet
to come, and on that account led a pious conversation. Had he died in that
state, his soul, no doubt, had been saved with the rest of the godly Jews
before Christ: But better things were provided for this Centurion, God had
stored up more kindly mercies for him to receive; Peter is sent to inform of
Christ come, and to clear his implicit into a distinct says.

7. To this purpose the Apostle acquainteth him in his Sermon with the person
and practices of our Savior, though certainly the breviate only, and chief
heads, and not all his discourse at large, is opened by S. Luke, and my text is
a principal part of our Christ his complete character, Who went about doing of
good.

8. Observe in the words, First, Christ's Humility, He went

Secondly, His Industry. -- No small way, but About.

Thirdly, His Charity. Doing of good.

First, Humility, He went, and that pedes ambulavit, he constantly footed it.
Indeed he was brought from Nazareth, the place of his Conception, to Bethlehem,
where he was born, in the womb of his Mother, and when forced to fly before he
could go) into Egypt, probably was carried in the arms of his parents,
otherwise he always travailed on foot, one time excepted, when not so much out
of Majesty as Mystery, not so much to ease himself, as perform the
prophetical prediction. He ( Mat. 2.) rode alternately on the Ass, and the
Ass Colt, o^herwise, always, (such his humility) he went.

9. Secondly, His Industry, About. But here it will be demanded, whether this
did not something trespass on our Saviors gravity, and that staidness which
he used in other actions. Did not this savor something of an erratical and
circumfraneous motion? Sure it was contrary to the counsel he gave his
Disciples, Into what town or city ye enter, there abide, Mat. 10. 11. Go not
from house to house, Luke 10. 2. Had not therefore our Savior, in like manner,
better have fixed himself in one place, than thus to wander up and down when
he went about?

10. I answer, three satisfactory reasons may be rendered of our Saviors
frequent removals, though the first so sufficient in its self, it will give a
discharge to the other two, as added only for Ornament, not Necessity: 1.
Therefore our Savior went about per force, because he had no certain
habitation of his own, therein constantly to recide, but was feign to make use
of the houses of his friends therein to abide. Mat. 8. 20. The foxes have
holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the son of man has not where
to lay his head.

11. By the way let me bespeak the thankfulness of many persons (whom I behold
in this Auditory) to whom God has not only given Agurs wish, Prove. 30. to be
fed with food convenient for them, but also so large estates, that they have
plenty of Places, exchange of Houses, variety of Habitations; How ought such to
lay out their souls in thankfulness to God! it faring in this point far
better with them, than with our Savior himself, who for want of a dwelling,
was fain to go about.

12. Secondly, Our Savior went about, so the better to decline and escape the
malice of those who sought after his life. Any man can at a near distance hit a
dead mark, whilst he must be a good marksman indeed who can hit a flying Foul.
Christ therefore was always in motion, that he might not give a steady aim to
his enemy's malice. When Herod the Fox designed his death in Galilee, then he
took his private progress into Judea, and when those in Judea projected to
murder him, he made his secret return into Galilee, or else retreated ( John
11. 54.) to a City called Ephraim, in the wilderness, and continued there.

13. He was unfit to be a Savior of mankind, who would not by all prudentiall
ways be a Saver of himself. Though he would not decline death when his hour
was come, he would not court it before that time, he would lay his life down,
not throw it down, patiently give himself, not wilfully cast himself away for
mankind. Otherwise, if he had refused to embrace all lawful ways of
self-preservation, until his appointed time was come, he had died a
Malefactor, not made by God a sin for us, but being a sinner of himself, no
better than Felo de se, guilty of his own destruction.

14. Thirdly, Christ went about, so the more conveniently to disperse and
dispense his doctrine and miracles, that the more people might enjoy the
benefit thereof. If the Sun should always stand still in one place, that part
of the earth would be fried, and the rest frozen, that would be parched with
heat, and the rest pinched with cold; wherefore the providence of Nature has
so ordered and disposed it, that the Sun shall take his circuit through the
Zodiac, that so his light and heat may be communicated to the more Countries.
Christ in like manner, that Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4. 2. arising with
healing in his wings, made his motion through the twelve Signs, I mean the
twelve Tribes of Israel, that so the more places might participate of his
Presence, Preaching, and Miracles.

14. Pass we now from his Humility to his Charity, Went about doing of good,
and that in several considerations, in respect of All times. All places. All
persons.



In endeavoring whereof may my weak endeavors, and your intentions, as well
as we may observe our Saviors motion, and go about after him. Sequiturque
Patrem non passibus aequis, and though in circular motions it matters not where
we begin, so be it we continue moving, till we return where we began; yet for
methods sake we will first handle the first point, in respect of all times.

16. Let us take notice of a Diurnall, or days work of our Savior, He was no
large lier on bed, but a timely riser about his fathers work, John 8. 2. And
early in the morning he came again into the Temple. As he rose early, he went
late to bed, especially on the Sabbath day, the day of his greatest employment:
for when he had wearied himself all the day long with preaching his Word, at
night when his work was ended, his work was new begun. People then pressing
upon him afresh (forbidden before by the superstitious Pharisees) to be healed
by him. As he rose early and went late to bed, so all the day long was he
busied in doing of good.

17. If any time of the day may seem to be privileged from Employment, and
exempted from Industry, sure it is, the time of Refection, when Men in midst of
the Term of all their work, may and must make a Vacation to themselves, the
better to refresh their hungry and weary bodies therein. But even at those
times, was Christ intentive in doing of good. True it is, it was meat and
drink unto him, to do his Fathers work, [ John 4. 32.] So zealous in
prosecution thereof, that sometimes he fasted from other food. Mark 3. 20. He
could not so much as eat bread, for the crowding of the company about him; but
when Liberty was allowed him to take his repast, he improved his time in doing
good, witness his demeanor at the table of the Pharisee, who invited him to
dinner, as Luke 14. where he received not so much temporal food from the
entertainer, as he bestowed Spiritual counsel upon him, verse 12. Then said
he also to them that bad him, etc. He put forth a parable to them that were
bidden, verse 7. and upon the occasion of these words, Blessed is he that shall
eat bread in the Kingdom of God, uttered by a fellow guest, he put forth a
most heavenly Parable.

18. One demanded how a Man might make himself welcome at a Feast? to whom it
was answered, ne sis, (...) come not thither without paying thy shot, lest
otherwise he be beheld as a clogge, or burden to the company. Another answered
much to the same effect, Sit not there as a stone upon a stool, that is,
contribute, if not money, yet mirth to the company, bring some ingratiating
quality with thee, that may make thee acceptable to thy fellow guests. Sure I
am our Savior was not indebted to the company where he dined, bringing with
him, though no carnal mirth, which ends in sadness, yet spiritual joy,
contained in that holy counsel which he so freely bestowed.

19. Secondly, In respect of all places, He did good wheresoever he came, at
Nazareth, where he was conceived, Bethleem, where he was born, Jordan, where he
was baptized, Galilee, where he conversed, Getbsemani, where he was betrayed,
Galbatha, where he was condemned, Golgatha, where he was crucified, and which
was the more to their sin and shame, such places which did partake most of
his corporal presence, did reap the less benefit by his spiritual preaching,
witness Bethsaida, Corazin, and Capernaum.

20. Thirdly, In respect of all persons, 1. to those that were above him in a
civil respect, namely, to Caesar and his Officers, not only preaching of
Obedience, and payment of Tribute to the Emperor, but also putting himself to
the expense of a Miracle, ( Matthew. 17. 27.) rather than Caesar should have
his Toll-mony unpaid. 2. To such as were beneath him, as poorer than himself,
because not having so good friends to relieve them. Thus though he himself
held all that he had in Frank-Almonage, and lived on the poor man's box,
beholden to the charity of Joanna, Susanna, and other his good Benefactors for
his Maintenance, yet of a little, he gave a little, it being his constant
custom (especially about the good time of the Passover) to dispense his alms
to the poor. Otherwise when he said to Judas (John 13. 27.) That thou do, do
quickly. The rest of the Disciples could not so quickly have commented on his
words: that he desired him, the bag-bearer, to give something to the poor; had
not the same been conformable to Christ's common practice on such occasions, He
did good to those about him, his Disciples, to those beside him, the ordinary
Jews, to those againsts them, the very Soldiers sent to attach him, witness
curing of Malchus his ear, stricken off by Peter.

21. But I meet with a double objection against Christ going about to do
general good; the one being a sin of omission, the other of commission, charged
on his account: I begin with the first, which thus may be urged against him, He
who has ability and opportunity to do right, and omitteth the same, is guilty
of doing wrong, or the pretermitting of a benefit in such a case, is the
committing of an injury. Now our Savior was solemnly quested and pressed (
Luke 12. 13.) to divide their Inheritance betwixt the two brethren, and yet he
declined the doing of so acceptable an office, and gave the Petitioner unto him
in that kind, a flat denial.

22. I answer, Both persons interested in the Divident of the land, did not sue
unto him, but so that it was only a single motion, not the joint petition of
both Brethren interested therein. 2. Christ, a searcher of hearts, might
discover in him, who made the motion, a covetous inclination, and perchance a
litigious disposition, not to stand to any agreement. Lastly, and chiefly, he
had no calling to meddle therein, being a private person, and captious people
lay at the catch on any shadow of a fault to accuse him, for invading the
office of a Magistrate.

23. It is confessed, it is an honorable work to accommodate differences
according to our Saviors own principles, Blessed are the peacemakers,
especially to compremize discord betwixt so near relations, as two Brethren.
Hereby, happily, our Savior might have prevented long and tedious suits, saved
them the expenses of a costly prosecution in Law, and which was more, might
have suppressed many uncharitable Animosities, and quenched heart burnings
betwixt them. But one thing was wanting, A Commission to intermeddle therein, A
good deed is an ill deed, do by him who has no calling to do it, The Courts
were open, and Judges therein appointed, to hear and determine Causes of this
nature. They both, if so disposed, might sue out what was equivalent to our
writ of partition in our Common Law, to part the Inheritance in equal portions
betwixt them, whilst our Savior justly refused to interpose in the
Controversy, made a Mediator betwixt God and Man in matters of higher
consequence, but not betwixt Man and Man in things of temporal concernments.

24. Such therefore will find themselves much mistaken, who having little
ability, and no authority, adventure on the Ministerial function to preach and
baptize, conceiving they shall be justified and born out in the Court of Heaven
by the integrity of their intentions to employ their parts to Gods glory,
whereas more is requisite to the legitimation of a public act, and making it
good, when done by a private person, namely, a lawful commission to do it,
for want whereof our Savior abstained to intermeddle as a Magistrate, though,
he went about doing of good.

25. And here, by the way, let me insert another caution: Our Saviors going
about from place to place, not fixed in a certain station, nothing favors or
befriendeth the practice of such, who refuse to reside on Parochial charge,
but must have a whole Province, or Principality for the circuit of their
plancticall preaching. These pretend to such prodigious parts, such Paramount
gifts and graces, above the standard of other men, (and we must believe they
have such signal endowments for they say to themselves, That they conceive if
pity such Talents should be buried in one Parish, and such ample abilities be
stifled within the narrowness of one Cure: and hence it is, these ambulatory
Preachers remove from place to place, refusing to be settled in a certain
habitation: But it is to be feared these men go about, sowing of Schism,
setting of Errors, and spreading Faction, whilst our Savior went about doing
of good.

26. The next is a fault of commission charged on our Savior, that he went not
always about doing of good, by his own confession, Mat. 10. 34. Think not I
am come to send peace on earth; I came not to send peace, but a sword. For I am
come to set a man at variance against his father, etc. Now such who come to
bring asword to any place, surely their room is more welcome than their
company, and it can no way be entitled to be a good work, when one (contrary to
the law of nature it self) shall set variance betwixt so near and dear
relations.

27. I answer, Our Saviors words, I come to set a man at variance, are not so
to be understood, as if it were his principal purpose and original intent,
out of premeditate plot, and set design to make these unnatural differences,
but that such sad effects, de facto, would come to pass, per accidens, through
the corruption in mankind: For the preaching of the Gospel would meet with such
opposition in carnal minds, that our Savior infallibly foresaw such
domestical Antipathies would inevitably follow the same. Thus, as the Sun
intended by nature to lighten clear eyes, and arising daily for that purpose,
yet occasioneth the smarting of such who are sore, or blear-sighted: So Christ
being a Peacemaker and Mediator, by his message, employment, and desire,
proved against his own will through men's default, the general incendiaries in
families, and by consequence in Cities, Countries, and Kingdoms, though he
went about doing of good.

28. Two eminent instances may be given of the good our Savior did, First, all
his Miracles were saving Miracles, which may serve for a character to
distingu^sh them from the Miracles of his Apostles; St. Paul strikes seeing
El^mas blind, Christ makes blind Bartimeus see; S. Peter strikes living
Ananias and Sapphira dead; Christ makes dead Girus his daughter and Lazarus
live. But if Christ was pleased to manifest himself in a destructive way, no
rational creature shall be made the object of his anger, but a Fig Tree is
sound out (and that but a barren one) Mat. 21. 19. to be cursed; Hoggs are
found out (and those the beastliest of all Beasts) Mat. 32. 8. to be drowned,
to show that if God in the vindication of his own honor, does deviate from his
natural pronity and propensity to mercy, and is necessitated, se defendendo,
to appear in a revenging way: it is our barrenness in goodness, and
beastliness in badnesse, which inforceth him to what is contrary to his own
inclination.

29. Secondly, we may observe, that some of our Saviors miracles were double
ones, one growing within another. Thus Mat. 9. 19. it was the chief intent of
our Savior to raise the daughter of the Ruler, when (...), obiter, as in the
way thither, he did almost as great a miracle in curing her, who was long
troubled with an Issue of blood. Thus as cunning Gardeners are said to have a
mystery, whereby (by inoculating one flower on another) they make them grow
double: so our Savior had Twin-miracles, and occasional springing up in the
midst of an intentional miracle.

30. But here a question may be propounded, not coming within the compass of
those condemned by the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 23. For foolish and unlearned that do
gender strife; but such the answering whereof may give some light to our heads,
and heat to our hearts and affections.

31. Seeing our Savior was a Benefactor general to all persons and places
where he came, how came it to pass that he was not the minion of mankind,
deliciae humani generis, the darling of the world, seeing he deserved no less,
by his favors conferred upon it? how came men so generally to hate him, so
often to plot, and at last to practice his destruction?

32. I answer, several reasons may be rendered, some nearer, some more remote,
why our Savior could never be popular, though no man more merited the same;
First, because had he been universally beloved, it would have hindered the grand
design of man's salvation, no Judas would have been found to betray him, no
false Witnesses to accuse him, no Pilate to condemn him, no Soldiers to
execute him, and therefore of necessity Christ was to incur many men's
displeasure.

33. Secondly, he was to have not only a notionall, but also an experimental,
yea, which was more, a meritorious knowledge of all miseries, to which humanity
was subject, of hunger, Mark 11. 12. of thirst, John 4. 9. long and painful
preaching with little profit, because of peoples unbelief, weariness under
pain, and nakedness upon the Cross, as also of the causlesse and undeserved
hatred of people from those on whom he had conferred great favors, that so he
might the better know to pray for pity, and believe his servants in the same
condition.

34. Thirdly, though our Savior went about doing of good, yet some wicked men
hated him, merely because they were wicked men; there is a generation of
people, which drive a trade (whereby they will never grow spiritually rich) of
receiving good, and returning evil. David, as a Prophet, yea, a Type of Christ,
complained of such, Psalm. 35. 12. They rewarded me evil for good, to the
spoiling of my soul. Some men have such foul stomachs, as to turn all honey
into choler, converting courtesies they have received into anger and malice.

35. Fourthly, Christ, though generally doing good, was distasted of many,
because the Doctrines he delivered, were either above their understanding, or
against their humor and inclination; it was said of Titus Vespasian the
Emperor, Neminem a se dimisit tristem, He sent no man sad away from him. A
happiness denied to our Savior himself, for when ( Mat. 19. 22.) he advised
the young man to sell all that he had and give it to the poor, and come and
follow him; it is said, he went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions.

36. Lastly, Christ, though generally ingratiating himself with his good deeds,
could never arrive to be universally beloved, because he told people of their
sins, and foretold them of their sufferings, especially the 23. of S. Matthew's
Gospel, where he pronounces eight woes, and every woe three fold (four and
twenty in all in effect) against Scribes, and Pharisees and Hypocrites.

37. It was said of Will: Nassaw, Prince of Orange, ( Father to the late
Maurice) the first Founder under God, of the Low Country men's liberty, being a
popular Prince, courteous in his carriage to the meanest person, that he never
put off his hat to a Peasant, or Boar, but with that gesture the King of Spain
lost a Subject, and a free Member was gained to the united Provinces, how well
they will requite his kindness to his family, posterity will take notice, and
succeeding generations will observe.

38. But our Savior never pronounced one of the aforesaid woes, but instantly
he lost the affections of some, who became his enemies for telling them the
truth: Here a Hyppocrite hated him, there a Scribe scorned him; here a Lawyer
left him, there a Pharisee forsook him; and at one time, Joh. 6. 66. many of
his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him.

39. And here it is worth our observation to take notice of the difference
between the preaching of Moses and our Savior, the former promised all outward
happiness to such as kept Gods laws, how they should be, Deuteronomy. 28. Blessed in
the field, and blessed in the city, blessed in their body, and blessed in their
ground, and blessed in their cattle, blessed in their basket, and blessed in
their store, in a word, on condition they would observe Gods commandments he
preached and promised unto them all external peace, plenty, and prosperity,

40. Our Saviour' s Sermons were of a different, yea, contrary nature, as
appears by that passage, Mat. 5. 44. But I say unto you, love your enemies,
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
which despightfully use you and persecute you?

wherein is 1. Supposed, That the servants of God notwithstanding their walking
soberly, righteously, and godlily, to the utmost of their endeavors, shall
have many enemies, crusers, and persecutors.

2. Imposed, That Gospel principles oblige such who will be the followers of
Christ, to bless those who are their most professed enemies.

These are two hard sayings together, and is able to bear them severally, and
asunder; this mauled Christ his popularity, that notwithstanding all his
heavenly Sermons, holy life, and happy miracles, he was hated by carnal men,
chiefly on this account, because such as followed his Doctrines, must be sure
of persecution here, and wait for a reward hereafter.

41. Let not the Ministers of the Gospel be disheartened, and discouraged, if
with all their painful preaching, and pious living and courteous, carriage to,
and good usage of their people, they can never get, nor gain their general
good will. The Disciple is not greater than his Master, nor the servant than
his Lord, let us know to our comfort that Christ himself could never be long in
peaceable possession of a general good esteem, but for the reasons aforesaid,
fell into peoples displeasure, though he went about doing of good.

42. Now to make some use of the Text in general, and first, is it so that our
Savior went about doing of good? serves in this the first place to confute
such, who will not at all go about, but immure themselves in a Cloister, pent
within the walls thereof, and then pride themselves in this their will worship,
as the highest and holiest state of perfection, though there they zily wither
on the stalk they grew on, without contributing any thing by their pains and
parts to the Church or Commonwealth: May not both Church and State, as their
creditors, justly sue them on an Action of Debt, for imbezilling these their
part; or, if you will, engrossing them to themselves alone, wherein the
Communion of Saints does claim a joint and public interest; sure I am, our
Savior, that grand Exemplar of Holiness, did not confine himself to a Cell,
but went about doing of good.

43. Secondly, confuteth such who go about, but how? not to do good, but to do
mischief, every place they come at faring the worse for their company: Thus as
a Snaile may be traced by the slime she leaves behind her, so these men may
be tracked whithersoever they remove, by the sootsteps of their own
wickedness. Here they have a wanton speech, there a drop, an uncharitable
passage; there they scatter a profane expression, they may be followed and
found out by their bad words in one place, and worse works in another; these
leave Satan for their Sovereigne, or chief of their order, Job 1. 7. Who came
from going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it. But
what to do? The Apostle tells us, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Walking about seeking whom he
may devour. Laziness is better than such labor, idleness than such
employment, to go about doing of evil.

44. Thirdly, it confuteth such, who (to give them their due) do some good, and
go doing of some good, but they go not about, their motion is circular, but
semicircular at the best, they are only beneficial to some of their own gang,
of their own party, of their own faction, their goodness is not general and
universal, to all the true and proper objects thereof.

45. What says S. Paul, Gal. 6. 10. As we have therefore opportunities, let us
do good to all men, especially to them who are of the household of faith; those
indeed are to have a Hanna's part of our Favor, a Benjamine's portion of our
Bounty, yet so, as all in extremity, are the objects of charity, we are to
baulk none who come in our way, not to say that some of plentiful estates are
bound to seek out such objects for their liberality.

46. It is observed, that the disease called S. Anthony's fire, or the Cingles,
(because it clippeth and surroundeth the body in fashion of a girdle) is never
mortal, till it wholly compasses the wast, both sides of the inflammation
meeting together; but on the contrary, Charity is never Sovereign effectually,
and cordial to purpose, until it finisheth its full circuit, and takes its
complete compass, going about to do good.

47. It is an use of comfort to the Saints and servants of God, considering
that Christ, who on Earth went about doing of good, now in heaven, antiquum
obtinet, keeps his old wont, still retains his former merciful and
bountiful disposition, he has not less goodness, for having more
greatness, less grace for having more glory, yea, rather now he does greater
and better things for us, because he is gone to the Father, John 14. 12. Whilst
on earth his power was limited and confined, his luster was clouded and
eclipsed with his humanity, whereas now he is put into a better capacity to
express himself, and assist us, able to work what we wish, and do what we
desire.

48. But now he does not go about doing of good, because after his long
weariness on earth, he is reposed in ease and honor, and fixed at the right
hand of his Father in heaven, yet still in some sense he may be said to go
about doing of good, such the extensivenesse of his providence, through the
whole circle of Creation, from Angels to worms, though the Masterpiece of his
mercy is the daily making of intercession to God for his servants.

49. Some difference there is amongst learned men about the manner of his
making intercession, some conceiving it done only with his mouth, others only
really by virtue of his merit, probably it may be done both ways, the rather
because our Savior has a tongue (as also a whole body, but glorified) in
heaven, and it is not likely, that the mouth which pleaded for us on earth, is
altogether silent for us in heaven, but in what manner soever this intercession
be made, it is so done, as makes it both acceptable to God, and effectual for
us, by him who now reigns in glory, and formerly went about doing of good.
Amen.

Finis.
A GIFT FOR GOD ALONE.

S. LUKE 10. ver. 27. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc.
LONDON. Printed for JOHN STAFFORD at Fleet bridge. 1655.

A Gift for God alone.
PROVE. 23. ver. 26. My son, give me thy heart.
THese words, [ My son*] are used more than sixteen times in this Book. It is
therefore well worth our inquiry, what particular persons Solomon designed by
that relative compellation.

First, Negatively: know that Rehoboam, Solomon's son begotten by him, ( heir
but to two parts of twelve of his Father's Kingdom, but not to the hundred
part of his wisdom) was not particularly reflected at herein, nor any other of
his bodily extraction; where, by the way, though we read of Solomon's Wives and
Concubines, we can give but a slender account of his Children, finding but one
Son, and two Daughters, 1 King. 4. 11, 15. And probably, he was not fruitful
in issue, proportionably to his marriages.

2. Nor Positively: know Solomon was but the isntrumental Pen man, Gods Spirit
the principal Inditor of this Book. And as our Savior said, Mat. 12. 50.
Whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my
brother, sister, and mother; So, whosoever shall attentively hear, and
conscionably practice the precept in my Text, the same is the beloved son, and
dear daughter therein intended, My son, give me thy heart.

3. We will begin with a brief paraphrase on each word, so to disincumber them
from all show of difficulty, and then by Gods assistance shall raise one staple
Doctrine, prove and apply it.

4. Give] not sell, we ought not to be saleable in Gods service, having
mercenary souls, chiefly aiming at our own interest. Indeed, we may, and must
with Moses, Heb. 11. 26 have respect unto the recompense of reward; we may look
to it, and

(...) was taken from him, and given to his companion. Then surely God will not
hold them guiltless, who having first given him their hearts, afterward take
them away again, and confer them upon the world and wickedness. 2 Timothy 4.
10. Demas has forsaken me, having loved this present world, and is departed.

1. Come we now to confute those flammes, which the world, the flesh and the
Devil, commonly suggest to men to deter them, or at the least to detain them
from giving their hearts to God. Indeed I could give them better terms, as to
call them pleas, pretenses, excuses; but flammes is even good enough to
express them.

2. First, they allege for themselves, that in case they should give their
hearts to God, they must presently take a final farewell of all comforts and
contentments in this World. Hereafter (say they) we must expect to live a
dismal, dreary, doleful, discontented, disconsolate life: no spark of
pleasure, mirth, and jollity, but a lifelesse heartlesse life, when we have
given our hearts unto God.

3. Answer, I know not whether this flamme has more of folly, or falsehood
therein. Such needless fears and Jealousies the Devil starts in men's
apprehensions. The Jews were afraid in case they did permit our Savior
publicly to preach amongst them, John. 11. 48. That the Romans would come and
take away from them both the place and nation. Whereas indeed it had been the
only way to prevent their invasion, seeing the putting of Christ to Death, did
not only accelerate, but cause the ruin of their Nation. Thus men suspect that
the giving of their hearts to God will mar their mirth, and destroy their
delight for the time to come, whereas on the contrary, it is the only way, for
the continuance, increase, and improvement thereof.

4. True it is, it will retrench that Mockmirth which ends in mourning, that
joy not to be rejoiced in, it will defaulk those exorbitances and extravagances
of Carnal pleasure, wherein wicked men lay out their souls. But the tree of
true joy shall thrive the better for the cutting off of these suckers. Yea,
which is more, a soul is utterly unacquainted with virgin, delibated, and
clarified joy, until such time as the heart be given to God, from which moment
all true joy bears the Date thereof.

5. It is worth our observation to mark the difference betwixt the old
Translation (made according to the vulgar Latin) and the new, conformed to the
Original in the rendering of the eighth Verse of the fourth Psalm.

Old Translation.
Thou haste put gladness in my heart: since the time their corn, and wine,
and oil increased.

New Translation.
Thou haste put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their corn,
and their wine increased.



Here we may see that oil (to bring in three staple Commodities of the Land of
Canaan) is inserted in the Vulgar without any warrant from the Original; we
cannot but dislike such an addition, more than what is warranted in the
Original; otherwise the Doctrine had been true in it self, though putting in
honey, balm, all other commodities which that Land did afford. All of these
could not equal that gladness of heart, which the Spirit of God puts into a
Christians soul, after his heart is freely given to Gods service.

6. The second flamme: if we give our hearts to God, we shall want one to
discharge our several Relations to our wives, children, friends, neighbors,
and acquaintance. God will so ingrosse and monopolize our hearts to himself
alone, we shall want the use of them, to all other purposes, and intents, where
we stand engaged.

7. Answer. This flamme has as much folly and more malice than the former.
Give thy heart to God, and he will return it unto thee during thy life, (and
what needs any longer term?) therewith to discharge thy Relations better than
ever before. A heart given to God will rule thy paces unto thy wives bed, to
keep thy affections loyal unto her without any wandering. In a word, it is so
given to God, that it is still kept to thy self, to perform all those offices,
which are according to Gods command.

8. Third flamme, But my heart is so bad, it is not worthy Gods acceptance, who
justly will cast it away, both the gift and giver thereof. All the bad Epithets
given to a heart in the Scripture, center and unite themselves in the mind, yea
concur in the constitution thereof. An obstinate heart, Deuteronomy. 2. 30. A froward
heart, Psalm. 101. 4. A proud heart, Psa. 101. 5. A perverse heart, Prove. 12. 8.
A haughty heart, Prove. 18. 12. A stout heart, Esa. 9. 9. A stony heart, Ezekiel.
11. 19. A hardened heart, Mar. 8. 17. A heart slow to believe, Luke 24. 25. An
uncircumcised heart, Act. 7. 51. An impenitent heart, Romans ^. 5. And what else
soever is found in Scripture sounding to the disgrace thereof. If therefore I
should give so bad a heart to God, he would refuse it, and return it to me in
his just displeasure.

9. I answer, if this flamme comes from a Hypocrite and Dissembler, it is
utterly unworthy that any answer should be afforded thereunto. But if it come
from a penitent soul, sadly sensible of its own badnesse, (as in charity we
are bound to believe the best) it deserves a better name then a flamme, yea,
is a hopeful and happy symptom (though of weak) of true grace in the party
propounding it. Happy that man, blessed that woman, who from a feeling of their
own unworthiness, make this sincere complaint.

10. Be it known then to their comfort, that if they had a better heart, then
this, whereof they complain, and did begrudge and repine to bestow it on God,
yea, did keep and reserve the same for the service of Satan, and their own
wicked lusts, then this were in them notorious and unpardonable Hypocrisy. But
if this (as bad as it is) be the best heart they have, they may, yea must give
it to God, and from him shall receive the same in a New edition bettered and
amended. Thy obstinate heart shall be made obedient; thy froward heart, forward
in Gods service; thy proud heart, humble; perverse heart, pliable; haughty
heart, submisse; stout heart, complying heart; stony heart, fleshy; hardened
heart, soft; heart slow, quick to believe; uncircumcised heart, circumcised;
impenitent heart, repenting, etc. The only way to get thy heart reformed, is,
to give it to God, who will create a new heart in thee, according to David's
desire.

11. Let us instance in three motives to quicken our performance in this duty.
The first may be drawn from the dignity of the party desiring it; God, who
might command, seems in some sort in the Text to request. These last ten
years have made a sad change in many men's conditions. Such who formerly
relieved others, have since received relief from others. Need has taught many
an ingenuous tongue, a language, wherewith formerly it was unacquainted. It may
move a misers heart to pity to hear them beg, (not thorough default of their
own) who had a hand and heart to distribute to others. But ought we not to be
affected with the motion made in the Text, wherein the great God of Heaven
seems in some sort to wave his Might and Majesty, and in Trial of our
Towardness and tenderness, becomes in the nature of a Petitioner unto us, my
Son give me thy heart, or at least wise, does only desire, what he may demand
as his due, yea command as his right belonging unto him.

12. Second motive may be drawn from the deserts of the Party, he is worthy
(say the Pharisees of the Centurion to Christ) For whom thou should do this
thing, for he loves our Nation, and has built us a Synagogue, Luke 7. 5. Many
and great are the indearments and obligations, which God has put upon us, he
loadeth us daily with benefits, Psalm. 68. 19. (though we make but light of that
load) as appears by our constant ingratitude.

13. The last motive may be taken from the danger of denial: for be thou well
assured, if thou refuse to give God thy heart, it will not remain thine long,
to thy comfort. If any special friend, so honest, that he would not deceive
thee with false frights, and so wise that he could not therewith be deceived by
others, should seriously inform thee, that this Night, thou should be
plundered of a Jewel of great value, which thou have in thy house, and should
request it of thee, to secure it for thee (in the best acceptance of the word)
promising safe keeping, and seasonable restoring thereof; Surely thou should
discover little discretion to run the hazard of a Robbery, and refuse so fair
and civil a motion for thy own advantage. Know in like manner, the world,
flesh, and Devil, one or all of them, will purloine thy heart from thee, and
imbezle it to thy destruction. In prevention whereof, do thou make a Friend
therewith, and speedily bestow it, where it may be preserved for thee. Adam
himself, though armed with Original Integrity, how ill he kept his own heart,
we his Posterity may sadly bemoan: despair thou therefore to be the Treasurer
of thy own heart, thou can not lock it so fast, but sin or Satan by force or
fraud, will command and cozen thee out of the possession of it, if it be not
solemnly given to God himself.

14. And now, as once the Eunuch said to Philip, Acts 8. 36. See here is water,
what does hinder me to be baptized? so behold here all the requisites to a deed
of gift, what is it that debarreth us, but that instantly this transaction of
our hearts may be completed? Here we the Granters are present, and I
charitably presume have our hearts in a spiritual sense, here within us; here
is God the Grantee, who has promised, where two or three are met together in
his name, to be in the midst of them; here are witnesses enough, seeing he who as
party to one deed (wherein himself is concerned) may be a witness to the grant
of another, and legally attest the truth thereof. Nor is there any need of
counsel of public Notaries to draw up and ingrosse an instrument herein,
seeing nothing is required to the giving of the heart save the giving of the
heart; the more simply, the more surely it is pefrormed.

15. O the commendable simplicity of former Ages, and their plain dealings in
bargains and seals: what their hearts thought then tongues said; what their
tongues said their teeth sealed, whose seals of brickle dough held better to
all purposes and intents than ours of the most tenacious wax: how many Manours
in those days were conveyed in few words, From me and mine, to thee and thine;
where, as now, a span of ground can scarce be conveyed under a span of
parchment, such is the litigiousnesse of our Age.

16. But know, in giving our hearts, we are to deal with him who is the
searcher of the hearts, and who hates all ceremonious complements, preferring
downright sincerity. Indeed, if the head was to be given, some might conceive
it fit and necessary that the tongue and brains thereof should be employed in
making a large and eloquent Oration at such transactions; but the heart being
now to be given, it may be done with silence and sincerity, with a serious
promise, from this very moment to consecrate the same totally and finally to
Gods service.

17. I have read of James the fourth, King of Scotland, that on his deathbed
he bequeathed his heart to the Lord Douglas, to carry the same to Jerusalem,
and to see it buried by the grave of our Savior, which the Lord performed
accordingly; and in avowance thereof, the Honorable Families of the Douglasses
at this day, give a heart proper in the Base-point of the Shield.

18. Some will praise the officiousness of a Servant in doing his Masters
command, but none can excuse the superstition of the Master, save only by
charging it on the erroneous devotion of those dark days he lived in: but let
not us delay it till our death, but in our lifetime in the height of our
health, wealth, and prosperity, let us not send by others, but give our selves,
not our carnal, corporeal heart, but our spiritual heart, (I mean, all the
powers and faculties of our souls) not to be interred in the material grave of
our Savior, but to be buried with him in true mortification, which will be
truly to practice the precept given in my Text, My son, give me thy heart. Amen.

FINIS.
THE TRUE PENITENT.

Prove. 28. 13. -- He that confesses and forsakes his sin, shall find mercy.
LONDON. Printed for JOHN STAFFORD at Fleet-bridge. 1655.

The true Penitent.
LUKE 22. 61. And wept bitterly.
TWo men do not more differ one from another, than the-selfe same man at
several times, differs from himself. Behold a Christian at the
High-water-mark, when it is Springtide of Grace with him, and how full is he
fraught with pious Meditations? Good Thoughts, godly Words, gracious Works, so
that one would think he would instantly stere from Holiness to Happiness.
(The Top of Grace confines with the Bottom of Glory) and wonders to see so much
Triumphant Sanctity in a Militant Christian. But now look on the same Man, at
Ebbing Water, when left to himself in the Agony of a Temptation, and how much
shall we find him disguised from himself? All his former good motions dead and
buried, and in their room arises another Generation, which never knew Joseph.
Dismal Thoughts, desperate Words, damnable Deeds, one would fear he would
suddenly fall into the Bottomless pit, but one Hairs breadth betwixt him and
Hell. Woeful the soul who comes so near, yet blessed the soul who never comes
nearer. We need not go farther for a pregnant proof thereof, than to the
Example of S. Peter, in this Chapter. How promise-valiant was He, never to
forsake his Master? And yet in the time of trial, how basely did he behave
himself? Thus every one can conquer a Temptation, but He who is assaulted with
it, and when it is brought home to our heart, There is the Man, yea, there is
more than the Man, yea, there must be a God to assist the Man, to subdue and
overcome it.

2. But as the sickness of Lazarus, so the sin of Saint Peter was not unto
death, but for the Glory of God. Rejoice not over me, O mine enemy; for though
I fall, yet shall I rise again. Soon after the Lord looked, the Cock Crew,
and the day dawned in the heart of Saint Peter, out he hasts of the High
Priests Hall; Privacy complyes best with Repentance. No such company for a
Penitent, as only himself and his God, and now all alone he gives himself over
to Lamentation. He smote the stony Rock also, and waters gushed forth; so that
rivers Ran in desolate places. Cephas a stone, Peter, a rock, smitten with the
sense of his sins, flows with plentiful rivers of Sorrow. O Happy day of
his Repentance! day, which had a fair afternoon, but a very rainy morning, And
he went out and wept bitterly.

3. And wept bitterly. The Text contains the Cure for the falling sickness of
the Soul, and is so short that it needs no division, only (to avoid
confusion) I will handle it, first, in reference to Saint Peter, then in
application to our selves; mean time let none be offended at me, that clean
thorough my discourse, I call him S. Peter, though then in the midst of his
misery whom some will not style so, though now in the height of his happiness.
Sure their taking of the Saintship from those in heaven, has added no more
holiness to themselves on earth. But, such Honor have all his Saints, that
they are to be mentioned with honor. And see the Pattent of Peter's Saint-ship
penned with his tears in my text, written out so much the more fairly, by how
much it was the more blurred. And wept bitterly.

4. In reference to S Peter, three pertinent Questions must be propounded, and
answered. The first, Why did S Peter take on so heavily, seeing so much may be
said for lessening his fault? and though not wholly to excuse, in great degree
to extenuate his offense. For first, it was but a sin of Infirmity, done
besides, yea, against his purpose and intention. He did not with a high hand
tempt a temptation: but alas! his Heart was too great for his Heart, his Will
to promise too great for his power to perform. Secondly, a forcible Motive
moved him thereunto, namely, fear to lose his life. It was not S. Peter, but
S. Peter's Passion which denied his Master, or rather, he did but reserve
himself to confess him at a fitter opportunity. Thirdly, As the Spouse in the
Canticles says, I sleep, but my heart waketh; So Saint Peter might say, My
mouth renounceth my Master, but my mind does retein him. The Denial is but
from the teeth outward, ore, non cord. Lastly, the lameness of his Lie may be
hidden or helped, by lending it the Charitable Staff of an equivocation,
Verily I know not the Man, that is, I know him not with intent to tell you of
him; or I know no such mere man as you mean, for my Master is both God and Man.

5. The Answer to this Objection is easy: For, S. Peter did not look on such
Passages, as might lessen his Fault, but only observed such Circumstances, as
tended to the Heightening, Extending, and Aggravating thereof. As for
Equivocatio^, that sluggish Piece of Popery, could not be so early a riser, as
to be up in the Church in the twy-light, and first dawning of the Gospel. For
first, S. Peter did consider, that he was forewarned, and therefore should have
been forearmed. He could not plead that he was surprised on a sudden, Christ
having given him before a Caveat thereof. Secondly, He did it against his free
Promise, and flat Protestation; as if Child's play, too mean for men, were good
enough for God, fast and loose, bind and break, solemnly say one thing, and
presently do another. Thirdly, He did it Thrice: Once may be imputed to
Incogitancy, Twice ascribed to Infirmity, but Thrice is incapable of any
charitable Comment. So that Favor it self must be forced to condemn it for a
wilful Offense. Lastly, It was not a bare Denial, but a Denial imbossed with
Oaths, and embroidered with Curses, such is the Concatenation betwixt one Sin
and another. The Naturalists report of the Providence of the Pismire, that when
she storeth up Grain for the Winter, she biteth off both the ends of the Corn,
thereby to prevent the growing thereof. But if we should be so unhappy as to
commit one Sin, O let us with speedy repentance spoil the procreative power
thereof, before that One Sin has begot another: for how quickly did S. Peter
add Swearing to Lying, and Cursing to both?

6. Thus the Ears and Eyes of S. Peter were only open to hear and see such
matters as most made against him: learn we from him, to measure the dimension
of a sin, and not to listen to what Flesh and Blood may prompt us, for the
lessening of our Offenses. Mattereth it not then, though we cannot measure the
Compass of the Earth, take the Height of the Heavens, if we can, by the Jacobs
Staff of Gods Word, take the true Altitude of our heinous transgressions: If
there be any Circumstances which tend to the extenuating of our Faults, though
we should chance to lose them, Gods goodness will find them; and if we should
forget them, he would remember them. Let us look seriously on such things as
render our faults the foulest; following the Example of S. Peter in my Text,
Looking upwards, he sees God threatening, downwards, the Devil insulting
within him, his Conscience raging without him, Good men mourning, Bad men
mocking, that the first of the Apostles, S. Peter, in the Publick'st of Places,
the Highpriests Hall, before the Prophanest of Persons, the Highpriests
Servants, at the Weakest of Motives, the Summons of a Maid, did the worst of
Actions, Deny his Master, Once, and not touched thereat, Twice, and not
troubled thereat, Thrice, but there he stopped, but there he stayed, but there he
stinted: And he went out and wept bitterly.

7. The second Question here to be demanded, is this, Wherein consisted the
validity and efficacy of the weeping of S. Peter, that thereby he obtained his
Pardon?

8. To this we answer, First Negatively. The virtue of his Weeping did not
consist in his Weeping, for by the bare Deed done, did redound neither Good to
him, nor Glory to God. If God be thirsty, he will not tell us, nor drink of the
buckets of our tears. For all the Rivers of the Field are his, and so are the
Fountains on a thousand Hills. I could both sigh and smile, at the simplicity
of some Pagan People in America, who having told a Lie, used to let their
tongues blood in expiation thereof. A good Cure for the Squinancy, but no
Satisfaction for Lying. And if not Red tears, then much less White tears,
are in themselves, any ways expiatory of the least sin. Now, Positively,
Herein was the virtue of St. Peter's Weeping, which procured his Pardon, that
his Weeping was washed in the blood of his Savior: In vain had Peter wept,
had not Christ first bled for Peter. Could the eyes of a Penitent vie moisture
with the Month of April? All were to no purpose, without relating by Faith to
Christ; such Prodigal weeping would sooner drown the Sinner, than wash a Sin.
It was not the Water, but it was that Soap, Malac. 3. 2. which did rinse the
soul of S. Peter.

9. By the way we must observe, that all people are not bound to weep for
their sins, because some cannot, by reason of natural impediment. There is
genus siccoculum, people, whose eyes by nature are like the Pit, into which
Joseph was put, wherein there was no water. Others there be, whose grief is too
great to be managed by weeping. And as the tears are even ready to salley out
of their eyes, they are countermanded back again with amazement and
stupefaction: therefore those Mothers, who want Milk, are not bound to suckle
their own Children, but either to bring them up by hand, or to provide a Nurse
for them; so God expects not that those should weep, whose eyes are dry
Nurses, but that some other ways they express their sorrow for their sins.
And commonly such people, though they are waterbound, yet will not be
wind-bound too, but what they spare in tears, they spend in sighs. Such
persons are not to be reproached, but pitied, as lacking an outlet for the
exportation of their sorrow; and it is to be feared, that Grief will wrong the
Vessel the more, for lacking a vent; a favor, which Nature afforded to St.
Peter in my Text: For He could go out and weep bitterly.

10. The third and last Question to be propounded, is this: Suppose S. Peter
had died suddenly, immediately after his denying of his Master, and just before
his Repentance; What then had become of the soul of S. Peter?

11. I answer: First, As is the Mother, so is the Daughter: an Impossible
Supposition has begot and brought forth an Impossible Conclusion. Suppose that
the Sun had been quite put out in the last Eclips, whence then should the torch
of the Moon, and the taper of the Stars be lighted? Suppose that Abraham had
really sacrificed Isaac, when he did but offer him, who then had been the
Father of Jacob? To come closer to the question. It was impossible for Peter to
die before his Repentance; not but that he was mortal in himself (any Arrow in
Deaths Quiver might have wounded him to the heart, a Fever burn him, a Dropsy
drown him, any deadly Disease surprise him) but because his life, as well
natural, as spiritual, was hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. whose wisdom, as
it had permitted his Fall, so his goodness had decreed his Recovery.

The Bones in the blessed body of our Savior, were frangibilia, but not
frangenda; they were breakable in their own nature, but could never actually be
broken, as being secured from all possibility of fracture, by that Prophecy
premised, A bone of him shall not be broken. In like manner, seeing God had
determined the salvation of St. Peter; Heaven and Earth might sooner pass
away, than he fall finally, in spite of Sickness, and Death, and Sin, and
Satan, and Hell it self, he must rise, he must survive, he must recover. But,
not forced with the strength of the Supposition, but out of good will, to
gratify ingenious Adversaries, be it granted, that S. Peter had died suddenly,
after his sin, and before his explicit, actual repentance for this
particular fault; yet I say, his soul had gone to Heaven. For, consider first,
Though the Boughs of his sins spread wide, and Branches sprouted high, yet the
Root thereof was but humane Infirmity, consistent with saving Grace. And though
he denied his Master Thrice, yet it was but Once in efeffect, All in one
continued Hot blood, his soul being never cooled, or reinforced with new
thoughts. Secondly, He had in him true repentance, quoad principium gratiae, an
habitual Repentance, which through Gods Mercy, and Christ's Merits, was
sufficient for his salvation. If any dissent from me herein, because I make
Habitual Repentance, like Janus, to look as well forward as backward,
effectual for the remission of future, as well as past-sinnes; let such
consider with themselves, First, they cannot, but must die. Secondly, they
cannot, but must sin, and it is possible they may suddenly; guilty of sins of
infirmity, actually unrepented of. In such a case their judgment will not
allow Purgatory: Their will cannot endure Hell, Heaven is the place which they
hope and desire to go to, wherefore what favor they expect for themselves, let
them charitably allow to S. Peter. But what go we about to do? the Text takes
away the subject of the Question, whereof we dispute, Peter did revive, and
recover, witness his sighing, his sobbing, his weeping, his wailing in my Text.

12. The use of this might serve to confute the censoriousnes of many in this
Age, who seeing their Brother guilty of a grievous sin, presently condemn him
for A Reprobate and Castaway. Thus the Poor man's Soul, cast by his own
sins to Hells Brinke, is thrown down by other men's Censures to Hells Bottom.
It is reported, of John Duns Scotus, the great School man, that being in a
strong fit of an Apoplexy, the standers by conceived him to be dead indeed.
Whereupon, out of the cruel kindness, and over-officious forwardness of his
Friends and Kindred, he was buried as yet being alive, and afterward knocked
out his brains against the sides of the Coffin. Thus the precipitate hastiness
of some censorious people, beholding their brother in a desperate sin, or
deep temptation, bring no Cordials, but call for a Coffin, vote him spiritually
dead, and instead of rubbing him, fall a winding him. They conclude, there is
no hope, there is no help, he is past sense, he is past saving, he is gone, he is
given over to a reprobate mind, no way with him but one, and that is eternal
damnation. Thus they bury men's souls alive, and (as much as lies in their
power) tumble them into the bottomless pit; though the best is, such
uncharitable carriage more hurts the Doers than the Sufferers. Whereas men
should know, that every wound in the soul, which is Mortale, is not
mortiferum; And that it comes to pass in the Christian Combat, what often
happens in Bodily Battles. Fames Trumpet kills more than the Sword, and many,
reported by People to be slain overnight, are found alive in the morning,
though (perchance) sorely wounded, or taken Captives. Sorely wounded! but so as
they may be cured. Taken captives! but so as they may be freed by Gods pardon
on their repentance, like S. Peter in my Text, who went out, etc.

13. So much of the Text, in reference to S. Peter: Come we now to the
application unto our selves. The Pope pretends to be the only Successor of
S. Peter, but in this respect we all are his Successors; we all have followed
him, we all have sat in his Chair, we all have denied our Master, though not
Formally, totidem verbis, yet Equivalently, and it is to be feared, some of us
Transcendently. There be diverse degrees, and different manners of denying of
Christ; some deny him Totally, as Apostates; some Partially, as Profane
people; some in his Essence, as Atheists; some in his Deity, as Arians; some in
his Humanity, as Nestorians; some in his Merits, as some Proud Papists; some in
his spiritual Dominion over them, as all Licentious People. If I be a master,
where is my fear? says the Lord of Hosts: Mal. 1. 6. so that they who call God
Master with their mouths, and do not honor him in their hearts by their lives,
do in effect Deny him, and Un-master him, as much as lies in their power.

14. Saint Paul complains, ( Titus 1. last ver.) of some who profess that
they know God, but in works they deny him. And S. Peter comes closer (second
Epist. Cap. 2. ver. 1.) even denying the Lord that bought them. And the same
reproof is ecchoed by S. Jude, ver. 4. turning the grace of God into
lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. The
best of us all, in some measure, have been guilty hereof, and have abused our
Christian Freedom, the more freely to abuse Christ who gave it us. Wherefore,
as we have been like S. Peter in Sinning, let us be like S. Peter in Sorrowing,
let us go out, not with outward Moving, but inward Mending; not shifting our
Place, but changing our Practice, go out of our Sins, go out of our Selves,
go out to our Savior, go out and weep bitterly.

15. Yea, but may some man say, I never could, nor shall weep bitterly for my
sins. I am affected for outward afflictions, like Rahel weeping for her
children, and would not be comforted. If I have a Ship sunk in the Sea, I can
almost again drown it in my weeping. But alas! when I am to sorrow for my
Sins, no Tears, as Voluntaries, profer themselves to my service. And I have
much ado to Press any to bewail my Wickedness, yea, I have grieved more for
one Temporal Cross, than for all the Sins I ever Committed: which makes me
to fear, that for want of bitter weeping here, I shall go to the place of
weeping and wailing hereafter.

16. If any penitent Soul does stagger with this Objection, let him stay
himself with these following Meditations. First know, that Sorrow for
Sufferings must of necessity be more Violent and Passionate, than our Sorrow
for our Sins. First, because it is not only a Pure, Virgin, and Delibated
Sorrow, but has much of the mixture of Impatience, Coffeehouse, and
Rebellion against Divine Providence. And these make the Sorrow more Vocal,
Clamorous, and Obstreperous. Secondly, because we Sorrow for our Sufferings,
with the whole man; and for our Sins, but with half the man, only our
Regenerate Part, our Sanctified Moity. For our Flesh, all the while, laughs at
Sin, and delights in it. Thirdly, because Sorrow for our Sufferings makes an
immediate impression upon our bodies, whereas sorrow for our Sins works directly
on the Soul, and on the Body, but by the by, and at the second hand, Now,
although all Sorrow does flow from the Soul, as the Fountain; yet because it
runs through the Body, as the Channel, and from thence is furnished with
outward Expressions (as Tears, Sighs, Cries, rending the Hair, wringing the
Hands, and the like) hence comes it to pass, that Sorrow for Sufferings is
best stored with plenty and variety of outward lamentations.

17. For a second Comfort take this. Though Sorrow for Sufferings be more
Passionate, Sorrow for Sins is more Permanent. David says, Psalm. 51. 3. And
my sin is ever before me. As the Sin, so the Sorrow of a Saint is ever before
him, morning, evening, early, late, day, night; he may go away with it, but
cannot run away without it. Again, Sorrow for Sin does grieve more, though it
does complain less, which will appear by comparing of Two sick Persons, one
having the Toothache, the other the Consumption: He that has the Toothache,
cries out most, even to the disturbing of the standers by; and no wonder, if
where the mouth be Plantiff, it complains aloud of its own grievances: and
yet all know the Toothache not to be mortal; it has raised many from their
Beds, sent few to the Grave, hindered the sleep of many, hastened the death of
few: Whereas he who has the Consumption, does not roar, nor rage, nor cry
out, and the little breath left in his bad lungs, he lays out, rather than in
living, than in sighing. And yet sure his grief is the greater, as knowing that
he carries, though the easiest, yet the surest death about him. And such is a
Saints Sorrow for his Sins, low and silent; the less grieving he keeps, the
more grieving he keeps; the less he expresses the more he retains. It is a
continual dropping, and you know it is the sober rain which makes the earth
drunk.

18. Third and last Comfort. Know, that our Sorrow for our Sins, though little
in it self, is great in Gods acceptance and Appreciation. Well does any wise
earthly Prince know how to value the liberality of his loyal Subjects, who
shall assist him in his great want with a small sum of money, especially if
he knows that they are deeply impoverished and struggle with their necessity,
which makes his gracious goodness to interpret a small gift a great one,
coming from a large Heart, confined to a narrow Estate. But far better does
the King of Heaven know how barren we are in Grace, how beggarly in Goodness,
so that sorrow for our Sins comes from us with great difficulty and
disadvantage, we are feign to strive and struggle against our corruptions,
before one tear be extracted.

Spigellius in his Book of Anatomy, tells us, That many English Mothers and
Nurses have a foolish custom to swaddle the breasts of their newborn Babes
over-hard, and so straiten their stomachs, that their lungs cannot dilate
themselves in breathing: and this (by the way) does he say is the cause why
more die of the Consumption in England, than in any other Country. Sure I am,
that by the wilful folly of our first Parents, Adam and Eve, before we had our
Birth, when first we had our Being, we were so soule-bound with sin, and hard
tied with the bands of Original Corruption, that it hinders the spiritual
breathing of all our affections. Yet God is pleased to take our Widows Mite of
Sorrow in good worth, knowing it proceds from poverty; yea, which is more,
Heaven can smile to see a sinner grieve, that he cannot grieve for his sins;
and God is pleased to see him squeeze the bottles of his eyes, though he can
wring no moisture out of them. Twist these several Cords together into one
Cable of comfort, which tied to the Anchor of hope, will keep the pensive soul
from sinking in despair, though he cannot weep so bitterly for his sins, as
he does for outward afflictions.

19. However, seeing it is the bounden duty of all, to endeavor to sorrow for
their sins; this serves to confute the jollity of this Age. Wherein, instead
of weeping bitterly, we have laughing heartily, and quaffing constantly, and
faring daintily, and talking wantonly, and lying horribly, and swearing
hideously, and living lazily, and dying desperately. In those days the Lord
began to cut Israel, short, 2 Kings 10. 23. And God now begins to cut England
short, short in men short in meat, short in money, short in wealth, so that it
is to be feared, that Great Britain will be Little Britain, and remain great
only in her Sins and Sufferings. And is this a time for men to lengthen
themselves, when God does shorten them! Is this a time for people to affect
fond fashions, when it is to be feared we shall be all brought into the same
fashion of Ruin and Desolation? A strange People! who can dance at so doleful
music, as the Passing Bell of a Church and Commonwealth? Take heed, Atheism
knocks at the door of the hearts of all men, and where Luxury is the Porter it
will be let in. Let not the multiplicity of so many Religions as are now on
foot, make you careless to have any, but careful to have the best.

20. O Beloved, take the Fruit, though you should throw away the Basket though
you should slight the Preacher, embrace his Counsel. Think not that Christ will
call each of you immediately from Heaven as he did, Saul, Saul, why perscutest
thou me? or that with S. Austin, you shall here a voice saying to you, toll
and lege, take up thy book and read: or that with St. Peter, before we repent,
the cock must literally crow, and Christ Corporally look upon us. Every
reproof of the Preacher, is the crowing of the Cock, every check in your
Conscience, is the crowing of the Cock, every spectacle of Mortality presented
before you, every affliction inflicted upon you, every motion to Repentance
arising within you, is the crowing of the Cock. These you must listen to, and
obey. And yet we read of the Sybarites, a luxurious people in Graecia, who,
that they might better enjoy their case, and quiet, commanded that no Cocks
should be kept in their City, that so they might sleep the more soundly, not
having their heads troubled with the proclamations of those Heralds of the
Morning. So I am afraid there be some that could wish, that there were no more
Preachers in England, then at one time there were smiths in Israel, no Cocks
to crow, no ways to waken them out of the sleep of their carnal security.

21. But I hope better things of you, and such as accompany salvation.
Neitherneed I to use any other motive to incite you to spiritual sorrow, then
the very words of our Savior, Mat. 5. 4. Blessed are those that mourn, for
they shall be comforted. Peter was comforted afterward, yea, he had an
express of Comfort dispatched and addressed to him in particular* Mark. 16. 7.
But go your way, and tell his Disciples and Peter, that he goes before you
into Gallilee.

22. Yea, all Gods Saints shall taste of spiritual comfort. As Joshua when he
entered to Jericho was careful to spare her house, at whose window the Red Lace
did hang out, so God will be careful to preserve such, at whose windows, at
whose eyes, Redness made by their mourning, as a sign of their sorrow does
appear, and at the last day, as it is Isaiah. 25. 8. The Lord God will wipe
away tears from all their faces. The Papists have a tale, that as our Savior
sweated with carrying his Cross, a worthy woman, one Veronica met him, and
gave him a handkerchief therewith to wipe his face. Which ragge (they say)
still remains at Rome, fit therein to wrap up the rest of their Apocraphal
Traditions. Grant it a tale that this Saint gave a handkerchief to him, it is a
truth, that he will give one to every good Saint, to take away their tears,
and he will wipe the face of that Magdalen, who wiped his feet.

23. It is reported of Aristotle that great Philosopher, that being unable to
unriddle that mystery of nature, the motion of the Sea, impatient of his
ignorance, he wilfully drowned himself in that water which Posed him, with
these words, Quid ego non capio te, tu capias me, because I cannot conceive
thee, thou shall contain me: no little foolish deed of a great carnal wise
man. But seeing that the happiness Heaven mounteth so High, that it cannot
enter into the heart of man to conceive it, let us labor so to live here, that
in due time going hence, we may enter into those Joys, which cannot enter into
us, and be received by that Bliss, which cannot be conceived by our brain,
Where amongst many other worthy Saints we shall meet with S. Peter, though not
in the Pensive posture wherein we find him my Text, then Singing sweetly, who
in my Text went out and wept bitterly. Amen.

FINIS.
THE BEST ACT OF OBLIVION.

ECCLES: 12. 1, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth. LONDON.
Printed for JOHN STAFFORD at Fleet-bridge. 1655.

The best Act of Oblivion.
PSALM. 25. 7. Remember not Lord the sins of my youth.
IN these four Psalms which immediately follow one another, we may find the
soul of David, presented in all the several postures of Piety, lying, standing,
sitting, kneeling. In the 22. Psalm. he is lying all along, falling flat on's
face, low grovelling on the ground, even almost entering into a degree of
despair. Speaking of himself in the History, of Christ in the Mystery, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

2. In the three and twentieth Psalm, he standing, and through Gods favor; in
despite of his foes, trampling and triumphing over all opposition, The Lord is
my sheepherd, therefore shall I lack nothing.

3. In the 24 Psalm he is sitting, like a Doctor in his Chair, or a Professor
in his place, reading a Lecture of Divinity, and describing the Character of
that man, how he must be accomplished, who shall ascend into the holy hill, and
hereafter be partaker of happiness.

4. In this 25 Psalm he is kneeling, with hands, and voice lifted up to God,
and on these two hinges the whole Psalm turns, the one is a hearty beseeching
of Gods mercy, the other a humble bemoaning of his own misery. Lent is a season
for sorrow, this Week is the suburbs of Lent, this day the leader of this
week, Shrove-Sunday, anciently used for penitents confessing of their sins.
Wherefore what doctrine more needful in it self, more useful to us, more
suitable to the Season, then to shrive our selves to God on Shrove-Sunday,
joining with David in his paenitentiall devotions, Remember not O Lord the
sins of my youth.

5. Which words contain David's Petition to the King of heaven, that he would
be pleased to pass an ACT OF OBLIVION, of the sins of his youth. Premise we
this, that God cannot properly be said either to remember or forget, because
all things always present themselves as present unto him. But in Scripture
phrase, God is said then to remember men's sins, when he does punish them, then
to forget men's sins when he does pardon them. Thus as Moses veiled his face,
that he might be the better beheld, so God to allay the purity of his
imcomprehensiblenesse with meaner metal, namely with expressions after the
manner of men, to make it work to our capacities, let us praise God for his
goodness herein, that whereas we could not ascend to him, he does descend to
us, and let us pray him, that as here he does cloud the object, to make it
fitter for our eyes, so hereafter he would clear our eyes to make them fitter
for the object, when in heaven we shall see him as he is.

6. Before we come to the principal point, we must first clear the Text from
the Encumbrance of a double objection. The first is this, it may seem (may
some say) very improbable, that David should have any sins of his youth, if we
consider the Principalls whereupon his youth was past. The first was Poverty,
We read that his Father Jesse passed for an old man, we read not that he passed
for a rich man, and probably his seven proper sons, were the principal part
of his wealth. Secondly, painfulness: David, though the youngest was not made
a darling, but a drudge, sent by his father to follow the Ewes big with young,
where he may seem to have learned innocence and simplicity from the sheep he
kept. Thirdly, Piety, Psalm. 71. 5. For thou art my hope, O Lord God, thou art
my trust from my youth. And again in the 17 verse of the same Psalm, O God
thou have taught me from my youth: David began to be good betimes, a young
Saint, and yet crossed that pestilent Proverb, was no old devil. And what is
more still, he was constant in the furnace of affliction, Psalm. 88. 15. Even
from my youth up thy terrors have I suffered with a troubled mind. The question
then will be this, how could that water be corrupted, which was daily
clarified? how could that steel gather rust, which was duly filed? How could
David's soul in his youth be sooty with sin, which was constantly scoured
with suffering.

7. But the answer is easy, for though David, for the maine were a man after
Gods own heart, (the best transcript of the best copy) yet he, especially in
his youth, had his faults and infirmities, yea his sins and transgressions.
Though the Scripture makes no mention of any eminent sin in his youth, the
business with Beersheba being justly to be referred to David's reduced, and
elder age. I will not conclude that David was of a wanton Constitution, because
of a reddy Complexion. It is as injurious an inference, to conclude all bad
which are beautiful, as it is a false and flattering consequence, to say all
are honest who are deformed. Rather we may collect David's youth guilty of
wantonness, from his having so many Wives and Concubines. But what go I about
to do? Expect not that I should tell you the particular sins, when he could
not tell his own, Psalm. 19. Who can tell how often he offends? Or how can
David's sins be known to me, which he confesses were unknown to himself,
which made him to say, O Lord cleanse me from my secret sins. But to silence
our curiosity, that our conscience may speak. If David's youth which was poor,
painful, and pious, was guilty of sins, what shall we say of such whose
education has been Wealthy, Wanton, and Wicked? and I report the rest to be
acted with shame, sorrow, and silence, in every man's conscience.

8. The second objection has more difficulty in it, which is this, this may
seem but a superfluous prayer of David. For whereas in Charity it may and must
be presumed, that David long since had begged pardon for his youthful sins,
that upon his begging, God had granted it, that upon his granting God never
revoked it. What need now had David to prefer this petition for pardon of
antiquated sin, time out of mind committed by him, time out of mind remitted
by God?

9. To this Objection I shape a fourfold answer, First, though David no
doubt, long since had been truly sorrowful for his youthful sins, yet he
was sensible in himself, that if God would be extreme, to mark what was done
amiss, though he had repented of those his sins, yet he had sinned in that
his Repentance. Secondly, though God had forgiven David's sins so far forth,
as to pardon him eternal Damnation, yet he had not remitted unto him temporal
affliction, which perchance pressing upon him at this present, he prays in
this Psalm, for the removing or mitigating of them. So then the sense of his
words sound thus, Remember not Lord the sins of my youth, that is, Lord
lighten and lessen the afflictions which lie upon me, in this mine old age,
justly inflicted on me, for my youthful sins. Thirdly, Gods pardon for
sins past, is ever granted with this condition, that the Party so pardoned,
is bound to his good behavior for the time to come, which if he breaks, he
deserves in the strictness of Justice to forfeit the benefit of his Pardon.
Now David was guilty afterward in that grand transgression of Beersheba and
Uriah, which might in the extremity of Justice have made all his youthful
sins to be punished afresh upon him. Lastly, Grant David certainly assured of
the Pardon of his youthful sins, yet Gods Servants may pray for those
blessings they have in possession, not for the obtaining of that they have,
that is needless; but for the keeping of what they have obtained, that is
necessary. Yea, God is well pleased with such prayers of his Saints, and
interprets them to be praises unto him, and then these words, Remember not the
sins of my youth, amount to this effect, Blessed be thy gracious goodness,
who have forgiven me the sins of my youth. However, here we may see that in
matters of Devotion, too much caution cannot do amiss, in the point of Pardon
for sins, we cannot seek too often, shut too safe, bind too sure. And
therefore David who prays elsewhere, Lord remember David in his Troubles, he
could well be contented God would remember David's Person to protect it, David's
Piety to reward it, David's Misery to remove it, wrong done to David to revenge
it; but as for David's sins, and especially the sins of his youth, here he
lies at another Guard, Remember not Lord the sins of my youth.

10. Come we now to the principal point, which is this, youth is an age wherein
men are prone to be excessively sinful. By youth I understand that distance of
age, which is interposed betwixt infancy, and the time wherein nature decays;
all the time, that a man in his strength is in his own disposing. Now the
reasons, why youth rather then infancy or old age should be prone to
wickedness are these: First, because that in youth they first break loose
from the command of their masters, Gal. 4. 1. Now I say, that the heir, as
long as he is a child, differs nothing from a servant, though he be Lord of
all, but is under Tutors, and governors, until the time appointed of the
Father, which time, though long a coming, when it comes at last, is very
welcome to young men. Esaias said in his heart, the days for the mourning, for
my father Isaac will come shortly, then will I slay my brother Jacob. Thus
young men plot, project, and promise to themselves, The days will come, when
my Father, or Master, or Tutor, will die, either naturally, or legally, will
decease, either in his person, or power over me, and then I Will roar, and
revell, and gad, and Game, and Dice, and Drink, and what not? In a word, young
men think, that they justly may have an action against their parents, for
false imprisonment, because they have unjustly curbed, and confined their
wills; and though they dare not lay their action against their Parents, yet to
make the best amends they may to themselves, whom they conceive heretofore
wronged with too much restraint, they will hereafter right with too much
liberty.

11. Secondly, because youth is an age, wherein men's passions are most
headstrong, violent, and impetuous, so that it may be called the Midsommer
Moon, or if you will rather the Dog days of man's life.

12. Thirdly, because as in youth, men's minds are most strong to desire, so
their bodies are most able and active to perform any wickedness.

13. Lastly, because young men put the day of death far from them. For there
is nothing that more frights men from profanesse and into piety, then the
serious apprehension of death appearing, with the Arrerages thereof, eternal
damnation, in case the party dies not in the faith and favor of God. Now
whereas old men see death in plano, as under their eyes, death is represented
to young men in Landskipt, as at a great distance from them. And when old men
discourse to young men of death, young men are ready to answer them, as the
High Priest did Judas in a different case, what is that to us? look you unto
it. The days of a man says David are threescore years and ten. Now what some
men possibly may live to, young men think they certainly must live to, they
will not abate a day, nor a minute, nor a moment of threescore and ten, they
have calculated their own Nativities, and so long they are sure they shall
live.

14. As for the sins whereof youth is most properly guilty, they are these:
First Pride, and indeed, though they, and none else, have any just cause to be
proud, yet they have the best seeming cause to flesh and blood. For young men
have health, and strength, and swiftness, and valor, and wit, and wisdom
too, as they think themselves, though indeed the more fools because they
think so themselves.

15. Secondly Prodigality, for they begin where their Fathers did end, and are
(the eldest son especially) in matter of Worldly wealth, as good men at their
starting, as their fathers were at the ending of their Race. And commonly it
comes to pass, that where the father like Logic had his fist contracted,
the son like Rhetoric has his hand expanded.

16. The third sin of youth is Rashness. For as old men, because they are
acquainted with the Changes and chances of the world, when they go about any
great Action, start all doubts, dangers, and difficulties, probable, and
possible, whereby sometimes it comes to pass, that by their tedious tarrying
on causeless caution, they lose the advantage of great Actions, which are made
to go off with a spring of speedy execution; so on the other side, young men
who know little, and fear less, being loath to confess the poverty of their
experience by borrowing council from others, rashly run on, often to their
hurt, always to their hazard, as if success was bound out of duty, to attend
their most desperate designs. Yea, David himself cannot be excused from this
sin of Rashness, witness his words to Abigail, the 1 of Sam. 25. 34. As the
Lord God of Israel lives, except thou had hastened and come to meet me,
surely there had not been left unto Nabal, by to morrow light, any that pisseth
against the wall. A precipitate project, what if the master was wilful, must
all the servants be woeful? what if Nabal had been too niggardly of his meat,
must David be too prodigal of his sword? Yea, and he binds it too with an
oath, so that either he took Gods name too vainly in jest, or the innocent
blood too sadly in earnest. Rashness is the third sin of youth.

17. Disobedience to Parents, follows in the fourth place, a great sin to
which young men are much subject, especially if their parents be feeble, and
froward, and foolish too, perchance as doting by age, then they are ready to
despise them.

18. The fifth and last sin we insist on is wantonness, the proper and
paramount sin of youth, and therefore S. Paul writing to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.
22. Flee youthful lusts. One might think this precept, to Timothy might well
have been spared, considering that Timothy had a weak body, subject to often
infirmities, and such sick folk are likely to think rather of a Winding
sheet, then Wantonness. Secondly, Timothy was temperate in his dier, daily
drinking nothing but water, and such cold liquor was likely to quench all heat
of lust, and yet because Timothy though a good man, though a weak, though a
temperate man, yet but a man, and a young man, S. Paul thought the precept not
improper for the person, Flee youthful lusts. Lust is the fifth sin of youth.

19. All these five are the sins of youth. Would I could say but as truly
these five are all the sins of youth. But alas, youth is capable of, and
subject to all sins whatsoever. And yet, though youth be too bad in it self,
let us not make it worse then it is; With the fashion of the World, when an
offender is guilty of more then he can answer, to charge him with more then he
is guilty. Youth may commit all sins, yet all sins are not the sins of
youth. A young man may be covetous, yet Covetousness is no young man's sin.
Old men would be angry, if they might not keep that vice to themselves. Though
perchance they will call it by a more mannerly name of thriftinesse. The result
of all is this. These five sins are the waiters in ordinary, attending on
youth. So that all young Persons are guilty of them in some measure, except God
give them a better Proportion of restraining grace. As for sins
extraordinary, waiters on youth, they are innumerable, being as many as any
other age has, either inclination to desire, or ability to commit.

20. We come now to make a twofold Application of what has been said, the one
to young men, the other to old men. But you will say, where shall middle age
People be placed? Shall they be wholly neglected in the dispensation of this
days doctrine? I answer, middle age People, shall have free leave and liberty
to rank and reduce themselves, either amongst the young, or old persons,
according to their own Christian discretions. But I know where I shall find
them all, for naturally we all would be young, and therefore to them, amongst
the young people, I thus address my discourse.

21. You young people, ye have heard how youth is an age wherein men are prone
to be exceedingly sinful, wherefore as you tender the Glory of God, the health
of your bodies, the saving of your souls, let me entreat you to be careful to
avoid the sins of youth. It will be your own another day. Remember what Job
says, though no doubt an excellent man, Job 13. 26. Thou writest bitter things
against me, and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth. Thou make
me to possess the iniquities of my youth. If you lead dissolute lives whilst
you are young, other possessions I cannot promise you, for your Lands may be
lost, your goods gone, but this possession ye shall be sure of, (a strange
Possession often purchased by Prodigality) you shall possess the sins of
your youth, and (if you live so long) in your old age soundly smart, for the
luxury and intemperance of your youth. Remember also what Solomon says,
Ecclesiastes 11. 9. Rejoice, O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer
thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in
the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things, God will
bring thee unto judgment. Which words consist: The first a Concession, The
second a Commination; the first a Concession, for it is no positive Command, or
rather it is but an interpretative Connivance, not so much given as gotten, and
indulgent to the frailty of humane flesh, Rejoice, O young man in thy youth,
etc. The second is a Commination, contrary to good Music, it is harshest in
the close, I should like the Indentures well but for the condition: But know
thou that for all these things God will bring thee unto judgment. Will bring
thee, which words import two things. First, the unwillingnesse of youth to come
to judgment, Secondly, the unavoidablenesse, that youth must come to
judgment; And how soon you shall come to judgment, is known to God alone.
Flatter not your selves with a fond conceit of immortality. For though the
Psalmist says, a horse is but a vain thing to save a man, yet a very mote is
no vain thing to destroy a man. And whosoever shall be pleased to count the
number, and mark the age of this Sacrifice in the old Testament, shall find
more Kids and Lambs offered, then Goats and old Sheep.

22. But young men will say, preach you what you please, we will do what we
list. Your persuasions shall not befoole us out of the pleasures of youth. Yea,
this is but an envious discourse. Have ye not read of a Tyrant who having had
one of his eyes accidentally put out, cruelly caused an eye of every one of his
subjects to be bored out, that they might not mock at his deformity? And so
seeing youth is taken away from you, you would put it out in others, persuading
them if you could prevail, to deprive themselves of those pleasures, to which
youth does entitle them.

23. If any such there be that hear me to day, who fasten such envious
Comments on my innocent doctrine, I say if any such there be, as I fear there
be some, and hope there be few, and wish there were none, to such I say in the
holy Irony of the Prophet Michaiah to King Ahab, Go up and prosper. Larde your
souls with delight, may your own mind be the only Measure of your Pleasure,
carve what you please, and eat what you carve, and much good may that do you
which you eat; if it be not bad in it self, it shall never be made worse by
my wishes. But as God says to Daniel, Dan. 12. the last, in respect of his
Prophecy, But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, and go
thy way till the end be, for thou shall rest, and stand up in the lot at the
end of days: So say I to my Sermon this day, though only in relation to such
as count it an envious discourse; Sermon sleep for seven and seven years, yea
let the doctrine delivered this day, die for so long time, and when that time
is expired, when it is probable enough that the Preacher shall be dead, the
Sermon shall new live, and then have a resurrection in the belief of those
young men, who now less believe it. The instructions now laughed at, will then
be longed for. For indeed, this doctrine will grow the best when it is sown in
those furrows, which age has made in the face. Till then, my Sermon will be
contented to bear the burden of Envy, and then they that accuse it, must bear
the burden of Folly, when they shall freely acquit it, and flatly condemn
themselves.

24. I come now in the second place (and I hope with better success) to you
aged persons, nor let it be interpreted any disloyalty against the crown of
your old age, that I address my self to you in the last place; for (if I
mistake not) the last, is the first, the close and conclusion the highest place
in the Sermon. Let me in all humility advise you, not to repine at Gods
Providence, because your Youth is past. Coorse Complements were exchanged
betwixt Pharaoh and Moses at their last meeting, Exodus 10. 28. Pharaoh began,
Get thee gone, look to thy self, see my face no more. Moses, though meek, not
mopish, returned as short an answer, Thou have well spoken, I will see thy face
no more. The bargain is easily driven, where both parties desire it. I,
Pharaoh cares not for Moses, Moses cares as little for Pharaohs company. In
like manner labor to be as willing to lose youth, as that has been to leave
you. Never seek by unlawful ways to woo it to stay one minute longer. Let
the departing thereof cost thee not a sigh the more, or a smile the fewer. Is
youth gone with the sweet thereof? then it is gone with the sin thereof: Is it
gone with the delight thereof? then is it gone with the danger thereof: As
hereafter your carnal delight will be the less, so your spiritual joy will
be the more, if the fault be not in your selves.

25. Secondly, desire not, that as the Sun went back ten degrees on the dial
of Ahaz, so that thou might be ten days, ten Weeks, ten Months, ten years
younger then thou art. Such wishes I am sure are vain, I suspect are wicked.
What Soldier having escaped a desperate fight, desires himself again in the
midst of it? What seaman having escaped the Sands and Shelves, wishes himself
there again? and seeing ye have passed salum juventutis, as Tully terms it,
the troublesome Sea of youth; why should you wish your selves in it again?
Neither think to say within your selves, O if we were young again, the time
which formerly we misspent in riot, we would hereafter improve in piety. The
truth hereof will plainly be perceived, by your well husbanding the life which
is left you to Gods glory. For he that will not be faithful in a little, will
not be faithful in much. He will not be a good husband on the Remnant, would
be a bad one, if he had the whole Cloth. It is therefore to be suspected, that
in your desiring to be young again, you only make the pretense of Piety, the
Pander to your own Profaneness.

26. Beware therefore that in your old age ye be not guilty of the sins of
youth. Gardiners can tell you, that when Rose-trees are clipped in the month of
May, so that then they cannot bring Roses, they do commonly bring them in the
Autumn spring, in the month of September. And it is possible, if you have been
restrained, either by sickness of body, or natural modesty, or want of
opportunity, or restraining grace, from the excrescencies of youth, when you
are young, I say it is possible, that you may be visited with such guests in
your old age, and make them welcome at your own peril.

27. And this let me commend unto you, when you survey the sins of your
youth, take heed of mistaking your Oblivion, for Innocence, and thinking your
selves free from committing those sins which ye cannot remember. For were we
at this instant arraigned for some sins we have done, we would plead, Not
guilty. Not that we would be so impudent as to deny them if we did remember
them, but we have as clearly forgot them, as if we had never committed them.
Lord, thou layest such a sin to my charge, there is some error, some mistake,
some other may be guilty of it, but it is not I. But O what is said, Rev. 20.
12. in the description of the General judgment, And the books were opened.
The books wherein every ones faults are registered and recorded, the persons
who, and with whom, the place where, the time when, and in this point, midnight
is as clear a witness as noon day, concurring with the Testimony of our
guilty consciences.

28. Another place of Scripture also deserves your observation, Psalm. 50. 21.
these things have thou done, and I kept silence, thou thoughtest, that I was
altogether such a one as thy self, but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine eyes. I will set them in order. Alas! when we sin, we jumble
and confound, and heap, and huddle all together without any order or method.
But God in his Book will reduce it into a method.

Imprimis, such a sin when thou first did awake. Item, such a one before thou
did rise. Item, such a one before thou wast ready. Item, such a one before
thou eatedst thy breakfast. Or else thus: I Will set them in order according to
their several matter; The first leaf in the Book is Original sin, and then
Actual sins against God; actual sins against our selves, actual sins against
our neighbors; then truly shall we be in the case of Judah, Genesis 44. 16. when
the cup was found in his brother Benjamin's sack, and may say with him, What
shall we say unto my Lord? what shall we speak? or how shall we clear our
selves? God has found out the iniquity of thy servants.

29. One word more and I have done, and I hope none will censure my Sermon to
be too long for this passage that remains, though our sins be set in order,
and though the books be opened, be the books never so big, be the volumes never
so vast, it matters not how big the books be of the debts we have owed if all
be crossed. If therefore we have true interest in the mercies of God, and merits
of Christ, we may confidently come, and may comfortably pray, and shall be
certainly heard with David in my Text, Remember not O Lord the sins of my
youth. Amen.

A Corolary.
THe Soul of Man as conjoined with his Body, is in Scripture compared to a Job
18. 6. Prove. 20. 27.
Candle: Non although omnes animae sunt aequales, all souls are equal in
essence, yet both in operation (wherein they must ask the body leave to
exercise it self by its proper organs) as also in duration whilst conjoined
here with the body, there is great difference betwixt them. And we may in
humble prosecution of the Scriptures Metaphor observe seven Candles in relation
to their continuance in this life:

1. The first and least size is of those who have life in them, but never see
light without them.

2. The second size is of such who are born into this world, but die before the
concurrence of their Will with their Judgment, and therefore before their
possibility of committing Actual sin, with the Babes of Bethlehem murdered
by Herod.

3. The third is of those who arrive at an ability of Actual sin, yet expire
before they have attained unto the Perfection of Youth, with the Children that
mocked the Prophet Elisha.

4. The fourth size succeeds of those who are in the height and heat of their
Youth, the proper subject of our foregoing Sermon.

5. The fifth is of those who cannot be so foolish and fond in flattering
themselves, but that they must confess Youth is past with them, though as yet
they are not sensible of any decay in Nature: These are my Pew-fellowes in age,
God grant we may beware the Atheistical inference of those in the 2 Pet. 3. 4.
denying the Day of Judgment, because all things continue as they were from the
beginning of the Creation. We are subject to commit the same dangerous mistake
in our Microcosme as they did in their great World, and to conclude Death will
never surprise because we find not in our selves any evident and eminent
diminution of our strength, being as able and active as ever we have been in
our remembrance.

6. The sixth size is of those whose Almond-tree does flourish, though the
budding thereof be no sign of Spring, but Autumn in them; God grant they may
understand the summons of Death, though at distance, listen to, and make good
use of them.

7. The seventh and last size is of such who cannot appear in this place, nor
come within the hearing of a Sermon, no Church but a Chimney-corner, or a Bed
is the place of their abode, whose Candle is in the socket, and Lamps ready to
go out for want of oil to feed them.

To all these several sizes, I mean to so many of them as are capable of
understanding GOD in Solomon speaks, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember now thy Creator.
I say now, now is an Atome, it will puzzle the skill of an Angel to divide:
now is a Monosyllable in all Learned ( and many other) Languages, best
otherwise the name should be longer in pronouncing than the thing in
continuing. God grant that what size soever the Candle of our life be, we may
instantly remember our Creator. Amen.

FINIS.
NOTES UPON JONAH.

By Thomas Fuller.

LONDON, Printed for John Stafford in George-yard near Fleet-bridge. 1656.

NOTES UPON JONAH:
Chap. 1. ver. 1. The word of the Lord came also unto Jonah the son of Amittai,
saying.
SOme thing must be premised of the Name, Parentage, Time and Place of this
Prophet: His name (JONAH) signifying a Dove in Hebrew, but he answered his Name
rather in flying so fast away, than in want of gall, wherewith he abounded.

Parentage: son of Amittai. Men are differenced in the Bible, 1. by their
Fathers: as Benaiah son of Jehoida. 2. Mothers: as Joab son of Zerviah. 3.
Husbands: as Mary the wife of Cleophas. 4. Brothers: as Judas the brother of
James. 5. Sons: as Simon of Cyrene the father of Alexander and Rufus. But that
this Prophet was son to the widow of Sarepta, I believe no more, than that
Dinah, Jacob's daughter was wife to Job. Or that Ruth was daughter to Eglon
King of Moab: both which are as fondly fabled by Jews, as justly rejected by
Christians.

As for the Time and Place of this Prophet when and where he lived, though here
omitted, is supplied, 2 Kings 14. 25. He was of Gath Hepher, a City of the
Tribe of Zebulon, and lived in the time of Ioash King of Israel.

The word of the Lord came.] All Prophets and Preachers ought to have their
Patent and Commission from God. How can they Preach except they be sent? Romans
10. 15. That is, how can they Preach lawfully and profitably, though de facto
they preach to their own great harm and others little good. But as long as
there is current coin, there will be counterfeit. Ieroboam's Priests under the
Law, and Sheva's Sons in the Gospel, and at this day some who leap from the
Loom to the Pulpit. I must confess, an Asses head was good food in a famine;
course meat is dainty when no better can be had. But now (thanks be to God)
great is the company of Preachers, able and learned, and for ought I see, the
Universities afford more Vine-dressers, than the Country can yield them
Vineyards. No necessity therefore, that such blind Guides should be admitted.

Verse 2. Arise and go to Niniveh that great City, and cry against it: for
their wickedness is come up before me.
The words contain Ionah's Commission. The place whither he was sent. What he
should do there.

The Commission, Arise. As if he had said, Thou have long preached in Israel to
little purpose: Great the pains, Small the profit of thy Ministry. I will
therefore transplant thy preaching, to see if it will bring more fruit in
another soil. It is a sign of a ruin of a Church, when their Pastors are
called from their Flocks to go to Forraigners. As Jonah, who was here made
Non-resident against his will. When the eye-strings are broken, the
heartstrings hold out not long after. The Prophets are called Seers, their
departure presageth, that their Parishes soon after will dye and decay. For
sure the Children of Israel prospered not long after, that Jonah a star of
the first bigness was fallen from that firmament to arise into the horizon of
Nineveh.

Go to Nineveh that great City.] It is more than probable that this City being
the Metropolis of Assyria, was not a little proud of the greatness of it, as
able thereby to outface the judgments of God, and to blunt the edge of his
revenging sword with the populousness of her Inhabitants, before it could cut
clean through them. But let no City, though never so great, thus presume upon
her multitudes; the greater, the fairer mark she is for the arrows of Gods
judgments (though indeed nothing seems great in his eyes save that man that
seems little in his own:) and God can quickly substract in a day by sword,
plague and famine, what health, peace and plenty has multiplied in seven
years. This Island since the ends of two Kingdoms, were made the middle of
one Monarchy, has got the addition of Great Britain, yet if compared to the
Continent, we may say of it, as Lot of Zoar, Is it not a little one? Isa. 40.
15. Behold the Nations are as the drop of a bucket, and are counted as the
small dust of a balance, he takes up the Isles as a very little thing. Let us
the Inhabitants thereof not be proud of the greatness of it, which probably
puffed up Niniveh the great City.

And cry against it.] Ministers must not mutter, but publicly and strongly cry
against sinners: First, because sinners are afar off: Isa. 59. 2. But your
iniquities have separated betwixt you and your God. Mat. 15. 8. Their heart is
far from me. Ephesians. 2. 13. You who sometimes were afar off. Secondly,
because they are deaf. Thirdly, asleep. Fourthly, dead. If any object, why
then it is lost labor to cry against sinners, Preaching to the Dead is as
unprofitable as Praying for them. I Answer, Not so. For it is said, John 5. 25.
The hour is coming and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God, and they that hear shall live. Too blame then are those that are cruelly
kind unto their people in sowing pillows under their elbowes. Honey-dewes,
though they be sweet in taste, do blast and black the corn: And smoothing of
people in their sins, though pleasant to the palate of flesh, damneth and
destroys the soul. And yet this command to cry no whit favors their
practice, who change the strength of matter into stentoriousnesse of voice.
Such pieces make a great report with powder, but are charged with no shot, and
are useless to the beating down of sin. And it may be said of their crying,
that they do but whisper whilst they hollow.

For their wickedness is come up before me.] What the particular sin of
Nineveh was, is not expressed. Some think, had that City been arraigned for the
sins of Sodom, it would have been found guilty: And no doubt Sorcerie the sin
of the East, was no stranger in her own Country, and therefore the Ninevites
thereto much addicted. But that Oppression was certainly their predominant sin,
may be gathered out of the third of Nahum, ver. 1. O bloody City, it is full of
lies and robbery, the prey departs not. Not content to be a Queen of those
Countries she had subdued, she was a Tyrant. So then we see, all sins but
Oppression especially, though naturally they tend downwards to their center,
and with their weight press sinners to Hell; Yet they do mount upwards by
their cry and clamor, Genesis 4. 10. and 18. 20. It were then an advised way for
us to make some counter-sounds to drown the noise of our sins, that God may not
hear them. First, by sending up sighs from a penitent heart. Secondly, prayers
and alms, Acts 10. 41. Cornelius thy prayer is heard, and thine alms are had
in remembrance in the sight of God. Thirdly, by pleading Christ his merits;
That the loud language of his blood may out-noise and silence the cry of our
sins. Heb. 12. 24. Yet let Oppressors take notice, that theirs being the sin
of Nineveh, as it is of an higher nature, so is it of an higher cry than other
sins. And let the remorslesse Extortioner take this into his consideration:
Hand-mills, though they grind not so much, yet they grind as much to powder
as either Winde-mills or Water-mills, which are far greater: though these
Oppressors do not mischief to so many as Nineveh did, yet to so many as comes
within their clutches; they show as merciless cruelty, and this is a sin will
come up before God.

Verse 3. But Jonah rose up to flee into Tarshish, from the presence of the
Lord, and went down to Japho: For he found a ship going to Tarshish; so he paid
the fare thereof; and went down into it, that he might go with them into
Tarshish, from the presence of the Lord.
But Jonah rose up.] Whose superscription does this Book bear? Ionah's. Why did
he not like Alexander, when he was painted lay his finger on his wart? Why did
he not conceal in silence his own faults and infirmities? Why did he paint his
own deformity with his own pensill? Because the Penmen of the Holy Word, are
unpartiall Relators of their own faults, and of them who are dearest and
nearest unto them. Who speaks more against David than David? So ignorant was I
and foolish, even as a beast before thee. Who accuses S. Paul more than S.
Paul? 1 Timothy 1. 13. I was a Blasphemer, and a Persecuter, and an Oppressor. We
learn from S. Stephen, Acts 7. 22. That Moses was learned in all the wisdom of
the Egyptians, but in Moses in his own writings, we find no mention or
commendation of this his learning. He spared not himself in registring his
passion in smiting of the rock, neither spared he to record the cruelty of Levi
his Grandfather, the shrewishness of Zippora his Wife, the Idolatry-promoting
of Aaron his Brother, the murmuring of Miriam his Sister, the profaneness of
Nadab and Abihu his Nephews. This amongst other reasons may be one to prove,
that no Scripture is of private interpretation, but that holy men of God wrote
it, as they were inspired by Gods holy Spirit. Whereas the Books of Heathen
Writers are nothing else but the Inventories of their own virtues. What are
Caesar's Commentaries, but commentaries on the text of his own valor? But for
a man thus far to be unmann'd, as to banish self-love from himself, and with
Jonah, to put his own flight and fault into the Calendar of Eternity. Who sees
not the finger of God in Ionah's hand writing this prophecy?

Sundry carnal reasons may be alleged for Ionah's flight: First, fear of
extreme and cruel usage from the wicked Ninevites. Secondly, despair that his
preaching barren in Israel should be fruitful in Ashur. Thirdly, the
strangeness of the message, distasteful to a Jewish palate, to be sent to the
Gentiles. Fourthly, a zeal to his Country, he might perceive that the
conversion of the Gentiles would be the eversion of the Jews; and therefore he
was loath to be accessory to the destruction of his own Nation. Fifthly, that
reason alleged by himself in the fourth Chap. and ver. 2. He feared to be
disproved, because God was so merciful. But let his reasons, though never so
many and weighty, be put into one scale, and Gods absolute command weighed
against them in the other, TEKEL, They are weighed in the balance and found
too light. Prosper: Obedientia non discutit Dei mandata, sed facit. The Popish
tenent of blind Obedience, is true doctrine in this case; What God commands
let us put in speedy execution, without denying or delaying, or disputing the
difficulties that attend it.

To flee.] God bids Jonah go, and he flies, he supererogates, but in a wrong
work. In him the Proverb finds truth, The more haste, the worse speed. We see
then, those that want legs to go in goodness, can find wings to fly in
wickedness. The Elders of the Jews (probably aged Grandsires) how late were
they up that night our Savior was betrayed? How early did they rise that
morning he was condemned? How duly did they attend the whole day he was
crucified? who otherwise (no doubt) would have been in their beds as drowzie as
Dormice. It is not therefore the greatness of the strides, nor the swiftness
of the pace, but the rightnesse of the way which makes our going pleasing unto
God. 1 Cor. 9. 24. So run that ye may obtain. And if, with David, we cannot run
the way of Gods commandments, let us go them; if not go, let us creep. And
this may comfort us, that though* we go not so swift in our calling as we
could desire, yet we go in our calling: Our pace, though not fast, is firm;
and still by degrees we draw nearer and nearer to that Niniveh, to which God
has sent us.

To Tarshish.] What and where this Tarshish was, Authors only agree, in
disagreeing. Let this suffice: Be this Tarshish in Asia, be it in Africa; Be it
City, be it Country; Be it Sea, be it Continent: this sure I am, it was not
that Nineveh to which Jonah was sent.

From the presence of the Lord.] It were great ignorance in us to charge Jonah
with such ignorance, as if he thought it absolutely possible to fly from Gods
presence: And if he had been so erroneous, he made the most unadvised choice,
to fly to the Sea, where there appears the most evident demonstration of God's
powerful presence. Psalm. 107. 23. They that go down into the Sea in ships,
etc. The sight of the Sea might have been a Remembrancer to an Atheist, and put
him in mind of a God. Esau went to kill his brother Jacob, but when he met him
his mind was altered, he fell a kissing him, and so departed. Thus the waves
of the Sea march against the shore, as if they would eat it up: But when they
have kissed the utmost brink of the sand, they melt themselves away to nothing.
And this spectacle must needs make a man acknowledge a Deity. So then, these
words to fly away from the presence of the Lord, are not simply to be
understood; there being no flying from God, but thus: From God, an angry Judge
for our sins; to God, a merciful Father in our Savior. By this phrase then is
meant, He deserted the Office of a Prophet, he forsook and relinquished the
Ministerial Function, whereabout God had employed him. Thus to be In Gods
presence is used in Holy Writ, Deuteronomy. 10. 8. The Lord separated the Tribe of
Levi to stand before the Lord. 1 Kings 17. 1. As the Lord lives, says Elias,
before whom I stand. What kind of men then ought we Ministers to be? How
decently ought we to demean and behave our selves, who are Chaplains in
Ordinary to the King of Heaven. Every Month is our waiting Month: We are bound
to constant and continual attendance. It was the title of the Angel Gabriel,
Luke 1. 19. I am Gabriel that stands in the presence of God, i. e. Ever ready
to be sent of him in any employment. Now as Angels are Gods Ministers in
Heaven, so Ministers are Gods Angels on Earth, and stand in his presence from
which Jonah did fly.

And he went down to Japho, for he found a ship going to Ta^shish.] Japho was
the Port of Jerusalem, distant from thence some thirty miles, in the Tribe of
Dan, afterward called Ioppa. Here Jonah finds a ship for his purpose; how all
things seem to favor and flatter his flight. He lights on a ship, the ship
sets sail, and at the first the tide serves, the wind seconds them. Let us
suspect our selves, and search our actions whether they be not wrong, when we
run without rub, and sail without remora: For the first entrance into sin is
easy and pleasant; whereas in good actions when we begin them, it is a
thousand to one, but that the Devil or our corruptions, start some enemies or
obstacles to hinder us.

So he paid the fare thereof.] Jonah herein seems to be a man of a good
conscience. Hearken ye detainers of the wages of the hirelings: Know that
Oppression, the master whom you serve, will deal otherwise with you, than you
deal with your servants: For the wages of sin is death, and that shall duly be
paid you. And you Servants who have received your hire before hand, deal not
worse with your Masters, for dealing the better with you, but conscionably do
your work, that the Outlandish Proverb may not be verified in you, He that
pays his Servants wages before hand, cuts off his right arm: that is,
Occasions him to be lazy and slothful.

That he might go with them to Tarshish from the presence of the Lord.]
Pharaoh's dreams were doubled, because it was a thing determined by God, Genesis
40. 42. So these words were doubled in the Text, to show that it was no sudden
motion or project whereon Jonah stumbled unawares, but it was a purpose
consulted, concluded, debated, determined. He would, that he would fly from
the presence of the Lord. Now, it is the opinion of some, that Jonah altered
his calling and turned Merchant, but this is more than can be proved out of the
words. Traffic in it self is lawful, making those wooden bridges over the
Sea, which join the Islands to the Continent, adopting those Commodities to
Countries, whereof they are barren themselves by nature. But it is not fitting
that the Tribe of Levi should change Lots with the Tribe of Ashur; Or that
those who have Curam Animarum, should take upon them Curam Animalium: Apply
themselves to Husbandry, Grasing, or any Mechanical Trade.

Verse 4. But the Lord sent out a great wind into the Sea, and there was a
mighty tempest in the Sea, so that the ship was like to be broken.
But the Lord.] Though the man did thus leave his Master, yet the Master will
not thus leave his man: but sends a Pursevant after him. Learn from hence, God
is careful for his Servants, though they be careless for themselves. Genesis 19
16. Thus also was God merciful to Thomas, (who, for his temper, may be called,
the Jonah of the Apostles) making a new apparition for the confirming of his
faith, John 20. 26. Let us pray to God, that he would love us to the end; that
though we forsake him, he would not forsake us. That though we forget the duty
of Children to him, he would be pleased to remember the love of a Father to us.
And here we may admire Gods goodness to take such pains about the recalling of
a froward sinner. Lord! what was Jonah that thou should regard him? or the
son of Amittai, that thou should visit him?

Sent out a great wind into the Sea.] God is the commander of the winds, and
has them at his beck as the Centurion had his Servants. He says to the East
wind, Go, and he goes, Exodus 10. 13. And the West wind, Come, and he
comes, Exodus 10. 19. And to the South wind, Do this, and he does it, Psalm.
78. 16. If it be objected, that the Devil is styled, Ephesians. 2. 2. The Prince of
the power of the air: and therefore (to give the Devil his due) sithence wind
is nothing else but air moved by vapors: It may seem to be a subject of the
Devils Dominions. I Answer, The Devil is no absolute Prince of the air, no
Monarch, but only he has a deputed Command therein under the God of Heaven.
And Satan dares not for the fear of a praemunire exceed his commission, and
endeavor any thing in the air, without Gods express command or permission:
Much less can Witches and Conjurers (Lieutenants under the Devil) perform any
thing therein. And as for the Heathens fancy, which make AEolus God of the
Wind, it is lighter than the wind it self.

So that the ship was like to be broken.] Here a difficult Objection may be
started. How could it stand with Gods justice to put so many innocent Mariners
in hazard and jeopardy of their lives for the sin of Jonah alone? But these
Sheep, what have they done? Will God destroy the righteous with the wicked?
Shall not the Judge of all the earth do righteously? I answer, first at large.
In God's proceedings what we cannot conceive to be good, we must not condemn to
be bad: But suspect our selves, suspend our censures, admire his works, which
are never against right, though often above reason. To come nearer: God need
not pick a quarrel with man, he has just matter enough at any time to have a
controversy with him, and to commence actions against him. These Mariners,
though not guilty with Jonah in this particular act; yet had deserved this
punishment of God, for their former manifold transgressions, from which no man
is free.

Yet God hastened this punishment upon them for Jonah's presence with them.
Wash not in the same bath with Cerinthus, decline the society of notorious
sinners, Rev. 18. 4. Gold, though the noblest metal, loses of his luster by
being continually worn in the same purse with silver: And the best men by
associating themselves with the wicked, are often corrupted with their sins,
yea and partake of their plagues. Yet when men are implunged in misery, through
the faults of others, and suffer for company for the sins of others, (as men in
suretyship, undone by the prodigality of their friends for whom they were
bound, Let them reflect their eyes on their own faults, and know that though
they be innocent in this particular, yet they have deserved this punishment of
God for some other sin. And God may justly take advantage at his own pleasure
to inflict the punishment. However, let them know themselves for sinners in an
high degree, who involve others within the very and latitude of their own
punishments; As drunken Husbands, who by their prodigality drowned their whole
Family in a sea of want, making their Wives, Children, Servants, Cattle pinch
and pine through their riot, and excess. For our parts let us labor to attain
to true piety, that so we may rather be a Joseph, whose goodness may make a
whole family to prosper; Rather one of those ten Righteous, for whose
righteousness a whole Sodom might be saved; then an Achan, for whose sins an
Army may be routed; or a Jonah, for whose fault, a whole ship full of men was
like to be broken.

Verse 5. Then the Mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his God, and
cast the wares that were in the ship into the Sea to lighten it of them: But
Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship, and he lay down, and was fast
asleep.
Then the Mariners were afraid.] These words afford an harder than Sampson's
riddle: Out of the Bold came Fear. Out of the Profane, Piety. Out of the
Covetous, came Casting away of goods. Mariners they are the hardiest of all
people, so always in danger, that they are never in danger, as if their hearts
were made of those rocks, amongst which they use to sail, yet see they feared.
They are accounted a profane kind of people, a-kin'd unto the unjust Judge,
Luke 18. 2. They are esteemed the Nazareth of the world, out of which comes no
good; Yet see, they pray. They are generally covetous, venturing their lives
for lucre: yet see, they cast away their goods. Whence we may learn, that
afflictions are able to affright most profane men into piety: whether really
inflicted, as unto Pharaoh; or certainly denounced, as unto Ahab. Wherefore,
let us labor that we be as good, when afflictions are removed, as when they
are inflicted; as pious in wealth, as in want; as well affected in health, as
in sickness, that in prosperity we prove not Apostates from those pious
resolutions, which we made in adversity. When David had appointed Solomon King,
1 Kings 1. 36. Benaiah the son of Jehoiada answered, AMEN. And the Lord God of
my Lord the King, say, AMEN. So when in afflictions we have made any vows of
future piety, if we have deliverance, let us pray to God to ratify and confirm
our resolutions; and to give us strength to fulfill and perform them: Lest
otherwise we take but a lease of piety, during the term that the tempest does
last, and relapse to our former wickedness when the calm begins.

And cried every man unto his God.] General punishments must have general
prayer and humiliation, otherwise the plaster will be too narrow for the sore.
To his God. The ship was fraught with a Miscelanie of all Nations: It was a
Babel, and contained a confusion of as many Religions, as that of Languages:
None were at a loss for a Deity to pray to. (So an unnatural sin was
Atheism) Yet woeful then was the estate of the World, when one could not see
GOD for Gods. But let us now be thankful, that as the true Serpent of Moses,
eat up and devoured the seeming Serpents which Iannes and Iambres the Egyptian
Inchanters did make: So now, in the civillized world the knowledge of the true
God has devoured and done away all fancies and fables of feigned Gods.
Nevertheless, as the Heathens in this ship, so every Christian may still pray
to his proper GOD. My Lord and my God, says Thomas. I thank my god, 1 Cor. 1.
4. The same is God to all in general, and to each in particular.

And cast the wares that were in the ship into the Sea.] Skin for skin, and all
that a man has, will he give for his life, Act. 27. Now if life be so dear,
how dear is the life of our life, the eternal happiness of our souls? What
shall a man gain, if etc? Therefore when it comes in competition, whether we
shall lose our souls, or our goods; let us drown our outward pelf, lest it
drown us; let us cast it away, lest we be cast away by it. Woe be to him that
loadeth himself of thick clay, Hab. 2. 6. Rather as Joseph saved himself from
his Mistress, though he left his garment behind him: So it matters not though
we lose (the clothes of our souls) our earthly possessions; so be it our souls
themselves still remain safe and entire. And if in such a case we must forgo
our goods, much more must we forsake our sins which are good for nothing, but
to sink us down to destruction, Heb. 12. 1. Lets lay aside every weight, and
the sin that does so easily beset us. And not only pray to God to assists us,
but with the Mariners in the Text, back and second our prayers by using all
lawful means for our own safety.

But Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship.] I here read a
contradiction in Jonah's actions: He went down into the sides of the ship; this
favors of flight and of fear: And there he slept; this of confidence and
security. Yet wonder I not that I cannot make sense of Jonah's actions, who
surely at this time could scarce make sense of his own. Sin distracts men, and
makes them at the same time embrace contradicting purposes: So that their
resolutions fight as the twins in Rebecka's womb, and are as contrary to
themselves as to God's laws. See Jonah at one instant, Formidat and audet.

And lay down, and was fast asleep.] An Emperor hearing of the death of one of
his subjects, who was deeply indebted, sent to buy his bed, supposing there was
some opium, or soporiferous virtue therein, that he could sleep so soundly
thereon and be so much engaged. Surely this Emperor would have proved a (...)
Chapman to have purchased Jonah's ship; who, notwithstanding he had so many
things within, without, about, above, beneath to disturb him, yet, as if the
rossing of the waves, had been the rocking of this cradle; and the roaring of
the winds, Lullabyes in his ear, was fast asleep. Learn, first, it is a great
sin with Jonah to be drowsy, when the rest are at their devotion, and yet many
such Separatists, and Non-conformists we have, who by their sluggishnesse
divide themselves from the whole Congregation. Indeed, Eutiches had some plea
for his sleeping, because S. Paul's Sermon was continued until midnight. But
we may say to our people, as our Savior to his Disciples, What? can ye not
watch with me one hour? Secondly, it is a great sin with us (with Jonah) to
be secure, whilst we (with others) are in a common danger, and calamity.
Consider the present estate of the Christian Church; Is it not tossed with the
tempest of war, as bad as Jonah's ship? It lost an Anchor, when the
Palatiuate was lost. It sprung a Leake, when Rochel was taken. One of the main
Masts thereof was split, when the King of Sweden was killed. Though we in this
Island be safe in the sides of the ship, yet let us not be sleepy as Jonah; but
with our prayers commend to God the distresses of our Beyond* sea* brethren;
and thank God that we (like Gedeon's Fleece) are dry, when the ground round
about is wet with weeping; steeped in tears, bedewed with mourning. Thirdly,
persevering in sin besots men, and makes them insensible of the greatest
dangers. It makes men like Nabal, their heart dies within them, and they become
like a stone; so frozen in their sins, that no fear of Hellfire can thaw
them. Thus David, when he killed Uriah, seemed to kill his own conscience. How
was he berest of sense of sin and punishment for nine months together; yea,
the time of Bathsheba's deliverance was come, but the time of David's
repentance was not come. Who ever saw the Sun so long in an eclipse? Let us
therefore stop sin in the beginning: For profaneness as well as piety is
advanced by degrees, and in the progress thereof, has certain stages before
it comes to the journeys end. Crush it therefore in the first motion before it
comes to be a settled thought; in the thought, before it break forth into
action; in the action, ere it become a disposition; in the disposition, ere it
be an habit; in the infant-habit, before it become inveterate, and another
nature. And here also we may see how desperate security in wicked men has by
usurpation entitled it self to be true valor. Men count wicked men full of
sortitude, which run on Gods drawn sword without any fear; when alas! it is
nothing but a sottish security arising from a seared conscience. Will any say,
that it is true valor in a Bedlem that he feels no pain, whose limbs are
benumbed and past sense.

Verse 6. So the Ship-master came to him, and said unto him, What meanest thou,
o sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us, that
we perish not.
So the Ship-master.] The Ship-master that was, (but now no Master of it, the
Tyranny of the tempest Commanding both it and him) begins to bestirre him.
Great men must not think to be privileged from danger by the eminency of
their place. Mordecai to Hester: Think not thou shall escape in the Kings house
more than all the Jews. Yea, sometimes Great men are in the greatest dangers,
they are most aimed at, Fight neither against small nor against great, save
only against the King of Israel, 1 Kings 22. 31. Now sithence there was a
Governor in a ship, it teaches us that no company can long subsist without
order and superiority one above another: From the Courtiers to the Prisoners,
Genesis 39. 22. Joseph had all the Prisoners in the Prison committed to to his
hand. Ten is but a small number, yet Moses made Governors over ten, Exodus 18.
21. Yea, as there is Michael the Archangel in heaven, so is there Beel Zebub
the Prince of Devils in Hell: So much order there is in the very place of
confusion. Away then with the Anabaptist, who would set all men at odds by
making all men even. For a Commonwealth to want Chief, it is the chief of
all wants, every man will do what he list, few what they should: too much
liberty would make men slaves to their own self-will. Let us therefore be
subject to the higher powers, knowing that there are no powers but of God.

Came unto him, and said.] Every one in authority ought to look unto those
which are under their command; otherwise they shall answer to God for such
faults as those commit which are under their charge, through their oversight
and neglect. Christ is said to have baptized* John 3. 23. And yet it is said,
John 4. 2. That he himself baptized not, but his Disciples. We see that the
deed of the Servants being done by the countenance and command of the Master,
is attributed and ascribed to his Master as his own proper work. If the Master
hears of his Servants drunkenness, and punishes it not, it is the Masters
drunkenness. If the Master hears of his Servants profaneness, and reproves
him not for it, it is his profaneness. Blameworthy then are those
Magistrates who would have the profit, not the pain; the credit, not the care
of their place and charge: so that they deal with those that are under them,
as David did with Adoniah, they will not so much as trouble themselves to say
to Offenders, Why do thou so?

What meanest thou, o sleeper!] See here the Gentile teaches the Jew, the
Pagan preaches to the Prophet, and he is content to hear him. How faulty is
their pride, who count it an imbasing of their knowledge to listen to the
advice of others, who in any respect are their inferiors, Ioh. 9. ver. 34. Yet
David hearkened to the advice of Abigail, Abraham to the counsel of Sarah,
Apollos to the instruction of Aquila and Priscilla, yea Solomon (the wisest of
earthly Kings) had a Council of Aged men which stood before him. Neither need
any man think much to learn of the meanest of men, who may be taught by
Pismires and Lillyes. Yet when inferiors on just occasion adventure to counsel
those that are above them, that their counsel may better relish, Let it be
seasoned with these three ingredients, first, Secrecy. This alone was good in
Peter's reproving of our Savior, Mat. 16. 22. (...), He took him aside.
Secondly, Seasonablenesse. Abigail, 1 Samuel 25. 36. told drunken Nabal neither
more nor less, till the next morning: she thought her physic would work the
better, if she gave it him fasting. Thirdly, Humility. Naaman's Servants:
Father, if the Prophet had bid thee some great thing, would not thou have
done it? 2. Kings 5. 13. They brought not only good Logic, reasoning from the
greater (...) but also good Ethics, Father. These cautions observed, meaner
persons by Gods assistance, with hope of success, may take upon them to advise
their betters.

Arise, and call upon thy God.] He does not only reprove him for what he had
done amiss, but also directs him in what he should do well. They are
miserable Guides, that tell the wandering Traveller, that he has lost the way,
but tell him not how to find it.

Arise.] Men must put away all laziness, when they prepare themselves to
prayer. Indeed, when in sickness we are Gods prisoners, then we can only rouse
up our souls and not arise in our bodies; then, with Hezekiah, we may lie on
our bed and pray, pleading to God, as Mephibosheth to David, that his servant
is lame: But otherwise, Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord
negligently. The first fruits of the Ass was not to be dedicated to God in the
Leviticall Law, but the neck thereof was to be broken. Let us break the asses
neck, let us banish all sloth and laziness when we go about to perform any
service of God, Call upon thy God.] Because perchance the Ship-master had a
great opinion of the sufficiency of Ionah's God, or because he might have a
conceit that Ionah's prayers might be more prevalent than his own. Aeschinus
said unto his Uncle Mitio, in the Comedy:

Tu potius deos comprecare, nam tibi eos certo scio,
Quo vir melior es, quam ego sum, obtemperaturos magis.
Or else he only aimed at a general collection of prayers, hoping that that
cablerope would be strongest that was twisted of most several cords.

If so be that God will think upon us, that we perish not.] It is worth our
search to know, when these words, If so be God will, are to be inserted into
our prayers, and when they must be omitted. When we pray for pardon of our
sins, then we must omit them: For God has said, At what time etc. I will put
all his wickedness out of my remembrance. Now let us not dispute of what is
determined suspect what is sure. God says, he will. Let us not say, If so be
God will. If our repentance be unfaigned, our pardon may be undoubted: In such
a case, Let us come to the Throne of Grace with boldness in the assurance of
faith, with reasoning, trust perfectly in grace. But when we pray for the
removal of punishment, then these words are no Parenthesis, but an essential
part of our prayers, then we must submit our selves not our wills, but thy will
be done; then with children we must not cry to carve our own meat, but eat that
which God our Father cuts for us, though it be untoothsome for our palats to
taste, it is never unwholesome for our stomachs to digest.

Verse 7. And they said every one to his fellow, Come and let us cast lots,
that we know for whose cause this evil is upon us. So they cast lots, and the
lot fell upon Jonah.
And they said every one to his fellow.] The apprehension of the present
danger, was the cement that did glue and unite their different judgments and
affections, to resolve on that, which they conceived was for their general
good. It is likely that the beasts in the Arc when they were in a common
danger of drowning did agree together, and for that time dispense with their
mutual Antipathies. Grant then that we have several tempers, humors,
opinious; yet the apprehension that we have one grand unpartiall enemy, the
Devil, who like a roaring Lion seeks to devour us: This should make us center
our votes in such resolutions, which are behoofull for all our goods.

Come let us cast lots.] The use of Lots was very ancient amongst both Jews
and Gentiles. They were of three natures, 1. The Lot Divinatorie, used by
Haman, Hest. 3. 7. And as for this kind of Lot, it is utterly unlawful, We
have no such custom, nor yet the Churches of God. Secondly Divisorie, Obad.
11. Mat. 27. 35. Thirdly Consultory, Lev. 16. 21. Josh. 7. 18. 1 Samuel 14. 42.
These are lawful, if used lawfully, with these cautions: First, in matters of
difficulty; As quicksilver in the Iliaca passio, when nothing else can untwine
the gutts; in perplexed and intricate causes. Secondly, in matters of
consequence, otherwise there may difficiles nugae; Riddles not worth the
reading. Hard shells without a kernel not worth the cracking. Difficulties
which deserve not the resolving. Thirdly, they are to be ushered with prayer,
as in the choice of Matthias, Act. 1. Fourthly, that nothing therein be
attributed to Chance, Prove. 16. 33. The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole
disposition thereof is from the Lord. Whole. Fortune, that God of man's making;
is a mere Idol of Dagon: and falls down at the approach of the Arc of GOD's
providence: Loosing both head and hands, power both to plot and perform. It is
not Fortune blind through ignorance that cannot see, But Divine Justice blind
through impartiality that will not see, which orders the matter. Lastly, no
cousenage or deceit is to be used in them. Lots are Gods scales, wherein he
weighs matters of seeming equallity, and shows which preponderates: they
therefore that falsify this balance of the Sanctuary, must needs be
abomination in the sight of God.

Now because Lots may say to Cards, what Naomi said to Boaz, They are near unto
us, and of our affinity; something also of the use of them. It were no great
harm if there were no other Cards used, than those of Clothiers about wool,
and of Mariners in the ship. But as for Cards to play with, Let us not wholly
condemn them, lest lacing our consciences too straight, we make them to grow
awry on the wrong side.

Such Recreations are lawful if we use them as Jonathan tasted the honey,
putting forth the end of his rod he touched a little of it, and his eyes were
cleared. But let us take heed of a surfeit, into which those do fall who
either play out of covetousness, or for more than their estates can bear, or
constantly and continually; all their meat is sauce, all the days in their
Almanac play-dayes, though few Holy Days. The Creation lasted but a Week, but
these men's Recreations all the days of their lives; such using of lawful
exercises is altogether unlawful.

That we may know for whose cause this evil is upon us.] The best man in the
ship carried sin enough about him to drown himself, ship, and passengers. But
this milk we suck from the breasts of our mother Eve, to shift and post off the
fault from our selves, how guilty soever we are, 1 Samuel 15. 9. But Saul and the
people spared Agag and the best sheep: Now ver. 15. it is said, They have
brought them from the Amalekites, for the people spared the best of the sheep.
He that was the greatest in the sin, would not be at all in the shame. Should
God scourge this Land with Famine, or any other general punishment, The
Courtiers would impute the cause thereof to the Covetousness of the Citizens:
The Citizens to the Prodigality of the Courtiers: The Rich to the
unthankfulness, discontented murmuring of the Poor: The Poor to the
hard-heartednesse of the Rich: The Laity to the Clergies want of preaching: The
Clergy to the Laities want of practicing: Every one would post the fault from
himself, and be inquisitive with these Mariners, For whose fault this evil
was upon them.

FINIS.



