TWO LETTERS From His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, ONE To both Houses of
PARLIAMENT; Giving an Account of what Transactions and Proceedings have been
betwixt the Kings Majesty and the Army, since His coming into their Quarters.

WITH Some farther Proposals in relation to His Majesty, and the speedy
settlement of the Peace of the Kingdom.

THE OTHER A LETTER to the Lord Major, Aldermen and Common Counsel of the City
of LONDON, With some PAPERS of the Proceedings of the Treaty with the ARMY.

BY the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the Council of War.

Reading, July 8. 1647.

Signed JOHN RUSHWORTH.

London, Printed for Laurence Chapman. IELY 10. 1647.

Mr. Speaker,
I Was sent unto by the King on Friday last, to desire the Parliament to give
way to Him to see His Children; and that they might for that purpose be sent to
Him: If I may be bold humbly to offer my Opinion, I think the allowance of such
a thing may be without the least prejudice to the Kingdom, and yet gain more
upon His Majesty then denying it; and if it be in the prayers of every good
man, That His heart may be gained, the performance of such civilities to Him is
very suitable to those Desires, and will hear well with all men, who (if they
can imagine it to be their own case) cannot but be sorry, if His Majesty's
natural affections to His Children, in so small a thing should not be complied
with; and if any question should be concerning the assurance of their return, I
shall engage for their return within what time the Parliament shall limit.

Upon this occasion give me leave, I beseech you, to take notice of some
Reports spread abroad, as if my self and the Officers of the Army were upon
some underhand Contract or Bargain with the King; and from thence occasion is
taken to slander our Integrities, and endeavor a misunderstanding betwixt the
Parliament and their Army, the fidelity of which to the Parliament and Kingdom,
and their affection to it, are the great objects of many men's Envies, because
they see nothing so likely to settle Right and Freedom, with Truth and Peace to
us and posterity, and to hinder their Designs against the same, as an Harmony
or good accord between the Parliament and Army, which is the joy of good men,
and it shall be our study to preserve against all Designs and Designers to the
contrary.

To prevent therefore all misunderstandings of that kind, I thought fit with
all clearness to declare unto you, That we have done nothing, nor shall do any
thing which we desire to hide from you or the world, or shall not avow to the
faces of our greatest Adversaries.

Our Desires concerning a just consideration and settlement of the Kings Rights
(His Majesty first giving, His concurrence to settle and secure the Rights and
Liberties of the Kingdom) We have already publicly declared in our
Representation and Remonstrance. Since the first of those Papers sent to the
Parliament, there have been several Officers of the Army upon several occasions
sent to His Majesty, the first to present to Him a copy of the Representation,
and after that some others to tender Him a copy of the Remonstrance; upon both
which, the Officers sent were appointed to clear the sense and intention of any
thing in either Paper, whereupon His Majesty might make any question. Since
then, there have also been some Officers at several times sent to His Majesty
about His remove from Hatfield, to dissuade (if possibly) from Windsor or any
place so near London, to some place of further distance, answerable to what we
had desired of the Parliament.

In all which addresses to His Majesty, We care not who knows what has been
said or done; for as We have nothing to bargain for or to ask, either from His
Majesty or the Parliament, for advantage to our selves, or any particular party
or interest of our own; so in all those Addresses to His Majesty We have
utterly disclaimed and disavowed any such thing, or any Overtures or Thoughts
tending that way; But the only intent and effect of those our Addresses has
been, to desire and endeavor His Majesty's free concurrence with the
Parliament, for establishing and securing the common Rights and Liberties, and
settling the peace of the Kingdom; and to assure Him, That (the Public being
so provided for, with such His Majesty's concurrence) it is fully agreeable to
our Principles, and should be our desires and endeavor, That (with, and in such
settling of the Public) the Rights of His Majesty's Royal Family should be
also provided for, so as a lasting Peace and Agreement might be settled in this
Nation: And that, as We had publicly declared for the same in general terms,
so (if things came to a way of settlement) We should not be wanting (in our
sphaeres) to own that general Desire, in any particulars of natural or civil
right to His Majesty's Person or Family, which might not prejudice or again
endanger the Public: and in the mean time, That His Majesty should find all
personal civilities and respects from us, with all reasonable freedom that
might stand with safety, and with the trust or charge lying upon us concerning
His Person.

You have here the utmost sum of what has passed from us to His Majesty; and
We could wish all men did rightly understand (without misrepresentations) every
particular wherein (as We know nothing not agreeable to Reason, Justice,
Honesty or Conscience, so) We thought our selves concerned the rather to say
and do, as We have toward His Majesty since He came within our quarters,
because of those common prejudices suggested against us, as if We were utter
Enemies to Monarchy, and all Civil Order or Government.

And for that particular of the Duke of Richmond and the Two Chapleins lately
permitted to attend His Majesty, It was not done without much reluctance,
because therein We doubted We might be misunderstood by the Kingdoms best
friends.

But upon His Majesty's continuing importunity for it (as a thing very nearly
concerning His present inward and outward contentment; and conceiving those
persons such (as we hoped) would not do ill offices to prejudice the Peace of
the Kingdom, We did give way to it, and the persons (before they came) had
notice of the permission: And as We then thought, so We still do think, That to
allow him some such company of persons least dangerous, whom former
acquaintance may make him take pleasure in; and the allowance of some such
Chapleins of His own, are things both reasonable and just; and the debarring of
that liberty in the latter (We doubt) will but make Him more prejudiced against
other Ministers.

In general, We humbly conceive, that to avoid all harshness, and afford all
kind usage to His Majesty's Person, in things consisting with the Peace and
Safety of the Kingdom, is the most Christian, Honorable and Prudent way: And in
all things (as the Representation and Remonstrance of the Army does express) We
think that tender, equitable and moderate dealing, both toward His Majesty,
His Royal Family, and His late party (so far as may stand with safety to the
Kingdom, and security to our common Rights and Liberties) is the most hopeful
course to take away the seeds of War or future Feuds amongst us for posterity,
and to procure a lasting Peace and Agreement in this now distracted Nation; To
the effecting and settling whereof (with a secure provision first to be made for
the common Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom, and a due care to preserve and
propagate the Gospel of Truth and Peace amongst us) we shall hope that neither
the Parliament nor His Majesty will be wanting: And if God shall see it good to
make us any way instrumental thereunto or that We may otherwise see the same
accomplished, We shall then think our selves indeed discharged from the public
engagements We have been called out unto, more clearly and effectually then
(before such things were settled) We could have thought our selves to be, and
(to demonstrate our clearness from seeking self-advantages in what We did) We
shall thenceforth account it our greatest happiness and Honor (if God see it
good) to be disingaged and dismissed, not only from our Military charges, but
from all other matters of Power or public employment whatsoever.

I have in these things spoke, not in my own Name alone, but in the Name
(because I find it to be the clear sense of the generality, or at least of the
most considerable part) of the Army, and I am confident you and the Kingdom
will never find it otherwise: I shall leave it to your favorable construction,
and commit all to the goodness of God for an happy issue. I remain

Reading, July 8. 1647. Your most humble Servant, T. Fairfax.
For the Right Honorable, The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
For the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Counsel of the
City of LONDON.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
TO the end we may continue a right understanding betwixt you and us all along
in the management of this great business with the Parliament, (the happy
proceedings thereof so much concerning the safety and peace of this Kingdom) we
have given your Commissioners this day the copy of a Paper which we presented
to the Commissioners of Parliament residing with us; wherein we take notice of
the true reasons of the slow progress in the Treaty, and declare where the
stop remains. And to the end that nothing may be wanting in us which might work
toward the speedy settlement of the quiet of this Kingdom; we have humbly
offered what we can say will most effectually tend to remove those encumbrances
and letts which stand between us and the universal good of the Kingdom; and
till that be done, it cannot be expected that we should procure the Peace of
this Kingdom by a Treaty, but rather give occasion and opportunity thereby to
others to engage us in a second War, which must necessarily hazard the ruin of
this Kingdom, as also the certain destruction of Ireland, the relief whereof we
shoud most effectually apply unto you, were the affairs of England but once put
into an hopeful posture. It is a sudden and substantial settlement of the whole
we desire, in a general, safe, and well-grounded Peace, and the establishment
of such good Laws, as may duly and readily render to every man their just
Rights and Liberties: And for the obtaining of these, not only our intentions
had led us to, but we think that all the Blood, Treasure and Labor spent in
this War, was for the accomplishing those very things which are of that
concernment both to our selves and posterity, that neither we nor they can live
comfortably without them; and thereof we hope your selves will have the same
sense, and therefore improve your interest for the obtaining out just Desires
in the Proposals now sent unto the Parliament; which being granted, and we
secured from the danger of a War, we shall proceed with cheerfulness to the
Treaty, and doubt not in a short time to see an happy Conclusion, to the
satisfaction of all honest men's Expectation, and that in all our undertakings
we shall be found men of truth, fully and singly answering the things we have
held forth to the Kingdom in our several Declarations and Papers, without by or
base respects to any private end or interest whatsoever.

READING, July 8. 1647. By the Appointment of His Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and his Council of War. Signed, JO. RUSHWORTH, Secretary.

A Paper delivered in by the Commissioners of Parliament, Wednesday, July 7.
1647.
THat finding the Expectation of the Parliament and Kingdom to be very great
upon the speedy progress and happy issue of this Treaty; in consideration
whereof, we have made it our Care constantly to attend at the appointed times
of meeting, and to press all dispatch therein: And we cannot but take notice
that the proceedings on your part have been and are very slow, and that little
or nothing has been done in the Treaty since our entrance thereupon: and
therefore in discharge of our Duty, and the Trust reposed in us, we do very
earnestly desire that the Treaty may be effectually proceeded on with all
expedition, and the times for meeting punctually kept; there being nothing that
shall be wanting in us, according to the power given us, to further a work of
so great importance, and which may perfect a right understanding betwixt the
Parliament and the Army.

Reading, July 7. 1647. By the appointment of the Commissioners residing with
the Army. Signed, GEO. PYKE, Secretary.

An Answer of the Commissioners of the Army to the Paper of the Commissioners
of Parl ament about a speedy proceeding.
BY the last Paper delivered in unto us from your Lordships at Reading the 7 of
July, we perceive you find, That the Expectation of the Parliament and Kingdom
is great upon the speedy progress and happy issue of this Treaty. We
answer, That we do really apprehend the same things with you; neither can we
but witness that you have constantly attended the appointed times of meeting,
and pressed dispatch therein: Nevertheless we cannot but be very sensible, that
you seem to reflect upon us further then there is just cause, in your taking
notice that the proceedings herein should be slow and dilatory on our part, as
if we should not seem to desire and labor the quick and speedy settlement of
the affairs of the Kingdom in a safe and well-grounded Peace as cordially as
any persons whatsoever. We shall therefore desire you to remember with what
forwardness we have in the first place presented to you those things which we
did in our hearts conceive necessary in order to a Treaty, and without which
being granted, we could not with safety to the Kingdom and satisfaction to our
selves proceed in Treaty; and further pressed you to present them to the
Parliament with speed, that a quick dispatch might be had therein, as being in
our thoughts the chiefest and surest way to prevent the engaging this Kingdom
in a second War; when contrary to our expectation we have found little
effectually done in relation to our Desires in those things most concerning the
safety and peace of the Kingdom.

To the end therefore we may acquit our selves from being guilty of the delay
you mention, and that it may appear to all men where the stick is of not
proceeding in the Treaty to a settlement of the peace of the Kingdom so much
thirsted after by us all, we thought fit to reminde you of these following
proposals, which we have formerly insisisted upon, and to which satisfaction is
not given.

I. That there is nothing done with effect, notwithstanding the Votes of the
House, to the dispersing of the Reformado Officers, who still continue in and
about London, ready to head Forces, to the apparent bazzard of a new War.

II. That notwithstanding the Votes of the House for the speedy sending into
Ireland, or disbanding those Forces which left the Army, and their special
Order to the Committee at Derby House to take speedy care therein, yet they are
still continued in bodies in and about London, and as we hear, are daily
listing more Forces, pretending the Service of Ireland.

III. That notwithstanding the Votes of the House of the tenth of June, and
those since of the fifth of July, for the present purging the of House, yet
diverse persons comprised in these Votes continue still to sit there.

So long as we remain unsatisfied in the two first of these particulars, we
cannot be secured from those doubts we have expressed of the danger of a new
War, especially if it be considered, that the end of inviting so many
Reformado Officers to London, was to lay a foundation of a new War, and was
principally carried on by the design of some of those Members of the House of
Commons we have impeached. And likewise that diverse of the Officers and
Soldiers which left this Army were procured by promises of pay, and other
engagements, which were likewise designed by the same persons aforementioned,
if possibly they might thereby have broken this Army.

And for the last; What comfortable effect may we expect of a Treaty, so long
as the Parliament (the supreme Judicatory of the Kingdom) is constituted of
some that are men of interests contrary to the common good thereof, from whom
we can expect nothing but banding and designing, to obstruct and frustrate all
proceedings (contrary to their interest) though never so essential to the
happy settlement of the Kingdom: and if a seasonable remedy be not given
herein, we despair of any good to the Kingdom by way of Treaty.

Reading, 7o Julii, 1647. By the appointment of the Commissioners of the Army.
Signed, WILLIAM CLERK Secretary.

FINIS.

