THE HOLY STATE

By Thomas Fuller Bachelour of Divinity, and Prebendary of Sarum late of
Sidney College in Cambridge.

CAMBRIDGE* Printed by R: D: for John Williams at the Sign of the Crown in
St. Paul's Churchyard 1642 W: Marshall Sculpt



THE HOLY STATE. BY THOMAS FULLER, B. D. and Prebendarie of Sarum.

ZECHARIAH 14.20. In that day shall there be upon the bells of the horses,
HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by ROGER DANIEL for John Williams, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1642.

To the Reader.
WHo is not sensible with sorrow of the distractions of this age? To write
books therefore may seem unseasonable, especially in a time wherein the Press,
like an unruly horse, has cast off his bridle of being Licensed, and some
serious books, which dare fly abroad, are hooted at by a flock of Pamphlets.

But be pleased to know that when I left my home, it was fair weather, and my
journey was half past, before I discovered the tempest, and had gone so far
in this Work, that I could neither go backward with credit, nor forward with
comfort.

As for the matter of this Book, therein I am resident on my Profession;
Holiness in the latitude thereof falling under the cognizanse of a Divine. For
curious method, expect none, Essays for the most part not being placed as at a
Feast, but placing themselves as at an Ordinary.

The characters I have conformed to the then standing Laws of the Realm, (a
twelvemoneth ago were they sent to the press) since which time the wisdom of
the King and State has thought fitting to alter many things, and I expect the
discretion of the Reader should make his alterations accordingly. And I conjure
thee by all Christian ingenuity, that if lighting here on some passages, rather
harsh-sounding then ill-intended, to construe the same by the general drift
and main scope which is aimed at.

Nor let it render the modesty of this Book suspected, because it presumes to
appear in company unmann'd by any Patron: If right, it will defend it self; if
wrong, none can defend it: Truth needs not, falsehood deserves not a Supporter.
And indeed the matter of this Work is too high for a subjects, the workmanship
thereof too low for a Princes patronage.

And now I will turn my pen into prayer, That God would be pleased to discloud
these gloomy days with the beams of his mercy: which if I may be so happy as
to see, it will then encourage me to count it freedom to serve two
apprentiships (God spinning out the thick thread of my life so long) in writing
the Ecclesiastical History from Christ's time to our days, if I shall from
remoter parts be so planted, as to enjoy the benefit of walking, and standing
Libraries, without which advantages the best vigilancie does but vainly dream
to undertake such a task.

Mean time I will stop the leakage of my soul, and what heretofore has run out
in writing, shall hereafter (God willing) be improved in constant preaching, in
what place soever Gods providence, and friends good will shall fix

Thine in all Christian offices THOMAS FULLER.

An Index of the several Chapters contained in this Book; the first figure
showing the book, the second the chapter, the third the page.
B. Chapter Page 1 4 Abraham's life. 10 2 1 The Advocate. 51 5 19 Duke D'Alva's
life. 435 5 18 Andronicus his life. 429 3 8 Anger. 169 2 6 Antiquary. 69 3 6
Apparel. 164 2 7 Artist. 72 5 6 Atheist. 378 4 11 S. Augustines life. 284 5 13
Barrettour. 408 4 9 The Bishop. 277 3 18 Books. 199 5 7 Borgia his life. 383 4
4 Brandon his life. 254 1 14 Elder Brother. 44 15 Younger Brother. 47 3 7
Building. 166 4 6 Lord Burleigh his life. 265 2 23 Cambdens life. 145 1 6
Child. 14 3 24 Churches. 219 3 5 Company. 161 3 17 Contentment. 195 2 4 The
Controversiall Divine. 60 3 15 Deformity. 190 5 14 The Degenerous Gentleman 410
5 11 The Donatists. 396 2 21 Sr Francis Drakes life. 132 4 20 Edward the black
Prince his life. 342 1 9 Eliezers life. 22 4 15 Queen Elizabeth her life. 312 4
16 The Ambassador. 319 5 4 Endor Witch, her life. 369 3 9 Expecting
Preferment. 171 3 23 Fame. 215 4 1 Favorite. 237 3 12 Fools. 180 4 17 The
General. 326 2 24 The Gentleman. 149 3 21 Gravity. 209 4 2 Hamans life. 245 2
19 Handicrafts-man. 119 5 1 Harlot. 357 2 22 Herald. 141 5 10 Heretic. 393 1
13 Hildegardis her life. 40 3 1 Hospitality. 153 1 3 Husband. 8 5 8 Hypocrite.
388 4 14 Lady Jane her life. 307 5 9 Iehu his life. 390 3 2 Jesting. 155 5 5
Joan of Arc her life. 372 5 2 Joan Queen of Naples her life. 361 4 7 Judge. 270
4 21 The King. 349 4 13 The Lady. 301 2 13 Landlord. 99 5 12 The Liar. 406 3 22
Marriage. 212 4 8 Markham his life. 274 1 7 Master. 17 2 14 Master of a
College. 102 3 10 Memory. 174 2 17 Merchant. 113 2 15 Metcalfe his life. 105 2
9 The Minister. 80 3 25 Ministers maintenance. 228 3 20 Moderation. 205 1 2
Monica her life. 4 4 12 The Nobleman. 296 2 3 Paracelsus his life. 56 1 5
Parent. 12 2 11 Parishioner. 93 2 12 Patron. 95 1 11 Lady Paula her life. 27 5
16 Pazzians conspiracy. 421 2 10 Perkins his life. 88 3 11 Fancy. 177 2 2
Physician. 353 3 16 Plantations. 193 4 19 The Prince. 336 3 13 Recreations. 183
4 11 Bishop Ridleys life. 289 2 8 Scaliger his life. 76 2 16 Schoolmaster. 109
2 20 Sea-Captain. 128 3 3 Self-praising. 157 1 8 Servant. 19 2 19 Soldier. 119
4 5 Statesman. 257 4 18 Swedens King. 330 3 19 Time-serving. 202 3 14 Tombs.
187 5 15 Traitor. 418 3 4 Travel. 158 5 17 Tyrant. 425 1 12 The Virgin. 34 2
5 Whitakers his life. 65 1 10 Widow. 24 1 1 Wife. 1 5 3 Witch. 365 4 3
Cardinal Wolsey his life. 249 2 18 The Yeoman. 116

ERRATA.
Page 70 line 29 after superstition add, How the Fathers. 121. 9. r. wear.
152. 8. r. (Yea Mercury was a greater speaker th^n Jupiter himself) 202. 5. r.
affectation.

The Holy State. THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. 1. The good Wife.
St. PAUL to the Colossians chap. 3. verse. 18. first advises women to submit
themselves to their husbands, and then counsels men to love their wives. And
sure it was fitting that women should first have their lesson given them,
because it is hardest to be learned, and therefore they need have the more time
to conne it. For the same reason we first begin with the character of a good
Wife.

She commands her husband in any equal matter, Maxim 1
by constant obeying him. It was always observed, that what the English gained
of the French in battle by valor, the French regained of the English by
cunning in Comineus lib. 4. cap. 8 and Rodinus. De Repub. lib. 5. p. 782.
Treaties: So if the husband should chance by his power in his passion to
prejudice his wives right, she wisely knows by compounding and complying to
recover and rectify it again.

She never crossetb her husband in the springtide of his anger, 2
but stays till it be ebbing-water. And then mildly she argues the matter, not
so much to condemn him, as to acquit her self. Surely men, contrary to iron,
are worst to be wrought upon when they are hot; and are far more tractable in
cold blood. It is an observation of Seamen, Erasmus Dial. in nausragio.
That if a single meteor or fireball falls on their mast, it portends ill luck;
but if two come together (which they count Castor and Pollux) they presage good
success: But sure in a family it bodeth most bad, when two firebals (husbands
and wives anger) come both together.

3.
She keeps home if she has not her husbands company, or leave for her patent
to go abroad: For the house is the woman's center. It is written, Psalm 104.2.
The sun arises, -- man goes forth unto his work, and to his labor until
the evening: but it is said of the good woman, Prove. 31.15. She rises whiles
it is yet night: For man in the race of his work starts from the rising of the
sun, because his business is without doors, and not to be done without the
light of heaven: but the woman has her work within the house, and therefore
can make the sun rise by lighting of a candle.

4.
Her clothes are rather comely then costly, and she makes plain cloth to be
velvet by her handsome wearing it. She is none of our dainty dames, who love to
appear in variety of suits every day new, as if a good gown, like a stratageme
in war, were to be used but once: But our good wife sets up a sail according
to the keel of her husbands estate; and if of high parentage, she does not so
remember what she was by birth, that she forgets what she is by match.

5.
Arcana imperii (her husbands secrets) she will not devulge. Especially she is
careful to conceal his infirmities. If he be none of the wisest, she so orders
it that he appears on the public stage but seldom; and then he has conn'd
his part so well, that he comes off with great applause. If his Forma informans
be but bad, she provides him better formas assistentes, gets him wise servants
and secretaries.

6.
In her husbands absence she is wife and deputy husband, which makes her double
the files of her diligence. At his return he finds all things so well, that he
wonders to see himself at home when he was abroad.

Her carriage is so modest, 7.
that she dis-heartens wantons not only to take but even to besiege her
chastity. I confess some desperate men will hope any thing; yea, their
shameless boldness will fasten on impossibilities, measuring other folks
badnesse by their own: yet seldom such Salamanders, which live in the fire of
lust, dare approach, without seeing the smoke of wantonness in looks, words,
apparel, or behavior. And though charity commands me to believe, that some
women which hang out signs, notwithstanding will not lodge strangers; yet
these mock-guests are guilty in tempting others to tempt them.

In her husbands sickness she feels more grief then she shows. 8.
Partly that she may not dis-hearten him; and partly because she is not at
leisure to seem so sorrowful, that she may be the more serviceable.

Her children, 9.
though many in number, are none in noise, steering them with a look whither
she lists. When they grow up, she teaches them not pride but painfulnesse,
making their hands to clothe their backs, and them to wear the livery of their
own industry. She makes not her daughters Gentlewomen before they be women,
rather teaching them what they should pay to others, then receive from them.

The heaviest work of her servants she makes light, 10.
by orderly and seasonable enjoining it: Wherefore her service is counted a
preferment, and her teaching better then her wages. Her maids follow the
president of their mistress, live modestly at home. One asked a grave
Gentlewoman, How her maids came by so good husbands, and yet seldom went
abroad; Oh, said she, good husbands come home to them. So much for this
subject: and what is defective in this description shall be supplied by the
pattern ensuing.

MONICA WIFE of Patricivs, and Mother to St Augustine. She Died at Ostia in
Italye. Ao Do 389. aged 56 years. W. Marshall sculp:
CHAP. 2. The life of MONICA.
MONICA is better known by the branch of her issue, then root of her parentage,
and was born in or nigh Tagasta in Africa. August. confess. lib. 9. c. 8.
Her parents, whose names we find not, were Christians, and careful of her
education, committing her to the breeding of an old maid in the house, who,
though herself crooked with age, was excellent to straighten the manners of
youth. She instructed her with holy severity, never allowing her to drink wine,
or between meals. Having out-grown her tuition, she began by degrees to sip,
and drink wine, lesser draughts like wedges widening her throat for greater,
till at last (ill customs being not knocked, but insensibly scru'd into our
souls) she could fetch off her whole ones. Now it happened that a young maid
(formerly her partner in potting) fell at variance with her, and (as malice
when she shoots draws her arrow to the head) called her Tos-pot, and drunkard;
whereupon Monica reformed her self, and turned temperate. Thus bitter taunts
sometime make wholesome Physic, when God sanctifies unto us the malice of our
enemies to perform the office of good will.

After this was she married to Patricius, one of more honor then wealth, and
as yet a pagan; wherein she brake S. Paul's precept, To marry only in the Lord.
Perchance then there was a dearth of husbands, or she did it by her parents
importunity, or out of promise of his conversion: and the history herein being
but lamely delivered us, it is charity to support it with the most favorable
construction. He was of a stern nature, none more lamb when pleased, or lion
when angry; and which is worse, his wild August. confess. lib. 9. c. 9.
affections did prey abroad, till she lured them home by her loving behavior.
Not like those wives who by their hideous outcries drive their wandering
husbands farther out of the way.

Her own house was to her a house of correction, wherein her husbands mother
was bitter unto her, having a quarrel not so much to her person as relation,
because a daughter in law. Her servants, to climb into the favor of their old
mistress, trampled on their young, they bringing tales, and the old woman
belief; though the teeth of their malice did but file her innocence the
brighter. Yea at last her mother in law, turning her compurgatour, caused her
son to punish those maids which causelessly had wronged their mistress.

When her neighbors, which had husbands of far milder dispositions, would show
her their husbands cruelty legible in their faces, all her pitying was
reproving them: and whereas they expected to be praised for their patience, she
condemned them for deserving such punishment. She never had blow from, or jarre
with her husband, she so suppled his hard nature with her obedience, and to her
great comfort saw him converted to Christianity before his death. Also she saw
Augustine her son, formerly vicious in life, and erroneous in doctrine (whose
soul she bathd in her Tears) become a worthy Christian, who coming to have his
ears tickled, had his heart touched, and got Religion in to boot with the
eloquence of S. Ambrose. She survived not long after her sons conversion (God
sends his servants to bed when they have done their work) and her candle was
put out, as soon as the day did dawn in S. Augustine.

Take an instance or two of her signal piety. There was a custom in August.
confess. lib. 6. c. 2.
Africa to bring pulse bread and wine to the monuments of dead Saints, wherein
Monica was as forward as any. But being better instructed that this custom was
of heathenish parentage, and that Religion was not so poor as to borrow rites
from Pagans, she instantly left off that ceremony: and as for pietie's sake she
had done it thus long, so for pietie's sake she would do it no longer. How many
old folks now adays, whose best argument is use, would have flown in their
faces, who should stop them in the full career of an ancient custom.

There was one Licentius a novice-convert, who had got these words by the end,
Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts: show us the light of thy countenance and we
shall be whole. And (as it is the fashion of many men's tongues to echo forth
the last sentence they learnt) he said it in all places he went to. But Monica,
over-hearing him to sing it in the house of office, was August. lib. 1. De
ordine, c. 8.
highly offended at him: because holy things are to be suited to holy places;
and the harmony could not be sweet where the song did jarre with the place.
And although some may say, that a gracious heart consecrateth every place into
a Chapel; yet sure though pious things are no where unfitting to be thought
on, they may somewhere be improper to be uttered.

Drawing near her death, she sent most pious thoughts as harbingers to heaven,
and her soul saw a glimpse of happiness through the chincks of her
sicknesse-broken body. She was so inflamed with zeal, that she turned all
objects into fuel to feed it. One day standing with S. Augustine at an
East-window, August. confess. lib. 9. c. 10.
she raised her self to consider the light of Gods presence, in respect whereof
all corporal light is so far from being matched, it deserves not to be
mentioned. Thus mounted on heavenly meditations, and from that high pitch
surveying earthly things, the great distance made them appear unto her like a
little point, scarce to be seen, and less to be respected.

She died at Ostia in Italy in the fifty sixth year of her age, Augustine
closing her eyes, when through grief he had scarce any himself.

CHAP. 3. The good Husband.
HAving formerly described a good Wife, she will make a good Husband, whose
character we are now to present.

Maxim 1
His love to his wife weakeneth not his ruling her, and his ruling lesseneth
not his loving her. Wherefore he avoideth all fondness, (a sick love, to be
praised in none, and pardoned only in the newly married) whereby more have
wilfully betrayed their command, then ever lost it by their wives rebellion.
Methinks the he-viper is right enough served, which (as Plin. Not. hist. lib.
10. cap. 62.
Pliny reports) puts his head into the she-vipers mouth, and she bites it off.
And what wonder is it if women take the rule to themselves, which their
uxorious husbands first surrender unto them?

2
He is constant to his wife, and confident of her. And sure where jealousy is
the Jailour, many break the prison, it opening more ways to wickedness then
it stops; so that where it finds one, it makes ten dishonest.

3
He allows her meet maintenance, but measures it by his own estate: nor will
he give less, nor can she ask more. Which allowance, if shorter then her
deserts and his desire, he lengtheneth it out with his courteous carriage unto
her; chiefly in her sickness, then not so much word-pitying her, as providing
necessaries for her.

4
That she may not entrench on his prerogative, he maintains her propriety in
feminine affairs: yea, therein he follows her advice: For the soul of a man is
planted so high, that he overshoots such low matter as lie level to a woman's
eye, and therefore her counsel therein may better hit the mark. Causes that
are properly of feminine cognizance he suffers her finally to decide, not so
much as permitting an appeal to himself, that their jurisdictions may not
interfere. He will not countenance a stubborn servant against her, but in her
maintains his own Authority. Such husbands as bait the mistress with her maids,
and clap their hands at the sport, will have cause to wring them afterward.

Knowing she is the weaker vessel he bears with her infirmities. 5
All hard using of her he detests, desiring therein to do not what may be
lawful, but fitting. And grant her to be of a servile nature, such as may be
bettered by beating; yet he remembers he has enfranchised her by marrying her.
On her wedding day she was like S. Paul free born, and privileged from any
servile punishment.

He is careful that the wounds betwixt them take not air, 6
and be publicly known. Jarres conceald are half reconciled; which if
generally known, it is a double task to stop the breach at home, and men's mouths
abroad. To this end he never publicly reproves her. An open reproof puts her
to do penance before all that are present, after which many rather study
revenge then reformation.

He keeps her in the wholesome ignorance of unnecessary secrets. 7
They will not be starved with the ignorance, who perchance may surfeit with the
knowledge of weighty Counsels, too heavy for the weaker sex to bear. He knows
little, who will tell his wife all he knows.

He beats not his wife after his death. 8
One having a shrewd wife, yet loath to use her hardly in his life time, awed
her with telling her that he would beat her when he was dead, meaning that he
would leave her no maintenance. This humor is unworthy a worthy man, who will
endeavor to provide her a competent estate: yet he that impoverisheth his
children to enrich his widow, destroys a quick hedge to make a dead one.

CHAP. 4. The Life of ABRAHAM.
I Intend not to range over all his life as he stands threesquare in relation,
Husband, Father, Master. We will only survey and measure his conjugall side,
which respects his wife.

We read not that ever he upbraided her for her barrenness, as knowing that
natural defects are not the creatures fault, but the Creatours pleasure: all
which time his love was loyal to her alone. As for his going in to Hagar, it
was done not only with the consent but by the advice of Sarah, who was so
ambitious of children she would be made a mother by a proxy. He was not
jealous of her (though a grand beauty) in what company soever he came. Indeed
he feared the Egyptians, because the Egyptians feared not God; suspecting
rather them of force, then her of falsenesse, and believing that sooner they
might kill him, then corrupt her.

Yet (as well as he loved her) he expected she should do work fit for her
calling. Make ready quickly three measures of meal and knead it. Well may Sarah
be cook, where Abraham was caterer, yea where God was guest. The print of her
fingers still remain in the meal, and of crumbling dow she has made a lasting
monument of her good houswifry.

Being falsely indicted by his wife, he never traversed the bill, but compounded
with her on her own terms. The case this. Hagar being with child by Abraham,
her pride sweld with her belly, and despises her mistress: Sarah, laying her
action wrong, sues Abraham for her maids fault, and appeals to God. I see the
Plaintiff has not always the best cause; nor are they most guilty which are
most blamed. However Abraham passes by her peevishness, and remits his maid to
stand or fall to her own mistress. Though he had a great part in Hagar, he
would have none in Hagars re^bellion. Masters which protect their faulty
servants hinder the proceeding of justice in a family.

He did deny himself to grant his wives will in a matter of great consequence.
Sarah desired, Cast out this bondwoman and her son. Oh hard word! She might
as well have said, Cast out of thy self nature and natural affection. See how
Abraham struggles with Abraham, the Father in him striving with the Husband in
him, till God moderated with his casting-voyce, and Abraham was contented to
hearken to the counsel of his wife.

Being to sacrifice Isaac, we find not that he made Sarah privy to his
project. To tell her, had been to torture her, fearing her affections might be
too strong for her faith. Some secrets are to be kept from the weaker sex; not
always out of a distrust, lest they hurt the counsel by telling it, but lest
the counsel hurt them by keeping it.

The dearest Husband cannot bail his wife when death arrests her. Sarah dies,
and Abraham weeps. Tears are a tribute due to the dead. It Is fitting that the
body when it is sown in corruption should be watered by those that plant it in
the earth. The Hittites make him a fair offer, In the chiefest of our
sepulchers bury thy dead: But he thinks the best of them too bad for his Sarah.
Her chaste ashes did love to lie alone; he provides her a virgin tomb in the
cave of Machpelah, where her corpse sweetly sleep till he himself came to bed to
her, and was buried in the same grave.

CHAP. 5. The good Parent.
HE begins his care for his children not at their birth but conception,
giving them to God to be, if not (as 1. Sam. 1.11.
Hannah did) his Chaplains, at least his Servants. This care he continues till
the day of his death, in their Infancy, Youth, and Man's estate. In all which,

Maxim 1
He shows them in his own practice what to follow and imitate; and in others,
what to shun and avoid. For though The words of the wi^e be as Eccles 12.11.
nails fastened by the masters of the Assemblies, yet sure their examples are
the hammer to drive them in to take the deeper hold. A father that whipped his
son for swearing, and swore himself whilst he whipped him, did more harm by
his example then good by his correction.

2
He does not welcome and embrace the first essays of sin in his children.
Weeds are counted herbs in the beginning of the spring: nettles are put in
pottage, and sallads are made of eldern-buds. Thus fond fathers like the oaths
and wanton talk of their little children, and please themselves to hear them
displease God. But our wise Parent both instructs his children in Piety, and
with correction blasts the first buds of profaneness in them. He that will not
use the rod on his child, his child shall be used as a rod on him.

3
He observes Give^ each child a part, Versteg. O^ decayed intell. cap 3.
Gavel-kind in dividing his affections, though not his estate. He loves them
(though leaves them not) all alike. Indeed his main land he settles on the
eldest: for where man takes away the birthright, God commonly takes away the
blessing from a family. But as for his love, therein, like a well-drawn
picture, he eyes all his children alike (if there be a parity of deserts) not
parching one to drown another. Did not that mother show little wit in her great
partiality, to whom when her neglected son complained that his brother (her
darling) had hit and hurt him with a stone, whipped him only for standing in the
way where the stone went which his brother cast? This partiality is tyranny,
when Parents despise those that are deformed, enough to break them whom God had
bowed before.

He allows his children maintenance according to their quality: 4
Otherwise it will make them base, acquaint them with bad company and sharking
tricks; and it makes them surfeit the sooner when they come to their estates. It
is observed of camels, that having traveled long without water through sandy
deserts, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 8. c. 18.
Implentur cum bibendi est occasio and in praeteritum and in futurum: and so
these thirsty heirs soak it when they come to their means, who whilst their
fathers were living might not touch the top of his money, and think they shall
never feel the bottom of it when they are dead.

In choosing a profession he is directed by his child's disposition: 5
whose inclination is the strongest indenture to bind him to a trade. But when
they set Abel to till the ground, and send Cain to keep sheep; Jacob to hunt,
and Esau to live in tents; drive some to school, and others from it; they
commit a rape on nature, and it will thrive accordingly. Yet he humors not his
child when he makes an unworthy choice beneath himself, or rather for ease then
use, pleasure then profit.

If his son prove wild he does not cast him off so far, 6
but he marks the place where he lights. With the mother of Moses, he does not
suffer his son so to sink or swim, but he leaves one to Exodus 2.4.
stand afar off to watch what will become of him. He is careful whilst he
quenches his luxury, not withal to put out his life. The rather, because
their souls, who have broken and run out in their youth, have proved the more
healthful for it afterward.

He moves him to marriage rather by arguments drawn from 7
his good, then his own authority. It is a style too Princely for a Parent
herein, To will and command, but sure he may will and desire. Affections like
the conscience are rather to be led then drawn; and it is to be feared, They
that marry where they do not love, will love where they do not marry.

8
He does not give away his loaf to his children, and then come to them for a
piece of bread. He holds the reins (though loosely) in his own hands, and keeps
to reward duty, and punish undutifulnesse; yet on good occasion for his
childrens advancement he will depart from part of his means. Base is their
nature who will not have their branches lopt, till their body be felled; and
will let go none of their goods, as if it presaged their speedy death: whereas
it does not follow that he that puts off his cloak must presently go to bed.

9
On his deathbed he bequeaths his blessing to all his children: Nor rejoices
he so much to leave them great portions, as honestly obtained. Only money well
and lawfully gotten is good and lawful money. And if he leaves his children
young, he principally nominates God to be their Guardian, and next him is
careful to appoint provident overseers.

CHAP. 6. The Good Child.
Maxim 1
HE reverenceth the person of his Parent though old, poor, and froward. As his
Parent bare with him when a child, he bears with his Parent if twice a child:
nor does his dignity above him, cancel his duty unto him. When Stapleton. in
vita Tho. Mori, cap. 1.
Sr. Thomas More was Lord Chancellor of England, and Sr. John his father one of
the Judges of the King's Bench, he would in Westminster Hall beg his blessing of
him on his knees.

He observes his lawful commands, 2
and practices his precepts with all obedience. I cannot therefore excuse S.
Barbara from undutifulnesse, and occasioning her own death. The matter this.
Her father being a pagan commanded his workmen building his house, to make two
windows in a room: Barbara, knowing her fathers pleasure, in his absence
enjoined them to make A^phons. Vil^eg. in the ^i^e of Barbara on the 4. o^
December.
three, that seeing them she might the better contemplate the mystery of the
holy Trinity. (Methinks two windows might as well have raised her meditations,
and the light arising from both, would as properly have minded her of the Holy
Spirit proceeding from the Father and the Son.) Her father enraged at his
return, thus came to the knowledge of her religion, and accused her to the
magistrate, which cost her her life.

Having practiced them himself, 3
he entayls his Parents precepts on his posterity. Therefore such instructions
are by Solomon, Proverbs 1.9. compared to frontlets and chains (not to a suit
of clothes, which serves but one, and quickly wears out, or out of fashion)
which have in them a real lasting worth, and are bequeathed as legacies to
another age. The same counsels observed are chains to grace, which neglected
prove halters to strangle undutifull children.

He is patient under correction, 4
and thankful after it. When Mr West, formerly Tutour (such I count in loco
parentis) to Dr. Whitaker, was by him, then Regius Professor, created Doctor,
Whitaker solemnly gave him thanks before the University for giving him
correction when his young scholar.

In marriage he first and last consults with his father: 5
when propounded, when concluded. He best bowls at the mark of his own
contentment, who besides the aim of his own eye, is directed by his father, who
is to give him the ground.

He is a stork to his parent, 6
and feeds him in his old age. Not only if his father has been a pelican, but
though he has been an estridge unto him, and neglected him in his youth. He
confines him not a long way off to a short pension, forfeited if he comes in
his presence; but shows piety at home, and learns (as S. Paul says the 1.
Timothy. 5.4.) to requite his Parent. And yet the debt (I mean only the
principal, not counting the interest) cannot fully be paid, and therefore he
compounds with his father to accept in good worth the utmost of his endeavor.

7
Such a child God commonly rewards with long life in this world. If he chance
to die young, yet he lives long that lives well; and time misspent is not lived
but lost. Besides, God is better then his promise, if he takes from him a long
lease, and gives him a freehold of better value. As for disobedient children,

8
If preserved from the gallows, they are reserved for the rack, to be tortured
by their own posterity. One complained, that never father had so undutifull a
child as he had. Yes, said his son, with less grace then truth, my
grandfather had.

I conclude this subject with the example of a Pagans son, which will shame
most Christians. Pomponius In vita Attici in fine Epist. ad Attic.
Atticus, making the funeral oration at the death of his mother, did protest
that living with her threescore and seven years, he was never reconciled unto
her, Se nunquam cum matre in gratiam rediisse; because (take the comment with
the text) there never happened betwixt them the least jarre which needed
reconciliation.

CHAP. 7. The good Master.
HE is the heart in the midst of his household, primum vivens et ultimum
moriens, first up and last abed, if not in his person yet in his providence. In
his carriage he aims at his own and his servants good, and to advance both.

He oversees the works of his servants. Maxim 1
One said that the dust that fell from the masters shoes was the best compost
to manure ground. The lion Plin. not. Hist. lib. 8. cap 16.
out of state will not run whilst any one looks upon him, but some servants out
of slothfulness will not run except some do look upon them, spurred on with
their Masters eye. Chiefly he is careful exactly to take his servants
reckonings. If their Master takes no account of them, they will make small
account of him, and care not what they spend who are never brought to an audit.

He provides them victuals, 2
wholesome, sufficient and seasonable. He does not so allay his servants bread
to debase it so much as to make that servants meat which is not man's meat. He
allows them also convenient rest and recreation, whereas some Masters, like a
bad conscience, will not suffer them to sleep that have them. He remembers the
old law of the Saxon King Ina, S. H. Spilman in concili^s, An. chapter 692. page
188.
If a villain work on Sunday by his lords command, he shall be free.

The wages he contracts for he duly and truly pays to his servants. 3
The same word in the Greek (...) signifies rust and poison: and some strong
poison is made of the rust of mettalls, but none more venomous then the rust of
money in the rich man's purse unjustly detained from the labourer, which will
poison and infect his whole estate.

He never threatens Ephesians. 6.9.
his servant but rather presently corrects him. 4
Indeed conditional threatenings with promise of pardon on amendment are good
and useful. Absolute threatenings torment more, reform less, making servants
keep their faults, and forsake their Masters: wherefore herein he never passes
his word, but makes present payment, lest the creditour run away from the
debtour.

5
In correcting his servant, he becomes not a slave to his own passion. Not
cruelly making new indentures of the flesh of his apprentice. To this end he
never beats him in the height of his passion. Moses being to fetch water out of
the rock, and commanded by God only to speak to it with his rod in his hand,
being transported with anger smote it thrice. Thus some Masters, which might
fetch penitent tears from their servants with a chiding word (only shaking the
rod withal for terror) in their fury strike many blows which might better be
spared. If he perceives his servant incorrigible, so that he cannot wash the
black-moore, he washes his hands of him, and fairly puts him away.

6
He is tender of his servant in his sickness and age. If crippled in his
service, his house is his hospital: yet how many throw away those dry bones
out of the which themselves have sucked the marrow? It is as usual to see a
young serving-man an old beggar, as to see a lighthorse first from the great
saddle of a Nobleman to come to the hackney-coach, and at last die in drawing a
carre. But the good Master is not like the cruel hunter in the fable, who beat
his old dog because his toothlesse mouth let go the game; he rather imitates
the noble nature of our Prince Henry, who took order for the keeping of an
Hows continuat. of Stows Chron. page 836.
old English mastiffe which had made a Lion run away. Good reason good
service in age should be rewarded. Who can without pity and pleasure behold
that trusty vessel which carried Sr. Francis Drake about the world.

Hitherto our discourse has proceeded of the carriage of Masters toward free
covenant servants, not intermedling with their behavior toward slaves and
vassals, whereof we only report this passage: When Charles the fifth Emperor
returning with his fleet from Algier was extremely beaten with a tempest, and
their ships overloaden, he caused them to cast their best horses into the sea
to save the life of many Pantal^^n part. 3. De ^llust. Germ. and alii autores.
slaves, which according to the market price was not so much worth. Are there
not many that in such a case had rather save Jack the horse then Jocky the
keeper. And yet those who first called England the Purgatory of servants, sure
did us much wrong: Purgatory it self being as false in the application to us,
as in the doctrine thereof; servants with us living generally on as good
conditions as in any other country. And well may masters consider how easy a
transposition it had been for God, to have made him to mount into the saddle
that holds the stirrup; and him to sit down at the table, who stands by with a
trencher.

CHAP. 8. The good Servant.
HE is one that out of conscience serves God in his Master, and so has the
principle of obedience in himself. As for those servants who found their
obedience on some external thing, with engines, they will go no longer then
they are wound, or weighed up.

He does not dispute his Masters lawful will, Maxim 1
but does it. Hence it is that simple servants (understand such whose capacity
is bare measure, without surplusage equal to the business he is used in) are
more useful, because more manageable, then abler men, especially in matters
wherein not their brains but hands are required. Yet if his Master out of want
of experience injoyns him to do what is hurtful, and prejudicial to his own
estate, duty herein makes him undutifull (if not to deny, to demurre in his
performance) and choosing rather to displease then hurt his master, he humbly
represents his reasons to the contrary.

2
He loves to go about his business with cheerfulness. One said, He loved to
hear his carter though not his cart to sing. God loves a cheerful giver; and
Christ reproved the Pharisees for disfiguring their faces with a sad
countenance. Fools! who to persuade men that Angels lodged in their hearts,
hung out a devil for a sign in their faces. Sure cheerfulness in doing
renders a deed more acceptable. Not like those servants, who doing their work
unwillingly, their looks do enter a protestation against what their hands are
doing.

3
He dispatcheth his business with quicknes and expedition. Hence the same
English word Speed signifies celerity, and success; the former in business of
execution causing the latter. Indeed haste and rashness are storms and
tempests, breaking and wrecking business; but nimblenesse is a fair full wind,
blowing it with speed to the haven. As he is good at hand, so is he good at
length, continually and constantly careful in his service. Many servants, as
if they had learnd the nature of the besoms they use, are good for a few days,
and afterward grow unserviceable.

4
He disposes not of his masters goods without his privity or consent: no not
in the smallest matters. Open this wicket, and it will be in vain for masters
to shut the door. If servants presume to dispose small things without their
masters allowance (besides that many little leaks may sink a ship) this will
widen their consciences to give away greater. But though he has not always a
particular leave, he has a general grant, and a warrant dormant from his
master to give an alms to the poor in his absence, if in absolute necessity.

5
His answers to his master are true, direct, and dutiful. If a dumb devil
possesses a servant, a winding cane is the fittest circle, and the master the
exorcist to drive it out. Some servants are so talkative, one may as well
command the echo as them not to speak last; and then they count themselves
conquerours, because last they leave the field. Others, though they seem to
yield and go away, yet with the flying Parthians shoot backward over their
shoulders, and dart bitter taunts at their masters; yea, though with the clock
they have given the last stroke, yet they keep a jarring, muttering to
themselves a good while after.

Just correction he bears patiently, 6
and unjust he takes cheerfully; knowing that stripes unjustly given more hurt
the master then the man: and the Logic maxim is verified, Agens agendo
repatitur, the smart most lights on the striker. Chiefly he disdains the
baseness of running away.

Because charity is so cold, 7
his industry is the hotter to provide something for himself, whereby he may be
maintained in his old age. If under his master he trades for himself (as an
apprentice may do if he has Bracton. lib. 5. tract. 2. cap. 3. number. 7.
covenanted so beforehand) he provides good bounds and sufficient fences
betwixt his own and his masters estate ( Jacob Genesis 30.36. set his flock three
days journey from Labans) that no quarrel may arise about their propriety,
nor suspicion that his remnant has eaten up his masters whole cloth.

CHAP. 9. The life of ELIEZER.
ELiezer was Steward of Abraham's household, Lieutenant general over the army of
his servants, ruler over all his Master had: the confidence in his loyalty,
causing the largeness of his commission.

But as for those who make him the founder of Damascus, on no other evidence
but because he is called Eliezer of Damascus, they build a great city on too
narrow a foundation. It argues his goodness that Abraham, if dying without a
son, intended him his heir (a kinsman in grace is nearest by the surest side)
till Isaac stepping in stopped out Eliezer, and reverst those resolutions.

The Scripture presents us with a remarkable president of That the namelesse,
servant, Genesis 24 was this Eliezer Abraham's steward, is the opinion of Luther in
his comment on that chapter, Rivet on the same, Exercit. 111. with many others.
his piety, in a matter of great moment: Abraham, being to send him into
Mesopotamia, caused him to swear that he would faithfully fetch Isaac a wife
from his own kindred. Eliezer demurred awhile before he would swear, carefully
surveying the latitude of the oath, lest some unseen ambushes therein should
surprise his conscience. The most scrupulous to take an oath will be the most
careful to perform it, whereas those that swear it blindly will do it lamely.
He objects, Peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me. At last
being satisfied in this quaere, he takes the oath: as no honest man which means
to pay, will refuse to give his bond if lawfully required.

He takes ten camells (then the coaches of the East-countrey) with servants and
all things in good equipage, to show a sample of his Masters greatness; and
being a stranger in the country asked direction of him who best knew the way,
God himself. If any object that his craving of a sign was a sign of
infidelity, and unmannerly boldness to confine God to particulars; yet
perchance Gods spirit prompted him to make the request, who sometimes moves men
to ask what he is minded to give, and his petition seems just because granted.

Rebecca meets him at the well. The lines drawn from every part of the sign
required center themselves in her. Drink my Lord, said she, and I will draw
water for thy camells. Her words Prophecy that she will be a good housewife,
and a good housekeeper. Eliezers eyes are dazeled with the beams of Gods
providence: Her drawing of water drew more wonder from him; and the more he
drinks of her pitcher, the more he is athirst to know the issue of the matter.
He questions her of her parentage, and finds all his mystical expectation
historically expounded in her. Then he bowed down his head, and did homage to
Gods providence, blessing him for his protection. Many favors which God gives
us ravell out for want of hemming, through our own unthankfulness: for though
prayer purchases blessings, giving praise does keep the quiet possession of
them.

Being come into the house, his first care is for his cattle, whose dumbness
is oratory to a conscientio^s man; and he that will not be merciful to his
beast, is a beast himself. Then preferring his message before his meat, he
empties his mind before he fills his body. No dainties could be digested,
whilst his errand like a crudity lay on his stomach.

In delivering his message, first he reads his commission, I am Abraham's
servant; then he reports the fullness of his Masters wealth without any
hyperboles. How many, employed in such a matter, would have made mountains of
gold of molehills of silver? not so Eliezer, reporting the bare truth; and a
good estate if told, commends it self. As plain also is his narration of the
passages of Gods providence, the artificialnesse whereof best appeard in his
natural relation. Then concludes he, with desiring a direct answer to his
motion.

The matter was soon transacted betwixt them; for seeing that heaven did ask
the banes, why should earth forbid them? only her friends desire Rebecca
should stay ten days with them, which Eliezer would not yield to. He would
speedily finish that bargain whereof God had given the happy earnest; and
because blessed hitherto, make more haste hereafter. If in a dark business we
perceive God to guide us by the lantern of his providence, it is good to follow
the light close, lest we lose it by our lagging behind. He will not truant it
now in the afternoon, but with convenient speed returns to Abraham, who only
was worthy of such a Servant, who only was worthy of such a Master.

CHAP. 10. The good Widow.
SHe is a woman whose head has been quite cut off, and yet she lives, and
has the second part of virginity. Conceive her to have buried her Husband
decently according to his quality and condition, and let us see how she behaves
her self afterward.

Maxim 1
Her grief for her Husband though real, is moderate. Excessive was the sorrow
of King Richard the second beseeming him neither as king, man, or Christian,
who so fervently loved Anna of Bohemia his Queen, that when she dyed at Shean
in Surrey, he both cursed the place, and also out of madness Weaver fun.
monum. p. 473. out of Stows Annals.
overthrew the whole house.

2
But our widows sorrow is no storm but a still rain. Indeed some foolishly
discharge the surplusage of their passions on themselves, tearing their hair,
so that their friends coming to the funeral, know not which most to bemoan the
dead husband, or the dying widow. Yet commonly it comes to pass, that such
widows grief is quickly emptyed, which streameth out at so large a vent;
whilst their tears that but drop, will hold running a long time.

She continues a competent time in her widows estate. 3
Anciently they were, at least, to live out their annum luctus, their year of
sorrow. But as some vid. August. de c^vitat. Dei lib. 15. cap. 12.
erroneously compute the long lives of the Patriarks before the flood not by
solary, by lunary years, making a month a year: so many overhasty widows cut
their year of mourning very short, and within few weeks make post speed to a
second marriage.

She does not only live sole and single, 4
but chaste and honest. We know pesthouses always stand alone, and yet are
full of infectious diseases. Solitariness is not an infallible argument of
sanctity: and it is not enough to be unmarried, but to be undefiled.

Though going abroad sometimes about her business, 5
she never makes it her business to go abroad. Indeed man goes forth to his
labor, and a widow in civil affairs is often forced to act a double part of
man and woman, and must go abroad to solicit her business in person, what she
cannot do by the proxy of her friends. Yet even then she is most careful of
her credit, and tender of her modesty, not impudently thrusting into the
society of men. Oh it is improper for tinder to strike fire, and for their sex
which are to be sued to, first to intrude, and offer their company.

She loves to look on her husbands picture, 6
in the children he has left her: not foolishly fond over them for their
fathers sake (this were to kill them in honor of the dead) but gives them
careful education. Her husbands friends are ever her welcomest guests, whom
she entertaineth with her best cheer, and with honorable mention of their
friends, and her husbands memory.

7
If she can speak little good of him, she speaks but little of him. So
handsomely folding up her discourse, that his virtues are shown outward, and
his vices wrapped up in silence, as counting it Barbarism to throw dirt on his
memory who has moulds cast on his body. She is a champion for his credit if
any speak against him. Foolish is their project who by raking up bad savor
against their former husbands think thereby to perfume their bed for a second
marriage.

8
She puts her especial confidence in Gods providence. Surely if he be a
father to the fatherless, it must needs follow that he is an husband to the
widow. And therefore she seeks to gain and keep his love unto her, by her
constant prayer and religious life.

9
She will not morgage her first husbands pawns, thereby to purchase the good
will of a second. If she marries (for which she has the Apostles license, not
to say mandate, I will that the younger widows marry) she will not abridge her
children of that which justly belongs unto them. Surely a broken faith to the
former is but a weak foundation to build thereon a loyal affection to a latter
love. Yet if she becomes a mother in law, there is no difference betwixt her
carriage to her own and her second husbands children, save that she is severest
to her own, over whom she has the sole jurisdiction. And if her second
husbands children by a former wife commit a fault, she had rather bind them
over to answer for it before their own father, then to correct them her self,
to avoid all suspicion of hard using of them.

PAVLA Widow of Toxotius, and Mother to Evstochium. She Died at Bethlehem, Ano
doni 404 Aged 56 years 8 mon^ths 21 days W.M. (...).
CHAP. 11. The life of the Lady PAULA.
WHat? (will some say) having a wood of widows of upright conversation, must
you needs gather one crooked with superstition to be pattern to all the rest?
must Paula be their president? whose life was a very masse-book, so that if
every point of popery were lost, they might be found in her practice.

Nothing less. Indeed Paula lived in an age which was, as I may say, in the
knuckle and bending betwixt the primitive times and superstition, popery being
then a hatching, but far from being fledged. Yea no Papist (though picking
out here and there some passages which make to his purpose) will make her
practice in gross the square of his own: for where she embraces some
superstitions with her left hand, she thrusts away more with her right. I have
therefore principally made choice to write her life, that I may acquaint both
my self and the reader with the garb of that age in Church Matters* wherein
were many remarkable passages, otherwise I might and would have taken a far
fitter example.

I know two trades together are too much for one man to thrive upon, and too
much it is for me to be an Historian and a Critic, to relate and to judge: yet
since Paula, though a gracious woman, was guilty of some great errors, give me
leave to hold a pencil in one hand, and a sponge in the other, both to draw her
life and dash it where it is faulty. And let us that live in purer times be
thankful to God for our light, and use our quicker sight to guide our feet in
Gods paths, lest we reel from one extremity to another.

To come to the Lady Paula's birth: the Noblest blood in the world by a
confluence ran in her veins. I must confess the most Ancient Nobility is
junior to no Nobility, when all men were equal. Yet give others leave to see
Moses his face to shine, when he knew it not himself; and seeing Paula was
pleased not to know, but to neglect and trample on her high birth, we are bound
to take notice thereof. She was descended from Hieron. Epist. ad Eustoch. page
185.
Agamemnon, Scipio, and the Gracchi's, and her husband Toxotius from Idem in
eadem epist. p. 172.
Aeneas, and the Julian family; so that in their marriage the wars of the
Grecians and Trojanes were reconciled.

Some years they lived together in the City of Rome, in holy and happy
wedlock, and to her husband she bare four daughters, Blesilla, Paulina,
Eustochium, and Ruffina. Yet still her husband longed for posterity, like
those who are so covetous of a male heir, they count none children but sons:
and at last God, who keeps the best for the close, bestowed Toxotius, a young
son upon her.

But commonly after a great blessing comes a great cross: scarce was she made
a mother to a son, when she was made a widow, which to her was a great and
grievous affliction. But as a rub to an overthrown bowl proves an help by
hindering it; so afflictions bring the souls of Gods Saints to the mark, which
otherwise would be gone and transported with too much earthly happiness.
However Paula grieved little less then excessively hereat, she being a woman
that in all her actions (to be sure to do enough) made always measure with
advantage.

Yet in time she overcame her sorrow, herein being assisted by the counsel and
comfort of S. Hierome, whose constant frequenting of her, commented upon by his
enemies malice (which will pry narrowly and talk broadly) gave occasion to the
report, that he accompanied with her for dishonest intents. Surely if the
accusations of slanderous tongues be proofs, the primitive times had no
Churches but stews. It is to be suspected that Erasmus in scholia in epitaphium
Paulae p. 193.
Ruffin his sworn enemy raised the report; and if the Lady Paula's memory
wanted a compurgatour, I would be one my self, it being improbable that those
her eyes would burn with lust which were constantly drowned with tears. But the
reader may find S. Hierome purging In epistola quae incipit, Si tibiputem, tom.
2. sol. 368.
himself; and he who had his tongue and an innocent heart needed no body else
to speak for him.

It happened that the Bishops of the East and West were summoned by the
Hier^nym. Epist. praedict. page 172.
Emperors letters to appear at Rome for the according of some differences in
the Church. (It seems by this that the Pope did not so command in chief at
Rome, but that the power of congregating Synods still resided in the Emperor.)
Hither came Paulinus Bishop of Antioch, and Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine in
Cyprus, who lodged at the Lady Paula's, and his virtues so wrought upon her,
that she determined to leave her native country, and to travel into the East,
and in Judea to spend the remainder of her life. The reasons that moved her to
remove, was because Rome was a place of riot and luxury, her soul being almost
stifled with the frequencie of Ladies visits; and she feared courtesy in her
would justle out piety, she being fain to crowd up her devotions to make room
for civil entertainments. Besides, of her own nature she ever loved privacie
and a sequestered life, being of the Pelicans nature, which use not to fly in
flocks. Lastly, she conceived that the sight of those holy places would be the
best comment on the History of the Bible, and fasten the passages thereof in
her mind. Wherefore she intended to survey all Palestine, and at last to go to
Bethlehem, making Christ's inn her home, and to die there where he was born,
leaving three of her daughters, and her poor infant Toxotius behind her.

For mine own part, I think she had done as acceptable a deed to God, in
staying behind to rock her child in the cradle, as to visit Christ's manger,
seeing Grace does not cut of the affections of nature but ripen them: the
rather, because Christianity is not naild to Christ's cross and mount Calvary,
nor Piety fastened (as we may say) to the freehold of the land of Palestine. But
if any Papist make her a pattern for pilgrimages, let them remember that she
went from Rome: and was it not an unnatural motion in her to move from that
center of Sanctity?

She with her daughter Eustochium began her journie, and taking Cyprus in her
way, where she visited Epiphanius, she came at last to Judea. She measured that
country with her traveling, and drew the truest map thereof with her own
feet, so accurately that she left out no particular place of importance. At
last she was fixed at Bethlehem, where she built one monastery for men, and
three for women. It will be worth our pains to take notice of some principal
of the orders she made in those feminine Academies; because Paula's practice
herein was a leading case, though those that came after her went beyond her.
For in the rules of monastical life, Paula stood at the head game, and the
Papists in after ages, desirous to better her hand, drew themselves quite out.

Each monastery had a chief matrone, whilst Paula was Principal over all.
These societies were severd at their meat and work, but met together at their
prayers: they were carefully kept apart from men, not like those Epicoene
monasteries not long since invented by Joan Queen of Sweden, wherein men and
women lived under one roof, not to speak of worse libertines. Well were Nuns
called Recluses, which according to the true meaning of the word signify those
which are set wide open, or left at liberty, though that Barbarous age mistook
the sense of the word, for such as were shut up, and might not stir out of
their Littleton fol. 92.
Cloister.

They used to sing Halelujah, which served them both for a psalm, and a bell to
call them all together. In the Mane, hora tertia, sexta, nona, vesperi. Hieron.
in praefat. Epist. p. 180. surely living in Palestine he means the Jewish
computation of hours.
morning, at nine a clock, at noon, at three a clock in the afternoon, and at
night they had prayers, and sang the psalms in order. This I believe gave
original to canonical hours. The Apostles precept is the plain song, Pray
continually; and thus men's inventions ran their descants upon it, and confined
it to certain hours. A practice in it self not so bad for those who have
leisure to observe it, save that when devotion is thus artificially plaited
into hours it may take up men's minds in formalities to neglect the substance.

They rose also at midnight to sing psalms. A custom begun before in the time
of persecution, when the Christians were forced to be Antipodes to other men,
so that when it was night with others, it was day with them, and they then
began their devotions. These night-prayers, begun in necessity, were continued
in Paula's time in grateful remembrance, and since corrupted with
superstition: the best is, their rising at midnight breaks none of our sleep.

These virgins did every day learn some part of the holy Scriptures; whereas
those Nuns which pretend to succeed them learn only with posthorses to run
over the stage of their beads (so many Ave Mary's, and Pater nosters) and are
ignorant in all the Scripture besides. Such as were faulty, she caused to take
their meat apart from others at the entrance of the dining room; with which
mild severitie she reclaimed many: shame in ingenuous natures making a deeper
impression then pain. Mean time I find amongst them no vow of virginity, no
tyrannical Penance, no whipping themselves; as if not content to interre their
sins in Christ's grave, they had rather bury them in furrows dug in their
own backs. They wrought hard to get their living, and on the Lords day alone
went out of their monastery to hear Gods word.

Yet was she more rigid and severe toward her self, then to any of them,
macerating her body with fasting, and refusing to drink any wine, when advised
thereto by Physicians for her health. So that (as an Bernard. devot. devotis
holy man complained of himself, whilst he went about to subdue an enemy he
killed a subject) she overturned the state of her body, and whilst she thought
to snuff the candle put it quite out. Yea S. Hierome himself, what his
Eloquence herein does commend in her, his Charity does excuse, and his
Judgment does Haec refero, non quod inconsideranter and ultra vires sumta
onera probem, p. 181.
condemn. But we must Charitably believe that these her fastings proceeded out
of true humiliation and sorrow for her sins; otherwise where opinion of merit
is annexed to them, they are good only to fill the body with wind, and the
soul with pride. Certainly prodigious Popish self-penance is will worship, and
the purest Epicurisme, wherein pain is pleasant: for as long as people impose
it on themselves, they do not deny their own will, but fulfill it; and whilst
they beat down the body they may puff up the flesh.

Nor can her immoderate bounty be excused, who gave all and more then all away,
taking up money at interest to give to the poor, and leaving Eustochium her
daughter deep in debt, a great charge, and nothing to maintain it. Sure none
need be more bountiful in giving then the Sun is in shining, which though
freely bestowing his beams on the world keeps notwithstanding the body of light
to himself. Yea it is necessary that Liberality should as well have banks as a
stream.

She was an excellent text-woman, yea could say the holy Scriptures by heart,
and attained to understand and speak the Hebrew tongue, a language which
Hierome himself got with great difficulty, and kept with constant use (skill
in Hebrew will quickly go out, and burn no longer then it is blown) yet she in
her old age did speedily learn it. She diligently heard Hierome expounding the
old and new Testament, asking him many doubts, and Quaeres in difficult places
(such constant scouring makes our knowledge brighter) and would not suffer his
judgment to stand neuter in hard points, but made him express the probable
opinion.

Most naturally fly from death; Gods Saints stand still till death comes to
them; Paula went out to meet it, not to say, called death unto her by consuming
her self in fasting: she died in the fifty sixth year of her age, and was
solemnly buried in Bethlehem. People of all countries flockt to her funeral:
Bishops carried her corpse to the grave: others carried torches and lamps before
it, which though some may condemn to be but burning of day was no more then
needed, she being buried in a cave or grot as an G. Sandys Travells, page 179.
eyewitness does testify. Psalms were sung at her burial in the Hebrew,
Greek, Latin, and Syriack tongue, it being fit there should be a key for every
lock, and languages to be understood by all the miscelany company there present.

Eustochium her daughter had little comfort to be Executrix or Administratrix
unto her, leaving her not a penny of money, great debts, and many brothers and
sisters to provide for, quos sustentare arduum, abjicere impium. I like not
this charity reversed, when it begins far off and neglects those at home.

To conclude, I can do her memory no better right, then to confess she was
wrong in somethings. Yet surely Gods Glory was the mark she shot at, though
herein the hand of her practice did sometimes shake, and oftener the eye of her
judgment did take wrong aim.

CHAP. 12. The constant Virgin
IS one who has made a resolution with herself to live chaste, and unmarryed.
Now there is a grand difference betwixt a Resolution and a Vow. The former is a
covenant drawn up betwixt the party and herself; and commonly runs with this
clause, durante nostro beneplacito, as long as we shall think fitting; and
therefore on just occasion she may give a release to herself. But in a vow God
is interested as the Creditour, so that except he be pleased to give up the
band, none can give an acquittance to themselves. Being now to describe the
Virgin, let the reader know that virginity belongs to both sexes; and though in
Courtesy we make our Maid a female, let not my pen be challenged of
improprietie, if casually sometimes it light on the Masculine Gender.

She chooses not a single life solely for its self, Maxim 1
but in reference to the better serving of God. I know none but beggars that
desire the Church Porch to lie in, which others only use as a passage into the
Church. Virginity is none of those things to be desired in and for it self, but
because it leads a more convenient way to the worshipping of God, especially in
time of persecution. For then if Christians be forced to run races for their
lives, the unmarryed have the advantage, lighter by many ounces, and freed from
much encumbrance, which the married are subject to; who, though private
Persons, herein are like Princes, they must have their train follow them.

She improveth her single life therewith to serve God the more constantly. 2
Housekeepers cannot so exactly mark all their family-affairs, but that
sometimes their ranks will be broken; which disorder by necessary consequence
will disturb their duties of piety, to make them contracted, omitted; or
unseasonably performed. The Apostle says, Such shall have troubles in the
flesh; and grant them sanctified troubles, yet even Holy-thistle and
Sweet-brier have their prickles. But the Virgin is freed from these
encumbrances. No lording Husband shall at the same time command her presence
and distance, to be always near in constant attendance, and always to stand
aloof off in an awful observance; so that providing his breakfast hazards her
soul to fast a meal of morning prayer: No crying Children shall drown her
singing of psalms, and put her devotion out of tune: No unfaithful Servants
shall force her to divide her eyes betwixt lifting them up to God and casting
them down to oversee their work; but making her Closet her Chapel, she freely
enjoys God and good thoughts at what time she pleases.

3
Yet in all her discourse she makes an honorable mention of marriage. And
good reason that virginity should pay a chief rent of honor unto it, as
acknowledging her self to be a colonia deducta from it. Unworthy is the
practice of those who in their discourse plant all their arguments point blank
to batter down the married estate, bitterly inveighing against it; yea base is
the behavior of some young men, who can speak nothing but Satyrs against Gods
ordinance of Matrimony, and the whole sex of women. This they do either out of
deep dissimulation, to divert supicion, that they may prey the farthest from
their holes; or else they do it out of revenge: having themselves formerly
lighted on bad women (yet no worse then they deserved) they curse all
adventures because of their own shipwreck; or lastly they do it out of mere
spite to nature and God himself: and pity it is but that their fathers had
been of the same opinion. Yet it may be tolerable if only in harmless mirth
they chance to bestow a jest upon the follyes of married people. Thus when a
Gentlewoman told an ancient Batchelour who lookd very young, that she thought
he had eaten a snake; No mistress (said he) it is because I never meddled with
any snakes which makes me look so young.

4
She counts her self better lost in a modest silence then found in a bold
discourse. Divinity permits not women to speak in the Church; morality forbids
maids to talk in the House, where their betters are present. She is far from
the humors of those, who (more bridling in their chinnes then their tongues)
love in their constant prating to make sweet music to their own ears, and
harsh jarring to all the rest of the company: yea as some report of sheep, that
when they run they are afraid of the noise of their own feet; so our Virgin
is afraid to hear her own tongue run in the presence of graver persons. She
conceives the bold maintaining of any argument concludes against her own civil
behavior; and yet she will give a good account of any thing whereof she is
questioned, sufficient to show her silence is her choice, not her refuge. In
speaking she studiously avoids all suspicious expressions, which wanton
apprehensions may colourably comment into obscenity.

She blusheth at the wanton discourse of others in her company. 5
As fearing that being in the presence where treason against modesty is spoken,
all in the place will be arraigned for principalls: yea if silent, she is
afraid to be taken to consent; if offering to confute it, she fears lest by
stirring a dunghill, the savor may be more noisome. Wherefore that she may not
suffer in her title to modesty, to preserve her right she enters a silent
caveat by a blush in her cheeks, and embraces the next opportunity to get a
gaole-delivery out of that company where she was detained in durance. Now
because we have mentioned Blushing, which is so frequent with virgins that it
is called a maidens blush, (as if they alone had a patent to die this color)
give us leave a little to enlarge our selves on this subject.

1 Blushing oftentimes proceeds from guiltines; when the offender being pursued
after seeks as it were to hide himself under the visard of a new face. 2
Blushing is othertimes rather a compurgatour then an accuser; not arising from
guiltiness in our Virgin, but from one of these reasons: First because she is
surprised with a sudden accusation, and though armed with innocence, that she
cannot be pierced, yet may she be amazed with so unexpected a charge. Secondly
from sensiblenesse of disgrace, ashamed, though innocent, to be within the
suspicion of such faults, and that she has carried her self so that any tongue
durst be so impudent as to lay it to her charge. Thirdly from a disability to
acquit her self at the instant (her integrity wanting rather clearing then
clearness) and perchance she wants boldness to traverse the action, and so
non-suiting her self, she fears her cause will suffer in the judgments of all
that be present: and although accused but in jest, she is jealous the
accusation will be believed in earnest; and edged tools thrown in merriment may
wound reputations. Fourthly out of mere anger: for as in fear the blood makes
not an orderly retreat but a confused flight to the heart; so in blushing the
blood sallies out into our Virgins cheeks, and seems as a champion to challenge
the accuser for wronging her. 3 Where small faults are committed blushing
obtaines a pardon of course with ingenuous beholders. As if she be guilty of
casual incivilities, or soloecismes in manners occasioned by invincible
ignorance, and unavoidable mistakes, in such a case blushing is a sufficient
penance to restore her to her state of innocence.
6
She imprisons not her self with a solemn vow never to marry. For first, none
know their own strength herein. Who has sailed about the world of his own
heart, sounded each creek, surveied each corner, but that still there remains
therein much terra incognita to himself? Junius, at the first little better
then a Iunius in his life writ by himself.
Misogynist, was afterward so altered from himself, that he successively
married four wives. Secondly, fleshly corruption being pent will swell the
more, and Shemei being confined to Jerusalem will have the greater mind to gad
to Gath. Thirdly, the devil will have a fairer set mark to shoot at, and will
be most busy to make people break their vow. Fourthly, God may justly desert
people for snatching that to themselves, which is most proper for him to give,
I mean, Continency. Object not, that thou will pray to him to take from thee
all desire of marriage, it being madness to vow that one will not eat, and
then pray to God that he may not be hungry. Neither say that now thou may
presume on thy self, because thou art well stricken in years, for there may
happen an autume-spring in thy soul; and lust is an unmannerly guest, we know
not how late in the evening of our lives it may intrude into us for a lodging.

She counts it virginity to be unspotted, not unmarried. 7
Or else even in old age, when nature has given an inhibition, they may be
strong in desiring who are weak in acting of wickedness; yea they may keep
stews in their hearts, and be so pregnant and ingravidated with lustful
thoughts, that they may as it were die in travail because they cannot be
delivered. And though there be no fire seen outwardly; as in the English
chymnies, it may be hotter within, as in the Dutch stoves; and as well the
devils as the Angels in heaven, neither marry nor are given in marriage.

As she lives with less care, 8
so she dies with more cheerfulness. Indeed she was rather a sojourner, then
an inhabitant in this world, and therefore forsakes it with the less grief. In
a word, the way to heaven is alike narrow to all estates, but far smoother to
the Virgin then to the married. Now the great advantage Virgins have to serve
God above others, and high favors he has bestowed on some of them, shall
appear in this Virgin prophetess, whose life we come to present.

HILDEGARDIS a Virgin Prophetess Abbess of St Rvperts Nunnerye. She died at
Bingen Ao Do: 1180. Aged 82 years. W. Marshall sculpsit.
CHAP. 13. The life of HILDEGARDIS.
HIldegardis was born in Germany, in the County of Spanheim, in the year 1098.
So that she lived in an age which we may call the first cock-crowing after the
midnight of Ignorance and Superstition.

Her parents (Hidebert, and Mechtilda) dedicated her to God from her infancy:
And surely those whose Childhood, with Hildegardis, has had the advantage of
pious education may be said to have been good time out of mind, as not able to
remember the beginning of their own goodness. At eight years of age she became
a Nun under S. Jutta sister to Megenhard, Earl of Spanheim, and afterward
she was made Abbess of S. Ruperts Nunnery in Bingen on Rhene in the Palatinate.

Men commonly do beat and bruise their links before they light them, to make
them burn the brighter: God first humbles and afflicts whom he intends to
illuminate with more then ordinary grace. Poor Hildegardis was constantly and
continually sick, and so Fuerunt ei ab ipsa pene infantia crebri ac fere
continui languorum dolores, ita ut pedum incessu petraro uteretur, Theod. Abbas
in vita Hildegardis, lib. 1. cap. 2.
weak that she very seldom was strong enough to go. But God who denied her
legs, gave her wings, and raised her high-mounted soul in Visions and
Revelations.

I know a general scandal is cast on Revelations in this ignorant age: first,
because many therein entitled the Meteors of their own brain to be Stars at
least, and afterward their Revelations have been revealed to be forgeries:
secondly, because that night-raven did change his black feathers into the
silver wings of a dove, and transforming himself into an Angel of light deluded
many with strange raptures and visions, though in their nature far different
from those in the Bible. For S. Paul in his Revelations was caught up into the
third heaven; whereas most Monks with a contrary motion were carried into hell
and purgatory, and there saw apparitions of strange torments. Also S. John's
Revelation forbids all additions to the Bible, under heavy penalties; their
visions are commonly on purpose to piece out the Scripture, and to establish
such superstitions as have no footing in Gods word.

However all held Hildegardis for a Prophet, being induced thereunto by the
piety of her life: no breck was ever found in her veil, so spotless was her
conversation; by the sanctity of her writings, and by the general approbation
the Church gave unto her. For Pope Eugenius the third, after exact examination
of the matter, did in the Council of Trevers (wherein S. Bernard was present)
allow and privilege her Revelations for authentical. She was of the Popes
Conclave, and Emperors Counsel, to whom they had recourse in difficulties: yea
the greatest torches of the Church lighted themselves at her candle. The
Patriach of Jerusalem, the Bishops of Mentz, Colen, Breme, Trevers sent such
knots as posed their own fingers to our Hildegardis to untie.

She never learned word of Latin; and yet Trithemius de Scriptor. Eccles. fol.
92.
therein would she fluently express her Revelations to those notaries that
took them from her mouth; so that throwing words at random she never brake
Priscian's head: as if the Latin had learned to make it self true without the
speakers care. And no doubt, he that brought the single parties to her married
them also in her mouth, so that the same Spirit which furnished her with Latin
words, made also the true Syntaxis. Let none object that her very writing of
fifty eight Homilies on the Gospel is false construction, where the feminine
Gender assumes an employment proper to men: for though S. Paul silenceth women
for speaking in the Church, I know no Scripture forbids them from writing on
Scripture.

Such infused skill she had also of Music, whereof she was naturally ignorant,
and wrote a whole book of verses very good according to those times. Indeed in
that age the trumpet of the warlike Heroic, and the sweet harp of the Lyrick
verse, were all turned into the gingling of Cymballs, tinckling with rhythmes,
and like-sounding cadencies.

But let us hear a few lines of her Prophecies, and thence guess the rest. In
those days there shall rise up a people without understanding, proud,
covetous, and deceitful, the which shall eat the sins of the people, holding a
certain order of foolish devotion under the feigned cloak of beggary. Also they
shall instantly preach without devotion or example of the holy Martyrs, and
shall detract from the secular Princes, taking away the Sacraments of the
Church from the true pastors, receiving alms of the poor, having familiarity
with women, instructing them how they shall deceive their husbands, and rob
their husbands to give it unto them, See much more to this purpose in Catalog.
Testium veritatis in Hildegard^: Also in F^^es Acts and monuments, p. 461.
etc. What could be said more plain to draw out to the life those Mendicant
friars (rogues by Gods statutes) which afterward swarmed in the world.

Hear also how she foretold the low water of Tiber, whilst as yet it was full
tide there. The Kings and other Rulers of the world, being stirred up by the
just judgment of God, shall set themselves against them, and run upon them,
saying, We will not have these men to reign over us with their rich houses,
and great possessions, and other worldly riches, over the which we are ordained
to be Lords and Rulers: and how is it meet or comely that those shavelings with
their stoles and chesils should have more soldiers or richer armor and
artillery then we? wherefore let us take away from them what they do not justly
but wrongfully possess.

It is well the Index expurgatorius was not up in those days, nor the
Inquisition on foot, otherwise dame Hildegardis must have been called to an
after account. I will only ask a Romanist this question, This Prophecy of
Hildegardis, was it from heaven or from men? If from heaven, why did ye not
believe it? If from men, why did the Pope allow it, and canonize her?

As for miracles, which she wrought in her life time, their number is as
admirable as their nature. I must confess at my first reading In Liponian. in
vitis Sanct. Tom. 5 fol. 91. and sequen.
of them, my belief digested some, but surfeted on the rest: for she made no
more to cast out a devil, then a barber to draw a tooth, and with less pain to
the patient. I never heard of a great feast made all of Cordialls: and it seems
improbable that miracles (which in Scripture are used sparingly, and chiefly
for conversion of unbelievers) should be heaped so many together, made every
days work, and by her commonly, constantly, and ordinarily, wrought. And I
pray why is the Popish Church so barren of true works nowadayes here wrought at
home amongst us? For as for those reported to be done far of, it were ill for
some if the gold from the Indies would abide the touch no better then the
miracles.

However Hildegardis was a gracious Virgin, and God might perform some great
wonders by her hand; but these piae frauds with their painting have spoiled
the natural complexion of many a good face, and have made Truth it self
suspected. She dyed in the 82. year of her age, was afterward Sainted by the
Pope, and the 17 day of September assigned to her memory.

I cannot forget how Udalrick Abbat of Kempten in Germany made a most Bruschius
Demonaster. and Centuriatores, Centur. 11. Col. 350.
courteous law for the weaker sex, That no woman, guilty of what crime soever,
should ever be put to death in his dominions, because two women condemned to
die were miraculously delivered out of the prison by praying to S. Hildegardis.

CHAP. 14. The Elder Brother
IS one who made have to come into the world to bring his Parents the first
news of male-posterity, and is well rewarded for his tidings. His composition
is then accounted most precious when made of the loss of a double Virginity.

Maxim 1
He is thankful for the advantage God gave him at the starting in the race
into this world. When twins have been even matched, one has gained the gole
but by his length. S. Questionibus ex utroque mix^im Tom. 40 Col. 874.
Augustine says, That it is every man's bounden duty solemnly to celebrate his
birthday. If so, Elder Brothers may best afford good cheer on the festival.

He counts not his inheritance a Writ of ease to free him from industry: 2
As if only the Younger Brothers came into the world to work, the Elder to
complement. These are the Tops of their houses indeed, like cotlofts, highest
and emptiest. Rather he labors to furnish himself with all gentile
accomplishment, being best able to go to the cost of learning. He need not fear
to be served as Ulrick Fugger was (chief of the noble family of the Fuggers in
Auspurg) who was disinherited of a great patrimony only for his Thua^. de
obit. vi^. do. l. in Ann. 1584.
studiousnesse, and expensivenesse in buying costly Manuscripts.

He does not so remember he is an Heir, 3
that he forgets he is a Son. Wherefore his carriage to his Parents is
always respectfull. It may chance that his father may be kept in a charitable
Prison, whereof his Son has the keys; the old man being only Tenant for
life, and the lands entaild on our young Gentleman. In such a case when it is
in his power, if necessity requires, he enlarges his father to such a
reasonable proportion of liberty as may not be injurious to himself.

He rather desires his fathers Life then his Living. 4
This was one of the principal reasons (but God knows how true) why Philip the
second, King of Spain, caused in the year 1568. Charles his Eldest Son to be
executed for plotting his fathers death, as was pretended. And a Op^rerus was
the Author thereof: Famianus Strada de bello Belg^ro lib. 7. page 432.
Wit in such difficult toys accommodated the numerall letters in Ovids verse
to the year wherein the Prince suffered. FILIVs ante DIeM patrIos InqVIrIt In
annos.
1568.
Before the tIMe, the Overhasty son
Seeks forth How near the fathers LIfe Is Done.
1568.
But if they had no better evidence against him but this poetical
Synchronisme, we might well count him a martyr.

5
His fathers deeds and grants he ratifies and confirms. If a stitch be fallen
in a lease, he will not widen it into an hole by cavilling, till the whole
strength of the grant run out thereat; or take advantage of the default of the
Clark in writing where the deed appears really done, and on a valuable
consideration: He counts himself bound in honor to perform what by marks and
signs he plainly understands his father meant, though he spoke it not out.

6
He reflecteth his luster to grace and credit his younger brethren. Thus Scipio
Africanus, after his great victories against the Carthaginians and conquering
of Hannibal, was content to serve as a Plutar. in the life of Scipio.
Lieutenant in the wars of Asia, under Lucius Scipio his younger Brother.

7
He relieveth his distressed kindred, yet so as he continues them in their
calling. Otherwise they would all make his house their hospital, his kindred
their calling. When one being an Husbandman challenged kindred of Robert
Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, and thereupon requested favor of him to bestow an
office on him, Cosen (quoth the Bishop) if your cart be broken, I Will mend it;
if your plough old, I Will give you a new one, and seed to sow your land: but an
Husbandman I found you, and an Husbandman I Will leave you. It is better to ease
poor kindred in their Profession, then to ease them from their Profession.

8
He is careful to support the credit and dignity of his family: neither
wasting his paternall estate by his unthriftinesse, nor marring it by
parcelling his ancient mannours and demesnes amongst his younger children, whom
he provides for by annuities, pensions, moneys, leases, and purchased lands. He
remembers how when our King Alfred divided the river of Lee (which parts
Hartfordshire and Essex) into three streams, it became so shallow that boats
could not row, where formerly ships did ride. Thus the ancient family of the
Woodfords (which had long continued in Leicestershire and elsewhere in England
in great account, estate and livelihood) is at this day quite extinct. For when
Sr. Thomas Woodford in the reign of King Henry the sixth made almost an even
partition of his means betwixt his five Grandchildren, the House in short space
utterly decayed; not any part of his lands now in the Burton in his descrip. of
Leicestershire, p. 264.
tenure or name of any of his male line, some whereof lived to be brought to a
low ebb of fortune. Yet on the other side to leave all to the eldest, and make
no provision for the rest of their children, is against all rules of religion,
forgetting their Christian-name to remember their Surname.

CHAP. 15. The Younger Brother.
SOme account him the better Gentleman of the two, because son to the more
ancient Gentleman. Wherein his Elder Brother can give him the hearing, and a
smile into the bargain. He shares equally with his Elder Brother in the
education, but differs from him in his portion, and though he gives also his
Fathers Arms, yet to use the Herauld's language, he may say, This to my Elder
Brother I must yield,
I have the Charge but he has all the Field.
Like herein to a young nephew of Tarquines in Rome, who was called Livi. lib.
1.
Egereus, from wanting of maintenance, because his Grandfather left him
nothing. It was therefore a mannerly answer which a young Gentleman gave to
King James, when he asked him what kin he was to such a Lord of his name:
Please your Majesty (said he) my Elder Brother is his Cosen german.

Maxim 1
He repines not at the Providence of God in ordering his birth. Heirs are made,
even where matches are, both in heaven. Even in twins God will have one next
the door to come first into the world.

2
He labors by his endeavors to date himself an Elder Brother. Nature makes
but one; Industry does make all the sons of the same man Heirs. The fourth
Brother gives a Martilet for the difference of his Arms: a bird Gerard Leigh
in his 9. differences of Brothers Arms.
observed to build either in Castles, Steeples, or Ships; showing that the
bearer hereof, being debarred from all hopes of his fathers inheritance, must
seek by war, learning, or merchandise to advance his estate.

3
In war he cuts out his fortunes with his own sword. William the Conqueror,
when he first landed his forces in England, burnt all his ships; that despair
to return might make his men the more valiant. Younger Brothers, being cut off
at home from all hopes, are more zealous to purchase an honorable support
abroad. Their small Arteries with great Spirits have wrought miracles, and
their resolution has driven success before it. Many of them have adventured
to cheapen dear enterprises, and were only abel to pay the earnest, yet
fortune has accepted them for chapmen, and has freely forgiven the^ the rest
of the payment for their boldness.

4
Nor are they less happy if applying themselves to their book. Nature
generally giving them good wits, which because they want room to burnish may
the better afford to soar high.

5
But he gains more wealth if betaking himself to merchandise. Whence often he
rises to the greatest annual honor in the kingdom. Many families in England
though not first raised from the City, yet thence have been so restored and
enriched that it may seem to amount to an original raising. Neither does an
apprentiship extinguish native, nor disinable to acquisitive Gentry; and they
are much mistaken who hold it to be in the nature of bondage. For first, his
indenture is a civil contract, whereof a bondsman is incapable: secondly, no
work can be base prescribed in reference to a noble end, as theirs is that
learn an honest mystery to enable them for the service of God and the Country:
thirdly, they give round sums of money to be bound. Now if apprentiship be a
servitude, it is either a pleasing bondage, or strange madness to purchase it
at so dear a rate. Gentry therefore may be suspended perchance, and asleep
during the apprentiship, but it awakens afterward.

Sometimes he raises his estate by applying himself to the Court. 6
A pasture wherein Elder Brothers are observed to grow lean, and Younger
Brothers fat. The reasons whereof may be these.

1 Younger Brothers, being but slender in estate, are easier bowed to a
Court-complyance then Elder Brothers, who stand more stiff on their means, and
think scorn to crave what may be a Princes pleasure to grant, and their profit
to receive. 2 They make the Court their calling, and study the mystery
thereof, whilst Elder Brothers, divided betwixt the Court and the Country,
can have their endeavors deep in neither, which run in a double channel. 3
Elder Brothers spend highly in proportion to their estates, expecting
afterward a return with increase, which notwithstanding never pays the
principal: and whilst they thus build so stately a staircase to their
preferment, the Younger Brothers get up by the back stairs in a private silent
way, little expense being expected from them that have little.
Sometimes he lights on a wealthy match to advance him. 7
If meeting with one that is Pilot of her own affections, to steer them without
guidance of her friends, and such as disdaineth her marriage should be
contracted in an exchange, where jointure must weigh every grain even to the
portion. Rather she counts it an act both of love and charity to affect one
rich in deserts, who commonly has the advantage of birth, as she has of
means, and so it is made level betwixt them. And thus many a young Gentleman
has gotten honorable maintenance by an Heiresse, especially when the crying
of the child has caused the laughing of the father.

8
His means the more hardly gotten are the more carefully kept. Heat gotten by
degrees, with motion and exercise, is more natural and stays longer by one,
then what is gotten all at once by coming to the fire. Goods acquired by
industry prove commonly more lasting then lands by descent.

9
He ever owneth his Elder Brother with dutiful respect: yea though God should
so bless his endeavors as to go beyond him in wealth and honor. The pride of
the Jesuits is generally taxed, who being the youngest of all other Orders,
and therefore by canon to go last, will never go in Vid. Preface to the
Jesuits Catechism.
Procession with other Orders, because they will not come behind them.

10
Sometimes the Paternall inheritance falls to them who never hoped to rise to
it. Thus John, surnamed Sans-terre, or, Without land, having five Elder
Brothers came to the kingdom of England, death levelling those which stood
betwixt him and the Crown. It is observed of the Carew Survey of Cornwall, fol.
117.
Coringtons, an ancient family in Cornwall, that for eight lineall descents
never any one that was born heir had the land, but it ever fell to Younger
Brothers.

To conclude, there is a hill in Voitland (a small country in Germany) called
Feitchtelberg, out of which arise four rivers running four several ways,
viz. 1. Eger, East, 2. Menus, West, 3. Sala, North, and 4. Nabus, South: so
that he that sees their fountains so near together would admire at their falls
so far asunder. Thus the younger sons issuing out of the same mothers womb
and fathers loins, and afterward embracing different courses to try their
fortunes abroad in the world, chance often to die far off, at great distance,
which were all born in the same place.

The Holy State. THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. 1. The good We take it promis^uously for Civil or Common Lawyer.
Advocate.
HE is one that will not plead that cause, wherein his tongue must be confuted
by his conscience. It is the praise of the Spanish soldier, that (whilst all
other Nations are mercenary, and for money will serve on any side) he will
never fight against his own King: nor will our Advocate against the Sovereigne
Truth, plainly appearing to his conscience.

He not only hears but examines his Client, Maxim 1
and pincheth the cause, where he fears it is foundred. For many Clients in
telling their case rather plead then relate it, so that the Advocate hears not
the true state of it, till opened by the adverse party. Surely the Lawyer that
fills himself with instructions will travel longest in the cause without
tiring. Others that are so quick in searching, seldom search to the quick; and
those miraculous apprehensions who understand more then all, before the Client
has told half, run without their errand, and will return without their
answer.

If the matter be doubtful, 2
he will only warrant his own diligence. Yet some keep an Assurance-office in
their chamber, and will warrant any cause brought unto them, as knowing that if
they fail they lose nothing but what long since was lost, their credit.

3
He makes not a Trojan-siege of a suit, but seeks to bring it to a set battle
in a speedy trial. Yet sometimes suits are continued by their difficulty, the
potencie and stomach of the parties, without any default in the Lawyer. Thus
have there depended suits in Cambdens Br^t. in Glocest.
Gloucestershire, betwixt the Heirs of the Lord Barkley, and Sr. Thomas Talbot
Viscount Lisle, ever since the reign of King Edward the fourth until now
lately they were finally compounded.

4
He is faithful to the side that first retains him. Not like Plutarch. in vita
Demosth.
Demosthenes, who secretly wrote one oration for Phormio, and another in the
same matter for Apolidorus his adversary.

5
In pleading he shoots fairly at the head of the cause, and having fastened, no
frowns nor favors shall make him let go his hold. Not snatching aside here and
there, to no purpose, speaking little in much, as it was said of Anaximenes,
That he had a flood of words, and a drop of reason. His boldness rises or
falls as he apprehends the goodness or badnesse of his cause.

6
He joys not to be retained in such a suit, where all the right in question,
is but a drop blown up with malice to be a bubble. Wherefore in such trivial
matters he persuades his Client to sound a retreat, and make a composition.

7
When his name is up, his industry is not down, thinking to plead not by his
study but his credit. Commonly Physicians like beer are best when they are old,
and Lawyers like bread when they are young and new. But our Advocate grows not
lazy. And if a leading case be out of the road of his practice, he will take
pains to trace it through his books, and prick the footsteps thereof wheresoever
he finds it.

8
He is more careful to deserve, then greedy to take fees. He accounts the very
pleading of a poor widows honest cause sufficient fees, as conceiving himself
then the King of Heavens Advocate, bound ex officio to prosecute it. And
although some may say that such a Lawyer may even go live in Cornwall, where it
is Carew Sur. of Cornwall, fol. 60.
observed that few of that profession hitherto have grown to any great
livelihood, yet shall he (besides those two felicities of Coke in h^s Preface
to Littletons Tenures.
common Lawyers, that they seldom die either without heirs or making a will)
find Gods blessing on his provisions and posterity.

We will respit him a while till he comes to be a Judge, and then we will give
an example of both together.

CHAP. 2. The good Physician.
HE trusts not the single witness of the water if better testimony may be
had. Maxim 1
For reasons drawn from the urine alone are as brittle as the urinall.
Sometimes the water runs in such post-hast through the sick man's body, it
can give no account of any thing memorable in the passage, though the most
judicious eye examine it. Yea the sick man may be in the state of death, and
yet life appear in his state.

Coming to his patient he persuades him to put his trust in God the fountain of
health. 2
The neglect hereof has caused the bad success of the best Physicians: for
God will manifest that though skill comes mediately from him to be gotten by
man's pains, success comes from him immediately to be disposed at his pleasure.

He ^ansells not his new experiments on the bodies of his patients; 3
letting loose mad receipts into the sick man's body, to try how well Nature in
him will fight against them, whilst himself stands by and sees the battle,
except it be in desperate cases when death must be expelled by death.

To poor people he prescribes cheap but wholesome medicines: 4
not removing the consumption out of their bodies into their purses; nor
sending them to the East Indies for drugs, when they can reach better out of
their gardens.

5
Lest his Apothecary should oversee, he oversees his Apothecary. For though
many of that profession be both able and honest, yet some out of ignorance or
haste may mistake: witness one of Bloys, Stephens Apology fol Herodotus, lib.
1. cap. 16.
who being to serve a Doctors bill, in stead of Optimi (short written) read
Opii, and had sent the patient asleep to his grave, if the Doctors
watchfulness had not prevented him; worse are those who make wilful errors,
giving one thing for another. A prodigal who had spent his estate was pleased
to jeer himself, boasting that he had cosened those who had bought his means;
They gave me (said he) good new money, and I sold them my
Great-great-grandfathers old land. But this cosenage is too too true in many
Apothecaries, selling to sick folk for new money antiquated drugs, and making
dying men's Physic of dead ingredients.

6
He brings not news with a false spy that the coast is clear till death
surprises the sick man. I know Physicians love to make the best of their
patients estate. First it is improper that Adjutores vitae should be Nuncii
mortis. Secondly, none, with their good will, will tell bad news. Thirdly,
their fee may be the worse for it. Fourthly, it is a confessing that their art is
conquered. Fifthly, it will poison their patients heart with grief, and make it
break before the time. However they may so order it, that the party may be
informed of his dangerous condition, that he be not outed of this world before
he be provided for another.

7
When he can keep life no longer in, he makes a fair and easy passage for it
to go out. He gives his attendance for the facilitating and asswaging of the
pains and agonies of death. Yet generally it is death to a Physician to be with
a dying man.

Unworthy pretenders to Physic are rather foils then stains to the Profession.
8
Such a one was that counterfeit, who called himself The Baron of Stowes Survey
of London. page 55.
Blackamore, and feigned he was sent from the Emperor to our young King Henry
the sixth, to be his principal Physician: but his forgery being discovered, he
was apprehended, and executed in the Tower of London, Anno 1426. and such the
world daily swarms with. Well did the Poets feign Aesculapius and Circe,
brother and sister, and both children of the Sun: for in all times in the
opinion of the multitude, witches, old women, and impostours have had a
competition with Physicians. And commonly the most ignorant are the most
confident in their undertakings, and will not stick to tell you what disease
the gall of a dove is good to cure. He took himself to be no mean Doctor, who
being guilty of no Greek, and being demanded why it was called an Hectic
fever; because (says he) of an hecking cough which ever attends that
disease. And here it will not be amiss to describe the life of the famous
Quacksalver Paracelsus, both because it is not ordinarily to be met with, and
that men may see what a monster many make a miracle of learning, and propound
him their pattern in their practice.

Physic Proffessor^ at Basil. Philip Theophrastus PARACELSUS He died at
Saltzburge Ano. Dom: 1540. aged 47 years. W. Marshall sculprit.
CHAP. 3. The life of PARACELSUS.
PHilip Theophrastus Bombastus of Hoenhaim, or Paracelsus, born as he says
himself in the wilderness of Helvetia, Anno 1493. of the noble and ancient
family of the Hoenhaims. But Thomas Erastus making strict enquiry after his
pedigree found none of his name or kindred in that place. Yet it is fit so great
a Chemist should make himself to be of noble extraction: And let us believe him
to be of high descent, as perchance born on some mountain in Switzerland.

As for his Education, he himself In praefatione Chiru^giae magnae.
boasts that he lived in most Universities of Europe; surely rather as a
traveller then a student, and a vagrant then a traveller. Yea some will not
allow him so much, and Sennertus de ^hymicorum consensu, cap. 4. page 35.
one who has exactly measured the length of his life, though crowding his
pretended travells very close, finds not room enough for them. But it is too
ridiculous what a Bickerus in Hermete redivivo.
Scholar of his relates, that he lived ten years in Arabia to get learning, and
conversed in Greece with the Athenian Philosophers. Whereas in that age Arabia
the Happy was accursed with Barbarism, and Athens grown a stranger to her
self; both which places being then subjected to the Turks, the very ruins of
all learning were ruined there. Thus we see how he better knew to act his part,
then to lay his Scene, and had not Chronology enough to tell the clock of
time, when and where to place his lies to make them like truth.

The first five and twenty years of his age he lived very civilly; being thirty
years old he came to Basil, just at the alteration of Religion, when many
Papists were expelled the University, and places rather wanted Professors,
then Professors places. Here by the favor of Oecolampadius he was admitted to
read Physic, and for two years behaved himself fairly, till this accident
caused his departure. A rich Bezoldus consideratione vitae and mort. p. 76. ex
Andraea Iocisio.
Canon of Basil being sick promised Paracelsus an hundred florens to recover
him, which being restored to his health he denied to pay. Paracelsus sues him,
is cast in his suit, the Magistrate adjudging him only an ordinary fee,
because the cure was done presently with a few pills. The Physician enraged
hereat talked treason against the State in all his discourses, till the
nimblenesse of his tongue forced the nimblenesse of his feet, and he was fain
to fly into Alsatia. Here keeping company with the Gentry of the country, he
gave himself over to all licentiousness: His body was the sea wherein the tide
of drunkenness was ever ebbing and flowing; for by putting his finger in his
throat he used to spew out his drink and drunkenness together, and from that
instant date himself sober to return to his cups again. Every month he had a
new suit, not for pride but necessity; his apparel serving both for wearing and
bedding: and having given his clothes many vomits, he gave them to the poor.
Being Codrus over night, he would be Croesus in the morning, flush of money as
if he carried the invisible Indies in his pocket: some suspected the devil was
his pursebearer, and that he carried a spirit in the pomel of his sword his
constant companion, whilst others maintain that by the heat of the furnace he
could ripen any metal into gold.

All the diet he prescribed his patients was this, to eat what, and how often,
they thought fitting themselves, and yet he did most strange cures. Like the
quicksilver (he so much dealt with) he would never be fixed in one place, or
live any where longer then a twelvemoneth: for some observe that by that time
the maladies reverted again, which he formerly cured. He gave so strong physic
as summoned Nature with all her force to expel the present disease, but the
remnant dregs thereof afterward reinforcing themselves did assault Nature
tired out with the violence of her former task, and easily subdued it.

His Scholars brag that the fragments of his learning would feast all the
Philosophers in the world, boasting that the gout, the disgrace of Physic, was
the honor of Paracelsus, who by curing it removed that scandal from his
profession: whereas others say he had little Learning, and less Latin. When
any asked him the name of an herb he knew not, he would tell them there was no
Beroldus ut prius, page 77.
use thereof in Physic; and yet this man would undertake not only to cure
men, but to cure the Art of curing men, and reform Physic it self.

As for his religion, it would as well pose himself as others to tell what it
was. He boasted that shortly he would order Luther and the Pope, as well as he
had done Galen and Hippocrates. He was never seen to pray, and seldom came to
Church. He was not only skilled in natural Magic (the utmost bounds whereof
border on the suburbs of hell) but is charged to converse constantly with
familiars. Guilty he was of all vices but wantonness; and I find an Oporinus
in Epist. de Paracel^o.
honest man his Compurgatour, that he was not given to women; perchance he
drank himself into wantonness and past it, quenching the fire of his lust by
piling fuel too hard and fast upon it.

Boasting that he could make a man immortal, he himself died at forty seven
years in the City of Saltzburg. His Scholars say he was poisoned through the
envy (that dark shadow ever waiting on a shining merit) and malice of his
adversaries. However his body should have been so fenced with antidotes, that
the battery of no poison might make a breach therein; except we impute it more
to his neglect then want of skill, and that rather his own security then his
enemies malice brought him to his grave. But it may be he was willing to die,
counting a twelvemoneths time enough to stay in one place, and forty seven
years long enough to live in one world. We may more admire that so beastly a
drunkard lived so long, then that so skillful a man died so soon. In a word, He
boasted of more then he could do, did more cures seemingly then really, more
cures really then lawfully; of more parts then learning, of more fame then
parts; a better Physician then a man, and a better Surgeon then Physician.

CHAP. 4. The Controversiall Divine.
HE is Truths Champion to defend her against all adversaries, Atheists,
Heretics, Schismatics, and Erroneous persons whatsoever. His sufficiency
appears in Opposing, Answering, Moderating, and Writing.

Maxim 1
He engages both his judgment, and affections in opposing of falsehood. Not
like country Fencers, who play only to make sport, but like Duellers indeed,
at it for life and limb; chiefly if the question be of large prospect, and
great concernings, he is zealous in the quarrel. Yet some, though their
judgment weigh down on one side, the beam of their affections stands so even,
they care not which part prevails.

2
In opposing a truth, he dissembles himself her foe, to be her better friend.
Wherefore he counts himself the greatest conqueror when Truth has taken him
captive. With Joseph having sufficiently sifted the matter in a disguise, he
discovers himself, Genesis 45.4.
I am Joseph your brother, and then throws away his visard. Dishonest they, who
though the debt be satisfied will never give up the bond, but continue
wrangling, when the objection is answered.

3
He abstains from all foul and railing language. What? make the Muses, yea the
Graces scolds? Such purulent spittle argues exulcerated lungs. Why should there
be so much railing about the body of Christ? when there was none about the body
of Moses in the Act kept betwixt the devil and Michael the Archangel.

4
He tyrannizeth not over a weak and undermatch'd Adversary; but seeks rather to
cover his weakness if he be a modest man. When a Professor pressed an
Answerer (a better Christian then a Clerk) with an hard argument, Reverende
Professor (said he) ingenue confiteor me non posse respondere huic argumento.
To whom the Professor, Recte respondes.

In answering he states the question, and expounds the terms thereof. 5
Otherwise the disputants shall end, where they ought to have begun, in
differences about words, and be Barbarians each to other, speaking in a
Language neither understand. If the Question also be of Historical cognizanse,
he shows the pedigree thereof, who first brewed it, who first broch'd it, and
sends the wandering Error with a pasport home to the place of its birth.

In taking away an objection he not only puts by the thrust, 6
but breaks the weapon. Some rather escape then defeat an argument, and though
by such an evasion they may shut the mouth of the Opponent, yet may they open
the difficulty wider in the hearts of the hearers. But our Answerer either
fairly resolves the doubt; or else shows the falsenesse of the argument, by
beggering the Opponent to maintain such a fruitful generation of absurdities,
as his argument has begotten; or lastly returns and retorts it back upon him
again. The first way unties the knot; the second cuts it asunder; the third
whips the Opponent with the knot himself tied. Sure it is more honor to be a
clear Answerer, then a cunning Opposer, because the latter takes advantage of
man's ignorance, which is ten times more then his knowledge.

What his answers want in suddenness they have in solidity. 7
Indeed the speedy answer adds luster to the disputation, and honor to the
disputant; yet he makes good payment, who though he cannot presently throw the
money out of his pocket, yet will pay it, if but going home to unlock his
chest. Some that are not for speedy may be for sounder performance. When
Melanchthon at the disputation of Ratisbon was pressed with a shrewd argument
by Ecchius, I will answer thee, said he, to morrow. Nay, said Ecchius, do it
now or it is nothing worth. Yea, said Melanchthon, I seek the Truth, and not
mine own Credit, and therefore it will be as good if I answer thee to Melchior
Adam. in vitis Germ. Theolog. p. 339.
morrow by Gods assistance.

8
In moderating he sides with the Answerer, if the Answerer sides with the
truth. But if he be conceited, and opinioned of his own sufficiency, he lets
him swound before he gives him any hot water. If a Paradox-monger, loving to
hold strange yea dangerous Opinions, he counts it charity to suffer such a one
to be beaten without mercy, that he may be weaned from his wilfulness. For the
main, he is so a staff to the Answerer, that he makes him stand on his own legs.

9
In writing, his Latin is pure, so far as the subject will allow. For those
who are to climb the Alps are not to expect a smooth and even way. True it is
that Schoolmen, perceiving that fallacy had too much covert under the nap of
flourishing Language, used thredbare Latin on purpose, and cared not to
trespass on Grammar, and tread down the fences thereof to avoid the circuit of
words, and to go the nearest way to express their conceits. But our Divine
though he uses barbarous School-terms, which like standers are fixed to the
controversy, yet in his moveable Latin, passages, and digressions his style
is pure and elegant.

10
He affects clearness and plainness in all his writings. Some men's heads are
like the world before God said unto it, Fiat lux. These dark-lanterns may shine
to themselves, and understand their own conceits, but no body else can have
light from them. Thus Matthias Farinator Professor at Vienna, assisted with
some other learned men, as the Times then went, was thirty years making a book
of applying Plato's, Aristotle's, and Galen's rules in Philosophy, to Christ
and his Prophets, and it is called Mercator Atlas in the descrip. of Austria.
Lumen animae; quo tamen nihil est caliginosius, labor magno, sed ridiculo,
and inani. But this obscurity is worst when affected, when they do as Persius,
of whom Scalig. de Art poet. lib. 6. c. 6.
one says, Legi voluit quae scripsit, intelligi noluit quae legerentur. Some
affect this darkness, that they may be accounted profound, whereas one is not
bound to believe that all the water is deep that is muddy.

He is not curious in searching matters of no moment. 11
Captain Martin Cambdens Elisab. anno. 1576.
Forbisher fetched from the farthest northern Countries a ships lading of
mineral stones (as he thought) which afterward were cast out to mend the high
ways. Thus are they served, and miss their hopes, who long seeking to extract
hidden mysteries out of nice questions, leave them off, as useless at last.
Antoninus Pius, for his desire to search to the least differences, was called
Cumini sector, the Carver of cumine seed. One need not be so accurate: for as
soon shall one scowr the spots out of the moon, as all ignorance out of man.
When Eunomius the Heretic vaunted that he knew God and his divinity, S. Epist.
168. quae est ad Eunomiun.
Basil gravells him in 21 questions about the body of an ant or pismire: so
dark is man's understanding. I wonder therefore at the boldness of some, who as
if they were Lord Mashalls of the Angels place them in ranks and files. Let us
not believe them here, but rather go to heaven to confute them.

He neither multiplies needless, nor compounds necessary Controversies. 12
Sure they light on a labor in vain, who seek to make a bridge of
reconciliation over the (...) betwixt Papists and Protestants; for though we go
99 steps, they (I mean their Church) will not come one to give us a meeting.
And as for the offers of Clara's and private men (besides that they seem to be
more of the nature of baits then gifts) they may make large profers, without
any Commission to treat, and so the Romish Church not bound to pay their
promises. In Giraldus Camb. in descr. of Wales.
Merionethshire in Wales there are high mountains, whose hanging tops come so
close together that shepherds on the tops of several hills may audibly talk
together, yet will it be a days journey for their bodies to meet, so vast is
the hallownesse of the valleys betwixt them. Thus upon sound search shall we
find a grand distance and remoteness betwixt Popish and Protestant tenants to
reconcile them, which at the first view may seem near, and tending to an
accommodation.

13
He is resolute and stable in fundamental points of Religion. These are his
fixed poles, and axletree about which he moves, whilst they stand unmovable.
Some sail so long on the Sea of controversies, tossed up and down, to and fro,
Pro and Con, that the very ground to them seems to move, and their judgments
grow scepticall and unstable in the most settled points of Divinity. When he
comes to Preach, especially if to a plain Auditory, with the Paracelsians he
extracts an oil out of the driest and hardest bodies, and knowing that knotty
timber is unfit to build with, he edifies people with easy and profitable
matter.

WILLIAM WHITACRES Dr. of D: Kings Professor and Master of Snt John's Coll in
Cambridge where He died Ano 1595. Aged 47 years. W. Marshall sculp:
CHAP. 5. The life of Dr. WHITAKER.
WIlliam Whitaker born at Holm in the County of Lancaster of good parentage,
especially by his mothers side, allied to two worshipful families. His
reverend uncle, Alexander Nowell, Dean of S. Paul's (the first fruits of the
English Confessors in the days of Queen Marie, who after her death first
returned into England from beyond the Seas) took him young from his parents,
sent him first to Paul's School, thence to Trinity College in Cambridge; where
he so profited in his studies, that he gave great promises of his future
perfection.

I pass by his youthful exercises, never striving for the garland, but he
won and wore it away. His prime appearing to the world, was when he stood for
the Professors place against two Competitours, in age far his superiors.
But the seven Electours in the Universitie who were to choose the Emperor of
the Schools, preferring a golden head before silver hairs, conferred the place
on Whitaker; and the strict form of their Election has no room for corruption.
He so well acquitted himself in the place that he answered expectation, the
strongest opponent in all disputes and lectures, and by degrees taught envy to
admire him.

By this time the Papists began to assault him, and the Truth. First Campian,
one fitter for a Trumpeter then a Soldier, whose best ability was that he
could boast in good Latin, being excellent at the flat hand of Rhetoric
(which rather gives pats then blows) but he could not bend his fist to dispute.
Whitaker both in writing and disputing did teach him, that it was easier to
make then maintain a challenge against our Church; and in like manner he
handled both Duraeus, and Sanders, who successively undertook the same cause,
solidly confuting their arguments.

But these Teazers, rather to rouse then pinch the Game, only made Whitaker
find his spirits. The fiercest dog is behind even Bellarmine himself, a great
scholar, and who wanted nothing but a good cause to defend, and generally
writing ingeniously, using sometimes slenting, seldom downright railing.
Whitaker gave him all fair quarter, stating the question betwixt them, yielding
all which the other in reason could ask, and agreeing on terms to fall out with
him, played fairly but fiercely on him, till the other forsook the field.

Bellarmine had no mind to reinforce his routed arguments, but rather consigned
over that service to a new General, Stapleton an English man: He was born the
same Pitz^us. De ill^^i Angl. scrip. Atat. 16. page 796.
year and month wherein Sr. Thomas More was beheaded, an observation little
less then mystical with the Papists, as if God had substituted him to grow up
in the room of the other for the support of the Catholic cause. If Whitaker in
answering him put more gall then usual into his ink, Stapleton (whose mouth
was as foul as his cause) first infected him with bitterness: and none will
blame a man for arming his hands with hard and rough gloves, who is to meddle
with briars and brambles.

Thus they baited him constantly with fresh dogs: None that ran at him once
desired a second course at him; and as Davenant in Praefat. De Iud^^c and N^rma
^idei.
one observes, Cum nullo host unquam constixit, quem non fudit and fugavit.

He filled the Chair with a graceful presence, so that one needed not to do
with him as In epist. ad Spalalmum.
Luther did with Melanchthon when he first heard him read, abstract the
opinion and sight of his stature and person, lest the meannesse thereof should
cause an undervaluing of him: for our Whitakers person carried with it an
excellent port. His style was manly for the strength, maidenly for the modesty,
and elegant for the phrase thereof; showing his skill in spinning a fine thread
out of course wool, for such is controversiall matter. He had by his second
wife, a modest woman, eight children. It being true of him also, what is said
of the famous Lawyer Thuanus, obit. doct. vir. anno 1558.
Andreas Tiraquillus, singulis annis singulos libros and liberos Reipublicae
dedit.

My Father has told me, that he often wished that he might lose so much
Learning as he had gotten in after-supper studies, on condition he might gain
so much strength as he had lost thereby. Indeed his body was strongly built for
the natural temper, and well repaired by his temperate diet and recreations;
but first he foundred the foundation of this house by immoderate study, and at
last the roof was set on fire by a hot disease.

The unhappy controversy was then started, Whether justifying faith may be
lost. And this thorny question would not suffer our Nightingale to sleep. He
was sent for up by Archbishop Whitgift to the conference at Lambeth, after
which returning home, unseasonable riding, late studying, and night-watching
brought him to a burning-fever, to which his body was naturally disposed, as
appeared by the mastery of redness in his complexion. Thus lost he the health
of his body, in maintaining, That the health of the soul could not be lost. All
agreed that he should be let blood; which might then easily have been done, but
was deferred by the fault of some about him, till it was too late. Thus, when
God intends to cut a man's life off, his dearest friends by dangerous
involuntarie mistakes shall bring the knife. He died in the 47. year of his
age, Anno Dom. 1595. and in S. John's College (whereof he was Master) was
solemnly interred, with the grief of the University, and whole Church of God.

CHAP. 6. The true Church Antiquary.
HE is a traveller into former times, whence he has learnt their language and
fashions. If he meets with an old manuscript, which has the mark worn out of
its mouth, and has lost the date, yet he can tell the age thereof either by
the phrase or character.

He baits at middle Antiquity, Maxim 1.
but lodges not till he comes at that which is ancient indeed. Some scour off
the rust of old inscriptions into their own souls, cankering themselves with
superstition, having read so often Orate pro anima, that at last they fall a
praying for the departed; and they more lament the ruin of Monasteryes, then
the decay and ruin of Monks lives, degenerating from their ancient piety and
painfulnesse. Indeed a little skill in Antiquity inclines a man to Popery; but
depth in that study brings him about again to our religion. A Nobleman who had
heard of the extreme age of one dwelling not far off, made a journey to visit
him, and finding an aged person sitting in the chimney-corner, addressed
himself unto him with admiration of his age, till his mistake was rectified:
for, Oh Sr, (said the young-old man) I am not he whom you seek for, but his
son; my father is farther off in the field. The same error is daily
committed by the Romish Church, adoring the reverend brow and gray hairs of
some ancient Ceremonies, perchance but of some seven or eight hundred years
standing in the Church, and mistake these for their fathers, of far greater
age in the Primitive times.

He desires to imitate the ancient Fathers, 2
as well in their Piety, as in their Postures. Not only conforming his hands
and knees, but chiefly his heart to their pattern. O the holiness of their
living and painfulnesse of their preaching! how full were they of mortified
thoughts, and heavenly meditations! Let us not make the ceremonial part of
their lives only Canonical, and the moral part thereof altogether Apocrypha,
imitating their devotion not in the finenesse of the stuff, but only in the
fashion of the making.

3
He carefully marks the declination of the Church from the Primitive purity.
Observing how sometimes humble devotion was contented to lie down, whilst
proud superstition got on her back. Yea not only Frederick the Emperor, but
many a godly Father some hundreds of years before held the Pope's stirrup, and
by their well-meaning simplicity gave occasion to his future greatness. He
takes notice how their Rhetorical hyperboles were afterward accounted the just
measure of dogmaticall truths; How plain people took them at their word in
their funeral apostrophes to the dead; How praying for the departed brought
the fuel, under which after-ages kindled the fire of Purgatory; How one
Ceremony begat another, there being no bounds in will worship, wherewith one
may sooner be wearied then satisfied; the inventours of new Ceremonies
endeavoring to supply in number, what their conceits want in solidity; How
men's souls being in the full speed and career of the Historical use of
Pictures could not stop short, but must lash out into superstition, vailing
their bonnets to Rome in civil courtesy, when making honorable mention
thereof, are interpreted by modern Papists to have done it in adoration of the
idol of the Popes infallibility. All these things he ponders in his heart,
observing both the times and places, when and where they happened.

4
He is not zealous for the introducing of old useless Ceremonies. The mischief
is, some that are most violent to bring such in, are most negligent to preach
the cautions in using them; and simple people, like Children in eating of fish,
swallow bones and all to their danger of choking. Besides, what is observed of
horse-hairs, that lying nine days in water they turn to snakes; so some
Ceremonies though dead at first, in continuance of time quicken, get stings,
and may do much mischief, especially if in such an age wherein the meddling of
some have justly awaked the jealousy of all. When many Popish tricks are
abroad in the country; if then men meet with a Ceremony which is a stranger,
especially if it can give but a bad account of it self, no wonder if the watch
take it up for one on suspicion.

He is not peremptory but conjecturall in doubtful matters. 5
Not forcing others to his own opinion, but leaving them to their own liberty;
not filling up all with his own conjectures to leave no room for other men: nor
tramples he on their credits, if in them he finds slips and mistakes. For here
our souls have but one eye (the Apostle says, we know in part) be not proud if
that chance to come athwart thy seeing side, which meets with the blind side of
another.

He thankfully acknowledges those by whom he has profited. 6
Base natured they, who when they have quenched their own thirst, stop up, at
least muddy, the fountain. But our Antiquary, if he be not the first Founder of
a commendable conceit, contents himself to be a Benefactour to it in clearing
and adorning it.

He affects not phancy-full singularity in his behavior: 7
Nor cares he to have a proper mark in writing of words, to disguise some
peculiar letter from the ordinary character. Others, for fear travelers should
take no notice that skill in Antiquity dwells in such an head, hang out an
antique hat for the sign, or use some obsolete garb in their garments,
gestures, or discourse.

8
He does not so adore the Ancients as to despise the Modern. Grant them but
dwarfs, yet stand they on giants shoulders, and may see the further. Sure, as
stout champions of Truth follow in the rere, as ever marched in the front.
Besides, as Sr. Fran. Ba^on Advance. of learn. p. 46.
one excellently observes, Antiquitas seculi juventus mundi. These times are
the ancient times, when the world is ancient; and not those which we count
ancient ordine retrogrado, by a computation backwards from our selves.

CHAP. 7. The general Artist.
I Know the general cavil against general learning is this, that aliquis in
omnibus est nullus in singulis. He that sips of many arts, drinks of none.
However we must know, that all learning, which is but one grand Science, has
so homogeneall a body, that the parts thereof do with a mutual service relate
to, and communicate strength and luster each to other. Our Artist knowing
language to be the key of learning, thus begins.

Maxim 1
His tongue being but one by nature he gets cloven by art and industry. Before
the confusion of Babel, all the world was one continent in language; since
divided into several tongues, as several islands. Grammar is the ship, by
benefit whereof we pass from one to another, in the learned languages
generally spoken in no country. His mother tongue was like the dull music of
a monochord, which by study he turns into the harmony of several instruments.

2
He first gains skill in the Latin and Greek tongues. On the credit of the
former alone, he may trade in discourse over all Christendom: But the Greek,
though not so generally spoken, is known with no less profit, and more
pleasure. The joints of her compounded words are so naturally oyled, that they
run nimbly on the tongue; which makes them though long never tedious, because
significant. Besides, it is full and stately in sound: only it pities our
Artist to see the vowels therein rackt in pronouncing them, hanging oftentimes
one way by their native force, and haled another by their accents which
countermand them.

Hence he proceeds to the Hebrew, 3
the mother tongue of the world. More pains then quickness of wit is required
to get it, and with daily exercise he continues it. Apostasy herein is usual
to fall totally from the language by a little neglect. As for the Arabic, and
other Oriental languages, he rather makes sallies and incursions into them,
then any solemn sitting down before them.

Then he applies his study to Logic, 4
and Ethics. The latter makes a man's soul mannerly and wise; but as for
Logic, that is the armory of reason, furnished with all offensive and
defensive weapons. There are Syllogismes, long swords; Enthymems, short
daggers; Dilemma's, two-edged swords that cut on both sides; Sorites,
chain-shot: And for the defensive, Distinctions, which are shields; Retortions,
which are targets with a pike in the midst of them, both to defend and oppose.
From hence he raises his studies to the knowledge of Physics, the great hall
of Nature, and Metaphysics the closet thereof; and is careful not to wade
therein so far, till by subtle distinguishing of notions he confounds himself.

He is skillful in Rhetoric, 5
which gives a speech color, as Logic does favor, and both together beauty.
Though some condemn Rhetoric as the mother of lies, speaking more then the
truth in Hyperboles, less in her Miosis, otherwise in her metaphors, contrary
in her ironies; yet is there excellent use of all these, when disposed of with
judgment. Nor is he a stranger to Poetry, which is music in words; nor to
Music, which is poetry in sound: both excellent sauce, but they have lived and
died poor, that made them their meat.

6
Mathematics he moderately studieth to his great contentment. Using it as
ballast for his soul, yet to fix it not to stall it; nor suffers he it to be so
unmannerly as to justle out other arts. As for judicial Astrology (which has
the least judgment in it) this vagrant has been whipped out of all learned
corporations. If our Artist lodges her in the out-rooms of his soul for a
night or two, it is rather to hear then believe her relations.

7
Hence he makes his progress into the study of History. Nestor, who lived
three ages, was accounted the wisest man in the world. But the Historian may
make himself wise by living as many ages as have past since the beginning of
the world. His books enable him to maintain discourse, who besides the stock of
his own experience may spend on the common purse of his reading. This directs
him in his life, so that he makes the shipwracks of others sea-marks to
himself; yea accidents which others start from for their strangenes, he
welcomes as his wonted acquaintance, having found presidents for them formerly.
Without History a man's soul is purblind, seeing only the things which almost
touch his eyes.

8
He is well seen in Chronology, without which History is but an heap of tales.
If by the Laws of the land he is counted a Natural, who has not wit enough to
tell twenty, or to tell his Fits Herbert de not. brev. de Idiota inquiren.
age; he shall not pass with me for wise in learning, who cannot tell the age
of the world, and count hundreds of years: I mean not so critically, as to
solve all doubts arising thence; but that he may be able to give some tolerable
account thereof. He is also acquainted with Cosmography, treating of the world
in whole joints; with Chorography, shredding it into countries; and with
Topography, mincing it into particular places.

Thus taking these Sciences in their general latitude, he has finished the
round circle or golden ring of the arts; only he keeps a place for the diamond
to be set in, I mean for that predominant profession of Law, Physic, Divinity,
or State-policie, which he intends for his principal Calling hereafter.

Julius Caesar SCALIGER. a great Restorer of Learning. He died at Again in
France. Ano. Dni. 1558. aged 75 years. W. M. sculp:
CHAP. 8. The life of JULIUS SCALIGER.
I Know my choice herein is liable to much exception. Some will make me the
pattern of ignorance, for making this Scaliger the pattern of the general
Artist, whose own son Joseph might have been his father in many arts. But all
things considered, the choice will appear well advised, even in such variety of
examples. Yet let him know that undertakes to pick out the best ear amongst an
acre of wheat, that he shall leave as good if not a better behind him, then
that which he chooses.

He was born Anno 1484. in Italy, at the Castle of Ripa upon lacus Benacus,
now called Lago di Garda, of the illustrious and noble family of the Scaligers,
Princes, for many hundreds of years, of Verona, till at last the Venetians
outed them of their ancient inheritance. Being about eleven years old, he was
brought to the Court of Maximilian Emperor of Germany, where for seventeen
years together he was taught learning, and military discipline. I pass by his
valiant performances achieved by him, save that this one action of his is so
great and strong, it cannot be kept in silence, but will be recorded.

In the cruel battle at Ravenna betwixt the Emperor and the French, he not
only bravely fetched off the dead bodies of Benedictus and Titus his father
and brother, but also with his own hands rescued the Eagle (the standard
Imperial) which was taken by the enemies. For which his prowess Maximilian
knighted him, and with his own hands put on him the golden spurs, and chain,
the badges of knighthood.

Amidst these his Martial employments he made many a clandestine match with
the Muses, and whilst he expected the tides and returns of business, he
filled up the empty places of leisure with his studies. Well did the Poets
feign Pallas Patroness of arts and arms, there being ever good intelligence
betwixt the two Professions, and as it were but a narrow cut to ferry over out
of one into the other. At last Scaliger sounded a retreat to himself from the
wars, and wholly applied himself to his book, especially after his wandering
life was fixed by marriage unto the beautiful Andietta Lobeiaca, with whom he
lived at Agin, near Montpeliar in France.

His Latin was twice refined, and most critical, as appears by his own
writings, and notes on other Authors. He was an accurate Grecian, yet began to
study it, when well nigh forty years old, when a man's tongue is too stiff to
bow to words. What a torture was it to him who flowed with streams of matter
then to learn words, yea letters, drop by drop? But nothing was unconquerable
to his pains, who had a golden wit in an iron body. Let his book of Subtilties
witness his profound skill in Logic, and Natural Philosophy.

His skill in Physic was as great, as his practice therein was happy; in so
much that he did many strange and admirable cures. Hear how a Stephanus
Boethius Regius Senator Burdigolae ad Vidum Brassacum Praesidem.
noble and learned pen does commend him: Non hunc fefellit ulla vis recondita
Salubris herbae, saltibus si quam aviis
Celat nivosus Caucasus, seu quam procul
Riphaea duro contigit rupes gelu.
Hic jamque spectantes ad orcum non semel
Animas repressit victor, and membris suis
Haerere succis compulit felicibus,
Nigrique avaras Ditis elusit manus.
On snowy Caucasus there grew no root
Of secret power, but he was privy to 't;
On cold Riphean hills no simple grew,
But he the force thereof and virtue knew.
Wherewith (applied by his successful art)
Such sullen souls as would this world depart,
He forced still in their bodies to remain,
And from deaths door fetched others back again.


As for his skill in Physiognomy, it was wonderful. I know some will say, that
cannot be read in men's faces which was never wrote there, and that he that
seeks to find the disposition of men's souls in the figures of their bodies,
looks for letters on the backside of the book. Yet is it credibly In vita Iul.
Scalig. p. 54.
averred that he never looked on his infant-sonne Audectus but with grief, as
sorrow-struck with some sad sign of ill success he saw in his face: which
child at last was found stifled in bed with the embraces of his nurce being
fast asleep.

In Mathematics he was no Archimedes, though he showed his skill therein with
the best advantage, and stood therein on his tiptoes, that his learning might
seem the taller.

But in Poetry his over-measure of skill might make up this defect, as is
attested by his book de Art Poetica. Yet his own Poems are harsh, and
unsmooth, (as if he rather snorted then slept on Parnassus) and they sound
better to the brain then the ear. Indeed his censure in Poetry was
incomparable; but he was more happy in repairing of Poems then in building them
from the ground, which speaks his judgment to be better then his invention.

What shall I speak of his skill in History? whose own actions were a
sufficient History. He was excellently versed in the passages of the world,
both modern and ancient. Many modern languages, which departed from Babel in a
confusion, met in his mouth in a method, being skillful in the Sclavonick
tongue, the Hungarian, Dutch, Italian, Spanish, and French.

But these his excellent parts were attended with prodigious pride; and he had
much of the humor of the Ottomans in him, to kill all his brethren, and cry
down all his equals, which were corrivalls with him in the honor of arts,
which was his principal quarrel with Cardan. Great was his spite at Erasmus,
the morning-starre of learning, and one by whom Julius himself had profited,
though afterward he sought to put out that candle whereat he had lighted his
own. In the bickering betwixt them, Erasmus plucked Scaliger by the long locks
of his immoderate boasting, and touched him to the quick (a proud man lies pat
for a jeering man's hand to hit) yea Erasmus was a badger in his jeeres, where
he did bite he would make his teeth meet. Nor came Scaliger behind him in
railing. However afterward Scaliger repented of his bitterness, and before his
death was Thuan. obit. Illustr. Anno. 1558.
reconciled unto him.

Thus his learning, being in the circuit of arts, spread so wide, no wonder if
it lay thin in some places. His parts were nimble, that starting so late he
overtook, yea overran his equals: so that we may safely conclude that making
abatement for his military avocations, and late applying himself to study,
scarce any one is to be preferred before him for generality of humane learning.
He died Anno 1558. in the 75. year of his age.

CHAP. 9. The faithful Minister.
WE suppose him not brought up by hand only in his own country studies, but
that he has sucked of his Mother University, and thoroughly learnt the arts: Not
as S. Camb. Brit. in Northamptonshire.
Rumball, who is said to have spoken as soon as he was born, does he preach as
soon as he is Matriculated. Conceive him now a Graduate in arts, and entered
into orders, according to the solemn form of the Church of England, and
presented by some Patron to a pastoral charge, or place equivalent, and then
let us see how well he discharges his office.

Maxim 1
He endeavors to get the general love and good will of his parish. This he
does not so much to make a benefit of them, as a benefit for them, that his
ministry may be more effectual; otherwise he may preach his own heart out,
before he preaches any thing into theirs. The good conceit of the Physician is
half a cure, and his practice will scarce be happy where his person is hated;
yet he humors them not in his Doctrine to get their love: for such a spanniel
is worse then a dumb dog. He shall sooner get their good will by walking
uprightly, then by crouching and creeping. If pious living and painful
laboring in his calling will not win their affections, he counts it gain to
lose them. As for those which causelessely hate him, he pities and prays for
them: and such there will be; I should suspect his preaching had no salt in it,
if no gald horse did winse

He is strict in ordering his conversation. As for those who cleanse blurres
with blotted fingers, 2
they make it the worse. It was said of one who preached very well, and lived
very ill, That when he was out of the Pulpit, it was pity he should ever go
into it, and when he was in the Pulpit, it was pity he should ever come out of
it: But our Minister lives Sermons. And yet I deny not but dissolute men, like
unskilful horsemen which open a gate on the wrong side, may by the virtue of
their office open heaven for others, and shut themselves out.

His behavior toward his people is grave and courteous. 3
Not too austere and retired; which is laid to the charge of good Mr Fox, Acts
and Mon. in his life.
Hooper the martyr, that his rigidnesse frighted people from consulting with
him. Let your light (says Christ) shine before men; whereas over reservednesse
makes the brightest virtue burn dim. Especially he detesteth affected gravity
(which is rather on men then in them) whereby some belie their register-book,
antedate their age to seem far older then they are, and plait and set their
brows in an affected sadness. Whereas S Athanasius in ejus vita.
Anthony the Monk might have been known among hundreds of his order by his
cheerful face, he having ever (though a most mortified man) a merry
countenance.

He does not clash Gods ordinances together about precedence. 4
Not making odious comparisons betwixt Prayer and Preaching, Preaching and
Catechizing, Public prayer and Private, Premeditate prayer and Ex tempore.
When at the taking of new Carthage in Spain two Soldiers contended about the
Murall crown (due to him who first climbed the walls) so that the whole army
was thereupon in danger of division, Plutarch in Scipio's. life, page 1807.
Scipio the General said, He knew that they both got up the wall together, and
so gave the Scaling crown to them both. Thus our Minister compounds all
controversies betwixt Gods ordinances, by praising them all, practicing them
all, and thanking God for them all. He counts the reading of Common Prayers to
prepare him the better for preaching; and as one said, if he did first toll the
bell on one side, it made it afterward ring out the better in his Sermons.

5
He carefully Catechiseth his people in the elements of religion. Except he
has (a rare thing) a flock without lambs, all of old sheep; and yet even
Luther did not scorn to profess himself Discipulum Catechismi, a scholar of
the Catechism. By this Catechizing the Gospel first got ground of Popery* and
let not our Religion now grown rich be ashamed of that which first gave it
credit and set it up, lest the Jesuits beat us at our own weapon. Through the
want of this Catechizing many which are well skilled in some dark out-corners
of Divinity have lost themselves in the beaten road thereof.

6
He will not offer to God of that which costs him nothing; but takes pains
aforehand for his Sermons. Plutarch in the life of Demosth.
Demosthenes never made any oration on the sudden; yea being called upon he
never rose up to speak, except he had well studied the matter: and he was wont
to say, That he showed how he honored and reverenced the people of Athens
because he was careful what he spoke unto them. Indeed if our Minister be
surprised with a sudden occasion, he counts himself rather to be excused then
commended, if premeditating only the bones of his Sermon he clothes it with
flesh ex tempore. As for those, whose long custom has made preaching their
nature, that they can discourse Sermons without study, he accounts their
examples rather to be admired then imitated.

Having brought his Sermon into his head, he labors to bring it into his
heart, 7
before he preaches it to his people. Surely that preaching which comes from
the soul most works on the soul. Some have questioned ventriloquie, when men
strangely speak out of their bellies, whether it can be done lawfully or no:
might I coin the word cordiloquie, when men draw the doctrines out of their
hearts, sure all would count this lawful and commendable. 8


He chiefly reproves the reigning sins of the time, and place he lives in. We
may observe that our Savior never inveighed against Idolatry, Usury,
Sabbath-breaking amongst the Jews; not that these were not sins, but they were
not practiced so much in that age, wherein wickedness was spun with a finer
thread: and therefore Christ principally bent the drift of his preaching against
spiritual Pride, Hypocrisy, and Traditions then predominant amongst the
people. Also our Minister confuteth no old Heresies which time has confuted;
nor troubles his Auditory with such strange, hideous cases of Conscience, that
it is more hard to find the case then the resolution. In public reproving of
sin, he ever whips the vice, and spares the person.

He does not only move the bread of life, and toss it up and down in
generalities, 9
but also breaks it into particular directions: drawing it down to cases of
Conscience, that a man may be warranted in his particular actions, whether they
be lawful or not. And he teaches people their lawful liberty as well as
their restraints and prohibitions; for amongst men it is as ill taken to turn
back favors, as to disobey commands.

The places of Scripture he quotes are pregnant and pertinent. 10
As for heaping up of many quotations, it smacks of a vain ostentation of
memory. Besides, it is as impossible that the hearer should profitably retain
them all, as that the preacher has seriously perused them all: yea, whilst
the auditors stop their attention, and stoop down to gather an impertinent
quotation, the Sermon runs on, and they lose more substantial matter.

11
His similes and illustrations are always familiar, never contemptible. Indeed
reasons are the pillars of the fabric of a Sermon, but similitudes are the
windows which give the best light. He avoids such stories whose mention may
suggest bad thoughts to the auditors, and will not use a light comparison to
make thereof a grave application, for fear lest his poison go farther then his
antidote.

12
He provideth not only wholesome but plentiful food for his people. Almost
incredible was the painfulnesse of Baronius, the compiler of the voluminous
Annals of the Church, who for thirty years together preached The words being
somewhat ambiguous are thus, In audiendis confessionibus, and sermonibus ad
populum ter in hebdomada quaterve habendis per triginta and amplius annos
diligentissima assiduitate laboravit, Spondivus in vita Baronii, page 2. part.
7.
three or four times aweek to the people. As for our Minister, he prefers
rather to entertain his people with wholesome cold meat which was on the table
before, then with that which is hot from the spit, raw and half roasted. Yet in
repetition of the same Sermon, every edition has a new addition, if not of new
matter of new affections. Of whom, says S. Paul, we have told you often, and
now we tell you weeping.

13
He makes not that wearisome, which should ever be welcome. Wherefore his
Sermons are of an ordinary length except on an extraordinary occasion. What a
gift had John Mercator Atlas in the descrip. of Austria.
Haselbach, Professor at Vienna, in tediousness? who being to expound the
Prophet Esaias to his auditors read twenty one years on the first Chapter, and
yet finished it not.

14
He counts the success of his Ministry the greatest preferment. Yet herein God
has humbled many painful pastors, in making them to be clouds to rain, not
over Arabia the happy, but over the stony or desert: so that they may complain
with the Herdsman in the Poet, He^ mihi, quam pingui macer est mihi taurus in
arvo?
My starveling bull,
Ah woe is me,
In pasture full,
How lean is he?


Yet such Pastors may comfort themselves that great is their reward with God
in heaven, who measures it not by their success but endeavors. Besides,
though they see not, their people may feel benefit by their Ministry. Yea the
preaching of the Word in some places is like the planting of woods, where
though no profit is received for twenty years together, it comes afterward.
And grant, that God honors thee not to build his temple in thy parish, yet
thou may with David provide metal and materials for Solomon thy successor
to build it with.

To sick folks he comes sometimes before he is sent for, 15
as counting his vocation a sufficient calling. None of his flock shall want
the extreme unction of Prayer and Counsel. Against the Communion especially he
endeavors that Janus his temple be shut in the whole parish, and that all be
made friends.

He is never plaintiff in any suit but to be rights defendant. 16
If his dues be detained from him, he grieves more for his parishioners bad
conscience then his own damage. He had rather suffer ten times in his profit,
then once in his title, where not only his person, but posterity is wronged:
And then he proceeds fairly and speedily to a trial, that he may not vex and
weary others, but right himself. During his suit he neither breaks off nor
slacks offices of courtesy to his adversary; yea though he loses his suit, he
will not also lose his charity. Chiefly he is respectfull to his Patron, that
as he presented him freely to his living, so he constantly presents his Patron
in his prayers to God.

17
He is moderate in his tenets and opinions. Not that he gilds over
lukewarmnesse in matters of moment with the title of discretion, but withal he
is careful not to entitle violence in indifferent and in concerning matters to
be zeal. Indeed men of extraordinary tallnesse, (though otherwise little
deserving) are made porters to lords, and those of unusual littleness are
made ladies dwarfs, whilst men of moderate stature may want masters. Thus many
notorius for extremities may find favorers to prefer them, whilst moderate
men in the middle truth may want any to advance them. But what says the
Apostle? If in this life only we had hope we are of all men the most miserable.

18
He is sociable and willing to do any courtesy for his neighbor Ministers. He
willingly communicates his knowledge unto them. Surely the gifts and graces of
Christians lay in common, till base envy made the first enclosure. He neither
slighteth his inferiors; nor repineth at those who in parts and credit are
above him. He loves the company of his neighbor Ministers. Sure as
ambergreece is nothing so sweet in it self, as when it is compounded with other
things; so both godly and learned men are gainers by communicating themselves
to their neighbors.

19
He is careful in the discreet ordering of his own family. A good Minister and
a good father may well agree together. When a certain Frenchman came to visit
Pantaleon de Illustr. Germ. in vita Melanch.
Melanchthon, he found him in his stove with one hand dandling his child in the
swadling-clouts, and in the other hand holding a book and reading it. Our
Minister also is as hospitable as his estate will permit, and makes every alms
two by his cheerful giving it. He loves also to live in a well-repaired
house, that he may serve God therein more cheerfully. A Clergieman who built
his house from the ground wrote in it this counsel to his successor, If thou
do find an house built to thy mind
Without thy cost,
Serve thou the more God and the poor;
My labor is not lost.


Lying on his deathbed he bequeaths to each of his parishioners his precepts
and example for a legacy: 20
and they in requital erect every one a monument for him in their hearts. He
is so far from that base jealousy that his memory should be outshined by a
brighter successor, and from that wicked desire that his people may find his
worth by the worthlesnesse of him that succeeds, that he does heartily pray to
God to provide them a better Pastor after his decease. As for outward estate,
he commonly lives in too bare pasture to die fat* It is well if he has
gathered any flesh, being more in blessing then bulk.

WILLIAM PERKINS The Learned, pious, and painful Preacher of Gods word, at St
Andrews in Cambridge where He died Anno Dni. 1602. Aged 44 years. W. M. sculp.
CHAP. 10. The life of Mr PERKINS.
William Perkins, born at Marston nigh Coventry in Warwickshire, was afterward
brought up in Christ-Colledge in Cambridge, where he so well profited in his
studies that he got the grounds of all liberal Arts, and in the 24. of Queen
Elizabeth was chosen fellow of that College, the same year wherein Doctor
Andrew Willet (one of admirable industry) and Doctor Richard Clark (whose
learned Sermons commend him to posterity) were elected into the same Society.

There goes an uncontrolled tradition, that Perkins, when a young scholar, was
a great studier of Magic, occasioned perchance by his skill in Mathematics.
For ignorant people count all circles above their own sphere to be conjuring,
and presently cry out those things are done by black art for which their dim
eyes can see no color in reason. And in such cases, when they cannot fly up
to heaven to make it a Miracle, they fetch it from hell to make it Magic,
though it may lawfully be done by natural causes. True it is he was very wild
in his youth till God (the best Chymick who can fix quicksilver it self)
graciously reclaimed him.

After his entrance into the Ministry, the first beam he sent forth shined to
those which sat in darkness and the shadow of death, I mean the prisoners in
the castle of Cambridge, people (as generally in such places) living in England
out of Christendom, wanting the means of their salvation, bound in their
bodies, but too loose in their lives, yea often branded in their flesh, and
seared in their consciences. Perkins prevailed so far with their jaylour,
that the prisoners were brought (fettered) to the Shire-house hard by, where he
preached unto them every Lords day. Thus was the prison his parish, his own
Charity his Patron presenting him unto it, and his work was all his wages. Many
an Onesimus here he begat, and as the instrument freed the prisoners from the
captivity of sin. When this began to be known, some of good quality of the
neighboring parishes became his auditors, and counted it their feast to feed
out of the prisoners basket. Hence afterward he became Preacher of S. Andrews
parish in Cambridge, where he continued to the day of his death.

His Sermons were not so plain but that the piously learned did admire them,
nor so learned but that the plain did understand them. What was said of
Socrates, That he first humbled the towering specul^^ions of Philosophers into
practice and morality; so our Perkins brought the schools into the Pulpit, and
unshelling their controversies out of their hard school-terms, made thereof
plain and wholesome meat for his people. For he had a capacious head with angles
winding, and roomthy enough to lodge all controversiall in^^^asies; and, had
not preaching diverted him from that way, he had no doubt attained to eminency
therein. An excellent Surgeon he was at joynting of a broken soul, and at
stating of a doubtful conscience. And sure in Case-divinity Protestants are
defective. For (save that a Smith or two of late have built them forges, and
set up shop) we go down to our enemies to sharpen all our instruments, and are
beholden to them for offensive and defensive weapons in Cases of Conscience.

He would pronounce the word Damn with such an emphasis as left a doleful
Echo in his auditors ears a good while after. And when Catechist of
Christ-Colledge, in expounding the Commandments, S. W. M^. of S. C. C.
applied them so home, able almost to make his hearers hearts fall down, and
hairs to stand upright. But in his older age he altered his voice, and remitted
much of his former rigidnesse, often professing that to preach mercy was that
proper office of the Ministers of the Gospel.

Some octject that his Doctrine, referring all to an absolute decree,
hamstrings all industry, and cuts off the sinews of men's endeavors toward
salvation. For ascribing all to the wind of Gods spirit, (which blows where
it lists) he leaves nothing to the oars of man's diligence, either to help or
hinder to the attaining of happiness, but rather opens a wide door to
licentious security. Were this the hardest objection against Perkins his
doctrine, his own life was a sufficient answer thereunto, so pious, so
spotless, that Malice was afraid to bite at his credit, into which she knew
her teeth could not enter.

H^ had a rare felicity in speedy reading of books, and as it were but turning
them over would give an exac^ account of all considerables therein. So that as
it were riding post through an Author, he took strict notice (...) all
passages, as if he had dwelt on them particularly; perusing books so speedily,
one would think he read nothing; so accurately, one would think he read all.

He was of a cheerful nature and pleasant disposition: Indeed to mere
strangers he was reserved and close, suffering them to knock a good while
before he would open himself unto them; but on the least acquaintance he was
merry and very familiar.

Besides his assiduity in preaching he wrote many books, extant at this day.
And pity it was, that he set not forth more of them himself; for though some of
his Orphan works lighted on good Guardians, yet all were not so happy; and
indeed no nurse for a child to the own mother.

He dyed in the 44. year of his age of a violent fit of the stone. It has
been reported that he dyed in the conflict of a troubled conscience; which
admit were so, had been no wonder. For God sometimes seemingly leaves his
Saints when they leave the world, plunging them on their deathbeds in deep
temptations, and casting their souls down to hell, to rebound the higher to
heaven. Besides, the devil is most busy on the last day of his Term; and a
Tenant to be outed cares not what mischief he does. But here was no such
matter. S. W. ut prius.
Indeed he always cried out Mercy Mercy: which some standers by misinterpreted
for despair, as if he felt not Gods favor, because he called for it: whereas
Mercy is a Grace which they hold the fastest, that most catch after it. It Is
true that many on less reason have expressed more confidence of their future
happiness, and have delivered themselves in larger speeches concerning the
same. But who could expect a long oration from him, where every word was
accented with pain in so sharp a disease.

His funerals were solemnly and sumtuously performed of the sole charges of
Christ-Colledge, which challenged, as she gave him his breeding, to pay for his
burial; the University and Town lovingly contending which should express more
sorrow thereat. Doctor Mountague, afterward Bishop of Winchester, preached
his Funerall-Sermon, and excellently discharged the place, taking for his Text,
Moses my servant is dead.

He was of a ruddy complexion, very fat and corpulent, lame of his right hand;
and yet this Ehud with a lefthanded pen did stab the Romish Cause, and Hugh
Holland in his Icones.
as one says, Dextera quantumvis fuerat tibi manca, docendi
Pollebas mira dexteritate tamen.
Though nature thee of thy right hand bereft,
Right well thou writest with thy hand that is left.


He was born the first, and dyed the last year of Queen Elisabeth, so that his
life streamed in equal length with her reign, and they both had their
fountains, and falls together.

I must not forget, how his books after his death were translated into most
modern Christian languages. For though he excellently improved his talent in
the English tongue, yet forreiners thought it but wrapped up in a napkin, whilst
folded in an unknown language. Wherefore some translated the main body of his
works into French, Dutch, and Italian; and his books speak more tongues, then
the Maker ever understood. His Reformed Catholic was done into Spanish, and no
Spaniard ever since durst take up that gantlet of defiance our Champion cast
down: yea their Inquisition rather chose to answer it with tortures, then
arguments.

CHAP. 11. The good Parishioner.
WE will only describe his Church-reference; his Civil part has and shall be
met with under other Heads. Conceive him to live under such a faithful
Minister as before was charactered, as, either judging charitably that all
Pastors are such, or wishing heartily that they were.

Though near to the Church he is not far from God. Maxim 1
Like unto Justus, Acts 18.8. One that worshipped God, and his house joined
hard to the Synagogue. Otherwise if his distance from the church be great, his
diligence is the greater to come thither in season.

He is timely at the beginning of Common prayer. 2
Yet as De sinibus boni and mali, lib. 2.
Tullie Charged some dissolute people for being such sluggards that they never
saw the sun rising or setting, as being always up after the one, and abed
before the other; so some negligent people never hear prayers begun, or sermon
ended: the Confession being past before they come, and the Blessing not come
before they are passed away.

In sermon he sets himself to hear God in the Minister. 3
Therefore divesteth he himself of all prejudice, the jaundise in the eyes of
the soul presenting colors false unto it. He hearkens very attentively: It Is a
shame when the Church it self is Coemeterium, wherein the living sleep above
ground as the dead do beneath.

At every Point that concerns himself, 4
he turns down a leaf in his heart; and rejoices that Gods word has pierced
him, as hoping that whilst his soul smarts it heals. And as it is no manners
for him that has good venison before him, to ask whence it came, but rather
fairly to fall to it; so hearing an excellent Sermon, he never enquires whence
the Preacher had it, or whether it was not before in print, but falls aboard to
practice it.

5
He accuses not his Minister of spite for particularizing him. It does not
follow that the archer aimed, because the arrow hit. Rather our Parishioner
reasons thus; If my sin be notorious, how could the Minister miss it? if
secret, how could he hit it without Gods direction? But foolish hearers make
even the bells of Aarons garments to clink as they think. And a guilty
conscience is like a whirlpool, drawing in all to it self which otherwise would
pass by. One, causelessely disaffected to his Minister, complained that he in
his last Sermon had personally inveighed against him, and accused him thereof
to a grave religious Gentleman in the parish: Truly, said the Gentleman, I had
thought in his Sermon he had meant me, for it touched my heart. This rebated
the edge of the others anger.

6
His Tithes he pays willingly with cheerfulness. How many part with Gods
portions grudgingly, or else pinch it in the paying. Fluctus Decimus pro
maximo. Ovidio and Lucano.
Decimum, the Tenth, amongst the Romans was ever taken for what was best or
biggest. It falls out otherwise in paying of Tithes, where the least and
leanest are shifted off to make that number.

7
He hides not himself from any Parish-office which seeks for him. If chosen
Churchwarden, he is not busily-idle, rather to trouble then reform, presenting
all things but those which he should. If Overseer of the poor, he is careful
the rates be made indifferent (whose inequality oftentimes is more burdensome
then the sum) and well disposed of. He measures not peoples wants by their
clamorous complaining, and dispenses more to those that deserve then to them
that only need relief.

He is bountiful in contributing to the repair of Gods house. 8
For though he be not of their opinion, who would have the Churches under the
Gospel conformed to the magnificence of Solomon's Temple (whose porch would
serve us for a Church) and adorn them so gaudily, that devotion is more
distracted then raised, and men's souls rather dazeled, then lightened; yet he
conceives it fitting that such sacred places should be handsomely and decently
maintained: The rather because the climactericall year of many Churches from
their first foundation, may seem to happen in our days; so old, that their
ruin is threatened if not speedily repaired.

He is respectfull to his Ministers widow and posterity for his sake. 9
When the only daughter of Peter Martyr was, through the riot and prodigality
of her debauched husband, brought to extreme poverty, the Thuan obit. vir.
doct. Anno. 1562.
State of Zurick, out of grateful remembrance of her Father, supported her with
bountiful maintenance. My prayers shall be, that Ministers widows, and
children may never stand in need of such relief, and may never want such relief
when they stand in need.

CHAP. 12. The good Patron.
THat in the Primitive times (though I dare not say generally in all Churches)
if not the sole choice, at least the consent of the people was required in
appointing of Ministers, may partly appear out of Acts 14.2^. (...)
Scripture, more plainly out of Lib. 1. epist. 4
Cyprian, and is confessed by reverend Defense of the Answer to the Admonition.
page 164.
Dr. Whitgift. These popular elections were well discharged in those purer
times, when men being scoured with constant persecution had little leisure to
rust with factions, and when there were no baits for Corruption; the places of
Ministers being then of great pains and peril, and small profit. But
dissension creeping in, in after-ages (the eyes of common people at the best
but dim through ignorance being wholly blinded with partiality) it may seem
their right of election was either devolved to, or assumed of the Bishop of the
Dioces, who Council. Toletan. Anno 589. Can. 9. Synod. Antiochen. Can. 24. and
2. Council. Gangrense Can. 7. and 8.
only was to appoint Curates in every parish. Afterward to invite laymen to
build and endow Churches, the Bishops departed with their right to the lay
Patrons according to the verse, Patronum faciunt Dos, Aedificatio, Fundus.
A Patron's he that did endow with lands,
Or built the Church, or on whose ground it stands.


It being conceived reasonable that he who paid the Churches portion, should
have the main stroke in providing her an husband. Then came Patronages to be
annexed to Mannours, and by sale or descent to pass along with them; nor could
any justly complain thereof, if all Patrons were like him we describe.

Maxim 1
He counts the Living his to dispose, not to make profit of. He fears more to
lapse his conscience, then his Living, fears more the committing then the
discovery of Simony.

2
A Benefice he sometimes gives speedily, never rashly. Some are long in
bestowing them out of state, because they love to have many suitors; others out
of covetousness will not open their wares till all their chapmen are come
together, pretending to take the more deliberation.

3
He is deaf to opportunity, if wanting desert. Yet is he not of the mind of
Tamberlane the Scythian King, who never gave Office to any that sought for it:
for desiring proceeds not always from want of deserving; yea God himself likes
well that his favors should be sued for. Our Patron chiefly respects piety,
sufficiency, and promise of painfulnesse, whereby he makes his election. If he
can by the same deed provide for Gods house and his own family, he counts it
lawful, but on no terms will prefer his dearest and nearest son or kinsman
if unworthy.

He hates not only direct simony, 4
or rather Gehazisme, by the string, but also that which goes about by the bow.
Ancient Councels present us with several forms hereof. Council. Pa^ent. Anno
1312. Constit. 14.
I find how the Patrons sons and nephews were wont to feed upon the
Incumbent, and eat out the presentation in great banquets and dinners, till at
last the Palentine Council brought a voyder to such feasts, and made a canon
against them. But the former ages were bunglers to the cunning contrivance of
the simony-engineers of our times. O my soul come thou not into their secrets.
As if they cared not to go to hell, so be it were not the nearest way, but that
they might fetch a far compass round about. And yet father Vid. Videl.
Comment. in Epist. Ignatii ad Tralienses.
Campian must nreot carry it so clearly, who taxes the Protestants for
maintaining of ^imony. We confess it a personal vice amongst us, but not to
be charged as a Church-sinne, which by penal Laws it does both prohibit and
punish. Did Rome herein look upon the dust behind her own doors, she would
have but little cause to call her neighbor slut. What says the Epigram?

An Petrus fuerat Romae sub judice lis est;
Simonem Romae nemo fuisse negat.
That Peter was at Rome, there is strife about it;
That Simon was there, none did ever doubt it.
He hates corruption not only in himself, 5
but his servants. Otherwise it will do no good for the Master to throw bribes
away, if the Men catch them up at the first rebound, yea before ever they come
to the ground. In the life of Queen Elizab. Anno Dom. 1596.
Cambden can tell you what Lord Keeper it was in the days of Queen Elizabeth,
who though himself an upright man was hardly spoken of for the baseness of his
servants in the sale of Ecclesiastical preferments.

6
When he has freely bestowed a Living, he makes no boasts of it. To do this
were a kind of spiritual simony, to ask and receive applause of others; as if
the commonnesse of faulting herein made a right, and the rarity of giving
things freely merited ex condigno a general commendation. He expects nothing
from the Clerk he presented but his prayers to God for him, respectfull
carriage toward him, and painfulnesse in his Calling, who having gotten his
place freely may discharge it the more faithfully: whereas those will scarce
afford to feed their sheep fat, who rent the pasture at too high a rate.

To conclude, let Patrons imitate this particular example of King William
Rufus, who (though sacrilegious in other acts) herein discharged a good
conscience. Two Monks came to him to buy an Abbots place of him, seeking to
outvie each other in offering great sums of money, whilst a third Monk stood
by, and said nothing. To whom said the King, What will thou give for the place.
Not a penny, answered he, for it is against my conscience; but here I stay to
wait home on him whom your Royal pleasure shall design Abbot. Then quoth the
King, Thou of the three best deservest the place, and shall have it, and so
bestowed it on him.

CHAP. 13. The good Landlord.
IS one that lets his land on a reasonable rate, so that the Tenant by
employing his stock, and using his industry, may make an honest livelihood
thereby, to maintain himself and his children.

His rent does quicken his Tenant but not gall him. Maxim 1
Indeed it is observed, that where Landlords are very easy, the Tenants (but
this is per Accidens, out of their own laziness) seldom thrive, contenting
themselves to make up the just measure of their rent, and not laboring for any
surplusage of estate. But our Landlord puts some metal into his Tenants
industry, yet not grating him too much, lest the Tenant revenge the Landlords
cruelty to him upon his land.

Yet he raises his rents (or fines equivalent) in some proportion to the
present price of other commodities. 2
The plenty of money makes a seeming scarcity of all other things, and wares of
all sorts do daily grow dear. If therefore our Landlord should let his rents
stand still as his Grandfather left them, whilst other wares daily go on in
price, he must needs be cast far behind in his estate.

What he sells or sets to his Tenant, 3
he suffers him quietly to enjoy according to his covenants. This is a great
joy to a Tenant, though he buys dear to possess without disturbance. A
strange example there was of Gods punishing a covetous Landlord at Holinshed p.
1224.
Rye in Sussex, Anno 1570. He having a certain marish, wherein men on poles did
dry their fishnets, received yearly of them a sufficient sum of money, till
not content therewith he caused his servant to pluck up the poles, not
suffering the fishermen to use them any longer, except they would compound at a
greater rate. But it came to pass the same night that the sea breaking in
covered the same marish with water, and so it still continues.

4
He detests and abhorres all enclosure with depopulation. And because this may
seem a matter of importance, we will break it into several propositions.

1 Enclosure may be made without depopulating. Infinites of examples show this
to be true. But depopulation has cast a slander on enclosure, which because
often done with it, people suspect it cannot be done without it. 2 Enclosure
made without depopulating is injurious to none. I mean if proportionable
allotments be made to the poor for their commonage, and free and lease-holders
have a considerable share with the lord of the manor. 3 Enclosure without
depopulating is beneficial to private persons. Then have they most power and
comfort to improve their own parts, and for the time, and manner thereof may
mould it to their own conveniencie. The Monarch of one acre will make more
profit thereof then he that has his share in forty in common. 4 Enclosure
without depopulating is profitable to the Commonwealth. If injurious to no
private person, and profitable to them all, it must needs be beneficial to the
Commonwealth, which is but the Summa totalis of sundry persons, as several
figures. Besides, if a Mathematician should count the wood in the hedges, to
what a mighty forest would it amount? This underwood serves for supplies to
save timber from burning, otherwise our wooden walls in the water must have
been sent to the fire. Add to this the strength of an enclosed Country
against a foreign invasion. Hedges and counter-hedges (having in number what
they want in height and depth) serve for barracadoes, and will stick as
birdlime in the wings of the horse, and scotch the wheeling about of the foot.
Small resistance will make the enemy to earn every mile of ground as he
marches. Object not, That enclosure destroys tillage, the staff of a country,
for it need not all be converted to pasturage. Cain and Abel may very well
agree in the Commonwealth, the Plowman and Shepherd part the enclosures betwixt
them. 5 Enclosure with depopulation is a canker to the Commonwealth. It needs
no proof: woeful experience shows how it unhouses thousands of people, till
desperate need thrusts them on the gallows. Long since had this land been sick
of a plurisie of people, if not let blood in their Western Plantations. 6
Enclosure with depopulation endammageth the parties themselves. It Is a paradox
and yet a truth, that reason shows such enclosures to be gainful, and
experience proves them to be loss to the makers. It may be, because God being
(...), a Lover of man, mankind, and men's society, and having said to them,
Multiply and increase, counts it an affront unto him, that men depopulate, and
whereas bees daily swarm, men make the hives fewer. The margin shall direct you
to the Mr Benthams Christian Constici, page 322.
Author that counts eleven mannours in Northhamptonshire thus enclosed: which
towns have vomited out (to use his own expression) and unburthened themselves
of their former desolating and depopulating owners, and I think of their
posterity.
He rejoices to see his Tenants thrive. 5
Yea he counts it a great honor to himself, when he perceives that God
blesses their endeavors, and that they come forward in the world. I close up
all with this pleasant story. A Farmer rented a Grange generally reported to be
haunted by Faries, and paid a shrewd rent for the same at each half years end.
Now a Gentleman asked him how he durst be so hardy as to live in the house, and
whether no Spirits did trouble him. Truth (said the Farmer) there be two Saints
in heaven vex me more then all the devils in hell, namely the Virgin Mary, and
Michael the Archangel; on which days he paid his rent.

CHAP. 14. The good Master of a College.
THe Jews Anno 1348. were banished out of most countries of Christendom,
principally for poisoning of springs and Munster de German. lib. 3. page 457.
fountains. Grievous therefore is their offense, who infect Colleges, the
fountains of learning and religion; and it concerns the Church and State,
that the Heads of such houses be rightly qualified, such men as we come to
character.

Maxim 1
His learning if beneath eminency is far above contempt. Sometimes ordinary
scholars make extraordinary good Masters. every one who can play well on
Apollo's harp cannot skilfully drive his chariot, there being a peculiar
mystery of Government. Yea as a little allay makes gold to work the better, so
(perchance) some dullness in a man makes him fitter to manage secular affairs;
and those who have climbed up Parnassus but half way better behold worldly
business (as lying low and nearer to their sight) then such as have climbed up
to the top of the mount.

2
He not only keeps the Statutes (in his study) but observes them: for the
maintaining of them will maintain him, if he be questioned. He gives them their
true dimensions, not racking them for one, and shrinking them for another, but
making his conscience his daily Visitour. He that breaks the Statutes, and
thinks to rule better by his own discretion, makes many gaps in the hedge, and
then stands to stop one of them with a stake in his hand. Besides, thus to
confound the will of the dead Founders, is the ready way to make living men's
charity (like Sr Hugh Willoughby in discovering the Northern passage) to be
frozen to death, and will dishearten all future Benefactours.

He is principal Porter, 3
and chief Chappell-monitour. For where the Master keeps his chamber always,
the scholars will keep theirs seldom, yea perchance may make all the walls of
the College to be gate. He seeks to avoid the inconvenience when the gates do
rather divide then confine the scholars, when the College is distinguished (as
France into Cis and Transalpina) into the part on this, and on the otherside of
the walls. As for out-lodgings (like galleries, necessary evils in populous
Churches) he rather tolerates then approves them.

In his Elections he respects merit, 4
not only as the condition but as the cause thereof. Not like Leofricus Abbot
of S. Albans, who would scarce admit any into his Covent though well deserving,
except he was a Math. Paris. in 23. Abbat. S. Alban. page 42.
Gentleman born. He more respects literature in a scholar, then great men's
letters for him. A learned Master of a College in Cambridge (since made a
reverend Bishop, and, to the great grief of good men and great loss of Gods
Church, lately deceased) refused a Mandate for choosing of a worthless man
fellow. And when it was expected, that at the least he should have been outed
of his Mastership for this his contempt, King James highly commended him, and
encouraged him ever after to follow his own conscience, when the like occasion
should be given him.

He winds up the Tenants to make good music, 5
but not to break them. Sure Colledge-lands were never given to fat the Tenants
and sterve the scholars, but that both might comfortably subsist. Yea generally
I hear the Muses commended for the best Landladies, and a Colledge-lease is
accounted but as the worst kind of freehold.

6
He is observant to do all due right to Benefactours. If not piety, policy
would dictate this unto him. And though he respects not Benefactours kinsmen,
when at their first admission they count themselves born heirs apparent to all
preferment which the house can heap on them, and therefore grow lazy and idle;
yet he counts their alliance, seconded with mediocrity of desert, a strong
title to Colledge-advancement.

7
He counts it lawful to enrich himself, but in subordination to the College
good. Not like Varus, Governor of Syria, who came poor into the country, and
found it rich, but departed thence rich, and left the country poor. Methinks
it is an excellent commendation which Trinity College in Cambridge in her
records bestows on Doctor Still once Master thereof. Se ferebat Patremfamilias
providum, (...), nec Collegio gravis fuit aut onerosus.

8
He disdains to nourish dissension amongst the members of his house. Let
Machiavills Maxim, Divide and regnabis, if offering to enter into a
Colledge-gate, sink through the grate, and fall down with the dirt. For besides
that the fomenting of such discords agrees not with a good conscience, each
party will watch advantages, and Pupils will often be made to suffer for their
Tutours quarrels: Studium partium will be magna pars studiorum, and the
College have more rents then revenues.

9
He scorneth the plot, to make only dunces Fellows, to the end he may himself
command in chief. As thinking that they who know nothing, will do any thing,
and so he shall be a figure amongst ciphers, a be amongst drones. Yet
oftentimes such Masters are justly met with, and they find by experience, that
the dullest horses are not easiest to be reined. But our Master endeavors so
to order his elections, that every Scholar may be fit to make a Fellow, and
every Fellow a Master.

CHAP. 14. The life of Dr. METCALF.
NIcholas Metcalf Doctor of Divinity, extracted out of an ancient and numerous
family of Gentry in Yorkshire, was Archdeacon of Rochester, and Chaplain to
John Fisher the Bishop thereof; by whom this our Doctor was employed to issue
forth the moneys for the building of S. John's College in Cambridge. For
Margaret Countess of Richmond and Derby intending to graft S. John's College
into the old stock of S. John's Hospital, referred all to the Bishop of
Rochester, and he used Metcalf as an agent in all proceedings which did concern
that Foundation: which will infer him to be both a wise and an honest man.

Some make him to be but meanly Ascham. Schoolmaster, 2. Book, fol. 47.
learned; and Lively in his Chron. of Persian Monarch. p. 196.
one tells us a long story how a Sophister put a fallacy upon him, a sensu
diviso ad sensum compositum, and yet the Doctors dim eyes could not discern
it. But such trifles were beneath him; and what wonder is it if a General long
used in governing an army, has forgotten his school-play, and Fencers rules,
to put by every thrust?

Doubtless, had not his learning been sufficient, Bishop Fisher, a great clerk
himself, would not have placed him to govern the College. But we know that
some count all others but dry scholars, whose learning runs in a different
channel from their own: and it is possible, that the great distance betwixt
men in matter of Religion might hinder the new learning in one to see the old
learning in the other.

But grant that Metcalf, with Themistocles, could not fiddle, yet he could make
a little city a great one: though dull in himself, he could whet others by his
encouragement. He found the College spending scarce two hundred marks by the
year, he left it spending a Ascham. in loco prius citato.
thousand marks and more. For he not only procured and settled many donations,
and by-foundations (as we term them) of Fellowships, and Scholarships, founded
by other; but was a Benefactour himself, Pro certis ornamentis and structuris
in Capella, and pro aedificatione sex Camerarum a tergo Coquinae, etc. as it is
evidenced in the College books. He counted the College his own home, and
therefore cared not what cost he bestowed on it: not like those Masters, who
making their Colleges as steps to higher advancement will trample on them to
raise up themselves, and using their wings to fly up to their own honor,
cannot afford to spread them to brood their College. But the thriving of the
nourcery, is the best argument to prove the skill and care of the nource. See
what store of worthy men the house in his time did yield: Statesmen.
William Cecill, Lord Burly, Sr. John Cheek, Walter Haddon.
Ralph Bain, Bishop of Coventrie and Lichfield John Christopherson, Bishop of
Chichester, Robert Horn, Bishop of Winton, James Pilkinton, Bishop of Duresme,
John Tailour, Bishop of Lincoln, Thomas Watson. Bishop of Lincoln.
Learned writers.
Roger Ascham, George Pi^zaeus de Scriptor. Angli. page 773.
Bullock, Roger Baleus de Scriptor. Anglicanis.
Hutchinson, Alban Langdale, John Seaton.
Learned Men.
Hugh Fitz-Herbert, William Jreland, Laurence Pilkinton, -- Tomson, Henry
Wright.


With very many more. For though I dare not say that all these were old enough
to bear fruit in Metcalfs time, yet sure I am by him they were inoculated, and
in his days admitted into the College.

Yet for all these his deserts Metcalf in his old age was expelled the
College, and driven out when he could scarce go. A new generation grew up
(advanced by him) whose active spirits stumbled at his gravity (young seamen do
count ballast needless yea burdensome in a ship) and endeavored his
removal. It appears not what particular fault they laid to his charge. Some
think that the Bishop of Rochester his good lord being put to death, occasioned
his ruin, Fishers misfortune being Metcalfs highest misdemeanour. He sunk with
his Patron, and when his sun was set it was presently night with him: for
according to the Spanish proverb, Yra la s^ga con el calderon.
where goes the bucket, there goes the rope, where the principal miscarries,
all the dependants fall with him.

Others conceive it was for his partiality in preferring Northern men, as if in
his compass there were no points but such only as looked to the North,
advancing alone his own contrymen, and more respecting their need then
deserts. Indeed long 1446. Manuscrip Hutch^^. Coll. R^gal.
before, I find William Millington first Provost of Kings College put out of
his place, for his partiality in electing Yorkshire men.

But herein Metcalf is sufficiently justified: for he found Charity hottest in
the cold country, Northern men were most Ascham. in loco citato.
partial (says one) in giving lands to the College, for the furtherance of
learning. Good reason therefore Northern Scholars should be most watered there,
where Northern Benefactours rained most.

Well, good old Metcalf must forsake the House. Methinks the blushing bricks
seem ashamed of their ingratitudes, and each door, window, and casement in the
College, was a mouth to plead for him.

But what shall we say? Mark generally the grand deservers in States, and you
shall find them lose their luster before they end their life. The world, out of
covetousness to save charges to pay them their wages, quarrelling with them,
as if an over-merit were an offense. And whereas some impute this to the
malignant influence of the heavens, I ascribe it rather to a pestilent vapor
out of the earth; I mean, That rather men then stars are to be blamed for it.

He was twenty years Master, and on the 4 day of June 1537. went out of his
office, and it seems dyed soon after: his Epitaph is fastened on a piece of
brass on the wall, in the Colledge-Chappell. We must not forget that all who
were great doers in his expulsion, were great sufferers afterward, and dyed
all in great Omnes qui Metcalfi excludendi autores exstiterunt, multis adversae
fortunae procellis (sive divina ultione seu fato suo) jactati, de gradu dejecti
and deturbati, i^glorii mortem obierunt exemplo memorabili, Caius lib. 1. Hist.
Cantab^. page 75, and 76.
misery. There is difference betwixt prying into Gods secrets, and being stark
blind: Yea I question whether we are not bound to look where God points by so
memorable a judgment, showing that those branches most justly whithered which
plucked up their own root.

CHAP. 16. The good Schoolmaster.
THere is scarce any profession in the Commonwealth more necessary, which is so
slightly performed. The reasons whereof I conceive to be these: first, young
scholars make this calling their refuge, yea perchance before they have taken
any degree in the University, commence Schoolmasters in the country, as if
nothing else were required to set up this profession but only a rod and a
ferula. Secondly, others who are able use it only as a passage to better
preferment, to patch the rents in their present fortune, till they can provide
a new one, and betake themselves to some more gainful calling. Thirdly, they
are disheartened from doing their best with the miserable reward which in some
places they receive, being Masters to the children, and slaves to their
parents. Fourthly, being grown rich, they grow negligent, and scorn to touch
the school, but by the proxy of an Usher. But see how well our Schoolmaster
behaves himself.

His genius inclines him with delight to this profession. Maxim 1
Some men had as lieve be schoolboyes as Schoolmasters, to be tied to the
school as Coopers Dictionary, and Scapula's Lexicon are chained to the desk
therein; and though great scholars, and skillful in other arts, are bunglers in
this: But God of his goodness has fitted several men for several callings,
that the necessities of Church, and State, in all conditions may be provided
for. So that he who beholds the fabric thereof may say, God hewed out this
stone, and appointed it to lie in this very place, for it would fit none other
so well, and here it does most excellent. And thus God mouldeth some for a
Schoolmasters life, undertaking it with desire and delight, and discharging it
with dexterity and happy success.

2
He studieth his scholars natures as carefully as they their books; and ranks
their dispositions into several forms. And though it may seem difficult for
him in a great school to descend to all particulars, yet experienced
Schoolmasters may quickly make a Grammar of boys natures, and reduce them all
(saving some few exceptions) to these general rules.

1 Those that are ingenious and industrious. The conjunction of two such
Planets in a youth presage much good unto him. To such a lad a frown may be a
whipping, and a whipping a death; yea where their Master whips them once, shame
whips them all the week after. Such natures he uses with all gentleness. 2
Those that are ingenious and idle. These think with the hare in the fable, that
running with snails (so they count the rest of their school-fellows) they shall
come soon enough to the Post, though sleeping a good while before their
starting. Oh, a good rod would finely take them napping. 3 Those that are dull
and diligent. Wines the stronger they be the more lees they have when they are
new. Many boys are muddy-headed till they be clarified with age, and such
afterward prove the best. Bristoll diamonds are both bright, and squared and
pointed by Nature, and yet are soft and worthless; whereas orient ones in
India are rough and rugged naturally. Hard rugged and dull natures of youth
acquit themselves afterward the jewels of the country, and therefore their
dullness at first is to be born with, if they be diligent. That Schoolmaster
deserves to be beaten himself, who beats Nature in a boy for a fault. And I
question whether all the whipping in the world can make their parts, which are
naturally sluggish, rise one minute before the hour Nature has appointed. 4
Those that are invincibly dull and negligent also. Correction may reform the
latter, not amend the former. All the whetting in the world can never set a
rasours edge on that which has no steel in it. Such boys he consigneth over
to other professions. Shipwrights and boatmakers will choose those crooked
pieces of timber, which other carpenters refuse. Those may make excellent
merchants and mechanics which will not serve for Scholars.
He is able, 3
diligent, and methodicall in his teaching; not leading them rather in a circle
then forwards. He minces his precepts for children to swallow, hanging clogs on
the nimblenesse of his own soul, that his Scholars may go along with him.

He is, 4
and will be known to be an absolute Monarch in his school. If cockering
Mothers proffer him money to purchase their sons an exemption from his rod
(to live as it were in a peculiar, out of their Masters jurisdiction) with
disdain he refuses it, and scorns the late custom in some places of commuting
whipping into money, and ransoming boys from the rod at a set price. If he
has a stubborn youth, correction-proof, he debaseth not his authority by
contesting with him, but fairly if he can puts him away before his obstinacy
has infected others.

He is moderate in inflicting deserved correction. 5
Many a Shoolmaster better answers the name of (...) then (...), rather
tearing his scholars flesh with whipping, then giving them good education. No
wonder if his scholars hate the Muses, being presented unto them in the shapes
of fiends and furies. Junius complains de insolenti In his life, of his own
writing.
carnificina of his Schoolmaster, by whom conscindebatur flagris septies aut
octies in dies singulos. Yea hear the lamentable verses of poor Tusser in his
own life: From Paul's I went, to Eaton sent,
To learn straightwayes the Latin phrase,
Where fifty three stripes given to me
At once I had.
For fault but small, or none at all,
It came to pass thus beat I was;
See, Nich. Vdal Schoolmaster of Eaton in the Reign of King Henry the eight.
Vdal, see the mercy of thee
To me poor lad.


Such an Orbilius marres more Scholars then he makes: Their Tyranny has caused
many tongues to stammer, which spoke plain by nature, and whose stuttering at
first was nothing else but fears quavering on their speech at their Masters
presence. And whose mauling them about their heads has dulled those who in
quickness exceeded their Master.

6
He makes his school free to him, who sues to him in forma pauperis. And surely
Learning is the greatest alms that can be given. But he is a beast, who because
the poor Scholar cannot pay him his wages, pays the Scholar in his whipping.
Rather are diligent lads to be encouraged with all excitements to Learning.
This minds me of what I have heard concerning Mr. Bust, that worthy late
Schoolmaster of Eaton, who would never suffer any wandering begging Scholar
(such as justly the Statute has ranked in the forefront of Rogues) to come
into his school, but would thrust him out with earnestness (however privately
charitable unto him) lest his school-boyes should be disheartened from their
books, by seeing some Scholars after their studying in the University preferred
to beggary.

7
He spoils not a good school to make thereof a bad College, therein to teach
his Scholars Logic. For besides that Logic may have an action of trespass
against Grammar for encroaching on her liberties, Syllogismes are Solecismes
taught in the school, and oftentimes they are forced afterward in the
University to unlearn the fumbling skill they had before.

Out of his school he is no whit pedanticall in carriage or discourse; 8
contenting himself to be rich in Latin, though he does not gingle with it in
every company wherein he comes.

To conclude, Let this amongst other motives make Schoolmasters careful in
their place, that the eminencies of their Scholars have commended the memories
of their Schoolmasters to posterity, who otherwise in obscurity had altogether
been forgotten. Who had ever heard of R. Grant. in vit. Ascham. page 629.
Bond in Lancashire but for the breeding of learned Ascham his Scholar? or of
^shton in the life of Whitaker, page 29
Hartgrave in Brundly school, in the same County, but because he was the first
did teach worthy Doctor Whitaker. Nor do I honor the memory of Mulcaster for
any thing so much, as for his Scholar, that gulf of learning, Bishop Andrews.
This made the Athenians, the day before the great feast of Theseus their
founder, to sacrifice a ram to the memory of Plutar. in vit. Thes^i.
Conidas his Schoolmaster that first instructed him.

CHAP. 17. The Good Merchant
IS one who by his trading claspeth the island to the continent, and one
country to another. An excellent gardener, who makes England bear wine, and
oil, and spices; yea herein goes beyond Nature in causing that Omnis fert omnia
tellus. He wrongs neither himself, nor the Commonwealth, nor private chapmen
which buy commodities of him. As for his behavior toward the Commonwealth, it
far surpasses my skill to give any Rules thereof; only this I know, that to
export things of necessity, and to bring in foreign needless toys, makes a
rich Merchant, and a poor Kingdom: for the State loses her radical
moisture, and gets little better then sweat in exchange, except the necessaries
which are exported be exceeding plentiful, which then though necessary in
their own nature become superfluous through their abundance. We will content
our selves to give some general advertisements concerning his behavior
toward his chapmen, whom he uses well in the quantity, quality, and price of
the commodities he sells them.

Maxim 1.
He wrongs not the buyer in Number, Weight, or Measure. These are the
Landmarks of all trading, which must not be removed: for such cosenage were
worse then open felony. First, because they rob a man of his purse, and never
bid him stand. Secondly, because highway-thieves defy, but these pretend
justice. Thirdly, as much as lies in their power, they endeavor to make God
accessory to their cosenage, deceiving by pretending his weights. For God is
the principal clark of the market, All the Prove. 16.11.
weights of the bag are his work.

2
He never warrants any ware for good but what is so indeed. Otherwise he is a
thief, and may be a murderer, if selling such things as are applied inwardly.
Besides, in such a case he counts himself guilty if he sells such wares as
are bad, though without his knowledge, if avouching them for good; because he
may, professes, and is bound to be Master in his own mystery, and therefore in
conscience must recompense the buyers loss, except he gives him an Item to buy
it at his own adventure.

3
He either tells the faults in his ware, or abates proportionably in the price
he demands: for then the low value shows the viciousness of it. Yet commonly
when Merchants depart with their commodities, we hear (as in funeral
orations) all the virtues but none of the faults thereof.

4
He never demands out of distance of the price he intends to take: If not
always within the touch, yet within the reach of what he means to sell for.
Now we must know there be four several prices of vendible things. First, the
Price of the market, which ebbes and flows according to the plenty or scarcity
of coin, commodities, and chapmen. Secondly, the Price of friendship, which
perchance is more giving then selling, and therefore not so proper at this
time. Thirdly, the Price of fancy, as twenty pounds or more for a dog or hauk,
when no such inherent worth can naturally be in them, but by the buyers and
sellers fancy reflecting on them. Yet I believe the money may be lawfully
taken. First, because the seller sometimes on those terms is as loath to forgo
it, as the buyer is willing to have it. And I know no standard herein whereby
men's affections may be measured. Secondly, it being a matter of pleasure, and
men able and willing, let them pay for it, Volenti non fit injuria. Lastly,
there is the Price of cosenage, which our Merchant from his heart detests and
abhorres.

He makes not advantage of his chapmans ignorance, 5
chiefly if referring himself to his honesty: where the sellers conscience is
all the buyers skill, who makes him both seller and judge, so that he does not
so much ask as order what he must pay. When one told old Bishop Latimer that
the Cutler had cosened him, in making him pay twopence for a knife not (in
those days) worth a penny; No, quoth Latimer, he cosen'd not me but his own
conscience. On the other side S. Lib. 13. de Trinitat. c. 3.
Augustine tells us of a seller, who out of ignorance asked for a book far
less then it was worth, and the buyer (conceive himself to be the man if you
please) of his own accord gave him the full value thereof.

He makes not the buyer pay the shot for his prodigality; 6
as when the Merchant through his own ignorance or ill husbandry has bought
dear, he will not bring in his unnecessary expenses on the buyers score: and in
such a case he is bound to sell cheaper then he bought.

Selling by retail he may justify the taking of greater gain: 7
because of his care, pains, and cost of fetching those wares from the
fountain, and in parcelling and dividing them. Yet because retailers trade
commonly with those who have least skill what they buy, and commonly sell to
the poorer sort of people, they must be careful not to grate on their
necessity.

But how long shall I be retailing out rules to this Merchant? It would employ
a Casuist an apprentiship of years: take our Saviors wholesale rule,
Whatsoever ye would have men do unto you, do you unto them; for this is the
Low, and the Prophets.

CHAP. 18. The good Yeoman
IS a Gentleman in Ore, whom the next age may see refined; and is the wax
capable of a gentile impression, when the Prince shall stamp it. Wise Solon
(who accounted Herodotus lib. 1. page 12
Tellus the Athenian the most happy man for living privately on his own lands)
would surely have pronounced the English Yeomanry, a fortunate condition,
living in the temperate Zone, betwixt greatness and want, an estate of people
almost peculiar to England. France and Italy are like a die, which has no
points betwixt sink and ace, Nobility and Pesantry. Their walls though high,
must needs be hollow, wanting filling-stones. Indeed Germany has her Boores,
like our Yeomen, but by a tyrannical appropriation of Nobility to some few
ancient families, their Yeomen are excluded from ever rising higher to clarify
their bloods. In England the Temple of Honor is bolted against none, who have
passed through the Temple of Virtue: nor is a capacity to be gentile denied to
our Yeoman, who thus behaves himself.

Maxim 1
He wears russet clothes, but makes golden payment, having tin in his
buttons, and silver in his pocket. If he chance to appear in clothes above his
rank, it is to grace some great man with his service, and then he blusheth at
his own bravery. Otherwise he is the surest landmark, whence forreiners may
take aim of the ancient English customs; the Gentry more floting after foreign
fashions.

In his house he is bountiful both to strangers, 2
and poor people. Some hold, when Hospitality dyed in England, she gave her
last groan amongst the Yeomen of Kent. And still at our Yeomans table you shall
have as many joints as dishes: No meat disguised with strange sauces; no
straggling joint of a sheep in the midst of a pasture of grass, beset with
sallads on every side, but solid substantial food; no serviters (more nimble
with their hands then the guests with their teeth) take away meat, before
stomachs are taken away. Here you have that which in it self is good, made
better by the store of it, and best by the welcome to it.

He has a great stroke in making a Knight of the shire. 3
Good reason, for he makes a whole line in the subsidie-book, where whatsoever
he is rated he pays without any regret, not caring how much his purse is let
blood, so it be done by the advice of the physicians of the State.

He seldom goes far abroad, 4
and his credit stretches further then his travel. He goes not to London, but
se defendendo, to save himself of a fine, being returned of a Jurie, where
seeing the King once, he prays for him ever afterward.

In his own country he is a main man in Iuries. 5
Where if the Judge please to open his eyes in matter of law, he needs not to
be led by the nose in matters of fact. He is very observant of the Judges item,
when it follows the truths inprimis; otherwise (though not mutinous in a Jurie)
he cares not whom he displeases so he pleases his own conscience.

He improveth his land to a double value by his good husbandry. 6
Some grounds that wept with water, or frowned with thorns, by draining the
one, and clearing the other, he makes both to laugh and sing with corn. By
marle and limestones burnt he bettereth his ground, and his industry works
miracles, by turning stones into bread. Conquest and good husbandry both
enlarge the Kings Dominions: The one by the sword, making the acres more in
number; the other by the plough, making the same acres more in value. Solomon
says, The King himself is maintained by husbandry. Pythis Plutarch. de virtut.
mulierum, exemplo ultimo.
a King having discovered rich mines in his kingdom, employed all his people
in digging of them, whence tilling was wholly neglected, insomuch as a great
famine ensued. His Queen, sensible of the calamities of the country, invited
the King her husband to dinner, as he came home hungry from overseeing his
workmen in the mines. She so contrived it, that the bread and meat were most
artificially made of gold; and the King was much delighted with the conceit
thereof, till at last he called for real meat to satisfy his hunger. Nay,
said the Queen, if you employ all your subjects in your mines, you must expect
to feed upon gold, for nothing else can your kingdom afford.

7
In time of famine he is the Joseph of the country, and keeps the poor from
sterving. Then he tameth his stacks of corn, which not his covetousness but
providence has reserved for time of need, and to his poor neighbors abateth
somewhat of the high price of the market. The neighbor gentry court him for
his acquaintance, which he either modestly waveth, or thankfully accepts, but
no way greedily desires. He insults not on the ruins of a decayed Gentleman,
but pities and relieves him: and as he is called Goodman, he desires to answer
to the name, and to be so indeed.

8
In war, though he serves on foot, he is ever mounted on an high spirit: as
being a slave to none, and a subject only to his own Prince. Innocence and
independance make a brave spirit: Whereas otherwise one must ask his leave to
be valiant on whom he depends. Therefore if a State run up all to Noblemen and
Gentlemen, so that the husbandmen be only mere laborers, or cottagers, (which
Bacons Henry. 7. page 74.
one calls but housed beggars) it may have good Cavalry, but never good bands
of foot; so that their armies will be like those birds called Apodes, without
feet, always only flying on their wings of horse. Wherefore to make good
Infantry, it requires men bred, not in a servile or indigent fashion, but in
some free and plentiful manner. Wisely therefore did that knowing Prince, King
Henry the seventh, provide laws for the increase of his Yeomanry, that his
kingdom should not be like to Coppice-woods, where the staddles being left too
thick, all runs to bushes and briers, and there is little clean underwood. For
enacting, that houses used to husbandry should be kept up with a competent
proportion of land, he did secretly sow Hydra's teeth, whereupon (according to
the Poets fiction) should rise up armed men for the service of this kingdom.

Chap. 19. The Handicrafts-man.
HE is a necessary member in a Commonwealth: For though Nature, which has
armed most other creatures, sent man naked into the world, yet in giving him
hands and wit to use them, in effect she gave him Shells, Scales, Paws, Claws,
Horns, Tusks, with all offensive and defensive weapons of Beasts, Fish and
Fowl, which by the help of his hands in imitation he may provide for himself,
and herein the skill of our Artisan does consist.

His trade is such whereby he provides things necessary for mankind. Maxim 1.
What S. 1. Cor. 12.
Paul says of the natural, is also true of the politic body, those members
of the body are much more necessary which seem most feeble. Mean trades for
profit, are most necessary in the State; and a house may better want a gallery
then a kitchen. The Philistines knew this when they massacred all the smiths in
Israel (who might worse be spared then all the userers therein) and whose
hammers nail the Commonwealth together, being necessary both in peace and war.

2
Or else his trade contributeth to man's lawful pleasure. God is not so hard a
master, but that he allows his servants sauce (besides hunger) to eat with
their meat.

3
But in no case will he be of such a trade which is a mere Pander to man's lust;
and only serves their wantonness (which is pleasure run stark mad) and
foolish curiosity. Yet are there too many extant of such professions, which,
one would think, should stand in daily fear lest the world should turn wise,
and so all their trades be cashierd, but that (be it spoken to their shame)
it is as safe a tenure to hold a livelihood by men's riot, as by their necessity.

4
The wares he makes show good to the eye, but prove better in the use. For he
knows if he sets his mark (the Tower-stamp of his credit) on any bad wares, he
sets a deeper brand on his own conscience. Nothing has more debased the credit
of our English cloth beyond the seas, then the deceitfulness in making them,
since the Fox has crept under the fliece of the Sheep.

5
By his ingenuousnesse he leaves his art better then he found it. Herein the
Hollanders are excellent, where children get their living, when but newly they
have gotten their life, by their industry. Indeed Nature may seem to have made
those Netherlanders the younger brethren of mankind, allowing them little land,
and that also standing in daily fear of a double deluge, of the sea and the
Spaniard: but such is their painfulnesse and ingenuity, hating laziness as
much as they love liberty, that what commodities grow not on their Country by
nature they graft on it by art, and have wonderfully improved all making of
Manufactures, Stuffes, Clocks, Watches: these latter at first were made so
great and heavy, it was rather a burden then an ornament to wear them, though
since watches have been made as light and little, as many that were them make
of their time.

He is wiling to communicate his skill to posterity. 6
An invention though found is lost if not imparted. But as it is reported of
some old toads, that before their death they suck up the gelly in their own
heads (which otherwise would be hardened into a precious stone) out of spite,
that men should receive no benifit thereby; so some envious Artisans will have
their cunning die with them, that none may be the better for it, and had rather
all mankind should lose, then any man gain by them.

He seldom attaineth to any very great estate: 7
except his trade has some outlets and excursions into wholesale and
merchandise; otherwise mere Artificers cannot heap up much wealth. It is
difficult for gleaners, without stealing whole sheaves, to fill a barn. His
chief wealth consists in enough, and that he can live comfortably, and leave
his children the inheritance of their education.

Yet he is a grand Benefactour to the Commonwealth. 8
England in former ages, like a dainty dame, partly out of state, but more out
of laziness, would not suckle the fruit of her own body, to make the best to
battle and improve her own commodities, but put them out to nurse to the
Netherlanders, who were well paid for their pains. In those days the Sword and
the Plough so took up all men's employments that clothing was wholly neglected,
and scarce any other webs to be found in houses, then what the spiders did
make. But since she has seen and mended her error, making the best use of her
own wool; and indeed the riches of a kingdom does consist in driving the
home-commodities thereof as far as they will go, working them to their very
perfection, employing more handicrafts thereby. The sheep feeds more with his
fliece then his flesh, doing the one but once, but the other once a year, many
families subsisting by the working thereof. Let not meaner persons be
displeased with reading those verses wherewith Queen Elizabeth her self was so
highly affected, when in the one and twentieth year of her Hollingshead. page
1290.
reign she came in progress to Norwich, wherein a child, representing the
state of the City, spoke to her Highness as follows, Most gracious Prince,
undoubted Sovereigne Queen,
Our only joy, next God, and chief defense,
In this small show our whole estate is seen,
The wealth we have, we find proceeds from hence:
The idle hand has here no place to feed,
The painful wight has still to serve his need.
Again, our seat denies us traffic here,
The sea too near decides us from the rest:
So weak we were within this dozen year,
That care did quench the courage of the best:
But good advice has taught these Sixteen little children were there presented
to her Majesty, eight spinning worsted, and eight knitting yarne hose.
little hands
To rend in twain the force of pining bands.
From combed wool we draw this slender thread,
From thence the looms have dealing with the same,
And thence again in order do proceed
These several works which skillful art does frame:
And all to drive dame Need into her cave
Our heads and hands together labored have.
We bought before the things which now we sell:
These slender imps, their works do pass the waves:
Gods peace and thine we hold, and prosper well,
Of every mouth the hands the charges saves:
Thus through thy help, and aid of power divine
Does Norwich live, whose hearts and goods are thine.


We have cause to hope that as we have seen the cities Dornicks and Arras
brought over into England, so posterity may see all Flaunders brought hither, I
mean that their works shall be here imitated, and that either our land shall be
taught to bear foreign commodities, or our people taught to forbear the using
of them.

I should now come to give the description of the Day-Labourer (of whom we have
only a dearth in a plentiful harvest) but seeing his character is so
co-incident with the hired servant, it may well be spared. And now we will rise
from the hand to the arm, and come to describe the Soldier.

CHAP. 19. The good Soldier.
A Soldier is one of a lawful, necessary, commendable, and honorable
profession; yea God himself may seem to be one free of the company of
Soldiers, in that he styleth himself, A man of war. Now though many hate
Soldiers as the twigs of the rod War, wherewith God scourges wanton
countries into repentance, yet is their calling so needful, that were not some
Soldiers we must be all Soldiers, daily employed to defend our own, the world
would grow so licentious.

He keeps a clear and quiet conscience in his breast, Maxim 1
which otherwise will gnaw out the roots of all valor. For vicious Soldiers
are compassed with enemies on all sides, their foes without them, and an ambush
within them of fleshly lusts, which, as S. Peter says, fight against the soul.
None fitter to go to war, then those who have made their peace with God in
Christ; for such a man's soul is an impregnable fort: It cannot be scaled with
ladders, for it reaches up to heaven; nor be broken by batteries, for it is
walled with brass; nor undermined by pioners, for he is founded on a rock; nor
betrayed by treason, for faith it self keeps it; nor be burnt by grenades, for
he can quench the fiery darts of the devil; nor be forced by famine, for a good
conscience is a continual feast.

2
He chiefly avoids those sins, to which Soldiers are taxed as most subject.
Namely common swearing, which impayreth ones credit by degrees, and makes all
his promises not to be trusted; for he who for no profit will sin against
God, for small profit will trespass against his neighbor; drinking, whoring.
When valiant Zisca, near Pilsen in Bohemia, fought against his enemies, he
commanded the women which followed his army, to cast their kerchiefs and
partlets on the ground, wherein their enemies being entangled by their spurs
(for though horsemen, they were forced to alight, and fight on foot, through the
roughness of the place) were slain before they could Fox Acts and Monum page
646.
unloose their feet. A deep moral may be gathered hence, and women have often
been the nets to catch and ensnare the souls of many Martial men.

3
He counts his Princes lawful command to be his sufficient warrant to fight.
In a defensive war, when his country is In publicos hosts omnis homo miles,
Tertull. Apol. cap. 2.
hostilely invaded, it is pity but his neck should hang in suspense with his
conscience that doubts to fight; in offensive war, though the case be harder,
the common Soldier is not to dispute, but do Amesius. Cas. Conscien. lib. 5.
cap. 33.
his Princes command. Otherwise Princes, before they leavie an army of
Soldiers, must first leavy an army of Casuists and Confessors to satisfy
each scrupulous Soldier in point of right to the war; and the most cowardly
will be the most conscientious, to multiply doubts eternally. Besides, causes
of war are so complicated and perplexed, so many things falling in the
prosecution, as may alter the original state thereof, and private Soldiers
have neither calling nor ability to dive into such mysteries. But if the
conscience of a Counselor or Commander in chief remonstrates in himself the
unlawfulness of this war, he is bound humbly to represent to his Prince his
reasons against it.

He esteems all hardship easy through hopes of victory. 4
Moneys are the sinews of war, yet if these sinews should chance to be shrunk,
and pay casually fall short, he takes a fit of this convulsion patiently; he is
contented though in cold weather his hands must be their own fire, and warm
themselves with working; though he be better armed against their enemies then
the weather, and his corslet wholler then his clothes; though he has more
Fasts and Vigills in his almanac then the Romish Church did ever enjoin: he
patiently endures drougth for desire of honor, and one thirst quenches
another. In a word, though much indebted to his own back and belly, and unable
to pay them, yet he has credit with himself, and confidently runs on ticket
with himself, hoping the next victory will discharge all scores with advantage.

He looks at and also through his wages, 5
at Gods glory, and his countries good. He counts his pay an honorable
addition, but no valuable compensation for his pains: for what proportion is
there betwixt four shillings aweek, and adventuring his life? I cannot see how
their calling can be lawful, who for greater wages will fight on any side
against their own King and cause; yea as false witnesses were hired against our
blessed Mat. 28.15.
Savior (money will make the mouths of men plead against their Maker) so were
the Giants now in the world, who, as the Poets feigned, made war against God
himself, and should they offer great pay, they would not want mercenary
Soldiers to assist them.

6
He attends with all readiness on the commands of his General; rendering up
his own judgment in obedience to the will and pleasure of his Leader, and by
an implicit faith believing all is best which he enjoyneth; lest otherwise he
be served as the French Soldier was in Scotland some eighty years since, who
first mounted the bulwark of a fort besieged, whereupon ensued the gaining of
the fort: but Marescal de Hollman in his book of the Ambassador.
Thermes, the French General, first knighted him, and then hanged him within
an hour after, because he had done it without commandment.

7
He will not in a bravery expose himself to needless peril. It Is madness to
holloe in the ears of sleeping temptation, to awaken it against ones self, or
to go out of his calling to find a danger: But if a danger meets him (as he
walks in his vocation) he neither stands still, starts aside, nor steps
backward, but either goes over it with valor, or under it with patience. All
single Duels he detesteth, as having first no command in Gods Word; yea this
arbitrary deciding causes by the sword subverts the fundamental Laws of the
Scripture: Secondly, no example in Gods Word, that of David and Goliath moving
in an higher Sphere, as extraordinary: Thirdly, it tempts God to work a Miracle
for man's pleasure, and to invert the course of nature, whereby otherwise the
stronger will beat the weaker: Fourthly, each Dueller challenges his King as
unable or unwilling legally to right him, and therefore he usurps the office
himself: Fifthly, if slaying, he hazards his neck to the halter; if slain, in
heat of malice, without repentance, he adventures his soul to the devil.

Object. But there are some intricate cases (as in Titles of land) which cannot
otherwise be decided. Seeing therefore that in such difficulties, the right in
question cannot be delivered by the midwifery of any judicial proceedings,
then it must (with Julius Caesar in his mothers belly) be cut out and be
determined by the sword.

Answ. Such a right may better be lost, then to light a candle from hell to
find it out, if the Judges cannot find a middle way to part in betwixt them.
Besides, in such a case Duells are no medium proportionatum to find out the
truth, as never appointed by God to that purpose. Nor does it follow that he
has the best in right, who has the best in fight; for he that reads the
lawfulness of actions by their events, holds the wrong end of the book upwards.

Object. But suppose an army of thirty thousand Infidells ready to fight
against ten thousand Christians, yet so that at last the Infidells are
contented to try the day upon the valor of a single Champion; whether in such
a case may not a Christian undertake to combat with him, the rather because the
treble odds before is the reby reduced to terms of equality, and so the
victory made more probable.

Answ. The victory was more probable before; because it is more likely God will
bless his own means, then means of man's appointing: and it is his prerogative
to give victory, as well by few as by many. Probability of conquest is not to
be measured by the eye of humane reason, contrary to the square of Gods Word.
Besides, I question whether it be lawful for a Christian army to derive their
right of fighting Gods battles to any single man. For the title every man has
to promote Gods glory, is so invested and inherent in his own particular
person, that he cannot pass it over to another. None may appear in Gods
service by an Attorney; and when Religion is at the stake, there must be no
lookers on (except impotent people, who also help by their prayers) and every
one is bound to lay his shoulders to the work. Lastly, would to God no Duels
might be fought till this case came into question. But how many daily fall out
upon a more false, slight, and flitting ground, then the sands of Callis
whereon they fight: especially, seeing there is an honorable Court appointed,
or some other equivalent way, for taking up such quarrels, and allowing
reparations to the party injured.

Object. But Reputation is so spiritual a thing it is inestimable, and Honor
falls not under valuation: Besides, to complain to the civil Magistrate shows
no manhood, but is like a child's crying to his father, when he is only beaten
by his equal; and my enemies forced acknowledgement of his fault (enjoined him
by the Court) shows rather his submission to the laws then to me. But if I can
civilize his rudeness by my sword, and chastize him into submission, then he
sings his penitential song in the true tune, and it comes naturally indeed.

Answ. Honorable persons in that Court are the most competent Judges of
Honor, and though Credit be as tender as the apple of the eye, yet such
curious oculists can cure a blemish therein. And why, I pray, is it more
disgrace to repair to the Magistrate for redress in Reputation, then to have
recourse to him in actions of trespass? The pretense of a forced submission is
nothing, all submissions having aliquid violentum in them; and even the
Evangelicall repentance of Gods servants has a mixture of legal terror
frighting them thereto.

Object. But Gownmen speak out of an antipathy they bear to fighting: should we
be ruled by them, we must break all our swords into penknifes; and Lawyers, to
enlarge their gains, send prohibitions to remove suits from the Camps to their
Courts: Divines are not to be consulted with herein, as ignorant of the
principles of Honor.

Answ. Indeed Honor is a word of course in the talk of roaring boys, and pure
enough in it self, except their mouths soil it by often using of it: But indeed
God is the fountain of Honor, Gods Word the Charter of Honor, and godly men
the best Judges of it; nor is it any stain of cowardlinesse for one to fear
hell and damnation.

We may therefore conclude that the laws of Duelling, as the laws of drinking,
had their original from the devil; and therefore the declining of needless
quarrels in our Soldier, no abatement of Honor. I commend his discretion and
valor, who walking in London-streetes met a gallant, who cried to him a pretty
distance beforehand, I will have the wall? Yea (answered he) and take the house
too, if you can but agree with the Landlord. But when God, and his Prince,
calls for him, our Soldier

Had rather die ten times then once survive his credit. 8
Though life be sweet, it shall not flatter the pallat of his soul, as with the
sweetness of life to make him swallow down the bitterness of an eternal
disgrace: He begrutcheth not to get to his side a probability of victory by the
certainty of his own death, and flies from nothing so much as from the mention
of flying. And though some say he is a madman that will purchase Honor so
dearly with his blood, as that he cannot live to enjoy what he has bought; our
Soldier knows that he shall possess the reward of his valor with God in
heaven, and also making the world his executor, leave to it the rich
inheritance of his memory.

9
Yet in some cases he counts it no disgrace to yield, where it is impossible to
conquer; as when swarms of enemies crowd about him, so that he shall rather be
stifled then wounded to death: In such a case if quarter be offered him, he may
take it with more honor then the other can give it; and if he throws up his
desperate game, he may happily win the next, whereas if he plays it out to
the last, he shall certainly lose it and himself. But if he be to fall into the
hand of a barbarous enemy, whose giving him quarter is but repriving him for a
more ignominious death, he had rather disburse his life at the present, then to
take day to fall into the hands of such remorslesse creditours.

10
He makes none the object of his cruelty, which cannot be the object of his
fear. Lions they say (except forced with hunger) will not prey on women and
children, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 16.
though I would wish none to try the truth hereof: the truly valiant will not
hurt women or infants, nor will they be cruel to old men. What conquest is it
to strike him up, who stands but on one leg, and has the other foot in the
grave? But arrant cowards (such as would conquer victory it self, if it should
stand in their way as they fly) count themselves never evenly matched, except
they have threefold odds on their side, and esteem their enemy never disarmed
till they be dead. Such love to show a nature steeped in gall of passion, and
display the ignoble tyrany of prevailing dastards: these being thus valiant
against no resistance, will make no resistance when they meet with true valor.

11
He counts it murder to kill any in cold blood. Indeed in taking Cities by
assault (especially when Soldiers have suffered long in an hard siege) it is
pardonable what present passion does with a sudden thrust; but a premeditated
back-blow in cold blood is base. Some excuse there is for blood enraged, and no
wonder if that scaldeth which boyleth: but when men shall call a consultation
in their soul, and issue thence a deliberate act, the more advised the deed is,
the less advised it is, when men raise their own passions, and are not raised
by them; specially if fair quarter be first granted; an alms which he who gives
to day may crave to morrow; yea, he that has the hilt in his hand in the
morning, may have the point at his throat ere night.

He does not barbarously abuse the bodies of his dead enemies. 12
We find that Hercules was the Plutarch. in vita Thes^^, Pagin. 1^.
first (the most valiant are ever most merciful) that ever suffered his
enemies to carry away their dead bodies, after they had been put to the sword.
Belike before his time they cruelly cut the corpse in pieces, or cast them to
the wild beasts.

In time of plenty he provides for want hereafter. 13
Yet generally Soldiers (as if they counted one Treasurer in an army were
enough) so hate covetousness that they cannot affect providence for the
future, and come home with more marks in their bodies then pence in their
pockets.

He is willing and joyful to embrace peace on good conditions. 14
The procreation of peace, and not the satisfying of men's lusts and liberties,
is the end of war. Yet how many, having war for their possession, desire a
perpetuity thereof! Wiser men then King Henry the eights fool use to cry in
fair weather, whose harvest being only in storms, they themselves desire to
raise them; wherefore fearing peace will starve, whom war has fatted, and to
render themselves the more useful they prolong discord to the utmost, and
could wish when swords are once drawn that all scabbards might be cut asunder.

15
He is as quiet and painful in peace, as courageous in war. If he has not
gotten already enough whereon comfortably to subsist, he rebetakes himself to
his former calling he had before the war began: the weilding of his sword
has not made him unweildie to do any other work, and put his bones out of
joint to take pains. Hence comes it to pass, that some take by-courses on the
highways, and death, whom they honorably sought for in the field, meets them
in a worse place.

But we leave our Soldier, seeking by his virtues to ascend from a private
place, by the degrees of Sergeant, Lieutenant, Captain, Colonel, till he comes
to be a General, and then in the next book, God willing, you shall have his
example.

CHAP. 20. The good Sea-Captain.
HIs Military part is concurrent with that of the Soldier already described:
He differs only in some Sea-properties, which we will now set down. Conceive
him now in a Man of war, with his letters of mart, well armed victuall'd and
appointed, and see how he acquits himself.

Maxim 1
The more power he has, the more careful he is not to abuse it. Indeed a
Sea-captain is a King in the Island of a ship, supreme Judge, above appeal, in
causes civil and criminal, and is seldom brought to an account in Courts of
Justice on land, for injuries done to his own men at sea.

2
He is careful in observing of the Lords day. He has a watch in his heart
though no bells in a steeple to proclaim that day by ringing to prayers. Sr
Francis Drake Manuscr. of Mr. Fortescu, who went with him.
in three years sailing about the world lost one whole day, which was scarce
considerable in so long time. It Is to be feared some Captains at sea lose a day
every week, one in seven, neglecting the Sabbath.

He is as pious and thankful when a tempest is past, 3
as devout when it is present: not clamorous to receive mercies, and tongue-tied
to return thanks. Many mariners are calm in a storm* and storm in a calm,
blustering with oaths. In a tempest it comes to their turn to be religious,
whose piety is but a fit of the wind, and when that is allayed, their devotion
is ended.

Escaping many dangers makes him not presumptuous to run into them. 4
Not like those Seamen who (as if their hearts were made of those rocks they
have often sailed by) are so always in death they never think of it. These in
their navigations observe that it is far hotter under the Tropicks in the
coming to the Line, then under the Line it self, and in like manner they
conceive that the fear and fancy in preparing for death is more terrible then
death it self, which makes them by degrees desperately to contemn it.

In taking a prize he most prizeth the men's lives whom he takes; 5
though some of them may chance to be Negroes or Savages. It Is the custom of
some to cast them over^bord, and there is an end of them: for the dumb fishes
will tell no tales. But the murder is not so soon drowned as the men. What, is
a brother by the half blood no kin? a Savage has God to his father by
creation, though not the Church to his mother, and God will revenge his
innocent blood. But our Captain counts the image of God nevertheless his image
cut in ebony as if done in ivory, and in the blackest Moors he sees the
representation of the King of heaven.

In dividing the gains he wrongs none who took pains to get them. 6
Not shifting off his poor mariners with nothing, or giving them only the
garbage of the prize, and keeping all the flesh to himself. In time of peace he
quietly returns home, and turns not to the trade of Pirates, who are the worst
sea-vermine, and the devils water-rats.

7
His voyages are not only for profit, but some for honor and knowledge; to
make discoveries of new countries, imitating the worthy Peter Columbus. Before
his time the world was cut off at the middle; Hercules Pillars (which indeed
are the navell) being made the feet, and utmost bounds of the continent, till
his successful industry enlarged it.

Primus ab infusis quod terra emerserat undis
Nuncius adveniens ipsa Genesis 8.11.
Columba fuit.
Occiduis primus qui terram invenit in undis
Nuncius adveniens ipse Columbus erat.
Our Sea-captain is likewise ambitious to perfect what the other began. He
counts it a disgrace, seeing all mankind is one family, sundry countries but
several rooms, that we who dwell in the parlour (so he counts Europe) should
not know the out-lodgings of the same house, and the world be scarce acquainted
with it self before it be dissolved from it self at the day of judgment.

8
He daily sees, and duly considers Gods wonders in the deep. Tell me, ye
Naturalists, who sounded the first march and retreat to the Tide, Hither shall
thou come, and no further? why does not the water recover his right over the
earth, being higher in nature? whence came the salt, and who first boiled it,
which made so much brine? when the winds are not only wild in a storm, but
even stark mad in an herricano, who is it that restores them again to their
wits, and brings them asleep in a calm? who made the mighty whales, who swim in
a sea of water, and have a sea of oil swimming in them? who first taught the
water to imitate the creatures on land? so that the sea is the stable of
horse-fishes, the stall of kine-fishes, the stye of hog-fishes, the kennell of
dog-fishes, and in all things the sea the ape of the land. Whence grows the
ambergris in the Sea? which is not so hard to find where it is, as to know
what it is. Was not God the first ship-wright? and all vessels on the water
descended from the loins (or ribs rather) of Noah's ark; or else who durst be so
bold with a few crooked boards nailed together, a stick standing upright, and a
rag tied to it, to adventure into the ocean? what loadstone first touched the
loadstone? or how first fell it in love with the North, rather affecting that
cold climate, then the pleasant East, or fruitful South, or West? how comes
that stone to know more then men, and find the way to the land in a mist? In
most of these men take sanctuary at Occulta qualitas, and complain that the
room is dark, when their eyes are blind. Indeed they are Gods Wonders; and that
Seaman the greatest Wonder of all for his blockishnesse, who seeing them daily
neither takes notice of them, admires at them, nor is thankful for them.

Sr FRANCIS DRAKE one of the first of those which in his Sea voyages put a Girdle
about the World. He Died upon the Seas. Anno Dni 1595. W.M. sculp:
CHAP. 21. The life of Sir FRANCIS DRAKE.
FRancis Drake was born nigh Sr. Francis Drake his nephew in the descript. of
his third voyage, Epistle to the Reader.
south Tavestock in Devonshire, and brought up in Kent; God dividing the honor
betwixt two Counties, that the one might have his birth, and the other his
education. His Father, being a Minister, fled into Kent for fear of the Six
Articles, wherein the sting of Popery still remained in England, though the
teeth thereof were knocked out, and the Popes Supremacy abolished. Coming into
Kent, he bound his son Francis apprentice to the Master of a small bark,
which traded into France, and Zealand, where he underwent a hard service; and
pains with patience in his youth did knit the joints of his soul, and made them
more solid and compacted. His Master dying unmarried, in reward of his
industry, bequeathed his bark unto him for a Legacy.

For some time he continued his Masters profession: But the Narrow Seas were a
prison for so large a spirit, born for greater undertakings. He soon grew weary
of his bark, which would scarce go alone but as it crept along by the shore:
wherefore selling it, he unfortunately ventured most of his estate with Captain
John Hawkins into the West Indies, 1567.
whose goods were taken by the Spaniards at S. John de Ulva, and he himself
scarce escaped with life. The King of Spain being so tender in those parts,
that the least touch does wound him; and so jealous of the West Indies, his
wife, that willingly he would have none look upon her, and therefore used them
with the greater severity.

Drake was persuaded by the Minister of his ship that he might lawfully recover
in value of the King of Spain, and repair his losses upon him any where else.
The Case was clear in sea-divinity, and few are such Infidels, as not to
believe doctrines which make for their own profit. Whereupon Drake, though a
poor private man, hereafter undertook to revenge himself on so mighty a
Monarch; who, as not contented that the Sun rises and sets in his
dominions, may seem to desire to make all his own where he shines. And now let
us see how a dwarf, standing on the Mount of Gods providence, may prove an
overmatch for a giant.

After two or three several Voyages to gain intelligence in the West Indies,
and some prizes taken, at last he effectually set forward from Plymouth with
two ships, the one of seventy, the other twenty five tons, and seventy three
men and boys in both. He made with all speed and secrecy to Nombre de Dios, as
loath to put the Town to too much charge (which he knew they would willingly
bestow) in providing beforehand for his entertainment; which City was then the
granary of the West Indies, wherein the golden harvest brought from Panama was
hoarded up till it could be conveyed into Spain. They came hard aboard the
shore, and lay quiet all night intending to attempt the Town in the dawning of
the day.

But he was forced to alter his resolution, and assault it sooner; for he heard
his men muttering amongst themselves of the strength and greatness of the
Town: and when men's heads are once fly-blown with buzzes of suspicion, the
vermin multiply instantly, and one jealousy begets another. Wherefore he
raised them from their nest before they had hatched their fears, and to put
away those conceits, he persuaded them it was day-dawning when the Moon rose,
and instantly set on the Town, and won it being unwalled. In the Marketplace
the Spaniards saluted them with a volley of shot; Drake returned their greeting
with a flight of arrows, the best and ancient English complement, which drove
their enemies away. Here Drake received a dangerous wound, though he valiantly
concealed it a long time, knowing if his heart stooped, his men's would fall,
and loath to leave off the action, wherein if so bright an opportunity once
sets, it seldom rises again. But at length his men forced him to return to
his ship, that his wound might be dressed, and this unhappy accident defeated
the whole design. Thus victory sometimes slips through their fingers, who have
caught it in their hands.

But his valor would not let him give over the project as long as there was
either life or warmth in it: And therefore having received intelligence from
the Negroes, called Symerons, of many mules-lading of gold and silver, which
was to be brought from Panama, he leaving competent numbers to man his ships
went on land with the rest, and bestowed himself in the woods by the way as
they were to pass, and so intercepted and carried away an infinite mass of
gold. As for the silver which was not portable over the mountains, they dug
holes in the ground and hid it therein.

There want not those who love to beat down the price of every honorable
action, though they themselves never mean to be chapmen. These cry up Drakes
fortune herein to cry down his valor; as if this his performance were nothing,
wherein a golden opportunity ran his head with his long forelock into Drakes
hands beyond expectation. But certainly his resolution and unconquerable
patience deserved much praise, to adventure on such a design, which had in it
just no more probability then what was enough to keep it from being impossible:
yet I admire not so much at all the treasure he took, as at the rich and deep
mine of Gods providence.

Having now full fraughted himself with wealth, and burnt at the House of
Crosses above two hundred thousand pounds worth of Spanish Merchandise, he
returned with honor and safety into England, and some 1577. December. 13.
years after undertook that his famous voyage about the world, most accurately
described by our English Authors: and yet a word or two thereof will not be
amiss.

Setting forward from Plymouth, he bore up for Caboverd, where near to the
Island of S. Jago he took prisoner Nuno-da-Silva, an experienced Spanish pilot,
whose direction he used in the coasts of Brasil and Magellan straits, and
afterward safely landed him at Guatulco in New Spain. Hence they took their
course to the island of Brava, and hereabouts they met with those tempestuous
winds, whose only praise is, that they continue not above an hour, in which
time they change Manusc. of Geor. For^escue who went the voyage with Sr Fran.
Drake.
all the points of the compass. Here they had great plenty of rain, poured
(not as in other places, as it were out of sives, but) as out of spouts, so
that a but of water falls down in a place: which notwithstanding is but a
courteous injury in that hot climate far from land, and where otherwise fresh
water cannot be provided: then cutting the Line, they saw the face of that
heaven which earth hides from us, but therein only three Cambd. Eliza. Anno
1580. p. 323.
stars of the first greatness, the rest few and small compared to our
Hemisphere, as if God, on purpose, had set up the best and biggest candles in
that room wherein his civilest guests are entertained.

Sailing the South of Brasile, he afterward passed the August. 20. 1578.
Magellan straits, and then entered Mare pacificum, came to the Southermost land
at the height of 55 latitude; thence directing his course Northward, he
pillaged many Spanish Towns, and took rich prizes of high value in the
kingdoms of Chily, Peru, and New Spain. Then bending Eastwards, he coasted
China, and the Moluccoes, where by the King of Terrenate, a true Gentleman
Pagan, he was most honorably entertained: The King told them, They and he were
all of one religion in this respect, that they believed Manuscri. Geor.
Fortescue
not in Gods made of stocks and stones as did the Portugalls. He furnished them
also with all necessaries that they wanted.

On the ninth of 1579.
January following, his ship, having a large wind and a smooth sea, ran a
ground on a dangerous shole, and struck twice on it, knocking twice at the
door of death, which no doubt had opened the third time. Here they Hacluits
voyage, p. 741.3. vol.
stuck from eight a clock at night till four the next afternoon, having ground
too much, and yet too little to land on, and water too much, and yet too little
to sail in. Had God ( who, as the wiseman says, Prove. 30.4. holds the winds
in his fist) but opened his little finger, and let out the smallest blast, they
had undoubtedly been cast away; but there blew not any wind all the while. Then
they conceiving aright that the best way to lighten the ship, was first to ease
it of the burden of their sins by true repentance, humbled themselves by
fasting under the hand of God: Afterward they received the Communion, dining
on Christ in the Sacrament, expecting no other then to sup with him in heaven:
Then they cast out of their ship six great pieces of ordinance, threw
overboard as much wealth as would break the heart of a Miser to think on it,
with much sugar, and packs of spices, making a caudle of the sea round about:
Then they betook themselves to their prayers, the best lever at such a dead
lift indeed, and it pleased God that the wind, formerly their mortal enemy,
became their friend, which changing from the Starboard to the Larboard of the
ship, and rising by degrees, cleared them off to the sea again, for which they
returned unfeigned thanks to almighty God.

By the Cape of good hope and west of Africa he returned safe into England, and
landed at November. 3. 1580.
Plymouth, (being almost the first of those that made a thorow-light through
the world) having in his whole voyage, though a curious searcher after the
time, lost one day through the variation of several Climates. He feasted the
Queen in his ship at Dartford, who Knighted him for his service: yet it grieved
him not a little, that some prime Camb. Eliza. Anno ut prius, page 127.
Courtiers refused the gold he offered them, as gotten by piracy. Some of them
would have been loath to have been told, that they had Aurum Tholosanum in their
own purses. Some think that they did it to show that their envious pride was
above their covetousness, who of set purpose did blur the fair copy of his
performance, because they would not take pains to write after it.

I pass by his next 1585.
West Indian voyage, wherein he took the Cities of S. Jago, S. Domingo,
Carthagena, and S. Augustine in Florida: as also his service performed in 88,
wherein he with many others helped to the waining of that half Moon, which
sought to govern all the motion of our Sea. I have to his last Voyage.

1595.
Queen Elizabeth perceiving that the only way to make the Spaniard a criple for
ever, was to cut his Sinews of war in the West Indies, ^urnished Sr Francis
Drake, and Sr John Hawkins with six of her own ships, besides 21 ships and
Barks of their own providing, containing in all 2500 Men and Boys, for some
service on America. But, alas, this voyage was marred before begun. For so
great preparations being too big for a cover, the King of Spain knew of it, and
sent a Caravall of adviso to the West Indies, so that they had intelligence
Hacluits voyage, 3. vol. page 583.
three weeks before the Fleet set forth of England, either to fortify, or
remove their treasure; whereas in other of Drakes Voyages not two of his own
men knew whither he went; and managing such a design is like carrying a Mine
in war, if it has any vent, all is spoiled. Besides, Drake and Hawkins being
in joint Commission hindered each other. The later took himself to be inferior
rather in success then skill, and the action was unlike to prosper when
neither would follow, and both could not handsomely go abreast. It vexed old
Hawkins that his counsel was not followed, in present sailing to America, but
that they spent time in vain in assaulting the Canaries; and the grief that his
advice was slighted (say some) was the cause of his death. Others impute it to
the sorrow he took, for the taking of his Bark called the Francis, which five
Spanish Frigates had intercepted: But when the same heart has two mortal
wounds given it together, it is hard to say which of them kills.

Drake continued his course for Port-Rico, and riding within the road, a shot
from the Castle entered the steerage of the ship, took away the stool from under
him as he sat at supper, wounded Sr Nicholas Clifford and Brute Brown to
death. Ah dear From the mouth of Henr. Drake Esquire there present, my dear and
worthy parishioner lately deceased.
Brute (said Drake) I could grieve for thee* but now is no time for me to let
down my spirits. And indeed a Soldiers most proper bemoaning a friends death
in war is in revenging it. And sure, as if grief had made the English
furious, they soon after fired five Spanish ships of two hundred tons apiece,
in despite of the Castle.

America is not unfitly resembled to an Houre-glasse, which has a narrow neck
of land (suppose it the hole where the sand passes) betwixt the parts thereof,
Mexicana and Pervana. Now the English had a design to march by land over this
Isthmus from Port-Rico to Panama, where the Spanish treasure was laid up. Sr
Thomas Baskervile, General of the landforces, undertook the service with seven
hundred and fifty armed men. They marched through deep ways, the Spaniards
much annoying them with shot out of the woods. One fort in the passage they
assaulted in vain, and heard that two others were built to stop them, besides
Panama it self. They had so much of this breakfast, they thought they should
surfeit of a dinner and supper of the same. No hope of conquest, except with
cloying the jaws of Death, and thrusting men on the mouth of the Canon.
Wherefore fearing to find the Proverb true, That Gold may be bought too dear,
they returned to their ships. Drake afterward fired Nombre de Dios, and many
other petty Towns (whose treasure the Spaniards had conveyed away) burning the
empty casks, when their precious liquour was run out before, and then
prepared for their returning home.

Great was the difference betwixt the Indian cities now from what they were
when Drake first haunted these coasts: At first the Spaniards here were safe
and secure, counting their treasure sufficient to defend it self, the
remoteness thereof being the greatest (almost only) resistance, and the
fetching of it more then the fighting for it. Whilst the King of Spain guarded
the head and heart of his dominions in Europe, he left his long legs in America
open to blows, till finding them to smart, being beaten black and blew by the
English, he learned to arm them at last, fortifying the most important of them
to make them impregnable.

Now began Sr Francis his discontent to feed upon him. He conceived that
expectation, a merciless usurer, computing each day since his departure
exacted an interest and return of honor and profit proportionable to his great
preparations, and transcending his former achievements. He saw that all the
good which he had done in this voyage, consisted in the evil he had done to
the Spaniards afar off, whereof he could present but small visible fruits in
England. These apprehensions accompanying if not causing the disease of the
flux wrought his sudden January 28. 1595.
death. And sickness did not so much untie his clothes, as sorrow did rend at
once the robe of his mortality asunder. He lived by the sea, died on it, and
was buried in it. Thus an ex-tempore performance (scarce heard to be begun
before we hear it is ended) comes off with better applause, or miscarries with
less disgrace, then a long studied and openly premeditated action. Besides, we
see how great spirits, having mounted to the highest pitch of performance,
afterward strain and break their credits in striving to go beyond it. Lastly,
God oftentimes leaves the brightest men in an eclipse, to show that they do but
borrow their luster from his reflection. We will not justify all the actions
of any man, though of a tamer profession then a Sea-Captain, in whom civility
is often counted preciseness. For the main, we say that this our Captain was a
religious man toward God and his houses (generally sparing Churches where he
came) chaste in his life, just in his dealings, true of his word, and merciful
to those that were under him, hating nothing so much as idleness: And
therefore lest his soul should rust in peace, at spare hours he brought fresh
water to Plymouth. Careful he was for posterity (though men of his profession
have as well an ebb of riot, as a flote of fortune) and providently raised a
worshipful Family of his kindred. In a word, should those that speak against
him fast till they fetch their bread where he did his, they would have a good
stomach to eat it.

CHAP. 22. The good Herald.
HE is a Warden of the temple of Honor. Mutual necessity made mortal enemies
agree in these Officers; the lungs of Mars himself would be burnt to pieces
having no respiration in a truce. Heralds therefore were invented to proclaim
peace or war, deliver messages about summons of forts, ransoming of captives,
burying the dead, and the like.

He is grave and faithful in discharging the service he is employed in. Maxim
1
The names which Homer gives the Grecian Ceryces, excellently import their
virtues in discharging their office: One was called Asphalio, such an one as
made sure work; another Eurybates, cunning and subtle; a third Theotes, from
his piety and godliness; a fourth Stentor, from his loud and audible
pronouncing of messages. Therefore of every Heathen sacrifice the Sr. Hen.
Spelman Glossar. de verbo Herald.
tongue was cut out, and given to the Heralds, to show that liberty of speech
in all places was allowed them.

2
He imbitters not a distasteful message to a foreign Prince by his indiscretion
in delivering it. Commendable was the gravity of Guien King of arms in France,
and Thomas Bevolt Clarenceaux of England, sent by their several Princes to
defy Charles the Emperor. For after leave demanded and obtained to deliver
the message with safe conduct to their persons, they delivered the Emperor the
lie in writing, and defying him were sent home safe with rewards. It fared
worse with a foolish French Herald, sent from the Count of Orgell to challenge
combat with the Count of Cardonna, Admiral of Arragon, where instead of wearing
his Coat of Arms the Herald was attired in a long linen garment, painted with
some dishonest actions, imputed to the said Count of Cardonna. But Ferdinand
King of Arragon caused the Herald to be whipped naked through the streets Span.
Hist. in the life of Ferdinand.
of Barcelona, as a punishment of his presumption. Thus his indescretion
remitted him to the nature of an ordinary person, his Armor of proof of
public credence fell off, and he left naked to the stroke of justice, no
longer a public Officer, but a private offender. Pass we now from his use in
war to his employment in peace.

3
He is skillful in the pedigrees and descents of all ancient Gentry. Otherwise,
to be able only to blazon a Coat does no more make an Herald, then the reading
the titles of Gally-pots makes a Physician. Bring our Herald to a Monument, ubi
jacet epitaphium, and where the Arms on the Tomb are not only crest-fallen,
but their colors scarce to be discerned, and he will tell whose they be, if
any certainty therein can be rescued from the teeth of Time. But how shameful
was the ignorance of the French Andr. Favin (a Parisian Advocate) in his
Theater of Honor, 1. book 4. chap. page 35
Heralds some forty years since, who at a solemn entertainment of Queen Mary
of Florence, wife to King Henry the fourth, did falsely devise and blazon both
the Arms of Florence, and the Arms of the Daulphin of France, now King thereof.

He carefully preserves the memories of extinguished Families, 4
of such Zelophehads, who dying left only daughters. He is more faithful to
many ancient Gentlemen then their own Heirs were, who sold their lands, and
with them (as much as in them lay) their memories, which our Herald carefully
treasureth up.

He restores many to their own rightful Arms. 5
An Heir is a Phoenix in a family, there can be but one of them at the same
time. Hence comes it often to pass, that younger brothers of gentile families
live in low ways, clouded often amongst the Yeomanry; and yet those
under-boughs grow from the same root with the top-branches. It may happen
afterward that by industry they may advance themselves to their former luster;
and good reason they should recover their ancient ensigns of honor belonging
unto them: For the river Anas in Spain, though running many miles under ground,
when it comes up again is still the same river which it was before. And yet

He curbs their Usurpation who unjustly entitle themselves to ancient Houses. 6
Hierophilus a Valor. Max. lib. 9. cap. 16.
Ferrier in Rome pretended himself to be nephew to C. Marius, who had seven
times been Consul, and carried it in so high a strain that many believed him,
and some companies in Rome accepted him for their Patron. Such want not amongst
us, who in spite of the stock will engraff themselves into noble bloods, and
thence derive their pedigree. Hence they new mould their names, taking from
them, adding to them, melting out all the liquid letters, torturing mutes to
make them speak, and making vowels dumb to bring it to a fallacious Homonomy
at the last, that their names may be the same with those noble Houses they
pretend to. By this trick (to forbear dangerous instances, if affinity of sound
makes kindred) Lutulentus makes himself kin to Luculentus, dirt to light, and
Angustus to Augustus, some narrow-hearted Peasant, to some large-spirited
Prince, except our good Herald mar their mart, and discover their forgery.
For well he knows where indeed the names are the same (though altered through
variety of writing in several ages, and disguised by the lisping of vulgar
people, who miscall hard French Sirnames) and where the equivocation is untruly
affected.

7
He assigns honorable Arms to such as raise themselves by deserts. In all
ages their must be as well a beginning of new Gentry, as an ending of ancient.
And let not Linea, when far extended in length, grow so proud as to scorn the
first Punctum which gave it the original. Our Herald knows also to cure the
surfeit of Coats, and unsurcharge them, and how to wash out stained colors,
when the merits of Posterity have outworn the disgraces of their Ancestors.

8
He will not for any profit favor wealthy unworthiness. If a rich Clown (who
deserves that all his shield should be the Base point) shall repair to the
Herald-office, as to a drapers shop, wherein any Coat may be bought for money,
he quickly finds himself deceived. No doubt if our Herald gives him a Coat, he
gives him also a badge with it.

WILLIAM CAMBDEN Clarenciaux king of Arms. He dyed at Westminster Anno Dni
1623 Aged 74 years. W Marshall sculp:
CHAP. 23. The life of Mr W. CAMBDEN.
WIlliam Cambden was born Anno 1550 in old Baily, in the City of London. His
Father, Sampson Cambden, was descended of honest parentage in Staffordshire;
but by his Mothers side he was extracted from the worshipful family of the A
quibus nobis (absit invidia) genus maternum, Cambd. Brit. in Cumber.
Curwens in Cumberland.

He was brought up first in Christ-Church, then in Paul's School in London, and
at fifteen years of age went to Magdalen College in Oxford, and thence to Ex
Parentatione Degorii Wheat.
Broadgates Hall, where he first made those short Latin Graces, which the
Servitours still use. From hence he was removed, and made student of Christ
Church, where he profited to such eminency, that he was preferred to be Master
of Westminster School, a most famous seminary of learning.

For whereas before, of the two grand Schools of England, one sent all her
Foundation-scholars to Cambridge, the other all to Oxford, the good Queen (as
the Head equally favoring both Breasts of Learning and Religion) divided her
Scholars here betwixt both Universities, which were enriched with many hopeful
plants sent from hence, through Cambdens learning, diligence, and clemency.
Sure none need pity the beating of that Scholar, who would not learn without it
under so meek a Master.

His deserts called him hence to higher employments. The Queen first made him
Richmond Herald, and then Clarenceaux King of Arms. We read how Dionysius
first King of Sicily turned afterward a Schoolmaster in his old age. Behold
here Dionysius inverted, one that was a Schoolmaster in his youth become a King
(of Arms) in his riper years, which place none ever did or shall discharge with
more integrity. He was a most exact Antiquary, witness his worthy work, which
is a comment on three kingdoms; and never was so large a text more briefly, so
dark a text more plainly expounded. Yea what a fair garment has been made out
of the very shreds and Remains of that greater Work?

It is most worthy observation with what diligence he inquired after ancient
places, making Hue and Cry after many a City which was run away, and by
certain marks and tokens pursuing to find it; as by the situation on the Watlin
Ermin street
Roman highways, by just distance from other ancient cities, by some affinity
of name, by tradition of the inhabitants, by Roman coyns dug up, and by
some appearance of ruins. A broken urn is a whole evidence, or an old gate
still surviving, out of which the city is run out. Besides, commonly some new
spruce town, not far off, is grown out of the ashes thereof, which yet has
so much natural affection, as dutifully to own those reverend ruins for her
Mother.

By these and other means he arrived at admirable knowledge, and restored
Britain to her self. And let none tax him for presumption in conjectures where
the matter was doubtful; for many probable conjectures have stricken the fire,
out of which Truths candle has been lighted afterward. Besides, conjectures,
like parcells of unknown ore, are sold but at low rates: If they prove some
rich metal, the buyer is a great gainer; i^ base, no looser, for he pays for
it accordingly.

His candor and sweet temper was highly to be commended, gratefully
acknowledging those by whom he was assisted in the work (in such a case
confession puts the difference betwixt stealing and borrowing) and surely so
heavy a log needed more levers then one. He honorably mentions such as
differ from him in opinion; not like those Antiquaries, who are so snarling one
had as good dissent a mile as an hairs breadth from them.

Most of the English ancient Nobility and Gentry he has unpartially observed.
Some indeed object that he Hugh Holland in the life of the Earl of Leicester.
claws and flatters the Grandees of his own age, extolling some families rather
great then ancient, making them to flow from a far fountain because they had
a great channel, especially if his private friends. But this cavil has more
of malice then truth: indeed it is pity he should have a tongue, that has not
a word for a friend on just occasion; and justly might the stream of his
commendations run broader, where meeting with a confluence of desert and
friendship in the same party. For the main, his pen is sincere and unpartiall,
and they who complain that Grantham steeple stands awry will not set a straiter
by it.

Some say that in silencing many gentile families, he makes baulks of as good
ground as any he ploweth up. But these again acquit him, when they consider
that it is not only difficult but impossible to anatomize the English Gentry
so exactly, as to show where every smallest vein thereof runs. Besides, many
Houses, conceived to be by him omitted, are rather rightly placed by him, not
where they live, but whence they came. Lastly, we may perceive that he prepared
another work on purpose for the English Gentry.

I say nothing of his learned Annalls of Queen Elizabeth, industriously
performed. His very enemies (if any) cannot but commend him. Sure he was as
far from loving These words he wrote in the beginning of his Testament,
Christi solius meritis and satisfactione spem omnem salutis meae semper ni^i
profiteor.
Popery, as from hating Learning, though that aspersion be general on
Antiquaries; as if they could not honor hoary hairs, but presently themselves
must dote.

His liberality to Learning is sufficiently witnessed in his Founding of an
History-Professour in Oxford, to which he gave the manor of Bexley in Kent,
worth in present a hundred and forty pounds, but (some years expired) four
hundred pounds per Annum, so that he merited that distich, Est tibi pro Tumulo,
Cambdene, Britannia tota,
Oxonium vivens est Epigramma tibi.


The Military part of his office he had no need to employ, passing it most
under a peaceable Prince. But now having lived many years in honor and esteem,
death at last, even contrary to Ius Gentium, killed this worthy Herald, so
that it seems, Mortality, the Law of Nature, is above the Law of Arms. He died
Anno 1623. the ninth of November, in the seventie fourth year of his age.

CHAP. 24. The true Gentleman.
WE will consider him in his Birth, Breeding, and Behavior.

He is extracted from ancient and worshipful parentage. Maxim 1
When a Pepin is planted on a Pepin-stock, the fruit growing thence is called a
Draitons Polio^bion, p. 298.
Renate, a most delicious apple, as both by Sire and Damme well descended. Thus
his blood must needs be well purified who is gentilely born on both sides. 2


If his birth be not, at leastwise his qualities are generous. What if he
cannot with the Hevenninghams of Suffolk count* ^eavers su^mon. page 854.
five and twenty Knights of his family, or tell Idem. p. 818.
sixteen Knights successively with the Tilneys of Norfolk, or with the Nauntons
show where their Ancestors had Idem p 758.
seven hundred pound a year before or at the conquest; yet he has endeavored
by his own deserts to ennoble himself. Thus Valor makes him son to Caesar,
Learning entitles him kinsman to Tully, and Piety reports him nephew to godly
Constantine. It graceth a Gentleman of low descent and high desert, when he
will own the meannesse of his parentage. How ridiculous is it when many men
brag, that their families are more ancient then the Moon, which all know are
later then the star which some seventy years since shined in Cassiopea. But
if he be generously born, 3
see how his parents breed him.

He is not in his youth possessed with the great hopes of his possession. No
flatterer reads constantly in his ears a survey of the lands he is to inherit.
This has made many boys thoughts swell so great they could never be kept in
compass afterward. Only his Parents acquaint him that he is the next
undoubted Heir to correction, if misbehaving himself; and he finds no more
favor from his Schoolmaster then his Schoolmaster finds diligence in him,
whose rod respects persons no more then bullets are partial in a battle.

4
At the University he is so studious as if he intended Learning for his
profession. He knows well that cunning is no burden to carry, as paying
neither portage by land* nor poundage by sea. Yea though to have land be a good
First, yet to have learning is the surest Second, which may stand to it when
the other may chance to be taken away.

5
At the Innes of Court he applies himself to learn the Laws of the kingdom.
Object not, Why should a Gentleman learn law, who if he needs it may have it
for his money, and if he has never so much of his own, he must but give it
away. For what a shame is it for a man of quality to be ignorant of Solon in
our Athens, of Lycurgus in our Sparta? Besides, law will help him to keep his
own, and besteed his neighbors. Say not, that there be enough which make this
their set practice: for so there are also many masters of defense by their
profession; and shall private men therefore learn no skill at their weapons.

As for the Hospitality, the Apparel, the Traveling, the Company, the
Recreations, the Marriage of Gentlemen, they are described in several Chapters
in the following Book. A word or two of his behavior in the country.

6
He is courteous and affable to his neighbors. As the sword of the best
tempered metal is most flexible; so the truly generous are most pliant and
courteous in their behavior to their inferiors.

7
He delights to see himself, and his servants well mounted: therefore he loves
good Horsemanship. Let never any foreign Rabshakeh send that brave to our
Jerusalem, offering to lend her 2. Kings. 18.23.
two thousand horses, if she be able for her part to set riders upon them. We
know how Darius got the Persian Empire from the rest of his fellow Peers, by
the first neighing of his generous steed. It were no harm if in some needless
suits of intricate precedencie betwixt equal Gentlemen, the priority were
adjudged to him who keeps a stable of most serviceable horses.

He furnishes and prepares himself in peace against time of war. 8
Lest it be too late to learn when his skill is to be used. He approves himself
courageous when brought to the trial, as well remembering the custom which is
used at the Creation of Knights of the Bath, wherein the Kings Master-Cook M.
Seldom in his titles of Honor, page 820.
comes forth, and presents his great knife to the new-made Knights,
admonishing them to be faithful and valiant, otherwise he threatens them that
that very knife is prepared to cut off their spurs.

If the Commission of the Peace finds him out, 9
he faithfully discharges it. I say, Finds him out; for a public Office is a
guest which receives the best usage from them who never invited it. And though
he declined the Place, the country knew to prize his worth, who would be
ignorant of his own. He compounds many petty differences betwixt his
neighbors, which are easier ended in his own Porch then in Westminster Hall:
for many people think, if once they have fetched a warrant from a Justice, they
have given earnest to follow the suit, though otherwise the matter be so mean
that the next nights sleep would have bound both parties to the peace, and made
them as good friends as ever before. Yet

He connives not at the smothering of punishable faults. 10
He hates that practice, as common as dangerous amongst country people, who
having received again the goods which were stolen from them, partly out of
foolish pity, and partly out of covetousness to save charges in prosecuting
the law, let the thief escape unpunished. Thus whilst private losses are
repaired, the wounds to the Commonwealth (in the breach of the Laws) are left
uncured: And thus petty Larceners are encouraged into Felons, and afterward
are hanged for pounds, because never whipped for pence, who, if they had felt the
cord, had never been brought to the halter.

11
If chosen a Member of Parliament he is willing to do his Country service. If
he be no Rhetorician to raise affections, (yea Barnabas was a Acts 14.12.
greater speaker then S. Paul himself) he counts it great wisdom to be the
good manager of Yea and Nay. The slow pace of his judgment is recompensed by
the swift following of his affections, when his judgment is once soundly
informed. And here we leave him in consultation, wishing him with the rest of
his honorable Society all happy success.

The Holy State. THE THIRD BOOK. Containing General Rules.
CHAP. 1. Of Hospitality.
HOspitality is threefold: for ones family; this is of Necessity: for
strangers; this is Courtesy: for the poor; this is Charity. Of the two latter.

To keep a disorderly house is the way to keep neither house nor lands. Maxim
1.
For whilst they keep the greatest roaring, their state steals away in the
greatest silence. Yet when many consume themselves with secret vices, then
Hospitality bears the blame: whereas it is not the Meat but the Sauce, not the
Supper but the Gaming after it, does undo them.

Measure not thy entertainment of a guest by his estate, but thine own. 2
Because he is a Lord, forget not that thou art but a Gentleman: otherwise if
with feasting him thou breakest thy self, he will not cure thy rupture, and
(perchance) rather deride then pity thee.

When provision (as we say) grows on the same, it is miraculously multiplied.
3
In Northamptonshire all the rivers of the County are bred in it, besides those
(Ouse and Charwell) it lends and sends into other shires: So the good
Housekeeper has a fountain of wheat in his field, mutton in his fold, etc.
both to serve himself, and supply others. The expense of a feast will but
breath him, which will tire another of the same estate who buys all by the
penny.

4
Mean men's palates are best pleased with fare rather plentiful then various,
solid then dainty. Dainties will cost more, and content less, to those that
are not Critical enough to distinguish them.

5
Occasional entertainment of men greater then thy self is better then solemn
inviting them. Then short warning is thy large excuse: whereas otherwise, if
thou do not overdo thy estate, thou shall underdo his expectation, for thy
feast will be but his ordinary fare. A King of France was often pleased in his
hunting wilfully to lose himself, to find the house of a private Park-keeper;
where going from the School of State Affairs, he was pleased to make a play-day
to himself. He brought sauce (Hunger) with him, which made course meat dainties
to his palate. At last the Park-keeper took heart, and solemnly invited the
King to his house, who came with all his Court, so that all the man's meat was
not a morsel for them: Well (said the Park-keeper) I will invite no more
Kings; having learnt the difference between Princes when they please to put on
the visard of privacie, and when they will appear like themselves, both in
their Person and Attendants.

6
Those are ripe for charity which are withered by age or impotencie.
Especially if maimed in following their calling; for such are Industries
Martyrs, at least her Confessors. Add to these those that with diligence
fight against poverty, though neither conquer till death make it a drawn
battle. Expect not, but prevent their craving of thee; for God forbid the
heavens should never rain till the earth first opens her mouth, seeing some
grounds will sooner burn then chap.

7
The House of correction is the fittest Hospital for those Cripples, whose legs
are lame through their own laziness. Surely King Edward the sixth was as truly
charitable in granting Bridewell for the punishment of sturdy Rogues, as in
giving S. Thomas Hospital for the relief of the Poor. I have done with the
subject, only I desire rich men to awaken Hospitality, which Cambd. ^^s. Anno
1573.
one says since the year 1572 has in a manner been laid asleep in the grave
of Edward Earl of Darby.

CHAP. 2. Of Jesting.
Harmless mirth is the best cordial against the consumption of the spirits:
wherefore Jesting is not unlawful if it trespasseth not in Quantity, Quality,
or Season.

It is good to make a Jest, Maxim 1.
but not to make a trade of Jesting. The Earl of Leicester, knowing that Queen
Elizabeth was much delighted to see a Gentleman dance well, brought the Master
of a dancing-school to dance before her: Pish (said the Queen) it is his
profession, I will not see him. She liked it not where it was a Master-quality,
but where it attended on other perfections. The same may we say of Jesting.

Jest not with the two-edged (...), Heb. 4.11.
sword of Gods Word. 2
Will nothing please thee to wash thy hands in, but the Font? or to drink
healths in, but the Church Chalice? And know the whole art is learnt at the
first admission, and profane Jests will come without calling. If in the
troublesome days of King Edward the fourth a Citizen in Cheap Side was
executed as a traitor, for saying he would make his son heir to the Speed in
Edward the 4.
Crown, though he only meant his own house, having a Crown for the sign; more
dangerous it is to wit-wanton it with the Majesty of God. Wherefore if without
thine intention, and against thy will, by chancemedly thou hittest Scripture in
ordinary discourse, yet fly to the city of refuge, and pray to God to forgive
thee.

Wanton Jests make fools laugh, 3
and wise men frown. Seeing we are civilized English men, let us not be naked
Salvages in our talk. Such rotten speeches are worst in withered age, when men
run after that sin in their words which flies from them in the deed.

4
Let not thy Jests like mummie be made of dead men's flesh. Abuse not any that
are departed; for to wrong their memories is to rob their ghosts of their
winding-sheets.

5
Scoff not at the natural defects of any which are not in their power to
amend. Oh it is cruelty to beat a cripple with his own crutches. Neither flout
any for his profession if honest though poor and painful. Mock not a Cobbler
for his black thumbes.

6
He that relates another man's wicked Jest with delight, adopts it to be his
own. Purge them therefore from their poison. If the profaneness may be
severed from the wit, it is like a Lamprey, take out the string in the back, it
may make good meat: But if the staple conceit consists in profaneness, then
it is a viper, all poison, and meddle not with it.

7
He that will lose his friend for a Jest deserves to die a beggar by the
bargain. Yet some think their conceits, like mustard, not good except they
bite. We read that all those who were born in England the year after the
beginning of the great mortality Tho. Walsingam in eodem anno.
1349. wanted their four Cheek-teeth. Such let thy Jests be, that they may not
grind the credit of thy friend, and make not Jests so long till thou becomest
one.

8
No time to break Jests when the heart strings are about to be broken. No more
showing of wit when the head is to be cut off. Like that dying man, who, when
the Priest coming to him to give him extreme unction, asked of him where his
feet were, answered, at the end of my legs. But at such a time Jests are an
unmannerly crepitus ingenii: And let those take heed who end here with
Democritus, that they begin not with Heraclitus hereafter.

CHAP. 3. Of Self-praysing.
HE whose own worth does speak need not speak his own worth. Maxim 1
Such boasting sounds proceed from emptiness of desert: whereas the
Conquerours in the Olympian games did not put on the Laurells on their own
heads, but waited till some other did it. Only Anchorets that want company may
crown themselves with their own commendations.

It shows more wit but no less vanity to commend ones self not in a strait
line but by reflection. 2
Some sail to the port of their own praise by a side-wind: as when they
dispraise themselves, stripping themselves naked of what is their due, that the
modesty of the beholders may cloth them with it again; or when they flatter
another to his face, tossing the ball to him that he may throw it back again to
them; or when they commend that quality, wherein themselves excel, in another
man (though absent) whom all know far their inferior in that faculty; or
lastly (to omit other ambushes men set to surprise praise) when they send the
children of their own brain to be nursed by another man, and commend their own
works in a third person, but if challenged by the company that they were
Authors of them themselves, with their tongues they faintly deny it, and with
their faces strongly affirm it.

Self-praising comes most naturally from a man when it comes most violently
from him in his own defense. 3
For though modesty binds a man's tongue to the peace in this point, yet being
assaulted in his credit he may stand upon his guard, and then he does not so
much praise as purge himself. One braved a Gentleman to his face that in skill
and valor he came far behind him; It Is true (said the other) for when I
fought with you, you ran away before me. In such a case, it was well returned,
and without any just aspersion of pride.

4
He that falls into sin is a man; that grieves at it, is a saint; that boasts
of it, is a devil. Yet some glory in their shame, counting the stains of sin
the best complexion for their souls. These men make me believe it may be true
what Mandevil writes of the Isle of Somabarre, in the East Indies, that all the
Nobility thereof brand their faces with a hot iron in token of honor.

5
He that boasts of sins never committed is a double devil. Many brag how many
gardens of virginity they have defloured, who never came near the walls
thereof, lying on those with whom they did never lie, and with slanderous
tongues committing rapes on chaste women's reputations. Others (who would sooner
creep into a scabbard then draw a sword) boast of their robberies, to usurp the
esteem of valor: Whereas first let them be well whipped for their lying, and as
they like that, let them come afterward and entitle themselves to the gallows.

CHAP. 4. Of Traveling.
IT is a good accomplishment to a man, if first the stock be well grown whereon
Travel is graffed, and these rules observed Before, In, and After his going
abroad.

Maxim 1.
Travel not too early before thy judgment be risen; lest thou observest
rather shows then substance, marking alone Pageants, Pictures, beautiful
Buildings, etc.

2
Get the Language (in part) without which key thou shall unlock little of
moment. It is a great advantage to be ones own interpreter. Object not that the
French tongue learnt in England must be unlearnt again in France; for it is
easier to add then begin, and to pronounce then to speak.

Be well settled in thine own Religion, 3
lest, traveling out of England into Spain, thou go out of Gods blessing
into the warm Sun. They that go over maids for their Religion, will be
ravished at the sight of the first Popish Church they enter into. But if first
thou be well grounded, their fooleries shall rivet thy faith the faster, and
Travel shall give thee Confirmation in that Baptism thou did receive at
home.

Know most of the rooms of thy native country before thou go over the
threshold thereof. 4
Especially seeing England presents thee with so many observables. But late
Writers lack nothing but age, and home-wonders but distance to make them
admired. It Is a tale what Antiqu. Iud. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Josephus writes of the two pillars set up by the sons of Seth in Syria, the
one of brick, fire-proof; the other of stone, water-free, thereon engraving
many heavenly matters to perpetuate learning in defiance of time. But it is
truly moralized in our Universities, Cambridge (of Brick) and Oxford (of Stone)
wherein Learning and Religion are preserved, and where the worst College is
more sight-worthy then the best Dutch Gymnasium. First view these, and the rest
home-rarities; not like those English, that can give a better account of
Fountain-bleau then Hampton Court, of the Spaw then Bath, of Anas in Spain then
Mole in Surrey.

Travel not beyond the Alps. 5
Mr. In his preface to his Schoolmaster.
Ascham did thank God that he was but nine days in Italy, wherein he saw in
one city (Venice) more liberty to sin, then in London he ever heard of in
nine years. That some of our Gentry have gone thither, and returned thence
without infection, I more praise Gods providence then their adventure.

To travel from the sun is uncomfortable. 6
Yet the northern parts with much ice have some crystal, and want not their
remarkables.

If thou will see much in a little, travel the Low countries. 7
Holland is all Europe in an Amsterdam-print, for Minerva, Mars, and Mercury,
Learning, War, and Traffic.

8
Be wise in choosing Objects, diligent in marking, careful in remembering of
them: yet herein men much follow their own humors. One asked a Barber, who
never before had been at the Court, what he saw there? Oh (said he) the King
was excellently well trimmed! Thus Merchants most mark foreign Havens,
Exchanges, and Marts; Soldiers note Forts, Armories, and Magazines; Scholars
listen after Libraries, Disputations, and Professors; Statesmen observe Courts
of justice, Counsels, etc. Every one is partial in his own profession.

9
Labor to distill and unite into thy self the scatterd perfections of several
Nations. But (as it was said of one, who with more industry then judgment
frequented a Colledge-Library, and commonly made use of the worst notes he met
with in any Authors, that he weeded the Library) many weed foreign Countries,
bringing home Dutch Drunkenness, Spanish Pride, French Wantonness and Italian
Atheism. As for the good herbs, Dutch Industry, Spanish Loyalty, French
Courtesy, and Italian Frugality, these they leave behind them. Others bring
home just nothing; and because they singled not themselves from their
Countrymen, though some years beyond Sea, were never out of England.

10
Continue correspondency with some choice foreign friend after thy return. As
some Professor or Secretary, who virtually is the whole University, or State.
It Is but a dull Dutch fashion, their Albus Amicorum, to make a dictionary of
their friends names: But a selected familiar in every Country is useful,
betwixt you there may be a Letter-exchange. Be sure to return as good wares as
thou receivest, and acquaint him with the remarkables of thy own Country, and
he will willingly continue the trade, finding it equally gainful.

Let discourse rather be easily drawn, 11
then willingly flow from thee. That thou may not seem weak to hold, or
desirous to vent news, but content to gratify thy friends. Be sparing in
reporting improbable truths, especially to the vulgar, who instead of informing
their judgments will suspect thy credit. Disdain their pevish pride who rail
on their native land (whose worst fault is that it bred such ungrateful fools)
and in all their discourses prefer foreign countries, herein showing
themselves of kin to the wild Irish in loving their Nurses better then their
Mothers.

CHAP. 5. Of Company.
Company is one of the greatest pleasures of the nature of man. Maxim 1.
For the beams of joy are made hotter by reflection, when related to another;
and otherwise gladness it self must grieve for want of one to express itself
to.

It is unnatural for a man to court and hug solitariness. 2
It is observed, that the farthest Islands in the world are so seated that there
is none so remote but that from some shore of it another Island or Continent may
be discerned: As if hereby Nature invited countries to a mutual commerce one
with another. Why then should any man affect to environ himself with so deep
and great reservednesse, as not to communicate with the society of others? And
though we pity those who made solitariness their refuge in time of
persecution, we must condemn such as choose it in the Churches prosperity. For
well may we count him not well in his wits, who will live always under a bush,
because others in a storm shelter themselves under it.

Yet a desert is better then a debauched companion. 3
For the wildness of the place is but uncheerfull, whilst the wildness of
bad persons is also infectious. Better therefore ride alone then have a thiefs
company. And such is a wicked man, who will rob thee of precious time, if he
does no more mischief. The Nazarites who might drink no wine were also
forbidden (Numb. 6.3.) to eat grapes, whereof wine is made. We must not only
avoid sin it self, but also the causes and occasions thereof: amongst which
bad company (the limetwigs of the devil) is the chiefest, especially, to catch
those natures which like the good fellow planet Mercury are most swayed by
others.

4
If thou be cast into bad company, like Hercules, thou must sleep with thy
club in thine hand, and stand on thy guard. I mean if against thy will the
tempest of an unexpected occasion drives thee amongst such rocks; then be thou
like the river Cambd. Brit. in Merioneth.
Dee in Merionethshire in Wales, which running through Pimble mere remains
entire, and mingles not her streams with the waters of the lake. Though with
them, be not of them; keep civil communion with them, but separate from their
sins. And if against thy will thou fall'st amongst wicked men, know to thy
comfort thou art still in thy calling, and therefore in Gods keeping, who on
thy prayers will preserve thee.

5
The company he keeps is the comment, by help whereof men expound the most
close and mystical man; understanding him for one of the same religion, life,
and manners with his associates. And though perchance he be not such an one,
it is just he should be counted so for conversing with them. Augustus Caesar came
thus to discern his two daughters inclinations: for being once at a public
Show, where much people was present, he Sucton. in August. Caes.
observed that the grave Senators talked with Livia, but loose Youngsters and
riotous persons with Julia.

9.
He that eats cherries with Noblemen shall have his eyes spirted out with the
stones. This outlandish Proverb has in it an English truth, that they who
constantly converse with men far above their estates shall reap shame and
loss thereby: If thou payest nothing, they will count thee a sucker, no
branch; a wen, no member of their company: If in payments thou keep pace
with them, their long strides will soon tire thy short legs. The Bevers in New
England, when some ten of them together draw a stick to the building of their
lodging, set the Wood in his description of New England.
weakest Bevers to the lighter end of the log, and the strongest take the
heaviest part thereof: whereas men often lay the greatest burden on the
weakest back; and great persons, to teach meaner men to learn their distance,
take pleasure to make them pay for their company. I except such men, who
having some excellent quality are gratis very welcome to their betters; such a
one, though he pays not a penny of the shot, spends enough in lending them his
time and discourse.

To affect always to be the best of the company argues a base disposition. 7
Gold always worn in the same purse with silver loses both of the color and
weight; and so to converse always with inferiors degrades a man of his worth.
Such there are that love to be the Lords of the company, whilst the rest must
be their Tenants: as if bound by their lease to approve, praise, and admire,
whatsoever they say. These knowing the lowness of their parts love to live
with dwarfs, that they may seem proper men. To come amongst their equals, they
count it an abbridgement of their freedom, but to be with their betters, they
deem it flat slavery.

It is excellent for one to have a Library of Scholars, 8
especially if they be plain to be read. I mean of a communicative nature,
whose discourses are as full as fluent, and their judgments as right as their
tongues ready: such men's talk shall be thy Lectures. To conclude, Good Company
is not only profitable whilst a man lives, but sometimes when he is dead. For
he that was buried with the bones of 2. Kings. 13.21.
Elisha, by a Posthumous miracle of that Prophet, recovered his life by lodging
with such a grave-fellow.

CHAP. 6. Of Apparel.
CLothes are for Necessity; warm cloths for Health; cleanly for Decency;
lasting for Thrift; and rich for Magnificence. Now there may be a fault in
their Number, if too various; Making, if too vain; Matter, if too costly; and
Mind of the wearer, if he takes pride therein. We come therefore to some
general directions.

Maxim 1
It Is a chargeable vanity to be constantly clothed above ones purse, or place.
I say Constantly; for perchance sometimes it may be dispensed with. A Great
man, who himself was very plain in apparel, checked a Gentleman for being over
fine: who modestly answered, Your Lordship has better clothes at home, and I
have worse. But sure no plea can be made when this Luxury is grown to be
ordinary. It was an arrogant act of Math. Paris in Joan. Anno. 1201.
Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, who, when King John had given his Courtiers
rich Liveries, to Ape the Lion, gave his servants the like, wherewith the King
was not a little offended. But what shall we say to the riot of our age,
wherein (as Peacocks are more gay then the Eagle himself) subjects are grown
braver then their Sovereigne?

2
It Is beneath a wise man always to wear clothes beneath men of his rank. True,
there is a state sometimes in decent plainness. When a wealthy Lord at a great
Solemnity had the plainest apparel, O (said one) if you had marked it well his
suit had the richest pockets. Yet it argues no wisdom, in clothes always to
stoop beneath his condition. When Antisthenes saw Socrates in a torn coat, he
showed a hole thereof to the people; And lo (quoth he) through this I see
Socrates his pride.

He shows a light gravity who loves to be an exception from a general fashion.
3
For the received custom in the place where we live is the most competent
judge of decency; from which we must not appeal to our own opinion. When the
French Courtiers mourning for their King Mont. 1. book. Chap. 4.
Henry the second had worn cloth a whole year, all silks became so vile in
every man's eyes, that if any was seen to wear them, he was presently accounted
a Mechanic or Countrey-fellow.

It Is a folly for one Proteus-like never to appear twice in one shape. 4
Had some of our Gallants been with the Deuterono. 29.5.
Israelites in the wilderness, when for forty years their clothes waxed not
old, they would have been vexed, though their clothes were whole, to have been
so long in one fashion. Yet here I must confess, I understand not what is
reported of Fulgentius, that he used the same garment Winter and Summer, and
never altered his Vincentius. Spec. lib. 20. cap. 105.
clothes, etiam in Sacris peragendis.

He that is proud of the russling of his silks, like a mad man, 5
laughs at the rattling of his fetters. For indeed, Clothes ought to be our
remembrancers of our lost innocence. Besides, why should any brag of what is but
borrowed? Should the Estrige snatch off the Gallants feather, the Beaver his
hat, the Goat his gloves, the Sheep his suit, the Silkworm his stockings, and
Neat his shoes (to strip him no farther then modesty will give leave) he would
be left in a cold condition. And yet it is more pardonable to be proud, even of
cleanly rags, then (as many are) of affected slovennesse. The one is proud of a
molehill, the other of a dunghill.

To conclude, Sumptuary laws in this land to reduce apparel to a set standard
of price, and fashion, according to the several states of men, have long been
wished, but are little to be hoped for. Some think private men's superfluity is
a necessary evil in a State, the floting of fashions affording a standing
maintenance to many thousands which otherwise would be at a loss for a
livelihood, men maintaining more by their pride then by their charity.

CHAP. 7. Of Building.
HE that alters an old house is tied as a translatour to the original, and is
confined to the phancie of the first builder. Such a man were unwise to pluck
down good old building, to erect (perchance) worse new. But those that raise a
new house from the ground are blameworthy if they make it not handsome, seeing
to them Method and Confusion are both at a rate. In building we must respect
Situation, Contrivance, Receipt, Strength, and Beauty. Of Situation.

Maxim 1.
Chiefly choose a wholesome air. For air is a dish one feeds on every minute,
and therefore it need be good. Wherefore great men (who may build where they
please, as poor men where they can) if herein they prefer their profit above
their health, I refer them to their Physicians to make them pay for it
accordingly.

2
Wood and water are two staple commodities where they may be had. The former I
confess has made so much iron, that it must now be bought with the more
silver, and grows daily dearer. But it is as well pleasant as profitable to see
a house cased with trees, like that of Anchises in Troy.

-- Virgil 2. Aeneid. 32.
quanquam secreta parentis
Anchisae domus arboribusque obtecta recessit.
The worst is, where a place is bald of wood, no art can make it a periwig. As
for water, begin with Pindars beginning, (...). The fort of Camb. Brit. in
Cambridgeshire.
Gogmagog Hills nigh Cambridge is counted impregnable but for want of water,
the mischief of many houses where servants must bring the well on their
shoulders.

Next a pleasant prospect is to be respected. 3
A medly view (such as of water and land at Greenwich) best entertains the
eyes, refreshing the wearied beholder with exchange of objects. Yet I know a
more profitable prospect, where the owner can only see his own land round
about.

A fair entrance with an easy ascent gives a great grace to a building: 4
where the Hall is a preferment out of the Court, the Parlour out of the Hall;
not (as in some old buildings) where the doors are so low Pygmies must stoop,
and the rooms so high that Giants may stand upright. But now we are come to
Contrivance.

Let not thy common rooms be several, 5
nor thy several rooms be common. The Hall (which is a Pandocheum) ought to
lie open, and so ought Passages and Stairs (provided that the whole house be
not spent in paths) Chambers and Closets are to be private and retired.

Light (Gods eldest daughter) is a principal beauty in a building: 6
yet it shines not alike from all parts of Heaven. An East-window welcomes the
infant beams of the Sun, before they are of strength to do any harm, and is
offensive to none but a sluggard. A South-window in summer is a chimny with a
fire in it, and needs the schreen of a curtain. In a West-window in summer time
toward night, the Sun grows low and over familiar with more light then
delight. A North-window is best for Butteries and Cellars, where the beer will
be sower for the Suns smiling on it. Thorow-lights are best for rooms of
entertainment, and windows on one side for dormitories. As for Receipt,

A house had better be too little for a day then too great for a year. 7
And it is easier borrowing of thy neighbor a brace of chambers for a night,
then a bag of money for a twelvemonth. It is vain therefore to proportion the
receipt to an extraordinary occasion, as those who by overbuilding their houses
have dilapidated their lands, and their states have been pressed to death under
the weight of their house. As for Strength,

8
Countrey-houses must be Substantives, able to stand of themseves. Not like
City-buildings supported by their neighbors on either side. By Strength we
mean such as may resist Weather and Time, not Invasion, Castles being out of
date in this peaceable age. As for the making of motes round about, it is
questionable whether the fogs be not more unhealthfull, then the fish brings
profit, or the water defense. Beauty remains behind as the last to be regarded,
because houses are made to be lived in not looked on.

9
Let not the Front look asquint on a stranger, but accost him right at his
entrance. Uniformity also much pleases the eye; and it is observed that
freestone, like a fair complexion, soonest waxes old, whilst brick keeps her
beauty longest.

10
Let the office-houses observe the due distance from the mansion house. Those
are too familiar which presume to be of the same pile with it. The same may be
said of stables and barns; without which a house is like a city without
outworks, it can never hold out long.

11
Gardens also are to attend in their place. When God (Genesis 2.9) planted a
garden Eastward, he made to grow out of the ground every tree pleasant to the
sight, and good for food. Sure he knew better what was proper to a garden then
those, who nowadayes therein only feed the eyes, and starve both taste and smell.

To conclude, in Building rather believe any man then an Artificer in his own
art for matter of charges, not that they cannot but will not be faithful.
Should they tell thee all the cost at the first, it would blast a young Builder
in the budding, and therefore they sooth thee up till it has cost thee
something to confute them. The spirit of Building first possessed people after
the flood, which then caused the confusion of languages, and since of the
estate of many a man.

CHAP. 8. Of Anger.
ANger is one of the sinews of the soul; he that wants it has a maimed mind,
and with Jacob sinew-shrunk in the hollow of his thigh must needs halt. Nor is
it good to converse with such as cannot be angry, and with the Caspian sea
never ebb nor flow. This Anger is either Heavenly, when one is offended for
God: or Hellish, when offended with God and Goodness: or Earthly, in temporal
matters. Which Earthly Anger (whereof we treat) may also be Hellish, if for no
cause, no great cause, too hot, or too long.

Be not angry with any without a cause. Maxim 1.
If thou be, thou must not only, as the Proverb says, be appeased without
amends (having neither cost nor damage given thee) but, as our Savior Matthew
5.22.
says, be in danger of the judgment.

Be not mortally angry with any for a venial fault. 2
He will make a strange combustion in the state of his soul, who at the landing
of every cockboat sets the beacons on fire. To be angry for every toy debases
the worth of thy anger; for he who will be angry for any thing, will be angry
for nothing.

Let not thy anger be so hot, 3
but that the most torrid zone thereof may be habitable. Fright not people from
thy presence with the terror of thy intolerable impatience. Some men like a
tiled house are long before they take fire, but once on flame there is no
coming near to quench them.

Take heed of doing irrevocable acts in thy passion. 4
As the revealing of secrets, which makes thee a bankrupt for society ever
after: neither do such things which done once are done for ever, so that no
bemoaning can amend them. Sampsons hair grew again, but not his eyes: Time may
restore some losses, others are never to be repaird. Wherefore in thy rage make
no Persian decree which cannot be reversed or repeald; but rather Polonian laws
which (they say) last but three days: Do not in an instant what an age cannot
recompense.

5
Anger kept till the next morning, with Exodus 16.24.
Manna, does putrify and corrupt. Save that Manna corrupted not at all, and
anger most of all, kept the next Sabbath. S. Paul Ephesians. 4.26.
says, Let not the Sun go down on your wrath; to carry news to the Antipodes
in another world of thy revengefull nature. Yet let us take the Apostles
meaning, rather then his words, with all possible speed to depose our passion,
not understanding him so literally that we may take leave to be angry till
Sunset: then might our wrath lengthen with the days; and men in Greenland,
where day lasts above a quarter of a year, have plentiful scope of revenge.
And as the English (by command from William the Conqueror) always raked up
their fire, and put out their candles, when the Cowels Interpreter out of Stows
Annals.
Curfew-bell was rung; let us then also quench all sparks of anger and heat of
passion.

6
He that keeps anger long in his bosom gives place to the Ephesians. 4.27.
devil. And why should we make room for him, who will crowd in too fast of
himself? Heat of passion makes our souls to chappe, and the devil creeps in at
the cranies; yea a furious man in his fits may seem possessed with a devil,
fomes, fumes, tears himself, is deaf, and dumb in effect, to hear or speak
reason: sometimes wallows, stares, stamps, with fiery eyes and flaming cheeks.
Had Narcissus himself seen his own face when he had been angry, he could never
have fallen in love with himself.

CHAP. 9. Of Expecting Preferment.
THere are as many several tenures of Expectation as of Possession, some
nearer, some more remote, some grounded on strong, others on weaker reasons.
(As for a groundless Expectation, it is a wilful self-delusion. (We come to
instructions how men should manage their hopes herein.

Hope not for impossibilities. Maxim 1.
For though the object of hope be Futurum possibile, yet some are so mad as to
feed their Expectation on things, though not in themselves, yet to them
impossible, if we consider the weakness of the means whereby they seek to
attain them. He needs to stand on tiptoes that hopes to touch the moon; and
those who expect what in reason they cannot expect, may expect.

Carefully survey what proportion the means thou have bear to the end thou
expectest. 2
Count not a Courtiers promise of course a specialty that he is bound to
prefer thee: Seeing Complements oftentimes die in the speaking, why should
thy hopes (grounded on them) live longer then the hearing? perchance the text
of his promise intended but common courtesies, which thy apprehension expounds
speedy and special favors. Others make up the weakness of their means with
conceit of the strength of their deserts, foolishly thinking that their own
merits will be the undoubted Patrons to present them to all void Benefices.

The heir apparent to the next preferment may be disinherited by an unexpected
accident. 3
A Gentleman, servant to the Lord Admiral Howard, was suitor to a Lady above
his deserts, grounding the confidence of his success on his relation to so
honorable a Lord; which Lord gave the Anchor as badge of his office, and
therefore this suitor wrote in a window, If I be bold,
The anchor is my hold.


But his corrivall to the same Mistress coming into the same room wrote under,
Yet fear the worst:
What if the Cable burst?


Thus useless is the Anchor of hope (good for nothing but to deceive those
that rely on it) if the cable or small cords of means and causes whereon it
depends fail and miscarry. Daily experience tenders too many examples. A
Gentleman who gave a Basilisk for his Arms or Crest promised to make a young
kinsman of his his heir, which kinsman to ingratiate himself painted a Basilisk
in his study, and beneath it these verses, Falleris asspectu Basiliscum
occidere, Plini,
Nam vitae nostrae spem Basiliscus alit.
The Basilisk's the only stay,
My life preserving still;
Pliny, thou li'dst when thou did say
The Basilisk does kill.


But this rich Gentleman dying frustrated his expectation, and bequeathed all
his estate to another, whereupon the Epigram was thus altered, Certe aluit, sed
spe vana, spes vana venenum:
Ignoscas, Plini, verus es Historicus.
Indeed vain hopes to me he gave,
Whence I my poison drew:
Pliny, thy pardon now I crave,
Thy writings are too true.


4
Proportion thy expenses to what thou have in possession, not to thy
expectancies. Otherwise he that feeds on wind must needs be griped with the
Colic at last. And if the Ceremonial law forbad the Jews to sees a kid in
the mothers milk, the law of good husbandry forbids us to eat a kid in the
mothers belly, spending our pregnant hopes before they be delivered.

Imbrue not thy soul in bloody wishes of his death who parts thee and thy
preferment. 5
A murder the more common, because one cannot be arraigned for it on earth.
But those are charitable murderers which wish them in heaven, not so much that
they may have ease a^ their journeys end, but because they must needs take
death in the way.

In earthly matters expectation takes up more joy on trust, 6
then the fruition of the thing is able to discharge. The Lion is not so fierce
as painted; nor are matters so fair as the pencill of the expectant limbs them
out in his hopes. They forecount their wives fair, fruitful, and rich, without
any fault; their children witty, beautiful, and dutiful, without any
frowardness: and as S. Basil held that roses in paradise before man's fall grew
without prickles, they abstract the pleasures of things from the troubles
annexed to them, which when they come to enjoy, they must take both together.
Surely a good unlooked for is a virgin happiness; whereas those who obtain
what long they have gazed on in expectation, only marry what themselves have
defloured before.

When our hopes break let our patience hold: 7
relying on Gods providence without murmuring, who often provides for men above
what we can think or desire. When Robert Godwin in his Catal. of Archbishops of
York.
Holgate could not peaceably enjoy his small living in Lincolneshire, because
of the litigiousnesse of a neighboring Knight, coming to London to right
himself he came into the favor of King Henry the eighth, and got by degrees
the Archbishopric of York. Thus God sometimes defeats our hopes, or disturbs
our possession of lesser favors, thereby to bestow on his servants better
blessings, if not here, hereafter.

CHAP. 10. Of Memory.
IT is the treasure-house of the mind, wherein the monuments thereof are kept
and preserved. Plato makes it the mother of the Muses. Metaphys. lib. 1 cap. 1.
Aristotle sets it one degree further, making Experience the mother of Arts,
Memory the parent of Experience. Philosophers place it in the rere of the head;
and it seems the mine of Memory lies there, because there naturally men dig for
it, scratching it when they are at a loss. This again is twofold: one, the
simple retention of things; the other, a regaining them when forgotten.

Maxim 1
Brute creatures equal, if not exceed, men in a bare retentive Memory. Through
how many labyrinths of woods, without other clue of thread then natural
instinct, does the hunted hare return to her muce? How does the little be,
flying into several meadows and gardens, sipping of many cups, yet never
intoxicated, through an ocean (as I may say) of air, steddily steer her self
home, without help of card or compass. But these cannot play an aftergame, and
recover what they have forgotten, which is done by the mediation of discourse.

2
Artificial memory is rather a trick then an art, and more for the gain of the
teacher then profit of the learners. Like the tossing of a pike, which is no
part of the postures and motions thereof, and is rather for ostentation then
use, to show the strength and nimblenesse of the arm, and is often used by
wandering Soldiers as an introduction to beg. Understand it of the artificial
rules which at this day are delivered by Memory-mountebanks; for sure an art
thereof may be made (wherein as yet the world is defective) and that no more
destructive to natural Memory then spectacles are to eyes, which girls in
Holland wear from 12 years of age. But till this be found out, let us observe
these plain rules.

First soundly infix in thy mind what thou desire to remember. 3
What wonder is it if agitation of business jog that out of thy head, which
was there rather tacked then fastened? whereas those notions which get in by
violenta possessio will abide there till ejectio firma, sickness or extreme
age, dispossess them. It is best knocking in the nail overnight, and clinching
it the next morning.

Overburthen not thy Memory to make so faithful a servant a slave. 4
Remember Atlas was weary. Have as much reason as a Camel, to rise when thou
have thy full load. Memory, like a purse, if it be over full that it cannot
shut, all will drop out of it: Take heed of a gluttonous curiosity to feed on
many things, lest the greediness of the appetite of thy Memory spoil the
digestion thereof. Beza's case was peculiar and memorable; being above
fourscore years of age he perfectly could say by heart any Greek Chapter in
Thuan. obit. doct. virorum. page 384.
S. Paul's Epistles, or any thing else which he had learnt long before, but
forgot whatsoever was newly told him; his Memory like an inn retaining old
guests, but having no room to entertain new.

Spoil not thy Memory with thine own jealousy, 5
nor make it bad by suspecting it. How can thou find that true which thou will not trust? S. Augustine tells us of his friend Simplicius, who being
asked, could tell all Virgills verses backward and forward, and yet the same
party, Testatus est Deum, nescisse se hoc; esse ante illud experimentum,
August. Tom. 7. lib. de anima and ejus orig. cap. 7.
vowed to God, that he knew not that he could do it till they did try him. Sure
there is concealed strength in men's Memories, which they take no notice of.

Marshall thy notions into a handsome method. 6
One will carry twice more weight trust and packed up in bundles, then when it
lies untowardly flapping and hanging about his shoulders. Things orderly
fardled up under heads are most portable.

Adventure not all thy learning in one bottom, 7
but divide it betwixt thy Memory and thy Note-books. He that with Bias carries
all his learning about him in his head will utterly be beggerd and bankrupt, if
a violent disease, a merciless thief, should rob and strip him. I know some
have a Commonplace against Common-place-books, and yet perchance will
privately make use of what publicly they declaim against. A Common-place-book
contains many Notions in garrison, whence the owner may draw out an army into
the field on competent warning.

8
Moderate diet and good air preserve Memory; but what air is best I dare not
define, when such great ones differ. Plato, Aristotle, Tully.
Some say a pure and subtle air is best, another commends a thick and foggy
air. For the Singulari valent memoria quo urbs crassiore fruatur acre, Market.
Atlas in Tussia.
Pisans sited in the fennes and marish of Arnus have excellent memories, as if
the foggy air were a cap for their heads.

9
Thankfulness to God for it continues the Memory: whereas some proud people
have been visited with such oblivion, that they have forgotten their own names.
Staupitius Tutour to Luther, and a godly man, in a vain ostentation of his
memory repeated Christ's Genealogy (Matthew. 1.) by heart in his Sermon, but
being out about the Captivity of Babylon, I see (says Melchior Adamus in vita
Staupitii, page 20.
he) God resists the proud, and so betook himself to his book. Abuse not thy
Memory to be Sins Register, nor make advantage thereof for wickedness.
Excellently De civ. Dei lib. 7. cap. 3.
Augustine, Quidam vero pessimi memoria sunt mirabili, qui tanto pejores sunt,
quanto minus possunt, quae male cogitant, oblivisci.

CHAP. 11. Of Phancie.
IT is an inward Sense of the soul, for a while retaining and examining things
brought in thither by the Common sense. It is the most boundles and restless
faculty of the soul: for whilst the Understanding and the Will are kept as it
were in Libera Custodia to their objects of Verum and Bonum, the Phancie is
free from all engagements: it digs without spade, sails without ship, flies
without wings, builds without charges, fights without bloodshed, in a moment
striding from the center to the circumference of the world, by a kind of
omnipotency creating and annihilating things in an instant; and things
divorced in Nature are married in Phancie as in a lawless place. It is also
most restless: whilst the Senses are bound, and Reason in a manner asleep,
Phancie like a sentinel walks the round, ever working, never wearied. The
chief diseases of the Phancie are, either that they are too wild and
high-soaring, or else too low and grovelling, or else too desultory and
overvoluble. Of the first.

If thy Phancie be but a little too rank, Maxim 1
age it self will correct it. To lift too high is no fault in a young horse,
because with traveling he will mend it for his own ease. Thus lofty Phancies
in young men will come down of themselves, and in process of time the overplus
will shrink to be but even measure. But if this will not do it, then observe
these rules.

Take part always with thy Judgment against thy Phancie in any thing wherein
they shall dissent. 2
If thou suspectest thy conceits too luxuriant, herein account thy suspicion a
legal conviction, and damn whatsoever thou doubtest of. Warily Tullie, Been
monent, qui vetant quicquam facere, de quo dubitas, aequum sit an iniquum.

Take the advice of a faithful friend, 3
and submit thy inventions to his censure. When thou pennest an oration, let
him have the power of Index expurgatorius, to expunge what he pleases; and do
not thou like a fond mother cry if the child of thy brain be corrected for
playing the wanton. Mark the arguments and reasons of his alterations, why that
phrase least proper, this passage more cautious and advised, and after a while
thou shall perform the place in thine own person, and not go out of thy self
for a censurer. If thy Phancie be too low and humble,

4
Let thy judgment be King but not Tyrant over it, to condemn harmless yea
commendable conceits. Some for fear their orations should giggle will not let
them smile. Give it also liberty to rove, for it will not be extravagant. There
is no danger that weak folks if they walk abroad will straggle far, as
wanting strength.

5
Acquaint thy self with reading Poets, for there Phancie is in her throne; and
in time the sparks of the Authors wit will catch hold on the Reader, and
inflame him with love, liking, and desire of imitation. I confess there is
more required to teach one to write then to see a copy: however there is a
secret force of fascination in reading Poems to raise and provoke Phancie. If
thy Phancie be over voluble, then

6
Whip this vagrant home to the first object whereon it should be settled.
Indeed nimblenesse is the perfection of this faculty, but levity the bane of
it. Great is the difference betwixt a swift horse, and a skittish, that will
stand on no ground. Such is the ubiquitary Phancie, which will keep long
residence on no one subject, but is so courteous to strangers that it ever
welcomes that conceit most which comes last; and new species supplant the old
ones, before seriously considered. If this be the fault of thy Phancie, I say
whip it home to the first object, whereon it should be settled. This do as
often as occasion requires, and by degrees the fugitive servant will learn to
abide by his work without running away.

Acquaint thy self by degrees with hard and knotty studies, 7
as School Divinity, which will clog thy overnimble Phancie. True, at the first
it will be as welcome to thee as a prison, and their very solutions will seem
knots unto thee. But take not too much at once, lest thy brain turn edge. Taste
it first as a potion for Physic, and by degrees thou shall drink it as beer
for thirst: Practice will make it pleasant. Mathematics are also good for this
purpose: If beginning to try a Conclusion, thou must make an end, lest thou
losest thy pains that are past, and must proceed seriously and exactly. I
meddle not with those Bedlam-phancies, all whose conceits are antiques, but
leave them for the Physician to purge with hellebore.

To clothe low-creeping matter with high-flown language is not fine Phancie, 8
but flat foolerie. It rather loads then raises a Wren, to fasten the feathers
of an Estridge to her wings. Some men's speeches are like the high mountains in
Ireland, having a durty bog in the top of them; the very ridge of them in high
words having nothing of worth, but what rather stalls then delights the
Auditour.

Fine Phancies in manufactures invent engines rather pretty then useful; 9
and commonly one trade is too narrow for them. They are better to project new
ways then to prosecute old, and are rather skillful in many mysteries then
thriving in one. They affect not voluminous inventions, wherein many years must
constantly be spent to perfect them, except there be in them variety of
pleasant employment.

Imagination (the work of the Phancie) has produced real effects. 10
Many serious and sad examples hereof may be produced: I will only insist on a
merry one. A Gentleman having led a company of children beyond their usual
journey, they began to be weary, and jointly cried to him to carry them; which
because of their multitude he could not do, but told them he would provide them
horses to ride on. Then cutting little wands out of the hedge as nagges for
them, and a great stake as a gelding for himself, thus mounted Phancie put
metal into their legs, and they came cheerfully home.

11
Phancie runs most furiously when a guilty Conscience drives it. One that owed
much money, and had many Creditours, as he walked London-streets in the
evening, a tenterhook caught his cloak. At whose suit? said he, conceiving
some Bailiff had arrested him. Thus guilty Consciences are afraid where no fear
is, and count every creature they meet a Sergeant sent from God to punish them.

CHAP. 12. Of Natural Fools.
THey have the cases of men, and little else of them besides speech and
laughter. And indeed it may seem strange that Risibile being the property of
man alone, they who have least of man should have most thereof, laughing
without cause or measure.

Maxim 1
Generally Nature hangs out a sign of simplicity in the face of a Fool; and
there is enough in his countenance for an Hue and Cry to take him on
suspicion: or else it is stamped on the figure of his body; their heads
sometimes so little, that there is no room for wit; sometimes so long, that
there is no wit for so much room.

2
Yet some by their faces may pass current enough till they cry themselves down
by their speaking. Thus men know the bell is cracked, when they hear it tolled;
yet some that have stood out the assault of two or three questions, and have
answered pretty rationally, have afterward of their own accord betrayed and
yielded themselves to be fools.

3
The oaths and railing of Fools is oftentimes no fault of theirs but their
teachers. The Hebrew word Barac signifies to bless, and to curse; and it is the
speakers pleasure if he use it in the worst acception. Fools of themselves are
equally capable to pray and to swear; they therefore have the greatest sin
who by their example or otherwise teach them so to do.

One may get wisdom by looking on a Fool. 4
In beholding him, think how much thou art beholden to him that suffered thee
not to be like him: Only Gods pleasure put a difference betwixt you. And
consider that a Fool and a Wiseman are alike both in the starting-place, their
birth, and at the post, their death; only they differ in the race of their
lives.

It is unnatural to laugh at a Natural. 5
How can the object of thy pity be the subject of thy pastime? I confess
sometimes the strangeness, and, as I may say, witty simplicity of their
actions may extort a smile from a serious man, who at the same time may smile
at them and sorrow for them. But it is one thing to laugh at them in transitu,
a snap and away, and another to make a set meal in jeering them, and as the
Philistines to send for Sampson to make them sport.

To make a trade of laughing at a Fool is the highway to become one. 6
Tullie confesses that whilst he laughed at one Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 9.
Hircus a very ridiculous man, dum illum rideo pene factus sum ille: And one
tells us of Gallus Vibius, a man first of great eloquence, and afterward of
great madness, which seized not on him so much by accident as his own
affectation, so long Dum insanos imitatur, quod assimulabat ad vivum redegit,
Rhodiginus Antiq. lib. 11. c. 13.
mimically imitating mad men that he became one.

Many have been the wise speeches of fools, 7
though not so many as the foolish speeches of wise men. Now the wise speeches
of these silly souls proceed from one of these reasons: Either because talking
much, and shooting often, they must needs hit the mark sometimes, though not by
aim, by hap: Or else because a Fools mediocriter is optime; Sense from his
mouth, a Sentence; and a tolerable speech cried up for an Apothegme: Or lastly,
because God may sometimes illuminate them, and (especially toward their death)
admit them to the possession of some part of reason. A poor beggar in Paris
being very hungry stayed so long in a Cooks shop, who was dishing up of meat,
till his stomach was satisfied with the only smell thereof. The choleric
covetous Cook demanded of him to pay for his breakfast. The pooreman denied it,
and the controversy was referred to the deciding of the next man that should
pass by, which chanced to be the most notorious Idiot in the whole City. He on
the relation of the matter determined that the poor man's money should be put
betwixt two empty dishes, and the Cook should be recompensed with the gingling
of the poor man's money, as he was satisfied with the only smell of the Cooks
meat. And this is affirmed by Io. And. Panor. Barba. and alii inde ad nostram.
Hiero. Franc. in lib. furios. de reg. juris ff. Boer. decis. 23 n 58. Mantic.
de conject. ult. v. lib. 2. Tit. 5. n. 8. Corset. sing. verbi Testamentum.
credible Writers, as no fable but an undoubted fact. More waggish was that of
a rich landed Fool, whom a Courtier had begged, and carried about to wait on
him. He coming with his master to a Gentleman's house where the picture of a
Fool was wrought in a fair suit of arras, cut the picture out with a penknife.
And being chidden for so doing, You have more cause (said he) to thank me, for
if my master had seen the picture of the Fool, he would have begged the
hangings of the King as he did my lands. When the standers by comforted a
Natural which lay on his deathbed, and told him that four proper fellows
should carry his body to the Church: Yea (quoth he) but I had rather by half go
thither my self; and then prayed to God at his last gasp not to require more of
him then he gave him.

As for a Changeling, which is not one child changed for another, but one child
on a sudden much changed from it self; and for a Jester, which some count a
necessary evil in a Court (an office which none but he that has wit can
perform, and and none but he that wants wit will perform) I conceive them not
to belong to the present subject.

CHAP. 13. Of Recreations.
REcreation is a second Creation, when weariness has almost annihilated ones
spirits. It is the breathing of the soul, which otherwise would be stifled with
continual business. We may trespass in them, if using such as are forbidden
by the Lawyer, as against the statutes; Physician, as against health; Divine,
as against conscience.

Be well satisfied in thy Conscience of the lawfulness of the recreation thou
usest. Maxim 1
Some fight against Cockfighting, and bait Bull and Bearbaiting, because man is
not to be a common Barretour to set the creatures at discord; and seeing
Antipathy betwixt creatures was kindled by man's sin, what pleasure can he
take to see it burn? Others are of the contrary opinion, and that Christianity
gives us a placard to use these sports; and that man's Charter of dominion over
the creatures enables him to employ them as well for pleasure as necessity. In
these, as in all other doubtful recreations, be well assured first of the
legality of them. He that sins against his Conscience sins with a witness.

Spill not the morning (the quintessence of the day) in recreations. 2
For sleep it self is a recreation; add not therefore sauce to sauce; and he
cannot properly have any title to be refreshed, who was not first faint.
Pastime, like wine, is poison in the morning. It is then good husbandry to sow
the head, which has lain fallow all night, with some serious work. Chiefly
entrench not on the Lords day to use unlawful sports; this were to spare thine
own flock, and to sheere Gods lamb.

Let thy recreations be ingenious, 3
and bear proportion with thine age. If thou say with Paul, When I was a
child I did as a child, say also with him, But when I was a man I put away
childish things. Wear also the child's coat, if thou usest his sports.

4
Take heed of boisterous and overviolent exercises. Ringing oftentimes has
made good music on the bells, and put men's bodies out of tune, so that by
overheating themselves they have rung their own passing bell.

5
Yet the ruder sort of people scarce count any thing a sport which is not loud
and violent. The Muscovite women esteem none loving husbands except they beat
their wives. It Is no pastime with country Clowns that cracks not pates, breaks
not shins, bruises not limbs, tumbles and tosses not all the body. They think
themselves not warm in their geeres, till they are all on fire; and count it
but dry sport, till they swim in their own sweat. Yet I conceive the Physicians
rule in exercises, Ad ruborem but non ad sudorem, is too scant measure.

6
Refresh that part of thy self which is most wearied. If thy life be sedentary,
exercise thy body; if stirring and active, recreate thy mind. But take heed of
cousening thy mind, in setting it to do a double task under pretense of giving
it a play-day, as in the labyrinth of Chesse, and other tedious and studious
Games.

7
Yet recreations distasteful to some dispositions relish best to others.
Fishing with an angle is to some rather a torture then a pleasure, to stand an
hour as mute as the fish they mean to take: yet herewithall In his life writ
by Mr. Ashton.
Doctor Whitaker was much delighted. When some Noblemen had gotten William
Cecill Lord Burleigh and Treasurer of England to ride with them a hunting, and
the sport began to be cold; What call you this, said the Treasurer? Oh now said
they the dogs are at a fault. Yea quoth the Treasurer, take me again in such a
fault, and I Will give you leave to punish me. Thus as soon may the same meat
please all palats, as the same sport suit with all dispositions.

8
Running, Leaping, and Dancing, the descants on the plain song of walking, are
all excellent exercises. And yet those are the best recreations which besides
refreshing enable, at least dispose, men to some other good ends. Bowling
teaches men's hands and eyes Mathematics, and the rules of Proportion: Swimming
has saved many a man's life, when himself has been both the wares, and the
ship: Tilting and Fencing is war without anger; and manly sports are the
Grammar of Military performance.

But above all Shooting is a noble recreation, 9
and an half Liberal art. A rich man told a poor man that he walked to get a
stomach for his meat: And I, said the poor man, walk to get meat for my
stomach. Now Shooting would have fitted both their turns; it provides food when
men are hungry, and helps digestion when they are full. King Edward the sixth
(though he drew no strong bow) shot very well, and when once John Dudley Duke
of Northumberland commended him for hitting the mark; You shot better (quoth
the King) when you shot off my good uncle Protectours head. But our age sees
his Successor exceeding him in that art, whose eye like his judgment is clear
and quick to discover the mark, and his hands as just in Shooting as in dealing
aright.

Some sports being granted to be lawful, 10
more propend to be ill then well used. Such I count Stage Plays, when made
always the Actours work, and often the Spectatours recreation. Plin. not.
Hist. lib. 35. cap. 10.
Zeuxis the curious picturer painted a boy holding a dish full of grapes in his
hand, done so lively that the birds being deceived flew to peck the grapes. But
Zeuxis in an ingenious choler was angry with his own workmanship. Had I (said
he) made the boy as lively as the grapes the birds would have been afraid to
touch them. Thus two things are set forth to us in Stage Plays: some grave
sentences, prudent counsels, and punishment of vicious examples; and with
these desperate oaths, lustful talk, and riotous acts are so personated to
the life, that wantons are tickled with delight, and feed their palats upon
them. It seems the goodness is not portrayed out with equal accents of
liveliness as the wicked things are: otherwise men would be deterred from
vicious courses, with seeing the woeful success which follows them. But the
main is, wanton speeches on stages are the devils ordinance to beget badnesse;
but I question whether the pious speeches spoken there be Gods ordinance to
increase goodness, as wanting both his institution and benediction.

11
Choke not thy soul with immoderate pouring in the cordial of pleasures. The
Creation lasted but six days of the first week: Profane they whose Recreation
lasts seven days every week. Rather abridge thy self of thy lawful liberty
herein; it being a wary rule which S. Lib. 5. moral. and Homil. 35. supra Evang.
Gregory gives us, Solus in illicitis non cadit, qui se aliquando and a licitis
caute restringit. And then Recreations shall both strengthen labor, and
sweeten rest, and we may expect Gods blessing and protection on us in following
them, as well as in doing our work: For he that faith grace for his meat, in it
prays also to God to bless his sauce unto him. As for those that will not
take lawful pleasure, I am afraid they will take unlawful pleasure, and by
lacing themselves too hard grow awry on one side.

CHAP. 14. Of Tombs.
Tombs are the clothes of the dead: a Grave is but a plain suit, and a rich
Monument is one embroidered. Most moderate men have been careful for the
decent interment of their corpse. Few of the fond mind of Arbogastus an Irish
Saint, and Bishop of Spires in Germany, who would be buried near the Warraeus
de Scriptor. Hiber. page 26.
Gallows in imitation of our Savior, whose grave was in mount Calvary near the
place of execution.

It Is a provident way to make ones Tomb in ones lifetime; Maxim 1
both hereby to prevent the negligence of heirs, and to mind him of his
mortality. Georgi^. lib. 4.
Virgil tells us that when bees swarm in the air, and two armies meeting
together fight as it were a set battle with great violence, cast but a little
dust upon them and they will be quiet, Hi motus animorum, atque haec certamina
tanta
Pulveris exigui jactu compressa quiescunt.
These stirrings of their minds and strivings vast,
If but a little dust on them be cast,
Are straitwayes stinted, and quite overpast.


Thus the most ambitious motions and thoughts of man's mind are quickly quelled
when dust is thrown on him, whereof his fore-prepared Sepulcher is an excellent
remembrancer.

Yet some seem to have built their Tombs, 2
therein to bury their thoughts of dying, never thinking thereof, but embracing
the world with greater greediness. A Gentleman made choice of a fair stone,
and intending the same for his Gravestone, caused it to be pitched up in a
field a pretty distance from his house, and used often to shoot at it for his
exercise. Yea but (said a wag that stood by) you would be loath Sir to hit the
mark: And so are many unwilling to die who notwithstanding have erected their
Monuments.

3
Tombs ought in some sort to be proportioned not to the wealth but deserts of
the party interred. Yet may we see some rich man of mean worth laden under a
tomb big enough for a Prince to bear. There were Officers appointed in the
Lucian. (...).
Grecian Games, who always by public authority did pluck down the Statues
erected to the Victours, if they exceeded the true symmetrie and proportion of
their bodies. We need such nowadayes to order Monuments to men's merits, chiefly
to reform such depopulating Tombs as have no good fellowship with them, but
engrosse all the room, leaving neither seats for the living, nor graves for the
dead. It was a wise and thrifty law which Hector Boeth in the life of King
Reutha.
Reutha King of Scotland made, That Noblemen should have so many pillars, or
long pointed stones set on their sepulchers, as they had slain enemies in the
wars. If this order were also enlarged to those who in peace had excellently
deserved of the Church or Commonwealth, it might well be revived.

4
Overcostly Tombs are only baits for Sacrilege. Thus Sacrilege has
beheaded that peerless Prince King Henry the fifth, the body of whose Statue
on his Tomb in Westminster was covered over with silver plate gilded, and his
head of I. Speed in the end of Henry the 5.
massy silver; both which now are stolen away: Yea hungry palats will feed on
courser meat. I had rather In the descript* of London, Broadstreet-ward, page
184.
Mr Stow then I should tell you of a Nobleman who sold the monuments of
Noblemen, in S. Augustines Church in Broadstreet, for an hundred pound, which
cost many thousands, and in the place thereof made fair stabling for horses; as
if Christ who was born in a stable should be brought into it the second time.
It was not without cause in the Civil Law that a wife might be divorced, from
her husband, if she could prove him to be one that had Si nimirum sepulchrorum
dissolutorem esse probaverit, Kirkman. de suner. Roman. lib. 3. c. 26. ex cod.
de repudiis.
broken the Sepulchers of the dead: For it was presumed he must needs be a
tyrannical husband to his wife, who had not so much mercy as to spare the
ashes of the departed.

The shortest, 5
plainest, and truest Epitaphs are best. I say, the Shortest; for when a
Passenger sees a Chronicle written on a Tomb, he takes it on trust, some Great
man lies there buried, without taking pains to examine who he is. Mr Cambden in
his Remains presents us with examples of Great men that had little as, Fui
Caius. Scaligeri quod r^liquum est. Depositum Cardinalis Poli, etc.
Epitaphs. And when once I asked a witty Gentleman, an honored friend of mine,
what Epitaph was fittest to be written on Mr Cambdens Tomb. Let it be, said
he, CAMBDENS REMAINS.


I say also the Plainest; for except the sense lie above ground, few will
trouble themselves to dig for it. Lastly, it must be True: Not as as in some
Monuments, where the red veins in the marble may seem to blush at the falsehoods
written on it. He was a witty man that first taught a stone to speak, but he
was a wicked man that taught it first to lie.

To want a Grave is the cruelty of the living, 6
not the misery of the dead. An English Gentleman not long since did lie on his
deathbed in Spain, and the Jesuits did flock about him to pervert him to
their Religion. All was in vain. Their last argument was, If you will not turn
Roman Catholic, then your body shall be unburied. Then (answered he) I Will
stink, and so turned his head and dyed. Thus love, if not to the dead, to the
living will make him, if not a grave, a hole: and it was the Beggars Epitaph,
Nudus eram vivus, mortuus ecce tegor.
Naked I lived, but being dead,
Now behold I Am covered.


A good Memory is the best Monument. 7
Others are subject to Casualty and Time, and we know that the Pyramids
themselves doting with age have forgotten the names of their Founders. To
conclude, Let us be careful to provide rest for our souls, and our bodies will
provide rest for themselves. And let us not be herein like unto Gentlewomen,
which care not to keep the inside of the orange, but candy and preserve only
the outside thereof.

CHAP. 15. Of Deformity.
Deformity is either Natural, Voluntary, or Adventitious, being either caused
by Gods unseen Providence (by men nicknamed, Chance) or by man's Cruelty. We
will take them in order.

Maxim 1
If thou be not so handsome as thou would have been thank God thou art no
more unhandsome then thou art. It Is his mercy thou art not the mark for
passengers fingers to point at, an Heteroclite in Nature, with some member
defective or redundant. Be glad that thy clay-cottage has all the necessary
rooms thereto belonging, though the outside be not so fairly playstered as some
others.

2
Yet is it lawful and commendable by Art to correct the defects and
deformities of Nature. Ericthonius being a goodly man from the girdle upwards,
but, as the Poets feign, having downwards the body of a Servius in illud
Virgilii lib. 3. Georg Primus Ericthonius, etc.
Serpent (moralize him to have had some defect in his feet) first invented
charets, wherein he so sat that the upper parts of him might be seen, and the
rest of his body concealed. Little heed is to be given to his Sanders de
schism. Anglic. lib. 1. page 17.
lying pen, who makes Anna Bollen, Mother to Queen Elizabeth, the first finder
out and wearer of Ruffes, to cover a wen she had in her neck. Yet the matter's
not much, such an addition of Art being without any fraud or deceit.

Mock not at those who are misshapen by Nature. There is the same reason of the
poor and of the deformed; he that despises them despises God that made them.
A poor man is a picture of Gods own making, but set in a plain frame, not
gilded: a deformed man is also his workmanship, but not drawn with even lines
and lively colors: The former, not for want of wealth, as the latter not for
want of skill, but both for the pleasure of the maker. As for (...). 7. Polit.
cap. 16.
Aristotle, who would have parents expose their deformed children to the wide
world without caring for them, his opinion herein, not only deformed but most
monstrous, deserves rather to be exposed to the scorn and contempt of all men.

Some people handsome by Nature have wilfully deformed themselves. 4
Such as wear Bacchus his colors in their faces, arising not from having, but
being, bad livers. When the woman (the first of Kings, the 3. and 21.)
considered the child that was laid by her, Behold, said she, it was not my
son which I did bear. Should God survey the faces of many men and women, he
would not own and acknowledge them for those which he created: many are so
altered in color, and some in sex, women to men, and men to women in their
monstrous fashions, so that they who behold them cannot by the evidence of
their apparel give up their verdict of what sex they are. It is most safe to
call the users of these hermaphroditicall fashions, Francisses, and Philips,
names agreeing to both sexes.

Confessors which wear the badges of truth are thereby made the more
beautiful; 5
though deformed in time of Persecution for Christ's sake through men's malice.
This made Constantine the Great to Russin. lib. 1. cap. 4.
kiss the hole in the face of Paphnutius, out of which the Tyrant Maximinus
had bored his eye for the profession of the faith, the good Emperor making
much of the socket even when the candle was put out. Next these, wounds in
war are most honorable: Halting is the stateliest march of a Soldier; and
it is a brave sight to see the flesh of an Ancient as torn as his Colors. He
that mocks at the marks of valor in a Soldiers face, is likely to live to
have the brands of justice on his own shoulders.

6
Nature oftentimes recompenceth deformed bodies with excellent wits. Witness
Aesop, then whose Fables children cannot read an easier, nor men a wiser book;
for all latter Morallists do but write comments upon them. Many jeering wits
who have thought to have rid at their ease on the bowed backs of some Cripples,
have by their unhappy answers been unhors'd and thrown flat on their own backs.
A jeering Gentleman commended a Beggar who was deformed and little better then
blind for having an excellent eye, True (said the Beggar) for I can discern an
honest man from such a knave as you are.

7
Their souls have been the Chappells of sanctity, whose bodies have been the
Spitolls of deformity. An Guliel. Malm. lib. 2. cap. 10.
Emperor of Germany coming by chance on a Sunday into a Church, found there a
most misshapen Priest, pene portentum Naturae, insomuch as the Emperor scorned
and contemned him. But when he heard him read those words in the Service, For
it is he that made us and not we our selves, the Emperor checked his own proud
thoughts, and made inquiry into the quality and condition of the man, and
finding him on examination to be most learned and devout, he made him
Archbishop of Colen, which place he did excellently discharge.

CHAP. 16. Of Plantations.
PLantations make mankind broader, as Generation makes it thicker. To advance
an happy Plantation the Undertakers, Planters, and Place it self must
contribute their endeavors.

Let the prime Undertakers be men of no shallow heads, Maxim 1
nor narrow fortunes. Such as have a real Estate, so that if defeated in their
adventure abroad, they may have a retreating place at home, and such as will be
contented with their present loss to be benefactours to posterity. But if the
Prince himself be pleased not only to wink at them with his permission, but
also to smile on them with his encouragement, there is great hope of success:
for then he will grant them some immunities and privileges. Otherwise (Infants
must be swathed not laced) young Plantations will never grow, if straightened with
as hard Laws as settled Commonwealths.

Let the Planters be honest, 2
skillful, and painful people. For if they be such as leap thither from the
gallows, can any hope for cream out of scumme? when men send (as I may say)
Christian Savages to Heathen Savages. It was rather bitterly then falsely
spoken concerning one of our Western Plantations (consisting most of dissolute
people) That it was very like unto England, as being spit out of the very mouth
of it. Nor must the Planters be only honest but industrious also. What hope is
there that they who were drones at home will be bees abroad, especially if
far off from any to oversee them.

Let the place be naturally strong, 3
or at leastwise capable of fortification. For though at the first Planters are
sufficiently fenced with their own poverty, and though at the beginning their
worst enemies will spare them out of pity to themselves, their spoil not
countervailing the cost of spoiling them; yet when once they have gotten
wealth, they must get strength to defend it. Here know Islands are easily shut,
whereas Continents have their doors ever open, not to be bolted without great
charges. Besides, unadvised are those Planters, who having choice of ground,
have built their Towns in places of a servile nature, as being overawed and
constantly commanded by some hills about them.

4
Let it have a Self-sufficiency, or some Staple commodity to balance
traffic with other countries. As for a Self-sufficiencie few countries can
stand alone, and such as can for matter of want, will for wantonness lean on
others. Staple commodities are such as are never out of fashion, as belonging
to a man's Being, Being with comfort, Being with delight, the Luxury of our age
having made superfluities necessary. And such a place will thrive the better,
when men may say with Isaac, Genesis 26.22.
Rehoboth, Now the Lord has made room for us, when new Colonies come not in
with extirpation of the Natives; for this is rather a Supplanting then a
Planting.

5
Let the Planters labor to be loved and feared of the Natives. With whom let
them use all just bargaining, being as naked in their dealings with them as the
other in their going, keeping all covenants, performing all promises with them:
Let them embrace all occasions to convert them, knowing that each Convert is a
conquest; and it is more honor to overcome Paganism in one, then to conquer a
thousand Pagans. As for the inscription of a Deity in their hearts it need not
be new written, but only new scowred in them. I am confident that America
(though the youngest sister of the four) is now grown marriageable, and daily
hopes to get Christ to her husband, by the Preaching of the Gospel. This makes
me attentively to listen after some Protestant first fruits, in hope the
harvest will ripen afterward.

CHAP. 17. Of Contentment.
IT is one property which (they say) is required of those who seek for the
Philosophers stone, that they must not do it with any covetous desire to be
rich; for otherwise they shall never find it. But most true it is that
whosoever would have this jewel of Contentment (which turns all into Gold, yea
Want into Wealth) must come with minds divested of all ambitious and covetous
thoughts, else are they never likely to obtain it. We will describe Contentment
first negatively:

It is not a senseless stupidity what becomes of our outward estates. Maxim 1
God would have us take notice of all accidents which from him happen to us in
worldly matters. Had the Martyrs had the dead palsy before they went to the
stake to be burnt, their sufferings had not been so glorious.

It is not a word-braving, 2
or scorning of all wealth in discourse. Generally those who boast most of
Contentment have least of it. Their very boasting shows that they want
something, and basely beg it, namely Commendation. These in their language are
like unto kites in their flying, which mount in the air so scornfully, as if
they disdaind to stoop for the whole earth, fetching about many stately
circuits: but what is the Spirit these conjurers with so many circles intend to
raise? a poor chicken, or perchance a piece of carrion: And so the height of
the others proud boasting will humble it self for a little base gain.

But it is an humble and willing submitting our selves to Gods pleasure in all
conditions. 3
One observes (how truly I dispute not) that the French naturally have so
elegant and graceful a carriage, that what posture of body soever in their
salutations, or what fashion of attire soever they are pleased to take on them
it does so beseem them, that one would think nothing can become them better.
Thus Contentment makes men carry themselves gracefully in wealth, want, in
health, sickness, freedom, fetters, yea what condition soever God allots them.

4
It is no breach of Contentment for men to complain that their sufferings are
unjust, as offered by men: provided they allow them for just, as proceeding
from God, who uses wicked men's injustice to correct his children. But let us
take heed that we bite not so high at the handle of the rod, as to fasten on
his hand that holds it; our discontentments mounting so high as to quarrel
with God himself.

5
It is no breach of Contentment for men by lawful means to seek the removal
of their misery, and bettering of their estate. Thus men ought by industry to
endeavor the getting of more wealth, ever submitting themselves to Gods will.
A lazy hand is no argument of a Contented heart. Indeed he that is idle, and
follows after vain persons shall have enough, but how? Prove. 28.19. Shall
have poverty enough.

6
Gods Spirit is the best Schoolmaster to teach Contentment: A Schoolmaster who
can make good Scholars, and warrant the success as well as his endeavor. The
School of Sanctified afflictions is the best place to learn Contentment in: I
say, Sanctified; for naturally, like resty horses, we go the worse for the
beating, if God bless not afflictions unto us.

7
Contentment consists not in adding more fuel, but in taking away some fire:
not in multiplying of wealth, but in substracting men's desires. Worldly riches,
like nuts, tear many clothes in getting them, spoil many teeth in cracking
them, but fill no belly with eating them, obstructing only the stomach with
toughnes, and filling the guts with windiness: Yea our souls may sooner surfeit
then be satisfied with earthly things. He that at first thought ten thousand
pound too much for any one man, will afterward think ten millions too little
for himself.

Men create more discontents to themselves, 8
then ever happened to them from others. We read of our Savior that at the
burial of Lazarus, John 11.33. (...), He troubled himself, by his spirit
raising his own passions, though without any ataxie or sinful disturbance.
What was an act of power in him, is an act of weakness in other men: Man
disquieteth himself in vain, with many causeless and needless afflictions.

Pious meditations much advantage Contentment in adversity. 9
Such as these are, to consider first, that more are beneath us then above us;
secondly, many of Gods dear Saints have been in the same condition; thirdly, we
want rather superfluities then necessities; fourthly, the more we have the more
we must account for; fifthly, earthly blessings through man's corruption are
more prone to be abused then well used. In some fenny places in England, where
they are much troubled with gnats, they use to hang up dung in the midst of the
room for a bait for the gnats to fly to, and so catch them with a net provided
for the purpose. Thus the devil ensnareth the souls of many men by alluring
them with the muck and dung of this world, to undo them eternally; sixthly, we
must leave all earthly wealth at our death, and riches avail not in the day of
wrath. But as some use to fill up the stamp of light gold with dirt, thereby to
make it weigh the heavier; so it seems some men load their souls with thick
clay, to make them pass the better in Gods balance, but all to no purpose;
seventhly, the less we have, the less it will grieve us to leave this world;
lastly, it is the will of God, and therefore both for his glory and our good,
whereof we ought to be assured. I have heard how a Gentleman traveling in a
misty morning asked of a Shepherd (such men being generally skilled in the
Physiognomie of the Heavens) what weather it would be? It will be, said the
Shepherd, what weather shall please me: and being courteously requested to
express his meaning, Sir (says he) it shall be what weather pleases God, and
what weather pleases God, pleases me. Thus Contentment makes men to have
even what they think fitting themselves, because submitting to Gods will and
pleasure.

To conclude, A man ought to be like unto a cunning Actour, who if he be
enjoined to represent the person of some Prince or Nobleman, does it with a
grace and comeliness; if by and by he be commanded to lay that aside, and play
the Beggar, he does that as willingly and as well. But as it happened in a
Tragedy (to spare naming the Person and Place) that one being to act Theseus,
in Hercules Furens, coming out of Hell, could not for a long time be persuaded
to wear old sooty clothes proper to his part, but would needs come out of Hell
in a white Satin doublet: so we are generally loath, and it goes against flesh
and blood, to live in a low and poor estate, but would fain act in richer and
handsomer clothes, till Grace, with much ado, subdues our rebellious stomachs
to Gods will.

CHAP. 18. Of Books.
SOlomon says truly, Of making many Books there is no end, so insatiable is
the thirst of men therein: as also endless is the desire of many in buying and
reading them. But we come to our Rules.

It is a vanity to persuade the world one has much learning by getting a great
library. Maxim 1
As soon shall I believe every one is valiant that has a well furnished
armoury. I guess good housekeeping by the smoking, not the number of the
tunnels, as knowing that many of them (built merely for uniformity) are without
chimnies, and more without fires. Once a dunce, void of learning but full of
Books, flouted a library-lesse Scholar with these words, Salve Doctor sine
libris: But the next day the Scholar coming into this jeerers study crowded
with Books, Salvete libri (says he) sine Doctore.

Few Books well selected are best. 2
Yet as a certain Fool bought all the pictures that came out, because he might
have his choice; such is the vain humor of many men in gathering of Books: yet
when they have done all, they miss their end, it being in the Editions of
Authors as in the fashions of clothes, when a man thinks he has gotten the
latest and newest, presently another newer comes out.

Some Books are only cursorily to be tasted of. 3
Namely first Voluminous Books, the task of a man's life to read them over;
secondly, Auxiliary Books, only to be repaired to on occasions; thirdly, such
as are mere pieces of Formality, so that if you look on them you look through
them; and he that peeps through the casement of the Index sees as much as if he
were in the house. But the laziness of those cannot be excused who
perfunctorily pass over Authors of consequence, and only trade in their
Fables and Contents. These like City-Cheaters having gotten the names of all
country Gentlemen, make silly people believe they have long lived in those
places where they never were, and flourish with skill in those Authors they
never seriously studied.

4
The Genius of the Author is commonly discovered in the Dedicatory epistle.
Many place the purest grain in the mouth of the sack for chapmen to handle or
buy: And from the dedication one may probably guess at the Work, saving some
rare and peculiar exceptions. Thus when once a Gentleman admired how so pithy,
learned, and witty a dedication was matched to a flat, dull, foolish book; In
truth, said another, they may be well matched together, for I profess they are
nothing a kin.

5
Proportion an hours meditation to an hours reading of a staple Author. This
makes a man master of his learning, and dispirits the book into the Scholar.
The King of Sweden never Wards Animadver. of war sect. 17. lib. 2. cap. 5.
filed his men above six deep in one company, because he would not have them
lie in useless clusters in his Army, but so that every particular Soldier
might be drawn out into service. Books that stand thin on the shelves, yet so
as the owner of them can bring forth every one of them into use, are better
then far greater libraries.

6
Learning has gained most by those books by which the Printers have lost.
Arius Montanus in printing the Hebrew Bible (commonly called the Bible of the
King of Spain) much wasted himself, and was accused in the Court of Rome for
his good deed, and being cited thither, Thuanus obit. vir. Doct. Anno 1598.
Pro tantorum laborum praemio vix veniam impetravit. Likewise Christopher
Plantin by printing of his curious interlineary Bible in Anwerp, through the
unseasonable Idem in eodem oper. Anno 1589.
exactions of the Kings Officers, sunk and almost ruined his estate. And our
worthy English Knight, who set forth the golden-mouthed Father in a silver
print, was a looser by it.

7
Whereas foolish Pamphlets prove most beneificall to the Printers. When a
French Printer complained that he was utterly undone by Printing a solid
serious book of Rablais concerning Physic, Rablais to make him recompense made
that his jesting scurrilous Work which repaired the Printers loss with
advantage. Such books the world swarms too much with. When one had set out a
witless Pamphlet, writing Finis at the end thereof, another wittily wrote
beneath it, -- Nay there thou li'st, my friend,
In writing foolish books there is no end.


And surely such scurrilous scandalous papers do more then conceivable
mischief. First their lusciousnesse puts many palats out of taste, that they
can never after relish any solid and wholesome Writers: secondly, they cast
dirt on the faces of many innocent persons, which dried on by continuance of
time can never after be washed off: thirdly, the Pamphlets of this age may
pass for Records with the next (because publicly uncontrolled) and what we
laugh at, our children may believe: fourthly, grant the things true they jeer
at, yet this music is unlawful in any Christian Church, to play upon the
sins and miseries of others, the fitter object of the Elegies then the Satyrs
of all truly religious.

But what do I speaking against multiplicity of books in this age, who
trespass in this nature my self? What was a Erasmus in praefat. in 3. s^riem
4. Tomi Hieron. page 408.
learned man's complement may serve for my confession and conclusion, Multi mei
similes hoc morbo laborant, ut cum scribere nesciant tamen a scribendo
temperare non possint.

CHAP. 19. Of Time-serving.
THere be four kinds of Time-serving: first, out of Christian discretion,
which is commendable; second, out of humane infirmity, which is more
pardonable; third, and fourth, out of ignorance, or affection, both which are
damnable: of them in order.

Maxim 1
He is a good Time-server that complyes his manners to the several ages of
this life: pleasant in youth, without wantonness; grave in old age without
frowardness. Frost is as proper for winter, as flowers for spring. Gravity
becomes the ancient; and a green Christmas is neither handsome nor healthful.

2
He is a good Time-server that finds out the fittest opportunity for every
action. God has made a time for every thing under the sun, save only for
that, which we do at all times, to wit Sin.

3
He is good Time-server that improves the present for Gods glory, and his own
salvation. Of all the extent of time. only the instant is that which we can
call ours.

4
He is a good Time-server that is pliant to the times in matters of mere
indifferency. Too blame are they whose minds may seem to be made of one entire
bone without any joints: they cannot bend at all, but stand as stiffly in
things of pure indifferency, as in matters of absolute necessity.

5
He is a good Time-server that in time of persecution neither betrays Gods
cause, nor his own safety. And this he may do, 1 By lying hid both in his
person and practice: though he will do no evil he will forbear the public
doing of some good. He has as good cheer in his heart, though he keeps not
open house, and will not publicly broch his Religion, till the palate of the
times be better in taste to relish it. The Annos. 5. v. 13.
Prudent shall keep silence in that time, for it is an evil time. Though
according to S. Peter's command we are to give a 1. Pet. 3.15.
reason of our hope to every one that asks; namely, that asks for his
instruction, but not for our destruction, especially if wanting lawful
Authority to examine us. Matthew. 10.18.
Ye shall be brought says Christ (no need have they therefore to run) before
Princes for my sake. 2 By flying away: if there be no absolute necessity of his
staying, no scandal given by his flight; if he wants strength to stay it out
till death; and lastly, if God opens a fair way for his departure: otherwise,
if God bolts the doors and windows against him, he is not to creep out at the
top of the chimney, and to make his escape by unwarrantable courses. If all
should fly, Truth would want champions for the present; if none should fly,
Truth might want champions for the future. We come now to Time-servers out of
infirmity.


Heart of oak has sometimes warped a little in the scorching heat of
persecution. 6
Their want of true courage herein cannot be excused. Yet many censure them for
surrendering up their forts after a long siege, who would have yielded up their
own at the first summons. Oh, there is more required to make one valiant, then
to call Cranmer or Jewel Coward, as if the fire in Smithfield had been no
hotter, then what is painted in the Book of Martyrs.

Yet afterward they have come into their former straightness and stiffnesse. 7
The troops which at first rather wheeld about then ran away have come in
seasonable at last. Yea their constant blushing for shame of their former
cowardlinesse has made their souls ever after look more modest and beautiful.
Thus Cranmer (who subscribed to Popery) grew valiant afterward, and thrust his
right hand which subscribed first into fire, so that that hand dyed (as it
were) a malefactor and all the rest of his body dyed a martyr.

8
Some have served the times out of mere Ignorance. Gaping for company, as
others gaped before them, Pater noster, or, Our Father. I could both sigh and
smile at the witty* simplicity of a poor old woman who had lived in the days
of Queen Marie, and Queen Elizabeth, and said her prayers daily both in Latin
and English, and Let God, said she, take to himself which he likes best.

9
But worst are those who serve the times out of mere Affectation. Doing as the
times do, not because the times do as they should do, but merely for sinister
respects, to ingratiate themselves. We read of an Earl of Lord Bacon in Henry
seventh, p. 211.
Oxford fined by King Henry the seventh fifteen thousand marks for having too
many Retainers. But how many Retainers has Time had in all ages? and Servants
in all offices? yea and Chaplains too?

10
It is a very difficult thing to serve the times; they change so frequently, so
suddenly, and sometimes so violently from one extreme to another. The times
under Dioclesian were Pagan; under Constantine, Christian; under Constantius,
Arian; under Julian, Apostate; under Jovian, Christian again, and all within
the age of man, the term of seventie years. And would it not have wrench'd and
spraind his soul with short turning, who in all these should have been of the
Religion for the time being?

11
Time-servers are oftentimes left in the lurch. If they do not only give their
word for the times in their constant discourses, but also give their bands for
them, and write in their defense. Such, when the times turn afterward to
another extreme, are left in the briers, and come off very hardly from the bill
of their hands; If they turn again with the times none will trust them; for who
will make a staff of an osier?

12
Miserable will be the condition of such Time-servers when their Master is
taken from them. When as the Angel swore Rev. 10.6. that Time shall be no
longer. Therefore is it best serving of him who is eternity, a Master that can
ever protect us.

To conclude, he that intends to meet with one in a great Fair, and knows not
where he is, may sooner find him by standing still in some principal place
there, then by traversing it up and down. Take thy stand on some good ground in
Religion, and keep thy station in a fixed posture, never hunting after the
times to follow them, and an hundred to one, they will come to thee once in thy
lifetime.

CHAP. 20. Of Moderation.
MOderation is Bishop Hall of Christian Moderation, page 6.
the silken string running through the pearl-chain of all virtues. It appears
both in Practice, and Judgment: we will insist on the latter, and describe it
first negatively:

Moderation is not an halting betwixt two opinions, Maxim 1
when the through-believing of one of them is necessary to salvation: no pity
is to be shown to such voluntary cripples. We read (Acts 27.12.) of an Haven
in Crete which lay toward the South-West, and toward the North-West: strange,
that it could have part of two opposite points, North and South, sure, it must
be very winding. And thus some men's souls are in such intricate postures, they
lay toward the Papists, and toward the Protestants; such we count not of a
moderate judgment, but of an immoderate unsettlednesse.

Nor is it a lukewarmnesse in those things wherein Gods glory is concernd. 2
Herein it is a true Rule, Augustine. contra Adamant. cap. 13.
Non amat qui non zelat. And they that are thus lukewarm here shall be too hot
hereafter in that oven wherein Dow-bak'd cakes shall be burnt.

But it is a mixture of discretion and charity in ones judgment. 3
Discretion puts a difference betwixt things absolutely necessary to salvation
to be done and believed, and those which are of a second sort and lower form,
wherein more liberty and latitude is allowed. In maintaining whereof, the
stiffnesse of the judgment is abated, and suppled with charity toward his
neighbor. The lukewarm man eyes only his own ends, and particular profit; the
moderate man aims at the good of others, and unity of the Church.

4
Yet such moderate men are commonly crushed betwixt the extreme parties on both
sides. But what said Ignatius? Irenaeus lib. 5.
I am Christ's wheat, and must be ground with the teeth of beasts, that I may be
made Gods pure manchet. Saints are born to suffer, and must take it patiently.
Besides, in this world generally they get the least preferment; it faring with
them as with the guest that sat in the midst of the table, who could reach to
neither mess, above or beneath him: Esuriunt Medii, Fines been sunt saturati;
Dixerunt stulti, Medium tenuere beati.
Both ends of the table furnished are with meat,
Whilst they in middle nothing have to eat.
They were none of the wisest well I wist,
Who made bliss in the middle to consist.


Yet these temporal inconveniences of moderation are abundantly recompensed
with other better benefits: for 1 A well informed judgment in it self is a
preferment. Potamon began a sect of Philosophers called Diog. Laert in fine
Prooemii.
(...), who wholly adhered to no former sect, but chose out of all of them what
they thought best. Surely such Divines, who in unimporting controversies
extract the probablest opinions from all Professions, are best at ease in their
minds. 2 As the moderate man's temporal hopes are not great so his fears are
the less. He fears not to have the splinters of his party (when it breaks)
fly into his eyes, or to be buried under the ruins of his side if suppressed.
He never pinned his religion on any man's sleeve, no, not on the Arm of flesh,
and therefore is free from all dangerous engagements. 3 His conscience is clear
from raising Schisms in the Church. The Turks did use to wonder much at our
English men for Bidulph. in his travel to Jerusalem, page 98.
pinking or cutting their clothes, counting them little better then mad for
their pains to make holes in whole cloth, which time of it self would tear too
soon. But grant men may do with their own garments, as their fancy advises
them: yet woe be to such who willingly cut and rend the seamlesse Coat of
Christ with dissentions. 4 His religion is more constant and durable; being
here, in via, in his way to Heaven, and jogging on a good Travelers pace he
overtakes and out-goes many violent men, whose over-hot ill-grounded Zeal was
quickly tired. 5 In matters of moment indeed none are more Zealous. He
thriftily treasured up his spirits for that time, who if he had formerly rent
his lungs for every trifle, he would have wanted breath in points of
importance. 6 Once in an age the moderate man is in fashion, Each extreme
courts him, to make them friends; and surely he has a great advantage to be a
Peacemaker betwixt opposite parties. Now whilst, as we have said, moderate
men are constant to themselves,


Violent men reel from one extremity to another. Who would think that the East
and West Indies were so near together, whose names speak them at diametricall
opposition? And yet their extremities are either the same Continent, or parted
with a very narrow Sea. As the world is round, so we may observe a circulation
in opinions, and Violent men turn often round in their tenets.

6
Pride is the greatest enemy to Moderation. This makes men stickle for their
opinions, to make them fundamental: Proud men having deeply studied some
additionall point in Divinity, will strive to make the same necessary to
salvation, to enhanse the value of their own worth and pains; and it must be
fundamental in religion, because it is fundamental to their reputation. Yea
as love does descend, and men dote most on their Grandchildren, so these are
indulgent to the deductions of their deductions, and consequentiall inferences
to the seventh generation, making them all of the foundation, though scarce of
the building of religion. Irenaeus cap. 2.3.

Tertull. de virgin. velan. Hilarious ad Constant. August.

Taur.

Maxim.

Sermon. de symbolo.

August. Sermon. 2. and 1081. De Tempore.


Ancient Fathers made the Creed symbolum, the shot and total sum of Faith.
Since which how many arrearages, and after-reckonings have men brought us in?
to which if we will not pay our belief, our souls must be arrested without bail
upon pain of damnation. Next to Pride popular Applause is the greatest foe
Moderation has, and sure they who sail with that wind have their own vain
glory for their Haven.

To close up all, Let men on Gods blessing soundly, yet wisely, whip and lash
Lukewarmnesse and Time-serving, their thongs will never fly in the face of
true Moderation, to do it any harm; for however men may undervalue it, that
Ambros. de poeniten. contra Novat. lib. 1. cap. 1
Father spoke most truly, Si virtutum finis ille sit maximus, qui plurimorum
spectat profectum, Moderatio prope omnium pulcherrima est.

CHAP. 21. Of Gravity.
GRavity is the ballast of the soul, which keeps the mind steady. It is either
true, or counterfeit.

Natural dullness, Maxim 1
and heaviness of temper, is sometimes mistaken for true Gravity. In such men
in whose constitutions one of the tetrarch Elements fire may seem to be
omitted. These sometimes not only cover their defects, but get praise: Saepe
latet vitium proximitate boni.


They do wisely to counterfeit a reservednesse, and to keep their chests
always locked, not for fear any should steal treasure thence, but lest some
should look in, and see that there is nothing within them. But they who are
born Eunuchs deserve no such great commendation for their chastity. Wonder not
so much that such men are grave, but wonder at them if they be not grave.

Affected Gravity passes often for that which is true: 2
I mean with dull eyes, for in it self nothing is more ridiculous. When one
shall use the preface of a mile, to bring in a furlong of matter, set his face
and speech in a frame, and to make men believe it is some precious liquour,
their words come out drop by drop: Such men's visards do sometimes fall from
them, not without the laughter of the beholders. One was called Gravity for his
affected solemness, who afterward being caught in a light prank was ever
after to the day of his death called Gravity-levity.

True Gravity expresses it self in Gate, 3
Gesture, Apparel, and Speech. Vox Ambros. de offic. lib. 1. cap. 18.
quaedam est animi, corporis motus. As for Speech, Gravity enjoins it, 1 Not to
be over much. In Prove 10 19.
the multitude of words there wants not sin. For of necessity many of them
must be idle, whose best commendation is that they are good for nothing.
Besides, Greg moral. l^b. 7. cap. 17.
Dum otiosa verba cavere negligimus, ad noxia pervenimus. And great talkers
discharge too thick to take always true aim; besides, it is odious in a
company. A man full of words, who took himself to be a Grand wit, made his brag
that he was the leader of the discourse in what company soever he came, and
None, said he, dare speak in my presence, if I hold my peace. No wonder,
answered one, for they are all struck dumb at the miracle of your silence. 2
To be wise and discreet, Colossians 4.6. Let your speech be always with grace,
seasoned with salt. Always, not only sometimes in the company of godly men.
Fox Martyrs, page 1079.
Tindals being in the room hindered a juggler that he could not play his feats:
(A Saints presence stops the devils elbow-room to do his tricks) and so some
wicked men are awed into good discourse, whilst pious people are present. But
it must be always seasoned with salt, which is the primum vivens and ultimum
moriens at a feast, first brought, and last taken away, and set in the midst as
most necessary thereunto. With salt, that is with wisdom and discretion, non
salibus, sed sale; nor yet with smarting jeeres, like those whose discourse is
fire-salt, speaking constant satyrs to the disgrace of others.


4
That may be done privately without breach of Gravity, which may not be done
publicly. As when a father makes himself his child's rattle, sporting with him
till the father has devoured the wiseman in him.

Equitans in arundine longa.
In stead of stately steed,
Riding upon a reed.
Making play unto him, that one would think he killed his own discretion, to
bring his child asleep. Such cases are no trespass on Gravity, and married men
may claim their privilege, to be judged by their Peers, and may herein appeal
from the censuring verdict of batchelours.

Nature in men is sometimes unjustly taxed for a trespass against Gravity. 5
Some have active spirits, yea their ordinary pace is a race. Others have so
scornful a carriage, that he who sees them once may think them to be all
pride, whilst he that sees them often knows them to have none. Others have
perchance a misbeseeming garb in gesture which they cannot amend; that fork
needing strong tines wherewith one must thrust away nature. A fourth sort are
of a merry cheerful disposition; and God forbid all such should be condemned
for lightness. O let not any envious eye disinherit men of that which is their
Eccles 7.18.
Portion in this life, comfortably to enjoy the blessings thereof. Yet Gravity
must prune though not root out our mirth.

Gracious deportment may sometimes unjustly be accused of lightness. 6
Had one seen David 2. Sam 6.16.
dancing before the Ark, 1. Kings 18.42.
Eliah in his praying-posture when he put his head betwixt his legs, perchance
he might have condemned them of unfitting behavior. Had he seen John 20.14.
Peter and John posting to Christ's grave, Acts. 12.14
Rhodia running into the house, he would have thought they had left their
Gravity behind them. But let none blame them for their speed until he knows
what were their spurs, and what were the motives that urged them to make such
haste. These their actions were the true conclusions, following from some
inward premises in their own souls; and that may be a syllogism in grace,
which appears a solecisme in manners.

In some persons Gravity is most necessary. 7
Viz. in Magistrates and Ministers. One Scaliger de subtle. page 18.
Palevizine an Italian Gentleman, and kinsman to Scaliger, had in one night all
his hair changed from black to gray. Such an alteration ought there to be in
the heads of every one that enters into Holy Orders, or Public Office,
metamorphos'd from all lightness to Gravity.

8
God alone is the giver of true Gravity. No man wants so much of any grace as
he has to spare; and a constant impression of Gods omnipresence is an
excellent way to fix men's souls. Bishop Andrews ever placed the picture of Vid.
in the funeral sermon. on him, page 18.
Mulcaster his Schoolmaster over the door of his study (whereas in all the
rest of his house you should scarce see a picture) as to be his Tutour and
Supervisour. Let us constantly apprehend Gods being in presence, and this will
fright us into stayed behavior.

CHAP. 22. Of Marriage.
SOme men have too much decried Marriage, as if she the mother were scarce
worthy to wait on Virginity her daughter, and as if it were an advancement for
Marriage to be preferred before fornication, and praise enough for her to be
adjudged lawful. Give this holy estate her due, and then we shall find,

Maxim 1
Though batchelours be the strongest stakes, married men are the best binders
in the hedge of the Commonwealth. It Is the Policy of the Londoners when they
send a ship into the Levant or Mediterranean sea, to make every mariner
therein a merchant, each seaman adventuring somewhat of his own, which will
make him more wary to avoid, and more valiant to undergo dangers. Thus married
men, especially if having posterity, are the deeper sharers in that state
wherein they live, which engages their affections to the greater loyalty.

2
It is the worst clandestine marriage when God is not invited to it. Wherefore
beforehand beg his gracious assistance. Marriage shall prove no lottery to
thee, when the hand of providence chooses for thee, who, if drawing a blank,
can turn it into a prize by sanctifying a bad wife unto thee.

Deceive not thy self by overexpecting happiness in the married estate. 3
Look not therein for contentment greater then God will give, or a creature in
this world can receive, namely to be free from all inconveniences. Marriage is
not like the hill Olympus, (...), wholly clear, without clouds; yea expect both
wind and storms sometimes, which when blown over, the air is the clearer, and
wholsomer for it. Make account of certain cares and troubles which will attend
thee. Remember the nightingales which sing only some months in the spring,
but commonly are silent when they have hatched their eggs, as if their mirth
were turned into care for their young ones. Yet all the molestations of
Marriage are abundantly recompensed with other comforts which God bestows on
them, who make a wise choice of a wife, and observe the following rules.

Let Grace and Goodness be the principal loadstone of thy affections. 4
For love which has ends will have an end, whereas that which is founded in
true virtue will always continue. Some hold it unhappy to be married with a
diamond ring, perchance (if there be so much reason in their folly) because the
diamond hinders the roundnesse of the ring, ending the infiniteness thereof,
and seems to presage some termination in their love, which ought ever to
endure, and so it will, when it is founded in religion.

Neither choose all, 5
nor not at all for Beauty. A cried-up Beauty makes more for her own praise
then her husbands profit. They tell us of a floting Island in Scotland: but sure
no wise pilot will cast anchor there, lest the land swim away with his ship.
So are they served (and justly enough) who only fasten their love on fading
Beauty, and both fail together.

6
Let there be no great disproportion in age. They that marry ancient people
merely in expectation to bury them, hang themselves in hope that one will come
and cut the halter. Nor is Gods ordinance but man's abusing thereof taxed in
this homely expression, used by the Apostle himself. If Virginity enforced
above the parties power be (...), 1. Cor. 7.35.
termed by S. Paul 1. Cor. 7.35. a snare or halter, marriage is no better when
against ones will, for private respects.

7
Let wealth in its due distance be regarded. There be two towns in the land of
Liege called Bovins and Dinant, the inhabitants whereof bear almost an
incredible hatred one to another, and yet notwithstanding their children
usually marry together; and the Phil. Com. lib. 2. cap. 1.
reason is, because there is none other good town, or wealthy place near them.
Thus parents for a little pelf often marry their children to those whose
persons they hate; and thus union betwixt families is not made, but the breach
rather widened the more.

This shall serve for a Conclusion. A Batchelour was saying, Next to no wife, a
good wife is best. Nay, said a Gentlewoman, next to a good wife, no wife is the
best. I wish to all married people the outward happiness which Thuan. de obit.
vir doct. in eod. Anno. page 385.
Anno 1605 happened to a couple in the city of Delph in Holland, living most
lovingly together seventy five years in wedlock, till the man being one hundred
and three, the woman ninety nine years of age, died within three hours each of
other, and were buried in the same grave.

CHAP. 23. Of Fame.
FAme is the echo of actions, resounding them to the world, save that the echo
repeats only the last part, but Fame relates all and often more then all.

Fame sometimes has created something of nothing. Maxim 1
She has made whole countries more then ever Nature did, especially near the
Poles, and then has peopled them likewise with inhabitants of her own
invention, Pygmies, Giants, and Amazons: Yea Fame is sometimes like unto a kind
of Mushrom, which In miraculi^ vel max^mum est (...) and vivere sine ulla
^adice, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 19. cap. 2.
Pliny recounts to be the greatest miracle in nature, because growing and
having no root, as Fame no ground of her reports.

Fame often makes a great deal of a little. 2
Absalom killed one of David's sons, and 2. Sam. 13.30.
Fame killed all the rest; and generally she magnifies and multiplies matters.
Loud was that lie which that bell told hanging in a clock-house at Westminster,
and usually rung at the Coronation and Funerals of Princes, having this
inscription about it, King Edward made me
thirty thousand and three,
Take me down and weigh me
and more shall you find me.


But when this bell was taken down at the doomsday of Abbeys, this and two more
were found not to weigh Stowes survey of London, page 528.
twenty thousand. Many relations of Fame are found to shrink accordingly.

Some Fames are most difficult to trace home to their form: 3
and those who have sought to track them, have gone rather in a circle then
forward, and oftentimes through the doubling of reports have returned back
again where they began. Fame being a bastard or filia populi, it is very hard to
find her father, and ofttimes she has rather all then any for her first
Authors.

4
Politicians sometimes raise Fames on purpose. As that such things are done
already, which they mean to do afterward. By the light of those false fires
they see into men's hearts, and these false rumors are true scouts to discover
men's dispositions. Besides, the deed (though strange in it self) is done
afterward with the less noise, men having vented their wonder beforehand, and
the strangeness of the action is abated, because formerly made stale in
report. But if the rumor startles men extremely, and draws with it dangerous
consequences, then they can presently confute it, let their intentions fall and
prosecute it no further.

5
The Papal side of all Fame-merchants drive the most gainful trade, as that
worthy S. Edward Sandys view of the West Religions, page 100.
Knight has given us an exact survey thereof. But long before them, strange
was that plot of Stratocles, who gave it out that he had gotten a victory, and
the constant report thereof continued three days, and then was confuted; and
Stratocles being charged with abusing his people with a lie, Why (said
Plutarchs (...).
he) are ye angry with me for making you pass three days in mirth and jollity
more then otherwise you should?

6
Incredible is the swiftness of Fame in carrying reports. First she creeps
through a village, then she goes through a town, then she runs through a city,
then she flies through a country, still the farther the faster. Yea Christ who
made the dumb speak, made not tell-tale Fame silent, though charging those he
cured to hold their peace, Luke 5.15.
but so much the more went there a Fame abroad of him. Yea some things have
been reported soon as ever they were done at impossible distance. The overthrow
of Perseus was brought out of Macedon to Rome in Livy. lib. 45. juxta princip.
four days. And in Domitians time a report was brought two thousand five
hundred miles in one day. In which accidents, 1 Fame takes post on some other
advantage. Thus the overthrow of the Sabines was known at Rome prius pene quam
nunciari possit, by the means of the Livy. lib. 1.
arms of the Sabines drowned in the river of Tiber, and carried down by the
tide to Rome. And thus Anno Famian. Strada de Bello Belgic. l^b. 5. page 456.
1568 the overthrow which the Spaniards gave the Dutch at the river of Ems was
known at Grunning before any horseman could reach thither, by the multitude of
the Dutch caps which the river brought down into the city. But these
conveiances are but slugs to make such miraculous speed: wherefore sometimes
reports are carried, 2 By the ministration of Spirits. The devils are well at
leisure to play such pranks, and may do it in a frolic. And yet they would
scarce be the carriers except they were well paid for the portage, getting
some profit thereby (doing of mischief is all the profit they are capable of)
and do harm to some by the suddenness of those reports. Or else 3 The Fame is
antedated and raised before the fact, being related at guess before 'twas
acted. Thus some have been causlessely commended for early rising in the
morning, who indeed came to their journeys end over night. If such foremade
reports prove true, they are admired and registered; if false, neglected and
forgotten: as those only which escaped shipwreck hung up votivas tabulas,
tablets with their names in those Haven-towns where they came ashore. But as
for those who are drowned, their memorialls are drowned with them.


General reports are seldom false. 7
Vox populi vox Dei. A body of that greatness has an eye of like clearness,
and it is impossible that a wanderer with a counterfeit pass should pass
undiscovered.

A fond Fame is best confuted by neglecting it. 8
By Fond understand such a report as is rather ridiculous then dangerous if
believed. It is not worth the making a Schism betwixt News-mongers to set up
an antifame against it. Yea seriously and studiously to endeavor to confute
it, will grace the rumor too much, and give suspicion that indeed there is
some reality in it. What madness were it to plant a piece of ordinance to beat
down an aspen leaf, which having always the palsy, will at last fall down of
it self. And Fame has much of the scold in her; the best way to silence her is
to be silent, and then at last she will be out of breath with blowing her own
trumpet.

9
Fame sometimes reports things less then they are. Pardon her for offending
herein, she is guilty so seldom. For one kingdom of Scotland, which (they
say) Geographers describe an hundred miles too short, most Northern countries
are made too large. Fame generally overdoes, underdoes but in some particulars.
The Italian proverb has it, There is less honesty, wisdom, and money in men
then is counted on: yet sometimes a close churl, who locks his coffers so fast
Fame could never peep into them, dies richer then he was reported when alive.
None could come near to feel his estate; it might therefore cut fatter in his
purse, then was expected. But Fame falls most short in those Transcendents,
which are above her Predicaments; as in 1 Kings. 10.7.
Solomon's wisdom: And behold one half was not told me: thy wisdom and
prosperity exceeds the Fame that I heard. But chiefly in fore-reporting the
Happiness in heaven, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man to conceive.

CHAP. 24. Of the Antiquity of Churches and Necessity of them.
WE will consider their Antiquity amongst the Jews, Heathen, and Christians.
Now Temples amongst the Jews were more or less ancient as the acception of the
word is straiter or larger.

Take Temple for a covered standing structure, Maxim 1
and the Jews had none till the time of Solomon, which was from the beginning
of the V^d. Chron. H^l^^^i.
world about two thousand nine hundred thirty two years: till then they had
neither leave nor liberty to build a Temple. For the Patriarchs, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, lived in Pilgrimage; their posterity in Egypt in persecution;
their children in the Wilderness in constant traveling; their Successors in
Canaan in continual warrefare, till the days of Solomon.

Take Templum for tectum Isidori^s lib. 15. cap 14.
amplum, 2
a large place covered to serve God therein, and the Tabernacle was a moveable
Temple, built by Moses in the wilderness about the year of the world two
thousand four hundred fifty five. Yea we find Gods Spirit styling this
Tabernacle a Temple, 1. Sam. 1.9. Ely the Priest sat upon a seat by a pillar
of the Temple. 1. Sam. 3.3. Before the lamp of the Lord went out in the Temple.
Such a portable Church Constantine Socrates lib. 1. cap. 14. and S^zomen. lib.
1. cap. 8.
had carried about with him when he went to war.

Gods children had places with Altars to serve God in before they had any
Temples. 3
Such Altars seem as ancient as Sacrifices, both which are twins; and in
Relatives find one and find both. Indeed the first Altar we read of in
Scripture is that which Noah built after the Flood: But hear what a (...). in
G^nes. page 2^^.
Learned man says thereof, Non tamen existimandum toto illo tempore, quo ante
diluvium pii homines Deo sacrificarunt Altarium usum fuisse incognitum. Potius
id credendum, Noachum sequutum fuisse exemplum eorum, qui eum praecesserant,
imo morem inolitum.

4
The Jews besides the Temple had many other Synagogues, serving instead of
Chappells of ease to the mother Church at Jerusalem. In the new Testament (the
Temple yet standing) it is plain that Christ often graced such Synagogues with
his presence and preaching; and it is H^spinian de orig. Temp c. 4.
probable they were in use ever since Josuahs time, when the land was first
inhabited with Israelites, and that the Levites dispersed all over the land did
teach the people therein: Otherwise Palestine was a great Parish, and some
therein had an hundred miles to Church; besides, peoples souls were poorly fed
having but three meals in a year, being but thrice to appear at Jerusalem.

5
Many Heathen Temples were ancienter then that of Solomon's. Amongst which Pagan
Temples there is much justling for precedence, though some think that of Apis
in Egypt shows the best evidence for her seniority, wherein was worshipped an
Ox, of whose herd (not to say breed) was the Calf which the Israelites
worshipped in the wilderness, being made in imitation thereof. But the Heathen
had this gross conceit that their Gods were affixt to their Statues, as their
Statues were confined in their Temples: So that in effect they did not so much
build Temples for their Gods, as thereby lay Nets to catch them in, inviting
them thither as into a Palace, and then keeping them there as in a Prison.

6
Most civilized Heathen Nations had Temples for their Gods. I say, Most, for
the Persians are said to have none at all. Perchance it was because they
chiefly worshipped the Sun, and then according to the general opinion of
fixing Deities to their Temples, it was in vain to erect any structure therein
to restrain and keep his Ubiquitary beams. And yet that the Persians were
wholly Temple-lesse will hardly be believed, seeing the Assyrians on this side
( 2 Kings 19.37.
Senacherib was killed worshipping in the house of Nisroch his God) and the
Indians on the other side of them had their Temples erected, as some will have
it, by Bacchus their Dionysius: yea we find a Temple in Persia dedicated to 2.
Maccabees 1.13. vide ^tiam. 1. Maccab. 6.2.
Nanea in the time of Antiochus, and though it may be pretended that the
influence of the Grecian Empire on the Persians had then spiced them with a
smack of Grecisme, yet Nanea will scarce be proved any Grecian Deity: not to
say any thing of the Temple of Bell. Civilized: for as for the Scythian
wandering Nomades, Temples sorted not with their condition, as wanting both
civility and settlednesse: and who can expect Churches from them, who had no
houses for themselves? Lastly I say, Nation: for the Stoics only, a conceited
sect, forbad any building of Temples, either out of derision of the common
conceit that Deities were kept in durance in their Temples; or else out of
humor, because they counted the general practice of other men a just ground
for their contrary opinion. And now we come to the Antiquity of Christian
Churches, and crave leave of the Reader, that we may for a while dissolve our
continued discourse into a dialogue.

A. I am much perplexed to find the beginning of Christian Churches in the
Scripture. There I find the Saints meeting in the house of Marie the mother of
Mark; in the School of Tyrannus; in an upper Chamber; but can see no foundation
of a Church, I mean of a place and structure separated and set apart solely for
Divine Service.


B. That the Saints had afterward Churches in your sense is plain: 1. Cor.
11.22. Have ye not Houses to eat and drink in, or despise ye the Church of God,
and shame them that have not? Here the opposition is a good exposition of the
Apostles meaning, and the Antithesis betwixt Houses and Church speaks them both
to be local; so that S. Paul thought their material Church despised, that is
abused and unreverenc'd, by their lay-meetings of Love Feasts therein.


A. By your favor, Sr, the Apostle by Church means there the assembly or
society of Gods servants, as appears by what follows, or despise ye the
Church of God, and shame them that have not? Them, and not that, not speaking
of the Place but Persons: The latter words of the Apostle comment on the
former, showing how to shame those who had not (that is, to neglect and upbraid
the poor) is to despise the Church of God.


B. Pardon me Sr: for the Apostle therein accuses the Corinthians of a second
fault. Imprimis he charge them for despising Gods material Church; Item, for
shaming their poor brethren in their Love Feasts. The particle And shows the
addition of a new charge, but no expounding or amplifying of the former. But,
Sr, suspending our judgments herein, let us descend to the Primitive times
before Constantine, we shall there find Churches without any contradiction.


A. Not so neither: Herein also the trumpet of Antiquity gives a very
uncertain sound: Indeed we have but little left of the story of those times
wherein Christian books were as much persecuted as men, and but a few
Counfessour-records escaping martyrdom are come to our hands. Yea God may seem
to have permitted the suppression of primitive History, lest men should be too
studious in reading, and observant in practicing the customs of that age, even
to the neglecting and undervaluing of his written Word.


B. Yet how slenderly soever those Primitive times are storied, there is enough
in them to prove the Antiquity of Churches. I will not instance on the decrees
of Evaristus, Hyginus, and other Popes in the first three hundred years about
the consecrating of Churches, because their authority is suspected as
antedated; and none are bound to believe that the Gibeonites came from so far a
Country as their moldy bread and clouted shoes did pretend. Churches are
plainly to be found in Tertullian, two hundred years after Christ; and Eusebius
Hist. Eccles. lib. 8. c. 1, and 2.
witnesses that before the time of Dioclesian the Christians had Churches,
which the Tyrant caused to be destroyed.


A. But Origin. lib. 4. contra ^e^^um, Objicit nobis Cel^us quod non habea^^us
Imagines aut Aras au^ Templa. Idem lib. 8. contra Celsum, Celsus and Aras and
Simulac^a and Delubra a^t ^os diffugere quo minus fundentur. Arnobius lib. 4
Contra Genesis Accusatis nos quod nec Templa habeamus, nec I^agines nec Aras.
Minut. ^elix page 73. Putatis autem nos occultate quod ^olamus si Delubra et
Aras non habemus. Lactantius, Quid sibi Templa, quid Arae volunt, quid denique
ipsa Simulacra, etc.
Origin, Minutius Felix, Arnobius, and Lactantius, being pressed by the Heathen
that Christians had no Churches, answered by way of confession, yielding that
they had none. This is the difficulty perplexeth me. It was a bloody speech of
Abner, Let the young men rise up and play before us: But worse is their cruelty
who make sport at the falling out of the old men, when the reverend brows of
Antiquity knock one against another, and Fathers thus extremely differ in
matters of fact.


B. Why, Sr? A charitable distinction may reconcile them: if by Churches,
stately magnificent Fabrics be meant, in that acception the Christians had no
Churches; but small Oratories and Prayer-places they then had, though little,
low and dark, being so fearful of persecution they were jealous the
Sunne-beams should behold them: and indeed stately Churches had but given a
fairer aim to their Enemies malice to hit them. Such an homely place learned Sr
Henry Spelman De Conciliis Brittan. page 11.
presents us with, which was first founded at Glastenbury, thatched and
wattled: And let not our Churches now grown men look with a scornful eye on
their own picture, when babes in their swaddling clothes. And no wonder if Gods
House Erubuit domino cultior esse suo,
The Church did blush more glory for to have


Then had her Lord. He begged, should she be brave? Christ himself being then
cold, and hungry, and naked in his afflicted members. Such a mean Oratory
Tertullian calls Adversus Gentes, cap. 3.9.
Triclimum Christianorum, the Parlour or Three-bed-room of the Christians.


A. But it seems not to consist with Christian ingenuity for the forenamed
Fathers absolutely to deny their having of Churches, because they had only
poor ones.


B. Take then another Answer, namely in denying they had no Temples, they meant
it in the same notion wherein they were interrogated, to wit, they had no
Temples like the Pagans for Heathen Gods, no claustra Numinum, wherein the
Deity they served was imprisoned. Or may we not say that in that age the
Christians had no Churches generally, though they might have them in some
places? the elevation of their happiness being varied according to several
climates: And Christendom then being of so large an extent, it might be stormy
with persecution in one country, and fair weather in another. We come now to
the Necessity.


7
There is no absolute necessity that Christians should have Churches. No
necessity at all in respect of God, no absolute necessity in respect of men,
when persecution hinders the erecting of them: In such a case any place is made
a Church for the time being, as any private house where the King and his
Retinue meet is presently made the Court.

Christians have no direct precept to build Churches under the Gospel. 8
I say direct: For the Law of God, which commands a public Sanctification of a
Sabbath, must needs, by Ut (...) fid^l^^us pr^^^^ D^^s verbo ^uo (...) sic and
Te^pla publica ipsis p^^agendis destinata este opor^^^, Cal^in. instit. lib. 3.
cap. 20. number. 30.
way of necessary consequence, imply a set, known, and public Place. Besides,
Gods command to Moses and Solomon to build a Temple in a manner obliges us to
build Churches. In which command observe the body and the soul thereof. The
body thereof was Ceremonial and mortal, yea dyed, and is buried in our
Saviors grave: The soul thereof is Moral and eternal, as founded in Nature,
and is always to endure. Thus S. Paul finds a constant bank for Ministers
Maintenance locked up in a Ceremonial Law, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of
the Ox that treads out the corn. The Apostle on the Morality couched therein
founded the Charter of endowment for Ministers in the Gospel. Besides, God has
left a warrant dormant with his Church, Let all things be done decently and in
order. And this ties Christians to the building of Churches for their public
Assemblies, whereby not only Decency but Piety is so much advanced, especially
in these three respects: 1 Hereby the same meat serves to feed many guests, one
Pastor instructing many people in the same place. 2 Devotion is increased with
company. Their praises are the louder; and music is sweetest in a full
consort: their prayers are the stronger, besetting God as it were in a round,
and not suffering him to depart till he has blessed them. Tertull. Apol.
Haec vis grata deo. 3 The very Place it self, being dedicated to Gods service,
is a Monitour to them Hoc agere, and stirs up pious thoughts in them. Say
not, it is but lame Devotion that cannot mount without the help of such a
wooden stock; rather it is lame indeed which is not raised though having the
advantage thereof.


9
Those that may, must frequent the public Churches. Such as nowadayes are
ambitious of conventicles are deeply guilty: for as it had been desperate
madness in time of persecution publicly to resort to Divine Service, so it is
no less unthankfulness to God now to serve him in woods and holes, not taking
notice of the liberty of the Gospel, which he graciously has vouchsafed; yea
such people in effect deny the King to be Defender of the Faith, but make him a
Persecuter rather, in that they dare not avouch the truth in the face of his
Authority. If it be good they do (thanks be to God) it may be done any where;
if bad, it must be done no where. Besides, by their voluntary private meetings,
they give occasions to many to supect their actions there: And grant them
unjustly traduced for their behavior therein, yet can they not justly be
excused, because they invite slanderous tongues to censure them, in not
providing for honest things in the sight of men, and clearing Gods service as
well from the suspicion as from the guilt of any dishonesty.

We should now come to speak of the Holiness, Reverence, Decency, and
Magnificencie of Churches: But herein I had rather hear the judgments of
other men. Let it serve instead of a conclusion to observe that Solomon's Temple
was the statelyest structure that ever was or shall be in the world; built by
the wealthyest, contrived by the wisest King in seven years (now counted the
life of a man) by an army of Workmen, no fewer then 1. Kings 5.15, 16.
one hundred forty three thousand three hundred, of the soundest timber, most
precious stones, most proper metal, as the nature of the things required;
either the strongest, Brass; or the richest, Gold: In a word, Earth gave it
most costly matter, and Heaven it self most curious workmanship, God directing
them. And though Solomon had no mines of Gold and Silver in his own land, yet
had he the spoils and gifts of the neighboring nations, and once in three
years the golden land of Ophir came swimming to Jerusalem. God being the
Landlord of the earth, Solomon was then his Receiver, to whom the World paid
in her rent, to build his Temple. And was not he a most wealthy King, in whose
days silver was nothing accounted of; seeing in our days the commander of
both Indyes has so much brass coin current in his Court? As for Josephus his
conceit, that the second edition of the Temple by Zorobabel, as it was new
forrelled and filleted with gold by Herod, was a statelier volume then that
first of Solomon, it is too weak a surmise to have a confutation fastened to it.

And yet we will not deny but the world has seen greater buildings for the
Piles and Fabrics, as may appear by this parrallel.

1 Gods Temple, built at Jerusalem by Solomon. Long 60 cubits. 2. Chron. 3.3.
Broad 20 cubits. High 30 cubits.
2 Diana's Temple, built at Ephesus by the Kings of Asia. Long 425 foot. Plin.
not. Hist. lib. 36. cap. 14.
Broad 220 foot. High 60 foot.
3 Sepulcher Church, built on Mount Calvary by Constantine. Long Eusebius lib.
3 de vit. Constantini, c. 24. (...).
We find no set dimension but hyperbolicall expressions of it. Broad We find no
set dimension but hyperbolicall expressions of it. High We find no set
dimension but hyperbolicall expressions of it.
4 S. Sophia's Church, built at Constantinople by Justinian. Long 260 foot.
Ev^grius lib. 4. cap. 30.
Broad 75 foot. High 180 foot.
5 S. Paul's Church, built at London by King Ethelbert. Long 690 foot. Namely in
the body of the Church besides the steeple, Cambd. Britt. in Middlesex.
Broad 130 foot. High 102 foot.
6 Turkish Mosque, built at Fez. Long 150 Florentine Cubits. The height we find
not, but it is a mile and half in compass, Leo Africanus, lib. 3. page 126.
Broad 80 Florentine Cubits. High Florentine Cubits.

But when the Reader has with his eyes surveyed these Temples, and finds
them to exceed Solomon's, yet let him remember, first, that there is nothing
more uncertain then the measures used in several countries; one countries span
may be another countries cubit, ^^ them. Not to relieve them, were not
Christianity, and to relieve them, were worse then Infidelity, because therein
they wrong their providing for their own family. Thus sometimes are they forced
to be Nabals against their will; yet it greiveth them to send away the people
empty. But what shall they do, seeing they cannot multiply their loaves and
their fishes? Besides, Clergymen are deeply rated to all payments. Oh that
their profession were but as highly prized, as their estate is valued.

4
Because they are to provide for their Posterity, that after the death of their
parents they may live, though not in an high, yet in an honest fashion, neither
leaving them to the wide world, nor to a narrow cottage.

5
Because the Levites in the Old Testament had plentiful provision. Oh it is
good to be Gods Pensioner, for he gives his large allowance. They had Cities
and Suburbs (houses and glebeland) Tithes, Freewill-offerings, and their parts
in First Fruits, and Sacrifices. Do the Ministers of the Gospel deserve worse
wages for bringing better tidings? Besides, the Levites places were hereditary,
and the Son sure of his Fathers house and land without a Faculty ad
succedendum patri.

6
Because the Papists in time of Popery gave their Priests plentiful means.
Whose Benefactours, so bountiful to them, may serve to condemn the
covetousness of our age toward Gods Ministers, in such who have more
knowledge, and should have more religion.

Ob. But the great means of the Clergy in time of Popery was rather wrested
then given. The Priests melted men's hearts into charity with the Scarefire of
Purgatory: And for justice now to give back what holy fraud had gotten away, is
not Sacrilege but Restitution. And when those grand and vast Donations were
given to the Church, there was (as some say) a voice of Angels heard from
heaven, saying, Hodie venenum in Ecclesiam Christi cecidit.

Answ. If poison then fell into the Church, since has there a strong antidote
been given to expel it, especially in Impropriations. Distinguish we betwixt
such Donations given to uses in themselves merely unlawful and superstitious,
as Praying for the dead, and the like; and those which in Genere were given to
Gods Service, though in Specie some superstitious end were annexed thereto. And
grant the former of these to be void in their very granting, yet the latter
ought to be rectified and reduced to the true use, and in no case to be
alienated from God. Plato says that in his time it was a Proverb amongst
Children, (...), Things that are truly given must not be taken away again.
Sure, as our Savior set a child in the midst of his Disciples to teach them
humility, so nowadayes a child need be set in the midst of some men to teach
them justice. Excellently In his Comment on the 47. of Genes. page 631.
Luther, Nisi superesset spolium Aegypti, quod rapuimus Papae, omnibus
Ministris Verbi fame pereundum esset; quod si sustentandi essent de
contributione populi, misere profecto ac duriter viverent. Alimur ergo de
spoliis Aegypti collectis sub Papatu, and hoc ipsum tamen quod reliquum est
diripitur a Magistratu: spoliantur Parochiae and Scholae, non aliter ac si fame
necare nos velint.

Ob. But in the pure Primitive times the Means were least, and Ministers the
best: And nowadayes, does not wealth make them lazy, and poverty keep them
painful? like Hawks they fly best when sharp. The best way to keep the stream
of the Clergy sweet and clear is to fence out the tide of wealth from coming
unto them.

Answ. Is this our thankfulness to the God of heaven, for turning persecution
into peace, in pinching his poor Ministers? When the Commonwealth now makes a
feast, shall neither Zadok the Priest, nor Nathan the Prophet, be invited to
it? that so the footsteps of Primitive persecution may still remain in these
peaceable times, amongst the Papists, in their needless burning of candles;
and amongst the Protestants, in the poor means of their Ministers. And what if
some turn the spurs unto Virtue into the stirrups of Pride, grow idle, and
insolent? let them soundly suffer for it themselves on Gods blessing; but let
not the bees be sterved that the drones may be punished.

7
Ministers Maintenance ought to be certain; lest some of them meet with Labans
for their Patrons and parishioners; changing their wages ten times; and at
last, if the fear of God does not fright the^, send them away empty.

8
It is unequal that there should be an equality betwixt all Ministers
Maintenance. Except that first there were made an equality betwixt all their
Parts, Pains, and Piety. Parity in means will quickly bring a level and flat
in Learning; and few will strive to be such spiritual Musicians, to whom David
directs many Psalms, To him that excels, but will even content themselves
with a Canonical sufficiency, and desiring no more then what the Law requires:
More learning would be of more pains, and the same profit, seeing the
mediocriter goes abreast with optime.

Ob. But neither the best, nor the most painful and learned get the best
preferment. Sometimes men of the least, get Livings of the best worth; yea such
as are not worthy to be the curates to their curates, and crassa Ingenia go
away with opima Sacerdotia.

Answ. Thus it ever was, and will be. But is this dust only to be found in
Churches, and not in Civil Courts? Is merit everywhere else made the exact
square of preferment? or did ever any urge, that all Offices should be made
champian for their profits, none higher then other? such corruption will ever
be in the Church, except there were a Law (ridiculous to be made, and
impossible to be kept) that men should be no men, but that all Patrons or
people in their Election or Presentations of Ministers should wholly divest
themselves of by-respects of kindred, friendship, profit, affection, and merely
choose for desert: and then should we have all things so well ordered, such
Pastors and such people, the Church in a manner would be Triumphant, whilst
Militant. Till then, though the best livings light not always on the ablest
men, yet as long as there be such preferments in the Church, there are still
encouragements for men to endeavor to excel, all hoping, and some happening on
advancement.

Ob. But Ministers ought to serve God merely for love of himself; and pity but
his eyes were out that squints at his own ends in doing Gods work.

Answ. Then should Gods best Saints be blind; for Moses himself had an eye to
the recompense of reward. Yea Ministers may look not only on their eternal
but on their temporal reward, as motives to quicken their endeavors. And
though it be true, that grave and pious men do study for learning sake, and
embrace virtue for it self, yet it is as true that youth (which is the season
when learning is gotten) is not without ambition, nor will ever take pains to
excel in any thing, when there is not some hope of excelling others in reward
and dignity. And what reason is it that whilst Law and Physic bring great
portions to such as marry them, Divinity their elder sister should only be put
off with her own beauty? In after-ages men will rather bind their sons to one
gainful, then to seven liberal Sciences: only the lowest of the people would
be made Ministers, which cannot otherwise subsist; and it will be bad when Gods
Church is made a Sanctuary only for men of desperate estates to take refuge in
it.

However, let every Minister take up this resolution, To preach the word, to be
instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering and doctrine. If thou have competent means comfortably to
subsist on, be the more thankful to God the fountain, to man the channel;
painful in thy place, pitiful to the poor, cheerful in spending some,
careful in keeping the rest. If not, yet tire not for want of a spur: do
something for love, and not all for money; for love of God, of goodness, of
the godly, of a good conscience. Know 't is better to want means, then to
detain them; the one only suffers, the other deeply sins: and it is as
dangerous a persecution to religion, to draw the fuel from it, as to cast
water on it. Comfort thy self that another world will pay this worlds debts,
and great is thy reward with God in heaven. A reward, in respect of his
promise; a gift, in respect of thy worthlesnesse: And yet the less thou
look at it, the surer thou shall find it, if laboring with thy self to
serve God for himself, in respect of whom even heaven it self is but a sinister
end.

To the Reader.
THese General Rules we have placed in the middle, that the Books on both
sides may equally reach to them; because all Persons therein are indifferently
concerned.

The Holy State. THE FOURTH BOOK.
CHAP. 1. The Favorite.
A Favorite is a Court-diall, whereon all look whilst the King shines on him,
and none, when it is night with him. A Minion differs from a Favorite: for He
acts things by his own will and appetite, as a Favorite by the judgment and
pleasure of his Prince. These again are twofold: either such as rely wholly on
their Kings favor, or such as the King partly relies on their wisdom, loving
them rather for use then affection. The former are like pretty wands in a
Princes hand, for him to play with at pleasure; the latter, like staves,
whereon he leans and supports himself in State Affairs.

God is the original Patron of all preferment, Maxim 1
all dignities being in his disposal. Promotion ( Psalm. 75.7.
says David) comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor yet from the
South. The word here translated South, in the Hebrew signifies the Desert; and
such a course list bounded Palestine both on the South and Tremelliu^ on the
verse.
North, so that in effect preferment blows from no point of the compass. True,
every man is, fortunae suae faber, the Smith to beat out his own fortunes; but
God first does give him coals, iron, and anvil before he can set up his trade.

2
The first inlet into a Princes knowledge is half way into his favor. Indeed
the heat of the sun pierces into the innermost bowels of the earth, but
only the surface thereof is gilded with his beams: So though the influence of
the Princes protection reaches the utmost and obscurest man in his dominions,
yet only some few, who lie on the top of the heap of his subjects, can be
graced with his favor. He therefore that is known to his Prince, starts in the
half way of his race to honor. A notable fellow, and a soldier to Alexander,
finding this first admission to be the greatest difficulty, put feathers into
his nose and ears, and danced about the Court in an antique fashion, till the
strangeness of the Show brought the King himself to be a spectatour. Then this
Mimick throwing off his disguize, Sr (said he to the King) thus I first arrive
at your Majesty's notice in the fashion of a fool, but can do you service in
the place of a wiseman, if you please to employ me.

3
It Is the easier for them to leap into preferment, who have the rise of noble
blood: such get their honor with more ease, and keep it with less envy,
which is busiest in maligning of upstarts. Nor is it any hinderance unto him,
but rather an advantage, if such a Nobleman be of an ancient family, decayed in
estate through the fault of his Ancestors; for such, Princes count the object
as well of their pity as favor, and it an act as well of charity as bounty to
relieve and raise them: But those are in some sort born Favorites, and succeed
by descent to a Princes affection (rather as a debt then a gift) whose parents
have formerly suffered in the Princes or his predecessors behalf. This made
Queen Elizabeth first reflect on the Lord Norris, (for in the peaceable
beginning of her reign the Martial spirits of his son were not yet raised)
because his father dyed her mothers Martyr, to attest her innocence in the
reign of King Henry the eighth.

Several doors open to preferment, 4
but the King keeps the key of them all. Some have been advanced for their
Faces, their Beauty; their Heads, their Wisdom; their Tongues, their
Eloquence; their Hands, their Valor; their Blood, their Nobility; their Feet,
their Nimblenesse, and Comeliness in dancing; but all is ultimately resolved on
the Princes pleasure.

Happy the Favorite that is raised without the ruin of another: 5
as those which succeed in a dead place, who draw less envy of competitours,
in keeping others out of the Kings favor, then those that cast one out of the
possession thereof. Also he that climbeth up by degrees stands more firmly in
favor, as making his footing good as he goes.

Sometimes the Princes favor is all the known worth in the Favorite. 6
I say, known: for he is an Infidel that believes not more then he sees, and
that a rational Prince will love where he sees no loveliness. Surely Charles
the ninth of France beheld some worth in Albertus Tudius (an Hucksters son,
to whom in five years, besides other honors, he gave six hundred thousand
crowns) though some affirm all the good the King got by him, was to learn to
Camerarius, med. Hist. cap. 4.
swear by the Name of God. Except we will say, that Kings desire in some to
show as the absoluteness of their power, to raise them from nothing, so of
their will also, to advance them for nothing. But Princes have their grounds
reard above the flats of common men, and who will search the reasons of their
actions must stand on an equal basis with them.

Some Kings to make a jest have advanced a man in earnest. 7
When amongst many Articles exhibited to King Henry the seventh by the Irish
against the Earl of Kildare, the last was, Camb. Rem. page 271.
Finally, all Ireland cannot rule this Earl. Then (quoth the King) shall this
Earl rule all Ireland; and made him Deputy thereof. But such accidents are
miraculous; and he shall sterve that will not eat till such Manna is dropped into
his mouth.

8
But by what lawful means soever he has gotten his advancement, he stands
but in a slippery place; and therefore needs constantly to wear ice-spurres,
for he rather glides then goes, and is in continual fear to be crushed from
above by his Princes anger, and undermined from beneath by his fellow subjects
envy. Against both which see how he fenceth himself.

9
He prayseth God for preferring him, and prays to him to preserve him. His
Greatness must needs fall which is not founded in Goodness. First he serves
his God in heaven, and then his Master on earth. The best way to please all, or
to displease them with least danger, is to please him who is all in all.

10
Next he studieth the alphabet of his Princes disposition: whose inclination
when found out is half fitted. Then he applies himself to please his natural,
though not vicious, humors, never preferring himself before his Prince in any
thing, wherein he desires or conceives himself to excel. Nero, though indeed
but a Fiddler, counted himself as well Emperor of Music as of Rome; and his
Followers too grossly did sooth him up in the admiration of his skill in that
Art. But the most temperate Princes love to taste the sweetness of their own
praises (if not overluscious with flattery) where their own deserts lay the
groundwork, and their Favorites give the varnish to their commendations.

11
Bluntness of speech has becom'd some, and made them more acceptable: Yea
this has been counted Freeheartednesse, in Courtiers; Conscience and Christian
simplicity, in Clergiemen; Valor, in Soldiers. I love thee the better (said
Queen Elizabeth to Archbishop Grindall) because you live unmarried. And I,
Madam, (replied Grindall) because you live unmarried love you the worse. But
those, who make music with so harsh an instrument, need have their bow well
rosend before, and to observe Time and Place, lest that gall which would tickle
at other times.

He leaves his Prince always with an appetite, 12
and never gluts him with his company. Sometimes taking occasion to depart,
whilst still his staying might be welcome. Such intermissions render him more
gracious; yet he absents himself neither far, nor long, lest he might seem to
neglect. Though he does not always spur up close to the Kings side (to be
constantly in his presence) he never lagges so far behind, as to be out of
distance. Long absence has drawn the curtain betwixt a Favorite and his
Sovereigne, and thereby has made room for others to step in betwixt them.

He does not boldly engrosse and limit his Masters favor to himself. 13
He is willing his Prince should shine beside him, but especially through him,
on others. Too covetous are they who, not content to be sole heirs to their
Princes favor, grudge that any pensions should be allotted to their younger
brethren. Why should it not as well be Treason to confine a Princes affection,
as to imprison his person?

He makes provident yet moderate use of his Masters favor. 14
Especially if he be of a various nature, and loves exchange, counting it not
to stand with the state of a King to wear a Favorite thredbare. Too blame
they, who thinking it will be continual summer with them (as in the country
under the Equator) will not so much as frostnip their souls with a cold
thought of want hereafter, and provide neither to oblige others, nor to
maintain themselves: As bad they on the other side, who like those who have a
lease, without impeachment of waste, speedily to expire, whip and strip, and
rap and rend, whatsoever can come to their fingers.

He makes his estate invisible by purchasing reversions, 15
and in remote countries. He has a moderate estate in open view, that the
world may settle their looks on it (for if they see nothing they will suspect
the more) and the rest far off and hereafter. The eyes of envy can never
bewitch that which it does not see. These Reversions will be ripe for his heir,
by that time his heir shall be ripe for them, and the money of distracted
revennues will meet entirely in one purse.

16
Having attained to a competent height, he had rather grow a buttresse broader,
then a story higher. He fortifieth himself by raising outworks, and twisting
himself by intermarriages of his kindred into noble Families: his Countenance
will give all his Kinswomen beauty. Some Favorites, whose heels have been
tript up by their adversaries, have with their hands held on their Allies, till
they could recover their feet again.

17
He makes not Great men dance envidious attendance to speak with him. Oh
whilst their heels cool how do their hearts burn? Wherefore in the midst of
the Term of his business he makes himself a vacation to speak with them.
Indeed some difficulty of access and conference begets a reverence toward
them in common people (who will suspect the ware not good if cheap to come by)
and therefore he values himself in making them to wait: Yet he loves not to
over-linger any in an afflicting hope, but speedily dispatcheth the fears or
desires of his expecting Clients.

18
He loves a good name, but will not woo or court it otherwise, then as it is
an attendant on honesty and virtue. But chiefly he avoydeth the sweet poison of
Popularity, wherewith some have swollen till they have broken. Especially, he
declines the entertainment of many Martialists, the harsh counsel of soldiers
being commonly untunable to the Court-way. The immoderate resorting of military
men to a Favorite (chiefly if by any palliation he pretends to the Crown) is
like the flocking of so many ravens and vulturs which foretell his funeral.

19
He preserves all inferior Officers in the full rights and privileges of
their places. Some are so boisterous, no severals will hold them, but lay all
Offices common to their power, or else are so busy, that making many circles
in other men's professions, they raise up ill spirits in them, and for every
finger they needlessely thrust into other men's matters, shall find an hand
against them, when occasion shall serve. As bad are they, who leaping over
meaner persons to whom the business is proper, bring it per saltum to
themselves, not suffering matters to run along in a legal channel, but in a
by-ditch of their own cutting, so drawing the profit to themselves, which they
drein from others.

If accused by his adversaries, 20
he flies with speed to his Princes person. No better covert for a hunted
Favorite to take to: where if innocent, with his loyal breath he easily
dispels all vapors of ill suggestions; if guilty, yet he is half acquitted,
because judged by the Prince himself, whose compassion he moves by an ingenuous
confession. But if this Sanctuary-doore be bolted against him, then his ruin
is portended, and not long after.

He is a fish on the dry shore when the tide of his Masters love has left him;
21
so that if he be not the more wise, he will be made a prey to the next that
finds him. Several are the causes of Favorites falls, proceeding either from
the Kings pleasure, their enemies malice, or their own default: different the
degrees and manner of their ruin: some when grown too great are shifted under
honorable colors of employment into a foreign air, there to purge and
lessen; others receive their condemnation at home. But how bad soever his cast
be, see how he betters it by good playing it.

He submits himself, 22
without contesting, to the pleasure of his Prince. For being a Tenant at will
to the favor of his Sovereigne, it is vain to strive to keep violent
possession when his Landlord will out him. Such struggling makes the hook of
his enemies malice strike the deeper into him. And whilst his adversaries
spur him with injuries on purpose to make him spring out into rebellious
practices, he reins in his passions with the stronger patience.

23
If he must down, he seeks to fall easily, and if possible, to light on his
legs. If stripped out of his robes, he strives to keep his clothes; loosing his
honor, yet to hold his lands, if not them, his life; and thanks his Prince for
giving him whatsoever he takes not away from him.

To conclude, A Favorite is a trade, whereof he that breaks once seldom sets
up again. Rare are the examples of those who have compounded and thrived well
afterward. Mean men are like underwood, which the Law calls sylva caedua, quae
Lynwood lib. 3. cap. Quanquam exsolventibus.
succisa renascitur, being cut down it may spring again, but Favorites are
like oaks, which scarce thrive after (to make timber) being lopt, but if once
cut down never grow more. If we light on any who have flourished the second
time, impute it to their Princes pleasure to cross the common observation, and
to show that nothing is past cure with so great a surgeon, who can even set
a broken Favorite.

Now to show the inconstancy of Greatness not supported with virtue, we will
first insist in a remarkable pattern in holy Scripture. Next will we produce a
parallel of two Favorites in our English Court, living in the same time, and
height of honor with their Sovereigne, the one through his vitiousnesse ending
in misery, the other by his virtuous demeanor shining bright to his death: for
I count it a wrong to our Country to import presidents out of foreign
Histories, when our home-Chronicles afford us as plentiful and proper examples.

CHAP. 2. The life of HAMAN.
HAman the son of Amedatha, of the kindred of Agag, and people of Amalek, was
highly favored by Ahasuerus Emperor of Persia. I find not what precious
properties he had, sure he was a pearl in the eye of Ahasuerus, who commanded
all his subjects to do lowly reverence unto him: only Mordecai the Jew
excepted himself from that rule, denying him the payment of so humble an
observance.

I fathom not the depth of Mordecai's refusal: perchance Haman interpreted
this reverence farther then it was intended, as a divine honor, and therefore
Mordecai would not blow wind into so empty a bladder, and be accessory to puff
him up with self-conceit; or because Amalek was the devils first fruits, which
first brake the peace with Israel, and God commanded an antipathy against them;
or he had some private countermand from God not to reverence him. What ever it
was, I had rather accuse my self of ignorance, then Mordecai of pride.

Haman swells at this neglect. Will not his knees bow? his neck shall break
with an halter. But oh, this was but poor and private revenge: one lark will
not fill the belly of such a vultur. What if Mordecai will not stoop to Haman,
must Haman stoop to Mordecai to be revenged of him alone? wherefore he plotteth
with the Kings sword to cut off the whole Nation of the Jews.

Repairing to Ahasuerus, he requested that all the Jews might be destroyed. He
backs his petition with three arguments: first, It was a scattered Nation; had
they inhabited one entire country, their extirpation would have weakened his
empire, but being dispersed, though killed every where, they would have been
missed no where; secondly, his Empire would be more uniform when this irregular
people, not observing his Laws, were taken away; thirdly, ten thousand talents
Haman would pay into the bargain into the Kings Treasure.

What, out of his own purse? I see his pride was above his covetousness; and
spightfull men count their revenge a purchase which cannot be overbought: or
perchance this money should arise out of the confiscation of their goods. Thus
Ahasuerus should lock all the Jews into his chest, and by help of Hamans
Chemistry convert them into silver.

See how this grand destroyer of a whole Nation pleads the Kings profit. Thus
our punie depopulatours allege for their doings the Kings and countries good;
and we will believe them, when they can persuade us that their private coffers
are the Kings exchequer. But never any wounded the Commonwealth, but first they
kissed it, pretending the public good.

Hamans silver is dross with Ahasuerus: only his pleasure is current with
him. If Haman will have it so, so it shall freely be; he will give him and not
sell him his favor. It Is woeful when great Judges see parties accused by other
men's eyes, but condemn them by their own mouths: and now Posts were sent
through out all Persia to execute the Kings cruel decree.

I had almost forgotten how before this time Mordecai had discovered the
treason, which two of the Kings Chamberlains had plotted against him; which
good service of his, though not presently paid, yet was scored up in the
Chronicles, not rewarded but recorded, where it slept till a due occasion did
awake it. Perchance Hamans envy kept it from the Kings knowledge; and Princes
sometimes to reward the desert of men want not mind, but minding of it

To proceed: See the Jews all pitifully pensive, and fasting in sackcloth and
ashes, even to Queen Esther her self, which (unknown to Haman) was one of that
nation. And to be brief, Esther invites Ahasuerus and Haman to a banquet (whose
life shall pay the reckoning) and next day they are both invited to a second
entertainment.

Mean time Haman provides a gallows of fifty cubits high to hang Mordecai on.
Five cubits would have served the turn; and had it took effect, the height of
the gallows had but set his soul so much the farther on his journey toward
heaven. His stomach was so sharp set, he could not stay till he had dined on
all the Jews, but first he must break his fast on Mordecai; and fit it was this
bell-weather should be sacrificed before the rest of the flock: wherefore he
comes to the Court to get leave to put him to death.

The night before Ahasuerus had passed without sleep. The Chronicles are called
for, either to invite slumber, or to entertain waking with the less
tediousness. Gods hand in the margin points the Reader to the place where
Mordecai's good service was related; and Ahasuerus asks Haman (newly come
into the presence) what shall be done to the man whom the King will honor?

Haman being now (as he thought) to measure his own happiness, had been much
too blame if he made it not of the largest size. He cuts out a garment of
honor, royal both for matter and making, for Mordecai to wear. By the Kings
command he becomes Mordecai's Herald and Page, lacquying by him riding on the
Kings steed (who he hoped by this time should have mounted the wooden horse)
and then pensive in heart hasts home to bemoan himself to his friends. Hamans
wife proves a true Prophetess, presaging his ruin. If the feet of a Favorite
begin to slip on the steep hill of Honor, his own weight will down with him to
the bottom: once past noon with him, it is presently night.

For at the next feast Ahasuerus is mortally incensed against him for plotting
the death of Esther, with the rest of her people. (For had his project
succeeded, probably the Jew had not been spared for being a Queen, but the
Queen had been killed for being a Jew.) Haman in a careless sorrowful
posture, more minding his life then his lust, had cast himself on the Queens
bed. Will he force the Queen also (said Ahasuerus) before me in the house?
These words rang his passing bell in the Court, and according to the Persian
fashion they covered his face, putting him in a winding sheet that was dead in
the Kings favor. The next news we hear of him is, that by exchange Haman
inherits the gibbet of Mordecai, and Mordecai the house and greatness of
Haman, the decree against the Jews being generally reversed.

THOMAS WOLSEY Archbishop of York, Chancelovr of England Cardinal and Legate
de Latere. He Died at Leicester Abbey* Anno Dni 1529. the 29th of November. W.M.
sculp:
CHAP. 3. The life of Card. WOLSEY.
THomas Wolsey was born at Ipswich in Suffolk, whose father was a Butcher, and
an Parentem habuit virum p^ob um at lanium, Pol. Virgil. page 633.
honest man, and was there brought up at school, where afterward he built a
beautiful College. From Ipswich he went to Oxford, and from thence was
preferred to be Schoolmaster to the Marquis of Dorset's children, where he
first learnt to be imperious over Noble blood. By the stairs of a Parsonage or
two he climbed up at last into the notice of Fox, Bishop of Winchester, and was
received to be his Secretary.

There was at that time a faction at Court betwixt Bishop Fox and Thomas
Howard, Earl of Surrey. The Bishop being very old was scarce able to make good
his party; yet it grieved him not so much to stoop to Nature as to the Earl his
Corrivall: wherefore not able to manage the matter himself, he was contented to
be the stock whereon Wolsey should be graffed, whom he made heir to his favor,
commending him to King Henry the seventh for one fit to serve a King, and
command others: And hereupon he was entertained at Court.

Soon after, when Henry his son came to the Crown, Wolsey quickly found the
length of his foot, and fitted him with an easy shoe. He persuaded him that it
was good accepting of pleasure whilst youth tendered it: let him follow his
sports, whilst Wolsey would undertake every night briefly to represent unto
him all matters of moment which had passed the Counsell-table. For Princes are
to take State Affairs not in the mass and whole bulk of them, but only the
spirits thereof skilfully extracted. And hereupon the King referred all matters
to Wolsey's managing, on whom he conferred the Bishoprics of Duresme,
Winchester, and York, with some other spiritual promotions.

Nothing now hindered Wolsey's prospect to overlook the whole Court but the head
of Edward Stafford Duke of Buckingham, who was high in birth, honor, and
estate. For as for Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, he stood not in Wolsey's
way, but rather besides then against him: Brandon being the Kings companion in
pleasures, Wolsey his counselor in policy; Brandon Favorite to Henry,
Wolsey to the King. Wolsey takes this Buckingham to task, who (otherwise a
brave Gentleman) was proud and popular; and that tower is easily undermined
whose foundation is hollow. His own folly with Wolsey's malice overthrew him.
Vainglory ever lies at an open guard, and gives much advantage of play to her
enemies. The Duke is condemned of high treason, though rather corrivall with
the King for his Clothes then his Crown, being excessively brave in apparel.

The ax that kills Buckingham frights all others, who turn contesting into
complying with our Archbishop, now Cardinal, Legate a latere, and
Lord-Chancellour. All the Judges stood at the bar of his devotion. His
displeasure more feared then the Kings, whose anger though violent was
placable; the Cardinals of less fury, but more malice: yet in matters of
Judicature he behaved himself commendably. I hear no widows sighs, nor see
orphans tears in our Chronicles caused by him: sure in such cases wherein his
private ends made him not a party, he was an excellent Justicer, as being too
proud to be bribed, and too strong to be overborn.

Next he aspires to the Triple Grown; he only wants Holiness, and must be
Pope. Yet was it a great labor for a Tramountain to climb over the Alps to S.
Peter's Chair; a long leap from York to Rome, and therefore he needed to take a
good rise. Besides he used Charles the fifth, Emperor, for his staff, gold he
gave to the Romish Cardinals, and they gave him golden promises, so that at
last Wolsey perceived, both the Emperor and the Court of Rome delayed and
deluded him.

He is no fox whose den has but one hole: Wolsey finding this way stopped, goes
another way to work, and falls off to the French King, hoping by his help to
obtain his desires. However if he help not himself, he would hinder Charles the
Emperors designs; and revenge is a great preferment. Wherefore covertly he
seeks to make a divorce betwixt Queen Katharine, Dowager, the Emperors Aunt,
and King Henry the eighth his Master.

Queen Katharines age was above her Husbands, her gravity above her age; more
pious at her beads then pleasant in her bed, a better woman then a wife, and a
fitter wife for any Prince then King Henry. Wolsey by his instruments
persuades the King to put her away, pleading they were so contiguous and near
in kindred, they might not be made continuous (one flesh) in marriage, because
she before had been wife to Prince Arthur the Kings brother. Besides, the King
wanted a male heir, which he much desired.

Welcome whisperings are quickly heard. The King embraces the motion: the
matter is entered in the Romish Court, but long delayed; the Pope first meaning
to divorce most of the gold from England in this tedious suit. But here Wolsey
miscarried in the Masterpiece of his policy. For he hoped upon the divorce of
King Henry from Queen Katharine his wife (which with much ado was effected)
to advance a marriage betwixt him and the King of France his sister, thinking
with their nuptial ring to wed the King of France eternally to himself, and
mould him for farther designs: whereas contrary to his expectation King Henry
fell in love with Anna Bullen, a Lady whole beauty exceeded her birth (though
honorable) wit her beauty, piety all; one for his love not lust, so that there
was no gathering of green fruit from her till marriage had ripened it:
whereupon the King took her to wife.

Not long after followed the ruin of the Cardinal, caused by his own
vitiousnesse, heightened by the envy of his Adversaries. He was caught in a
Praemunire for procuring to be Legate de latere, and advancing the Popes power
against the Laws of the Realm; and eight other Articles were framed against
him, for which we report the Reader to our Fox Acts and Monuments* p. 996.
Chronicles. The main was, his Ego and Rex meus, wherein he remembered his old
profession of a Schoolmaster, and forgot his present estate of a Statesman. But
as for some things laid to his charge, his friends plead, that where potent
malice is Promoter, the accusations shall not want proof, though the proof may
want truth. Well, the broad seal was taken from him, and some of his spiritual
Preferments. Yet was he still left Bishop of Winchester, and Archbishop of
York* so that the Kings goodness hitherto might have seemd rather to ease him
of burdensome greatness, then to have deprived him of wealth or honor: which
whether he did out of love to Wolsey, or fear of the Pope, I interpose no
opinion.

Home now went Wolsey into Yorkshire, and lived at his Manor of Cawood, where
he wanted nothing the heart of man could desire for contentment. But great
minds count every place a prison, which is not a Kings Court; and just it was
that he which would not see his own happiness, should therefore feel his own
misery. He provided for his enstalling Archbishop State equivalent to a Kings
Coronation, which his ambition revived other of his misdemeanors, and by
command from the King he was arrested by the Earl of Northumberland, and so
took his journeys up to London. By the way his soul was rackt betwixt different
tidings; now hoysed up with hope of pardon, then instantly let down with news
of the Kings displeasure, till at Leicester his heart was broken with these
sudden and contrary motions. The Story goes that he should breath out his soul
with speeches to this effect, Had I been as careful to serve the God of
Heaven, as I have to comply to the will of my earthly King, God would not have
left me in mine old age, as the other has done.

His body swelled after his death, as his mind did whilst he was living, which
with other symptoms gave the suspicion that he poisoned himself. It will
suffice us to observe, If a Great man much beloved dies suddenly, the report
goes that others poisoned him: If he be generally hated, then that he poisoned
himself. Sure never did a Great man fall with less pity. Some of his own
servants with the feathers they got under him flew to other Masters. Most of
the Clergy (more pitying his Profession then Person) were glad that the felling
of this oak would cause the growth of much underwood.

Let Geometricians measure the vastness of his mind by the footsteps of his
Buildings, Christ-Church White Hall, Hampton Court: And no wonder if some of
these were not finished, seeing his life was rather broken off then ended. Sure
King Henry lived in two of his houses, and lies now in the third, I mean his
Tomb at Windsor. In a word, in his prime he was the bias of the Christian
world, drawing the bowl thereof to what side he pleased.

CHAP. 4. The life of CHARLES BRANDON, Duke of Suffolk.
CHarles Brandon was son to Sr. William Brandon, Standerd-bearer to King
Henry the seventh, in whose quarrel he was slain in Bosworth field; wherefore
the King counted himself bound in honor and conscience to favor young
Charles, whose father spent his last breath to blow him to the haven of
victory, and caused him to be brought up with Prince Henry, his second son.

The intimacy betwixt them took deep impression in their tender years, which
hardened with continuance of time proved indeleble. It was advanced by the
sympathy of their active spirits (men of quick and large-striding minds loving
to walk together) not to say, that the looseness of their youthful lives made
them the faster friends. Henry, when afterward King, heaped honors upon him,
created him Viscount Lisle, and Duke of Suffolk.

Not long after some of the English Nobility got leave to go to the public
Tilting in Paris, and there behaved themselves right valiantly, though the
sullen French would scarce speak a word in their praise. For they conceived it
would be an eternal impoverishing of the credit of their Nation, if the honor
of the day should be exported by foreiners. But Brandon bare away the credit
from all, fighting at Barriers with a giant Almain, till he made an earthquake
in that mountain of flesh, making him reel and Hollinshed, page 833.
stagger, and many other courses at Tilt he performed to admiration. Yea, the
Lords beheld him not with more envious, then the Ladies with gracious eyes, who
darted more glaunces in love, then the other ran spears in anger against him;
especially Mary the French Queen, and sister to King Henry the eighth, who
afterward proved his wife.

For after the death of Lewis the twelfth her husband, King Henry her brother
employed Charles Brandon to bring her over into England; who improved his
service so well that he got her good will to marry her. Whether his affections
were so ambitious to climb up to her, or hers so courteous as to descend to
him (who had been First married to Margaret Nevil, after to Anne, daughter to
Sr Anthony Brown.
twice a widower before) let youthful pens dispute it: it suffices us, both
met together. Then wrote he in humble manner to request King Henry's leave to
marry his sister; but knowing that matters of this nature are never sure till
finished, and that leave is sooner got to do such attempts when done already;
and wisely considering with himself that there are but few days in the
Almanac, wherein such Marriages come in, and subjects have opportunity to wed
Queens, he first married her Hollinshed, page 836.
privately in Paris.

King Henry after the acting of some anger, and showing some state-discontent,
was quickly contented therewith; yea the world conceives that he gave this
woman to be married to this man, in sending him on such an employment. At Calis
they were afterward re-married, or if you will their former private marriage
publicly solemnized, and coming into England lived many years in honor and
esteem, no less dear to his fellow subjects then his Sovereigne. He was often
employed General in Martial affairs, especially in the wars betwixt the
English and French, though the greatest performance on both sides was but
mutual indenting the Dominions each of other with inrodes.

When the divorce of King Henry from Queen Katharine was so long in agitation,
Brandon found not himself a little agrieved at the Kings expense of time and
money: for the Court of Rome in such matters, wherein money is gotten by
delays, will make no more speed then the beast in Brasil, which the Spaniards
call Pigritia, which goes no farther in a fortnight then a man will cast a
stone. Yea Brandon well perceived that Cardinal Campeius and Wolsey in their
Court at Bridewell, wherein the divorce was judicially handled, intended only
to produce a solemn Nothing, their Court being but the clock set according to
the dial at Rome, and the instructions received thence. Wherefore knocking on
the table, in the presence of the two Cardinals, he bound it with an oath,
That It was never well in England since Cardinals had any thing to do therein:
And from that time forward, as an active instrument, he endeavored the
abolishing of the Popes power in England.

For he was not only (as the Papists complain Sanders. de Schismate Anglicano,
p. 108.
of him) a principal agent in that Parliament, Anno. 1534. wherein the Popes
supremacy was abrogated, but also a main means of the overturning of Abbeys, as
conceiving that though the head was struck off, yet as long as that neck and
those shoulders remained there would be a continual appetite of reuniting
themselves. Herein his thoughts were more pure from the mixture of
covetousness then many other employed in the same service: For after that our
eyes, justly dazzled at first with the brightness of Gods Justice on those
vicious fraternities, have somewhat recovered themselves, they will serve us to
see the greedy appetites of some instruments to feed on Church-morsels.

He lived and dyed in the full favor of his Prince, though as Cardinal Pool
observed, they who were highest in this Kings favor, their heads were nearest
danger. Indeed King Henry was not very tender in cutting off that joint, and
in his Reign the ax was seldom wiped, before wetted again with Noble blood.
He dyed Anno 1544. much beloved, and lamented of all, for his bounty, humility,
valor, and all noble virtues, since the heat of his youth was tamed in his
reduced age, and lies buried at Windsor.

CHAP. 5. The wise Statesman.
TO describe the Statesman at large, is the subject rather of a Volume then a
Chapter, and is as far beyond my power, as wide of my profession. We will not
lanch into the deep, but satisfy our selves to sail by the shore, and briefly
observe his carriage toward God, his King, himself, home-persons, and foreign
Princes.

He counts the fear of God the beginning of wisdom; Maxim 1
and therefore esteems no project profitable, which is not lawful; nothing
politic, which crosses piety. Let not any plead for the contrary Hushai's
dealing with Absalom, which strongly favored of double-dealing; for what is a
question cannot be an argument, seeing the lawfulness of his deed therein was
never decided; and he is unwise that will venture the state of his soul on the
litigious title of such an example. Besides, we must live by Gods precepts, not
by the godlies practice. And though God causes sometimes the sun of success
to shine as well on bad as good projects, yet commonly wicked actions end in
shame at the last.

2
In giving counsel to his Prince, he had rather displease then hurt him.
Plain-dealing is one of the daintiest rarities can be presented to some
Princes, as being novelty to them all times of the year. The Philosopher could
say, Seneca de benefic. lib. 3. c. 30.
Quid omnia possidentibus deest? Ille qui verum dicat. Wherefore our Statesman
seeks to undeceive his Prince from the fallacies of flatterers, who by their
plausible persuasions have bolster'd up their crooked counsels, to make them
seem straight in the Kings eyes.

3
Yet if dissenting from his Sovereigne, he does it with all humility and
moderation. It is neither manners nor wit to cross Princes in their game, much
less in their serious affairs. Yea, it may be Rebellion in a subject to give
his Sovereigne loyal counsel, if proceeding from a spirit of contradiction
and contempt, and uttered in audacious language. What do these but give
wholesome Physic, wrapped up in poisoned papers?

4
He is constant, but not obstinate in the advice he gives. Some think it
beneath a wise man to alter their opinion: A maxim both false and dangerous.
We know what worthy Father wrote his own Retractation; and it matters not
though we go back from our word, so we go forward in the truth and a sound
judgment. Such a one changes not his main opinion, which ever was this, to
embrace that course which upon mature deliberation shall appear unto him the
most advised. As for his carriage toward himself,

5
He takes an exact survey of his own defects and perfections. As for the
former, his weaknesses and infirmities he does carefully and wisely conceal:
sometimes he covers them over with a cautious confidence, and presents a fair
hilt, but keeps the sword in the sheath which wants an edge. But this he
manageth with much art, otherwise, being betrayed, it would prove most
ridiculous, and it would make brave music to his enemies, to hear the hissing
of an empty bladder when it is pricked.

His known perfections he seeks modestly to cloud and obscure. 6
It is needless to show the sun shining, which will break out of it self.
Not like our Phantasticks, who having a fine watch draw all occasions to draw
it out to be seen. Yea, because sometimes he concealeth his sufficiency in such
things, wherein others know he has ability, he shall therefore be thought at
other times to have ability in those matters wherein indeed he wants it, men
interpreting him therein rather modestly to dissemble, then to be defective.
Yet when just occasion is offered, he shows his perfections soundly, though
seldom, and then graceth them out to the best advantage.

In discourse he is neither too free, 7
nor overreserv'd, but observes a mediocrity. His hall is common to all comers,
but his closet is locked. General matters he is as liberal to impart, as
careful to conceal importancies. Moderate liberty in speech inviteth and
provokes liberty to be used again, where a constant closeness makes all
suspect him: and his company is burdensome that lives altogether on the
expenses of others, and will lay out nothing himself. Yea, who will barter
intelligence with him, that returns no considerable ware in exchange?

He trusts not any with a secret which may endanger his estate. 8
For if he tells it to his servant, he makes him his master; if to his friend,
he enables him to be a foe, and to undo him at pleasure, whose secrecy he must
buy at the parties own price, and if ever he shuts his purse, the other opens
his mouth. Matters of inferior consequence he will communicate to a fast
friend, and crave his advice; for two eyes see more then one, though it be
never so big, and set (as in Polyphemus) in the midst of the forehead.

9
He is careful and provident in the managing of his private estate.
Excellently Lib. 2. de ofsic. cap. 112.
Ambrose, An idoneum putabo qui mihi det consilium, qui non dat sibi? Well may
Princes suspect those Statesmen not to be wise in the business of the
Commonwealth, who are fools in ordering their own affairs. Our Politician, if
he enlarges not his own estate, at least keeps it in good repair. As for
avaricious courses, he disdaineth them. Sr Thomas More, though some years
Lord-Chancellour of England, scarce left his son Sanders. de Schism. Anglic.
page 118.
five and twenty pounds ayeare more then his father left him. And Sr Henry
Sidney (father to Sr Philip) being Lord President of Wales and Ireland, got not
Henry Lho^d, in the beginning of his Welsh Chronicle.
one foot of land in either Country, rather seeking after the common good then
his private profit. I must confess the last age produced an English Statesman,
who was the picklock of the cabinets of foreign Princes, who, though the wisest
in his time and way, died poor and indebted to private men, though not so much
as the whole Kingdom was indebted to him. But such an accident is rare; and a
small Hospital will hold those Statesmen who have impaired their means, not by
their private carelessness, but carfulness for the public. As for his
carriage toward Home-persons,

10
He studieth men's natures, first reading the Title-pages of them by the report
of Fame: but credits not Fames relations to the full. Otherwise, as in
London-exchange one shall overbuy wares, who gives half the price at first
demanded, so he that believes the moity of Fame may believe too much.
Wherefore to be more accurate,

11
He reads the Chapters of men's natures (chiefly his concurrents and
competitours) by the reports of their friends and foes, making allowance for
their engagements, not believing all in the mass, but only what he
judiciously extracteth. Yet virtues confessed by their foes, and vices
acknowledged by their friends, are commonly true. The best intelligence, if it
can be obtained, is from a fugitive Privado.

But the most legible Character and truest Edition wherein he reads a man is in
his own occasional openings: 12
And that in these three cases.

1 When the party discloses himself in his wine: for though it be unlawful to
practice on any to make them drunk, yet no doubt one may make a good use of
another man's abusing himself. What they say of the herb Lunaria ceremoniously
gathered at some set times, that laid upon any lock, it makes it fly open, is
most true of drunkenness, unbolting the most important secrets. 2 When he
discovers himself in his passions. Physicians to make some small veins in
their Patients arms plump and full, that they may see them the better to let
them blood, use to put them into hot water: so the heat of passion presents
many invisible veins in men's hearts to the eye of the beholder; yea the sweat
of anger washes off their paint, and makes them appear in their true colors.
3 When accidentally they bolt out speeches unawares to themselves. More hold is
then to be taken of a few words casually uttered, then of set solemn speeches,
which rather show men's arts then their natures, as endited rather from their
brains then hearts. The drop of one word may show more then the stream of an
whole oration; and our Statesman by examining such fugitive passages (which
have stolen on a sudden out of the parties mouth) arrives at his best
intelligence.
13
In Court-factions he keeps himself in a free neutrality. Otherwise to engage
himself needlessely were both folly and danger. When Francis the first, King of
France, was consulting with his Captains how to lead his army Pere de Lancre,
of the uncertainty of things, lib. 2. fourth discourse
over the Alps into Italy, whether this way or that way, Amarill his fool
sprung out of a corner, where he sat unseen, and bade them rather take care
which way they should bring their army out of Italy back again. Thus is it
easy for one to interest and embarque himself in others quarrels, but much
difficulty it is to be disengaged from them afterward. Nor will our Statesman
entitle himself a party in any feminine discords, knowing that women's jarres
breed men's wars.

14
Yet he counts neutrality profaneness in such matters wherein God, his Prince,
the Church, or State are concerned. Indeed, He that meddleth with strife not
belonging unto him is like one that takes a dog by the ears. Prove. 26.17.
Yet if the dog worrieth a sheep, we may, yea ought to rescue it from his
teeth, and must be champions for innocence when it is overborn with might. He
that will stand neuter in such matters of moment, wherein his calling commands
him to be a party, with Servilius in Rome, will please neither side: Of whom
the Historian says, P. Servilius medium se gerendo, nec plebis vitavit odium,
nec apud Patres gratiam inivit. And just it is with God, that they should be
strained in the twist, who stride so wide as to set their legs in two opposite
sides. Indeed an upright shoe may fit both feet, but never saw I glove that
would serve both hands. Neutrality in matters of an indifferent nature may fit
well, but never suit well in important matters, of far different conditions.

15
He is the center wherein lines of intelligence meet from all foreign countries.
He is careful that his outlandish instructions be full, true, and speedy; not
with the sluggard telling for news at noone, that the sun is risen. But more
largely hereof in the Ambassador, hereafter.

He refuses all underhand pensions from foreign Princes. 16
Indeed honourary rewards received with the approbation of his Sovereigne may
be lawful, and less dangerous. For although even such gifts tacitly oblige
him by way of gratitude to do all good offices to that foreign Prince whose
Pensioner he is; yet his counsels pass not but with an open abatement, in
regard of his known engagements, and so the State is armed against the advice
of such, who are well known to lean to one side. But secret pensions which flow
from foreign Princes, like the river Anas in Spain, under ground, not known or
discerned, are most mischievous. The receivers of such will play under-board at
the Counsell-table; and the eating and digesting of such outlandish food will
by degrees fill their veins with outlandish blood, even in their very hearts.

His Masterpiece is in negotiating for his own Master with foreign Princes. 17
At Rhodes there was a contention betwixt Apelles and Protogenes, corrivalls in
the Mystery of Limming. Apelles with his pencill drew a very slender even line;
Protogenes drew another more small and slender in the midst thereof with
another color: Apelles again with a third line of a different color drew
through the midst of that Protogenes had made, Plin. not. Hist. lib. 34. cap. 10.
Nullum relinquens amplius subtilitati locum. Thus our Statesman traverseth
matters, doubling and redoubling in his foreign negotiations with the
Politicians of other Princes, winding, and entrenching themselves mutually
within the thoughts each of other, till at last our Statesman leaves no degree
of subtlety to go beyond him.

To conclude: Some plead that dissembling is Lawful in the State-craft, upon
the presupposition that men must meet with others which dissemble. Yea they
hold, that thus to counterfeit, se defendendo, against a crafty corrivall, is
no sin, but a just punishment on our adversary, who first began it. And
therefore Statesmen sometimes must use crooked shoes, to fit hurled feet.
Besides, the honest Politician would quickly be beggered, if, receiving black
money from cheatours, he pays them in good silver, and not in their own coin
back again. For my part, I confess that herein I rather see what then whither
to fly; neither able to answer their arguments, nor willing to allow their
practice. But what shall I say? They need to have steady heads who can dive
into these gulfs of policy, and come out with a safe conscience. I Will look no
longer on these whirl-pools of State, lest my pen turn giddy.

WILLIAM CECIL Baron of Burgleigh and Lord Treasurer of England. He dyed Anno
1598. Aged 77 years. W. Marshall sculp:
CHAP. 6. The life of William Cecil Lord Burleigh.
WIlliam Cecil born at Bourn in Lincolnshire, descended from the ancient and
worshipful Family of the Sitsilts or Cecils of Alterynnis in Herefordshire, on
the confines of Wales; a name which a great Verstegen, restitut. of decaid
intelligence, page 312.
Antiquary thinks probably derived from the Roman Cecilii. No credit is to be
given to their pens, who tax him with meannesse of birth, and whose malice is
so general against all goodness, that it had been a slander if this worthy
man had not been slandred by them: The servant is not above his master; and we
know what aspersions their malice sought to cast on the Queen her self.

He being first bred in S. John's College in Cambridge, went thence to Grayes
Inn (and used it as an Inn indeed, studying there in his Passage to the
Court) where he attained good learning in the Laws: yet his skill in fencing
made him not daring to quarrel, who in all his lifetime neither Cambd.
Elizab. in Anno 1598.
sued any, nor was sued himself. He was after Master of the Requests (the first
that ever bare that office) unto the Duke of Sommerset, Lord Protector, and
was knighted by King Edward the sixth.

One S^. John Hayward in his Edward sixth, p. 417.
challenges him to have been a main contriver of that act, and unnatural will
of King Edward the sixth, wherein the King passing by his sisters, Marie and
Elizabeth, entailed the Crown on Queen Jane; and that he furnished that act
with reasons of State, as Judge Montague filled it with arguments of Law.
Indeed his hand wrote it, as Secretary of State, but his heart consented not
thereto; yea he openly Cambden, ut prius.
opposed it, though at last yielding to the greatness of Northumberland, in an
age wherein it was present drowning, not to swim along with the stream. But as
the Aristot. lib. 2. de coelo cap. 4. and 10.
Philosopher tells us, that though the Planets be whirled about daily from East
to West by the motion of the Primum mobile, yet have they also a contrary
proper motion of their own, from West to East, which they slowly yet surely
move at their leisures: so Cecill had secret counter-endeavours against the
strain of the Court herein, and privately advanced his rightful intentions
against the foresaid Dukes ambition; and we see that afterward Queen Marie not
only pardoned but employed him; so that toward the end of her reign he stood
in some twilight of her favor.

As for Sr. Edward Montague Lord chief Justice, what he did was by command
against his own will, as appears by his written protestation at his death,
still in the hands of his honorable posterity. But whilst in this army of
offenders, the Nobility in the ^ront made an escape for themselves, Queen
Mary's displeasure overtook the old Judge in the rere, the good old man being
not able with such speed to provide for himself; yea though he had done nothing
but by general consent and command, the rest of the Lords laid load on him,
desirous that the Queens anger should send him on an errand to the prison, and
thence to the scaffold, to excuse themselves from going on the same message.
However, after some imprisonment he was pardoned; a sufficient argument, that
the Queen conceived him to concur passively in that action.

In Queen Elizabeth's days he was made Secretary of State, Master of the Wards,
Lord Treasurer, and at last after long service Baron of Burleigh. For the Queen
honored her honors in conferring them sparingly, thereby making Titles more
substantial, wherewith she paid many for their service. The best
demonstration of his care in stewarding her Treasure was this, that the Queen,
vying gold and silver with the King of Spain, had money or credit, when the
other had neither; her Exchequer, though but a pond in comparison, holding
water, when his river, fed with a spring from the Indies, was dreined dry.

In that grand faction betwixt Leicester and Sussex, he meddled not openly,
though it is easy to tell whom he wished the best to. Indeed this cunning
Wrestler would never catch hold to grapple openly with Leicester (as having
somewhat the disadvantage of him both in height and strength) but as they ran
to their several goles, if they chanced to meet, Burleigh would fairly give
him a trip, and be gone; and the Earl had many a rub laid in his way, yet never
saw who put it there.

It Is true, the Swordmen accused him as too cold in the Queens credit, and
backward in fighting against foreign enemies. Indeed he would never engage the
State in a war, except necessity, or her Majesty's honor, sounded the alarm:
But no reason he should be counted an enemy to the Sparks of Valor, who was
so careful to provide them fuel, and pay the Soldier. Otherwise, in vain do
the brows frown, the eyes sparkle, the tongue threaten, the fist bend, and the
arm strike, except the belly be fed.

The Queen reflected her favor highly upon him, counting him both her
Treasurer, and her principal Treasure. She would cause him always to sit down
in her presence, because troubled with the gout, and used to tell him: My Lord,
we make much of you, not for your bad legs, but for your good head. This caused
him to be much envied of some great ones at Court; and at one time no fewer
then the Cambden. Elizab. Anno 1579.
Marquess of Winchester, Duke of Norfolk, Earls of Arundel, Northumberland,
Westmerland, Pembroke and Leicester combining against him, taking advantage
about his making over some moneys beyond sea to the French Protestants, and on
some other occasions; Sr Nicholas Throgmorton advised them first to clap him up
in prison, saying, that if he were once shut up, men would open their mouths to
speak freely against him. But the Queen understanding hereof, and standing, as
I may say, in the very prison-doore, quashed all their designs, and freed him
from the mischief projected against him.

He was a good friend to the Church, as then established by Law; he used to
advise his eldest son Thomas never to bestow any great cost, or to build any
great house on an Impropriation, as fearing the foundation might fail
hereafter. A Patron to both Universities, chiefly to Cambridge, whereof he was
Chancellor; and though Rent-corn first grew in the head of Sr Thomas Smith, it
was ripened by Burleighs assistance, whereby though the rents of Colleges
stand still, their revennues increase.

No man was more pleasant and merry at meals; and he had a pretty wit-rack in
himself, to make the dumb to speak, to draw speech out of the most sullen and
Hottoman in descrip. of the Ambassador witnesses so much, who had be^n at his
table.
silent guest at his table, to show his disposition in any point he should
propound. For foreign intelligence, though he traded sometimes on the stock of
Secretary Walsingham, yet wanted he not a plentiful bank of his own. At night
when he put off his gown, he used to say, Lie there, Lord Treasurer, and
bidding adieu to all State Affairs, disposed himself to his quiet rest.

Some looking on the estate he left, have wondered that it was so great, and
afterward wondered more that it was so little, having considered what Offices
he had, and how long he enjoyed them. His harvest lasted every day for above
thirty years together, wherein he allowed some of his servants the same
courtesy Boaz granted to Ruth, to glean even among the sheaves, and to suffer
some handfulls also to fall on purpose for them, whereby they raised great
estates.

To draw to a conclusion: There arose a great question in State, whether war
with Spain should be continued, or a peace drawn up? The Sword and Gown-men
brought weighty arguments on both sides, stamping also upon them with their
private interests, to make them more heavy: Burleigh was all against war, now
old, being desirous to depart in peace, both private in his Conscience, and
public in the State. But his life was determined before the question was fully
decided. In his sickness the Queen often visited him, a good plaster to
assuage his pain, but unable to prolong his life; so that, Cum satis naturae,
satisque gloriae, putriae autem non satis vixisset, in the seventy seventh
year of his age, Anno 1598. he exchanged this life for a better. God measured
his outward happiness not by an ordinary standard: How many great Undertakers
in State set in a cloud, whereas he shined to the last? Herein much is to be
ascribed to the Queens constancy, who to confute the observation of Feminine
fickleness, where her favor did light it did lodge; more to his own temper
and moderation, whereas violent and boisterous meddlers in State cripple
themselves with aches in their age; most to Gods goodness, who honors them
that honor him. He saw Thomas his eldest son richly married to an honorable
coheir; Robert, able to stand alone in Court, having a competent portion of
favor, which he knew thriftily to improve, being a pregnant proficient in
State-discipline.

CHAP. 7. The good Judge.
THe good Advocate, whom we Lib. 2. cap. 1.
formerly described, is since by his Princes favor, and own deserts, advanced
to be a Judge: which his place he freely obtained with Sr. Augustine Bolton in
his funer. notes on him.
Nicolls, whom King James used to call the Judge that would give no money.
Otherwise they that buy Justice by wholesale, to make themselves savers must
sell it by retail.

Maxim 1
He is patient and attentive in hearing the pleadings on both sides; and
hearkens to the witnesses, though tedious. He may give a waking testimony who
has but a dreaming utterance; and many country people must be impertinent,
before they can be pertinent, and cannot give evidence about an hen, but first
they must begin with it in the egg. All which our Judge is contented to
hearken to.

2
He meets not a testimony halfway, but stays till it come at him. He that
proceeds on half-evidence, will not do quarter-justice. Our Judge will not go
till he is lead. If any shall brow-beat a pregnant witness, on purpose to make
his proof miscarry, he checketh them, and helps the witness that labors in
his delivery. On the other side, he nips those Lawyers, who under a pretense of
kindness to lend a witness some words, give him new matter, yea clean
contrary to what he intended.

Having heard with patience, 3
he gives sentence with uprightness. For when he put on his robes, he put off
his relations to any; and like Melchisedech becomes without pedigree. His
private affections are swallowed up in the common cause, as rivers lose their
names in the ocean. He therefore allows no noted favorites, which cannot but
cause multiplication of fees, and suspicion of by-ways.

He silences that Lawyer who seeks to set the neck of a bad cause, 4
once broken with a definitive sentence; and causes that contentious suits be
spued out, as the surfets of Courts.

He so hates bribes, 5
that he is jealous to receive any kindness above the ordinary proportion of
friendship; lest like the Sermons of wandering Preachers, they should end in
begging. And surely Integrity is the proper portion of a Judge. Men have a
touchstone whereby to try gold, but gold is the touchstone whereby to try
men. It was a shrewd gird which Catulus gave the Roman Judges for acquitting
Clodius a great malefactor, when he met them going home well attended with
Officers; You do well (quoth he) to be well Plutar. in the life of Cicero, page
872.
guarded for your safety, lest the money be taken away from you, you took for
bribes. Our Judge also detesteth the trick of Mendicant Friars, who will touch
no money themselves, but have a boy with a bag to receive it for them.

When he sits upon life, 6
in judgment he remembers mercy. Then (they say) a butcher may not be of the
Jurie, much less let him be the Judge. Oh let him take heed how he strikes,
that has a dead hand. It was the charge Queen Marie gave to Judge Morgan,
chief Justice of the common Pleas, that notwithstanding the old Holinshed in
Queen Marie, page 1112.
error amongst Judges did not admit any witness to speak, or any other matter
to be heard in favor of the adversary, her Majesty being party; yet her
Highness pleasure was that whatsoever could be brought in the favor of the
Subject should be admitted and heard.

7
If the cause be difficult, his diligence is the greater to sift it out. For
though there be mention, Psalm. 37.6. of righteousness as clear as the
noonday, yet God forbid that that innocence which is no clearer then twilight
should be condemned. And seeing ones oath commands another life, he searches
whether malice did not command that oath: yet when all is done, the Judge may
be deceived by false evidence. But blame not the hand of the dial, if it
points at a false hour, when the fault's in the wheels of the clock which
direct it, and are out of frame.

8
The sentence of condemnation he pronounces with all gravity. It Is best when
steeped in the Judges tears. He avoideth all jesting on men in misery: easily
may he put them out of countenance, whom he has power to put out of life.

9
Such as are unworthy to live, and yet unfitted to die, he provides shall be
instructed. By Gods mercy, and good teaching, the reprive of their bodies may
get the pardon of their souls, and one days longer life for them here may
procure a blessed eternity for them hereafter, as may appear by this memorable
Example. It happened about the year one thousand five hundred and fifty six
in the town of Melchior Adamus in vit. Iac. Andreae, page 639.
Weissenstein in Germany that a Jew for theft he had committed, was in this
cruel manner to be executed: He was hanged by the feet with his head downwards
betwixt two dogs, which constantly snatched and bit at him. The strangeness of
the torment moved Jacobus Andreas (a grave, moderate, and learned Divine as any
in that age) to go to behold it. Coming thither he found the poor wretch, as
he hung, repeating Verses out of the Hebrew Psalms, wherein he cried out to
God for mercy. Andreas hereupon took occasion to counsel him to trust in Jesus
Christ the true Savior of mankind: The Jew embracing the Christian Faith,
requested but this one thing, that he might be taken down and be baptized,
though presently after he were hanged again (but by the neck as Christian
malefactors suffered) which was accordingly granted him.

He is exact to do justice in civil Suits betwixt Sovereigne and Subject. 10
This will most ingratiate him with his Prince at last. Kings neither are, can,
nor should be Lawyers themselves, by reason of higher State-employments, but
herein they see with the eyes of their Judges, and at last will break those
false spectacles which (in point of Law) shall be found to have deceived them.

He counts the Rules of State and the Laws of the Realm mutually support each
other. 11
Those who made the Laws to be not only disparate, but even opposite terms to
maxims of Government, were true friends neither to Laws nor Government. Indeed
Salus Reip. is Charta maxima: extremity makes the next the best remedy. Yet
though hot waters be good to be given to one in a swound, they will burn his
heart out who drinks them constantly, when in health. Extraordinary courses are
not ordinarily to be used, when not enforced by absolute necessity.

And thus we leave our good Judge to receive a just reward of his integrity
from the Judge of Judges, at the great Assize of the world.

CHAP. 8. The life of Sr. JOHN MARKHAM.
John Markham was born at Markham in Nottinghamshire, descended of an ancient
and worthy family. He employed his youth in the studying of the Municipall Law
of this realm, wherein he attained to such eminency, that King Edward the
fourth Knighted him, and made him Lord chief 13. Maii. 1. Edwardi. 4.
Justice of the Kings Bench in the place of Sr John Fortescue, that learned and
upright Judge, who fled away with King Henry the sixth.

Yet Fortescue was not missed, because Markham succeeded him: and that loss,
which otherwise could not be repaired, now could not be perceived. For though
these two Judges did severally lean to the sides of Lancaster and York, yet
both sat upright in matters of Judicature.

We will instance and insist on one memorable act of our Judge, which though
single in it self, was plural in the concernings thereof. And let the Reader
know, that I have not been careless to search, though unhappy not to find, the
original Record, perchance abolished on purpose, and silenced for telling
tales to the disgrace of great ones. We must now be contented to write this
Story out of the English Chronicles; Fabian. page 497 etc. Hollinshed page 670.
and Stow in 12. of Edward the fourth.
and let him die of drougth without pity, who will not quench his thirst at the
river, because he cannot come at the fountain.

King Edward the fourth having married into the family of the Woodvills
(Gentlemen of more antiquity then wealth, and of higher spirits then fortunes)
thought it fit for his own honor to bestow honor upon them: But he could not
so easily provide them of wealth, as titles. For honor he could derive from
himself, like light from a candle, without any diminishing of his own luster;
whereas wealth flowing from him, as water from a fountain, made the spring the
shallower. Wherefore he resolved to cut down some prime subjects, and to
engraff the Queens kindred into their estates, which otherwise like suckers must
feed on the stock of his own Exchequer.

There was at this time one Sr Thomas Cook, late Lord Mayor of London, and
Knight of the Bath, one who had well licked his fingers under Queen Margaret
(whose Wardroper he was, and customer of Hampton) a man of a great estate. It
was agreed that he should be accused of high Treason, and a Commission of Oyer
and Terminer granted forth to the Lord Mayor, the Duke of Clarence, the Earl of
Warwick, the Lord Rivers, Sr. John Markham, Sr. John Fogg, etc. to try him in
Guild Hall: And the King by private instructions to the Judge appeared so
far, that Cook, though he was not, must be found guilty, and if the Law were
too short, the Judge must stretch it to the purpose.

The fault laid to his charge was for lending moneys to Queen Margaret, wife to
King Henry the sixth; the proof, was the confession of one Hawkins, who being
racked in the Tower had confessed so much. The Counsel for the King, hanging
as much weight on the smallest wier as it would hold, aggravated each
particular, and by their Rhetorical flashes blew the fault up to a great
height. Sr Thomas Cook pleaded for himself, that Hawkins indeed upon a season
came to him, and requested him to lend one thousand marks, upon good security.
But he desired first to know for whom the money should be: and understanding it
was for Queen Margaret, denied to lend any money, though at last the said
Hawkins descended so low as to require but one hundred pounds, and departed
without any penny lent him.

Judge Markham in a grave speech did recapitulate, select and collate the
material points on either side, showing that the proof reached not the charge
of high Treason, and misprision of Treason was the highest it could amount to,
and intimated to the Jurie, to be tender in matter of life, and discharge good
consciences.

The Jurie being wise men (whose apprehensions could make up an whole sentence
of every nod of the Judge) saw it behoved them to draw up Treason into as
narrow a compass as might be, lest it became their own case; for they lived in
a troublesome world, wherein the cards were so shuffled, that two Kings were
turned up trump at once, which amazed men how to play their games. Whereupon
they acquitted the prisoner of high Treason, and found him guilty, as the Judge
directed.

Yet it cost Sr Thomas Cook, before he could get his liberty, eight hundred
pounds to the Queen, and eight thousand pounds to the King: A sum in that age
more sounding like the ransom of a Prince, then the fine of a Subject.
Besides, the Lord Rivers (the Queens Father) had, during his Imprisonment,
despoyled his houses, one in the city, another in the country of plate and
furniture, for which he never received a penie recompense. Yet God righted him
of the wrongs men did him, by blessing the remnant of his estate to him, and
his posterity, which still flourish at Giddy Hall in Essex.

As for Sr John Markham, the Kings displeasure fell so heavy on him, that he
was outed of his place, and Sr Thomas Billing put in his room, though the one
lost that Office with more honor then the other got it; and gloried in this,
that though the King could make him no Judge, he could not make him no upright
Judge. He lived privately the rest of his days, having (besides the estate got
by his practice) fair lands by Margaret his wife, daughter and coheir to Sr
Simon Leak Burtons Le^^cestershire, page 577.
of Cotham in Nottinghamshire, whose Mother Joan was daughter and heir of Sr
John Talbot, of Swannington in Leicestershire.

CHAP. 9. The good Bishop.
HE is an Overseer of a Flock of Shepherds, as a Minister is of a Flock of Gods
sheep. Divine providence and his Princes bounty advanced him to the Place,
whereof he was no whit ambitious: Only he counts it good manners to sit there
where God has placed him, though it be higher then he conceives himself to
deserve, and hopes that he who called him to the Office has or will in some
measure fit him for it.

His life is so spotless, Maxim 1
that Malice is angry with him, because she cannot be angry with him: because
she can find no just cause to accuse him. And as Diogen. Laerr. lib. 6. page
212. in vit. Diogenis.
Diogenes confuted him who denied there was any motion, by saying nothing but
walking before his eyes; so our Bishop takes no notice of the false accusations
of people disaffected against his order, but walks on circumspectly in his
calling, really refelling their cavils by his conversation. A Bishops bare
presence at a marriage in his own diocese, is by the Law interpreted for a
license; and what actions soever he graceth with his company, he is conceived
to privilege them to be lawful, which makes him to be more wary in his
behavior.

With his honor, 2
his holiness and humility does increase. His great Place makes not his piety
the less: far be it from him that the glittering of the candlestick should
dim the shining of his candle. The meanest Minister of Gods word may have
free access unto him: whosoever brings a good cause brings his own welcome
with him. The pious poor may enter in at his wide gates, when not so much as
his wicket shall be open to wealthy unworthiness.

3
He is diligent and faithful in preaching the Gospel: either by his pen,
Evangelizo manu and scriptione, says a strict Reinold. de Idol. Romans Eccles.
Epist. dedicat.
Divine; or by his vocal Sermons (if age and other indispensable occasions
hinder him not) teaching the Clergy to preach, and the Laity to live,
according to the ancient Council. To^etan. 2. Cap. 2. Tom. 4. page 820. Council.
Constant. 6. Can. 19. Tom. 5. page 328. Council. Aurel. Can. 33. page 723. and
lately, Council Trident. Sess 24. Can. 4
Canons. Object not that it is unfitting he should lie Perdue, who is to walk
the round, and that Governing as an higher employment is to silence his
Preaching: For Preaching is a principal part of Governing, and Christ himself
rules his Church by his Word. Hereby Bishops shall govern hearts, and make men
yield unto them a true and willing obedience, reverencing God in them. Many in
consumptions have recovered their healths by returning to their native air
wherein they were born: If Episcopacy be in any declination or diminution of
honor, the going back to the painfulnesse of the primitive Fathers in
Preaching, is the only way to repair it.

4
Painful, pious, and peaceable Ministers are his principal Favorites. If he
meets them in his way (yea he will make it his way to meet them) he bestows
all grace and luster upon them.

5
He is careful that Church Censures be justly and solemnly inflicted: namely,
1 Admonition, when the Church only chideth, but with the rod in her hand. 2
Excommunication, the Mittimus whereby the Malefactor is sent to the gaolour of
hell, and delivered to Satan. 3 Aggravation, whereby for his greater contempt,
he is removed out of the jail into the dungeon. 4 Penance, which is or should
be inward repentance, made visible by open confession, whereby the Congregation
is satisfied for the public offense given her. 5 Absolution, which fetches
the penitent out of hell, and opens the door of heaven for him, which
Excommunication had formerly locked, and Aggravation bolted against him.


As much as lies in his power, he either prevents or corrects those too
frequent abuses, whereby offenders are not Acts 2.37.
pricked to the heart, but let blood in the purse; and when the Court has her
costs, the Church has no damage given her, nor any reparation for the open
scandal she received by the parties offense. Let the memory of Worthy Bishop
Lake ever survive, whose hand had the true seasoning of a Sermon with Law and
Gospel, and who was most fatherly grave in inflicting Church Censures: Such
offenders as were unhappy in deserving, were happy in doing penance in his
presence.

He is careful and happy in suppressing of Heresies and Schisms. 6
He distinguishes of Schismatics, as Phisicians do of Leprous people: Some
are infectious, The Leprosy Eleph^ntiasis not infectious to the company.
others not; Some are active to seduce others, others quietly enjoy their
opinions in their own consciences. The latter by his mildness he easily
reduces to the truth; whereas the Surgeons rigourously handling it, often
breaks that bone quite off, which formerly was but out of joint: Toward the
former he uses more severity, yet endeavoring first to inform him aright,
before he punishes him. To use force first before people are fairly taught the
truth, is to knock a nail into a board, without wimbling a hole for it, which
then either not enters, or turns crooked, or splits the wood it pierces.

He is very merciful in punishing offenders; 7
both in matters of life and livelihood, seeing in S. John's Language the same
word John. 3 17.
B^os signifies both. He had rather draw tears, then blood. It was the honor
of the Roman State, as yet being Pagan, Livius lib. 1. page 20.
In hoc gloriari licet, nulli Gentium mitiores placuisse poenas: Yea for the
first seventy years (till the reign of Ancus Martius) they were without a
prison. Clemency therefore in a Christian Bishop is most proper: O let not the
Stars of our Church be herein turned to Comets, whose appearing in place of
judicature presageth to some death or destruction. I confess that even Justice
it self is a kind of mercy: But God grant that my portion of mercy be not paid
me in that coin. And though the highest detestation of sin best agrees with
Clergymen, yet ought they to cast a severe eye on the vice and example, and a
merciful eye on the person.

8
None more forward to forgive a wrong done to himself. Worthy Archbishop Cambd.
Elizab. in Anno 1588. p. 538.
Whitgift interceded to Queen Elizabeth for remitting of heavy fines laid on
some of his Adversaries (learning from Christ his Master to be a mediator for
them) till his importunity had angered the Queen, yea and till his importunity
had pleased her again, and gave not over till he got them to be forgiven.

9
He is very careful on whom he lays hands in Ordination; lest afterward he
has just cause to beshrew his fingers, and with Martianus, a Bishop of
Constantinople (who made Sabbatius a Jew and a turbulent man Priest) wish he
had then rather laid his hand on the Socrat. Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 20.
briers, then such a man's head. For the sufficiency of Scholarship he goes by
his own eye; but for their honest life, he is guided by other men's hands, which
would not so often deceive him, were Testimonialls a matter of less courtesy
and more conscience. For whosoever subscribes them enters into bond to God and
the Church, under an heavy forfeiture, to avouch the honesty of the party
commended; and, as Judah for Benjamin, they become sureties for the young man
unto his father. Nor let them think to void the band and make it but a blank
with that clause, so far forth as we know, or words to the like effect: For
what says the Apostle? God is not mocked.

He meddleth as little as may be with Temporal matters: 10
having little skill in them, and less will to them. Not that he is unworthy
to manage them, but they unworthy to be managed by him. Yea generally the most
dexterous in spiritual matters are left handed in temporal business, and go
but untowardly about them. Wherefore our Bishop, with reverend Funeral Sermon.
on him, page 19.
Andrews, meddleth little in civil affairs, being out of his profession and
element. Heaven is his vocation, and therefore he counts earthly employments
avocations: except in such cases which lie (as I may say) in the Marches of
Divinity, and have connection with his calling; or else when temporal matters
meddle with him, so that he must rid them out of his way. Yet he rather
admireth then condemns such of his brethren, who are strengthened with that
which would distract him, making the concurrence of spiritual and temporal
power in them support one another, and using worldly business as their
recreation to heavenly employment.

If called to the Court he there does all good offices, 11
betwixt Prince and people, striving to remove all misprisions and
disaffections, and advancing unity and concord. They that think the Church may
flourish when the Commonwealth does wither may as well conceive that the
brains may be sound when pia matter is perished. When in the way of a Confessor
he privately tells his Prince of his faults, he knows by Nathans parable, to go
the nearest way home by going far about.

He improves his power with his Prince for the Churches good, 12
in maintaining both true religion and the maintenance thereof; lest some
pretending with pious Ezechiah to beat down the brazen serpent, the occasion of
Idolatry, do indeed with sacrilegious Ahaz take away the brazen bulls from the
Laver, and set it on a pavement of stone. He jointly advances the pains and
gains, the work and wages of Ministers, which going together make a flourishing
Clergy, with Gods blessing, and without man's envy.

13
His mortified mind is no whit moved with the magnificent vanities of the
Court: no more then a dead corpse is affected with a velvet herse-cloth over it.
He is so far from wondering at their pomps, that though he looks daily on
them, he scarce sees them, having his eyes taken up with higher objects; and
only admires at such, as can admire such low matters. He is loved and feared
of all; and his presence frights the Swearer either out of his oaths or into
silence, and he stains all other men's lives with the clearness of his own.

14
Yet he daily prays God to keep him in so slippery a place. Elisha prayed
that a double portion of Eliahs Spirit might rest upon him. A Father descanteth
hereon, that a double portion of grace was necessary for Elisha, who was
gracious at Court, lived in a plentiful way, and favored of the Kings of
Israel; whereas Eliah lived poorly, and privately: And more wisdom is
requisite to manage prosperity then affliction.

15
In his grave writings he aims at Gods glory, and the Churches peace, with that
worthy Prelate, the second Jewel of Salisbury, whose Comments and
Controversies will transmit his memory to all Posterity: Whose dying pen did
write of Christian Union,
How Church with Church might safely keep Communion.
Commend his care, although the cure do miss;
The woe is ours, the happiness is his:
Who finding discords daily to increase,
Because he could not live, would die, in peace.


He ever makes honorable mention of foreign Protestant Churches; 16
even when he differs and dissents from them. The worst he wishes the French
Church is a Protestant King: not giving the left hand of Fellowship to them,
and reserving his right for some other. Cannot Christ's coat be of different
colors, but also it must be of several seams? railing one on another, till
these Sisters, by bastardizing one another, make the Popish Church the sole
heir to all truth. How often did reverend S. G. (...). in his life. p^^. 63, 64.
Whitgift (knowing he had the far better cheer) send a mess of meat from
his own table to the Ministers of Geneva? relieving many of them by bountiful
contributions. Indeed English charity to foreign Protestant Churches in some
respect is payment of a debt: their children deserve to be our welcome guests,
whose Grandfathers were our loving hosts in the days of Queen Mary.

He is thankful to that College whence he had his education. 17
He conceived himself to hear his Mother-Colledge always speaking to him in
the language of Joseph to Pharaohs Butler, Genesis 40.14.
But think on me, I pray thee, when it shall be well with thee. If he himself
has but little, the less from him is the more acceptable: A drop from a
sponge is as much as a tun of water from a Marish. He bestows on it Books, or
Plate, or Lands or Building; and the Houses of the Prophets rather lack
watering then planting, there being enough of them, if they had enough.

He is hospitable in his housekeeping according to his estate. 18
His bounty is with discretion to those that deserve it: Charity mistaken,
which relieves idle people, like a dead corpse, only feeds the vermin it
breeds. The rankness of his housekeeping produces no riot in his Family. S.
Paul calls a Christian Family well ordered, Romans 6.5. Theoph. in locum.
a Church in their house. If a private man's house be a Parochial, a Bishops
may seem a Cathedral Church, as much better as bigger, so decently all things
therein are disposed.

We come now to give a double Example of a godly Bishop: the first out of the
Primitive times, the second out of the English Church since the Reformation,
both excellent in their several ways.

St AVGUSTINE the Learned and painful Bishop of Hippo, in Africa, for the
space of 40 years where he dyed, in the 70th. year of His Age, about ye year
of or Lord 430. W. Marshall sculp.
CHAP. 11. The life of S. AUGUSTINE.
AUgustine was born in the City of Tagasta in Africa, of Gentile parentage,
Patricius and Monica, though their means bore not proportion to their birth, so
that the breeding of their son at Learning much weakened their estate, in so
much as Romanian a noble gentleman (all the world is bound to be thankful to
S. Augustines Benefactour) bountifully advanced his education.

It will be needless to speak of his youth, vicious in manners and erroneous
in doctrine, especially seeing he has so largely accused himself in his
Confessions. It Is tyranny to trample on him that prostrates himself; and whose
sins God has graciously forgotten, let no man despightfully remember.

Being made a Presbyter in the Church of Hippo, this great favor was allowed
him, to preach constantly, though in the presence of Posidonius in vit. August.
cap 5.
Valerius the Bishop: whereas in that age to hear a Priest preach when that a
Bishop was in the Church, was as great a wonder as the Moon shining at midday.
Yea godly Valerius, one that could do better then he could speak, and had a
better heart then tongue, (being a Grecian, and therefore not well understood
of the Africans) procured Augustine in his lifetime to be designed Bishop of
Hippo, and to be joined Idem cap. 8.
fellow-Bishop with himself, though it was flatly against the Canons.

For a Coadjutour commonly proves an hinderer, and by his envious clashing does
often dig his Partners grave with whom he is joined; besides that such a
superinstallation seems an unlawful bigamy, marrying two husbands at the same
time to the same Church. Yea, S. Augustine himself, afterward understanding
that this was against the Constitutions of the Church, was sorry thereat
(though others thought his eminency above Canons, and his deserts his
dispensation) and desiring that his ignorance herein should not misguide
others, obtained that the Canons (then not so hard to be kept as known, because
obscure and scattered) were compiled together and published, that the Clergy
might know what they were bound to observe.

Being afterward sole Bishop, he was diligent in continual preaching, and
beating down of Heretics especially the Manicheans, in whose Fence-school he
was formerly brought up, and therefore knew best ^^

To come to his death. It happened that the Northern countries, called by
Methodius Martyr and Paul Diacon.
some Vagina gentium, the Sheath of people (though more properly they may be
termed, Ensis dei, the Sword of God) sent forth the Vandalls, Albans, and
Goths, into the Southern parts, God punishing the pride of the Roman Empire to
be confounded by Barbarous enemies. Out of Spain they came into Africa, and
massacred all before them. The neighboring villages like little children did
fly to Hippo the mother-City for succor: thirteen months was Hippo besieged
by the Goths, and S. Augustine being therein prayed to God either to remove
the siege, or to give the Christians therein patience to suffer, or to take him
out of this miserable world, which he obtained, and dyed in the third month of
the siege.

Falling very sick (besides the disease of age and grief) he lay languishing a
pretty time, and took order that none should come to him save when his meat was
brought, or Physicians visited him, that so he might have elbow-room the more
freely to put off the clothes of his mortality.

The motion of Piety in him (by custom now made natural) was velocior in
fine, daily breathing out most pious Ejaculations. He died intestate, not for
lack of time to make a will, but means to bestow, having formerly passed his
soul to God, whilst his body of course bequeathed it self to the earth. As for
the books of his own making, a treasure beyond estimation, he carefully
consigned them to several Libraries. He dyed in the seventy sixth year of his
age, having lived a Bishop almost forty years. Thus a Saint of God, like an
oak, may be cut down in a moment; but how many years was he a growing! Not long
after his death the City of Hippo was sacked by the Goths, it being no wonder
if Troy was taken, when the Palladium was first fetched away from it.

NICHOLAS RIDLEY Bishop of LONDON. He died a constant Martyr for the Truth, and
was burnt at Oxford the 16th of October: 1555. W Marshall sculp:
CHAP. 11. The life of Bishop RIDLEY.
NIcholas Ridley born in the Bishopric of Duresme, but descended from the
ancient and worshipful family of the Ridleys of Willimotes-wike in
Northumberland. He was brought up in Pembrokehall in Cambridge, where he so
profited in general Learning, that he was chosen Fellow of the College, and
Anno 1533 was Proctour of the University.

At which time two Oxford men, George Throgmorton, and John Ashwell, came to
Cambridge, and in the public Schools challenged any to dipsute with them on
these questions, An Ius civil sit medicina praestantius? An Mulier condemnata,
bis ruptis laqueis, sit tertio suspendenda?


It seems they were men of more brow then brain, being so ambitious to be
known, that they had rather be hissed down then not come upon the stage. Sure
Oxford afforded as many more able disputants, as Civil Law yielded more
profound and needful questions. Throgmorton had the fortune of daring men, to
be worsted, being so pressed by John Redman and Nicholas Caius de Antiquit.
Cant. Acad. p. 19.20.
Ridley the opponents, that his second refused at all to dispute.

Indeed an University is an only fit match for an University; and any private
man who in this Nature undertakes a whole body, being of necessity put to the
worst, deserves not Phaetons Epitaph, magnis, but stultis tamen excidit ausis.
And though Brian Twine page 336.
one objects, Neminem Cantabrigiensium constat Oxonienses unquam ad certamen
provocasse; yet less learning cannot be inferred from more modesty. The best
is, the two Sisters so well agree together that they only contend to surpass
each other in mutual kindness, and forbidding all duells betwixt their
children, make up their joint forces against the common foe of them and true
Religion.

He was after chosen Master of Penbroke Hall, and kept the same whilst Bishop
of Rochester and London, till outed in the first of Queen Marie. Not that he
was covetous to hold his place in the College, but the College ambitious to
hold him; as who would willingly part with a jewel. He was in good esteem with
Henry the eighth, and in better with pious King Edward the sixth, and was
generally beloved of all the Court, being one of an handsome person, comely
presence, affable speech, and courteous behavior.

But before I go further, Reader, pardon a digression, and yet is it none, for
it is necessary. I have within the narrow scantling of my experimental
remembrance observed strange alteration in the worlds valuing of those learned
men which lived in that age; and take it plainly without welt or guard, for he
that smarts for speaking truth has a plaster in his own conscience.

When I was a child I was possessed with a reverend esteem of them, as most
holy and pious men, dying Martyrs in the days of Queen Marie for profession of
the truth; which opinion having from my Parents taken quiet possession of my
soul, they must be very forcible reasons which eject it.

Since that time they have been much cried down in the mouths of many, who
making a Coroners enquest upon their death, have found them little better then
Felons de se, dying in their own blood, for a mere formality, de modo, of the
manner of the Presence, and a Sacrifice in the Sacrament, who might easily with
one small distinction have knocked off their fetters, and saved their lives. By
such the Coronet of Martyrdom is plucked off from their memories; and others
more moderate equally part their death betwixt their enemies cruelty, and their
own over-forwardnesse.

Since that, one might have expected that these worthy men should have been
re-estated in their former honor, whereas the contrary has come to pass. For
some who have an excellent faculty in uncharitable Synecdoches, to condemn a
life for an action, and taking advantage of some faults in them do much
condemn them. And Author of the book lately printed of Causes hindering
Reformation in England, lib. 1. page 10.
one lately has traduced them with such language, as neither beseemed his
parts (whosoever he was) that spoke it, nor their piety of whom it was spoken.
If pious Latimer, whose bluntness was incapable of flattery, had his
simplicity abused with false informations, he is called another Doctor Shaw,
to divulge in his Sermon forged accusations. Cranmer and Ridley for some
failings styled, the common stales to countenance with their prostituted
gravities every politic fetch which was then on foot, as often as the potent
Statists pleased to employ them. page 11.
And, as it follows not far after, Bishop Cranmer, one of King Henry's
Executours, and the other Bishops, none refusing (lest they should resist the
Duke of Northumberland) could find in their consciences to set their hands to
the disenabling and defeating of the Princess Marie, etc. Where Christian
ingenuity might have prompted unto him to have made an intimation, that Cranmer
(with pious Justice Hales in Kent) was last and least guilty, much refusing to
subscribe; and his long resisting deserved as well to be mentioned, as his
yielding at last. Yea, that very Verse, which Doctor Smith at the burning of
Ridley used against him, is by the foresaid Author (though not with so full a
blow, with a slenting stroke) applied to those Martyrs, A man may give his body
to be burnt, and yet have not charity.

Thus the prices of Martyrs ashes rise and fall in Smithfield market. However
their real worth flotes not with peoples phancies, no more then a rock in the
sea rises and falls with the tide: S. Paul is still S. Paul, though the
Lycaonians now would sacrifice to him, and presently after would sacrifice him:
These Bishops, Ministers, and Lay People, which were put to death in Queen
Mary's days, were worthy Saints of God, holy and godly men, but had their
faults, failings, and imperfections. Had they not been men they had not burned;
yea had they not been more then men (by Gods assistance) they had not burned.
Every true Christian should, but none but strong Christians will, die at the
stake.

But to return to Ridley: One of the greatest things objected against him, was
his counsel to King Edward (which the good Prince washed away with his tears)
about tolerating the Mass for Princess Mary, at the intercession of Charles
the fifth Emperor, which how great it was, let the indifferent party give
judgment, when the Haywards Edward sixth page 291.
Historian has given his evidence, The Bishops, of Canterbury, London,
Rochester, gave their opinion, that to give license to sin, was sin, but to
connive at sin, might be allowed, in case it were neither too long, nor
without hope of reformation.

Another fault, wherewith he was charged, was that woeful and unhappy discord
betwixt him and reverend Bishop Hooper, about the wearing of some Episcopal
garments at his consecration (then in use) which Ridley pressed, and Hooper
refused with equal violence, as being too many, rather loading then gracing
him; and so affectedly grave, that they were light again. All we will say is
this, that when worthy men fall out, only one of them may be faulty at the
first, but if such strifes continue long, commonly both become guilty: But thus
Gods diamonds often cut one another, and good men cause afflictions to good men.

It was the policy of the Arist. polit. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Lacedaemonians always to send two Ambassadors together, which disagreed
amongst themselves, that so mutually they might have an eye on the actions each
of other: Sure I am that in those Ambassadors, the Ministers, which God
sends to men, God suffers great discords betwixt them, (Paul with Barnabas,
Jerome with Ruffin, and Augustine, and the like) perchance because each may be
more cautious and wary of his behavior in the view of the other. We may well
behold men's weakness in such dissentions, but better admire Gods strength and
wisdom in ordering them to his glory, and his childrens good. Sure it is,
Ridley and Hooper were afterward cordially reconciled; and let not their
discords pierce farther then their reconciliation: The worst is, men's eyes are
never made sound with the clearness, but often are made sore with the
bleernesse of other men's eyes in their company. The virtues of Saints are not
so attractive of our imitation, as their vices and infirmities are prone to
infect.

Hayward Edward 6. p. 407. and sequent.
Ridley was very gracious with King Edward the sixth, and by a Sermon he
preached before him so wrought upon his pious disposition, whose Princely
charity rather wanted a directour then a perswader, that the King at his motion
gave to the city of London, 1 Greyfriers, now called Christ-Church, for
impotent, fatherless, decrepid people by age or nature to be educated or
maintained. 2 S. Bartholomews near Smithfield, for poor by faculty, as wounded
soldiers, diseased and sick persons to be cured and relieved. 3 Bridewell, the
ancient Mansion of the English Kings, for the poor by idleness or
unthriftynesse, as riotous spenders, vagabonds, loyterers, strumpets to be
corrected and reduced to good order.


I like that Emblem of Charity which Fr. Quartes Enchirid. page 1.
one has expressed in a naked child, giving honey to a Be without wings;
only I would have one thing added, namely holding a whip in the other hand to
drive away the drones: So that King Edwards bounty was herein perfect and
complete.

To return to Ridley: His whole life was a letter written full of learning and
religion, whereof his death was the seal. Brought he was with Cranmer and
Latimer to Oxford to dispute in the days of Queen Mary, though before a
Syllogism was formed, their deaths were concluded on, and as afterward came
to pass, being burnt the sixteenth of October Anno 1555. in the ditch over
against Balioll College.

He came to the Fox. Acts Mon: An: 1555. October.
stake in a fair black gown furred and faced with foins, a Tippet of velvet,
furred likewise, about his neck, a velvet nightcap upon his head, and a
cornered cap upon the same.

Doctor Smith preached a Sermon at their burning; a Sermon which had nothing
good in it but the text (though misapplyed) and the shortness, being not above
a quarter of an hour long. Old Hugh Latimer was Ridleys partner at the stake,
sometimes Bishop of Worcester, who crauled thither after him, one who had lost
more learning then many ever had, who flout at his plain Sermons, though his
downright style was as necessary in that ignorant age, as it would be
ridiculous in ours. Indeed he condescended to peoples capacity; and many men
unjustly count those low in learning, who indeed do but stoop to their
Auditors. Let me see any of our sharp Wits do that with the edge, which his
bluntness did with the back of the knife, and persuade so many to restitution
of ill-gotten goods. Though he came after Ridley to the stake, he got before
him to heaven: his body, made tinder by age, was no sooner touched by the fire,
but instantly this old Simeon had his Nunc dimittis, and brought the news to
heaven that his brother was following after.

But Ridley suffered with far more pain, the fire about him being not well
made: And yet one would think that age should be skillful in making such
bonefires, as being much practiced in them. The Gunpowder that was given him
did him little service, and his Brother-in-law, out of desire to rid him out of
pain, increased it, (great grief will not give men leave to be wise with it)
heaping fuel upon him to no purpose; so that neither the fagots which his
enemies anger, nor his Brothers good will cast upon him, made the fire to burn
kindly.

In like manner, not much before, his dear friend Master See Mr Fox Acts and
Mon. on Hoopers death.
Hooper suffered with great torment; the wind (which too often is the bellows
of great fires) blowing it away from him once, or twice. Of all the Martyrs in
those days, these two endured most pain, it being true that each of them,
Quaerebat in ignibus ignes:
And still he did desire,
For fire in amidst of fire.
Both desiring to burn, and yet both their upper parts were but Confessors,
when their lower parts were Martyrs, and burnt to ashes: Thus God, where he
has given the stronger faith, he lays on the stronger pain. And so we leave
them going up to Heaven, like Eliah, in a chariot of fire.

CHAP. 12. The true Nobleman.
HE is a Gentleman in a Text Letter, because bred, and living in an higher and
larger way. Conceive him when young brought up at School, in ludo literario,
where he did not take ludus to himself, and leave literarius to others, but
seriously applied himself to learning, and afterward coming to his estate,
thus behaves himself.

Maxim 1
Goodness sanctifies his Greatness, and Greatness supports his Goodness. He
improves the upper ground whereon he stands, thereby to do God the more glory.

2
He counts not care for his Countries good to be beneath his state. Because he
is a great pillar, shall he therefore bear the less weight? never meddling
with matters of Justice. Can this be counted too low for a Lord, which is high
enough for a King? our Nobleman freely serves his Country, counting his very
work a sufficient reward. (As by our Statute 14. of Ric. 2. c. 11.
Laws no Duke, Earl, Baron, or Baronet, though Justices of Peace, may take any
wages at the Sessions.) Yea he detesteth all gainful ways, which have the
least blush of dishonor: For the Merchant Nobility of Florence and Venice (how
highly soever valued by themselves) pass in other countries with loss and
abatement of repute; as if the scarlet robes of their honor had a stain of the
stamell die in them.

3
He is careful in the thrifty managing of his estate. Gold, though the most
solid and heavy of metalls, yet may be beaten out so thin, as to be the
lightest and slightest of all things. Thus Nobility, though in it self most
honorable, may be so attenuated through the smalnesse of means as thereby to
grow neglected. Which makes our Nobleman to practice Solomon's precept, Prove.
27.23.
Be diligent to know the state of thy flocks, and look well to thine herds; for
the Crown does not endure to every generation. If not the Crown much less the
Coronet; and good husbandry may as well stand with great honor, as breadth may
consist with height.

If a weak estate be left him by his Ancesters, 4
he seeks to repair it, by ways thrifty, yet noble: as by traveling, sparing
abroad, till his state at home may outgrow debts and pensions: Hereby he gains
experience, and saves expense, sometimes living private, sometimes showing
himself at an half light, and sometimes appearing like himself as occasion
requires; or else by betaking himself to the wars: War cannot but in
thankfulness grace him with an Office, which graceth her with his person; or
else by warlike sea-adventures wisely undertaken, and providently managed:
otherwise, this course has emptied more full, then filled empty purses, and
many thereby have brought a Galeon to a Gally; or lastly by match with wealthy
Heirs, wherein he is never so attentive to his profit, but he listens also to
his honor.

In proportion to his means, 5
he keeps a liberal house. This much takes the affections of country people,
whose love is much warmed in a good kitchen, and turns much on the hinges of
a buttery-doore often open. Francis Russell, second Earl of Bedford of that
surname, was so bountiful to the poor, that Queen Elizabeth would merrily
complain of him, that he made all the beggars: sure it is more honorable for
Noblemen to make beggars by their liberality, then by their oppression. But our
Nobleman is especially careful to see all things discharged which he takes
up. When the corpse of Thomas Howard second Duke of Norfolk were carried to be
interred in the Abbey of Thetford, Anno 1524. no person could demand of him one
Weat^ers fun. Mon. p. 839.
groat for debt, or restitution for any injury done by him.

6
His servants are best known by the coat and cognizance of their civil
behavior. He will not entertain such ruffian-like men, who know so well who is
their Master, that they know not who they are themselves, and think their Lords
reference is their innocence, to bear them out in all unlawful actions. But
our Lords house is the College wherein the children of the neighboring Gentry
and Yeomanry are bred, and there taught by serving of him to rule themselves.

7
He hates all oppression of his tenants and neighbors; disdaining to crush a
mean Gentleman for a meaner offense; and counts it no conquest but an execution
from him, who on his side has the odds of height of place, strength of arm,
and length of weapon. But as the Proverb says, No grass grows where the grand
Seignieurs horse sets his feet; so too often nothing but grass grows where
some Great men set their footing, no towns or tillage, for all must be turned
into depopulating pastures, and commons into enclosures. Nigh the city of
Lunenberg in Germany flowed a plentiful salt spring, till such time as the
rich men, engrossing all the profit to themselves, would not suffer the poor
to make any salt thereof; whereupon God and Nature being offended at their
covetousness, the spring Morisons Travells, chap. 1. Part. 1. page 5. Yet
afterward upon readmission of the poor to it it ran again.
ceased, and ran no more for a time. Thus has Gods punishment overtaken many
great men, and stopped his blessing toward them, which formerly flowed
plentifully unto them, for that they have wronged poor people of their
commonage, which of right belonged unto them.

8
In his own pleasures he is careful of his neighbors profit. Though his
horses cannot have wings like his hawks to spoil no grass or grain as he
passes, yet he is very careful to make as little waste as possible may be:
his horses shall not trample on loaves of bread as he hunteth, so that whilst
he seeks to gather a twig for himself he breaks the staff of the commonwealth.

All the country are his Retainers in love and observance. 9
When they come to wait on him, they leave not their hearts at home behind
them, but come willingly to tender their respects. The holding up of his hand
is as good as the displaying of a banner; thousands will flock to him, but it
must be for the Kings and Countries service. For he knows that he who is more
then a Lord, if his cause be loyal, is less then a private man, if it be
otherwise: with S. 2. Cor. 13.8.
Paul, he can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. Thus Queen
Elizabeth Christ^ned the youngest daughter of Gilbert Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury
(now Countess of Arundell) Aletheia, Truth, out of true Vincents discov. of
Bro^ks Errors, p. 470.
consideration and judgment that the house of the Talbots was ever loyal to
the Crown.

Some privileges of Noblemen he endeavors to deserve: 10
namely such privileges as are completely Noble, that so his merits as well as
the Law should allow them unto him. He conceives this word, On mine Honor,
wraps up a great deal in it; which unfolded and then measured, will be found to
be a large attestation, and no less then an eclipticall oath, calling God to
witness, who has bestowed that Honor upon him. And seeing the State is so
tender of him, that he shall not be forced to swear in matters of moment in
Courts of Justice, he is careful not to swear of his own accord in his sports
and pleasures. Other privileges of Noblemen he labors not to have need of,
namely such as presuppose a fault, are but honorable penalties, and excuse
from shameful punishments. Thus he is not to be bound to the Lamb. Justice of
peace page ^3.
peace. And what needs he; who has the peace always bound to him, being of
his own accord always careful to preserve it, and of so noble a disposition,
he will never be engaged in any braules or contentions.

To give an instance of such a Nobleman seems to be needless, hoping that at
this time in one city of this Realm, and in one room of that city, many such
Noblemen are to be found together.

CHAP. 13. The Court-Lady.
TO describe an Holy State without a virtuous Lady therein, were to paint out a
year without a Spring: we come therefore to her Character.

Maxim 1
She sets not her face so often by her glass, as she composeth her soul by
Gods word. Which has all the excellent qualities of a glass indeed.

1 It is clear: in all points necessary to Salvation, except to such whose eyes
are blinded. 2 It is true: not like those false glasses some Ladies dress
themselves by. And how common is flattery at Court, when even glasses have
learnt to be parasites? 3 It is large; presenting all spots Cap-a-pe, behind
and before, within and without. 4 It is durable: though in one sense it is
broken too often (when Gods Laws are neglected) yet it will last to break them
that break it, and one tittle thereof shall not fall to the ground. 5. This
glass has power to smooth the wrinkles, cleanse the spots, and mend the
faults it discovers.
2
She walks humbly before God in all religious duties. Humbly: For she well
knows that the strongest Christian is like the city of Rome, which was never
besieged but it was taken, and the best Saint without Gods assistance would be
as often foiled as tempted. She is most constant and diligent at her hours of
private prayer. Queen Katharine Dowager never kneeld on a Sande^s. de Schism.
Anglic. lib. 1. page 5.
cushion when she was at her devotions: This matters not at all; our Lady is
more careful of her heart then of her knees, that her soul be settled aright.

She is careful and most tender of her credit and reputation. 3
There is a tree in Doctor Heglens Microces. page 783.
Mexicana which is so exceedingly tender, that a man cannot touch any of his
branches but it withers presently. A Ladies credit is of equal niceness, a
small touch may wound and kill it; which makes her very cautious what company
she keeps. The Latin tongue seems somewhat injurious to the feminine sex; for
whereas therein Amicus is a friend, Amica always signifies a Sweetheart, as if
their sex in reference to men were not capable of any other kind of familiar
friendship but in way to marriage, which makes our Lady avoid all privacie with
suspicious company.

Yet is she not more careful of her own credit then of Gods glory; 4
and stands up valiantly in the defense thereof. She has read how at the
Coronation of King Richard the second, Dame She claimed the place, but her
husband performed the office, Lelunds Colle. Tit. 1. page 299.
Margaret Dimock, wife to Sr John Dimock, came into the Court and claimed the
place to be the Kings Champion, by the virtue of the tenure of her Manor of
Scrinelby in Lincolnshire, to challenge and defy all such as opposed the Kings
right to the Crown. But if our Lady hears any speaking disgracefully of God or
Religion, she counts her self bound by her tenure (whereby she holds possession
of grace here, and reversion of glory hereafter) to assert and vindicate the
honor of the King of Heaven, whose Champion she professes to be. One may be a
lamb in private wrongs, but in hearing general affronts to goodness, they
are asses which are not lions.

She is pitiful and bountiful to people in distress. 5
We read how a daughter of the Duke of Exeter invented a brake or cruel rack
to torment people withal, to which purpose it was long reserved and often used
in the Tower of London, and commonly called (was it not fit so pretty a babe
should bear her mothers name?) The Vid. Stowes Chron. in the reign of King
Edward the fourth.
Duke of Exeters daughter. Me thinks the finding out of a salve to ease poor
people in pain had born better proportion to her Ladyship then to have been the
inventer of instruments of cruelty.

6
She is a good scholar, and well learned in useful Authors. Indeed as in
purchases an house is valued at nothing, because it returns no profit, and
requires great charges to maintain it; so for the same reasons, Learning in a
woman is but little to be prized. But as for great Ladies, who ought to be a
confluence of all rarities and perfections, some Learning in them is not only
useful but necessary.

7
In discourse her words are rather fit then fine, very choice and yet not
chosen. Though her language be not gaudy, yet the plainness thereof pleases,
it is so proper, and handsomely put on. Some having a set of fine phrases will
hazard an impertinency to use them all, as thinking they give full satisfaction
for dragging in the matter by head and shoulders, if they dress it in queint
expressions. Others often repeat the same things: the Platonic year of their
discourses being not above three days long, in which term all the same matter
returns over again, threadbare talk ill suiting with the variety of their
clothes.

8
She affects not the vanity of foolish fashions; but is decently apparelled
according to her state and condition. He that should have guessed the bigness
of Alexanders soldiers by their shields left in India, would much
overproportion their true greatness. But what a vast overgrown creature would
some guess a woman to be, taking his aim by the multitude and variety of
clothes and ornaments, which some of them use: insomuch as the ancient Latins
called a woman's wardrope Mundus, a World, wherein notwithstanding was much
terra incognita then undiscovered, but since found out by the curiosity of
modern Fashion-mongers. We find a map of this world drawn by Gods Spirit,
Isaiah the third, wherein one and twenty women's ornaments (all superfluous) are
reckoned up, which at this day are much increased. The Isaiah. 3.18.
moons, there mentioned, which they wore on their heads, may seem since grown
to the full in the luxury of afterages.

She is contented with that beauty which God has given her. 9
If very handsome, no whit the more proud, but far the more thankful: If
unhandsome, she labors to better it in the virtues of her mind, that what is
but plain cloth without may be rich plush within. Indeed such natural defects
as hinder her comfortable serving of God in her calling may be amended by art;
and any member of the body being defective, may thereby be lawfully supplied.
Thus glasse-eyes may be used, though not for seeing, for sightlinesse. But our
Lady detesteth all adulterate complexions, finding no president thereof in the
Bible save one, and her so bad, that Ladies would blush through their paint to
make her the pattern of their imitation. Yet are there many that think the
grossest fault in painting is to paint grossly (making their faces with thick
daubing not only new pictures, but new statues) and that the greatest sin
therein, is to be discovered.

In her marriage she principally respects virtue and religion, 10
and next that, other accomodations, as we have Vid. 3. Book chap of Marriage.
formerly discoursed of. And she is careful in match not to bestow her self
unworthily beneath her own degree to an ignoble person, except in case of
necessity. Thus the Gentlewomen in And^ Favin in his Theater of Honor, 1.
Book, chap. the 6.
Champaigne in France some three hundred years since were enforced to marry
Yeomen and Farmers, because all the Nobility in that country were slain in the
wars in the two voyages of King Lewis to Palestine: and thereupon ever since
by custom and privilege the Gentlewomen of Champaigne and Brye ennoble their
husbands and give them honor in marrying them, how mean soever before.

11
Though pleasantly affected she is not transported with Court-delights: as in
their stately Masks and Pageants. Seeing Princes cares are deeper then the
cares of private men, it is fit their recreations also should be greater, that
so their mirth may reach the bottom of their sadness: yea God allows to
Princes a greater latitude of pleasure. He is no friend to the tree, that
strips it of the bark; neither do they mean well to Majesty, which would
deprive it of outward shows, and State-solemnities, which the servants of
Princes may in loyalty and respect present to their Sovereigne; however, our
Lady by degrees is brought from delighting in such Masks, only to be
contented to see them, and at last (perchance) could desire to be excused from
that also.

12
Yet in her reduced thoughts she makes all the sport she has seen earnest to
her self: It must be a dry flower indeed out of which this be sucks no honey:
they are the best Origens who do allegorise all earthly vanities into heavenly
truths. When she remembers how suddenly the Scene in the Masque was altered
(almost before moment it self could take notice of it) she considers, how
quickly mutable all things are in this world, God ringing the changes on all
accidents, and making them tunable to his glory: The lively representing of
things so curiously, that Nature her self might grow jealous of Art, in
outdoing her, minds our Lady to make sure work with her own soul, seeing
hypocrisy may be so like to sincerity. But O what a wealthy exchequer of
beauties did she there behold, several faces most different, most excellent,
(so great is the variety even in bests) what a rich mine of jewels above
ground, all so brave, so costly! To give Court-masques their due, of all the
bubbles in this world they have the greatest variety of fine colors. But all
is quickly ended: this is the spite of the world, if ever she affords fine
ware, she always pincheth it in the measure, and it lasts not long: But oh,
thinks our Lady, how glorious a place is Heaven, where there are joys for
evermore. If an herd of kine should meet together to fancy and define
happiness, they would place it to consist in fine pastures, sweet grass,
clear water, shadowie groves, constant summer, but if any winter, then warm
shelter and dainty hay, with company after their kind, counting these low
things the highest happiness, because their conceit can reach no higher.
Little better do the Heathen Poets describe Heaven, paving it with pearl, and
roofing it with stars, filling it with Gods and Goddesses, and allowing them
to drink (as if without it no Poets Paradise) Nectar and Ambrosia; Heaven
indeed being Poetarum dedecus, the shame of Poets, and the disgrace of all
their Hyperboles, falling as far short of truth herein, as they go beyond it
in other Fables. However the sight of such glorious earthly spectacles
advantageth our Ladies conceit by infinite multiplication thereof to consider
of Heaven.

She reads constant lectures to her self of her own mortality. 13
To smell to a turf of fresh earth is wholesome for the body; no less are
thoughts of mortality cordial to the soul. Earth thou art, to earth thou shall
return: The sight of death when it comes will neither be so terrible to her,
nor so strange, who has formerly often beheld it in her serious meditations.
With Job. 17.14.
Job she says to the worm, Thou art my sister: If fair Ladies scorn to own the
worms their kindred in this life, their kindred will be bold to challenge them
when dead in their graves: for when the soul (the best perfume of the body) is
departed from it, it becomes so noisome a carcass, that should I make a
description of the lothsomnesse thereof, some dainty dames would hold their
noses in reading it.

To conclude: We read how Henry a Germain Prince was admonished by revelation
to search for a writing in an old wall, which should nearly concern him,
wherein he found only these two words written, Surius in vita Sancti Henr.
July 14 and Baronius in Anno 1007.
POST SEX, AFTER SIX. Whereupon Henry conceived that his death was foretold,
which after six days should ensue, which made him pass those days in
constant preparation for the same. But finding the six days past without the
effect he expected, he successively persevered in his godly resolutions six
weeks, six months, six years, and on the first day of the seventh year the
Prophecy was fulfilled, though otherwise then he interpreted it; for thereupon
he was chosen Emperor of Germany, having before gotten such an habit of piety
that he persisted in his religious course for ever after. Thus our Lady has so
inured her self all the days of her appointed time to wait till her change
comes, that expecting it every hour, she is always provided for that, then
which nothing is more certain or uncertain.

JANE GRAY proclaimed Queen of England wife to the Lord GILFORD DUDLEY. She was
beheaded on Tower Hill in London February ye 12. 1553. at 18 years of Age.
W.M. sculp
CHAP. 14. The life of Lady Jane GRAY.
JAne Gray, eldest daughter of Henry Gray Marquess of Dorset, and Duke of
Suffolk, by Francis Brandon eldest daughter of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk,
and Mary his wife youngest daughter to King Henry the seventh, was by her
parents bred according to her high birth in Religion and Learning. They were no
whit indulgent to her in her childhood, but extremely severe, more then needed
to so sweet a temper; for what need iron instruments to bow wax?

But as the sharpest winters (correcting the rankness of the earth) cause the
more healthful and fruitful summers; so the harshnesse of her breeding
compacted her soul to the greater patience and piety, so that afterward she
proved the miroir of her age, and attained to be an excellent Scholar through
the teaching of Mr Elmer her Master.

Once Mr Roger Ascham, coming to wait on her at Broad-gates in Leicestershire,
found her in her chamber reading Ascham's Schoolmaster, lib. 1. fol. 10.
Phoedon-Platonis in Greek, with as much delight as some Gentleman would have
read a merry tale in Bocchace, Whilst the Duke her father with the Duchess
and all their household were hunting in the Park: He asked of her, how she could
lose such pastime? who smiling answered, I wisse all the sport in the Park is
but the shadow of what pleasure I find in this book, adding moreover, that one
of the greatest blessings God ever gave her, was in sending her sharp parents,
and a gentle Schoolmaster, which made her take delight in nothing so much as in
her studies.

About this time John Dudley Duke of Northumberland projected for the English
Crown: But being too low to reach it in his own person, having no advantage of
royal birth, a match was made betwixt Guilford his fourth son, and this Lady
Jane; the Duke hoping so to reign in his daughter-in-law, on whom King Edward
the sixth by will, passing by his own sisters, had entayled the Crown: And not
long after that godly King, who had some defects, but few faults (and those
rather in his age then person) came to his grave: it being uncertain whether he
went, or was sent thither. If the latter be true, the crying of this Saint
under the Altar, beneath which he was buried in King Henry's Chapel (without
any other monument, then that of his own virtues) has been heard long since
for avenging his blood.

Presently after Lady Jane was proclaimed Queen of England. 1553
She lifted not up her least finger to put the Diadem on her self, but was
only contented to sit still, whilst others endeavored to Crown her; or
rather was so far from biting at the bait of Sovereignty, that unwillingly
she opened her mouth to receive it.

Then was the Duke of Northumberland made General of an Army, and sent into
Suffolk to suppress the Lady Marie, who there gathered men to claim the Crown.
This Duke was appointed out of the policy of his friend-seeming enemies for
that employment: For those who before could not endure the scorching heat of
his displeasure at the Counsell-table, durst afterward oppose him, having
gotten the skreen of London-walls betwixt him and them. They also stinted his
journeys every day (thereby appointing the steps by which he was to go down to
his own grave) that he should march on very slowly, which caused his confusion.
For lingering does tire out treacherous designs, which are to be done all on a
sudden, and gives breath to loyalty to recover it self.

His army like a sheep left part of his fleece on every bush it came by, at
every stage and corner some conveying themselves from him, till his Soldiers
were washed away before any storm of war fell upon them. Only some few, who
were chained to the Duke by their particular engagements, and some great
Persons hopeless to conceal themselves, as being too big for a cover, stuck
fast unto him. Thus those enterprises need a strong hand which are thrown
against the bias of peoples hearts and consciences. And not long after the
Norfolk and Suffolk Protestant Gentry (Loyalty always lodges in the same
breast with true Religion) proclaimed and set up Queen Marie, who got the Crown
by Our Father, and held it by Pater noster.

Then was the late Queen, now Lady Jane Gray, brought from a Queen to a
prisoner, and committed to the Tower. She made misery it self amiable by her
pious and patient behavior: Adversity, her nightclothes, becoming her as well
as her day-dressing, by reason of her pious deportment.

During her imprisonment many moved her to alter her religion, and especially
Mr Fecnam sent unto her by Queen Mary: but how wisely and religiously she
answered him, I refer the Reader to Mr Fox, Acts and Monum. page 1419. and
deinceps.
where it is largely recorded.

And because I have mentioned that Book, wherein this Ladies virtues are so
highly commended, I am not ignorant that of late great disgrace has been
thrown on that Author, and his worthy Work, as being guilty of much falsehood:
chiefly because sometimes he makes Popish Doctors, well known to be rich in
learning, to reason very poorly, and the best Fencers of their Schools worsted
and put out of their play by some country poor Protestants. But let the
cavillers hereat know, that it is a great matter to have the odds of the
weapon, Gods word on their side; not to say any thing of supernatural
assistance given them. Sure for the main, his Book is a worthy work (wherein
the Reader may rather leave then lack) and seems to me, like Aetna, always
burning, whilst the smoke has almost put out the eyes of the adverse party,
and these Foxes firebrands have brought much annoyance to the Romish
Philistines. But it were a miracle if in so voluminous a work there were
nothing to be justly reproved; so great a Pomgranate not having any rotten
kernel must only grow in paradise. And though perchance he held the beam at
the best advantage for the Protestant party to weigh down, yet generally he is
a true Writer, and never wilfully deceives, though he may sometimes be
unwillingly deceived.

To return to the Lady Jane: Though Qu^en Marie of her own disposition was
inclined finally to pardon her, yet necessity of State was such, as she must be
put to death. Some report her to have been with child when she was beheaded
(cruelty to cut down the tree with blossoms on it) and that that which has
saved the life of many women hastened her death; but God only knows the truth
hereof. On Tower Hill she most patiently, 1553. Feb. 12.
Christianly, and constantly yielded to God her soul, which by a bad way went
to the best end. On whom the foresaid Author (whence the rest of her life may
be supplied) bestows these verses, Nescio tu quibus es, Lector, lecturus
ocellis:
Hoc scio, quod siccis scribere non potui.
What eyes thou readst with, Reader, know I not:
Mine were not dry, when I this story wrote.


She had the innocence of childhood, the beauty of youth, the solidity of
middle, the gravity of old age, and all at eighteen: the birth of a Princess,
the learning of a Clerk, the life of a Saint, yet the death of a Malefactor,
for her parents offenses. I confess, I never read of any canonized Saint of
her name, a thing whereof some Papists are so scrupulous, that they count it an
unclean and unhallowed thing to be of a name whereof never any Saint was: which
made that great Jesuit Arthur Faunt (as his Burton of Leicestershire page 105.
kinsman tell's us) change his Christian name to Laurence. But let this worthy
Lady pass for a Saint; and let all great Ladies, which bear her name, imitate
her virtues, to whom I wish her inward holiness, but far more outward
happiness.

Yet lest Goodness should be discouraged by this Ladies infelicity, we will
produce another example, which shall be of a fortunate virtue.

ELIZABETH Queen of England. She dyed at Richmond the 24th of March 1602. in
the 44th year of Her Reign and 70th of Her Life. W Marshall Sculp:
CHAP. 15. The life of Queen ELISABETH.
WE intermeddle not with her description as she was a Sovereigne Prince, too
high for our pen, and performed by others already, though not by any done so
fully, but that still room is left for the endeavors of Posterity to add
thereunto. We consider her only as she was a worthy Lady, her private virtues
rendering her to the imitation, and her public to the admiration of all.

Her royal birth by her Fathers side does comparatively make her
Mother-descent seem low, which otherwise considered in it self was very noble
and honorable. As for the bundle of scandalous aspersions by some cast on her
birth, they are best to be buried without once See these slanders plainly
confuted in Anti-Sander. Dialog. 2. page 125. and deinceps.
opening of them. For as the basest rascal will presume to miscall the best
Lord, when far enough out of his hearing; so slanderous tongues think they
may run riot in railing on any, when once got out of the distance of time, and
reach of confutation.

But Majesty which dies not will not suffer it self to be so abused, seeing
the best assurance which living Princes have, that their memories shall be
honorably continued, is founded (next to their own deserts) in the maintaining
of the unstained reputation of their Predecessors. Yea divine Justice seems
herein to be a compurgatour of the parents of Queen Elizabeth, in that Nicholas
Sanders, a Popish Priest, the first raiser of these wicked reports, was
accidentally famished as he roved up and down in Ireland; either because it was
just he should be sterved that formerly surfeted with lying, or because that
Island out of a natural antipathy against poisonous creatures would not lend
life to so venomous a slanderer.

Under the reign of her Father, and Brother King Edward the sixth, (who
commonly called her his Sister Temperance) she lived in a Princely fashion. But
the case was altered with her when her Sister Mary came to the Crown, who ever
looked upon her with a jealous eye and frowning face: chiefly, because of the
difference betwixt them in religion. For though Queen Mary is said of her self
not so much as to have barked, yet she had under her those who did more then
bite; and rather her religion then disposition was guilty in countenancing
their cruelty by her authority.

This antipathy against her Sister Elizabeth was increased with the remembrance
how Katharine Dowager, Queen Mary's Mother, was justled out of the bed of Henry
the eighth by Anna Bullen, Mother to Queen Elizabeth: so that these two Sisters
were born, as I may say, not only in several but opposite horizons, so that
the elevation and bright appearing of the one inferred the necessary obscurity
and depression of the other; and still Qu. Mary was troubled with this fit of
the Mother, which incensed her against this her half Sister.

To which two grand causes of opposition, this third may also be added, because
not so generally known, though in it self of lesser consequence. Queen Mary had
released Edward Courtney Earl of Devonshire out of the Tower, where long he had
been detained prisoner, a Gentleman of a beautiful body, sweet nature, and
royal descent, intending him, as it was generally conceived, to be an husband
for her self. For when the said Earl petitioned the Queen for leave to travel
she advised him rather to marry, ensuring him that no Lady in the land, how
high soever, would refuse him for an husband; and urging him to make his choice
where he pleased, she pointed her self out unto him as plainly as might stand
with the modesty of a maid, and Majesty of a Queen. Hereupon the young Earl
(whether because that his long durance had some influence on his brain, or that
naturally his face was better then his head, or out of some private phancie and
affection to the Lady Elizabeth, or out of loyal bashfulnesse, not presuming
to climb higher, but expecting to be called up) is said to have requested the
Queen for leave to marry her Sister the Lady Elizabeth, unhappy that his choice
either went so high or no higher: For who could have spoken worse Treason
against Mary (though not against the Queen) then to prefer her Sister before
her? and she, innocent Lady, did afterward dearly pay the score of this Earls
indiscretion.

For these reasons Lady Elizabeth was closely kept and narrowly sifted all her
Sisters reign, Sr Bedenifield her keeper using more severity toward her then
his place required, yea more then a good man should, or a wiseman would have
done. No doubt the least tripping of her foot should have cost her the losing
of her head, if they could have caught her to be privy to any conspiracies.

This Lady as well deserved the title of Elizabeth the Confessor as ever
Edward her ancient predecessor did. Mr Ascham was a good Schoolmaster to her,
but affliction was a better, so that it is hard to say whether she was more
happy in having a Crown so soon, or in having it no sooner, till affliction had
first laid in her a low (and therefore sure) foundation of humility, for
highness to be afterward built thereupon.

We bring her now from the Cross to the Crown; and come we now to describe the
rare endowments of her mind, when behold her virtues almost stifle my pen, they
crowd in so fast upon it.

She was an excellent Scholar, understanding the Greek, and perfectly speaking
the Latin: witness her extempore speech in answer to the Polish Ambassador,
and another at Cambridge, Et si foeminilis iste meus pudor (for so it began)
elegantly making the word See her oration at large in Holinshead, p. 1^26.
Foeminilis: and well might she mint one new word, who did Moneta ad suum
valorem reducta is part of the Epitaph on her Tomb.
refine so much new gold and silver. Good skill she had in the French, and
Italian, using Interpreters not for need but state. She was a good Poet in
English, and fluently made verses. In her time of persecution, when a Popish
Priest pressed her very hardly to declare her opinion concerning the presence
of Christ in the Sacrament, she truly and warily presented her judgment in
these verses, 'Twas God the word that spoke it,
He took the bread and brake it;
And what the word did make it,
That I believe and take it.


And though perchance some may say this was but the best of shifts, and the
worst of answers, because the distinct manner of the Presence must be believed;
yet none can deny it to have been a wise return to an adversary who lay at wait
for all advantages. Nor was her Poetic vein less happy in Latin. When a
little before the Spanish Invasion in eighty eight, the Spanish Ambassador
(after a larger representation of his Masters demands) had summed up the effect
thereof in a Tetrastich, she instantly in one verse rejoined her answer. We
will presume to English both, though confessing the Latin loses luster by the
Translation.

Te veto ne pergas bello defendere Belgas:
Quae Dracus eripuit nunc restituentur oportet:
Quas Pater evertit jubeo te condere cellas:
Relligio Papae fac restituetur ad unguem.
These to you are our commands,
Send no help to the Netherlands:
Of the treasure took by Drake,
Restitution you must make:
And those Abbeys build anew,
Which your Father overthrew:
If for any peace you hope,
In all points restore the Pope.
The Queens extempore return, Ad Graecas, bone Rex, fient mandata calendas.
Worthy King, know this your will
At latter lammas we will fulfill.


Her piety to God was exemplary, none more constant or devout in private
prayers; very attentive also at Sermons, wherein she was better affected with
soundness of matter, then queintnesse of expression: She could not well digest
the affected over-elegancy of such as prayed for her by the title of
defendresse of the faith and not the Defender, it being no false construction
to apply a masculine word to so heroic a spirit.

She was very devout in returning thanks to God for her constant and continual
preservations; for one traitors stabbe was scarce put by, before another took
aim at her: But as if the poisons of treason by custom were turned natural
unto her, by Gods protection they did her no harm. In any design of
consequence she loved to be long, and well advised; but where her resolutions
once seized, she would never let go her hold, according to her motto, Semper
eadem.

By her Temperance she improved that stock of health which Nature bestowed on
her, using little wine, and less Physic. Her Continence from pleasures was
admirable, and she the Paragon of spotless chastity, what ever some Popish
Priests (who count all virginity hid under a Nuns veil) have feigned to the
contrary. The best is, their words are no slander, whose words are all slander,
so given to railing, that they must be dumb if they do not blaspheme
Magistrates. Edmond Campian.
One Jesuit made this false Anagram on her name, Elizabeth. Our English Bibles
call her Iezabel.
Iezabel.
false both in matter and manner. For allow it the abatement of H, (as all
Anagrams must sue in Chancery for moderate favor) yet was it both unequal and
ominous that T, a solid letter, should be omitted, the presage of the gallows
whereon this Anagrammatist was afterward justly executed.

Yea let the testimony of Pope Thuan. Hist. lib. 82.
Sixtus Quintus himself be believed, who professed that amongst all the Princes
in Christendom he found but two which were worthy to bear command, had they
not been stained with heresy, namely Henry the fourth, King of France, and
Elizabeth Queen of England. And we may presume that the Pope, if commending his
enemy, is therein infallible.

We come to her death, the discourse whereof was more welcome to her from the
mouth of her private Confessor, then from a public Preacher; and she loved
rather to tell her self, then to be told of her mortality, because the open
mention thereof made (as she conceived) her subjects divide their loyalty
betwixt the present and the future Prince. We need look into no other cause of
her sickness then old age, being seventy years old (David's age) to which no
King of England since the Conquest did attain. Her weakness was increased by
her removal from London to Richmond in a cold winter day, sharp enough to
pierce through those who were armed with health and youth. Also melancholy (the
worst natural Parasite, whosoever seeds him shall never be rid of his company)
much afflicted her, being given over to sadness and silence.

Then prepared she her self for another world, being more constant in prayer,
and pious exercises then ever before: yet spoke she very little to any, sighing
out more then she said, and making still music to God in her heart. And as the
red rose, though outwardly not so fragrant, is inwardly far more cordial
then the damask, being more thrifty of its sweetness, and reserving it in it
self; so the religion of this dying Queen was most turned inward in soliloquies
betwixt God and her own soul, though she wanted not outward expressions
thereof. When her speech failed her, she spoke with her heart, tears, eyes,
hands, and other signs, so commending herself to God the best interpreter, who
understands what his Saints desire to say. Thus dyed Queen Elizabeth, whilst
living, the first maid on earth, and when dead, the second in heaven.

Surely the kingdom had dyed with their Queen, had not the fainting spirits
thereof been refreshed by the coming in of gracious King James.

She was of person, tall; of hair and complexion, fair, well-favoured, but
high-nosed; of limbs and feature, neat; of a stately and majestic deportment.
She had a piercing eye wherewith she used to touch what metal strangers were
made of, which came into her presence. But as she counted it a pleasant
conquest with her Majestic look to dash strangers out of countenance, so she
was merciful in pursuing those whom she overcame, and afterward would cherish
and comfort them with her smiles, if perceiving towardliness, and an ingenuous
modesty in them. She much affected rich and costly apparel; and if ever
jewels had just cause to be proud, it was with her wearing them.

CHAP. 16. The Ambassador.
HE is one that represents his King in a foreign country (as a Deputy does in
his own Dominions) under the assurance of the public faith, authorized by the
Law of Nations. He is either Extraordinary for some one affair with time
limited, or Ordinary for general matters during his Princes pleasure, commonly
called a Legier.

He is born, Maxim 1
made, or at leastwise qualified honorably, both for the honor of the sender,
and him to whom he is sent; especially if the solemnity of the action wherein
he is employed consists in ceremony and magnificence. Lewis the eleventh King
of France is sufficiently condemned by Posterity for sending Oliver his Barber
in an Embassage to a Princess, who so trimly dispatched his business, that he
left it in the suddes, and had been well washed in the river Comin lib. 5. cap.
14.
at Gant for his pains, if his feet had not been the more nimble.

He is of a proper, 2
at least passable person. Otherwise if he be of a contemptible presence, he is
absent whilst he is present; especially if employed in love-businesses to
advance a marriage. Ladies will dislike the body for a deformed shadow. The
jest is well known: When the State of Rome sent Some say they sent three, and
one of them a fool, and that Cato should say they sent an Embassy without head,
heart, or feet. See Plutarchs Lives.
two Ambassadors, the one having scarres on his head, the other lame in his
feet, Mittit populus Romanus legationem quae nec caput habet, nec pedes, The
people of Rome send an Embassy without head or feet.

He has a competent estate whereby to maintain his port: for a great poverty
is ever suspected; 3
and he that has a breach in his estate lies open to be assaulted with bribes.
Wherefore his means ought at least to be sufficient both to defray set and
constant charges, as also to make sallies and excursions of expenses on
extraordinary occasions, which we may call Supererogations of State. Otherwise
if he be indigent and succeed a bountiful Predecessor, he will seem a fallow
field after a plentiful crop.

4
He is a passable scholar, well traveled in Countries and Histories; well
studied in the Pleas of the Crown, I mean not such as are at home, betwixt his
Sovereigne and his subjects, but abroad betwixt his and foreign Princes; to
this end he is well skilled in the Imperial Laws. Common Law it self is
outlawed beyond the seas; which though a most true, is too short a measure of
right, and reaches not foreign kingdoms.

5
He well understands the language of that country to which he is sent; and
yet he desires rather to seem ignorant of it (if such a simulation which stands
neuter betwixt a Truth and a Lie be lawful) and that for these reasons: first,
because though he can speak it never so exactly, his eloquence therein will be
but stammering, compared to the ordinary talk of the Natives: secondly, hereby
he shall in a manner stand invisible, and view others; and as Joseph's deafness
heard all the dialogues betwixt his brethren, so his not owning to understand
the language, shall expose their talk the more open unto him: thirdly, he shall
have the more advantage to speak and negotiate in his own language, at the
least wise, if he cannot make them come over to him, he may meet them in the
midway, in the Latin, a speech common to all learned Nations.

He gets his Commission and instructions well ratified and confirmed before he
sets forth. 6
Otherwise it is the worst prison to be commission-bound. And seeing he must
not jet out the least penthouse beyond his foundation, he had best well survey
the extent of his authority.

He furnishes himself with fit Officers in his family. 7
Especially he is careful in choosing 1 A Secretary, honest and able, careful
to conceal counsels, and not such a one as will let drop out of his mouth
whatsoever is poured in at his ear: Yea the head of every Ambassador sleeps
on the breast of his Secretary. 2 A Steward, wise and provident, such as can
temper magnificence with moderation, judiciously fashioning his ordinary
expenses with his Masters estate, reserving a spare for all events and
accidental occasions, and making all things to pass with decency, without any
rudeness, noise, or disorder.


He seasonably presents his Embassage, 8
and demands audience. Such is the fresh nature of some Embassages, if not
spent presently, they sent ill. Thus it is ridiculous to condole griefs almost
forgotten, for (besides that with a cruel courtesy it makes their sorrows
bleed afresh) it foolishly seems to teach one to take that, which he has
formerly digested. When some Trojane Ambassadors came to comfort Tiberius
Caesar for the loss of his son, Suetonius in Tiberio.
dead well nigh a twelvemoneth before; And I (said the Emperor) am very sorry
for your grief for the death of your Hector, slain by Achilles a thousand years
since.

Coming to have audience, 9
he applies himself only to the Prince to whom he is sent. When Chancellor
Morvill, Ambassador from the French King, delivering his message to Philip
Duke of Burgundy was interrupted by Charles the Dukes Comin. lib. 1.
son, I am sent (said he) not to treat with you, but with your father. And
our M^ Wade is highly commended that being sent by Queen Elizabeth to Philip
King of Spain, he would not be turned Cambd. Eliz. in Anno 1584. page 380.
over to the Spanish Privy Counsel (whose greatest Grandees were dwarfs in
honor to his Queen) but would either have audience from the King himself, or
would return without it. And yet afterward our Ambassador knows (if desirous
that his business should take effect) how, and when to make his secret and
underhand addresses to such potent Favorites as strike the stroke in the
State; it often happening in Commonwealths, that the Masters mate steers the ship
thereof, more then the Master himself.

10
In delivering his message he complies with the garb and guise of the country;
either longer, briefer, more plain, or more flourishing, as it is most
acceptable to such to whom he directs his speech. The Italians (whose country
is called the country of good words) love the circuits of courtesy, that an
Ambassador should not as a sparrow-hawk fly outright to his prey, and meddle
presently with the matter in hand, but with the noble falcon mount in language,
soar high, fetch compasses of complement, and then in due time stoop to game,
and seize on the business propounded. Clean contrary the Switzers (who sent
word to the King of France, not to send them an Ambassador with store of
words, but a Treasurer with plenty of money) count all words quite out, which
are not straight on, have an antipathy against eloquent language; the flowers
of Rhetoric being as offensive to them, as sweet perfumes to such as are
troubled with the Mother. Yea generally great soldiers have their stomachs
sharp set to feed on the matter, lothing long speeches, as wherein they
conceive themselves to lose time, in which they could conquer half a country,
and, counting bluntness their best eloquence, love to be accosted in their own
kind.

He commands himself not to admire any thing presented unto him. 11
He looks, but not gazeth, on foreign magnificence (as country clowns on a
city) beholding them with a familiar eye, as challenging old acquaintance
having known them long before. If he be surprised with a sudden wonder, he so
orders it, that though his soul within feels an admiration, none can perceive
it without in his countenance. For 1 It is inconsistent with the steadiness of
his gravity to be startled with a wonder. 2 Admiration is the daughter of
ignorance: whereas he ought to be so read in the world as to be posed with no
rarity. 3 It is a tacit confession (if he wonders at State, Strength, or
Wealth) that herein his own Masters kingdom is far surpassed. And yet he
will not slight and neglect such worthy sights as he beholds, which would
savor to much of sullenness and self-addiction, things ill beseeming his
noble spirit.


He is zealous of the least puntillo's of his Masters honor. 12
Herein it is most true, the Law of honor servanda in apicibus: Yea a toy may
be real, and a point may be essential to the sense of some sentences, and
worse to be spared then some whole letter. Great Kings wrestle together by the
strength and nimblenesse of their Ambassadors; wherefore Ambassadors are
careful to afford no advantages to the adverse party: and mutually no more
hold is given, then what is gotten, lest the fault of the Ambassador be drawn
into president to the prejudice of his Master. He that abroad will lose an hair
of his Kings honor deserves to lose his own head when he comes home.

He appears not violent in desiring any thing he would effect; 13
but with a seeming carelessness most carefully advances his Masters
business. If employed to conclude a Peace, he represents his Master as
indifferent therein for his own part, but that desiring to spare Christian
blood, preponderates him for Peace, whose conscience, not purse or arms are
weary of the war: He entreats not, but treats for an accord, for their
mutual good. But if the Ambassador declares himself zealous for it,
perchance he may be forced to buy those conditions, which otherwise would be
given him.

14
He is constantly and certainly informed of all passages in his own Country.
What a shame is it for him to be a stranger to his native affairs? Besides, if
gulls and rumors from his Country be raised on purpose to amuse our
Ambassador, he rather smiles then starts at these false vizards, who by
private instructions from home knows the true face of his Countrey-estate. And
lest his Masters Secretary should fail him herein, he counts it thrift to cast
away some pounds yearly to some private friend in the Court to send him true
information of all home-remarkables.

15
He carefully returns good intelligence to his Master that employeth him.

1. Speedy. Not being such a sluggard as to write for news at noon, That the
Sun is risen. 2. True; so far forth as may be: else he stamps it with a
mark of uncertainty or suspicion. 3. Full: not filling the paper, but informing
those to whom it is written. 4. Material: not grinding his advises too small,
to frivolous particulars of love-toyes, and private brawls, as Lipsiu^ in the
end of his Politics, in his censure of Historians.
one lays it to the charge of Francis Guicciardines History, Minutissima
quaeque narrat, parum ex lege aut dignitate Historiae. And yet such particulars
which are too mean to be served up to the Counsel-Table, may make a feast for
Ladies, or other his friends; and therefore to such our Ambassador relates
them by his private letters. 5. Methodicall: not running on all in a continued
strain, but stopping at the stages of different businesses to breath himself
and the Reader, and to take and begin a new sentence. 6. Well-penned, clear and
plain, not hunting after language, but teaching words their distance to wait on
his matter, intermingling sententious speeches sparingly, lest seeming
affected. And if constrained twice to write the same matter, still he varieth
his words, lest he may seem to write like Notaries by presidents.
He will not have his house serve as a retreating-place for people suspected
and odious, 16
in that State wherein he is employed. Much less shall his house be a
Sanctuary for Offenders, seeing the very horns of Gods Altar did push away from
them such notorious Malefactors as did fly unto them for protection.

He is cautious not to practice any treacherous act against the Prince under
whom he lives: 17
lest the Shield of his Embassy prove too small to defend him from the Sword of
Justice, seeing that for such an offense an Ambassador is resolved into a
private man, and may worthily be punished, as in the cases of Bernardinus
Mendoza and the Bishop of Set his case largely discussed in Cambd. Elizab. by
the best Civilians, Anno 1571.
Rosse. Yea he will not so much as break forth publicly into any discourse
which he knows will be distasteful in that Country wherein he is employed.
Learned Bodin, who some seventy years since waited on Monsieur into England,
was here, though highly admired for his learning, condemned much for his
indiscretion, if his Fran^isc. Hottoman in his Treatise of an Embass. fol. 42.
corrivals pen may be credited. For being feasted at an English Lords table, he
fell into the odious discourse, That a Princess, meaning Mary Queen of Scots,
was after Queen Elizabeth the presumptive Inheritrix of the English Crown,
notwithstanding an English Law seemed to exclude those which are born out of
the land; And yet, said he, I know not where this Law is, for all the diligence
that I have used to find it out: To whom it was suddenly replied by the Lord
that entertained him, You shall find it written on the backside of your Salick
Law: a judicious and biting rebound.

18
He is careful of suspicious complying with that Prince to whom he is sent: as
to receive from him any extraordinary gifts, much less pensions, which carry
with them more then an appearance of evil. Sr Idem. fol. 23, 24.
Amias Paulet was so scrupulous herein, that being Ambassador in France in the
days of Queen Elizabeth he would not at his departure receive from the French
King the chain of gold (which is given of course) till he was half a league out
of the city of Paris.

19
If he has any libera mandata, unlimited instructions, herein his discretion
is most admirable.

But what go I about to do? hereof enough already, if not too much: it better
complying with my profession to practice S. Paul's precept to mine own
parishioners, 2. Cor. 5.20.
Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us,
we pray you in Christ's stead, be reconciled to God.

CHAP. 17. The good General.
THe Soldier, whom we formerly described, has since by the stairs of his own
deserts climbed up to be a General, and now we come, to character him.

Maxim 1
He is pious in the ordering of his own life. Some falsely conceive that
Religion spoyleth the spirit of a General, as bad as a rainy day does his
plume of feathers, making it droop, and hang down; whereas indeed Piety only
begets true Prowess.

2
He acknowledges God the Generalissimo of all armies; who in all battles,
though the number be never so unequal, reserves the casting voice for himself.
Yet can I scarce believe what Tilman Bredenbach. de bello Livon. and Fitz
Herbert of Policy and Religion, part. 1. cap. 14.
one tells us, how Walter Pletemberg, Master of the Teutonick order, with a
small number slew in a battle an hundred thousand Muscovite enemies with the
loss of but one man on his side.

He has gained skill in his place by long experience: 3
not beginning to lead others before himself ever knew to follow, having never
before (except in Cockmatches) beheld any battles. Surely they leap best in
their providence forward, who fetch their rise farthest backward in their
experience.

He either is, or is presumed valiant. 4
Indeed courage in him is necessary, though some think that a General is above
valor, who may command others to be so. As if it were all one whether courage
were his naturally, or by adoption, who can make the valiant deeds of others
seem his own; and his reputation for personal manhood once raised, will bear
it self up; like a round body, some force is required to set it, but a touch
will keep it agoing. Indeed it is extreme indiscretion (except in extremities)
for him to be prodigal of his person.

He is cheerful and willing in undergoing of labor. 5
Admirable are the miracles of an industrious army, witness the mighty ditch
in Cambridge-shire made by the East Angles, commonly called Devils-ditch, as if
the Pioners thereof came from hell. Thus the effeminatenesse of our age,
defaming what it should imitate, falsely traduces the monuments of their
Ancestors endeavors.

He loves, and is beloved of his soldiers. 6
Whose good will he attaineth, 1. By giving them good words in his speeches
unto them. When wages have sometimes accidentally fallen short, soldiers have
accepted the payment in the fair language and promises of their General. 2. By
partaking with his soldiers in their painful employments. When the English,
at the Spanish Fleets approach in eighty eight, drew their ships out of
Plymouth haven, the Lord Admiral Howard himself Cambden. Elizab. Anno 1588.
towed a cable, the least joint of whose exemplarie hand drew more then twenty
men besides. 3. By sharing with them in their wants. When victuals have grown
scant, some Generals have pinched themselves to the same fare with their
soldiers, who could not complain that their mess was bad, whilst their
General was Fellow-commoner with them. 4. By taking notice, and rewarding of
their deserts; never disinheriting a worthy soldier of his birthright, of the
next Office due unto him. For a worthy man is wounded more deeply by his own
Generals neglect, then by his enemies sword: The latter may kill him, but the
former deads his courage, or, which is worse, mads it into discontent; Who had
rather others should make a ladder of his dead corpse to scale a city by it,
then a bridge of him whilst alive for his punies to give him the Goe-by, and
pass over him to preferment. For this reason chiefly (beside some others) a
great and valiant English General in the days of Queen Elizabeth was hated of
his soldiers, because he disposed Offices by his own absolute will, without
respect of orderly advancing such as deserved it, which made a Great man once
salute him with this letter: Sr, if you will be pleased to bestow a Captains
place on the bearer hereof, being a worthy Gentleman, he shall do that for you
which never as yet any soldier did, namely pray to God for your health and
happiness.


7
He is fortunate in what he undertakes. Such a one was Julius Caesar, who in
Caesar. Comment. lib. 4.
Britain, a country undiscovered, peopled with a valiant Nation, began a
war in Autumn, without apparent advantage, not having any intelligence
there, being to pass over the sea into a colder climate (an enterprise, says
The Duke of Rohan in the complete Captain, page 19.
one, well worthy the invincible courage of Caesar, but not of his accustomed
prudence) and yet returned victorious. Indeed God is the sole disposer of
success: Other gifts he also scatters amongst men, yet so that they
themselves scramble to gather them up; whereas success God gives immediately
into their hands, on whom he pleases to bestow it.

He tries the forces of a new enemy before he encounters him. 8
Sampson is half conquered, when it is known where his strength lies; and
skirmishes are scouts for the discovery of the strength of an army, before
battle be given.

He makes his flying enemy a bridge of gold, 9
and disarms them of their best weapon, which is necessity to fight whether
they will or no. Men forced to a battle against their intention often conquer
beyond their expectation: stop a flying coward, and he will turn his legs
into arms, and lay about him manfully; whereas open him a passage to escape,
and he will quickly shut up his courage.

But I dare dwell no longer on this subject. When the Pope earnestly wrote to
King Richard the first, not to detain in prison his dear son, the Martial
Bishop of Beavois, the King sent the Pope back the armor wherein the Bishop
was taken, with the words of Jacobs sons to their-Father, See whether or no
this be the coat of thy son. Surely a corslet is no canonical coat for me,
nor suits it with my Clergy-profession to proceed any further in this warlike
description; only we come to give an example thereof.

GUSTAVUS Adolphus the pious and Valiant King of Sweden. He was Slain in the
Battle at Lutzen* the 16 of November 1632. Aged 38 years. W.M. sculp:
CHAP. 18. The life of GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS King of Sweden.
GUstavus Adolphus King of Sweden, born Anno Domini 1594 had princely education
both for Arts and Arms. In Italy he learnt the Mathematics, and in other
places abroad, the French, Italian, and Germane tongues, and after he was King,
he traveled under the name of Mr Gustav^s Adolph. Rex Suecorum Dr. Wats in
charact. ad finem 3. part. p. 183.
G. A. R. S. being the four initiall letters of his name, and title.

He was but seventeen years old at his Fathers death, being left not only a
young King, but also in a young kingdom; for his title to the Crown of Sweden
was but five years old, to wit since the beginning of his Fathers reign. All
his bordering Princes (on the North nothing but the North bounded on him) were
his enemies; the Duke-Emperour of Muscovy on the East, the King of Denmark on
the West, and of Poland on the South: The former two laid claim to parcels, the
latter, to all his kingdom. Yet was he too great for them in his minority,
both defending his own, and gaining on them. Woe be to the kingdom whose King
is a child, yet blessed is that kingdom whose King, though a child in age, is
a man in worth.

These his first actions had much of glory, and yet somewhat of possibility and
credit in them. But Chronicle and belief must strain hard to make his Germane
Conquest probable with posterity; coming in with eleven thousand men, having no
certain confederates, but some of his alliance, whom the Emperor had outed of
all their estates: And yet in two years and four months he left the Emperor
in as bad a case almost, as he found those Princes in.

Gods Providence herein is chiefly to be admired, who to open him a free
entrance into Germany, diverted the Imperial and Spanish forces into Italy,
there to scramble against the French for the Dukedom of Mantua. For heaven
only knows how much Protestant flesh the Imperialists had devoured, if that
bone had not stuck in their teeth.

If we look on second causes, we may ascribe his victories to this Kings piety,
wisdom, valor, and other virtues. His piety to God was exemplary, being more
addicted to prayer then to fight, as if he would rather conquer Heaven then
Earth. He was himself exceeding temperate, save only too much given to anger,
but afterward he would correct himself, and be choleric with his choler,
showing himself a man in the one, and a Saint in the other.

He was a strict observer of Martial discipline, the life of War, without
which an Army is but a crowd (not to say herd) of people. He would march all
day in complete armor, which was by custom no more burden to him then his
arms, and to carry his helmet, no more trouble then his head; whilst his
example made the same easy to all his soldiers. He was a strict punisher of
misdemeanors and wanton intemperance in his camp: And yet let me relate this
story from one present therein.

When first he entered Germany, he perceived how that many women followed his
soldiers, some being their wives, and some wanting nothing to make them so but
marriage, yet most passing for their landresses, though commonly defiling more
then they wash. The King coming to a great river, after his men and the wagons
were passed over, caused the bridge to be broken down, hoping so to be rid of
these feminine impediments; but they one a sudden lift up a panick schrick
which pierced the skies, and the soldiers hearts on the other side of the
river, who instantly vowed not to stir a foot farther, except with baggage,
and that the women might be fetched over, which was done accordingly. For the
King finding this ill humor so generally dispersed in his men, that it was
dangerous to purge it all at once, smiled out his anger for the present, and
permitted what he could not amend: yet this abuse was afterward reformed by
degrees.

He was very merciful to any that would submit. And as the iron gate
miraculously opened to S. Peter of its own accord, so his mercy wrought
miracles, making many city-gates open to him of themselves, before he ever
knocked at them to demand entrance, the inhabitants desiring to shroud
themselves under his protection. Yea he was merciful to those places which he
took by assault, ever detesting the bloudinesse of Tilly at Magdenburg, under
the ashes whereof he buried his honor, coming valiant thither, and departing
cruel thence. In such cases he was merciful to women (not like those
Generals who know the differences of Sex in their lust, but not in their
anger) yea the very Jesuits themselves tasted of his courtesy, though merrily
he laid to their charge, that they would neither Preach faith to, nor keep
faith with others.

He had the true art (almost lost) of Encamping, where he would lie in his
Trenches in despite of all enemies, keeping the clock of his own time, and
would fight for no man's pleasure but his own. No seeming flight or disorder of
his enemies should cosen him into a battle, nor their daring bravado's anger
him into it, nor any violence force him to fight, till he thought fitting
himself, counting it good manners in War to take all, but give no advantages.

It was said of his Armies, that they used to rise when the swallows went to
bed, when winter began, his forces most consisting of Northern Nations, and a
Swede fights best when he can see his own breath. He always kept a long
vacation in the dog-dayes, being only a saver in the summer, and a gainer all
the year besides. His best harvest was in the snow; and his soldiers had most
life in the dead of winter.

He made but a short cut in taking of cities, many of whose fortifications were
a wonder to behold; but what were they then to assault and conquer? at scaling
of walls he was excellent for contriving, as his soldiers in executing: it
seeming a wonder that their bodies should be made of air, so light to climb,
whose arms were of iron, so heavy to strike. Such cities as would not
presently open unto him, he shut them up, and having business of more
importance then to imprison himself about one strength, he would consigne the
besieging thereof to some other Captain. And indeed he wanted not his Joabs,
who when they had reduced cities to terms of yielding knew (with as much
wisdom as loyalty) to entitle their David to the whole honor of the action.

He was highly beloved of his soldiers, of whose deserts he kept a faithful
Chronicle in his heart, and advanced them accordingly. All valiant men were
Swedes to him; and he differenced men in his esteem by their merits not their
country.

To come to his death, wherein his reputation suffers in the judgments of
some, for too much hazarding of his own person in the battle. But surely some
conceived necessity thereof urged him thereunto. For this his third grand set
battle in Germany, was the third and last asking of his banes to the Imperial
Crown; and had they not been forbidden by his death, his marriage in all
probability had instantly followed. Besides, Duke of Rohan, in his complete
Captain cap. 22.
Never Prince has founded great Empire, but by making war in person, nor
has lost any, but when he made war by his lieutenants: which made this King
the more adventurous.

His death is still left in uncertainty, whether the valor of open enemies, or
treachery of false friends caused it. His side won the day, and yet lost the
sun that made it; and as one says, Upon this place the great Gustavus died,
Whilst victory lay bleeding by his side.
Thus the readiest way to lose a jewel is to overprise it: for indeed many men
so doted on this worthy Prince, and his victories (without any default of his,
who gave God the glory) that his death in some sort seemed necessary to
vindicate Gods honor, who usually makes that prop of flesh to break whereon
men lay too great weight of their expectation.

After his death, how did men struggle to keep him alive in their reports?
partly out of good will, which made them kindle new hopes of his life at every
spark of probability, partly out of infidelity that his death could be true.
First they thought so valiant a Prince could not live on earth; and when they
saw his life, then they thought so valiant a Prince could never die, but that
his death was rather a concealment for a time, daily expecting when the
politickly dead should have a Resurrection in some noble exploit.

I find a most Dr. Hakewill in his Apology for divine Providence, lib. 4. cap.
11. p. 546.
learned pen applying these Latin verses to this noble Prince, and it is
honor enough for us to translate them: In Templo plus quam Sacerdos.
In Republica plus quam Rex.
In sententia dicenda plus quam Senator.
In Iudicio plus quam Iurisconsultus.
In Exercitu plus quam Imperator.
In Acie plus quam Miles.
In adversis perferendis injuriisque condonandis plus quam vir.
In publica liberate tuenda plus quam Civis.
In Amicitia colenda plus quam Amicus.
In convictu plus quam familiaris.
In venatione ferisque domandis plus quam Leo.
In tota reliqua vita plus quam Philosophus.
More then a Priest he in the Church might pass.
More then a Prince in Commonwealth he was.
More then a Counselor in points of State.
More then a Lawyer matters to debate.
More then a General to command outright.
More then a Soldier to perform a fight.
More then a man to bear affliction strong.
More then a man good to forgive a wrong.
More then a Patriot country to defend.
True friendship to maintain, more then a Friend.
More then familiar sweetly to converse.
And though in sports more then a Lion fierce,
To hunt and kill the game; yet he expressed
More then Philosopher in all the rest.


The Jesuits made him to be the Descript. Bell. Suecici, per Aut. Anony. mum,
page 186.
Antichrist, and allowed him three years and an half of reign and conquest:
But had he lived that full term out, the true Antichrist might have heard
further from him, and Romes Tragedy might have had an end, whose fifth and last
Act is still behind. Yet one Silvester Petra Sancta in his book against Du
Moulin.
Jesuit, more ingenuous then the rest, gives him this testimony, that, save
the badnesse of his cause and religion, he had nothing defective in him which
belonged to an excellent King, and a good Captain.

Thus let this our poor description of this King serve like a flat gravestone
or plain pavement for the present; till the richer pen of some Grotius or
Heinsius shall provide to erect some statelyer Monument unto his Memory.

CHAP. 19. The Prince or Heir apparent to the Crown.
HE is the best pawn of the future felicity of a kingdom. His Fathers Subjects
conceive they take a further estate of happiness in the hopes of his
Succession.

Maxim 1
In his infancy he gives presages of his future worth. Some first fruits are
dispatched before, to bring news to the world of the harvest of virtues which
are ripening in him: his own Royal spirit prompts him to some speeches and
actions wherein the standers by will scarce believe their own ears and eyes,
that such things can proceed from him: And yet no wonder if they have light the
soonest, who live nearest the East, seeing Princes have the advantage of the
best birth and breeding. The Gregorian account goes ten days before the
computation of the English calendar: but the capacity of Princes goes as many
years before private men's of the same age.

Antevenit sortem meritis, virtutibus, annos.
His worth above his wealth appears,
And virtues go beyond his years.
He is neither kept too long from the knowledge, 2
nor brought too soon to the acquaintance with his own Greatness. To be kept
too long in distance from himself, would breed in him a soul too narrow for his
place: On the other side, he needs not to be taught his Greatness too soon,
who will meet with it everywhere. The best of all is when his Governors open
him to himself by degrees, that his soul may spread according to his age.

He plays himself into Learning before he is aware of it. 3
Herein much is to be ascribed to the wisdom of his Teachers, who always
present Learning unto him (as Angels are painted) smiling, and candy over his
sourest studies with pleasure and delight, observing seasonable time, and fit
method. Not like many country Schoolmasters, who in their instructions spill
more then they fill, by their overhasty pouring of it in.

He sympathizeth with him that by a Proxy is corrected for his offense: 4
yea sometimes goes further, and (above his age) considers, that it is but
an Emblem, how hereafter his people may be punished for his own fault. He has
read how the Israelites, the second of Sam. 24.17. were plagued for David's
numbering of them. And yet withal he remembers how in the first verse of the
same chapter, The wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he (by
permitting of Satan the instrument 1. Chron. 21.1.) moved David to number them.
And as the stomach and vital parts of a man are often corroded with a rheum
falling from the head, yet so that the disaffection of the stomach first caused
the breeding of the same offensive distillation; so our young Prince takes
notice of a reciprocation of faults and punishments betwixt King and Kingdom
(both making up the same body) yea that sometimes the King is corrected for the
peoples offenses, and so e contra: Indeed in Relatives neither can be well, if
both be not.

5
He is most careful in reading, and attentive in hearing Gods word. King
Edward the sixth (who, though a Sovereigne, might still in age pass for a
Prince) accurately noted the days, Texts, and names of Ministers, that
preached before him. Next to Gods word, our Prince studies Basilicon Doron,
that Royal gift, which only King James was able to give, and only King James
his son worthy to receive.

6
He is careful in choosing and using his recreations, refusing such which in
their very posture and situation are too low for a Prince. In all his exercises
he affects comeliness, or rather a kind of carelessness in show, to make his
activities seem the more natural, and avoids a toyling and laborious industry,
especially seeing each drop of a Princes sweat is a pearl, and not to be thrown
away for no cause. And Princes are not to reach, but to trample on recreations,
making them their footstool to heighten their souls for seriousness, taking
them in passage thereunto.

7
His clothes are such as may beseem his Greatness: especially when he solemnly
appears, or presents himself to foreign Ambassadors. Yet he disdains not to be
plain at ordinary times. The late Sr. Fr. Nethersol, in the fun. orat. of him,
page 16.
Henry, Prince of Wales, being taxed by some for his too long wearing of a
plain suit of Welsh frize; Would (said he) my country cloth would last for
ever.

8
He begins to study his own country, and the people therein: what places are,
what may be fortified; which can withstand a long siege, and which only can
make head against a present insurrection. If his land accosteth the sea, he
considers what Havens therein are barred, whose dangerous chanells fence
themselves, and their rocks are their blockhouses; what Keys are rusty with
sands and shelves, and what are scoured with a free and open tide, with what
serviceable ships belong thereunto. He takes notice also of the men in the
land, and disdains his soul should be blurred with unjust prejudices, but
fairly therein writes every one in order, as they are ranked by their own
deserts.

Hence he looks abroad to see how his country stands in relation to foreign
Kingdoms; 9
how it is friended with Confederates, how opposed with Enemies. His little
eyes can cast a sour glance on the suspicious greatness of any near borderer;
for he conceives others weakened by their own distance. He considers foreign
Kingdoms, and States, whether they stand on their own strength, or lean on the
favor of friends, or only hang by a Political Geometry, equally poysing
themselves betwixt their neighbors, like Lucca and Geneva, the multitude of
enemies mouths keeping them from being swallowed up. He quickly perceives that
Kings, how nearly soever allied, are most of kin to their own interest; and
though the same Religion be the best bond of foreign affection, yet even this
breaks too often: and States when wonded, will cure themselves with a plaster
made of the heart-blood of their best friends.

He tunes his soul in consort to the disposition of his King-father. 10
Whatsoever his desire be, the least word, countenance, or sign given, of his
fathers disallowance makes him instantly desist from further pursuit thereof
with satisfaction, in regard he understands it disagreeing to his Majesty's
pleasure, and with a resolution not to have the least semblance of being
discontented: He has read how such Princes which were undutifull to their
Parents either had no children, or children worse then none, which repai'd
their disobedience. He is also kind to his Brothers, and Sisters, whose love
and affection he counts the bulwarks and redouts for his own safety and
security.

11
When grown to keep a Court by himself, he is careful in well ordering it. The
foresaid Prince Henry's Court consisted of few less then five hundred persons,
and yet his grave and Princely aspect gave temper to them all, so that in so
numerous a family, not so much as any Sr. William Cornwallis in the life of
Prince Henry.
blows were given.

12
With a frowning countenance he brusheth off from his soul all Court-mothes of
flattery: especially he is deaf to such as would advise him, without any, or
any just grounds, when he comes to the Crown, to run counter to the practice
of his Father; and who knowing that muddy water makes the strongest beer, may
conceive the troubling and embroyling of the State will be most advantageous
for their active spirits. Indeed seldom two successive Kings tread in the same
path: if the former be Martial, though the war be just, honorable, and
profitable, yet some will quarrel with the time present, (...).
not because it is bad, but because it is, and put a Prince forward to an
alteration. If the former King were peaceable, yet happiness it self is
unhappy in being too common, and many will desire war (conceited sweet to
every palate which never tasted it) and urge a Prince thereunto. But our Prince
knows to estimate things by their true worth and value, and will not take them
upon the credit, whereon others present them unto him.

13
He conceives they will be most loving to the branch, which were most loyal to
the root, and most honored his father. We read how Henry the fifth (as yet
Prince of Wales) intending to bear out one of his servants for a misdemeanour,
reviled Sr William Gascoine Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench to his face
in open court. The aged Judge considered how this his action would beget an
immortal example, and the echo of his words (if unpunished) would be resounded
for ever to the disgrace of Majesty, which is never more on its throne, then
when either in person, or in his substitutes, sitting on the bench of Justice;
and thereupon commanded the Prince to the prison, till he had given
satisfaction to his father for the affront offered. Instantly down fell the
heart of great Prince Henry, which (though as hard as rock) the breath of
Justice did easily shake, being first undermined with an apprehension of his
own guiltiness: And King Henry the fourth his father is reported greatly to
rejoice, that he had a Judge who knew how to command by, and a Son who knew
how to submit to his Laws. And afterward this Prince when King (first
conquering himself, and afterward the French) reduced his Court from being a
forest of wild trees, to be an orchard of sweet fruit, banishing away his bad
companions, and appointing and countenancing those to keep the key of his
honor, who had locked up his fathers most faithfully.

He shows himself to the people on fit occasions. 14
It is hard to say whether he sees or is seen with more love and delight. Every
one that brings an eye to gaze on him, brings also an heart to pray for him.
But his subjects in reversion most rejoice to see him in his military
exercises, wishing him as much skill to know them, as little need to use them,
seeing peace is as far to be preferred before victory it self, as the end is
better then the means.

He values his future sovereignty, not by impunity in doing evil, 15
but by power to do good. What now his desire is, then his ability shall be*
and he more joys, that he is a member of the true Church, then the second in
the land. Only he fears to have a Crown too quickly, and therefore lengthens
out his fathers days with his prayers for him, and obedience to him. And thus
we leave Solomon to delight in David, David in Solomon, their people in both.

EDWARD Prince of Wales, commonly called the black- Prince. He dyed at
Canturbury june the 8th. 1326. Aged 46 years. W Marshall s^ulp:
CHAP. 20. The life of EDWARD the Black Prince.
EDward the Black Prince (so called from his dreaded acts and not from his For
King Ed. his father called him his Fair Son, Speed p. 579.
complexion) was the eldest son to Edward the third by Philippa his Queen. He
was born Anno 1329, on the fifteenth of June, being friday, at Woodstock in
Oxfordshire. His Parents perceiving in him more then ordinary natural
perfections, were careful to bestow on him such education in Piety, and
Learning, agreeable to his high birth. The Prince met their care with his
towardliness, being apt to take fire, and blaze at the least spark of
instruction put into him.

We find him to be the first Prince of Wales, whose See the copy thereof in Mr.
Seldens titles of Honor, page 595.
Charter at this day is extant, with the particular rites of investiture, which
were the Crownet, and Ring of gold, with a rod of silver, worthily bestowed
upon him, who may pass for a miroir of Princes whether we behold him in Peace
or in War. He in the whole course of his life manifested a singular
observance to his Parents, to comply with their will and desire; nor less was
the tenderness of his affection to his Brothers and Sisters, whereof he had
many.

But as for the Martial performances of this Prince, they are so many and so
great that they would fill whole volumes: we will only insist on three of his
most memorable achievements, remitting the Reader for the rest to our English
Historians. The first shall be his behavior in the battle of 1346 in the
twenty year of Ed. the third.
Cressy, against the French, wherein Prince Edward, not fully eighteen years
old, led the sore front of the English.

There was a causlesse report (the beginning of a rumor is sometimes all the
ground thereof) spread through the French army, that the English were fled:
whereupon the French posted after them, not so much to overcome (this they
counted done) but to overtake them, preparing themselves rather to pursue then
to fight. But coming to the town of Cressy, they found the English fortified in
a woody place, and attending in good array to give battle. Whereat the French
falling from their hopes were extremely vexed (a fools paradise is a wisemans
hell) finding their enemies faces to stand where they looked for their backs.
And now both armies prepared to fight, whilst behold flocks of ravens and
vulturs in the air flew thither; bold guests to come without an invitation:
But these smell-feast birds when they saw the cloth laid (the tents of two
armies pitched) knew there would be good cheer, and came to feed on their
carcases.

The English divided themselves into three parts: The foremost consisting most
of Archers, led by the Black Prince; the second, by the Earl of Northampton;
the third, commanded by King Edward in person. The French were treble in number
to the English, and had in their army the three Kings, of France, Bohemia, and
Majorca: Charles Duke of Alenson, with John the Bohemian King, led the
vanguard; the French King Philip, the main battle; whilst Amie Duke of Savoy
brought up the rere.

The Genoan Archers in the French forefront, wearied with marching, were
accused for their slothfulness, and could neither get their wages nor good
words, which made many of them cast down their bows, and refuse to fight; the
rest had their bowstrings made useless, being wetted with a sudden shower
which fell on their side: But Heavens smiling offended more then her weeping,
the sun suddenly shining out in the face of the French, gave them so much
light that they could not see.

However Duke Charles, breaking through the Genoans, furiously charged the
fronts of the English, and joined at hand-strokes with the Princes battle, who
though fighting most courageously was in great danger: Therefore King Edward
was sent unto (who hitherto hovered on a hillock, judiciously beholding the
fight) to come and rescue his son. The King apprehending his case dangerous
but not desperate, and him rather in need then extremity, told the messenger,
Is my son alive, let him die or conquer, that he may have the honor of the
day.

The English were vexed, not at his denial, but their own request; that they
should seem to suspect their Kings fatherly affection, or Martial skill, as
needing a remembrancer to tell him his time. To make amends, they laid about
them manfully, the rather because they knew that the King looked on, to
testify their valor, who also had the best cards in his own hand, though he
kept them for a revie.

The victory began to incline to the English, when, rather to settle then get
the conquest, the King (hitherto a spectatour) came in to act the Epilogue.
Many English with short knifes for the nonce stabbed the bellies of their
enemies, cut the throats of more, letting out their souls wheresoever they
could come at their bodies: and to all such as lay languishing, they gave a
short acquittance, that they had paid their debt to nature. This makes French
Writers complain of the English cruelty, and that it had been more honor to
the General, and profit to the soldiers to have drawn less blood, and more
money in ransoming captives, especially seeing many French Noblemen, who fought
like lions, were killed like calves. Others plead that in War all ways and
weapons are lawful, where it is the greatest mistake not to take all
advantages.

Night came on, and the King commanded no pursuit should be made for preventing
of confusion; for soldiers scarce follow any order, when they follow their
flying enemy; and it was so late, that it might have proved too soon to make a
pursuit.

The night proved exceeding dark (as mourning for the blood shed) nor was the
next morning comforted with the rising of the sun, but remained sad and gloomy,
so that in the mist many French men lost their way, and then their lives,
falling into the hands of the English: so that next days gleanings for the
number, though not for the quality of the persons slain, exceeded the harvest
of the day before. And thus this victory, next to Gods Providence, was justly
ascribed to the Black Princes valor, who there won and wore away the
Estridge feathers, then the Arms of John King of Bohemia, there conquered and
killed, and therefore since made the Vid. Cambd. Remains page 344.
hereditary Emblemes of honor to the Princes of Wales.

The battle of Poictiers followed ten years after, which was fought betwixt the
foresaid Black Prince, and John King of September 19. 1356.
France. Before the battle began the English were reduced to great straits,
their enemies being six to one. The French conceived the victory, though not in
hand, yet within reach, and their arm must be put out not to get but take it.
All articles with the English they accounted alms, it being great charity but
no policy to compound with them. But what shall we say? war is a game wherein
very often that side loses which lays the odds. In probability they might
have famished the English without fighting with them, had not they counted it a
lean conquest so to bring their enemies to misery, without any honor to
themselves.

The conclusion was, that the French would have the English lose their honor
to save their lives, tendering them unworthy conditions, which being refused,
the battle was begun. The French King made choice of three hundred prime
horsemen to make the first assault on the English; the election of which three
hundred made more then a thousand Paulus Aemil. in the life of King John, page
286.
heartburnings in his army: every one counted his loyalty or manhood suspected,
who was not chosen into this number; and this took off the edge of their
spirits against their enemies, and turned it into envy and disdain against
their friends.

The French horse charged them very furiously, whom the English entertained
with a feast of arrows, first, second, third course, all alike. Their horses
were galled with the bearded piles, being unused to feel spurs in their
breasts and buttocks. The best horses were worst wounded, for their metal
made one wound many; and that arrow which at first did but pierce, by their
struggling did tear and rend. Then would they know no riders, and the riders
could know no ranks; and in such a confusion, an army fights against it self.
One rank fell foul with another, and the rere was ready to meet with the front:
and the valiant Lord Audley, charging them before they could repair themselves,
overcame all the Horse, Qua part belli (says my Author) invicti Galli
habebantur. The Horse being put to flight, the Infantry consisting most of
poor people (whereof many came into the field with conquered hearts, grinded
with oppression of their Gentry) counted it neither wit nor manners for them to
stay, when their betters did fly, and made post have after them. Six thousand
common soldiers were slain, fifty two Lords, and seventeen hundred Knights and
Esquires; one hundred Ensigns taken, with John the French King, and two
thousand prisoners of note.

The French had a great advantage of an after-game, if they had returned again,
and made head, but they had more mind to make heels, and run away. Prince
Edward, whose prowess herein was conspicuous, overcame his own valor, both in
his piety, devoutly giving to God the whole glory of the conquest, and in his
courtesy, with stately humility entertaining the French Prisoner-King, whom he
bountifully feasted that night, though the other could not be merry albeit he
was supped with great cheer, and knew himself to be very welcome.

The third performance of this valiant Prince, wherein we will instance, was
acted in Spain, on this occasion. Peter King of Castile was driven out of his
kingdom by Henry his base Brother, and the assistance of some French forces.
Prince Edward on this Peter's petition, and by his own Fathers permission, went
with an army into Spain, to re-estate him in his kingdom: For though this
Peter was a notorious Tyrant, (if Authors in painting his deeds do not
overshadow them, to make them blacker then they were) yet our Prince, not
looking into his vices but his right, thought he was bound to assist him: For
all Sovereignes are like the strings of a Basevioll equally tuned to the same
height, so that by sympathy, he that touches the one moves the other. Besides,
he thought it just enough to restore him, because the French helped to cast him
out; and though Spain was far off, yet our Prince never counted himself out
of his own country, whilst in any part of the world; valor naturalizing a
brave spirit through the Universe.

With much ado he effected the business through many difficulties, occasioned
partly by the treachery of King Peter, who performed none of the conditions
promised, and partly through the barrenness of the country, so that the
Prince was forced to sell all his own plate (Spain more needing meat then
dishes) to make provision for his soldiers; but especially through the
distemper of the climate, the air (or fire shall I say) thereof being extreme
hot, so that it is conceived to have caused this Princes death, which happened
soon after his return. What English heart can hold from inveighing against
Spanish air which deprived us of such a jewel? were it not that it may seem
since to have made us some amends, when lately the breath of our nostrills
breathed in that climate, and yet by Gods providence was kept there, and
returned thence in health and safety.

Well may this Prince be taken for a Paragon of his age, and place, having the
fewest vices, with so many virtues. Indeed he was somewhat given to women, our
Chronicles fathering two base children on him; so hard it is to find a Sampson
without a Dalila. And seeing never King or Kings eldest son since the
conquest before his time married a subject, I must confess his Match was much
beneath himself, taking the double reversion of a subjects bed, marrying Joan
Countess of Salisbury, which had been twice a widow. But her surpassing beauty
pleads for him herein, and yet her beauty was the meanest thing about her,
being surpassed by her virtues. And what a worthy woman must she needs be her
self, whose very garter has given so much honor to Kings and Princes?

He dyed at Canterbury, June the eighth 1376 in the forty sixth year of his
age: it being wittily Sr Francis Nethersole in his fun. or at. on Prince Henry,
page 16.
observed of the short lives of many worthy men, fatuos a morte defendit ipsa
insulsitas; si cui plus caeteris aliquantulum salis insit (quod miremini)
statim putrescit.

CHAP. 21. The King.
HE is a mortal God. This world at the first had no other Charter for its
being, then Gods Fiat: Kings have the same in the Present tense, I have said ye
are Gods. We will describe him, first as a good man (so was Henry the third)
then as a good King (so was Richard the third) both which meeting together make
a King complete. For he that is not a good man, or but a good man, can never be
a good Sovereigne.

He is temperate in the ordering of his own life. Maxim 1
O the Mandate of a Kings example is able to do much! especially he is, 1
Temperate in his diet. When Aeschines commended Philip King of Macedon, for a
joviall man that would drink freely, Plutarch in the li^e of Demosthenes.
Demosthenes answered, that this was a good quality in a sponge, but not in a
King. 2 Continent in his pleasures. Yea Princes lawful children are far
easier provided for then the rabida fames of a spurious offspring can be
satisfied, whilst their Paramors and Concubines (counting it their best
manners to carve for themselves all they can come by) prove intolerably
expensive to a State. Besides, many rebellions have risen out of the
marriage bed defiled.


2
He holds his Crown immediately from the God of Heaven. Dan. 4.17.
The most high rules in the kingdoms of men, and gives them to whomsoever he
will. Cujus jussu nascuntur homines, ejus jussu constituuntur Principes, says
a Irenaeus l. 5.
Father: Inde illis potestas unde spiritus, says Tertull. Apol. page 6.5.
another. And whosoever shall remount to the first original of Kings, shall
lose his eyes in discovering the top thereof, as past ken, and touching the
heavens. We read of a place in Mount Olivet (wherein the last footsteps, they
say, of our Savior before he ascended into heaven are to be seen) that it will
ever lie open to the skies, and will not admit of any close or Nullo modo
contegi aut concamerari potest, sed transitus ejus a terra ad coelum usque
patet apertum, Adricom. de terra Sancta ex Hieron. and aliis Autoribus.
covering to be made over it how costly soever. Far more true is this of the
condition of absolute Kings, who in this respect are ever sub dio, so that no
superior power can be interposed betwixt them and heaven. Yea the Character of
loyalty to Kings so deeply impressed in Subjects hearts shows that only Gods
finger wrote it there. Hence it is if one chance to conceive ill of his
Sovereigne, though within the cabinet of his soul, presently his own heart
grows jealous of his own heart, and he could wish the tongue cut out of his
tell-tale thoughts, lest they should accuse themselves. And though sometimes
Rebels (Atheists against the Gods on earth) may labor to obliterate loyalty in
them, yet even then their conscience, the Kings Aturney, frames Articles
against them, and they stand in daily fear lest Darius Longimanus (such a one
is every King) should reach them, and revenge himself.

3
He claims to be supreme Head on earth over the Church in his Dominions.
Which his power over all persons and causes Ecclesiastical 1. Is given him by
God, who alone has the original propriety thereof. 2. Is derived unto him by
a prescription time out of mind in the Law of Nature, declared more especially
in the Word of God. 3. Is cleared and averred by the private Laws and Statutes
of that State wherein he lives. For since the Pope (starting up from being the
Emperors Chaplain to be his Patron) has invaded the rights of many earthly
Princes, many wholesome Laws have been made in several Kingdoms to assert and
notify their Kings just power in Spiritualibus.


Well therefore may our King look with a frowning face on such, whose tails
meet in this firebrand (which way soever the prospect of their faces be) to
deny Princes power in Church Matters. Two Zanchez and Velasquez in their
Comments on the Text.
Jesuits give this farre-fetch'd reason, why 1. Sam. 9 14.
Samuel at the Feast caused the shoulder of the Sacrifice to be reserved and
kept on purpose for Saul to feed on; because, say they, Kings of all men have
most need of strong shoulders patiently to endure those many troubles and
molestations they shall meet with, especially, I may well add, if all their
Subjects were as troublesome and disloyal as the Jesuits. The best is, as God
has given Kings shoulders to bear, he has also given them arms to strike
such as deprive them of their lawful Authority in Ecclesiastical affairs.

He improves his power to defend true Religion. 4
Sacerdotall Offices though he will not do, he will cause them to be done. He
will not offer to burn incense with Uzziah, yet he will burn Idolaters bones
with Josiah, I mean advance Piety by punishing Profaneness. God Isaiah. 49.23.
says to his Church, Kings shall be thy Nursing-fathers, and their Queens thy
Nursing-mothers. And oh let not Princes out of State refuse to be so
themselves, and only hire others, it belonging to Subjects to suck, but to
Princes to suckle Religion by their authority. They ought to command Gods Word
to be read and practiced, wherein the blessed Memory of King James shall never
be forgotten. His Predecessor in England restored the Scripture to her
Subjects, but he in a manner, restored the Scripture to it self in causing the
New Translation thereof, whereby the meanest that can read English, in effect
understands the Greek and Hebrew. A Princely act, which shall last even when
the lease of Time shall be expired: Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this
Translation shall be read in the whole realm, there shall also this that this
King has done be told in memorial of him.

5
He uses Mercy and Justice in his proceedings against Offenders. Solomon Prove.
16.12.
says, The throne is established by Justice: and Solomon Prove. ^0.28.
says, The throne is upholden by Mercy. Which two Proverbs speak no more
contradiction, then he that says that the two opposite side-walls of an house
hold up the same roof. Yea as some Astronomers (though erroneously) conceived
the Crystalline Sphere to be made of water, and therefore to be set next the
Primum mobile to allay the heat thereof, which otherwise by the swiftness of
his motion would set all the world on fire; so Mercy must ever be set near
Justice for the cooling and tempering thereof. In his mercy our King desires to
resemble the God of heaven, who measures his judgments by the ordinary cubit,
but his kindnesses by the cubit of the Sanctuary, twice as big; yea all the
world had been a hell without Gods mercy.

6
He is rich in having a plentiful exchequer of his peoples hearts. Allow me,
said Archimedes, to stand in the air, and I will move the earth. But our King
having a firm footing in his Subjects affections, what may he do, yea what may
he not do? making the coward valiant, the miser liberal; for love, the key of
hearts, will open the closest coffers. Mean time how poor is that Prince
amidst all his wealth, whose Subjects are only kept by a slavish fear, the
jaylour of the soul. An iron arm fastened with scrues may be stronger, but never
so useful, because not so natural, as an arm of flesh, joined with muscles
and sinews. Loving Subjects are most serviceable, as being more kindly united
to their Sovereigne then those which are only knocked on with fear and
forcing. Besides, where Subjects are envassaled with fear, Prince and People
mutually watch their own advantages, which being once offered them, it is
wonderful if they do not, and woeful if they do, make use thereof.

He willingly orders his actions by the Laws of his realm. 7
Indeed some maintain that Princes are too high to come under the roof of any
Laws, except they voluntarily of their goodness be pleased to bow themselves
thereunto, and that it is Corban, a gift and courtesy, in them to submit
themselves to their Laws. But whatsoever the Theories of absolute Monarchy be,
our King loves to be legal in all his practices, and thinks that his power is
more safely locked up for him in his Law then kept in his own will; because God
alone makes things lawful by willing them, whilst the most calmest Princes
have sometimes gusts of Passion, which meeting with an unlimited Authority in
them may prove dangerous to them and theirs. Yea our King is so suspicious of
an unbounded power in himself, that though the wideness of his strides could
make all the hedge styles, yet he will not go over, but where he may. He also
hearkneth to the advice of good Counselors, remembering the speech of Antoninus
the Emperor, Aequius est ut ego tot taliumque amicorum consilium sequar, quam
tot talesque amici meam unius voluntatem. And yet withal our King is careful
to maintain his just Prerogative, that as it be not outstretched, so it may not
be overshortned.

Such a gracious Sovereigne God has vouchsafed to this Land. How pious is he
toward his God! attentive in hearing the Word, preaching Religion with his
silence, as the Minister does with his speech! How loving to his Spouse, tender
to his Children, faithful to his servants whilst they are faithful to their
own innocence; otherwise leaving them to Justice under marks of his
displeasure. How does he with David walk in the midst of his house without
partiality to any! How just is he in punishing wilful murder! so that it is as
easy to restore the murdered to life, as to keep the murderer from death.
How merciful is he to such who not out of leigier malice, but sudden passion
may chance to shed blood! to whom his pardon has allowed leisure to drop out
their own souls in tears by constant repentance all the days of their lives.
How many wholesome Laws has he enacted for the good of his Subjects! How great
is his humility in so great height! which makes his own praises painful for
himself to hear, though pleasant for others to report. His Royal virtues are
too great to be told, and too great to be concealed. All cannot, some must
break forth from the full hearts of such as be his thankful Subjects.

But I must either stay or fall. My sight fails me dazell'd with the luster of
Majesty: all I can do is pray.

Give the King thy judgments, O Lord, and thy righteousness to the Kings
Son: smite through the loins of those that rise up against his Majesty, but
upon him and his let the Crown flourish: Oh cause his Subjects to meet his
Princely care for their good, with a proportionable cheerfulness and alacrity
in his service, that so thereby the happiness of Church and State may be
continued. Grant this, O Lord, for Christ Jesus his sake our only Mediator
and Advocate. Amen.

THE PROFANE STATE.

BY THOMAS FULLER, B. D. and Prebendarie of Sarum.

ISAIAH 32.5. The vile person shall be no more called liberal, nor the churl
said to be bountiful.

EZEKIEL. 44.23. And they shall teach my people the difference betwixt the Holy
and the Profane.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by ROGER DANIEL for John Williams, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1642.

The Profane State. THE FIFTH BOOK.
CHAP. 1. The Harlot
IS one that her self is both merchant and merchandise, which she sells for
profit, and has pleasure given her into the bargain, and yet remains a great
loser. To describe her is very difficult; it being hard to draw those to the
life, who never sit still: she is so various in her humors, and mutable, it is
almost impossible to character her in a fixed posture; yea indeed some cunning
Harlots are not discernable from honest women. Solomon says, she wipeth her
mouth; and who can distinguish betwixt that which was never foul, and that
which is cleanly wiped.

Her love is a blank, Maxim 1
wherein she writes the next man that tendreth his affection. Impudently the
Harlot lied (Prove. 7.15.) Therefore came I forth to meet thee, diligently to
seek thy face, and I have found thee: else understand her that she came forth
to meet him, not qua talis, but qua primus, because he came first; for any
other youngster in his place would have served her turn: yet see how she makes
his chance her courtesy, she affecting him as much above others, as the common
road loves the next passenger best.

2
As she sees, so her self is seen by her own eyes. Sometimes she stares on men
with full fixed eyes; otherwhiles she squints forth glances, and contracts the
beams in her burning glasses, to make them the hotter to inflame her objects;
sometimes she dejects her eyes in a seeming civility, and many mistake in her a
cunning for a modest look. But as those bullets which graze on the ground do
most mischief to an army; so she hurts most with those glances which are shot
from a down-cast eye.

3
She writes characters of wantonness with her feet as she walks: And what
Potiphars wife said with her tongue, she says unto the passengers with her
gesture and gate, Come lie with me; and nothing angrieth her so much, as when
modest men affect a deafness and will not hear, or a dullness and will not
understand the language of her behavior. She counts her house a prison, and is
never well till gadding abroad: sure it is true of women what is observed of
elm, if lying within doors dry, no timber will last sound longer, but if
without doors exposed to weather, no wood sooner rots and corrupts.

4
Yet some Harlots continue a kind of strange coyness even to the very last:
which coyness differs from modesty as much as hemlock from parsely. They will
deny common favors, because they are too small to be granted: They will part
with all or none, refuse to be courteous, and reserve themselves to be
dishonest; whereas women truly modest will willingly go to the bounds of free
and harmless mirth, but will not be dragged any farther.

5
She is commonly known by her whorish attire: As crisping and curling, (making
her hair as winding and intricate as her heart) painting, wearing naked
breasts. The face indeed ought to be bare, and the haft should lie out of the
sheath; but where the back and edge of the knife are shown, it is to be feared
they mean to cut the fingers of others. I must confess some honest women may
go thus, but no whit the honester for going thus. The ship may have Castor and
Pollux for the badge, and notwithstanding have S. Paul for the lading: yet the
modesty and discretion of honest Matrons were more to be commended, if they
kept greater distance from the attire of Harlots.

Sometimes she ties her self in marriage to one, 6
that she may the more freely stray to many: and cares not though her husband
comes not within her bed, so be it he goes not out beyond the Foure-seas. She
uses her husband as an hood, whom she casts off in the fair weather of
prosperity, but puts him on for a cover in adversity, if it chance she prove
with child.

Yet commonly she is as barren as lustful. 7
Yea who can expect that malt should grow to bring new increase. Besides, by
many wicked devices she seeks on purpose to make her self barren (a retrograde
act to set Nature back) making many issues, that she may have no issue, and an
hundred more damnable devices, Which wicked projects first from hell did flow,
And thither let the same in silence go,
Best known of them who did them never know.


And yet for all her cunning, God sometimes meets with her (who varieth his
ways of dealing with wantons, that they may be at a loss in tracing him) and
sometimes against her will she proves with child, which though unable to speak,
yet tells at the birth a plain story to the mothers shame.

At last when her deeds grow most shameful she grows most shameless. So
impudent, that she her self sometimes proves both the poison and the antidote,
the temptation and the preservative; young men distasting and abhorring her
boldness. And those wantons, who perchance would willingly have gathered the
fruit fruit from the tree, will not feed on such fallings.

9
Generally she dies very poor. The wealth she gets is like the houses some
build in Gothland, made of Olaus magnus de Rit. Gent. sept. lib. 1. c. 23.
snow, no lasting fabric; the rather, because she who took money of those who
tasted the top of her wantonness, is fain to give it to such who will drink
out the dregs of her lust.

10
She dies commonly of a loathsome disease. I mean that disease, unknown to
Antiquity, created within some hundreds of years, which took the name from
Naples. When hell invented new degrees in sins, it was time for heaven to
invent new punishments. Yet is this new disease now grown so common and
ordinary, as if they meant to put divine Justice to a second task to find out a
newer. And now it is high time for our Harlot, being grown loathsome to her
self, to run out of her self by repentance.

Some conceive that when King Henry the eighth destroyed the public Stews in
this Land (which till his time stood on the banks side on Southwark next the
Bear-garden, beasts and beastly women being very fit neighbors) he rather
scattered then quenched the fire of lust in this kingdom, and by turning the
flame out of the chimney where it had a vent, more endangered the burning of
the Commonwealth. But they are deceived: for whilst the Laws of the Land
tolerated open uncleanness, God might justly have made the whole State do
penance for whoredom; whereas now that sin though committed, yet not
permitted, and though (God knows) it be too general, it is still but personal.

JOAN the first of that Name Queen of Naples which for her Incontinency and
other wicked Practices was put to Death. Anno 1381. Page 360. WM sculp:
CHAP. 2. The life of JOAN Queen of Naples.
JOan, grandchild to Robert King of Naples by Charles his son, succeeded her
grandfather in the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily, Anno 1343. a woman of a
beautiful body and rare endowments of nature, had not the heat of her lust
soured all the rest of her perfections, whose wicked life Taken out of Brovius
An. Eccle. an. 1344. Petrarch. lib. 5. Episi. and Summontius H. si. Neopol.
lib. 3.
and woeful death we now come to relate: And I hope none can justly lay it to
my charge, if the foulness of her actions stain through the cleanest language
I can wrap them in.

She was first married unto her cosen Andrew, a Prince of royal extraction,
and of a sweet and loving disposition. But he being not able to satisfy her
wantonness, she kept company with lewd persons, at first privately, but
afterward she presented her badnesse visible to every eye, so that none need
look through the chinks where the doors were open.

Now Elizabeth Queen of Hungary, her husband Andrews mother, was much offended
at the badnesse of her daughter-in-law, whose deeds were so foul she could not
look on them, and so common she could not look besides them; wherefore in a
matronly way she fairly advised her to reform her courses. For the lives of
Princes are more read then their Laws, and generally more practiced: Yea their
example passes as current as their coin, and what they do they seem to command
to be done. Cracks in glass though past mending are no great matter; but the
least flaw in a diamond is considerable: Yea her personal fault was a
national injury, which might derive and put the Scepter into a wrong hand.

These her mild instructions she sharpened with severe threatenings: But no razor
will cut a stony heart. Queen Joan imputed it to ages envy, old people
persuading youth to leave those pleasures, which have left themselves. Besides,
a Mother-in-laws Sermon seldom takes well with an audience of
Daughter-in-laws. Wherefore the old Queen finding the other past grace (that is
never likely to come to it) resolved no longer to punish another sin on her
self, and vex her own righteous soul, but leaving Naples returned into Hungary.

After her departure Queen Joan grew weary of her husband Andrew, complaining
of his insufficiency, though those who have caninum appetitum are not competent
judges what is sufficient food: And she caused her husband in the city of
Aversa to be hung upon a beam and strangled in the night time, and then threw
out his corpse into a garden, where it lay some days unburied.

There goes a Collenusius, l. 5. Regn. Neop.
story that this Andrew on a day coming into the Queens chamber, and finding
her twisting a thick string of silk and silver, demanded of her for what
purpose she made it: She answered, To hang you in it, which he then little
believed, the rather because those who intend such mischief never speak of it
before. But such blows in jest-earnest are most dangerous, which one can
neither receive in love, nor refuse in anger.

Indeed she sought in vain to color the business, and to divert the suspicion
of the murder from her self, because all the world saw that she inflicted no
punishment on the actours of it which were in her power. And in such a case,
when a murder is generally known, the sword of the Magistrate cannot stand
neuter, but does justify what it does not punish.

Besides, his corpse was not cold before she was hot in a new love, and married
Lewis Prince of Tarentum, one of the beautifullest men in the world. But it was
hard for her to please her love and her lust in the same person. This Prince
wasted the state of his body to pay her the conjugall debt, which she extorted
beyond all modesty or reason, so unquenchable was the wildfire of her
wantonness.

After his death (she hating widowhood as much as Nature does vacuum) married
James King of Majorca, and commonly styled Prince of Calabria. Some say he dyed
of a natural death: Others, that she beheaded him for lying with another woman
(who would suffer none to be dishonest but her self) Others, that he was
unjustly put to death, and forced to change worlds, that she might change
husbands.

Her fourth husband was Otho of Brunswick, who came a Commander out of Germany,
with a company of soldiers, and performed excellent service in Italy. A good
soldier he was, and it was not the least part of his valor to adventure on so
skittish a beast: But he hoped to feast his hungry fortune on this reversion.
By all four husbands she had no children; either because the drougth of her
wantonness parched the fruit of her womb; or else because provident Nature
prevented a generation of Monsters from her.

By this time her sins were almost hoarse with crying to heaven for revenge.
They mistake who think divine Justice sleeps when it winks for a while at
Offenders. Hitherto she had kept herself in a whole skin by the rents which
were in the Church of Rome. For there being a long time a Schism betwixt two
Popes, Urban, and Clement, she so poysed herself between them both, that she
escaped unpunished. This is that Queen Joan that gave Avignon in France (yet
under a pretense of sale) to Pope Urban and his Successors: the stomach of his
Holiness not being so squeamish, but that he would take a good alms from
dirty hands. It may make the chastity of Rome suspicious with the world that
she has had so good fortune to be a gainer by Harlots.

But see now how Charles Prince of Dyrachium, being next of kin to Prince
Andrew that was murdered, comes out of Hungary with an army into Naples to
revenge his uncles blood. He was received without resistance of any, his very
name being a Petrard to make all the city-gates fly open where he came. Out
issues Otho the Queens husband with an army of men out of Naples, and most
stoutly bids him battle, but is overthrown; yet was he suffered fairly to
depart the kingdom, dismissed with this commendation, That never a more
valiant Knight fought in defense of a more vicious Lady.

Queen Joan finding it now in vain to bend her fist, fell to bowing of her
knees, and having an excellent command of all her passions save her lust, fell
down flat before Charles the Conqueror, and submitted her self: Hitherto, said
she, I have esteemed thee in place of a son, but seeing God will have it so,
hereafter I shall acknowledge thee for my Lord. Charles knew well that
Necessity, her Secretary, endited her speech for her, which came little from
her heart; yet, to show that he had as plentiful an Exchequer of good
language, promised her fairly for the present: But mercy it self would be
ashamed to pity so notorious a malefactor. After some months imprisonment she
was carried to the place where her husband was murdered, and there accordingly
hanged, and cast out of the window into the garden, whose corpse at last was
buried in the Nunnery of S. Clare.

CHAP. 3. The Witch.
BEfore we come to describe her, we must premise and prove certain
propositions, whose truth may otherwise be doubted of.

1 Formerly there were Witches. Otherwise Gods Exodus 18.2^.
Law had fought against a shadow, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live: yea we
read how King Saul, who had formerly scoured Witches out of all Israel,
afterward drank a draught of that puddle himself. 2 There are Witches for the
present, though those Night-birds fly not so frequently in flocks since the
light of the Gospel. Some ancient arts and mysteries are said to be lost; but
sure the devil will not wholly let down any of his gainful trades. There be
many Witches at this day in Lapland, who sell winds to Mariners for money (and
must they not needs go whom the devil drives?) though we are not bound to
believe the old story of Ericus King of Swedeland, who had a Therefore called,
Ventosus pilcus, Olaus mag. de Gent. septent. lib. 3. cap. 14.
cap, and as he turned it the wind he wished for would blow on that side. 3 It
is very hard to prove a Witch. Infernal contracts are made without witnesses.
She that in presence of others will compact with the devil deserves to be
hanged for her folly as well as impiety. 4 Many are unjustly accused for
Witches. Sometimes out of ignorance of natural, and misapplying of
supernatural causes; sometimes out of their neighbors mere malice, and the
suspicion is increased, if the party accused be notoriously ill-favored;
whereas deformity alone is no more argument to make her a Witch, then
handsomnesse had been evidence to prove her an Harlot; sometimes out of their
own causlesse confession. Being brought before a Magistrate they acknowledge
themselves to be Witches, being themselves rather bewitched with fear, or
deluded with fancy. But the self-accusing of some is as little to be credited,
as the self-praising of others, if alone without other evidence. 5 Witches are
commonly of the feminine sex. Ever since Satan tempted our grandmother Eve, he
knows that that sex is most licorish to taste, and most careless to swallow his
baits. Fulgentius in Sermon.
Nescio quid habet muliebre nomen semper cum sacris: if they light well, they
are inferior to few men in piety, if ill, superior to all in superstition. 6
They are commonly distinguished into white and black Witches. White, I dare not
say good Witches ( for woe be to him that calls evil good) heal those that
are hurt, and help them to lost goods. But better it is to lap ones pottage
like a dog, then to eat it mannerly with a spoon of the devils giving: Black
Witches hurt, and do mischief. But in deeds of darkness there is no difference
of colors: The white and the black are both guilty alike in compounding with
the devil. And now we come to see by what degrees people arrive at this height
of profaneness.
Maxim 1
At the first she is only ignorant, and very malicious. She has usually a bad
face, and a worse tongue, given to railing and cursing, as if constantly bred
on mount Ebal, yet speaking perchance worse then she means, though meaning
worse then she should. And as the harmless wapping of a cursed curre may stir
up a fierce mastiffe to the vvorrying of sheep; so on her cursing the devil may
take occasion by Gods permission to do mischief, without her knowledge, and
perchance against her will.

2
Some have been made Multi dum vitare student quae vitanda non sunt, fuga vana
superstitionis superstitiosi siunt, Cardan. de Subtle. p. 924. lib. 8.
Witches by endeavoring to defend themselves against witchcraft: for fearing
some suspected Witch should hurt them, they fence themselves with the devils
shield against the devils sword, put on his whole armor, beginning to use
spells and charms to safeguard themselves. The art is quickly learnt to which
nothing but credulity and practice is required; and they often fall from
defending themselves to offending of others, especially the devil not being
dainty of his company where he finds welcome; and being invited once he haunts
ever after.

She begins at first with doing tricks rather strange then hurtful: 3
yea some of them are pretty and pleasing. But it is dangerous to gather
flowers that grow on the banks of the pit of hell, for fear of falling in; yea
they which play with the devils rattles, will be brought by degrees to wield
his sword, and from making of sport they come to doing of mischief.

At last she indents downright with the devil. 4
He is to find her some toies for a time, and to have her soul in exchange. At
the first (to give the devil his due) he observes the agreement to keep up his
credit, else none would trade with him; though at last he either deceives her
with an equivocation, or at some other small hole this Serpent winds out
himself, and breaks the covenants. And where shall she poor wretch sue the
forfeited band? in heaven she neither can nor dare appear; on earth she is
hanged if the contract be proved; in hell her adversary is judge, and it is
woeful to appeal from the devil to the devil. But for a while let us behold her
in her supposed felicity.

She takes her free progress from one place to another. 5
Sometimes the devil does locally transport her: but he will not be her
constant hackney, to carry such luggage about, but oftentimes to save portage
deludes her brains in her sleep, so that they brag of long journeys, whose
heads never traveled from their bolsters. These with Drake sail about the
world, but it is on an ocean of their own phancies, and in a ship of the same:
They boast of brave banquets they have been at, but they would be very lean
should they eat no other meat: Others will persuade, if any list to believe,
that by a Witch-bridle they can make a fair of horses of an acre of
besome-weed. Oh silly souls! Oh subtle Satan that deceived them.

6
With strange figures and words she summons the devils to attend her: using a
language which God never made at the confusion of Tongues; and an interpreter
must be fetched from hell to expound it. With these, or Scripture abused, the
devil is ready at her service. Who would suppose that roaring lion could so
finely act the spaniel? one would think he were too old to suck, and yet he
will do that also for advantage.

7
Sometimes she enjoins him to do more for her then he is able; as to wound
those whom Gods providence does arm, or to break through the tents of blessed
Angels, to hurt one of Gods Saints. Here Satan is put to his shifts, and his
wit must help him where his power fails; he either excuses it, or seemingly
performs it, lengthning his own arm by the dimnesse of her eye, and presenting
the seeming bark of that tree which he cannot bring.

8
She lives commonly but very poor. Methinks she should bewitch to her self a
golden mine, at least good meat, and whole clothes: But it is as rare to see one
of her profession as an hangman in an whole suit. Is the possession of the
devils favor here no better? Lord, what is the reversion of it hereafter?

9
When arraigned for her life the devil leaves her to the Law to shift for her
self. He has worn out all his shoes in her former service, and will not now go
barefoot to help her; and the circle of the halter is found to be too strong
for all her Spirits. Yea Plinius, lib. 3. cap. 1.
Zoroastes himself, the first inventer of Magic (though he laughed at his
birth) led a miserable life, and dyed a woeful death in banishment. We will
give a double example of a Witch: first of a real one, out of the Scripture,
because it shall be above all exception; and then of one deeply suspected, out
of our own Chronicles.

CHAP. 4. The Witch of 1. Sam. 28.
Endor.
HEr proper name we neither find, nor need curiously enquire: without it she is
described enough for our knowledge, too much for her shame.

King Saul had banished all Witches and Sorcerers out of Israel; but no besom
can sweep so clean as to leave no crumme of dust behind it: This Witch of Endor
still keeps her self safe in the land. God has his remnant where Saints are
cruelly persecuted; Satan also his remnant, where offenders are severely
prosecuted, and (if there were no more) the whole species of Witches is
preserved in this individuum, till more be provided.

It happened now that King Saul, being ready to fight with the Philistines, was
in great distress, because God answered him not concerning the success of the
battle. With the silent, he will be silent: Saul gave no real answer in his
obedience to Gods commands, God will give no vocal answer to Saul's requests.

Men's minds are naturally ambitious to know things to come: Saul is restless
to know the issue of the fight. Alas, what needed he to set his teeth on edge
with the soreness of that bad tidings, who soon after was to have his belly
full thereof.

He said to his servants, Seek me out (no wonder she was such a jewel to be
sought for) one with a familiar Spirit: which was accordingly performed, and
Saul came to her in a disguise. Formerly Samuel told him that his disobedience
was as witchcraft; now Saul falls from the like to the same, and tradeth with
Witches indeed (the receiver is as bad as the thief) and at his request she
raises up Samuel to come unto him.

What, true Samuel? It is above Satan's power to degrade a Saint from glory,
though for a moment; since his own fall thence, he could fetch none from
heaven. Or was it only the true body of Samuel? no; the precious ashes of the
Saints (the pawn for the return of their souls) are locked up safe in the
cabinet of their graves, and the devil has no key unto it. Or lastly was it
his seeming body? he that could not counterfeit the least and worst of Exodus
8.18.
worms, could he dissemble the shape of one of the best and greatest of men?

Yet this is most probable, seeing Satan could change himself into an Angel of
light, and God gives him more power at some times then at other. However, we
will not be too peremptory herein, and build standing structures of bold
assertions on so uncertain a foundation: rather with the Rechabites we will
live in tents of conjectures, which on better reason we may easily alter and
remove.

The devils speech looks backward and forward, relates and foretells: the
Historical part thereof is easy, recounting Gods special favors to Saul,
and his ingratitude to God, and the matter thereof very pious. Not every one
that says Lord, Lord (whether to him or of him) shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven: for Satan here uses the Lords name six times in four verses. The
Prophetical part of his speech is harder, how he could foretell to morrow
shall thou and thy sons be with me: what, with me true Samuel in heaven? that
was too good a place (will some say) for Saul: or with me true Satan in hell?
that was too bad a place for Jonathan. What then? with me pretended Samuel in
(...), in the state of the dead.

But how came the Witch or Satan by this knowledge? surely that uggly monster
never looked his face in that beautiful glass of the Trinity, which (as some
will have it) represents things to the blessed Angels. No doubt then he
gathered it by experimental collection, who, having kept an exact Ephemerides
of all actions for more then five thousand years together, can thereby make a
more then probable guess of future contingents; the rather because accidents
in this world are not so much new as renewed. Besides, he saw it in the
natural causes, in the strength of the Philistines, and weakness of the
Israelitish army, and in David's ripeness to succeed Saul in the Throne.
Perchance as vulturs are said to smell the earthlinesse of a dying corpse; so
this bird of prey resented a worse then earthly savor in the soul of Saul, an
evidence of his death at hand. Or else we may say the devil knew it by
particular revelation; for God to use the devil for his own turn might impart
it unto him, to advance wicked men's repute of Satan's power, that they who would
be deceived should be deceived to believe that Satan knows more then he does.

The dismal news so frighted Saul, that he fell along on the earth, and yet at
last is persuaded to arise and eat meat, she killing and dressing a fat calf
for him.

Witches generally are so poor they can scarce feed themselves: see here one
able to feast a King. That which goes into the mouth defiles not: better eat
meat of her dressing, then take counsel of her giving; and her hands might be
clean, whose soul meddled with unclean spirits. Saul must eat somewhat, that he
might be strengthened to live to be killed, as afterward it came to pass. And
here the mention of this Witch in Scripture vanishes away, and we will follow
her no farther. If afterward she escaped the justice of man, Gods judgment,
without her repentance, has long since overtaken her.

CHAP. 5. The life of JOAN of Arc.
Joan of Arc was born in a village called Domrenny upon the Marches of Bar,
near to Vaucoleurs. Her parents, James of Arc and Isabell, were very poor
people, and brought her up to keep sheep: where for a while we will leave her,
and come to behold the miserable estate of the kingdom of France wherein she
lived.

In her time Charles the seventh was the distressed French King, having only
two entire Provinces left him, Gascoigne and Languedoc, and his enemies were
about them, and in all the rest, which were possessed by the English, under
their young King Henry the sixth, and his aged Generals the Duke of Bedford,
and the Earls of Salisbury and Suffolk. Besides they had besieged the city of
Orleance, and brought it to that pass that the highest hopes of those therein
was to yield on good terms.

Matters standing in this woeful case, three French Gyrard Seigneurdu Haillizan
in Charles the seventh.
Noblemen projected with themselves to make a cordial for the consumption of
the spirits of their King and Countrymen; but this seemed a great difficulty
to perform, the French people being so much dejected: and when men's hearts are
once down, it is hard to fasten any pullies to them to draw them up. However
they resolved to pitch upon some project out of the ordinary road of accidents,
to elevate the peoples phancies thereby, knowing that men's phancies easily slip
off from smooth and common things, but are quickly caught and longest kept in
such plots as have odd angles, and strange unusual corners in them.

Hereupon they concluded to set up the foresaid Joan of Arc, to make her
pretend that she had a revelation JOAN of Arc the Victorious Leader of the
French Armies, She was condemned by the English for a Witch, and burnt at Rohan
julij the 6th 1461. being about 22 years of Age. Pag^ 373. W. Marshall sculp:
from heaven, to be the leader of an army, to drive all the English out of
France: and she being an handsome, witty, and bold maid (about twenty years of
age) was both apprehensive of the plot, and very active to prosecute it. But
other Authors will not admit of any such complotting, but make her moved
thereunto either of her own, or by some Spirits instigation.

By the mediation of a Lord she is brought to the presence of King Charles,
whom she instantly knew, though never seen before, and at that time of set
purpose much disguised. This very thing some heighten to a miracle, though
others make it fall much beneath a wonder, as being no more then a Scholars
ready saying of that lesson, which he has formerly learned without book. To
the King she boldly delivers her message, how that this was the time wherein
the sins of the English, and the sufferings of the French, were come to the
height, and she appointed by the God of heaven to be the French leader to
conquer the English. If this opportunity were let slip, let them thank heavens
bounty for the tender, and their own folly for the refusal; and who would pity
their eternal slavery, who thrust their own liberty from themselves.

He must be deaf indeed who hears not that spoken which he desires. Charles
triumphs at this news: Both his arms were to few too embrace the motion. The
Fame of her flies through France, and all talk of her, whom the Divines esteem
as Deborah, the Soldiers as Semiramis. People found out a nest of miracles in
her education, that so lyon-like a spirit should be bred amongst sheep like
David.

Ever after she went in man's clothes, being armed cap-a-pe, and mounted on a
brave Steed: and which was a wonder, when she was on horseback, none was more
bold and daring; when Gerson. lib. de mirab. victoria cujusdam pu^llae paulo
post initium.
alighted, none more tame and meek; so that one could scarce see her for her
self, she was so changed and altered as if her spirits dismounted with her
body. No sword would please her, but one taken out of the Polidor. Virg. in
Hen. sixth, page 471.
Church of S. Katharin in Fierebois in Tourain. Her first service was in twice
victualling of Orleance, whilst the English made no resistance, as if they had
eyes only to gaze, and no arms to fight.

Hence she sent a menacing See the copy thereof in Speeds King Hen. sixth,
page 654.
letter to the Earl of Suffolk, the English General, commanding him in Gods
and her own name to yield up the keys of all good cities to her, the Virgin
sent by God to restore them to the French. The letter was received with scorn;
and the trumpeter that brought it commanded to be burnt, against the Law of
Nations, says a French Du Serres in his French Hist. translat. by Grimston, p.
326.
Author, but erroneously: for his coming was not warranted by the authority of
any lawful Prince, but from a private maid, how highly soever self-pretended,
who had neither estate to keep, nor commission to send a trumpeter.

Now the minds of the French were all afloat with this the conceit of their new
General, which miraculously raised their Spirits. Phancie is the castle
commanding the city; and if once men's heads be possessed with strange
imaginations, the whole body will follow, and be infinitely transported
therewithal. Under her conduct they first drive away the English from
Orleance: nor was she a whit daunted, when shot through her arm with an arrow;
but taking the arrow in one hand, and her sword in another, This is a Idem. p.
317.
favor, said she; let us go on, they cannot escape the hand of God: and she
never left off, till she had beaten the English from the city. And hence this
virago (call her now John or Joan) marched on into other countries, which
instantly revolted to the French crown. The example of the first place was the
reason of all the rest to submit. The English in many skirmishes were worsted
and defeated with few numbers. But what shall we say? when God intends a Nation
shall be beaten, he ties their hands behind them.

The French followed their blow, losing no time, lest the height of their
Spirits should be remitted: (men's Imaginations when once on foot must ever be
kept going, like those that go on stilts in fenny countries, lest standing
still they be in danger of falling) and so keeping the conceit of their
soldiers at the height, in one twelvemoneth they recovered the greatest part
of that the English did possess.

But success did afterward fail this She-Generall: for seeking to surprise S.
Honories ditch near the city of S. Denis, she was not only wounded her self,
but also lost a Troup of her best and most resolute soldiers; and not long
after, nigh the city of Compeigne, being too far engaged in fight, was taken
prisoner by the bastard of Vendosme, who sold her to the Duke of Bedford, and
by him she was kept a prisoner a twelvemoneth in Rohan.

It was much disputed amongst the Statists what should be done with her: Some
held that no punishment was to be inflicted on her, because Nullum memorabile
nomen
Foeminea in poena.
Cruelty to a woman,
Brings honor unto no man.
Besides, putting her to death would render all English men guilty which should
hereafter be taken prisoners by the French. Her former valor deserved praise,
her present misery deserved pity; captivity being no ill action but ill
success: let them rather allow her an honorable pension, and so make her
valiant deeds their own by rewarding them. However, she ought not to be put to
death: for if the English would punish her, they could not more disgrace her
then with life, to let her live though in a poor mean way, and then she would
be the best confutation of her own glorious prophesies; let them make her the
Laundresse to the English, who was the Leader to the French army.

Against these arguments necessity of State was urged, a reason above all
reason; it being in vain to dispute whether that may be done which must be
done. For the French superstition of her could not be reformed except the idol
was destroyed; and it would spoil the French puppet-playes in this nature for
ever after, by making her an example. Besides she was no prisoner of war, but
a prisoner of Justice, deserving death for her witchcraft and whoredoms;
whereupon she was burnt at Rohan the sixth of July 1461, not without the
aspersion of Sententia post homines natos durissima, Pol. Vir. page 477.
cruelty on our Nation.

Learned Gerson in the book which he wrote of her, after long discussing the
point leaves it uncertain, but is rather charitably inclined.
men are in a great doubt what to think of her. Some make her a Saint, and
inspired by Gods Spirit, whereby she discovered strange secrets and foretold
things to come. She had ever an old Serres, page 325.
woman which went with her, and tutoured her; and it is suspicious, seeing this
clock could not go without that rusty wheel, that these things might be done by
confederacy, though some more uncharitable conceive them to be done by Satan
himself.

Two customs she had which can by no way be defended. One was her constant
going in man's clothes, flatly against Scripture: yea mark all the miracles in
Gods Word, wherein though men's estates be often changed (poor to rich, bond to
free, sick to sound, yea dead to living) yet we read of no old Aeson made
young, no woman Iphis turned to a man, or man Tiresias to a woman; but as for
their age or sex, where nature places them, there they stand, and miracle it
self will not remove them. Utterly unlawful therefore was this Joans
behavior, as an occasion to lust; and our English Writers say that when she
was to be condemned she confessed her self to be with Pol. Virgil. ut prius.
child to prolong her life; but being reprived seven months for the trial
thereof, it was found false. But grant her honest: though she did not burn
herself, yet she might kindle others, and provoke them to wantonness.

Besides, she shaved her hair in the fashion of a Gerson.
Friar, against God express word, it being also a Solecisme in nature, all
women being born votaries, and the veil of their long hair minds them of their
obedience they naturally owe to man: yea, without this comely ornament of hair,
their most glorious beauty appears as deformed, as the sun would be
prodigious without beams. Herein she had a smack of Monkery, which makes all
the rest the more suspicious, as being sent to maintain as well the Friars as
the French Crown. And if we survey all the pretended miracles of that age, we
shall find what tune soever they sung, still they had something in the close in
the favor of Friars, though brought in as by the by, yet perchance chiefly
intended, so that the whole sentence was made for the parenthesis.

We will close the different opinions which several Authors have of her with
this Epitaph, Here lies Joan of Arc, the which
Some count saint, and some count witch;
Some count man, and something more;
Some count maid, and some a whore:
Her life's in question, wrong, or right;
Her death's in doubt, by laws, or might.
Oh innocence take heed of it,
How thou too near to guilt do sit.
(Mean time France a wonder saw,
A woman rule against Salique Law.)
But, Reader, be content to stay
Thy censure, till the Iudgement-day:
Then shall thou know, and not before,
Whether Saint, Witch, Man, Maid, or Whore.


Some conceive that the English conquests, being come to the vertical point,
would have decayed of themselves, had this woman never been set up, which now
reaps the honor hereof as her action: Though thus a very child may seem to
turn the waves of the sea with his breath, if casually blowing on them at that
very instant when the tide is to turn of it self. Sure after her death the
French went on victoriously, and won all from the English, partly by their
valor, but more by our dissensions; for then began the cruel wars betwixt
the Houses of York and Lancaster, till the Red rose might become White, by
losing so much blood, and the White rose Red by shedding it.

CHAP. 6. The Atheist.
THe word Atheist is of a very large extent: every Polytheist is in effect an
Atheist, for he that multiplies a Deity, annihilates it; and he that divides
it, destroys it.

But amongst the heathen we may observe that whosoever sought to withdraw
people from their idolatry, was presently indicted and arraigned of Atheism. If
any Philosopher saw God through their Gods, this dust was cast in his eyes, for
being more quick-sighted then others, that presently he was condemned for an
Atheist; and thus Socrates the Pagan Martyr was put to death Justin. Martyr
secund. Apolog. pro Christian. page 156.
(...). At this day three sorts of Atheists are extant in the world: 1 In life
and conversation. Psalm. 10.4. God is not in all his thoughts; not that he
thinks there is no God, but thinks not there is a God, never minding or heeding
him in the whole course of his life and actions. 2 In will and desire. Such
could wish there were no God, or devil, as thieves would have no judge nor
jaylour; Quod metuunt periisse expectunt. 3 In judgment and opinion. Of the
former two sorts of Atheists, there are more in the world then are generally
thought; of this latter, more are thought to be, then there are, a
contemplative Atheist being very rare, such as were August. tom. 7. lib. 3.
contra Petilianum, c. 1. David cum dicit, Stultus dixit in cord, etc. videtur
Diagoram praedixisse.
Diagoras, Protagoras, Lucian, and Theodorus, who though carrying God in his
name was an Atheist in his opinion. Come we to see by what degrees a man may
climb up to this height of Profaneness. And we will suppose him to be one
living in wealth and prosperity, which more disposes men to Atheism then
adversity: For affliction minds men of a Deity, as those which are pinched
will cry, O Lord: but much outward happiness abused occasioneth men, as wise
Agur observes, to deny God, and say, who is the Lord.


First he quarrels at the diversities of religions in the world: Maxim 1
complaining how great Clerks dissent in their judgments, which makes him
scepticall in all opinions: Whereas such differences should not make men
careless to have any, but careful to have the best religion.

He loves to maintain Paradoxes, 2
and to shut his eyes against the beams of a known truth; not only for
discourse, which might be permitted: for as no cloth can be woven except the
woof and the warp be cast cross one to another, so discourse will not be
maintained without some opposition for the time. But our enclining-atheist goes
further, engaging his affections in disputes, even in such matters where the
supposing them wounds piety, but the positive maintaining them stabs it to the
heart.

He scoffs and makes sport at sacred things. 3
This by degrees abates the reverence of religion, and ulcers men's hearts with
profaneness. The Popish Proverb well understood has a truth in it, Never dog
barked against the Crucifix, but he ran mad.

4
Hence he proceeds to take exception at Gods Word. He keeps a register of many
difficult places of Scripture, not that he desires satisfaction therein, but
delights to puzzle Divines therewith, and counts it a great conquest when he
has posed them. Unnecessary questions out of the Bible are his most necessary
study; and he is more curious to know where Lazarus his soul was the four
days he lay in the grave, then careful to provide for his own soul when he
shall be dead. Thus is it just with God that they who will not feed on the
plain meat of his Word, should be choked with the bones thereof. But his
principal delight is to sound the alarm, and to set several places of
Scripture to fight one against another, betwixt which there is a seeming, and
he would make a real, contradiction.

5
Afterward he grows so impudent as to deny the Scripture it self. As Sampson
being fastened by a web to a pin, carried away both web and pin; so if any urge
our Atheist with arguments from Scripture, and tie him to the Authority of Gods
Word, he denies both reason and Gods Word, to which the reason is fastened.

6
Hence he proceeds to deny God himself. First in his Administration; then in
his Essence. What else could be expected but that he should bite at last, who
had snarl'd so long? First he denies Gods ordering of sublunarie matters; Tush
does the Lord see, or is there knowledge in the most Highest? making him a
maimed Deity, without an eye of Providence or an arm of Power, and at most
restraining him only to matters above the clouds. But he that dares to confine
the King of heaven, will soon after endeavor to depose him, and fall at last
flatly to deny him.

7
He furnishes himself with an armoury of arguments to fight against his own
conscience: Some taken from 1. The impunity and outward happiness of wicked
men: as the heathen Ovid. lib. 3. Amor. Eleg. 3.
Poet, whose verses for me shall pass unenglished. Esse Deos credamne? fidem
jurata fefellit,
Et facies illi, quae fuit ante, manet.
And no wonder if an Atheist breaks his neck thereat, whereat the foot of David
himself did almost Psalm. 73.2, 3.
slip, when he saw the prosperity of the wicked; whom God only reprives for
punishment hereafter. 2. From the afflictions of the godly, whilst indeed God
only tries their faith and patience. As Absalom complained of his Father
David's government, that none were deputed to redress peoples grievances; so he
objects that none righteth the wrongs of Gods people, and thinks (proud dust)
the world would be better steered if he were the Pilot thereof. 3. From the
delaying of the day of Judgment, with those mockers 2. Peter 3. Whose
objections the Apostle fully answers. And in regard of his own particular the
Atheist has as little cause to rejoice at the deferring of the day of
Judgment, as the Thief has reason to be glad, that the Assizes be put off,
who is to be tried, and may be executed before, at the Quarter Sessions: So
death may take our Atheist off before the day of Judgment come.


With these and other arguments he struggles with his own conscience, and long
in vain seeks to conquer it, even fearing that Deity he flouts at, and dreading
that God whom he denies. And as that famous Athenian soldier Justin. lib. 2.
Cynegirus catching hold of one of the enemies ships held it first with his
right hand, and when that was cut off, with his left, and when both were cut
off, yet still kept it with his teeth; so the conscience of our Atheist, though
he bruise it, and beat it, and maim it never so much, still keeps him by the
teeth, still feeding and gnawing upon him, torturing and tormenting him with
thoughts of a Deity, which the other desires to suppress.

8
At last he himself is utterly overthrown by conquering his own conscience. God
in justice takes from him the light which he thrust from himself, and delivers
him up to a feared conscience, and a reprobate mind, whereby hell takes
possession of him. The Apostle says, Acts 17.27. That a man may feel God in
his works: But now our Atheist has a dead palsy, is past all sense, and
cannot perceive God who is everywhere presented unto him. It is most strange,
yet most true, which is reported, that the arms of the Duke of Rohan in
France, which are fusills or lozenges, are to be seen in the wood or stones
throughout all his country, so that break a stone in the middle, or lop a
bough of a tree, and one shall behold the grain thereof (by some secret cause
in Nature) Because of these natural forms in wood and stone, it seems that
from thence the Dukes assumed their arms.
diamonded or streaked in the fashion of a lozenge: yea the very same in effect
is observed in England: for the resemblances of stars, the arms of the
worshipful family of the Shugburies in Warwickshire, are found in the Cambd.
Brit. in Warwickshire.
stones within their own manor of Shugbury. But what shall we say? The arms
of the God of heaven, namely Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, are to be seen in
every creature in the world, even from worms to men, and yet our Atheist will
not acknowledge them, but ascribes them either to Chance (but could a blind
painter limme such curious pictures) or else to Nature, which is a mere slight
of the devil to conceal God from men, by calling him after another name; for
what is natura naturans but God himself?

9
His death commonly is most miserable: either burnt, as Diagoras, or eaten up
with lice, as Paul. Diacon. lib. 15.
Pherecydes, or devoured by dogs as Lucian, or thunder-shot and turned to
ashes, as Olimpius. However descending impenitent into hell, there he is
Atheist no longer, but has as much religion as the devil, to confess God and
tremble: Nullus in inferno est Atheos, ante fuit.
On earth were Atheists many,
In hell there is not any.
All speak truth, when they are on the rack; but it is a woeful thing to be
hells Convert. And there we leave the Atheist, having dwelt the longer on his
Character, because that speech of worthy Mr. In his grave Counsel, p. 3.
Greenham deserves to be heeded, That Atheism in England is more to be feared
then Popery.

To give an instance of a speculative Atheist, is both hard and dangerous:
hard; for we cannot see men's speculations otherwise then as they cloth
themselves visible in their actions, some Atheistical speeches being not
sufficient evidence to convict the speaker an Atheist. Dangerous; for what
satisfaction can I make to their memories, if I challenge any of so foul a
crime wrongfully? We may more safely insist on an Atheist in life and
conversation; and such a one was he whom we come to describe.

CHAP. 7. The life of CAESAR BORGIA.
Caesar Borgia was base-son to Rhoderick Borgia, otherwise called Pope Alexander
the sixth. This Alexander was the Guicciard. History of Italy lib. 1. page 10.
first of the Popes who openly owned his bastards; and whereas his
Predecessors (counting fig leaves better then nothing to cover their
nakedness) disguised them under the names of Nephews and God-sonnes, he was
such a savage in his lust as nakedly to acknowledge his base children, and
especially this Caesar Borgia, being like his Father in the swarthinesse of the
complexion of his soul.

His Father first made him a Cardinal, that thereby his shoulders might be
enabled to bear as much Church-preferment as he could load upon him. But
Borgia's active spirit disliked the profession, and was ashamed of the Gospel,
which had more cause to be ashamed of him; wherefore he quickly got a
dispensation to uncardinall himself.

The next hindrance that troubled his high designs was, that his elder
brother, the Duke of Candia, stood betwixt him and preferment. It is reported
also that these two brothers justled together in their Idem lib. 3. page 179.
incest with their own sister Lucretia, one as famous for her whoredoms, as
her namesake had Live. lib. 1.
formerly been for her chastity. The throne and the bed cannot severally abide
partners, much less both meeting together as here they did. Wherefore Caesar
Borgia took order that his brother was killed one night as he rode alone in the
city of Rome, and his body cast into Tyber; and now he himself stood without
competitour in his fathers and sisters affection.

His father was infinitely ambitious to advance him, as intending not only to
create him a Duke, but also to create a Dukedom for him, which seemed very
difficult if not impossible; for he could neither lengthen the land, nor lessen
the sea in Italy, and petty Princes therein were already crowded so thick,
there was not any room for any more. However the Pope by fomenting the discords
betwixt the French and Spanish about the kingdom of Naples, and by embroyling
all the Italian States in civil dissensions, out of their breaches picked
forth a large Principality for his son, managed in this manner.

There is a fair and fruitful Province in Italy, called Romania, parcelled
into several States, all holding as feodaries from the Pope, but by small
pensions, and those seldom paid. They were bound also not to serve in arms
against the Church, which old tie they little regarded, and less observed, as
conceiving time had fretted it asunder; soldiers generally more weighing his
gold that entertaineth them, then the cause or enemy against whom they fight.
Pope Alexander set his son Borgia to reduce that country to the Churches
jurisdiction, but indeed to subject it to his own absolute hereditary Dominion.
This in short time he Guicciard. lib. 4. page 237.
effected, partly by the assistance of the French King, whose pensioner he was
(and by a French title made Duke Ualentinois) and partly by the effectual aid
of the Ursines, a potent Family in Italy.

But afterward the Ursines too late were sensible of their error herein, and
grew suspicious of his greatness. For they in helping him to conquer so many
petty States, gathered the several twigs, bound them into a rod, and put it
into his hands to beat them therewith. Whereupon they began by degrees to
withdraw their help, which Borgia perceived, and having by flattery and fair
promises got the principal of their Family into his hands, he put them
Machiavill in his Prince, cap. 7.
all to the sword. For he was perfect in the devilish art of dealing an ill
turn, doing it so suddenly his enemies should not hear of him before, and so
soundly, that he should never hear of them afterward, either striking always
surely, or not at all.

And now he thought to cast away his crutches, and stand on his own legs,
rendering himself absolute, without being beholden to the French King or any
other: Having wholly conquered Romania, he cast his eyes on Hetruria, and
therein either wan to submission or compliance most of the cities, an earnest
of his future final conquest, had not the unexpected death of his father Pope
Alexander prevented him.

This Alexander with his son Caesar Borgia intended to poison some rich
Cardinals, to which purpose a flagon of poisoned wine was prepared: But
through the Guicciard. l. 6. page 307.
error of a servant, not privy to the project, the Pope himself and Borgia his
son drank thereof, which cost the former his life, and the other a long
languishing sickness.

This Caesar Borgia once bragged to Machiavill, that he had so cunningly
contrived his plots, as to warrant himself against all events. If his father
should die first, he had made himself master of such a way, that by the
strength of his party in the city of Rome, and conclave of Cardinals, he could
choose what Pope he pleased, so from him to get assurance of this province of
Romania to make it hereditary to himself. And if (which was improbable) Nature
should cross her hands, so that he should die before his father, yet even then
he had chalked out such a course as would ensure his conquest to his posterity:
so that with this politic dilemma he thought himself able to dispute against
heaven it self.

But (what he afterward complained of) he never expected that at the same
time, wherein his father should die, he himself should also lie desperately
sick, disenabled to prosecute his designs, till one unexpected counterblast of
Fortune ruffled yea blew away all his projects so curiously plaited. Thus three
aces chance often not to rub; and Politicians think themselves to have stopped
every small cranny, when they have left a whole door open for divine
providence to undo all which they have done.

The Cardinals proceed to the choice of a new Pope, whilst Borgia lay sick
abed, much bemoaning himself; for all others (had they the command of all April
showrs) could not bestow on drop of pity upon him. Pius the third was first
chosen Pope, answering his name, being a devout man (such black swans seldom
swim in Tyber) but the chair of Pestilence choked him within twenty six days,
and in his room Julius was chosen, or rather his greatness chose himself, a
sworn enemy to Caesar Borgia, who still lay under the Physicians hands, and had
no power to oppose the election, or to strengthen his new-got Dukedom of
Romania: the state of his body was to be preferred before the body of his
state, and he lay striving to keep life, not to make a Pope. Yea the operation
of this poison made him vomit up the Dukedom of Romania which he had swallowed
before, and whilst he lay sick the States and cities therein recovered their
own liberties formerly enjoyed.

Indeed this disease made Borgia lose his nails, that he could never after
scratch to do any mischief; and being banished Italy, he fled into Navarre,
where he was obscurely killed in a tumultuous insurrection.

He was a man master in the art of dissembling, never looking the same way he
rowed; extremely lustful, never sparing to tread hen and chickens. At the
taking of Capua, where he assisted the French, he reserved Idem, lib. 5. page
260.
forty of the fairest Ladies to be abused by his own wantonness. And the
prodigality of his lust had long before his death made him bankrupt of all the
moisture in his body, if his Physicians had not daily repaired the decays
therein. He exactly knew the operations of all hot and cold poisons, which
would surprise nature on a sudden, and which would weary it out with a long
siege. He could contract a hundred toads into one drop, and cunningly infuse
the same into any pleasant liquour, as the Italians have poisoning at their
fingers ends. By a fig ( which restored Hezekiahs 2. Kings 20.7.
life) he took away the lives of many. In a word, if he was not a practical
Atheist, I know not who was.

If any desire to know more of his badnesse, let them read Machiavills Prince,
where Borgia is brought in as an Nunquam verebor in exemplum Valentinum
subjicere, Machiavel Prince, cap. 13. page 73.
instance of all vilany. And though he deserves to be hissed out of
Christendom, who will open his mouth in the defense of Machiavills precepts,
yet some have dared to defend his person; so that he in his Book shows not what
Princes should be, but what then they were, intending that work, not for a
glass for future Kings to dress themselves by, but only therein to present
the monstrous face of the Politicians of that Age. Sure he who is a devil in
this book, is a Saint His notes on Livy, but especially his Florentine History
savours of Religion.
in all the rest; and those that knew him, Boissardus part. 3. Iconum virorum
illustrium.
witness him to be of honest life and manners: so that that which has
sharpened the pens of many against him, is his giving so many cleanly wipes to
the foul noses of the Pope and Italian Prelacy.

CHAP. 8. The Hypocrite.
BY Hypocrite we understand such a one as does (Isaiah 32.6.) practice
hypocrisy, make a trade or work of dissembling: For otherwise, Hieronym. lib.
2. contra Pelag. and August in eadem verba, Sermon. 59. de Tempore
Hypocriseorum macula carere, aut paucorum est aut nullorum. The best of Gods
children have a smack of hypocrisy.

Maxim 1.
An Hypocrite is himself both the archer and the mark, in all actions shooting
at his own praise or profit. And therefore he does all things that they may be
seen: What with others is held a principal point in Law, is his main Maxim in
Divinity, To have good witness. Even fasting it self is meat and drink to him,
whilst others behold it.

2
In the outside of religion he out-shines a sincere Christian. Guilt cups
glitter more then those of massy gold, which are seldom burnished. Yea, well
may the Hypocrite afford gaudy facing, who cares not for any lining; brave it
in the shop, that has nothing in the warehouse. Nor is it a wonder if in
outward service he out-strips Gods servants, who out-doeth Gods command by
will worship, giving God more then he requires, though not what most he
requires, I mean, his heart.

3
His vizard is commonly plucked off in this world. Sincerity is an entire thing
in it self: Hypocrisy consists of several pieces cunningy closed together;
and sometimes the Hypocrite is smote (as Ahab with an arrow, 1. Kings 22.34.)
betwixt the joints of his armor, and so is mortally wounded in his reputation.
Now by these shrewd signs a dissembler is often discovered: First, heavy
censuring of others for light faults: secondly, boasting of his own goodness:
thirdly, the unequal beating of his pulse in matters of piety, hard, strong
and quick, in public actions; weak, soft and dull, in private matters:
fourthly, shrinking in persecution; for painted faces cannot abide to come nigh
the fire.

Yet sometimes he goes to the grave neither detected nor suspected. 4
If Masters in their art, and living in peaceable times wherein piety and
prosperity do not fall out, but agree well together. Maud, mother to King Henry
the second, being besieged in Cambd. Brit. in Hantshire.
Winchester castle, counterfeited herself to be dead, and so was carried out in
a coffin whereby she escaped. Another time being besieged at Matthew. Paris in
Anno Dom. 1141.
Oxford in a cold winter, with wearing white apparel she got away in the snow
undiscovered. Thus some Hypocrites by dissembling mortification that they are
dead to the world, and by professing a snow-like purity in their conversations,
escape all their life time undiscerned by mortal eyes.

By long dissembling piety he deceives himself at last: 5
Yea, he may grow so infatuated as to conceive himself no dissembler but a
sincere Saint. A scholar was so possessed with his lively personating of King
Richard the third, in a Colledge-Comedy, that ever after he was transported
with a royal humor in his large expenses, which brought him to beggary,
though he had great preferment. Thus the Hypocrite by long acting the part of
piety, at last believes himself really to be such an one, whom at first he did
but counterfeit.

God here knows, 6
and hereafter will make Hypocrites known to the whole world. Ottocar King of
Bohemia refused to do homage to Rodulphus the first, Emperor, till at last,
chastised with war, he was content to do him homage privately in a tent;
which tent was so contrived by the Pantaleon in vita Rodulph. Imperat. lib. de
Illustrib. Germ. part. 2.285.
Emperors servants, that by drawing one cord, it was all taken away, and so
Ottocar presented on his knees doing his homage, to the view of three Armies in
presence. Thus God at last shall uncase the closest dissembler to the sight of
men angels and devils, having removed all veils and pretenses of piety: no goat
in a sheepskin shall steal on his right hand at the last day of judgment.

CHAP. 9. The life of Iehu.
IEhu the son of Jehosaphat, the son of Nimshi, was one of an active
spirit, and therefore employed to confound the house of Ahab; for God, when he
means to shave clear, chooses a razour with a sharp edge, and never sends a
slug on a message that requires haste.

A son of the Prophets sent by Elisha privately anointed him King at Ramoth
Gilead, whereupon he was proclaimed King by the consent of the army. Surely God
sent also an invisible messenger to the souls of his fellow-captains, and
anointed their hearts with the oil of Subjection, as he did Jehu's head with
the oil of Sovereignty.

Secrecy and celerity are the two wheels of great actions. Jehu had both: he
marched to Jezreel faster then Fame could fly, whose wings he had clipped by
stopping all intelligence, that so at once he might be seen and felt of his
enemies. In the way meeting with Jehoram and Ahaziah, he conjoined them in
their deaths who consorted together in idolatry. The corpse of Jehoram he
orders to be cast into Nabaoths vineyard, a garden of herbs royally dung'd, and
watered with blood.

Next he revengeth Gods Prophets on cruel Jezabell, whose wicked carcass was
devoured by dogs to a small reversion, as if a head that plotted, and hands
that practiced so much mischief, and feet so swift to shed blood were not meat
good enough for dogs to eat. Then by a letter he commands the heads of Ahabs
seventy sons (their Guardians turning their executioners) whose heads being
laid on two heaps at the gate of Jezreel served for two soft pillows for Jehu
to sleep sweetly upon, having all those corrivalls to the Crown taken away.

The Priests of Baal follow after. With a prettywile he fetches them all into
the temple of their Idol, where having ended their sacrifice, they themselves
were sacrificed. However I dare not acquit Jehu herein. In Holy Fraud I like
the Christian but not the surname thereof, and wonder how any can marry these
two together in the same action, seeing surely the parties were never agreed.
This I dare say, Be it unjust in Jehu, it was just with God, that the
worshippers of a false God should be deceived with a feigned worship.

Hitherto I like Jehu as well as Josiah; his zeal blazed as much: But having
now got the Crown, he discovers himself a dissembling Hypocrite. It was an ill
sign when he said to Jonadab the son of Rechab, Come with me, and see my
zeal for the Lord. Bad inviting guests to feed their eyes on our goodness. But
Hypocrites rather then they will lose a drop of praise will lick it up with
their own tongue.

Before, he had dissembled with Baal, now he counterfeits with God. He took no
heed to walk in the way of the Lord God of Israel with all his heart: formerly
his sword had two edges, one cut for Gods glory, the other for his own
preferment. He that before drove so furiously, whilst his private ends whipped
on his horses, now will not go a footpace in Gods commandments, He departed not
from the golden calves in Dan and Bethel.

I know what Flesh will object, that this State-sinne Jehu must commit to
maintain his kingdom: for the lions of gold did support the throne of Solomon,
but the calves of gold the throne of Jeroboam and his Successors. Should he
suffer his Subjects to go up to Jerusalem thrice a year (as the Law Exodus
34.23.
of Moses commanded) this would un-King him in effect, as leaving him no able
Subjects to command. And as one in the heathen Poet complains, Tres sumus
imbelles numero, sine viribus uxor,
Laertesque senex, Telemachusque puer.
Three weaklings we, a wife for war too mild,
Laertes old, Telemachus a child.
So thrice a year should Jehu only be King over such an impotent company of
old men, women, and children. Besides, it was to be feared that the ten Tribes
going to Jerusalem to worship, where they fetched their God, would also have
their King.

But Faith will answer, that God that built Jehu's throne without hands, could
support it without buttresses, or being beholden to idolatry: And therefore
herein Jehu, who would needs piece out Gods providence with his own carnal
policy, was like a foolish greedy gamester, who having all the game in his own
hand steals a needless card to assure himself of winning the stake, and
thereby loses all. For this deep diver was drowned in his own policy, and
Hazael King of Syria was raised up by God to trouble and molest them. Yet God
rewarded him with a lease of the Kingdom of four successive lives, who had he
been sincere would have assured him of a Crown here and hereafter.

Chap. 10. The Heretic.
IT is very difficult accurately to define him. Amongst the Heathen Atheist
was, and amongst Christians Heretic is the disgraceful word of course,
always cast upon those who dissent from the predominant current of the time.
Thus those who in matters of opinion varied from the Hic videtur quod omnis qui
non obedit statutis Romanae sedis sit Haereticus, Glossa in C. nulli did. 19.
in verbo Prostratus.
Popes copy the least hair-stroke, are condemned for Heretics. Yea, Virgilius
Bishop of Saltzburg was branded with that censure for maintaining that there
were Ioh. Avent. lib. 3. Annal. ^^ior.
Antipodes opposite to the then known world. It may be, as Alexander, hearing
the Philosophers dispute of more worlds, wept that he had conquered no part of
them; so it grieved the Pope that these Antipodes were not subject to his
jurisdiction, which much incensed his Holiness against that strange opinion.
We will branch the description of an Heretic into these three parts.

First, he is one that formerly has been of the true Church: 1. John 2.19.
They went out from us, but they were not of us. These afterward prove more
offensive to the Church then very Pagans; as the English-Irish, descended
anciently of English Parentage (be it spoken with the more shame to them, and
sorrow to us) turning wild become worse enemies to our Nation then the Native
Irish themselves. 2. Maintaining a Fundamental error. Every scratch in the
hand is not a stab to the heart; nor does every false opinion make a Heretic.
3. With obstinacy. Which is the dead flesh, making the green wound of an error
fester into the old soar of an Heresy.
It matters not much what manner of person he has. Maxim 1.
If beautiful, perchance the more attractive of feminine followers: If
deformed, so that his body is as odd as his opinions, he is the more properly
entitled to the reputation of crooked Saint.

2
His natural parts are quick and able. Yet he that shall ride on a winged
horse to tell him thereof, shall but come too late to bring him stale news of
what he knew too well before.

3
Learning is necessary in him if he trades in a critical error: but if he
only broches dregs, and deals in some dull sottish opinion, a trovell will
serve as well as a pencill to daub on such thick course colors. Yea in some
Heresies deep studying is so useless, that the first thing they learn, is to
inveigh against all learning.

4
However some smattering in the original tongues will do well. On occasion he
will let fly whole vollies of Greek and Hebrew words, whereby he not only
amazeth his ignorant Auditors, but also in conferences daunteth many of his
opposers, who (though in all other learning far his superiors) may perchance
be conscious of want of skill in those languages, whilst the Heretic hereby
gains credit to his cause and person.

5
His behavior is seemingly very pious and devout. How foul soever the postern
and backdoore be, the gate opening to the street is swept and garnished, and
his outside adorned with pretended austerity.

6
He is extremely proud and discontented with the times, quarrelling that many
beneath him in piety are above him in place. This pride has caused many men
which otherwise might have been shining lights prove smoking firebrands in the
Church.

7
Having first hammered the heresy in himself, he then falls to seducing of
others: so hard it is for one to have the itch and not to scratch. Yea Babylon
her self will allege, that for Sions sake she will not hold her peace. The
necessity of propogating the truth is errors plea to divulge her falsehoods.
Men, as naturally they desire to know, so they desire what they know should be
known.

If challenged to a private dispute, 8
his impudence bears him out. He counts it the only error to confess he has
erred. His face is of brass, which may be said either ever or never to blush.
In disputing his Modus is sine modo; and as if all figures (even in Logic)
were magical, he neglects all forms of reasoning, counting that the only
Syllogism which is his conclusion.

He slights any Synod if condemning his opinions; 9
esteeming the decisions thereof no more then the forfeits in a barbers shop,
where a Gentleman's pleasure is all the obligation to pay, and none are bound
except they will bind themselves.

Sometimes he comes to be put to death for his obstinacy. 10
Indeed some charitable Divines have counted it inconsistent with the lenity of
the Gospel, which is to expect and endeavor the amendment of all, to put any
to death for their false opinions; and we read of S. Paul (though the Papists
paint him always with a sword) that he only came with a rod. However the
Gerards Common places de Magistrate. Polit. p. 1047.
mildest Authors allow that the Magistrate may inflict capital punishment on
Heretics, in cases of 1. Sedition against the State wherein he lives. And
indeed such is the sympathy betwixt Church and Commonwealth that there are few
Heresies, except they be purely speculative (and so I may say have heads
without hands or any practical influence) but in time the violent maintainers
of them may make a dangerous impression in the State. 2. Blasphemy against God,
and those points of religion which are awfully to be believed.


For either of these our Heretic sometimes willingly undergoes death, and then
in the Calendar of his own conceit he canonizeth himself for a Saint, yea a
Martyr.

CHAP. 11. The rigid Donatists.
Anno Domini 331.
THe Donatists were so called from a double Donatus, whereof the one planted the
sect, the other watered it, and the devil by Gods permission gave the increase.
The elder Donatus being one of tolerable parts, and intolerable pride, raised a
Schism in Carthage against good Cecilian the Bishop there, whom he loaded
unjustly with many crimes, which he was not able to prove; and vexed with this
disgrace he thought to right his credit by wronging religion, and so began the
Augustine. ad Quod vult Deum.
heresy of Donatists.

His most dominative tenet was, that the Church was perished from the face of
the earth, the relics thereof only remaining in his party. I instance the
rather on this Heresy, because the reviving thereof is the new disease of our
times. One Valor. Max. lib. 9. cap. 15.
Vibius in Rome was so like unto Pompey, ut permutato statu Pompeius in illo,
and ille in Pompeio salutari possit: Thus the Anabaptists of our days, and
such as are Anabaptistically inclined, in all particulars resemble the old
Donatists, abating only that difference which is necessarily required to make
them alike.

The epithet of rigid I therefore do add, to separate the Donatists from
themselves, who separated themselves from all other Christians. For there were
two principal sides of them: first, the Rogatists, from Rogatus their teacher,
to whom S. Augustine bears witness that they had zeal but not according to
knowledge. These were pious people for their lives, hating bloody practices,
though erroneous in their doctrine. The learned Ipsum Fraternitatis nomen
u^cunque Donatistis fastidiosum, est tamen orthodoxis erga ipsos Donatistas
necessarium, Optat. lib. 3. init.
Fathers of that age count them part of the true Church, and their brethren,
though they themselves disclaimed any such brotherhood with other Christians.
Oh the sacred violence of such worthy men's charity in plucking those to them
which thrust themselves away! But there was another sort of Jesuited Donatists,
as I may say, whom they called Circumcellions, though as little reason can be
given of their S. August. in Psalm. 132. quia circum cel^as vagantur, count them
so called; which i^ rather his Allusion then the true Etymology.
name as of their opinions, whom we principally intend at this time.

Their number in short time grew not only to be considerable but terrible:
their tenet was plausible and winning; and that Faith is easily wrought which
teaches men to believe well of themselves. From Numidia, where they began,
they overspread Africa, Spain, France, Italy and Rome it self. We find not any
in Britain, where S^ H. Spelman Counsels, page 446.
Pelagianisme mightily reigned: either because God in his goodness would not
have one country at the same time visited with a double plague, or else
because this infection was to come to this Island in after-ages, furbished up
under a new name.

Their greatest increase was under Julian the Emperor. This Apostate next to
no religion loved the worst religion best, and was a professed friend to all
foes of goodness. The Donatists, being punished under former Christian
Emperors, repaired to him for succor, not caring whether it was an Olive or a
Bramble they fled to, so be it afforded them shelter. They extolled him for
such a godly man (flattery and false doctrine go ever together) with whom alone
Quod apud eum solum justitia locum habe et, Aug. contra literas Petil. lib. 2.
cap. 97.
justice did remain, and he restored them their good Churches again, and armed
them with many privileges against Christians. Hereupon they raised a cruel
persecution, killing many men in the very Churches, murdering women and
infants, defiling virgins, or ravishing them rather, for consent only defiles.
God keep us from standing in the way where blind zeal is to pass, for it will
trample down all before it, and mercy shall as soon be found at the hands of
prevailing cowards. What the Anabaptists did in Germany, we know; what they
would do here, had they power, God knows. The best security we have they will
do no harm is because they cannot.

We come to set down some of their principal opinions: I say, Principal; for
at last they did enterfere with all Heretics, Arians, Macedonians, etc.
ignorant zeal is too blind to go right, and too active to stand still: yea all
errors are of kin, at the farthest but cousens once removed; and when men
have once left the truth, their only quiet home, they will take up their
lodging under any opinion which has the least shadow of probability. We will
also set down some of their reasons, and how they torture Scripture with
violent interpretations to wrest from it a confession on their side, yet all in
vain.

First Position.
That the true Church was perished from the face of the earth, the remnants
thereof being only in part Donati, in that August. lib 2. contra Crescon.
cap. 37.
part of Africa where Donatus and his followers were. The Anabaptists in like
manner stifle Gods Church by crowding it into their corner, confining the
monarchy of Christ in the Gospel unto their own toparchy, and having a quarrel
to the words in the Creed, Catholic Church.

The Donatists Reasons.
It is said, Canticles. 1.7. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou
feedest, where thou make thy flocks to rest in the South. By this the
Donatists are meant: Africa wherein they lived was in the South.

Confutation.
An argument drawn from an Quis non impudentissime nitatur aliquid in allegoria
positum pro se interpretari, nisi habeat and manifesta testimonia quotum lumine
illustrentur obscura. Aug. Tom. Epist. 48. ad Vincent.
allegory is weak, except all the obscurities therein be first explained.
Besides, Africa Cesariensis (where the Donatists were) was much more West then
South from Judea. But Gods Church cannot be contracted to the Chapel of
Donatus, to which God himself (the truest surveyour) allows larger bounds,
Psalm. 2.8. Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Now the restrainers of
the Church to a small place (as much as in them lies) falsify Gods promise and
shorten Christ's portion. Many other Optat. Milev. lib. 7. and Aug. contraliter
Petil. cap 6.7.8.
places speak the large extent of the Gospel, Genesis 22.17. Genesis 28.14. Psalm.
72.8. etc.

Second Position.
That their Church consisted of an holy company, pure and undefiled indeed.
Thus also the Anabaptists brag of their holiness, as if nothing else were
required to make men pure but a conceit that they are so. Sure had they no
other fault but want of charity, their hands could not be clean who throw so
much dirt on other men's faces.

Reasons.
It is said, Ephesians. 5.27. That Christ might present to himself a glorious
Church, without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy
and without blemish: which the Donatists appropriate to themselves.

Confutation.
This glorious presentation of the Church is Aug. ut prius ad Vincentium, and
epist. 50. ad Bonifac.
performed in the world to come. Here it consists of sinners (who had rather
confess their wrinkles then paint them) and had need to pray daily, And
forgive us our trespasses.

Third Position.
That mixed Communions were infectious, and the pious promiscuously receiving
with the profane are polluted thereby. Hear the Anabaptizing sing the same
note, By Protestation protested, p. 14.
profane and ignorant persons coming to the Lords table, others also that
communicate with them are guilty of the same profanation.

Reasons.
Because several places of Scripture commend, yea command, a separation from
them. Jerem. 15.19. Take forth the precious from the vile. 2. Cor. 6.17. Be ye
separate and touch no unclean thing. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. Withdraw your selves from
every brother that walks disorderly. 1. Cor. 5.7. Purge out therefore the old
leven, etc.

Confutation.
In these and the like places two things are enjoined: first, a separation from
intimate familiarity with profane persons; secondly, a separation from their
vices and wickedness, by detesting and disclaiming them: but neither civil
State-society, nor public Church Communion is hereby prohibited. By purging
out the old leven, Church Censures are meant, to excommunicate the openly
profane. But that mixed Communions pollute not, appears, because S. Paul says,
1. Cor. 11.28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread,
etc. but enjoins not men to examine others; which was necessary if bad
Communicants did defile. It neither makes the cheer or welcome the worse to
sit next to him at Gods table who wants a wedding garment, for he that touches
his person, but disclaims his practices, is as far from him, as the East from
the West, yea as heaven from hell. In bodily diseases one may be infected
without his knowledge, against his will: not so in spiritual contagions, where
August. contr. Don. post Coll. Lib.
acceditur ad vitium corruptionis vitio consensionis, and none can be infected
against their consent.

Fourth Position.
That the godly were bound to sever from the society of the wicked, and not to
keep any communion with them. Thus the most rigid of modern Factours for the
Independent congregations would draw their files out of the army of our
National Church, and set up a congregation wherein Christ shall reign in
Beauty and Purity. But they may fly so far from mystical Babylon as to run
to literal Babel, I mean bring all to confusion, and founder the Commonwealth:
For they that stride so wide at once will go far with few paces.

Reason.
Because it is written, 2 Cor. 6.14. What Aug. lib. 2. contra Petill. cap. 39.
communion has light with darkness? and in other places, to the same effect.

Confutation.
The answer is the same with the former: But the tares shall grow with the
corn. And in the visible militant Church and kingdom of grace, that wicked men
shall be unseparablie mingled with the godly, besides our Saviors testimony,
Matt. 13.30. these reasons do approve: first, because Hypocrites can never be
severed, but by him that can search the heart; secondly, because if men should
make the separation, weak Christians would be counted no Christians, and those
who have a grain of grace under a load of imperfections would be counted
reprobates; thirdly, because Gods vessels of honor from all eternity, not as
yet appearing, but wallowing in sin, would be made castawayes; fourthly,
because God by the mixture of the wicked with the godly will try the
watchfulness and patience of his servants; fifthly, because thereby he will
bestow many favors on the wicked, to clear his justice, and render them the
more inexcusable: lastly, because the mixture of the wicked, grieving the
godly, will make them the more heartily pray for the day of judgment. The
desire of future glory makes the godly to cry, Come Lord Jesus; but the feeling
of present pain (whereof they are most sensible) causes the ingemination, Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly. In a word as it is wholesome for a flock of sheep for
some goats to feed amongst them, their bad sent being good Physic for the
sheep to keep them from the Shakings; so much profit redounds to the godly by
the necessary mixture of the wicked amongst them, making the pious to stick the
faster to God and goodness.

Fifth Position.
That Aug. lib. 1. contraliter. Petil cap. 1.
the efficacy of the Sacrament depends on the piety of the Minister; so that
in effect his piety washes the water in baptism, and sanctifies it, whereas
the profaneness of a bad man administering it does unsacrament baptism it
self, making a nullity thereof. Herein the Anabaptists join hands with them, as
it is generally known by their re-baptizing: Yea I. Penry p. 46. and 49.
some tending that way have maintained, that Sacraments received from ignorant
and unpreaching Ministers are of no validity.

Reason.
It is written, Matthew. 7.18. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither
can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.

Confutation.
This is true of men's personal, but not of their ministerial acts: that
Minister that can add the word Aug. tract. 80. in Johan.
of institution to the element, makes a sufficient Sacrament: And Sacraments,
like to shelmeats, may be eaten after fowl hands, without any harm. Cum Idem
contra Parmen. lib. 2. cap. 10.
obsint indigne tractantibus, prosint tamen digne sumentibus. Yet God make all
Ministers pious, painful, and able: we, if beholding the present age, may
justly bemoan their want, who remembering the former age, must as justly admire
their plenty.

Sixth Position.
That all learning and Idem. lib. 1. contra Cresco. cap. 30.
eloquence was to be condemned. Late Sectarists go farther: Greenwood and
Barrow Dr Soame writing against them, lib. 2. page 4.
moved Queen Elizabeth to abolish both Universities, Which we believe and wish
may then be done,
When all blear eyes have quite put out the sun.


Reason.
Because learning has been the cause of many Heresies, and discords in the
Church.

Confutation.
Not learning but the conceit thereof in those that wanted it, and the abuse
thereof in such as had it, caused Heretics.

Seventh Position.
That Magistrates have no power to compel people to serve God by outward
punishment: which is also the distilled position of our Anabaptists, thus
blinding the Ministers, and binding the Magistrate, what work do they make?

Reason.
Because it is a breach of the August lib. 3. cont. Crescon. cap. 51.
liberty of the creature: The King of heaven gave not men freewill, for the
Kings of the earth to take it away from them.

Confutation.
God gave men freewill to use it well; if they abuse it, God gave Magistrates
power to punish them, else they bear the sword in vain. They may command people
to serve God, who herein have no cause to complain; better to be compelled to a
feast, Luke 14.23. then to run to a fray. But these men who would not have
Magistrates compel them, quaere whether if they had power they would not
compel Magistrates.

The Donatists also did mightily boast of miracles and visions: they made
nothing to step into the third heaven, and have familiar Donatus oravit,
respondet ei Deus de coelo, Aug. in Iohann. tract. 3. prope finem.
dialogues with God himself: they used also to cite their revelations as
arguments for their opinions; we will trust the copy of such their visions to
be true, when we see the original produced: herein the Anabaptists come not
behind them. Strange was the Donatists ambition of Martyrdom; they used to
force such as they met to wound them mortally, or violently to stab and kill
them; and on purpose to fall down from Theodoretus in fabulis Haeret.
steep mountains, which one day may wish the mountains to fall on them. For
Martyrs are to die willingly but not wilfully; and though to die be a debt due
to nature, yet he that pays it before the time, may be called upon for
repayment to die the second death.

Once many Donatists met a noble Centuriator. cent. 4 c. 5 p. 211. ex
Theodoreto.
Gentleman, and gave him a sword into his hand, commanding him to kill them, or
threatening to kill him. Yet he refused to do it, unless first they would
suffer him to bind them all; for fear, said he, that when I have killed one or
two of you, the rest alter their minds and fall upon me. Having fast bound them
all, he soundly whipped them, and so let them alone. Herein he showed more wit
then they wanted, and more charity then wit, denying them their desires, and
giving them their deserts, seeking to make true Saints by marring of false
Martyrs.

These Donatists were opposed by the learned writings of private Fathers,
Optatus Milevitanus, and S. Augustine (no Heresy could bud out, but presently
his pruning-hook was at it) and by whole Counsels, one at Carthage, another at
Arles. But the Donatists, whilst blessing themselves, cared not for the
Churches Anathema's, being so far from fearing her excommunications, that
they prevented them in first excommunicating themselves by separation; and they
count it a kindness to be shut out, who would willingly be gone. Besides, they
called at Aug. Epist. ad Vincentium.
Carthage an Anti-councell of their own faction, consisting of two hundred
seventy Bishops, to confirm their opinions. Let Truth never challenge Error at
the weapon of number alone, without other arguments; for some Orthodox
Counsels have had fewer suffrages in them, then this Donatisticall
conventicle; and we may see small Pocket-Bibles, and a great Folio-Alchoran.

But that which put the period to this Heresy (for after the six hundredth
year of Christ the Donatist appears not, I looked after his place and he was
not to be found) was partly their own dissensions, for they In minutula
frustula, Idem.
crumbled into several divisions amongst themselves: Besides the honest
Rogatists (of whom before) they had several sects, some more, some less
strict, called from their several masters, Cresconians, Petilian went not so
far as the rest, Aug. lib. 3. de correct. Donati c. 17.19. Vid Aug. de
schism. Maxim. brevi. collat. 3 diei.
Petilians, Ticonians, Parmenians, Maximians, etc. which much differed amongst
themselves. Thus is it given to all Heresies to break out into under-factions,
still going further in their tenets; and such as take themselves to be
twice-refined will count all others to be but dross, till there be as many
Heresies as Heretics, like the Ammonites, so scattered by Saul, 1. Sam. 11.11.
that there remained not two of them which were together.

But chiefly they were suppressed by the civil Magistrate (Moses will do more
with a frown then Aaron with a blow, I mean with Church Censures) for He caused
the Patent of privilege which Julian granted the Donatists, publicis locis
assigendum in ^udibrium: vide Baron. in Anno. 362. ^um. 264.
Honorius the godly Emperor (with his arm above a thousand miles long) easily
reached them in Europe, Asia, and Africa, and by punishments mixed with the
Churches instructions converted and reclaimed very many.

In such a case teaching without punishment had done little good, and
punishment without teaching would have done much harm; both mingled together,
by Gods blessing, caused the conversion of many, and final suppression of that
Heresy.

The same God of his goodness grant that by the same means such as revive this
Heresy nowadayes may have their eyes opened and their mouths stopped, their
pride less and their knowledge more, that those may be stayed which are going,
and those brought back which are gone into their dangerous opinions. For if the
angels in heaven rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, none but devils and men
devilishly minded will be sorrowful thereat.

CHAP. 12. The Liar
IS one that makes a trade to tell falsehoods with intent to deceive. He is
either open or secret. A secret Liar or Equivocatour is such a one as by
mental reservations and other tricks deceives him to whom he speaks, being
lawfully called to deliver all the truth. And sure speech being but a copy of
the heart, it cannot be avouched for a true copy, that has less in it then
the original. Hence it often comes to pass, When Jesuits unto us answer Nay,
They do not English speak, it is Greek they say.


Such an Equivocatour we leave, more needing a Book then Character to describe
him. The open Liar is first, either Mischievous, condemned by all; secondly,
Officious, unlawful also, because doing ill for good to come of it; thirdly,
Jesting, when in sport and merriment. And though some count a Jesting lie to be
like the dirt of oysters, which (they say) never stains, yet is it a sin in
earnest. What Policy is it for one to wound himself to tickle others, and to
stab his own soul to make the standers by sport? We come to describe the Liar.

Maxim 1.
At first he tells a lie with some shame and reluctance. For then if he cuts
off but a lap of Truths garment his heart smites him; but in process of time
he conquers his Conscience, and from quenching it there arises a smoke which
soots and fouls his soul, so that afterward he lies without any regret.

2
Having made one lie he is fain to make more to maintain it. For an untruth
wanting a firm foundation needs many buttresses. The honor and happiness of
the Deuteronomy. 7.14.
Israelites is the misery and mischief of lies, Not one amongst them shall be
barren, but miraculously procreative to beget others.

He has a good memory which he badly abuses. 3
Memory in a Liar is no more then needs. For first lies are hard to be
remembered, because many, whereas truth is but one: secondly, because a lie
cursorily told takes little footing and settled fastness in the tellers
memory, but prints it self deeper in the hearers, who take the greater notice
because of the improbability and deformity thereof; and one will remember the
sight of a monster longer then the sight of an handsome body. Hence comes it to
pass that when the Liar has forgotten himself, his Auditors put him in mind
of the lie, and take him therein.

Sometimes though his memory cannot help him from being arrested for lying, 4
his wit rescues him: which needs a long reach to bring all ends presently and
probably together, gluing the splinters of his tales so cunningly that the
cracks cannot be perceived. Thus a relique-monger bragged he could show a
feather of the dove at Christ's baptism; but being to show it to the people, a
wag had stolen away the feather and put a coal in the room of it. Well, quoth
he to the Spectatours, I cannot be so good as my word for the present; but here
is one of the coals Chamnitius in exam. cont. Trident. part. 4. p. 12.
that broiled S. Laurence, and that is worth the seeing.

Being challenged for telling a lie no man is more furiously angry. 5
Then he draws his sword and threatens, because he thinks that an offer of
revenge, to show himself moved at the accusation, does in some sort discharge
him of the imputation; as if the condemning of the sin in appearance
acquitted him in effect: or else because he that is called a Liar to his face,
is also called a Coward in the same breath if he swallows it; and the party
charged does conceive that if he vindicates his valor, his truth will be given
him into the bargain.

At last he believes his own lies to be true. 6
He has told them over and over so often, that prescription makes a right, and
he verily believes that at the first he gathered the story out of some
authentical Author, which only grew in his own brain.

7
No man else believes him when he speaks the truth. How much gold soever he
has in his chest, his word is but brass, and passes for nothing: yea he is
dumb in effect, for it is all one whether one cannot speak, or cannot be
believed.

To conclude: Some of the west Indians to expiate their sin of lying use to
let themselves blood in their tongues, and to offer the blood to their idols: A
good cure for the squinancie, but no satisfaction for lying. Gods word has
taught us better, What profit is there in my blood? The true repentance of the
party washed in the blood of Christ can only obtain pardon for this sin.

CHAP. 13. The common Barreter.
A Barreter is an horseleach that only sucks the corrupted blood of the Law.
He trades only in tricks and quirks: His highway is in bypath, and he loves
a cavil better then an argument, an evasion then an answer. There be two kinds
of them: either such as fight themselves, or are trumpeters in a battle to set
on others. The former is a professed dueller in the Law that will challenge any,
and in all suite-combats be either principal or second.

Maxim 1
References and compositions he hates as bad as an hangman hates a pardon. Had
he been a Scholar, he would have maintained all paradoxes; if a Surgeon, he
would never have cured a wound but always kept it raw; if a Soldier, he would
have been excellent at a siege, nothing but ejectio firma would out him.

2
He is half starved in the lent of a long vacation for want of employment; save
only that then he brews work to broach in Term-time. I find one so much
delighted in Law-sport, that when Stephens Apol. for Herodotus.
Lewis the King of France offered to ease him of a number of suits, he
earnestly besought his Highness to leave him some twenty or thirty behind,
wherewith he might merrily pass away the time.

He has this property of an honest man, 3
that his word is as good as his band; for he will pick the lock of the
strongest conveiance, or creep out at the lattice of a word. Wherefore he
counts to enter common with others as good as his own several; for he will so
vex his partners, that they had rather forgo their right, then undergo a suit
with him. As for the trumpeter Barretour,

He falls in with all his neighbors that fall out, 4
and spurs them on to go to law. A Gentleman, who in a duel was rather
scratcht then wounded, sent for a Surgeon, who having opened the wound,
charged his man with all speed to fetch such a salve from such a place in his
study. Why (said the Gentleman) is the hurt so dangerous? Oh yes (answered the
Surgeon) if he returns not in post-hast the wound will cure it self, and so
I shall lose my fee. Thus the Barretour posts to the houses of his neighbors,
lest the sparks of their small discords should go out before he brings them
fuel, and so he be broken by their making up. Surely he loves not to have the
bells rung in a peal, but he likes it rather when they are jangled backward,
himself having kindled the fire of dissension amongst his neighbors.

He lives till his clothes have as many rents as himself has made dissensions.
5
I wonder any should be of this trade, when none ever thrived on it, paying dear
rates for their counsels: for bringing many cracked titles, they are fain to
fill up their gaping chinks with the more gold.

But I have done with this wrangling companion, half afraid to meddle with him
any longer lest he should commence a suit against me for describing him.

The Reader may easily perceive how this Book of the Profane State would swell
to a great proportion, should we therein character all the kinds of vicious
persons which stand in opposition to those which are good. But this pains may
well be spared, seeing that rectum est index sui and obliqui; and the luster of
the good formerly described will sufficiently discover the enormity of those
which are otherwise. We will therefore instance in three principal offenders,
and so conclude.

CHAP. 14. The Degenerous Gentleman.
SOme will challenge this title of incongruity, as if those two words were so
dissonant, that a whole sentence cannot hold them; for sure where the Gentleman
is the root, Degenerous cannot be the fruit. But if any quarrel with my words,
Valerius Maximus shall be my champion, who styleth such, Valor. Max. lib. 3
cap. 5.
Nobilia Portenta. By Gentleman we understand one whom the Heralds (except they
will deny their best Records) must allow of ancient parentage. Such a one, when
a child, being kept the devils Nazarite, that no razor of correction must come
upon his head in his fathers family, see what he proves in the process of
time, brought to extreme poverty. Herein we intend no invective glance on those
pious Gentlemen, whose states are consumed through Gods secret judgment, and
none of the owners visible default; only we meddle with such as by
carelessness and riot cause their own ruin.

Maxim 1.
He goes to school to learn in jest and play in earnest. Now this Gentleman,
now that Gentlewoman begges him a playday, and now the book must be thrown
away, that he may see the buck hunted. He comes to school late, departs soon,
and the whole year with him (like the fortnight when Christmas day falls on a
tuesday) is all Holidayes and half-Holidayes. And as the Poets feign of
Thetis, that she drenched Achilles her son in the Stygian waters, that he
might not be wounded with any weapon; so cockering mothers inchant their sons
to make them rod-free, which they do by making some golden circles in the hand
of the Schoolmaster: thus these two conjoyning together make the indentures to
bind the youth to eternal ignorance; yet perchance he may get some alms of
learning, here a snap, there a piece of knowledge, but nothing to purpose.

His fathers Servingmen (which he counts no mean preferment) admit him into
their society. 2
Going to a drinking match they carry him with them to enter him, and applaud
his hopefulnesse, finding him vicious beyond his age. The Butler makes him free
(having first pai'd his fees accustomed) of his own fathers cellar, and
guesseth the profoundnesse of his young masters capacity by the depth of the
whole-ones he fetches off.

Coming to the University, 3
his chief study is to study nothing. What is Learning but a cloakbag of books,
cumbersome for a Gentleman to carry? and the Muses fit to make wives for
Farmers sons: perchance his own Tutour, for the promise of the next living
(which notwithstanding his promise he afterward sells to another) contributes
to his undoing, letting him live as he list: yea, perhaps his own mother
(whilst his father diets him for his health with a moderate allowance) makes
him surfeit underhand by sending him money. Thus whilst some complain that the
University infected him, he infected the Universitie, from which he sucked no
milk but poisoned her nipples.

At the Innes of Court under pretense to learn Law, 4
he learns to be lawless; not knowing by his study so much as what an
Execution means, till he learns it by his own dear experience. Here he grows
acquainted with the Roaring Boys, I am afraid so called by a woeful Prolepsis,
Here, for Hereafter. What formerly was counted the chief credit of an Orator,
these esteem the honor of a Swearer, Pronunciation, to mouth an oath with a
graceless grace. These (as David says) cloth themselves with curses as with
a garment, and therefore desire to be in the latest fashion both in their
clothes and curses: These infuse all their skill into their young novice, who
shortly proves such a proficient, that he exceeds his Masters in all kinds of
vicious courses.

5
Through the mediation of a Scrivener he grows acquainted with some great
Usurer. Nor is this youngster so ravenous, as the other is ready to feed him
with money, sometimes with a courteous violence forcing on him more then he
desires, provided the security be good, except the Usurer be so valiant as to
hazard the losing of a small hook to catch a great fish, and will adventure to
trust him, if his estate in hope be overmeasure, though he himself be under
age. Now the greater part of the money he takes up is not for his own spending,
but to pay the shot of other men's riot.

6
After his fathers death he flies out more then ever before. Formerly he took
care for means for his spending, now he takes care for spending for his means.
His wealth is so deep a gulf, no riot can ever sound the bottom of it. To make
his guests drunk is the only seal of their welcome. His very meanest servant
may be master of the cellar, and those who deserve no beer may command the
best wine: such dancing by day, such masking by night, such roaring, such
revelling, able to awake the sleeping ashes of his Great-great-grandfather, and
to fright all blessing from his house.

7
Mean time the old soar of his London-debts corrupts and festers. He is
careless to take out the dead flesh, or to discharge either principal or
interest. Such small leaks are not worth the stopping or searching for till
they be greater; he should undervalue himself to pay a sum before it grew
considerable for a man of his estate. Nor can he be more careless to pay, then
the Usurer is willing to continue the debt, knowing that his bands, like
infants, battle best with sleeping.

Vacation is his vocation, 8
and he scorns to follow any profession; and will not be confined to any
laudable employment. But they who count a calling a prison, shall at last make
a prison their calling. He instills also his lazy principles into his
children, being of the same opinion with the Neapolitane Gentry, who stand so
on the Sr William Segar in his Honors milit. and civil.
puntoes of their honor, that they prefer robbery before industry, and will
rather suffer their daughter to make merchandise of her chastity, then marry
the richest merchant.

Drinking is one of the principal Liberal Sciences he professes. 9
A most ungentile quality, fit to be banished to rogues and rags. It was
anciently counted a Dutch vice, and swarmed most in that country. I remember a
sad accident which happened to Fliolmus King of Gothland, who whilst a Lord of
misrule ruled in his Court, and both he and his servants were drunk, in mere
merriment, meaning no harm, they took the King and put him in Olaus m^g. Hist.
septent. p. 531.
jest into a great vessel of beer, and drowned him in earnest. But Versteg.
restitut. of de^aid intellig. p. 53.
one tells us that this ancient and habited vice is amongst the Dutch of late
years much decreased: which if it be not, would it were. Sure our Mariners
observe that as the sea grows daily shallower and shallower on the shoars of
Holland and Zeland, so the channel of late waxes deeper on the coasts of Kent
and Essex. I pray God if drunkenness ebbes in Dutchland, it does not flow in
England, and gain not in the Island what it loses in the Continent. Yea some
plead, when overwhelmed with liquour, that their thirst is but quenched: as
well may they say, that in Noah's flood the dust was but sufficiently allayed.

10
Gaming is another art he studies much: an enticing witch, that has caused the
ruin of many. Live. lib. 27.
Hanniball said of Marcellus, that nec bonam nec malam fortunam far potest,
he could be quiet neither conqueror nor conquered; thus such is the itch of
play, that Gamesters neither winning nor losing can rest contented. One
propounded this question, Whether men in ships on sea were to be accounted
among the living or the dead, because there were but few inches betwixt them
and drowning. The same scruple may be made of great Gamesters, though their
estates be never so great, whether they are to be esteemed poor or rich, there
being but a few casts at dice betwixt a Gentleman (in great game) and a beggar.
Our Gallant games deeply, and makes no doubt in conscience to adventure
Advousands, Patronages, and Church Livings in gaming. He might call to mind Sr
Miles Pateridge, who (as the Soldiers cast lots for Christ his coat) played at
dice for These were four bells the greatest in London hanging in a fair Tower
in Paul's Churchyard, Stowes Survey of London, page 357.
Jesus bells with King Henry the eighth, and won them of him. Thus he brought
the bells to ring in his pocket, but the ropes afterward caught about his
neck, and for some offenses he was hanged in the days of King Edward the sixth.

11
Then first he sells the outworks of his state, some straggling manor. Nor is
he sensible of this sale, which makes his means more entire, as counting the
gathering of such scattering rents rather burdensome then profitable. This he
sells at half the value, so that the feathers will buy the goose, and the wood
will pay for the ground: with this money if he stops the hole to one Creditour,
by his prodigality he presently opens a wider gappe to another.

12
By this time the long dormant Usurer ramps for the payment of his money. The
Principal, the grandmother, and the Use, the daughter, and the Use upon use,
the grandchild, and perchance a generation farther, has swelled the debt to an
incredible sum, for the satisfying whereof our Gallant sells the moity of his
estate.

Having sold half his land he abates nothing of his expenses: 13
but thinks five hundred pounds a year will be enough to maintain that for
which a thousand pound was too little. He will not stoop till he falls, nor
lessen his kennell of dogs, till with Acteon he be eaten up with his own hounds.

Being about to sink he catches at every rush to save himself. 14
Perchance sometimes he snatcheth at the thistle of a project, which first
pricks his hands, and then breaks. Herein it may be he adventured on a matter
wherein he had no skill himself (hoping by letting the Commonwealth blood to
fill up his own veins again) and therefore trades with his partners brains, as
his partner with his purse, till both miscarry together: or else it may be he
catches hold on the heel of another man, who is in as dangerous a case as
himself, and they embracing each other in mutual bands hasten their drowning
together. His last manor he sells twice, to a countrey-Gentleman, and a
London-usurer, though the last, as having the first title, prevails to possess
it: Usurers herein being like unto Foxes; they seldom take pains to dig any
holes themselves, but earth in that which the foolish Badger made for them, and
dwell in the mannours and fair houses which others have built and provided.

Having lost his own legs, he relyes on the staff of his kindred; 15
first visiting them as an intermitting ague, but afterward turns a quotidian,
wearing their thresholds as bare as his own coat. At last he is as welcome as a
storm; he that is abroad shelters himself from it, and he that is at home shuts
the door. If he intrudes himself, yet some with their jeering tongues give him
many a gird, but his brazen impudence feels nothing; and let him be armed on
free-cost with the pot and the pipe, he will give them leave to shoot their
flouts at him till they be weary. Sometimes he sadly paceth over the ground he
sold, and is on fire with anger with himself for his folly, but presently
quenches it at the next alehouse.

16
Having undone himself, he sets up the trade to undo others. If he can but
scrue himself into the acquaintance of a rich heir, he rejoices as much at the
prize as the Hollanders when they had intercepted the Plate-Fleet. He tutours
this young Gamester in vice, leading him a more compendious way to his ruin
then possibly he could find out of himself. And does not the guide deserve good
wages for his direction?

17
Perhaps he behaves himself so basely that he is degraded; the sad and solemn
Ceremonies whereof we may meet with in old Presidents: but of them all, in my
apprehension, none should make deeper impression in an ingenuous soul then this
one, That at the solemn degradation of a Knight for high misdemeanour, the
Markams Decads of Honor, page 76.
King and twelve Knights more did put on mourning garments, as an emblem of
sorrow for this injury to honor, that a man Gentile by birth and blood, or
honored by a Princes favor, should so far forget not only himself but his
Order, as to deserve so severe punishment.

18
His death is as miserable, as his life has been vicious. An Hospital is the
height he hopes to be advanced to: But commonly he dies not in so charitable a
prison, but sings his last note in a cage. Nor is it impossible, but that
wanting land of his own he may incroch on the Kings highway, and there, taking
himself to be Lord of the soil, seize on Travelers as Strayes due unto him,
and so the hangman give him a wreath more then he had in his Arms before. If
he dies at liberty in his pilgrimage betwixt the houses of his acquaintance,
perhaps some well-disposed Gentleman may pay for his burial, and truly mourn
at the funeral of an ancient Family. His children, if any, must seek their
fortunes the farther off, because their father found his too soon, before he
had wisdom to manage them. Within two generations his name is quite forgotten
that ever any such was in the place, except some Herald in his visitation pass
by, and chance to spell his broken Arms in a Church-window. And then how weak a
thing is Gentry, then which (if it wants virtue) brittle glass is the more
lasting monument?

We forbear to give an instance of a degenerous Gentleman; would to God the
world gave no examples of them. If any please to look into the forenamed Loco
prius citato.
Valerius Maximus, he shall there find the base son of Scipio Africanus, the
conqueror of Hanniball and Africa, so ill imitating his father, that for his
viciousnes he received many disgraceful repulses from the people of Rome, the
fragrant smell of his Fathers memory making him to stink the more in their
nostrils; yea they forced him to pluck off from his finger a signet-ring,
whereon the face of his Father was engraven, as counting him unworthy to wear
his picture who would not resemble his virtue.

CHAP. 15. The Traitor.
A Traitor He is either against the Sovereigne Person alone, or against the
State wherein he lives. We deal only in describing the former, because to
character the other, exact skill in the Municipal Laws of that State is
required, wherein he is charged of treason.
works by fraud as a Rebel does by force, and in this respect is more
dangerous, because there is less stock required to set him up: Rebellion must
be managed with many swords, Treason to his Princes person may be with one
knife. Generally their success is as bad as their cause, being either detected
before, defeated in, or punished after their part acted; detected before,
either by wilfulness or weakness of those which are privy to it.

A plotter of Treason puts his head into the halter, and the halter into his
hand to whom he first imparts it. Maxim 1.
He oftentimes reveals it, and by making a footstool of his friends head,
climbs up the higher into the Princes favor.

2
Some men's souls are not strong enough, but that a weighty secret will work a
hole through them. These rather out of folly then falsenesse, unawares let fall
words, which are taken up by the judicious ears of suc who can spell Treason
by putting together distracted syllables, and by piecing of broken sentences.
Others have their hearts swollen so great with hope of what they shall get, that
their bodies are too little to hold them, and so betray themselves by
threatenings and blustering language. Others have cut their throats with their
own hands, their own writings, the best records, being produced against them.
And here we must know, That

3
Strong presumptions sometimes serve for proofs in point of Treason: For it
being a deed of darkness, it is madness to look that the Sun should shine
at midnight, and to expect evident proof. Should Princes delay till they did
plainly see Treason, they might chance to feel it first. If this semiplena
probatio lights on a party suspected before, the party himself is the other
part of the proof, and makes it complete. And here the Rack, though Fame-like
it be Tam ficti pravique tenax, quam nuncia very,
is often used; and the wooden horse has told strange secrets. But grant it
pass undiscovered in the plotting, it is commonly prevented in the practicing,

By the Majesty, 4
Innocence, or Valor of the Prince, or his attendants. Some have been dazeled
with the divine beams shining in a Princes face, so that coming to command his
life, they could not be masters of their own senses. Innocence has protected
others, and made their enemies relent; and pity (though a stranger to him for
many years before) has visited a Traitors heart in that very instant. If
these fail, a Kings valor has defended him; it being most true of a King,
what Pliny reports of a Not. hist. lib. 8. cap. 16.
lion, in hunting if he be wounded and not killed, he will be sure to eye and
kill him that wounded him.

Some by flourishing aforehand, 5
have never stricken a blow: but by warning have armed those to whom they
threatened. Thus mad Somervile, coming to kill Queen Elizabeth, by the way
(belike to try whether his sword would cut) quarrelled with and wounded one or
two, and therefore was apprehended before he came to the Court.

The palsy of guiltiness has made the stoutest Traitors hands to shake, 6
sometimes to miss their mark. Their conscience sleeping before, is then
awakened with this crying sin. The way seems but short to a Traveller when he
views it from the top of an hill, who finds it very long when he comes into the
plain: so Treason surveyed in the heat of blood, and from the height of
passion, seems easy to be effected; which reviewed in cold blood on even
terms, is full of dangers and difficulties. If it speed in the acting,
generally it is revenged afterward: For,

7
A King though killed is not killed, so long as he has son or subject
surviving. Many who have thought they have discharged the debt, have been
broken afterward with the arrearages. As for journeymen-Traytours who work for
others, their wages are ever paid them with an halter; and where one gains a
garland of bays, hundreds have had a wreath of hemp.

CHAP. 16. The Pazzians conspiracy.
IN the city of Anno 1478. April 26. The sum hereof is taken out of
Machiavels Florent. Hist lib. 8. page 407. and sequent.
Florence, being then a Popular State, the honorable family de-Medices
managed all chief affairs, so beloved of the people for their bounty, that the
honor they had was not extorted by their greatness, but seemed due to their
goodness. These Mediceans depressed the Pazzians, another family in that
State, as big set, though not so high grown, as the Medicei themselves, loading
them with injuries, and debarring them not only from Offices in the city, but
their own right. The Pazzians, though highly wronged, counterfeited much
patience, and, which was a wonder, though malice boiled hot in their hearts,
yet no scumme ran over in their mouths.

At last, meeting together, they concluded, that seeing the Legal way was
stopped with violence, the violent way was become Legal, whereby they must
right themselves; and they determined to invite Julian and Laurence Medices,
the Governors of the State, to dinner, with Cardinal Raphael Riarius, and
there to murder them. The matter was counted easy, because these two brethren
were but one in effect, their heads in a manner standing on the same shoulders,
because they always went together, and were never asunder. Fifty were privy to
this plot; each had his office assigned him. Baptista Monteseccius was to kill
Laurence, Francis Pazzius and Bernardus Bandinius were to set on Julian,
whilst the Archbishop of Pisa, one of their allies, was with a band of men to
seize on the Senate House. Cardinal Raphaels company rather then assistance
was required, being neither to hunt, nor kill, but only to start the game, and
by his presence to bring the two brothers to the dinner. All appointed the next
morning to meet at Mass, in the chief Church of S. Reparata.

Here meeting together, all the design was dashed: for here they remembered
that Julian de Medices never used to Machiav. disput. de Repub. lib. 3. cap. 6.
page 397.
dine. This they knew before, but considered not till now, as if formerly the
vapors arising out of their ambitious hearts had clouded their understanding.
Some advised to refer it to another time, which others thought dangerous,
conceiving they had sprung so many leaks of suspicion, it was impossible to
stop them, and feared, there being so many privy to the plot, that if they
suffered them to consult with their pillows, their pillows would advise them to
make much of their heads; wherefore not daring to stay the seasonable ripening
of their design, they were forced in heat of passion to parch it up presently,
and they resolved to take the matter at the first bound, and to commit the
murder (they intended at dinner) here in the Church, taking it for granted,
the two Mediceans would come to Mass, according to their daily custom.

But changing their stage, they were fain also to alter their Actours.
Monteseccius would not be employed in the business, to stain a sacred place
with blood; and the breaking of this string put their plot quite out of tune.
And though Anthony Volateran and Stephen a Priest were substituted in his room,
yet these two made not one fit person; so great is the difference betwixt a
choice and a shift. When the Host was elevated, they were to assault them; and
the Sacrament was a sign to them, not of Christ's death past, but of a murder
they were to commit.

But here again they were at a loss. Treason, like Pope Adrian, may be choked
with a fly, and marred with the least unexpected casualtie. Though Laurence
was at Church, Julian was absent. And yet by beating about, they recovered this
again: for Francis Pazzius and Bernard Bandinius going home to his house, with
complements and courteous discourse brought him to the Church. Then Bandinius
with a dagger stabbed him to the heart, so that he fell down dead, and Francis
Pazzius insulting over his corpse (now no object of valor but cruelty) gave it
many wounds, till blinded with revenge, he struck a deep gash into his own
thigh.

But what was over-measure in them, in overacting their parts, was wanting in
Anthony and Stephen, who were to kill Laurence in the Quire. You Machiav. disp.
de Repub. lib. 3. cap. 6. page 399.
Traitor, said Anthony; and with that Laurence starting back avoided the
strength of the blow, and was wounded only to honor, not danger, and so
recovered a strong chapel. Thus Malice, which vents it self in threatening,
warns men to shun it, and like hollow singing bullets, flies but halfway to the
mark. With as bad success did the Archbishop of Pisa seize on the
Senate House, being conquered by the Lords therein assembled, and, with many of
his Accomplices, hung out of a window.

The Pazzians now betake themselves to their last refuge which their desperate
courses had left them. James the chief of their family with one hundred more
repair to the marketplace, and there cry, Liberty, Liberty. A few followed
them at first, but the snow-ball by rolling did rather melt then gather, and
those, who before had seen the foul face of their treason naked, would not be
allured to love it now masked with the pretenses of the public good; and at
last, the whole strength of the State subdued them.

Every tree about the city bare the fruit of men's heads, and limbs: many were
put to death with torment, more with shame, and only one Renatus Pazzius with
pity, who loved his conscience better then his kindred, that he would not be
active in the conspiracy; and yet his kindred better then his conscience, that
he would not reveal it; Treason being like some kind of strong poison, which
though never taken inwardly by cordial consenting unto it, yet kill's by being
held in ones hand, and concealing it.

Chap. 17. The Tyrant.
A Tyrant He is twofold, 1. In Titulo, (properly an Usurper. 2. In Exercitio,
whom we only describe.

is one whose list is his law, making his subjects his slaves. Yet that is but
a tottering Kingdom which is founded on trembling people, which fear and hate
their Sovereigne.

He gets all places of advantage into his own hands: yea he would disarm his
subjects of all sythes and pruning hooks, Maxim 1.
but for fear of a general rebellion of weeds and thistles in the land.

He takes the Laws at the first, 2
rather by undermining then assault: And therefore to do unjustly with the more
justice, he counterfeits a legalitie in all his proceedings, and will not
butcher a man without a Statute for it.

Afterward he rages freely in innocent blood. 3
Is any man virtuous? then he is a Traitor, and let him die for it, who durst
presume to be good when his Prince is bad. Is he beloved? he is a rebel, has
proclaimed himself King, and reigns already in peoples affections, it must
cost him his life. Is he of kin to the Crown, though so far off that his
alliance is scarce to be derived? all the veins of his body must be dreined,
and emptyed to find there and fetch thence that dangerous drop of royal blood.
And thus having taken the prime men away, the rest are easily subdued. In all
these particulars Machiavell is his only Confessor, who in his Prince seems
to him to resolve all these cases of conscience to be very lawful.

Worst men are his greatest favorites. 4
He keeps a constant kennel of bloud-hounds to accuse whom he pleases. These
will depose more then any can suppose, not sticking to swear that they heard
fishes speak, and saw through a mil-stone at midnight: these fear not to
forswear, but fear they shall not forswear enough, to cleave the pin and do
the deed. The less credit they have, the more they are believed, and their
very accusation is held a proof.

5
He leaves nothing that his poor subjects can call their own but their
miseries. And as in the West Indies thousands of kine are killed for their
tallow alone, and their flesh cast away: so many men are murdered merely for
their wealth, that other men may make mummey of the fat of their estates.

6
He counts men in misery the most melodious instruments: Especially if they be
well tuned and played upon by cunning Musicians, who are artificial in
tormenting them, the more the merrier, and if he has a set, and full consort
of such tortured miserable souls, he danceth most cheerfully at the pleasant
dittie of their dying groans. He loves not to be prodigal of men's lives, but
thriftily improves the objects of his cruelty, spending them by degrees, and
epicurizing on their pain: So that as Philoxenus wished a cranes throat, he
could desire asses ears, the longer to entertain their hydeous and miserable
roaring. Thus Nature had not racks enough for men (the Colic, Gout, Stone,
etc.) but Art must add to them, and devils in flesh antedate hell here in
inventing torments; which when inflicted on malefactors, extort pity fom
merciful beholders, (and make them give what is not due) but when used by
Tyrants on innocent people, such tender hearts as stand by suffer what they
see, and by the proxy of sympathy feel what they behold.

7
He seeks to suppress all memorialls and writings of his actions: And as
wicked Tereus after he had ravished Philomela cut out her tongue; so when
Tyrants have wronged and abused the times they live in, they endeavor to make
them speechless to tell no tales to posterity. Herein their folly is more to
be admired then their malice, for learning can never be dreined dry: though it
may be dambd up for one Age, yet it will break over; and Historians pens, being
long kept fasting, will afterward feed more greedily on the memories of
Tyrants, and describe them to the full. Yea, I believe their ink has made some
Tyrants blacker then they were in their true complexion.

At last he is haunted with the terrors of his own conscience. 7
If any two do but whisper together (whatsoever the Propositions be) he
conceives their discourse concludes against him. Company and solitariness are
equally dreadful unto him, being never safe; and he wants a Guard to guard him
from his Guard, and so proceeds in infinitum. Comineus Comment. lib. 1. juxta
finem
The Scouts of Charles Duke of Burgundy brought him news that the French army
was hard by, being nothing else but a field full of high thistles, whose tops
they mistook for so many spears: On lesser ground this Tyrant conceives greater
fears. Thus in vain does he seek to fence himself from without, whose foe is
within him.

He is glad to patch up a bad nights sleep, 8
out of pieces of slumber. They seldom sleep soundly, who have blood for their
bolster. His fancy presents him with strange masks, wherein only Fiends
and Furies are actours. The fright awakes him, and he is no sooner glad that it
was a dream, but fears it is prophetical.

In vain he courts the friendship of foreign Princes. 9
They defy his amity, and will not join their clean hands with his bloody
ones. Sometimes to ingratiate himself he does some good acts, but virtue
becomes him worse then vice, for all know he counterfeits it for his own ends.

10
Having lived in other men's blood, he dies commonly in his own. He had his will
all his life, but seldom makes his Testament at his death, being suddenly
taken away either by a private hand, or a public insurrection. It is observed
of the camel that it lies quietly down till it has its full load, and then
rises up. But this Vulgus is a kind of beast, which rises up soonest when it
is overladen; immoderate cruelty causing it to rebel. Yet Fero is a fitter
motto then Ferio for Christians in their carriage toward lawful Authority,
though unlawfully used.

We will give a double example of a Tyrant: the one an absolute Sovereigne, the
other a Substitute or Viceroy under an absolute Prince.

CHAP. 18. The life of ANDRONICUS.
ANdronicus Comnenus, The sum of this chapter is taken out of Nicetas
Choniates his Annalls lib. 1. and 2. of Andronic. Comnenus.
descended of the Grecian Imperial blood, was a Prince most vicious in his
life, and perfidious in his dealing, and for his several offenses, after long
banishment, was at length by Emmanuel the Grecian Emperor, his kinsman,
confined to a private city in Paphlagonia.

Here Andronicus hugged himself in his privacie, though all that time he did
but level, and take aim, intending at last to shoot at the Empire, though for
a while he lay very still, and with the Hedgehog seemingly dead, he rounded
himself up in his own prickles without any motion.

Leave we him there, and come to behold the face of the Grecian Empire, which
presents us with all the Symptoms of a dying State. Emmanuell being dead
Alexius his son succeeds him, a Minor of twelve years of age, wanting wit to
guide himself, and his friends care to govern him. Xena the Mother-Empresse
wholly given to her pleasures, with her minion Alexius Protosebastus, who ruled
all in the State. The Nobility factious, snatching what they could get, and
counting violent possession the best and only title. The people of
Constantinople valiant only to make mutinies on every occasion, in confused
multitudes, without any Martial discipline; as who could expect that a rolling
snow-ball should have any curious fashion?

Andronicus, hearing of these misdemeanors, found that opportunity courted him
to procure the Empire for himself. Wherefore he remonstrates to the whole world
the great grief he conceived at these disorders: For though patience had made
him past feeling of any private injuries offered to himself, yet he must be
stark dead indeed, if he were not moved with these general miseries of the
Empire. He being a Prince of the blood could not without grief behold how Xena
the Empress, and Protosebastus had conspired to abuse the tender age of young
Alexius, so to draw all dominion to themselves; and who kowing that their
strength consisted in the young Emperors weakness, intended so to breed him,
that in point of judgment he should never be of age, and only able in
pleasures. Whereupon Andronicus resolved to free his young kinsman, and the
Empire from this thraldom. Treason is so uggly in her self, that every one
that sees it will cast stones at it, which makes her seldom appear but with a
borrowed face, for the good of the Commonwealth; but especially when ambition
has caught hold on pretended religion, how fast will it climb?

Andronicus with an army of Paphlagonians marched to Constantinople, in which
city he had a great party on his side, Maria Cesarissa, half sister to the
Emperor, with her husband, and many other good Patriots, which bemoaned the
distempers in the State, applying themselves to Andronicus for help, counting a
bad physician better then none at all. Besides, there were in the city many
turbulent spirits, desirous of alterations, as profitable unto them, counting
themselves the petty-Landlords of the times, to whom rich fines and herriots
would accrue upon every exchange, and all those took part with Andronicus.

Many more did Andronicus win to his party by his cunning behavior, for he
could speak both eloquently and religiously. He would ordinarily talk
Scripture Language (often foully misapplyed) as if his memory were a Concordance
of the whole Bible, but especially of S. Paul's Epistles, which he had by heart.
Besides, no man had better command of rain and sunshine in his face, to smile
and weep at pleasure: his tears flowed at will, which caught the affections of
many, though others, better acquainted with his tricks, no more pitied his
weeping, then they bemoaned the moist dropping of stone walls against rainy
weather.

Small resistance was made against him, only some seemed to fight against him
in complement, so that with ease he made himself master of Constantinople, and
not long after he caused Xena the Empress to be choked, the eyes of whose
Favorite Protosebastus he had formerly bored out.

The next care of Andronicus was to cut off all those steps by which he had
ascended to this height, lest leaving those stairs still standing, others also
might climb up the same way. All those friends who had assisted him in this
his design, he rewarded with death: yea though at first his cruelty might seem
to shoot at a mark, in taking of some prime men, for whose death some reason
might be rendered, his malice afterward shot at rovers, as if he had a quarrel
at mankind, killing all he came near. When any party accused recriminated the
accuser, the sword of Andronicus cut on both sides; the accuser and accused
were sent the same way, and what cup one began, the other was made to pledge.
Those Sycophants which ingratiated themselves with him, escaped no better then
others, it being equally dangerous to please and displease him. Men met every
where with his cruelty, but no where with the reasons thereof. But who can
expect other reasons of Tyrants actions, but that they are Tyrants actions?

But his dealing with young Alexius the Emperor (whose death was methodically
contrived with some politic pauses) deserves observation. At first entrance
into the city, Andronicus observed his awful distance toward the Emperor,
teaching others that the minority of Princes ought not to lessen their Subjects
reverence unto them. Afterward, he emboldned himself to make his nearer
approches, chalenging in young Alexius that interest which careful tutours
claim in those whose protection they tender. Hence he proceeded to set a guard
about him, not to defend but watch him, and to guard him from his friends; who,
though allowed to follow his sports in hunting, was indeed made sport of
himself, and the hunter kept in a net. Then Andronicus was forced by his
friends importunity (whom he himself had secretly importuned) to be elected
joynt-Emperour with Alexius, and with much unwillingnesse this great dissembler
(who could have taught Tiberius craft, and Nero cruelty) was driven up the
Imperial throne. Next day in all public Edicts the name of Andronicus was set
before Alexius, it seeming preposterous that a child should be preferred before
so sage and grave a man.

Hitherto the life of Alexius was profitable to Andronicus, but now his death
would be more behooffull. Wherefore Andronicus counting it cumbersome now any
longer to wear a cloak in the sunshine and heat of his happiness, abandoned
all useless dissembling, and appeared like himself. The next news we hear of
Alexius, is that his neck is broken with a bowstring by command from
Andronicus; 1181
his body was spurned and abused, a hole bored in his ear with a spit, his head
cut off, and shamefully dealt with, his body cast into the sea, with many more
cruel outrages, as much against policy as piety, and not only needless, but
scandalous to Andronicus. Thus Tyrants, having once given the rains to their
cruelty, are not able to stop themselves.

But this innocent blood cried to God for revenge, and obtained it. Next year
Isaacius Angelus was chosen Emperor by the people, and Andronicus chased out
of the city and pursued after. Andronicus got into a ship, and had conveyed
himself away, had not the winds and the waves (as if knowing him though
disguised) refused to be accessory to his escape, and beaten him back again,
till he was taken by his pursuers. Being carried into the presence of Isaacius
the new Emperor, he there was beaten, spurned, kicked on, and had an arm cut
off, and an eye bored out. But all this was mercy, in respect of what he next
day suffered by the rascal multitude, being carried on a scabb'd Camel through
Constantinople, happy he that could do most unhappiness unto him: all sorts of
people sought to mischief him, throwing that upon him, in comparison whereof
that which runs in the channel may be counted rosewater. Thus orphans
thought to revenge the death of their fathers, widows of their husbands: one
ran him through with a spit, another threw scalding water in his face. At last
he could hardly die, being hanged up by the feet betwixt two pillars after a
thousand abuses offered unto him.

It may seem miraculous how his body could make room for all their blows, or
that he so old a man could find so many lives for their cruelty, were it not
that passing with some speed through the city, few had their full blows at him;
and they were somewhat mannerly in their revenge, in that they would not take
all to themselves, but leave some to others. And indeed after long throwing of
dirt upon him, their darts became his shield, being so covered over with the
filth, that the mire kept him from the mire.

All which time he brake not out into any impatience, but still cried, Lord
have mercy upon me, and, Why break you a bruised reed? and bore all with an
invincible quietness of mind. Surely God measured unto him a time of
repentance by a large houreglasse; and happily (it were tyranny to think
otherwise of the worst Tyrant) the tempest of the peoples fury might drive his
soul to the best See bow charitably Drexelius is opinion'd of him in his book
de Aeternitate, Consider. 5. Sect. 3.
shelter, the mercy of the God of heaven. It is a good sign when one has his
hell in this world, and true repentance is never too late. As for those that
hold repentance on the deathbed unprofitable, by this their tenet they would
make heaven very empty, and yet never a whit the more room therein for the
maintainers of so uncharitable an opinion.

Andronicus reigned two years, having a beautiful aspect, and majestic
stature, almost ten foot high, of a strong constitution, advantaged by the
temperatenesse of his diet. In all his life time he took but one antidote, and
never purged but once, and then the Physic found no obnoxious humor to work
upon, so healthful was his temper. His death happened Anno Dom. 1183.

FERDINAND Alvarez de Toledo Duke of Alva, Viceroy of the Netherlands under
Philip the 2d. He dyed in Portugal Anno Dni 1582. in the ^75. year of his
Age. W.M. sculp:
CHAP. 19. The life of Duke D'ALVA.
FErdinand Alvarez de Toledo, Duke of Alva, one bred abroad in the world in
several wars (whom Charles the fifth more employed, then affected, using his
churlish nature to hew knotty service) was by Philip the second, King of Spain,
appointed Governor of the Netherlands.

At his first arrival there, the loyalty of the Netherlanders to the King of
Spain was rather out of joint, then broken off, as not being weary of his
government but their own grievances. The wound was rather painful then deadly,
only the skirts of their lungs were tainted, sending out discontented not
rebellious breath, much regretting that their Privileges, Civil and
Ecclesiastical, were infringed, and they grinded with exactions against their
Laws and Liberties.

But now Duke D'Alva coming amongst them, he intended to cancel all their
charters with his sword, and to reduce them to absolute obedience. And whereas
every city was fenced not only with several walls, but different local
liberties, and municipall immunities, he meant to lay all their privileges
level, and casting them into a flat to stretch a line of absolute command over
them. He accounted them a Nation rather stubborn then valiant, and that not
from stoutnesse of nature, but want of correction, through the long indulgence
of their late Governors. He secretly accused Margaret Duchess of Parma, the
last Governesse, for too much gentleness toward them, as if she meant to cure
a gangrened arm with a lenitive plaster, and affirmed that a Ladies hands were
too soft to pluck up such thistles by the root. Wherefore the said Duchess,
soon after D'Alva's arrival (counting it less shame to set, then to be
outshin'd) petitioned to resign her regencie, and returned into Italy.

To welcome the Duke at his entrance, he was entertained with prodigies and
monstrous Famianus Stra. de Bell^ Belgico, p. 430.
births, Ann. Dom. 1568.
which happened in sundry places; as if Nature on set purpose mistook her mark,
and made her hand to swerve, that she might shoot a warning-piece to these
countries, and give them a watchword of the future calamities they were to
expect. The Duke, nothing moved hereat, proceeds to effect his project, and
first sets up the Counsel of troubles, consisting of twelve, the Duke being
the President. And this Counsel was to order all things in an arbitrary way,
without any appeal from them. Of these twelve some were strangers, such as
should not sympathize with the miseries of the country; others were upstarts,
men of no blood, and therefore most bloody; who being themselves grown up in a
day, cared not how many they cut down in an hour. And now rather to give some
color, then any virtue to this new composition of counselors, four Dutch
Lords were mingled with them, that the native Nobility might not seem wholly
neglected. Castles were built in every city to bridle the inhabitants, and
Garrisons put into them. New Bishops Seas erected in several cities, and the
Inquisition brought into the country. This Inquisition, first invented against
the Moors, as a trappe to catch vermin, was afterward used as a snare to
catch sheep, yea they made it heresy for to be rich. And though all these
proceedings were contrary to the solemn oath King Philip had taken, yet the
Pope (who only keeps an Oath-office, and takes power to dispense with men's
consciences) granted him a faculty to set him free from his promise.

Sure as some adventurous Physicians, when they are posed with a mungrell
disease, drive it on set purpose into a fever, that so knowing the kind of the
malady they may the better apply the cure: So Duke D'Alva was minded by his
cruel usage to force their discontents into open rebellion, hoping the better
to come to quench the fire when it blazed out, then when it smok'd and
smothered.

And now to frighten the rest, with a subtle train he seiseth on the Earls of
Egmond and Horn. These counted themselves armed with innocence and desert,
having performed most excellent service for the King of Spain. But when
subjects deserts are above their Princes requital, oftentimes they study not
so much to pay their debts, as to make away their creditours. All these
victories could not excuse them, nor the laurel wreaths on their heads keep
their necks from the ax, and the rather, because their eyes must first be
closed up, which would never have patiently beheld the enslaving of their
country. The French Ambassador was at their execution, and wrote to his
Master Charles the ninth, King of France, concerning the Earl of Egmond, Fam.
Strad. de bell. Belgico, page 449.
That he saw that head struck off in the Marketplace of Brussels, whose valor
had twice made France to shake.

This Counsel of troubles having once tasted Noble blood, drank their
belly-fulls afterward. Then descending to inferior persons by apprehensions,
executions, confiscations, and banishments, they raged on men's lives and
states. Such as upon the vain hope of pardon returned to their houses, were
apprehended, and executed by fire, water, gibbets, and the sword, and other
kinds of deaths and torments: yea the bodies of the dead (on whom the earth as
their common mother bestowed a grave for a child's portion) were cast out of
their Grimst. Hist. of the Netherlands, page 413.
tombs by the Dukes command, whose cruelty outstunk the noysomnesse of their
carcases.

And lest the maintaining of Garrisons might be burdensome to the King his
Master, he laid heavy impositions on the people: the Duke affirming that these
countries were fat enough to be stewed in their own liquour, and that the
Soldiers here might be maintained by the profits arising hence; yea he boasted
that he had found the mines of Peru in the Low Countries, though the digging of
them out never quitted the cost. He demanded the hundredth penny of all their
moveable and immovable goods, and besides that, the tenth penny of their
moveable goods that should be bought and sold, with the twentieth penny of their
immovable goods; without any mention of any time, how long those taxes and
exactions should continue.

The States protested against the injustice hereof, alleging that all trading
would be pressed to death under the weight of this taxation: weaving of stuffs
(their staple trade) would soon decay, and their shuttles would be very slow,
having so heavy a clog hanging on them; yea hereby the same commodity must pay
a new tole at every passage into a new trade. This would dishearten all
industry, and make laziness and painfulnesse both of a rate, when beggary was
the reward of both, by reason of this heavy imposition, which made men pay dear
for the sweat of their own brows. And yet the weight did not grieve them so
much, as the hand which laid it on, being imposed by a foreign power against
their ancient privilege. Hereupon many Netherlanders, finding their own
country too hot, because of intolerable taxes, sought out a more temperate
climate, and fled over into England.

As for such as stayed behind, their hearts being brimfull before with
discontents, now ran over. It Is plain these wars had their original, not out
of the Church, but the State-house. Liberty was true doctrine to Papist and
Protestant, Jew and Christian. It is probable that in Noah's Ark the wolf agreed
with the lamb, and that all creatures drowned their antipathy, whilst all
were in danger of drowning. Thus all several religions made up one
Commonwealth to oppose the Spaniard: and they thought it high time for the Cow
to find her horns, when others not content to milk her, went about to cut off
her bag.

It was a rare happiness that so many should meet in one chief, William of
Nassaw, Prince of Orange, whom they chose their Governor. Yea he met their
affections more then halfway in his loving behavior; so that Alva's cruelty
did not drive more from him, then Nassaw's courtesy invited to him. His
popular nature was of such receipt, that he had room to lodge all comers. In
peoples eyes his light shined bright, yet dazzled none, all having free access
unto him: every one was as well pleased as if he had been Prince himself,
because he might be so familiar with the Prince. He was wont to content those,
who reproved his too much humanity, with this saying, Bar^l. Icon. Anim. cap. 5.
That man is cheap bought, who costs but a salutation.

I report the Reader to the Belgian Histories, where he may see the changes of
war betwixt these two sides. We will only observe that Duke D'Alva's
covetousness was above his policy in fencing the rich inland and neglecting
the barren maritime places. He only looked on the broad gates of the country
whereby it opens to the continent of Germany and France, whilst in the mean
time almost half the Netherlands ran out at the postern door toward the sea.
Nassaw's side then wounded Achilles in the heel indeed, and touched the
Spaniard to the quick, when on Palm Sunday (as if the day promised victory) at
Brill they took the first livery and seasin of the land, and got soon after
most cities toward the sea. Had Alva herein prevented him, probably he had
made those Provinces as low in subjection as situation.

Now at last he began to be sensible of his error, and grew weary of his
command, desiring to hold that staff no longer, which he perceived he had taken
by the wrong end. He saw that going about to bridle the Netherlanders with
building of castles in many places, they had gotten the bit into their own
teeth: He saw that war was not quickly to be hunted out of that country,
where it had taken covert in a wood of cities: He saw the cost of some one
cities siege would pave the streets thereof with silver, each city, ^ort, and
sconce being a Gordian knot, which would make Alexanders sword turn edge before
he could cut through it, so that this war and the world were likely to end
together, these Netherlands being like the headblock in the chimney, where the
fire of war is always kept in (though out every where else) never quite
quenched though raked up sometimes in the ashes of a truce. Besides, he saw
that the subdued part of the Netherlands obeyed more for fear then love, and
their loyalty did rather lie in the Spanish Garrisons, then their own hearts,
and that in their sighs they breathed many a prosperous gale to Nassaw's
party: Lastly, he saw that foreign Princes, having the Spaniards greatness in
suspicion, desired he might long be digesting this breakfast, lest he should
make his dinner on them, both France and England counting the Low Countries
their outworks to defend their walls: wherefore he petitioned the King of Spain
his Master to call him home from this unprofitable service.

Then was he called home, and lived some years after in Spain, being well
respected of the King, and employed by him in conquering Portugal, contrary to
the expectation of most, who looked that the Kings displeasure would fall heavy
on him, for causing by his cruelty the defection of so many countries; yet the
King favorably reflected on him, perchance to frustrate on purpose the hopes
of many, and to show that Kings affections will not tread in the beaten path of
vulgar expectation: or seeing that the Dukes life and state could amount to
poor satisfaction for his own losses, he thought it more Princely to remit the
whole, then to be revenged but in part: or lastly, because he would not measure
his servants loyalty by the success, and lay the unexpected rubs in the allie
to the bowlers fault, who took good aim though missing the mark. This led many
to believe that Alva only acted the Kings will, and not willed his acts,
following the instructions he received, and rather going beyond then against
his Commission.

However most barbarous was his cruelty. He bragged as he sat at dinner (and
was it not a good grace after meat) that he had caused eighteen thousand to be
executed by the ordinary minister of justice within the space of six years,
besides an infinite more murdered by other tyrannous means. Yea some men he
killed many times, giving order to the executioners to pronounce each syllable
of torment long upon them, that the thread of their life might not be cut off
but unravelled, as counting it no pain for men to die, except they dyed with
pain; witness Anthony Utenhow, whom he caused to be tied to a stake with a
chain in Grimst. Hist. of the Netherlands, page 411.
Brussells, compassing him about with a great fire, but not touching him,
turning him round about like a poor beast, who was forced to live in that
great torment and extremity, roasting before the fire so long, until the
Halberdiers themselves, having compassion on him, thrust him through, contrary
to the will both of the Duke and the Spanish Priests.

When the city of Harlem surrendered themselves unto him on condition to have
their lives, he suffered some of the Soldiers and Burgers thereof to be
starved to death, saying that though he promised to give them their lives, he
did not promise to find them meat. The Netherlanders used to fright their
children with telling them, Duke. D'Alva was coming; and no wonder if children
were scared with him, of whom their fathers were afraid.

He was one of a lean body and visage, as if his eager soul, biting for anger
at the clog of his body, desired to fret a passage through it. He had this
humor, that he neglected the good counsel of others, especially if given him
before he asked it, and had rather stumble then beware of a block of another
man's telling.

But as his life was a miroir of cruelty, so was his death of Gods patience. It
was admirable, that his tragical acts should have a comicall end; that he that
sent so many to the grave, should go to his own, and die in peace. But Gods
justice on offenders goes not always in the same path, nor the same pace: And
he is not pardoned for the fault, who is for a while reprived from the
punishment; yea sometimes the guest in the inn goes quietly to bed, before the
reckoning for his supper is brought to him to discharge.

FINIS.

