Peace and Holiness; IN THREE SERMONS Upon Several Occasions.



By Ignatius Fuller.

LONDON, Printed by Evan Tyler, and Ralph Holt, for R. Royston, Bookseller to
the King's most Excellent Majesty. 1672.

Imprimatur

Sam. Parker.
November. 2. 1671.
A SERMON AT THE Funerals Of Mrs ANNE NORTON, Widow and Relict of W. Norton
late of Sherrington, in the County of Bucks Esquire; July 12. 1671.

St. Paul. But thanks be to God who has given us the victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ. (...). Symplicius. By Ignatius Fuller.

LONDON, Printed by E. T. and R. H. for R: Royston, Bookseller to the King's
most Excellent Majesty. 1672.

BRETTO NORTONO Armigero, and MARGARETAe THO. DUNCOMBI Armigeri UXORI, Unicae
Proli ANNAe NORTONAe Nuper Vita Functae I. F.

Hoc quale quale Munusculum, Benevolentiae and Gratitudinis Ergo L. M. D. D. D.

To the Worshipful and well beloved the Inhabitants of SHERINGTON, in the
County of BUCKS, Grace and Peace.
My Dear Friends.
AFter more than twenty years Conversation with you in the same Relation which
as yet I hold; Divine Providence has at length given me a fair occasion, to
let you know how much I value you. It cannot be very long before a silent, and
a senseless night overtake me; and that I make my bed in the dust: That there
may be some remembrance, not of me, for who, or what am I? But of that
Doctrine, which I have advanced among you, or endeavored so to do (begun
already to be misreported by some) which is no other than universal Goodness,
or Virtue, a Righteousness in the lives of men; or, to use St. Paul' s words to
Titus, The denial of all ungodliness 2. 12.
and worldly lusts, and a Sober, Righteous, or Godly life in this present
World: the scope and design of that sovereign Goodness of God, which has
appeared unto us in the Gospel of hi^ Son. A distribution of our D^^y,
comprehending all the Con^^tions on our part, in that Covenant mediated and
transacted between God and Man, by the Man Christ Jesus, well expressed by a
late Person of The truly Noble Lord Viscount Faukland in his Reply to Mr. Tho.
White.
Honor; replying to that objection, That Christian Doctrine is not a
Speculative knowledge, instituted for delight; but it is an Art of living, a
Rule of attaining Everlasting bliss; wonders to hear that learned Gentleman say
so, whose Religion consists of so many points, no ways reducible into practice;
and then confesses, nay contends, That Christian Religion is a Covenant
between God and Man, by the entermise of Christ; that we Christians are
properly concerned but in the knowledge of what are the Conditions, and Rewards
proposed and promised; what we are to observe, and what to hope for; and so far
forth to understand the Nature and Attributes of the Maker and Messenger of
that Covenant, as may make us fully assured of the truths of the Threats and
Promises contained therein. So that Noble Author. Now because there are some
imaginations which do vehemently impede and hinder this Piety, and dereliction
of all habitual and customary sin^, scarcely permitting him that retains and
understands them, entirely to forsake them, I have often endeavored to remove
such stumbling stones out of the way of your Christian race. Such are their
mistakes concerning God's Decrees, Liberty of humane minds, our Justification
before God, and some others. And what Christian incumbent on the study of
Virtue, and seriously contending for a blessed Immortality, but may perceive
great ease in his understanding, and great encouragement in his said endeavors
from a clear and distinct explication and defense of the Truth in the Articles
before mentioned? If God's Decrees be irrespective, then is all endeavor and
solicitude superfluous; (...). St. Bus. Tom. 1. p. 343. Deus possibilta
mandavit, hoc nulli dubium est. St. Hieron. adv. Polag. l. 3.
If Christ died only for a few, it is no duty upon all to believe in him; If men
have no Wills, they can have no sins, for want of a Subject; If Christ's
Precepts be impossible, they are unnecessary; If to live in sins against
conviction of Conscience be the measure of Regeneration, it is very easy to be
born again.

If the Elect cannot fall away, and the rest never stood, all discourse against
Apostasy is idle and useless; If apprehension of Christ's Merits in the last
moments of our lives, and sorrow for sin against God does forthwith translate
us into the Kingdom of his dear Son; No man needs disserve here, or inhabit
hereafter the Kingdom of Darkness.

What Doctrine more grateful to flesh and blood? to the Sensualist, that
embraces an Herodias, or a Dalilah; to the Mammonist, who has purloined the
Babylonish Garment, or the Golden Wedge; to the Airy Cameleon, which feeds on
the foul and infectious breath of the Populacy; to the idle Sluggard, who
frights himself with the thoughts of a Bear or a Lion in the way. Who sees not,
how such surmises do not only evacuate the force and virtue, but quite
frustrate the use of the Ministry of the Word, rendering it incapable of
converting the Infidel, correcting of the Carnal, quickening of the Slothful,
and of comforting the tempted and afflicted? As you may see it piously and
ingeniously amplified and demonstrated in the Examination of Tilenus. So that
you may perceive, it was no wantonness of wit, or parts (as some will have it)
but very important, yea indispensable necessity (if I would adorn that conduct
and guidance of Souls which I have undertaken) that did constrain me to remove
those impediments out of the way of our Christian obedience.

If I be told, that such who have swallowed whole the Doctrine of Dort and
Geneva, live good lives, and comport with the Laws of the Holy Jesus, I answer,
peradventure it may be so. Although Deaths and Exiles, so cruelly inflicted
upon excellent men, may entitle them to the Character of loving God, and hating
their Neighbor with all their heart. Who does not observe the partiality of
their obedience; that the Factions have their Virtues and their Vices? Yea, if
some duller heads live better lives than their Principles oblige them to, yet
others who are wicked and witty too, defy all discourse to reform them, and
refuse to forsake these Altars where they have taken Sanctuary. Our daily
experience assures us, that the follies and debaucheries of men are ascribed to
Fate and divine Decrees. Nor can I conceive how many men of competent
understandings, without the help of these so useful Engines of sin and folly,
can reconcile in themselves great immortalities, with great professions of
Religion. No, no, let us not add to the difficulties from within, and from
without, these needless, these foolish obstructions of our pursuit of a blessed
Immortality. But I say not these things, my Friends, for your sakes, so much as
for theirs who (neither knowing what I teach, nor you learn) uncharitably think
all manner of evil. I shall say no more, but most vehemently beseech you, as
you will answer it in the day of Judgment (when you shall be proceeded with, by
that man whom God has appointed to judge Act. 17. 31.
the World, according to your works, not according to your opinions) that your
lives and conversations in the World be agreeable to your knowledge; and that if
you know the tenor of the new Covenant, you would observe your parts of it;
that you would give just, and but just respects to Truth, knowing that the
peace of God is more worth than notion, knowledge, or understanding. Ephesians. 4. 3.
And that together with the verity, you would consider the necessity of every
Proposition; it being in the judgment of the learned of our Kings, together
with his excellent Amanuensis, and of all Royal and Majestic K. Ja^^^s. Is.
Casaubon:
minds, not barely the best, but the only expedient to preserve the unity of
the Spirit, (i. e. Church, which is a spiritual body) in the bond of peace.

That you would seclude neither your selves nor others out of the Communion of
the Church; but for such causes as you have very full and rational assurance
will shut them, or your selves, out of the Kingdom of Heaven. Excommunication,
if the Churches proceedings be clave non errante, being summum futuri judicii
praejudicium, a vehement presumption of succeeding condemnation.

That in your daily reading of the holy Scriptures (whose perfection and
perspicuity in all necessary Articles, I have been wont to inculcate to you)
you would carefully collect all the instances of your duty toward God, your
Neighbor, your selves, in all your relations to the Civil and Sacred Societies
whereof you are constituent parts; and that you would acquaint your selves with
the arguments and motives with which our Lord and Master Christ, together with
the blessed Apostles and Evangelists do endeavor to induce you to the
observation of them. And then remember that not every one who Mat. 7. 21.
shall say Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does
the will of the Father which is in Heaven.

All Controversies in Religion I would wish you to decline, by reason of the
great damage which has thereby accrued to Religion, through the weak mesnagery,
and defense of it, and to Religionists, by leavening their spirits with pride,
peevishness, and passions; and so that which was designed by God to serve the
noblest ends of man,

Is by that old deceiver's subtle play,
Made the chief party in its own decay;
And meets that Eagles destiny, whose breast
Felt the same shaft which his own feathers dressed.
As the matchless Orinda sings.

Consider much the magnificent Commendations and Characters which St. Paul
gives to Charity. 1 Cor. 13.
Let it be conspicuous in all the actions of your lives.

I shall sum up all I shall now say to you in these 12. Rules of an holy Life,
laid down by a worthy Dr. Jer. Tailor.
Prelat.

1. Believe all the Articles of that Faith whereinto you were Baptized.

2. Worship God constantly with Natural Religion, i. e. Prayers, Praises and
Thanksgiving.

3. Take all opportunities to Commemorate the Death of Christ, by the
participation of his Body and Blood.

4. Live Chastely.

5. Be Merciful.

6. So use the World, as that it always give place to Duty.

7. Be Just in your Dealings.

8. Be Humble in your Spirits.

9. Be Obedient to Government.

10. Be Content in your Fortunes and Employments.

11. Let the Love of God inflame you to your Duty.

12. And if you shall be afflicted be Patient, and prepared to suffer for the
Cause of God.

These are twelve signs of Grace, and the man upon whom they are found, is the
son of God, as surely as he is his Creature.

And now, my Friends, let me assure you; that it is some trouble to me, that
the first present I should make you in this manner should be a bundle of
Cypress. But so our wise God would have it. I move you not now to follow her
with Crowns and Hymns, nor do I understand how, nor design to prepare the
incombustible Oil of the Ancients, with which I might supply a Lamp consacrated
to her memory, which might burn so long as that found some while since in the
Appian 1500 years. Pancerol. Licetus. Mancinus.
Way, in the Sepulcher of Tulliola the Daughter of Cicero. But all that I
design, all that I desire, is that that which was prepared for her Hearse, may
adorn your Closets: Yea, that you would look upon her, and learn to live, and
learn to die. In the ensuing Papers you have the Rule of our Religion, and you
have an Example too. Follow her so far as she followed Christ; and it is hard
to say where she stepped aside, where she stayed behind. (...). Naz. Orat. 20.
So often as you see the Armories of her Parentage, or your left Hands remind
you of her Funerals; Call to mind a great Example of Virtue and Goodness, so
Illustrious, and Conspicuous, that there remained no doubt but only whether the
Universality, or Sincerity of her Obedience was the greatest.

VALE ET SALVE ANIMA O ANNAE FELICISS. NOS EO ORDINE QUO NATURA PERMISERIT TE
SEQUEMUR. S. T. T. L.

Romans 8. 2. For the Law of the Spirit of life has made me free from the Law of
sin and death.
THat Mortality was an original condition of Humane Nature, will appear to him,
who shall consider these seven Observations following.

1. That before Adam sinned, the procreation of man was designed; whereas, such
as shall partake of the Resurrection of the dead, marry not, because they do
not die.

2. That he hungered, and was provided of meat; whereas Immortality needs
neither meats nor the belly; God will destroy both it and them.

3. That his Body was animal, which St. Paul makes all one with vile,
corruptible, and mortal.

4. That Christ Jesus, who has taken away sin, all its force, and punishment,
has yet left his dearest Saints liable unto death.

5. That the first man was of the earth earthy, and we, forasmuch as we die,
and corrupt, are said to bear his Image. 1 Cor. 15.


6. That God planted a Tree of Life in the Garden, which needed not, if man had
been created not liable unto death.

7. That all the causes of natural mortality within us, or without us, did
exist as well before as after Man had sinned. Yet notwithstanding, sin was the
way to actual death; and that the wages of it. It being usual with God to do
that upon occasion, which he has power absolutely to do; i. e. to make use of
the instances of his Dominion to serve other designs of his Providence; which
help us to understand that first threatening, In the day thou eatest thereof
thou shall die the death, i. e. Thy strength supported by the tree of life
shall begin to languish, and fail; Thy Oil at length shall be exhausted, and
thy Lamp shall be extinguished.

Now Death of its own nature being eternal, there being naturally no return
from the privation to the habit; therein must man have been detained for ever,
if our merciful God had not found out an expedient to deliver us from it, which
is by his Son Jesus, whom Acts 2. 36.
he has made both Lord and Christ; and has exalted to be a Prince and a Acts.
5. 31.
Savior, to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins; and by
consequence, deliverance from death. This being that very thing which St. Paul
says; The Law of the Spirit of Life has made me free from the Law of sin and
death.

Which words are a reason, or rather a clearer explication of what he had said
before, viz. That there is no condemnation to them who in Christ Jesus, that
is, by Christ Jesus, walk not after the flesh but walk after the Spirit i. e.
who for the most part do not in their actions follow the duct and guidance of
their sinful appetites, but walk according to that Gospel which the Spirit has
consigned to us; or that Virtuous habit of mind which that Spirit has
ingenerated in us; there is no condemnation to such. This Law of the spirit of
life, i. e. of the quickening Spirit, having delivered us from the Law of sin
Paraphrase of the words.
and death. That Spirit which our Lord is about to give, which leads to Eternal
life, has made me, i. e. every Christian free, first from all customary and
habitual sins, then from eternal death, which necessarily follows all sinful
habits and customs. By sins St. Paul understands consulted Strom. 2. p. 387.
and deliberated sins. So Clemens after a long discourse to that purpose,
concludes (...) only are matters So (...) is used in St. John 3. 6, 10.
which God will damn.

When our Lord and Master Jesus Christ had triumphed over Death, and the Grave,
had ascended on high, and was vested with all power in heaven and earth, then
he gave gifts unto men; but no donative did so excel, as that effusion of the
Spirit in the day of Pentecost, the chief and last effects and events whereof,
were the deliverance of all Believers from the double tyranny of sin and death.

Has made me free from the Law of sin and death.

In the words then we have a deliverance from

Sin, the cause of Death. Death, the fruit and consequent of Sin.
There is a victory over, and a deliverance from all habitual, customary,
consulted, and deliberate sins to be obtained in this life; which is that true,
Evangelical righteousness, which gives us at present a title to, and hereafter
will actually invest us with a blessed Immortality.

For our more distinct perception of which notion, we may consider, that Real
Evangelical Righteousness admits of various degrees.

1. The first, and lowest whereof is of them who for the most part yield
obedience to the Precepts of Christ, and abstain from sin; but yet not without
grievous conflicts, and great difficulties, because that although the Spirit be
superior to the flesh, yet the carnal part is not altogether subdued, nor a
habit of Virtue, taken in a more perfect acceptance, entirely acquired; for
which cause their lapses are frequent, either for that the Appetite is assisted
too strongly from external incitement, or too often surprised by error, or
incogitancy.

2. The second degree is of them who have acquired a perfect habit of
Righteousness; and have so subdued the flesh, that they find either none at
all, or very little difficulty in acting in the ways of God; thence
consequently are more steady and uniform in the ways of Virtue and holiness,
and such was St. Paul, as may be gathered from diverse passages of his writings;
and others such like there may be, as appears both from the sacred Book, and
also from Experience it self: which will yet be more manifest, if we shall
demonstrate (as by and by we shall) That there remains possible an higher
degree of holiness than that we have yet spoken of; although there needs no
farther proof than those plain words of our Lord, My yoke is easy, and my
burden is light, i. e. to all them who are supported with a firm hope of a
life after death, and a blessed immortality. And those words of St. John, This
is the love of God, i. e. Metonymically, the manifestation of our love toward
God, that we keep his commandments, and his commandments are not grievous.
These overcome the World, and that too by their Faith, which inspires strength
into them. And he that overcomes, i. e. all such things as the World objects to
him, to affright and call him off from righteousness, sive prospera, sive
aspera, whether smiles or frowns, to him it is easy to keep the commands of
God, to him, I say, that yoke is easy, that burden is light.

The third degree, and that the highest, is of such, who being most cheerfully
incumbent on the study of Virtue, have proceeded so far, as that for some
competent space of time they sin not at all, against any Precept of Christ.

To this degree ought all Christians who are going heaven-wards, always to
aspire; which state St. Paul seems mystically to call the Resurrection from
(...) Phil. 3. 11. (...) 12.
the dead, and was the mark whereto he pressed. Not that I have already
attained, neither am already perfect.

This then is the third degree, whereunto if Christians do not attain, it is
simply necessary they should reach the second, or the first. It Is praise worthy
in Pri^ra sequentem, ho^stum est in sec^nd is out terti^s consistere. Tully.
him that endeavors to excel, to be found in the second or the third degree
of Virtue.

Yet all who would find mercy in the day of Christ, must endeavor to attain
this highest degree: For all acknowledge it is never permitted to a Christian to
sin consultatively, for that is to sin maliciously. Now unless a man shall
labor to shun every sinful act (which is to aspire to this supreme degree of
Piety) he sins consultatively, i. e. maliciously, which no Christian will
defend. Sin becomes exceeding sinful, exceeding heavy with its own weight, if
done maliciously or with deliberation. And God sometimes remits greater sins,
if fallen into through frailty or ignorance, sooner than lesser sins
maliciously committed.

Again, that great study, diligence, vigilance, and labor, so exactly required
of us in all our Christian Conversation, points us out our Mark and Scope,
which is, to eschew every sin, and so to aspire to this highest degree of Piety.

Are we not every where all up and down the sacred Books called upon to imitate
God and Christ; to be holy as God is holy, to be perfect as our Father is
perfect, to walk in the light as God is in the light, to walk as Christ walked,
and to follow him? He that observes these Precepts, does no less than aspire to
the highest degree of holiness. Our imitation of God does imply our being made
like unto him.

But lest any one should doubt the existence of this ultimate, I shall attempt
its demonstration.

1. We must endeavor after it; but no man is obliged to attempt impossible
things, it would be in vain. But to attempt any thing in vain, would become
neither a wise God to require, nor a wise man to endeavor.

2. If this degree of holiness cannot be attained, then it is necessary that we
sin sometimes; but it cannot be necessary that we sin; for then it would not be
sin: for all sin is freely committed. Hand est nocens quicunqne non sponte est
nocens. Ci^mens.
If there be necessity in the case, it loses the nature of sin; it is (...), our
misfortune, not (...), our sin: (...), deliberate acts are punished. It cannot
demerit punishment, nor be justly imputed, nor ever did the God of equity
impute it to any man. But that the lapses of good men were sins, and might be
imputed to them, should God use his right, is evident, for that they do, and
ought to ask the pardon of them: Now where pardon is asked, there the crime is
confessed; therefore good men might have abstained from the few lapses of their
lives, and so not have sinned, which was the point to be demonstrated.

3. When we daily pray that the will of God might be done in Earth, as it is in
Heaven; what can we infer, but that we, as the Angels, may do his will, if our
prayers are so ardent, and our endeavors so serious as God requires. Is that
Petition in vain? You Will say no. Then God is as willing as able to effect it in
us,; and our non-attainment does loudly accuse our prayers, or our endeavors,
or both, of languor, or remisness. For of this we are confident, that if we ask
any thing according to his will, he hears us; now what can be more agreeable
to his will, than that we should be holy in our whole conversation as he is
holy?

4. Without this notion, what shall we make of the options of our great
Apostle? not to single, and eximious Saints, but to entire Churches. The very
God of peace sanctify you wholly. The Lord establish your hearts unblameable
in holiness before God. That you may be sincere and without offense till the
day of Christ. We cease not to pray that ye may walk worthy of the Lord, (...),
ut omnimodo placeatis Deo, i. e. that ye might every way please God; being
fruitful in every good work. The God of peace make you perfect in every good
work, to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight.

It Is somewhat too dilute to say, here are excluded only habitual sins, or such
flagitious sins which are as habits; the words being pregnant and emphatick;
nor is there any just cause why we should enervate them, by departing from
their proper sense, and not think rather the Apostle intended by them that
which is most perfect in its kind. But that which does not argue the necessity,
may show the possibility, which was the thing to be demonstrated.

5. Shall we say that the holy Spirit, and all the other aids of Virtue which
God affords us through Christ, are so weak and invalid, that notwithstanding
all our endeavors, sin cannot be subdued or extinguished in us? is not this to
derogate from the Spirit of God, and to be injurious to God himself?

I am yet to seek for a reason why, whilst God would have us break the bonds of
sin, and cast those cords from us, to embrace an entire holiness in this
present World, and thereunto has furnished us with divine aids, and
supernatural strengths, he should deny us such measures and degrees of them, as
to enable us to abstain from all Sin, and to embrace an universal
Righteousness: especially seeing St. John resolves the Victory 4. 4.
over the instruments of Satan into the power of God, because greater is he
that is in you than he that is in the world.

That which some say, that God would leave some Canaanites in the land, to
humble us, and to try us, some reliquiae and remains of sins, lest we should
too much pride and please our selves, seems too light to preponderate all the
precedent discourse. For indeed it is Vanity it self; it is as if God would have
us sin, lest we should sin; or as if whilst God would eradicate all sin, he
should not once lay the Axe to the root of the first and fowlest in the World.

And now I would willingly ask any Advocate for the wicked lives of Christians,
Why it should be thought impossible by the Grace of the Gospel, to obtain such
a deliverance from Sin? Did not God make man upright? Are not Christ's Precepts
very consentaneous to that Original nature? Is not Virtue (where there is a
parity of custom) much more pleasant than Vice? Is it not true (which Salvian
observes) that Fidelity, Chastity, Humility, Sobriety, Mercy, Sanctity, non
onerant nossed ornant, they are not our burdens but our ornaments. Does not
reason, (...) though obscurely discern (...), that which becomes, (...) in some
Sympl. p 74.
measure contend for it.

Is not Sin its own punishment? Is it not like the Locusts of St. John; Their
faces were like the faces of men, and their hair like the hair of a Women, but
had tails like Scorpions, and stings there. What else mean those ictus, those
laniatus, those surda verbera, those Vultures, those furies, and Thespian
Vipers; I mean those sad, and disconsolate reflections upon an immoral and
ill-govern'd life? No, no, Sin is but the disease and dyscrasie of the Soul;
Righteousness is the health and natural complexion of it. Now there is a
propension in every thing to return to its proper state, and to cast off
whatsoever is heterogeneous to it. As some Physicians say, Medicaments are but
subservient to Nature, by removing impediments and obstructions, but Nature it
self, and the inward Archeus released, and set at liberty, works the cure.

Then this reproves two popular Errors.

1. Of those who think those words, The good that I would I do not, the evil
that I would not that I do, to be the highest measure of a Christian's
proficiency; for the undeceiving of whom, I shall observe a triple estate of
impiety, or enmity to God.

1. Of such who night and day do little else but provide for the Flesh, to
fulfill its lusts; who without all shame wallow in many kinds of sins, in whom
the sense of good and evil is near upon extinguished, or but very obscure
footsteps of it do remain: Whose Character St. Paul has given us; Of vain Ephesians.
4. 18, 19.
minds, having their understandings darkened, being alienated from the life of
God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their
hearts; who being past feeling, have given themselves to lasciviousness, to
work all uncleanness with greediness.

2. The other is of them, who indulge their Lust with little or no conflict,
but have contracted a perfect habit of one or more vices; in reference to
which, they have extinguished all sense of Conscience, though in other
instances not all out so wicked.

3. A third is of such, who for the most part do the things that are evil, and
are overcome of the flesh, but not without strivings of Appetite and Reason,
alive at once to the Law, and Sin; the conviction of the one, and the power and
love of the other, both these struggling together within the bowels of the Soul,
checking and comptrolling one another.

This is the man St. Paul describes, by a Metaschematismus under his own
person, in that famous Paragraph to the Romans, of which I will give a succinct
but evident demonstration. Romans 7.


1 In this man sin wrought all manner of concupiscence, v. 8. 1 The regenerat
man has crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. Gal. 5. 24. 2 Sin
revived in him, deceived him, slew him. v. 9, 10, 11. 2 He is dead to sin, the
body of sin is destroyed, he serves not sin, sin reigns not, nor does he obey
it. Romans 6. 2, 12, 14. 3. He was carnal. v. 14. 3 Is not in the flesh. Romans 8.
8, 9. 4 Sold under sin. v. 14. 4 Is free from sin. Romans 6. 18, 22. 5 The good
he would he did not, but the evil which he would not that he did. v. 19. 5
Walks not after the flesh but after the spirit. Romans 8. 1, 4. 6. Was taken
captive to the Law of sin. v. 23. 6. Is freed from the Law of sin. Romans 8. 2. 7
Detained by the body of death, from which the poor wretch desired to be
delivered. v. 24. 7 Is freed from the law of death. Romans 8. 2.

Where you have seven Characters of each, as contrary to one another as light
to darkness; to know better, and to do worse, is so far from alleviating the
evil, that it is the greatest aggravation of it.

It Is the most brutish, unreasonable, (...), Plut. (...).
and wretched condition, for a man that knows what is best, to be led by
incontinency and effeminacy from it.

And therefore says the Philosopher, that we ought not only to think right,
and to be affected accordingly; But to conform our works to our right opinions.

He that sins, and accuses himself is (...), does but begin to learn, Symplic.
67.
and has not yet come to the knowledge of the truth.

2. Another is of them who deceive themselves, whilst they expect some other's
inherent Righteousness to be made over so completely to them, as if they
themselves had been really and perfectly righteous, and this upon the sole
Condition, or qualification of mere Faith scrupulously prescinded from all
Obedience. Now this Honeycomb of Antinomianism is but a branch of old
Gnosticism: antidoted by St. John. Little Children let 1. 3. 7.
no man deceive you, He that does righteousness is righteous even as he is
righteous: If we say that we have fellowship with him and walk in darkness, we
lie and do not the truth. And all the promises Christ makes to the Asian
Churches are (...) To him that overcomes.

And thus am I arrived at the other Achievement of this vivifying Spirit, our
deliverance from Death, the fruit and consequence of Sin. The ruin of Death
follows that of Sin, sicut Varasequitur Vibiam.

Sin is the sting of death, it is its Scepter, the ensign of its sovereignty;
deprived of that it loses its ancient nature, cease to be King of Terrors;
and differs not from a gentle sleep; an (...) or an easy transitus to a
blessed immortality. It Is but the dissolution of an old ruinous and cadaverous
Building, to raise a fair, and fresh, a stately and magnificent Structure in
the place thereof.

For we know that if our earthly house 2 Cor. 3.
of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not
made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, i. e. a celestial, glorious, and a
spiritual Body. St. Paul does lively describe the difference between these
mortal and those immortal Bodies with which we shall be clothed in the
Resurrection. It Is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption, it is sown
in dishonor, it is raised in glory, it is sown in weakness, it is raised in
power, it is sown an animal body, it is raised a spiritual body. Where the
Apostle compares man, in respect of hie body, to a fruitful grain of Wheat,
which is sown in the earth, and somewhile after spring up in a more excellent
and very different form.

And that which thou sowest, (...), non gignendum corpus seris, is not the body
that shall be, but bare and naked grain.

Whence is that body that is to be? (...), God gives it a body, as it has
pleased him, and to every seed his own body.

And all this relishes well to him that knows, that the most contrary
modifications of matter imaginable do constitute no specifical change,
according to the last, and best Philosophy: Nor can he be offended, who holds
the principle of individuation is the form only, and that the matter and
suppositum is individuated from it.

So then our Apostle institutes a fourfold collation of these our bodies with
those we shall have hereafter.

1. It is sown in Corruption, but shall rise in Incorruption, i. e. The body
which we bring into this World with us, is subject, and obnoxious to corruption
and change: here we dwell in houses of Clay, Job. 4. 19.
whose foundation is in the dust, and may truly say to corruption, Thou art my
17. 14.
father, and to the Worm thou art my mother and my sister; There we shall die
no more, but be as the Angels, the sons of God, being the Children of the
Resurrection. Luke 20. 36.


2. It Is sown in dishonor, shall be raised in glory; when we come into the
World, we bring bodies, some of whose parts and members seem to be (...),
uncomely and less honorable, besides the rugae and maculae, the wrinkles,
spots, and blemishes, which age, sickness, and other casualities do imprint
upon us. But then in the destitution of these deformities, our bodies shall be
more resplendent than the Sun, and brighter than the golden light of Aurora.
The glories of Mount Tabor were but shades and darkness, compared to that
refulgent light, (...), so far exceeding the brightness of the Sun, septuplum,
says St. Ephrem, wherewith Acts. 26. 13.
now our Lord is clothed, and yet shall he change our Vile bodies, until he
has made them like his Glorious body.

3. It Is sown in weakness, shall be raised Phil. 3.
in power. Here labors, diseases, or years, soon make the keepers of the house
to tremble, the strong men bow down themselves, and the grinders to cease.
There shall they be firm and robust, shall renew their strength like the Eagle,
and like the youthful Cherubs, their agility shall be great and indefatigable.

4. It Is sown an animal Body, shall be raised a spiritual Body. Here our
bodies, as of other Animals, need meats, and drinks, and consist of members,
and organs necessary to receive, concoct, and digest them; but there they shall
be spiritual, there will need no Stomach, no Liver, no Intestines. Meats for
the belly, and the belly for the meat, but God will destroy both it and them.
Hierocles speaking of the Apotheosis of good men, tells us they enjoy besides
(...), besides Truth and Virtue in the Soul, a great measure of purity in its
spiritual Vehicle.

St. Paul is positive, That the Bodies of Saints at the Resurrection shall be
physically and really, not morally only spiritual and celestial; for flesh and
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. We shall have bodies as tenuious and
imperceptible as are the bodies of Angels, not so crass and gross as Air; but
purer than the liquid Ether, and have for a Vest, to use Macarius his phrase,
(...), the glory of the divine light. So it is no wonder that Saints of old and
since have groaned within themselves, waiting for the adoption, viz. the
Redemption of the body.

A great and memorable instance whereof, worthy to be written in Cedar, or
engraven in Brass, is this venerable Matron, whose Obsequies we now celebrate,
whom now we consecrate to Eternity. I have discoursed to you the heighths and
perfections of Christianity; you have seen it in the Rule; and if you had now
such a Speculum or mirror as would reflect her life, you would see it in the
Example. St. Hierom thought if all the members of his body were turned into
Tongues, and all his Arteries became vocal, yet he could say nothing, sanctae
and venerabilis Paulae virtutibus dignum, worthy the Virtues of holy and
venerable Paula. The like may I say with much Epitaph.
more reason of holy and venerable Anna. Not only because I am so much
inferior for plenty of words, and Rhetorical schemes of speech to that
eloquent Father; but also because my Argument is much more illustrious,
refulgent and sublime; for if I should institute a parallel between them, you
would find equal Devotions surmounted by Prudences unequal.

I much applaud that Father, who would praise nihil nisi quod proprium, nothing
but what was her own, and which sprang from the pure fountain of her holy mind.
So shall I, passing by the (...) things not in our power. Such are, the (...)
Epict. (...).
Philosopher tells you, the Body, possessions, Honors, Principalities, and
whatsoever are not our own works. And that too for the very reason his
excellent Commentator assigns, We are not arbitrarious Lords of any of these
things. And therefore I shall pass by her Extraction, Education, Presence, and
that comely Mien, with which she struck all persons at once with Love and
Reverence.

I say, I shall pass these by, (they being Habentibus non grandia, though
co^te^^entibu^ mirabilia. St. Hierom.
not greatly to be esteemed by them that have them, though it is greatness to
contemn them) and speak of her (...), more divinely, more sublimely.

She was then of the same Country with Gorgonia, her exact parallel, and that
was the Jerusalem above, a City (...).
not seen with bodily eyes, but with those of the mind, where we have our
conversation, whither we are making haste; where Christ is a Citizen, and all
that (...), and Church of the first born are fellow Citizens. So you see it is
true of her what the Poet says of Aeneas, Contingit sanguine coelum. She was
Heavenborn, (...). Naz. Orat. 11.
and her Nobility was, The conservation of the divine impressions on her Soul,
and an imitation of God, the Architype, and first Pattern of all goodness.

She had an early institution in Piety, and as it befell Gorgonia, who received
the Seeds of Piety from thence, from (...).
whence she received her Life and Culture. So our Gorgonia derived the
spiritual Ornaments of her mind from the same Instruments who had propagated
her body. And no wonder, if that Cedar whose branches were enveloped in the
Clouds, had taken long and deep rooting.

She was truly, and becomingly religious; the right knowledge of God and Christ
did bear her enlightened mind so Eaven, that it was as far removed from
Superstition, as from Irreligion. Hers was no self-chosen Holiness, ceremonial
Righteousness, opinionative Zeal; she mistook not the Tree of Knowledge for the
Tree of Life.

She was not taken with high-flown Enthusiafm and Seraphicism, nor was she
patient of Epicurizing Philosophy, nor tempted with Antinomian liberty.

She did not frame to her self a Fantastical Religion, made up entirely of a
Faith divided from Obedience, imagining all to be done for her, all to be
imputed to her.

Nor did she place her Religion in endless scrupulosities about things
indifferent; and though her carriage was always passive and obedient, yet never
esteemed little things worthy of great contentions.

She was no Opinionist, nor yet jealoused any notions, which she thought not
inconsistent with Faith in Christ, and the observation of the Commandments of
God.

She like Gorgonia reconciled the sublimity of Coelibate with the security of
Marriage, and being (...), chaste (...),
and humble, blending the excellencies of Coelibate and Marriage together;
giving proof to the World, that neither of these States so simply unite us to
God, or divide us from him; neither of them solely to be declined, nor solely
to be pursued, but that a virtuous mind may rule and moderate both Conjugate
and Virginity. Well, as that, so this (...).
Gorgonia having been ministerial a little to the World and to Nature, (...),
consecrated her self wholly unto God.

Our Anna, like that Prophetess the daughter of Phanuel, having lived an
example to Wives some few years with an Husband, a Widow about twenty nine
years; in all which time she departed not from the Temple, that is, deserted
not Church Communion, nor God's public Service; but served him with fastings,
and prayers night and day; ever since her Widow-hood devoting one day in the
Week to fasting and prayer; in her desolate estate trimming, dressing, and
adorning of her mind for the Bridegroom of her Soul,

She was a severe exacter of indispensible Duties of Christianity; her Religion
was solid and substantial; she attended the (...), the weightier things of the
Law. She was a through Christian; in her was accomplished St. Paul's wish, she
was not almost, but altogether such an one as himself, his Chain excepted.

Hers was no barren Faith; but it was fruitful in good works; Her Charity
distributed it self to every object, to God, to man.

1. To God, by her frequent Fastings, her constant Prayers, her diligence in
God's public Service, her Zeal and care to promote his honor, to advance his
Rule and Government in the hearts of all with whom she did converse, in whom
she had interest. This she taught her Children so soon as they could learn, and
this she taught them so long as she could speak.

It Is said of Gorgonia that she made (...).
the fruit of her body, her Children, and her Childrens Children become the
fruits of the Spirit; and has not our Gorgonia done, or endeavored the like?
Who has been more painful, more faithful to the souls of Children, Nephews,
and Neeces, than she has been? who has tanght them more diligently, who has
prayed for them more ^requently, more ardently than she has done?

It Is said of Gorgonia that she purified (...).
and devoted to God her whole stock and family, in stead of her single soul.

So may we say of our worthy Matron, whilst an Oeconomist Wife or Widow.

Her house was a kind of Church, none so grateful, none so acceptable to her as
a painful, and conscientious Minister of Christ; None were the worse, but many
the better for coming under her Roof.

Gorgonia is said to have been whilst she lived, an Exemplar of all virtue to
her (...).
Children, and when God called her, she left her last Will behind her as a
silent exhortation to her family.

And was not this imparallel'd Saint, a great pattern of all good works to her
Family? was not piety, purity, humility, meekness, mercy, and every good work
most conspicuous in her? And I my self can witness, it was amongst her last
cares to recommend the ways of God, and a serious and through Piety to her
Children.

And if the last Wills, and Testaments of all the dead, have ever been thought
sacred, and inviolable; what a further, what a fresh obligation have you (my
honored Friends) to be religious; that is, to tread in the steps, to write out
the Copy of this blessed Saint, your incomparable Mother. But I was speaking of
her Charity.

The eloquent Father, speaking of the often praised Saint, says, Who stretched
(...);
cut a more liberal hand to the poor? that he fears not to apply the words of
Job to her, The stranger did not lodge in the Street, but she opened her doors
to the Traveller; she was eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, and a Mother to
the Orphan.

So our Saint, when she was Mistress of an house, and since; Who does not
remember the largeness of her bowels, and the liberality of her hands? Who has
not eat her Bread, worn her Cloth, received her Medicaments, applied her
Plasters, and her Unguents.

Nor did she leave any thing considerable to the Earth but her body. Exchanged
all she had, for the hopes of a better life, leaving little besides the
imitation of her self, and an ambition of the like Virtue.

Nor ever did she with works of mercy, commute with God for those of wantonness
and luxury. Who ever saw a garment, or an ornament of a garment which was
superfluous upon her? much less did she use Ceruss, or Stibium, Scarlet, or any
other fucus, signs and indications (...).
of a sick and weak mind. But like the abovesaid Gorgonia, although she knew
many and various external Ornaments of her sex, yet she esteemed none so
ornamental as her manners, and inward purity and brightness of her mind; the
only ruddiness which pleased her, was that of modesty; the only white, was that
of fasting and abstinence.

The Father commends Gorgonia, for that she did not labor so much to seem,
(...).
as really to be good.

So our Saint blew no Trumpet, made no noise, retired to her Closet, shut her
door, and offered the Sacrifices of an universal Righteousness to him that sees
in secret, but rewards openly.

What more sagacious in practical godliness than her discourses? yet what more
prudent than her silence?

So the Father admires Gorgonia; Who (...);
knew the things of God better than she, both from the sacred Oracles, and her
own understanding; yet who talked less? (...);
containing her self within the bounds of Piety proper to her sex. And this
also is the genuine character of our Anna.

(...) 5. These are great things, and these are great Truths.

Thus these two great Saints, lived instruments of Good, examples of Virtue,
and ornaments of their Sex, and now you long to hear how they died. Truly they
were lovely and pleasant in their lives and in their death they were not
divided.

Of Gorgonia the Father tells us she (...).
earnestly desired her dissolution; and to be with Christ, she preferred before
all the pleasures of the World.

So our Saint all the while of her last and happiest sickness, breathed out no
other longings: but as the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so panted her
soul after thee, O God; Her soul thirsted for God, for the living God, oh when
should she come and appear before God?

Gorgonia had some presensation of death, (...).
a kind of Vision, making known the day of her departure. And as if this Matron
had had some such sentiment and apprehension, at the very first notice of this
last sickness she often used these words, Lord fit me for thy self, and thy
will be done.

Gorgonia fallen into a very great extremity of body, suffered no Physician
(...).
but God.

How loath and unwilling our Saint was to use Physicians, not only in this, but
in former sicknesses, is very well known to all that were about her; which did
not spring so much from contempt of that conjectural Art, as from the fullness
of inward peace, and a desire to be in a safe Port and Haven.

It Is said Gorgonia having made her last day (...), a day of joy and festival,
she fell asleep.

So ours, the day before she died, confessed her humanity by groaning out now
and then her sense of a pain in her side; but on the day of her Apotheosis, by
all she did, by all she said, by all she suffered, there was nothing
perceptible, but the deepest peace, the sweetest comforts: with very little
reluctance of Nature, attested by a few drops of sweat on a hot day, in a
hotter room, with a singultus or two, she resigned her pure Soul into the hands
of her merciful Creator.

Oh Death where is thy sting, O Grave where is thy victory? Let me die the
death of the Righteous, and let my latter end be like his.

I will end with Hierom's words on the Lady Paula. Non moeremus quod talem
amisimus, sed gratias agimus quod habuimus, imo habemus.

We do not mourn that we have lost such an one, but we give infinite thanks to
Allmighty God that we ever had, yea that we have such an Example.

An Example too big for mine, too big for humane Eloquence, none but an Angel
is fit to write her Epitaph.

Now to the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the Only wise God, be Honor and
Glory for ever, and for ever.

THE END.
ERRATA.
IN the Preface for quales read qualem. p. 1. l. 16. read (...) in the margin
r. (...) p. 2. l. 8, 10. r. (...) p. 3. l. 3. r. (...) l. 4. r. (...) p. 4.
marg. (...) p. 5. marg. r. (...) p. 6. marg. remove the period to (...) put out
the comma at (...) p. 13. l. 7. put out the comma after (...). p. 21. l. 3. for
friends, quoth he, read O friends, quoth 1. p. 32. l. 7. dele miser. p. 33.
marg set these words against the 14. line, Mist. God!. p. 495 p. 41. l. 7. r.
optima. p. 55. marg, dele Epist. ad Cor. l. 12. p. 65. l. 18. r. for all written

In the Funeral Sermon.

In the Preface p. 2. l. 9. r. Righteous and godly, p. 13. l. 5. r. Thespesian.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Design no Apology, not only because when it is unextorted, it leaves some
suspicion of guilt; but because that part of the World, which is capable of it
does not need it; and that which does, is so transported with Passion,
Prejudice, and Pride, that they can make no good use of it. Nor do I take my
self concerned at that (...) amongst my John 7. 12. Private wh^^parings.
Brethren of the Clergy; whilst the Lovers of peace and present things, gave me
so much assurance of their favorable reception, of the Notions which I then
delivered; as I make no doubt but others will, when they shall have prepared
their minds for wisdom, by freeing themselves from Popular opinions, and from
passions; and shall have ennobled their Souls by a full, entire, and generous
liberty, both of Judgment and Will, as that excellent Frenchman advises;
Charron lib. 2. de la Sagesse.
whose second Book I would have all men read; who are impatient of such
discourses which relish not of their ancient Systems. Can any pretender to
Wisdom and Virtue take it unkindly to hear me say, That I have an infinite
ambition to be useful in my generation to the great God, who made the World,
and to the Holy Jesus, the only Son of God, who attempted to reform it? That my
spirit is stirred within me to see the lovely face of Christianity spotted,
blanched, and disfigured, with Vanity, Superstition, and Idolatry? I am
ashamed, that whilst the Jews Temple was building, there was neither hammer,
nor axe, 1 Kings 6. 7;
nor any tool of Iron heard in the house; but now when we are raising an house
to him that dwells not in Temples made with hands, we should make so much use
of Iron, and Steel, and should reckon Guns and Swords, Flames and Faggots
amongst our means of grace. I am sorry we should seem to have more of Nimrod
than Solomon in our building; that we should partake of the Curse poured down
upon the Workmen at Babel;

-- Let Us make the Brother, The Sire and Son, not understand each other.

Methinks it is unhappy that the Poet should have so happily expressed that
Spirit which has possessed the Guides of Christendom in these words:

Arise betimes, while the Opal colored Morn,
In Golden Pomp does May-days door adorn;
And patient hear the all-differing voices sweet,
Of painted Singers that in groves do greet
Their Love-bon-jours each in his phrase and fashion,
From Trembling perch uttering his earnest passion:
And so thou may conceit what mingle mangle
Amongst this people every where does jangle.
Such is the tumult and noise all over the Christian world, that the great
Apostle cannot be heard, who calls loud upon us to walk by the Phil. 3. 16.
same Rule, and to mind the same thing. And if it was but noise, it were so
much the better; but there is real danger: Christianity is in danger, and in
such a case, no wonder if a Genuine Child, who never spoke before, should say,
Don't kill Croesus.

Our Lord has told us that a Kingdom, City, or House divided cannot stand, but
is brought to Mat. 12. 25.
desolation; what may we not fear then touching the Kingdom of Christ, or the
City of God? Whence is that disquiet of the minds of men, and trouble of their
consciences? whence is that decay of sanctimony and holiness of life? whence
that coldness of our Charity? whence that increase of Irreligion and Atheism
among those who pretend to be within? whence that great offense taken by those
that are without? Whence are many troubles in Churches and States to their
utter ruin and subversion? Are they not from our divisions in Religion?
Whosoever doubts these things, may do well to consult an excellent discourse
from Saumour, intit'led La reunion du Christianism, which together with Or, La
maniere de rejoindre tous l^s Chrestiens sous une seule confess^on de Foy.
the two pieces that worthy Author promises, I doubt not but would much oblige
the whole Christian World. A man who shall but a little erect himself and look
about, may soon see many ghastly sights and grievous to a pious soul. Here a
Mind full of disquiet, there a Conscience full of trouble. On the one hand a
great decrease of Virtue; on the other no less an increase of Irreligion and
Atheism. Within, our Churches filled with Massacres and Rebellions, Smoke and
Flames; without, the Jew, Mohammedan, and Pagan warming their hands thereat.

Hence all that contempt which profane and rash spirits cast upon our holy
things, and upon them who do administer them. Can the best Instrument of humane
happiness, The worthy Mr. Claude affirms the true Church is known by these two
Characters; L'un, si l'on y enseigne toutes les chooses clairement contenues en
la Parole de Dieu; and l'autre, si, d'ailleurs, on n'y ens^^gn^ rien qui soit
contraire a tes chooses, and qui en corrompe L'efficace, on la force.
set on foot and advanced in the World by the infinitely best of Beings,
disquiet the mind, dethrone virtue, subvert States, foment profaneness, and
encourage imposture, if there was no falt in the administration of it? And can
any great mind see a venerable Religion, instituted by God, administered by his
only Son, to countermine the Enemy of mankind, and to undo his works, so
unhappily perverted, as to be made ministerial and subservient to them? I say
can any great Christian mind see so shameful a defeat put upon the Son of God,
and be silent? What Is this but to be ashamed of him among men? but to betray
him? Well, then when the rays, and beams of the Sun shall cause darkness, then
shall Religion be justly charged with all the disquiets and disorders in the
World. Either these are not Messes from that Pot; or else some servant of the
Prophet has infused some quantity of Colloquintida or wild Gourds. Yea, yea,
the Servants have either been ill employed or slept, whilst some envious one
has sown his Tares in our Lord's field; so that the weeding it is a tacit
reproach to the Husbandman; and therefore no wonder, if he that has; or does
worst deserve, be least at ease then, when this negligence shall be reproved.
Were we but as patient of the Cure, as we are of the Disease, there would soon
be found an Aesculapius, who could unite and enliven the scattered pieces of
our Christian Absyrtus.

In the mean while methinks all lovers of Wisdom and Virtue should take it not
amiss, that men endeavor to render Christianity intelligible, consistent with
its self, subservient to Virtue and Happiness, and Pacifick.

Intelligible, as doubtless it is. It is far fetched and affected terms,
extrascriptural terms, whereunto narrow and pedantick spirits do pertinaciously
adhere, which would render Christianity unintelligible to the Saints Paul and
Peter, with the other Apostles, if they should start out of their graves and
hear some Doctors of the Chair.

To what head must we reduce the discourses of the Order of Gods eternal
Decrees, of the conditional obligation of absolute Promises, of the fatal
determination of free will? Must we be ever pressing men to the observation of
the Precepts of Christ; and yet all that while openly acknowledge, nay teach,
that that same observation is neither possible, nor necessary?

And what shall we think of those most unadvised people, who would divide
between Goodness and Happiness; who supersede Virtue, and substitute I know not
what kind of Faith in the place thereof. Who would think he heard a Doctor, and
in some men's opinion no small Prophet, thus resolving the doubts of his immoral
Saints? It is not Clamores Anti^tomorum impios esse, qui vocifer antur renatos
retinere Spiritum sanctum, and justos esse fide, etiamsi perseverent in
sceleribus contra conscientiam. Melanct. Epist. lib. 1. Ep. 70.
the greatness of sin, nor continuance in sin, nor backsliding into sin, that
is the true cause of thy staggering, what ever thou pretendest, but solely from
thy Unbelief. Which passage a very learned and worthy person thus paraphraseth:
That though a man persevere in an habitual course of the greatest wickednesses,
yet for all that he has an undeniable claim to all the Promises of the Gospel;
if he will resolve at all adventure to be stomachful in his conceit, that they
were particularly made and designed to himself; and then observes, if this be
one of the mysteries of their new Godliness (as it is the choicest one) that no
doctrine can possibly be invented more apparently destructive of an holy life,
or repugnant to the tenor of the new Covenant, which (as that happy pen words
it) is plainly nor more nor less, than God's stipulation of Eternal life, upon
no other condition, than of an habitual, and uniform obedience to the Gospel.

And as for turbulency, which I attribute not so much to their surly and
waspish dispositions, as to some malign influence of their notions; many of
them being of a complaisant air, and conversible humor, until they come forth
full of their Master, and have filled up his character given him by the meek
Judicas prout amas vel odisti, amas au^em vel edisti prout libet.
and placid Bucer. Your judgment is governed by your passions, and your
passions by your humor. Upon which occasion it was that the incomparable Hugo
Grotius observed, that the Disciples of Melanchton were boni and lenes, good
men and meek, whilst those of Calvin were asperi, and tales, quales in maximam
partem humani generis Tantum refert quo utaris Doctore, says that excellent
person in his Votum.
Deum esse sibi imaginantur, sour, severe, and such as they imagine God to be
toward the greatest part of mankind. I say for turbulency, I am in some doubt,
whether the Men or their Doctrine be most blameworthy; whether they spoil
their Doctrine, or their Doctrine them. Be that as it will, I am sure all
Christendom is filled with Scandal taken at the proud, imperious, unquiet, and
uncharitable Spirit of that which some love to call, Calvinism, which soon
degenerates into a merciless Tyranny where it governs, and finds both States
and Churches work enough, where it ought to be governed.

I cannot but mightily appland a noble and generous passage in an Author
before praised, and transcribe it; not only because it expresses my sense,
better than I can my self; but also for that it is incapable of contraction.
Says he, There can be nothing more mischievous, or intolerable in any Church
or Commonwealth, than these peremptory dictators of truth, and professed
Masters of Polemick skill; they are so exact and curious in their own
Speculations, and impose them with that severity upon the consent of mankind,
and by consequence require such hard and impracticable conditions of agreement
and Church Communion, as must unavoidably break any Society of men into
factions and parties; for what so vain as to expect an unity of judgment, in
such a multitude of uncertain and undeterminable Opinions? The excellent Mr.
Claude makes it an error in Mr. Arnaud to imagine, que pour deumeurer dans
nostre Eglise, on soit oblige de discuter toutes les Controverses qui ont este
jusqu' a present agitees parmy les Chre^iens.
And therefore those men that stand with such an unyielding and unflexible
Stiffness upon the admittance of their own conceits make all reconcilements
impossible, and all ruptures incurable; every little opinion must make a great
Schism, and the bounds of Churches must be as nicely determined, as the points
of a Dutch Compass. Their Bodies of Orthodoxy are as vast and voluminous as
Aquinas's Sums, and they have drawn infinite Numbers of wanton and peevish
questions into the Articles of their Belief; and now when they have swollen up
their Faith to such a mighty bulk, and refined it to such a delicate subtilty,
it is unavoidable but that this must perpetuate disputes and divisions to all
Eternity. So far that worthy Author.

And who sees not that if every Speculative truth forsooth, be a necessary
condition of Ecclesiastical Communion, what a foundation is laid for numberless
and endless divisions. Then when all mankind shall have the same crafis and
temperament of body, the same Education, the same natural, and the same
acquired Parts, the same Interests, Relations, Age and Sex; then indeed we may
reasonably expect, they may have the same apprehension of abstruse and
Metaphysical notions, that the same Ite, the same Venite will be heard in all
our Churches. But I expect to hear both from the seven Hills, and the Leman
Lake, This man sure dis-believes, if he do not despise our Chairs and our Rods.
To whom I say; I believe that when a well pronounced Oration out of Tully, will
set a dislocated bone, or heal a broken leg, then will their Poynant Rods, and
Infallible Chairs, so clarify humane understandings, that they shall see that
Promises upon impossible conditions are rich and precious, and that both parts
of a contradiction may be true.

St. Paul has ruled this case; If Phil. 3 15. (...).
in any thing ye are otherwise minded, you shall neither be esteemed a Publican
or Heathen, nor yet delivered to Satan, nor no secluded Church Communion: How
then? God shall reveal even this unto (...).
you. And in the next Chapter he tells us that peaceable mindedness ought to be
preferred above deep Speculations. The Peace of God, or Christ, which passes
all understanding, (...).
i. e. study of preserving peace, the virtue, not the felicity; and so it is
enumerated amongst the Videfis D. Hammond in loc.
fruits of the Spirit by the same Apostle, Gal. 5. 22. Which was the Scope of
the following discourse; wherein, if I did not deserve, as I know I did not,
the Bays, the Laurel, nor a Crown; yet methinks no pious and pacifick spirit
should deny me a Tripode, a Shield, or a Cup. I advance no Faction, but labor,
to remove those discriminating Shiboleths, which do most scandalously rend and
divide Christendom. You Will not find the least intimation of any notion, but such
as renders the lovely Religion of our Lord and Master Christ, both more
intelligible, and more practicable, than does the vulgar Schemes, which reign
and rage in some of our Presses and Pulpits. I knew I had to do with Prejudice,
(and great is the power of prejudice) and therefore I sheltred my self under
the protection of the most excellent Primum Evangelicae simplicitatis est
fratr^ fact a scriptaque candide interpretari; deind^ si quis lapsus est, qui
dissimulari non potest, non illico saeviendum in eum qui lapsus est, quum nemo
non labatur; sed adnitendum ut, homine salvo, tellatur error. Denique sic est
admonendus proximus, quemadmodum nos admoneri cuperemus, si quid accidisset
humanitus, says the wise Erasmus in his Preface to St. Hilary.
persons of the first, and best, and of the last and most learned Ages.

And now at length, let me tell my Reader, that it was prepared without any
purpose of going beyond my hearer, which you may the rather believe by its late
seeing the light. Had not some petulant and malevolent people slandered it, and
traduced it, both amongst the faeces Romuli; and before some venerable persons;
to whom I am very ready, both from my proper inclination, and duty, to give an
account of all things of this nature, peradventure you had never received this
trouble. I could pay them in their own coin; but I know to whom Vengeance
belongs, and shall right my self only by the rule of M. Antoninus, (...), by
being as unlike them as may be. For I have so learned Christ. But I Will leave
them to their proper Scorpions, and comfort my self with an observation from
the Quadrains of Guy de Faur.

Si quelque fois le meschant te blasonne,
Que t'en chaut il? helas! c'est ton honneur:
La blasme prend la force du donneur:
Le Loz est bon, quand un bon nous le done.
I have done when I have further observed, that no notion in this discourse
has any aptitude or tendency to make any man the worse Citizen of this world
or of the City of God.

And if it has, or shall meet with any Unbelievers, do not think that I am
surprised, being well aware of that observation of Lactantius; That men
immersed and sunk Qui in vitiis sibi placent, nobis non credent, etiamsi solemn
in manibus gestemus.
into their pleasing sensualities will not receive such doctrines, though
demonstrated as clearly as if they were written with the beams of the Sun. I am
well enough aware that some notions touched upon in this little Tract, though
evident enough to a competent Reader, might yet from a larger deduction receive
both strength and ornament. For which reason, I have annexed another Discourse
hereunto, which may be of some use in the great disquisition of Fundamentals,
and consequently contributes somewhat to the peace of Christendom. When you
shall once understand what it is that renders an Article necessary, you will
forthwith be couvinced of their paucity; and the fewer matters we have of
difference, in all likelihood we shall the sooner agree. I foresee a great
number of small objections; but because I am not master of so much leisure as
Domitian was, I spare you, after I have begged of you, you would consider what
I have said, and of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus, that he would give us
understanding in all these things.

(...).

Semper Optima paucissimis placuerunt.

A SERMON TO THE Clergy AT STONY-STRAT FORD In the County of BUCKS, October. 27.
1670.

St. James. The Wisdom that is from above is first Pure, then Peaceable. (...).
By Ignatius Fuller.

LONDON, Printed by Evan Tyler, and Ralph Holt, for R. Royston, Bookseller to
the King's most Excellent Majesty. 1672.

Mark 9. 50. Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another.
FOR the better understanding of these words, we must open the 49: Verse. For
every one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted with
salt.

The particle For, intimates their connection with the precedent words; and that
they have the same sense, will appear by the sequel of this Discourse; viz.
That some part of the Body perish, that the whole may be preserved: which our
Lord illustrates by an allusion to the twofold Oblation, or the (...) in the
(...).
first and second of Leviticus, the (...) and (...), the burnt-Offering and the
Meat Offering; the first was all burnt upon the Altar, in the second the (...)
only, or the memorial, which was Lev. 2. 2. (...) Lev. 2. 13.
(...), a sweet savor unto the Lord: of this chiefly did the Law provide;
Every Oblation of thy meat-of-fering shall thou season with Salt, neither shall
thou suffer the Salt of the Covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy
meat offering; and then adds; With all thy Offerings thou shall offer Salt:
which former words the LXXII. translate thus. (...), and from them St. Mark,
with respect to the sense, (...), i. e. Every gift of Sacrifice, or every
Sacrifice, shall be salted with Salt. So that two things our Lord says; 1.
Every one shall be salted with fire, that is of them of whom he was speaking,
who should indulg their vitiousand depraved affections. They (...).
should be salted with fire, i. e. with both their eyes, and hands, and feet
should be confined to the Worm that does not dye, and the Fire that is not
quenched. A plain allusion to the perpetuity of the (...). Philo of them that
offer sacrifice. p. 851. Paris 1640.
fire upon the Altar of the burnt-offerings; for Philo observes, it was a Law
of the exterior Altar, Fire shall burn incessantly upon the Altar: and though
he makes that sacred Flame a Symbol of our incessant Gratitude; yet our Lord
refers to the consuming quality of it: and in respect to the great Act of his
Justice, God himself is called a Consuming Fire. And indeed (...) signifies as
well to be consumed, as to be salted. So the Prophet; the Heavens shall vanish
as Heb. 12. 29. Deuteronomy. 4. 24. (...) Esai. 51. 6. Sym. Aqui. Comminuetur, in
salis moduns conterentur. Nobil. Jer. 38. 11. Vim cons^^mendi.
Smoke. (...). Hence (...) are (...), old rotten rags which Abedmelech supplied
the Prophet with, to save his body from the Cords, by which he designed to take
him out of the Dungeon. And in that respect Salt is like to Fire; that it has
a faculty of consuming as well as fire, with this difference; it consumes but
part, whereas Fire, to use Philo's words, (...) consumes the whole.

Every Sacrifice shall be salted with Salt; here our Lord takes the word in its
proper signification, and intimates that every one who would be an acceptable
Sacrifice unto God, must refine and preserve himself pure from all evil and
corrupt Affections, as the Sacrifice is by Salt from all putrefaction. The Sum
is this. Every man must by all means suffer some or other consumption; either
by way of Salting, or by way of burning. This is the Vicious person, who will
not mortify, nor crucify his sinful Lusts and Affections; he shall be salted
with Fire, like the (...) shall be wholly burnt up, and consumed, i. e. go
whole into a state of perdition.

The other is the Virtuous Man, the true and real Christian, who is contented
to part with Hand, or Foot, or Eye, or whatsoever else shall stand in
competition with his obedience to his dear Lord and Master Jesus Christ. He
like the (...) is salted with Salt, a part of him only is consumed; and he
enters maimed into a state of life.

The Holy Scriptures frequently allude ^s 34. ^, 6. Jer. 46. 10.
to both these Sacrifices: To the first; My Sword shall be bathed in Heaven;
behold it shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse to
judgment; the Sword of the Lord is filled with blood, etc. For the Lord has a
Sacrifice in Bozra, and a great slaughter in the Land of Idumea.

To the second; I beseech you by the mercies of God, that you present your Romans
12. 1. (...).
Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
Service.

So St. Peter: We are an holy Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 5. (...).
to offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable unto God. Such as are (...);
Prayers and Eucharists offered up by worthy persons; these are (...), J. Martyr.
as the holy man speaks; the only perfect and acceptable Sacrifices unto God.
In allusion hereunto St. Paul Col. 4. 6.
would have our speech always seasoned with Salt, i. e. defecate and refined
from every thing that is putrid, corrupt, and rotten. The former words of this
Verse are thought to be loco non suo, however may be shut up in a Parenthesis,
and so we are at the Text. -- Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with
another.

But here I cannot but observe another quality of Salt, viz. its Vnitive, or
Henotic. 'Twas of old a Symbol of (...). Eustath.
Union and friendship, which is never more seasonable, than in our approaches
to that God who is One. Of its use in holy things, our Books abound with
instances.

Immunis aram fi tetigit manus
Non sumptuosa blandior hostia Salientem micam salis granum intellige, quod
saliat cum in ig nem missam sit. Forphyr. Far pium is mola salsa, which Greeks
call (...). Schol. on Homer. Barley mingled with salt.

Mollibit aversos penates
Far pio, and saliente mica. [i. e.]
An innocent life, with a little Mola salsa, shall propitiate your Household
Gods, sooner than whole Hecatombs without it. So Tibullus.

-- Omnia noctis
Far pio placant, and saliente sale.
A little flower and salt expiats all the errors of the night. So likewise of
its use in civil conversation; hereto Aeschines refers when he tells us we
ought highly to esteem the salts of the City, and the public table.

Hither also must we refer the Symbol (...) Laertius in vita Pythag. p. 222.
edit. Land. 1664. (...) Reverentia nunsae.
of Pythagoras, salem apponito, set on the salt, by which he would that we
should not dissolve friendship; because salt preserves every thing from
putrefaction, and is made of the most pure, and liquid things, viz. Water, and
the Sea, as Gyraldus observes: So salem, and mensam ne praeterito, despise not
the salt and table; whence the Reverence of the table was put for the law of
friendship, as Juvenal, Claudian, Euripides in Hecuba and Theccritus in Hyla
use it, and for that reason the Ancients were wont to set it before their
Guests before all other meat. But I shall end this observation with one ancient
and one modern testimony of this custom.

The first is of Origin speaking of Judas In his Comments of St. Matthew.
the Traitor. Neque salis ejusdem, neque mensae, neque panis communicati memor:
That he was mindful neither of the same salt nor table, nor the bread which our
Lord communicated to him.

The second is of Baron Sigismond who reports the Czar has no greater
expressions of his kindness than to send from his table bread and salt, idque
maximi honoris loco habetur, which is esteemed a very great honor, which he
himself received when Ambassador both from Maximilian and Ferdinand to
Basilius. He was also invited to dine with the Prince, with these words,
Sigismunde comedes sal and panem nostrum nobiscum; Sigismund you shall eat our
bread, and salt with us: And to this custom it is not unlike but our Lord
alludes in these words, Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with
another.

He had observed that envy and ambition had moved that question, verse. 34. Tic
(...), which of them should be the greatest? and therefore in order to the
latter it is no wonder he referred to the former of these symbolical qualities;
I mean that in order unto peace that he referred unto purgation. For only by
Prove. 13. 10.
pride comes contention. So that you may please to take this Paraphrase of the
words. Let the doctrine of the Gospel corrode and eat out all the corruptions
of your souls, and minds, and oblige you to all amity and peaceableness one
with another; of the latter of which I shall choose to entreat chiefly, and of
the former only in order thereunto.

Where you must not expect a tedious harangue in praise of peace: For, Quis
unquam Herculem vituperavit? whoever dispraised it? but rather a severe
stricture and reflection upon the want of charity in the Christian World, with
a proposal of some causes of that defect. Such as is,

1. The non-purgation of all vicious and depraved affections.

2. The mistaking the true notion of the Christian Religion.

3. The overvaluing of opinions.

4. The advancing doctrines which have no good influence upon our lives.

5. The taking up the senses of late men, without inquiring after the good old
paths, wherein the Fathers of the first and best Ages walked; and such like.

And if peace was the last Legacy our Lord left us before he dyed, and the
first blessing with which he did salute us after he rose again; how is it that
that innocent dove has so many Ages since taken her flight, and Terram (...)
reliquit? Of old in the multitude of believers Acts 4. 32.
there was (...), (...), one heart, and one soul; and their mutual charities,
did notam nobis inurere, did signalise us, says Tertullian: See, say they, how
Christians love one another, and are ready to die for one another. 'Twas
Lucian's observation in his peregrinus, Vide inquiunt ut invicem se diligunt;
ut pro alter utro mori sint parati; Tertul.
who speaking of his imprisonment, tells us it is incredible what zeal, and
celerity the Christians expressed in visiting and relieving of him; in such
cases Christians were wont to spare for (...).
nothing; nay they enriched him, and assigning the reason hereof, he says,
(...) Lucian page 996. Edit. Par 1615.
(...), i. e. Their chief Lawgiver persuaded them they would become mutual
Brethren.

So the City Prefect in the passion of Vincentius calls Christians by way of
Deridiculi causa.
scorn Fratres, Brethren. But whosoever shall take a view of the Christian
Churches from the beginning of the Fourth Century down to this very day; must
needs suffer some kind of commotion even for Religions sake; where he shall
find no footsteps of that Primitive charity, though it may be, now and then a
good man in vain calling for it.

Of old the Church was all one body compacted by the Literae formatae even from
the Rhene to Nilus; from the British Ocean to and beyond Euphrates: but now
every little spot of earth has (God help us) a several Church Catholic: Nay
ever since the opening of the Springs of Controversies, and the determining of
unnecessary Questions, the Church has suffered a deluge of Opinions, and
Schisms, with which at this day it is overrun, and which is the saddest effect
of all, since we are become anathema Dum alter alteri anathema esse coepit,
prope sane nem^ est Christi St. Hyl.
to one another, almost no man is found closely to adhere to Christ. The
dissentions of Christians are the disgrace of Christianity. Witness the woeful
effects of the Alexandrian controversy, wherein we have seen Council
condemning Council, and one Prelate another.

Whom would it not grieve to see the Mitre and the Crosier strangely converted
into the Helmet, and the Partizan; and such ingenious cruelties practiced upon
one another, as quite out-did the bloody Pagans? So that a Heathen complained,
Nullae infestae hominibus bestia ut sunt sibi f^rales plerique Christianorum,
Ammian. Marcel.
No Wolves nor Tigers, nor beast of prey are so hurtful to man as very many
Christians are to one another. What Ingenuous Christian is not troubled to hear
Julian bespeaking dissenting Christians. Audite me quem Alemanni audierunt, and
Franci, i. e. hear me whom the barbarous Nations have heard: To hear Marcus
Antoninus; O Marcomanni, O Quadi, O Sarmatae tandem alios vobis inquietiores
inveni; at length I have found some others more seditious and more unquiet than
your selves: So that a Parisian massacre, a Guisian league, or a Power-Treason,
and that too for Religion's sake (the more's the pity) is no great wonder in
the World. But O tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the 2 Samuel 1. 20.
streets of Ascalon, lest the Daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the
Daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

The Great Eusebius complained that (...).
the forementioned Alexandrian division caused the venerable divine doctrine to
undergo the impure scorns and ludibries even of the Pagans in the midst o^
their Theaters. And how much Religion suffers in these late days by these means
amongst weak men, who cannot, or will not distinguish betwixt humane passions,
and divine revelations, I need not now remember. What devastation the holy
house, the Sambanite, and the fatal pile have they made in the World! We have
seen Princes unthroned, Prelates unchaired, and people over run with fire and
sword, and all for Religion.

Tantum Relligio potuit suadere malorum?

For Religion did I say? no St. James has better resolved that question, (...),
whence are wars and fightings? are they not from your pleasures? by a Metonymy,
i. e. for the desires of things rather pleasurable than necessary for humane,
or divine life.

Divitis hoc vitium est auri, nec bella fuere Ex cupiditatibus odia diss^dia,
discordiae, seditiones, bella na scuntur, Cic. 1. de Fin.
Faginus adstabat cum scyphus ante dapes.

When men drank in a treen dish, there were no wars.

Our hatred, dissensions, discords, seditions, our holy and unholy wars are
from our lusts, our envy, our pride, our avarice, and our ambition: So that a
great part of our sufficiency for these things is a cordial endeavor after an
universal purity of heart, and life.

And therefore the best Philosophers do frequently discourse of their (...),
purgative virtues as necessary to preserve the soul for the knowledge of the
most excellent, and useful truths. For into a malicious soul wisdom shall not
enter, nor dwell in the body that is subject Wis. 1. (...).
unto sin. Wickedness is destructive of principles; and this notion is
agreeable to the sense of all mankind.

Amongst the Gentiles before a man could be imbued with the discipline of the
Eleusinia Sacra, or the holy things of the Magna Matter, he must by certain
degrees, and definite intervals of time be purged from the pollutions of this
life, and the sordes of his sins.

They had their (...), and then their (...), and their (...), and at length
their (...), their public purgations, their more recondid, their aggregations,
initiations, and then their visions: So we read no man could be consummate in
the mysteries of Mythra, unless having passed through many degrees of
punishments, (...), i. e. he present himself (...).
holy, and unhurt. He must go through fire and water, hunger and thirst, great
travels and such like, 80 in number: First, (...), and then the (...), The
lighter, then the more laboursome, (...), so the Candidate is consummate.

So the Primitive Christians always caused the Via purgativa to precede the via
illuminativa, from whom the mystical Divines had it. So the pretended Dionysius
distinguishes the operation of the sacred Mysteries into three actions (...).
divided by their proper rites and seasons, purgation, initiation, and
perfection.

The like we may observe in the whole procedure of the ancient Church, either
concerning such as were to be made Christians, or were to be restored to the
communion of the faithful; and the first must go through the state of
Catechumens, then of competents, before they could be fideles. But touching
(...)
their lapsed, their discipline was very severe; They were to go through (...),
four places of punishments, which they rarely underwent in less than twelve
years. So true it is that the wisdom which is from above is first James 3. 17.
pure, then peaceable.

The restoration of which Discipline Res Deo gratior absque dubio quam de
fidei dog matis subtiliter disputare extra scripturas; and omnes dissentientes
ferro and flamma prosequi; in quo hodie summus pietatis apex ponitur, Isa.
Casaub. 1 Cor. 5. 19. Gal. 5. 6. 6, 15. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
in the Church would be doubtless more acceptable to God Almighty than our
extrascriptural, and subtle determinations of Articles of our Faith, and the
prosecution of all Dissenters with fire and sword; which at this day is the
height of some men's Religion; says the Great Casaubon. Which yet St. Paul
places neither in circumcision nor uncircumcision, but in the new creature, i.
e. in faith that works by love; or in the keeping of the commandments of God.
And which will most evidently appear, if we consider that the great end, and
design of Religion, is to entitle us unto, and invest us with a Life after
Death, and a blessed Immortality.

Now let us consider first what it is that secludes us from that State; Saint
Paul will tell you it is unrighteousness, Galat. 5. 19.
Fornication, Idolatry, Adultery, Effeminacy, Sodomy, Theft, Covetousness,
drunkenness, Reviling, Extortion, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Witchcraft,
Hatred, Variance, emulation, Wrath, strife, Sedition, Heresies, Envyings,
Murders, Revellings, and such like; I have told you before, and I tell you
again, says the Apostle, That they that do such things shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God.

What is it then that admits into that Kingdom? our Lord will answer that
question. How read thou, says he to Luke 10. 26.
the Lawyer, who had asked him what he must do to inherit Eternal life. Thus I
read, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart etc. (which is no
otherwise exemplified, than by keeping his Commands) and thy Neighbor as thy
self; this do and thou shall live, says Christ.

Herein also did the ancient Church place the Essence of Christian Religion,
whereof I will give you assurance from Witnesses Domestic and Foreign.

J. Martyr; If you shall observe any (...) J. M. 2. Apolog.
to live not as our Lord has taught, (...), Let all the World know they are no
Christians, although they make never such Orthodox Confessions of their Faith.
So Athenagoras; (...) Athen. leg.
No Christian is a wicked man, unless he be such an one as does dissemble his
profession. So Tertullian; You would have us renounce the name of Christian; we
are excluded if our lives be as the lives Excludimur, si faci mus quae faciunt
non Christiani.
of such as are not Christians. And upbraiding to the Gentiles, that their
Prisons, Mines, and Beasts were daily cloyed with Malefactors, he tells them;
There is not a Christian amongst them, Nemo illic Christianus, nisi plaue
tantum Christianus, aut si and aliud, jam non Christianus.
unless he be there for his Christianity only; for if he be upon any other
account, he is no Christian. And again; You will say even some of ours do
swerve from the Rule of our Discipline, then they cease to be accounted
Christians amongst Desinunt tum Christiani haberi apud nos. Apol. Haec non
admittet omniuo qui natus a Deo fuerit, non futurus Dei filiussi admiserit. De
vestro numero carcer exaestuat; Christianus ibi nullus nisi aut reus suae, etc.
us. And in another Treatise, having enumerated very many of the works of the
Flesh; he says, He that is born of God will by no means commit these things;
for if he should commit them, he would be no longer the son of God.

So Minucius Felix; Your Prisons are crowded with your own number, but not a
Christian amongst them, nisi aut reus suae Religionis aut profugus, unless
guilty only of his Religion, or a Runagado from it.

So Lucian in his Peregrinus tells us, They worshipped their crucified Sophist,
(...) Ep. 97.
and lived according to his Laws. So Pliny to Trajan tells us, speaking of
Christians, They were wont to convene on a set day before it was light, and
there Carmen Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invicem. Ne furta, ne latrocinia,
ne adulteria committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne depositum appellati
abnegarent. Ad capiendum cibum promiscuum, tamen and innoxium, Mic. 6. 8. James
1. 27.
to sing alternatly an Hymn to Christ, as if he were God, and to bind
themselves by oath to no wickedness; but that they would commit no Thefts, nor
Robberies, nor Adulteries, nor break their faith, nor betray their trust: which
done, they were wont to depart, and to meet again to eat bread in common, but
very innocently. Agreeably hereunto does the Prophet Micah reduce Religion to
Righteousness, Mercy, and an humble Piety; and Saint James places true and
genuine Religion in Beneficence and Purity of life. So that if Christians will
contend as such, there remains to them only a laudable Ambition to excel in
Meekness and Humility, in Mercy and Charity, in Purity and Peaceableness; and
not in multiplying Articles of Faith, and then like foolish Builders, making
all of them of the foundation, whereof St. Hilary does gravely complain to
Constantius, That after the Council of Nice, Christians did Conscii nobis
invicem sumus post Niceni Conventus Synodum, nibil aliud quam fidem scribi.
little else but write Creeds.

Nor in determining fruitless and indeterminable Questions; which all
Christendom may truly say, is Fundus nostrae Calamitatis, the Ground of all our
Schisms and Divisions. Had the Tridentine Fathers had a right notion of
Christianity, they would have spared their Anathemata, and Geneva their Fires,
and Dort their Wagons; had they considered that such and only such Articles are
necessary, without the explicit knowledge of which, we could not perform the
conditions of the new Covenant. That is, Believe in God and Christ, and observe
their Precepts, (this entitles us to the Promises.) They would rather have
spent their Zeal in preaching The worthy Author of Causes of the decavs of
Christian piety has one chapter of the mischiefs arising from disputes.
St. Paul's Doctrine of Repentance from dead works, and the exercise of
Charity. For I would the Proud Disputer, and the whole Polemick Rabble should
know, that necessary Articles are neither many, nor obscure.

Not many. How succinct was that Creed upon which our Lord built his Church. We
believe and are sure that Matthew. 16. 19.
thou art the Son of the living God; and this was Marthas Creed, and Salvation
John 11. 27.
was particularly promised to it. This was the end of writing St. John's
Gospel, that we might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that
John 20. 31.
believing we might have life through his name. That Jesus Christ was the Son
of Acts 8. 37.
God, was the Eunuchs Creed. So St. Paul; This is the word of Faith which we
preach, Romans 10. 8, 9.
that if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thy heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. And this
simplicity did the ancient Church retain. Irenaeus, who when he had recited
that Creed, which then was not so long as now it is, adds, (...), Not the most
eloquent of all the (...), deminorabit traditionem. Iren. l. 1. 23.
Prelates in the Church (...), believes any more, and the most simple Idiot
believes no less: the Faith being one and the same. They who have the greatest
plenty of words do not exceed it, and they who have the fewest do not diminish
it.

So Tertullian tells us, the Rule of Faith is only one; stable and unalterable.
Regula fidel una omnino est sola, immobilis, irreformabilis. Arbitratur Rex
rerum absolute necessariarum ad salutem non magnum esse numerum.
So that it is no wonder that excellent Prince, in his Answer to Perrone,
thinks the number of things necessary to Salvation is not very great. And
further, his Majesty thought there was no more expedite way to Peace, than
diligently to separate Necessaries from Non-necessaries, and that we might all
agree in Necessaries; in non necessariis Libertati Christianae locus detur, in
unnecessary Articles let Christian liberty take place. The King further says,
That if we made Videsis responsionem ad Epist. Card. Per. Londini 1612
use of this distinction for deciding of Controversies at this day, there would
be neither long nor fierce Contention amongst Pious and Modest men, about
Articles absolutely necessary; Nam and pauca illa sunt, and fere ex aequo ab
omnibus probantur, i. e. That they are both few, and upon the matter received
by all who would be accounted Christians. Nay that learned and pacifick King
does so much value this distinction, for the lessening of Controversies, which
exercise Gods Church, that he judges it the Duty of all that are studious of
Peace, diligentissime hanc explicare, urgere, docere, most diligently to
explicate, urge, and teach it.

And this is but the breathing of that Spirit which influenced the first and
best Ages of the Church. How else shall we understand Justin Martyr, who
answering that objection of Trypho, That Christ should be God before the (...).
World was, and be made man and be born, and yet not be born according to the
manner of men; (...): i. e. (says Trypho) it seems to me not only incredible,
but also foolish. The holy man answers, If I cannot demonstrate that he did
pre-exist, the Son of him that made the Universe, and was a Man born of a
Virgin; herein only 'twas fit to say I was mistaken; but not to deny that he
was the Christ, if it should appear that he was a Man born according (...).
Videsis Just. Mart. p. 63. Edit. R. Steph. (...). Cyril p. 101. (...).
to the manner of men, and be demonstrated that he was made the Christ by
Election: For there are some friends, quoth he, of our Profession, who do
confess him to be the Christ, yet do affirm him to be a man born according to
the manner of men.

So Cyril of Jerusalem. That God has a Son, that you are to believe; but be
not so curious as to enquire into the Modus of that Filiation; for if you seek
it you shall not find it. Do not fly too high, lest you fall, but attend to
those things alone which he has commanded you. And a little after he tells
(...) etc. It is sufficient to assist thy Piety to know that God has but one
Son.

So Gregory Nazianzen, speaking of the holy Spirit, tells you. There are that
do depress him into the degree of a Creature and they he says, are injurious,
and bad, (...) Nazianz. Orat. 44. page 709.
and the worst of servants; There are that think him God, and they are Divine
Spirits, and of clear, and bright understandings. There are that name him so,
if it be in presence of men of good judgment. They are noble souls; but if in
presence of weak Christians, they are not wise dispencers of the word: It Is all
one as to cast a pearl into the dirt to object the voice of Thunder or the
brightness of the Sun to So the Greeks if they believed the procession of the
holy Ghost from the Son, yet did not condemn those of Heresy, who did not. See
the Judicious and Learned Doctor Stilling. in his Rational Account, page 10,
11, 12, 13.
a weak ear, or eye, to give solid meat to him that needs and uses milk.

And to these excellent men I shall subjoyn a worthy Prelate of our own See
relation of a conference, p. 25.
Church, who considering the proceedings of Rome, in the Article Filioque
concludes, it is hard to add and to anathematise too. All which passages cannot
For the modus of that Procession. See Cyril late Patriarch of Alexandria to the
Pious and Learned Vtenbogard. (...) (...) Epiphan. Ego me refero ad illas
scripturae voces, quae jubent invocare Christum, quod est ei honorem
divinitatis tribuere, and plenum consolationis est, (...), Melancthon, Ep. 140.
p. 708.
not be understood without that Royal distinction of necessary Articles and
non-necessary. And so we see what stress holy and good men laid upon the
niceties of the Christian Faith.

Yet all this notwithstanding the boutefeues and incendiaries of Christendom,
suppose, nor Creed, nor Scripture sufficient to make up an Orthodox Christians
Confession of Faith. To all such superfine wits, I shall oppose Tertullian;
What is Athens to Jerusalem, or the Academy Quid ergo Athenis and Hierosolumis,
quid Academiae and Ecclesiae, quid haereticis and Christianis. Viderrnt qui
Stoicum and Platonicum and dialecticum Christianssmum protulerunt. De
Praescript. C. 7, 8. Nobis curositate non ^st opus post Christum Jesum, nec
Inquisitione post evangelium. Cum credimus nihil desideramus ultra credere. Hoc
enim prius credimus, non esse ultrae quod credere debeamus.
to the Church, or Heretics to Christians. Let them see to it who have
introduced a Stoical, Platonic, or a subtle Christianity. What needs any
curiosity after and beyond Christ Jesus, or farther disquisition after we have
received the Gospel. So soon as we believe we desire nothing farther than to
believe: for this we first of all believe, that there is nothing further that
we ought to believe.

In vain I say did he adore the fullness of the Scripture, and provoke the shop
Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem. Advers. Herm. c. 22.
of Hermogenes to show where the matter in controverse was written, if not to
bid him fear, that woe which is denounced against all such as add to, or
detract from the Sacred Scriptures. In vain did Apollinaris fear to write
against the Heresy (...). Fusebius l. 5. c. 16.
of Miltiades, lest he should seem to some men to make additions to the
Doctrine of the New Testament. To or from which he may neither add nor
substract who would institute his life according to the precepts of the Gospel.
They who think they can speak more properly than the Wisdom of God has spoken,
let them reconcile themselves to Athanasius, who (...). Orat. cont. gentes.
avers the Sacred and Divinely inspired Scriptures are abundantly sufficient
for the declaration of the truth: and to Saint Basil who makes it without all
doubt a (...) a manifest falling from the Faith and a most certain proof of
pride (...), either to reject any thing De vera fide, p. 251. l. 10.
that is written, nor to introduce any thing that is not written; Our Lord
having said my sheep will hear my voice, and a stranger will they not follow,
but will flee from him; for they know the voice of strangers. And again,
enquiring of what mind the (...) ought to be, he says he would have them
always to fear lest he should affirm or determine any thing besides the Will of
God (...) Regul^ brevior. 98.
without controversy laid down in the Sacred Scriptures, lest he he found a
false witness of God. And again he tells us it is the property of a faithful
minister to preserve entire and without the adulterate mixtures of any other
Doctrines, that which was concredited to him by his (...). de Ver. fid. p. 249.
merciful Lord to be communicated to his fellow servants, and he assigns
irrefragable reason; because neither our Lord, nor the Spirit of God spoke from
themselves: Nay a little after he tells us, he would spare to use such terms
and (...). de ver. fid. p. 25.
words, which in so many syllables are not found in the divine Scriptures,
though they did retain the same sense; and assigns this reason for it; such
kind of terms and words, besides their novelty, (...), are apt to innovate the
sense of things, and were never found used by holy men heretofore; These I have
by all means declined, (...), as strange and foreign to the holy Faith.
Nothing can be more concluding, unless I should end this observation with that
voice out of the Cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
Mat. 17. 5.
pleased, Hear ye him.

Nor Obscure. Though some men think nothing makes a Solemnity but Shades, Cette
parole contient nettement and clairement, tout ce qui est necessaire pour
former la Foy and pour regler le Culte, les Moeurs, says the learned Claude in
his Answer to Arnaud. lib. 1. c. 4. speaking of God's Word. Nay he further adds
these excellent words; Il est aise mesine aux plus simples, de juger si le
Ministere sous le quel nous vivons pout conduire an salut, and per consequent
si nostre Societe est la veritable Eglise.
and therefore introduce their divine notions like Homer's Deities, always
clothed with Cloud. They represent our Lord as another Sphynx, that they might
be reputed the only Oedipus's in the World; but can we think that he, who was
disclosed from the bosom of that God, who dwells in inaccessible light; he
whose name is (...) the East or the Morning; he who is the Sun of
Righteousness, (...) the true and genuine Light, who was clothed with Light
upon Mount Tabor, and in that Garment appeared unto the persecuting Saul; he
who brought Life and Immortality to light, and whose Disciples are the light of
the World; that he discourses Aenigmata, Mysteries and Darkness. We find him in
his famous Sermon upon a Mountain indeed, but below the Clouds. Can we think it
that that God who appeared in a pillar of Fire under the Economy of Moses,
appears only in a pillar of Cloud under the dispensation of Christ? Is there no
light in the Sun that fountain of Light, because the blind man does not see it?
No, no, to the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according Esaias 8. 20.
to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Tell me not there are
(...), 2. Pet. 3. 16. Homil. 3. in 2 Thessalonians.
some things hard to be understood. St. Chrysostom solves that, (...), all
necessaries are clear and manifest. So Hilary; Almighty God does not Non per
difficiles nos Deus ad beatam vitam quaestiones vocat, nec multiplici
eloquentis facundiae genere solicitat. In absoluto nobis ac facili est
aeternitas. Jesum suscitatum a mortuis per Deum credere; and ipsum esse
dominum, confiteri. De Trinitat. lib. 10. p. 231. Am. Marcel. 21 Religionem
Christianam absolutam and simplicem anili superstitione confundens. 1 Timothy 6.
3. Tit. 1. 1. (...) significat id quo tenditur Grotius in loc. In id enim datur
and fides and cognitio ut pie vivatur.
invite us to a blessed Immortality by hard questions, nor does he solicit us
with any great variety of a copious Eloquence; but propounds Eternity to us
upon plain and intelligible terms, when this is all, even to believe that Jesus
was raised from the dead by God, and to confess him to be the Lord. And a
heathen Historian does complain of Constantius, That he did perplex the
Christian Religion, a Religion plain and intelligible enough, with superstition
and dotage.

For in the first and best Ages of the Church, Religion did not consist of
Systems of abstruse and difficult Speculations, nor dry and barren Opinions;
but there was a special care had that their Theological notions were (...) such
as tended to a virtuous and pious life, and did not directly contradict the
conditions of that Covenant by which we claim eternal happiness; such as are
the fatal pre-determinations of men's eternal states, and the servitude of
humane minds; which pair of Dogmata, like Hippocrates his Twins, laugh and cry,
live and die together. If there be any that are virtuous and consequently happy
(...), naturally and fatally such. Such an one I would esteem an Hero sprung ex
stirpe Deorum;

-- (...)
(...)
You Would think him not born of Mortal parents, but to be of divine extraction.
But that a Good and Righteous God has decreed from all Eternity, to bring into
being innumerable myriads of Souls, who let them do what they will and can, are
irreversibly determined to unspeakable torments; so great and so exceeding,
that all the racks and tortures the witty cruelties of enraged Tyrants could
ever invent or execute, would be ease and pleasure in comparison of them, and
that these pangs should remain fresh upon them for ever and for ever; this
says a learned and pious person Videsis Mist. of Godl. lib. 10. 2.
is the representation of that sour Dogma, which he justly accuses of being
contradictious to Reason, and blasphemous of God; and after tells you a great
truth, That the serious and imperious obtrusion of such a dismal conceit as
this, for one of the greatest Arcanums of Religion, is enough to make the free
spirit, and over inclinable to profaneness, to question the whole frame of it.
And that this should be done by men who pretend they would advance virtue,
piety and probity in the World, is a great argument that they So Suetonius
tells us of Nero he was Religionum negligentior, quia persuasionis plenus
cuncta fato agi. Ac vide seculi furores, Certamina Allabrogica de stoica
necessitate tanta sunt, ut carceri inclusus sit quidam qui a Zenone dissentit,
says Melancthon to Joach. Camerarius. Ep. 796 p. 923. The same Melancthon to
Gaspar Peucer relating the same passage, cries out, O rem miseram! doctrina
salutaris obscuratur peregrinis disputationibus
understand not the consequence of their own Dogmata so well as the Tragedian
did.

Solvite mortales animos, curisque levate, Totque supervacuis animu^ deplete
querelis; Fata regunt orbem, certa stant omnia lege.

Cast away your cares, and forbear your fruitless complaining, for Fate governs
the World, and nothing can fall out otherwise than it does.

And to introduce the Servitude of humane minds, does necessarily subvert all
Law, Discipline, and Religion, the sum whereof is contained in the Precepts of
Obedience, the Promises of Rewards, and the Threatenings of Punishments; but he
that acts from an inevitable necessity, is incapable of a commandment; that
which could not be otherwise neither merits the praise of obedience, nor the
reproach of disobedience. We praise not the Sun that he rises upon us, and
spreads his comfortable beams in our hemisphere; nor the Clouds that they drop
fatness. We know they can do no otherwise; It Is so with Man under these
Adamantine bonds of Fate: Haud est nocens quicunque non sponte est nocens.

And now could I account for the Degeneracy of Christendom from any other
cause, I would have considered no other Opinions. When I look into the Roman
Communion; the multitude of their Indulgences, and Pardons, their slight and
superficial Penances, their easy Promises of security to careless sinners,
must needs be acceptable to such a kind of people as have a mind to enjoy this
World as well as that to come, and so that part of the wonder ceases: But,
Iliacos intra muros peccatur and extra.

The Reformation is faulty too; which makes me think some bad doctrines do too
much influence their lives. Such as D^ Justitia Christi imputatu nobis, qu^si
eam onine^^ praestitissem us, and de fide, quae illum justitiam sic imputatam
amplecti debeat, nullum est verbum in sacris literis. Grotii Votum ad Articulum
IV.
an imaginary Righteousness, an empty Faith, no necessity, no possibility of
keeping the Commandments of Christ. What should they do with a righteousness of
their own, who do expect to be made as perfectly righteous as the holy Jesus
the Son of God, by the imputation of a righteousness not their own? Why should
they not set up their rest in a Faith prescinded from Charity, who vapor to
the World, Quam dives sit homo Christianus sive baptizatus, qui etiam volens
non potest perdere suam salutem, quantiscunque peccatis, nisi nolit credere.
And what necessity, what possibility of keeping the Commands of Christ, when
St. Paul is carnal, sold under sin, does not the good he would, and does the
evil he would not.

And so according to these men's Divinity, the measure of St. Paul's Virtue and
Obedience, and of every Regenerate man shall be the same with the Pagan's in
Lactantius, Medeas in Euripides, and Lesbonicus's in Plautus.

The Pagan, Volo equidem non peccare, Volo equidem non peccare, sed vincor;
indutus sum enim carne fragili and imbecilla: haec est quae concupiscit, quae
irascitur, quae dolet, quae mori timet; it aqu^ ducor invitus, and pecco, non
quia volo, sed quia Cogor; sentio me and ipse peccure, sed necessitas
fragilitatis impellit, cut repugnare non possum l. 4. c. 24.
sed vincor, etc. In good truth, I would not sin but I am overcome, I am
clothed with frail and weak flesh, it is that which lusts, grievs, and fears to
die; therefore I am led unwillingly, and I do sin, not that I would, but I am
compelled. I do perceive I do sin; but that frailty whereto I cannot resist
does necessarily enforce me to it.

So Medea;

(...),
(...).
I very well understand the horrid Crimes
I am about to accomplish; but my passion is too hard for my reason:
So Lesbonicus;

Scibam ut esse me deceret; facere non quibam miser.
Ita vi Veneris vinctus miser, otio captus in fraudem incidi.
I know what becomes me, but wretch that I am, I cannot do it; I am so taken
with lust and idleness, it is that deceives me.

But to this place I say no more, but only observe that memorable accident
which befell the famous Nicolas Zitinius, who was put up by a Synod of the
Reformed to explicate that Paragraph of St. Paul, agreably to the modern sense
of our Genevensian Masters; and he did, says a noble Author, eo Concilio rem
strenue aggredi, briskly undertake the design: but at length coming to those
words, I thank God through our Lord Jesus Christ, haesit attonito similis, was
astonished. But after he had recollected himself, he broke out into these
words: Ecquod beneficium illud quod tantas Apostolo grates expressit? an quod
in tant^ eum peccati servitute detineri necesse fuit? hoc vero mihi equidem
probari nullo pacto potest. Ego igitur, inquit, pariter ingentes patri luminum
ago gratias, quod mihi nunc ab errore liberato veritatis suae lucem adoriri
voluit.
Ecqua vero est ista liberatio? What deliverance is that? What benefit is that
which drew so great thank fullness from him? was it that he was necessarily
detained under so great bondage unto sin? I can by no means think so;
therefore, quoth he, I give all possible thanks to the Father of Lights, who
has now caused the light of truth to arise upon and deliver me from my error.

But whilst Zealots and high pretenders to Religion, do against the sense of
first and best Ages of the Church, depretiate and vilify moral honesty, and
obtrude such falsehoods as are pure contradictions and impossibilities, and that
Qui innocentiam colit, Domino supplicat; qui justitiam, Deo libat; qui
fraudibus abstinet, propitiat Deum; qui hominem periculo surripit, optimam
victimam caedit. Haec nostra sacrificia, haec Dei sacra sunt. Sic apud nos
religiosior est ille qui justior. Min. Fell.
with the same gravity, authority, and importunity as they do the holy Oracles
of God, it will startle prudent and conscientious men; but gratify the
profane and atheistical Spirit, who willingly takes this advantage against the
whole frame of Religion, as if there were no truth in it.

But in vain do I object unreasonableness to these men, who disclaim the use of
their most noble Faculty in their affairs of greatest importance; and that they
may be always like themselves, they think they have reason so to do. As Mist
Godl, p. 495.
if they had never read, Try all things; hold fast that which is good; believe
not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God or no; be ready to
render a reason of the hope that is in you. Thus St. Paul. If the blind lead
the blind they both fall into the ditch: Why of your selves do you not judge
that which is right, says our Lord? All which speeches, if they do not advise
men to make use of their Reason in the choice of their Religion, says an
Excellent person (dulce Mr. Chillingworth. p. 97.
Decus and Praesidium nostrum, the strength and ornament of our Church) I must
confess my self to understand nothing. It was indeed the saying of Apelles
Eusebius. l. 5. 19.
in Eusebius (...), we must by no means examine the Faith. But Ludovicus Vives
tells Alfaquinus a L. Viv. de Ver. fid lib. 6. 1. p. 546. Lugd. Bat. 1639.
great truth. Tutissimum mentiendi genus est nolle rationem little quae dicas
reddere: It is the safest way of lying, to refuse a reason of what you do
affirm, and to entitle God to your dreams. And the Lib. 6. de verit.
great Hugo Grotius says, Merito suspect a merx est, quae hac lege obtruditur
ne inspici possit; you may justly suspect such wares as are sold unto you upon
condition you may not look upon them. And a famous Prelat of our own Church,
would have Ep. Laud Rel. p. 7^.
no man think the Mysteries of Faith contradict reason, or the principles
thereof. And a worthy person now living, has plainly told the World that That
Religion is certainly false at the bottom, that will not suffer it self to be
enquired into by Reason.

And this was also the sense of other men, who are in reputation for wisdom.
Melchior Canus; Faith is not repugnant Fides sane cum natura non pugnat, sed
consentit; nec. dissident humana and divina ratio, sed cohaerent. Vtraque verum
est, nec verum vero adversatur. Vtraque est a Deo, nec sibi contrarius est
Deus. Melc. Can. C. C. fol. 358. 359. Col. Agrip. 15. 4.
unto Nature but agreeable unto it, nor does humane and divine reason dissent
but accord. Each is true, and one truth is not opposite to another; each of
them is from God, and God is not contrary to himself. And further he tells us;
It is the custom of unlearned men, such as are Saracens, Pagans, Heretics, ut
coeca and temeraria Sectae suae Dogmata sine judicio amplectantur, and quae
disquisitione egent maxim, sine ulla disquisitione recipiant; that they
swallow down without any judgment every foolish and temerarious Dogma of their
own Sect, and receive without any disquisition those doctrines that most of all
need it: And after he has most excellently perstringed this folly, he opposes
the divine method to it, and tells us, the Wisdom of God homines humano more
instituit and erudit, i. e. rationales rationibus, institutes and instructs men
after the manner of men; that is, reasonable creatures with reasons. But I
shall end this with the testimony of Athanasius, whose reason is as great as
his authority, he has a little Tract on purpose against such as would have men
believe (...). i. e. absolutely, and never consider what is or is not fit to be
believed; and in the body of that discourse, there is one passage Athan. Tom.
2. p. 325. Ed. Par. 1625.
which I cannot but exscribe. (...), i. e. Must I believe without all reason?
must I not enquire whether the notion be possible, useful or decorous? whether
it be grateful to God, congruous to Nature, and consonant to Truth? whether it
be consequent from the Text, agreeable to the Mystery, and worthy of Piety?
(...); What profit is there in a Scheme of unintelligible things? or like a
Parrat or an Echo to reverberate a sound empty of mind and sense?

But this Novelty, amongst the rest, minds me of the Precept of the Prophet;
Stand in the ways, and see, and Jer. 6. 16.
ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall
find rest for your Souls.

And here let me mind you my Brethren of the Clergy, of a Canon of our own
Church, yet in force, speaking of Preachers.

Imprimis vero videbunt ne quid unquam doceant pro concione quod a populo
religiose teneri and credi velint, nisi quod consentaneum sit doctrinae veteris
aut Novi Testamenti, quodque ex illa ipsa doctrina catholici patres, and
veteres Episcopi collegerint. A Canon which I read many years since; but never
resented its worth, until by an inspection into ancient divinity I found how
different it was from that which now reigns in our Pulpits and Presses. And
here let me observe for the service of my younger Brethren, whose reading
reaches not beyond Geneva; that those Apples of strife couched under the
Quinquarticular question, as they are apt to determine them, are as perfect a
piece of Novellism as any other notion we contemn under that name at this day.

He that thinks the liberty of humane minds is injurious to God's Grace, or
prejudicial to the faith and comfort of Christians, accuses those famous
Martyrs Ignatius, Irenaeus, Justin and Cyprian, together with Athanasius,
Basil, Nyssen, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Ambrose, and Jerome of the same crime.

And farther, let me mind you of the Anathemata of the Synod of Arles. Let
Anathema illi, qui per Dei praescientiam in mortem hominem deprimi dixerit.
Anathema illi, qui dixerit illum qui periit, non accepisse unde salvus esse
posset. Anathema illi, qui dixerit Vas contumeliae non posset assurgere ut sit
vas in honorem. Anathema illi, qui dixerit quod Christus non pro omnibus
mortuus sit, ^^ omnes lomines salvos esse velit.
him be Anathema who shall say that the divine Prescience does cause any man's
death. That he who perished had not grace enough to be saved. That a vessel of
dishonor could not rise to be a vessel of honor. That Christ did not die for
all men, and would have all men to be saved.

I might farther instance in the novel sense of that famous Paragraph to the
Romans, which as a great man observes, no man takes up but he that has a Lust
to serve; and could easily show you that the ancient Church were all for a
Metascematismus in the words; and that St. Austin himself, when he understood
it worst, understood it better than his pretended followers now do. And thus
have I imperfectly pointed out the causes of the decay of Christian Charity in
the World, and the fomes of those scandalous discords which vex Christendom at
this day, ridente Turc^, nec dolente Judaeo.

And now I shall end with a succinct Paraenesis to you that have vouchsafed
your presence and patience. And first to you my Brethren of the Clergy.
Methinks I hear our Lord and Master Christ like another Joseph bespeaking his
Brethren, going to their Father to Canaan, See that you fall not out by the
way. Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another. St. Paul
propounds a great Question (...); Who is sufficient for these things? The
Psalmist thought to wash the hands in innocence was an excellent preparation to
compass the Altars of God; and no doubt but it would prepare for that wisdom
also, which would make us meet to wait in the Sanctuary. My Brethren, much of
the peace and prosperity of God's Church depends upon our virtuous and prudent
conduct of those affairs concredited to our trust. We are constituted the
Guides of Souls; and in a sense to bear the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; but
whilst it suffers violence and the violent take it by force, let us see to it,
that we our selves be not shut out.

Let us remember the Age we live in, it is nice: Many will not drink the waters
of life, if offered to them in an unclean Chalice; they will not take the most
medicinal dose, if it be prepared with foul hands. It is Philosophical and
Rational; Absurdities will not go for Mysteries; weak and indemonstrable
Propositions will not pass for supernatural Verities; nor humane Presumptions,
for divine Revelations. Let our Discourses be strong and useful, that no
profane wit may say of our Exercises, as Gallen reproached the doctrine Nibil
iradatur populo nisi quod and indubitatum est, and ad fidei negotium
necessarium, and ad pie vivendum conducibile, says the great Erasmus Epist.
lib. 24. Epist. 1. (...).
of Moses and Christ; it was (...), They are indemonstrable. I could not read
without great affection an Observation of the learned Dr. Andrews (in his
Concio ad Clerum in a Provincial Convocation) of some men who did involare in
hunc locum, hoc divinae sapientiae Solium, and what does he here? hic ad
Clepsydram (...) cohaerentia, non cohaerentia, scabra, putida, insulsa, nec
cocta, nec condita, praecipitare ad nauseam usque, and hoc scilicet concionari
dicitur; This is to preach forsooth; too too lively a Character of many a
Preacher in these days. Let Us for Christ sake see our Doctrine and our lives be
pure and pacifick. If our Doctrines be doubtful and litigious, and our Lives be
careless and scandalous, (but I Will rather use the words of the pious Author) Si
Doctrina ludibrium, si Vita scandalum, fortasse non momento uno, non ictu
oculi; sed sensim tamen senescet, evanescet, tendet ad interitum Ordo vester
(...). Nay I Will add a few words more of that good Man from the same Paragraph.
Enimvero nisi vos vobis hac part caveatis, optimi Principis gratia, Procerum
favor, Legum terror diu vobis cavere non poterunt. But (...). Well, you see
Purity and Peace is in the precept of our Lord; the best method I know to
derive it into our hearts and lives, is laid down in this sudden discourse;
especially in that observation of the Learned King, who would have us
distinguish between Necessaries and Non-necessaries, and tells us the duty of
every peaceable Divine is to explicate, to urge, to teach that distinction.

And for your divertisement, now and then if you spent some time in Nazianzen's
Apology, Chrysostom de Sacerdotio, and the 81. Paragraph of Mr. Hooker's
Ecclesiastical Polity; as you would have no cause to repent your pains, no more
should I that have put you in remembrance so to do.

And now my Brethren of the Laity, let me speak to you in a few words, You are
concerned in the Text as well as We. Purity and Peaceableness becomes you, if
you will comport with the precept of our Lord: have you any pride that
extimulates and provokes you sometimes, (to use the Prophet's expression) to
strive with the Priest; and, which is worse, to run from the Communion of that
Church which bore you on her knees, and nourished you with her breasts? have
you any Avarice, which when you fled from Idols praecipitated you into
Sacrilege? these would be salted out. Well, Peaceableness you see is your duty,
and Purgation in order thereunto. Schism is the direct contradiction to my
Text; and you perceive how little reason any one has, so to requite the
Prudence and the Charity of that Church, wherein we have had the happiness to
be educated.

Are the conditions of her Communion sinful? Or are you obliged to profess that
which you believe is false, or practice that which you know is sinful? Let me
request in her behalf, that you would not make the Sentiments of every angry
Son of hers the measures of her Charity: or if you spy the tokens of Avarice,
or Ambition on other of her Sons, you would not make them the measures of her
Piety.

What is it that frights you from her Communion? It must certainly be reduced
to her Doctrine, or her Manners. Does she teach any suspected Doctrines? what
then? she disclaims infallibility: though it may be she is nearer it than those
that talk loudest of it. She gives you leave to suspect; nay designs by her
subscriptions (which yet are not required from you) but an Instrument of peace;
if the best, and most learned of her Sons do know her mind. Does Bps. Laud,
Bramhall, Sanderson.
any of her Doctrines destroy salvation? Indeed they of Rome say Protestancy
unrepented destroys salvation; but I think neither you nor we have cause to
believe them. Well then, if Salvation may be had with us, Take heed you don't
run the hazard of it by an unnecessary Separation from them here, whom (if ever
you come to heaven) you must accompany hereafter. But are her manners
defective? what do you mean? She teaches you to believe by the Apostles Creed,
to pray by the Example of her Lord, and to live by the Precepts of her Savior.

But you see some indications of carnality upon her Children; like enough; and
so you might in the Children of Apostolic Churches, and may in the most
confident pretenders to the most primitive Reformation. I have done. Methinks
you should grant me, that even in our Communion you may be as holy and as
humble, as meek and as merciful, as pure and as peaceable, as perfect
imitatours of the Divine Nature, as ardent lovers of God and your Neighbor as
will comport with the Commandment, and entitle you to the Promise, which is
ETERNAL LIFE.

Now to the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only wise God be Honor and
Glory for ever and for ever. Amen.

A SERMON TO A Great Presence IN LONDON.

Articles of the Church of England. Holy Scripture contains all things
Necessary to Salvation.

Respon. Is. Casaub. ad Card. Perr. nomine Regis Jacobi. Dogmata fidei, and
quicquid ad Salutem Necessarium meretur credi, e sola Scriptura sacra peti
debere: neque a quorum vis mortalium auctoritate pendere; Sed e Verbo Dei
dutaxat, quo suam ipse nobis Voluntatem per Spiritum Sanctum declaravit.

LONDON, Printed by E. Tyler, and R. Holt, for Rich. Royston, Book-Serller to
the King's most Excellent Majesty. 1672.

1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome
words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is
according to Godliness; he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about
questions and strifes of words; whereof comes envy, and strife, railings, evil
surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the
truth; supposing that gain is godliness.
FRom that day St. Paul wrote thus, till this, no age of the Church has been
more concerned in this discourse, than that we now live in: Such novelty of
Opinions, so disserviceable, or at least unserviceable to the ends and design
of our Lord in the World, and so influenced by our Secular interests, having
obtained, that not only the Superstructions of Religion, but the very
Foundations have been, and are in very great danger; whilst one Faction cries
up the Church and her Infallibility, and another listens to the whispers of
they nor we know what kind of Spirit, no less infallible. Whilst man's Altar is
set by the Altars of God; whilst Extrascriptural Tradition is received with an
equal, if not with superlative affection of piety and reverence; Pari pietatis
affectu and reverentia. Council. Trident.
whilst that meek and humble, pure, peaceable and charitable design of our Lord
to complete the happiness of our humane Natures, and Societies, is become a
Seminary of many vexatious, indeterminable, and fruitless Controversies, from
whence come envy, strife, heart-burnings, jealousy, and exasperation of
parties, the introduction of Factions and National quarrels, and consequently
all the calamities of war and devastation. The Remedying of which mischiefs
would be worthy the Wisdom and Virtue of the best and wisest men in the World.
Our Apostle you see concerns himself in the case, and forbears not to reproach
to the unhappy Contrivers of them, Pride, Ignorance, Corruption, and
destitution of the Truth: and not only so, but by pointing out the rocks
whereon they split, directs us to steer a safer course.

You see they taught otherwise, another Gospel; and so entitled themselves
(...).
to an Apostolical Curse Galat. 1. 8, 9. The Galatians did antiquum obtinere,
always like themselves. It Is part of the Character Caesar gives the Galli,
whence are these Galatae; They were In capiendis. corsil^is fuisse mobiles and
novis pler^nque rebus studuisse.
(says he) very variable in their counsels, and studious of novelties: which
might have some influence on their so sudden departure from him that called
them to another Gospel; which yet is not another; for they introduced only an
Institution, or two, Circumcision, and the (...). Chrysostom. in loc.
observation of days. But as he that shall clip away a little of the Royal
stamp, adulterates the whole money; even so he that subverts but a little of
the sound (...).
faith, corrupts the whole: And that is never done with more ease, and greater
danger, than when we mistake our Principles. A little distance, and almost
undiscernable near the Center, may be a vast one at the circumference; which is
the reason the Apostle so soon recalls us to wholesome words, even words of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine which is according to Godliness. And from
thence we are taught,

1. That the only Rule of a Christian's faith and life is the Doctrine of our
Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles.

2. That the Doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles is not a
Speculative but a Practical Doctrine.

3. And which will follow from both; The raising of Opinions, beside the
Doctrine of our Lord and his Apostles, and which have no good influence upon
the lives of men, is the effect of Pride, Ignorance, Corruption and destitution
of Truth; and the cause of Envy, Strife, Reproachings, Suspicions, and perverse
Disputings. Of these succinctly.

The only Rule of a Christian's faith, and life is the Doctrine of Tertul. de
Praescript. C. 6. Nobis vero nihil ex nostro arbitrio inducere licet, sed nec
eligere quod aliquis de arbitrio suo induxerit. Apostolos Domini habemus
Auctores, qui nec ipsi quicquam ex suo arbitrio quod inducerent elegerunt: sed
acceptam a Christo discipliuam fideliter Nationibus assignaverunt. 1 Pet. 4.
11. (...).
our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles. St. Peter would have him that speaks,
as the Oracles of God, i. e. without Addition, Subtraction, or Alteration: For
the Apostles were Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God.
Now it is required of Stewards that they be found faithful. 1 Cor. 4. 1.
St. Paul was not wont to withhold any thing profitable from them, but Acts 20.
20, 27.
to declare the whole Counsel of God. And Moses, speaking of our Savior, truly
said unto the Fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of
your Brethren like unto me, him shall Acts 3. 22.
ye hear in all things, whatsoever he shall say to you; and the voice from the
cloud telling us, he was the beloved Son of God, commands us to hear him. Luke
9. 35.
Why else are we bid to search the Scriptures? are said to have Moses and the
Prophets? Why did St. Paul think it a just and full defense of himself, to say,
After the way which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my. Fathers;
believing all things which are written Acts 24. 14.
in the Law and the Prophets.

But here I expect the objections of the old Gnostics, decliners of the
Scripture, Lucifugae Scripturarum. Tertul. de c. 47. In accusationem ipsarum
Scripturarum convertuntur.
as Tertullian calls them; when they are reproved out of the Scriptures, they
accuse the Scriptures themselves; either they want sufficient Authority, or are
hard to be understood, or imperfect without Tradition, not written, but oral;
because St. Paul said, We speak wisdom among them that are perfect. So Clemens
Iren. 3. 2. (...). p. 757. (...).
of Alexandria tells us of some who did patch together false and feigned
doctrines, that with very good reason they might refuse the Scriptures.

But when God's Church had exploded those conceits, the Romanist rises up
against the Word. Scriptures, says he, be not necessary; nor written by divine
command; are imperfect, obscure; that we have no original Books, and such as we
have be corrupted; and some others (quos dicere nolo) imagine that they can
speak better than the Wisdom and Spirit of God; and notwithstanding St. Paul
has told us the Scripture is useful for reproof; yet these men are pleased 1.
Tim. 3. 16.
to take up what Timothy was to avoid, the introduction of Profanas vocum
novitates. So Ambr and the vulgar Latin. Chrysostom, as Theophylact intimates
(...), though there is as little difference in the sense as the sound. All new
terms, i. e. postnate to the sealing of the Canon in matters of faith being
vain and empty, as to the establishing any one Article in it.
New and Extra-scriptural words for the more effectual reproving of Heretics
forsooth; as if he could be an Heretic who did receive the whole Scripture as
his only Rule of Christian faith and life. But if that be the Rule (which is
the language of the whole Reformation) it must be so complete that it needs no
addition, as Chilling worth 54.
well as so evident that it needs no interpretation; for both these we are
assured are properties requisite to a perfect Rule. It Is a strange piece of
arrogance to think we can speak of God, or the things of God better than he
himself has spoken. Cannot he that framed Number Deus and mentis and vocis and
linguae Artifex, diserte loqui non potest?
the mind, the voice, the tongue, speak apposity? Yes sure, divine Providence
took care that those things which were divine should be clear, that all might
understand Carere fuco voluit ea. Lactan. de vero cultu p. 623.
what things he spoke to them all. And Chrysostom having very much urged the
reading of the holy Scriptures, at length meets that objection, What if we do
not understand the things we read (...); Homil. 3. de Laz.
there? He answers, It Is not possible you should be equally ignorant of all
things therein. For the grace of the Spirit has so disposed matters therein
that Publicans and Fishers, and Tent-makers, and Shepherds, and Rusticks, and
Idiots, and Illiterate, did compose the books; So that the most Idiotick soul
cannot excuse himself on this account; things being plain enough to be seen,
that mechanic Servants, and Women, and the worst educated may receive great
benefit by them. These things were not composed for vain glory, Tom. 5. p. 244.
(...).
but for the salvation of such as should hear them. Gentile Philosophers
indeed, and Rhetoricians and Writers, not consulting the public good, but
their own reputation, delivered the most useful notions in their usual
obscurity. But Prophets and Apostles take the very contrary course; their clear
and manifest notions they explicated (...)
to all men, as became the common teachers of the whole World. So that every
man of himself may by reading only understand the things that are said in these
books. And afterward on occasion of the Eunuch's reading the Prophet, he
vehemently recommends a diligent reading of the holy Books. He tells us how the
reading of them defends us against sins; the ignorance of them is a dangerous
Precipice, and deep Abyss. A great hazard it is of our Salvation to be ignorant
of the Scriptures. This is it that introduces Heresies into our (...) Cyp. de
lapsu. Ecclesiae non jungitur, qui ab Evangelio separatur. Aufer haereticis
quae cum ethnicis sapiunt, ut de Scripturis solis quaestiones suas sistant, and
stare non poterunt. Tertul.
Faith, Immoralities into our lives, and causes great confusion in matters of
Religion. It Is the neglect, or contempt of Scripture is cause of heresy.

So that we say as Austin, All things De doct. Chr. l. 2. c. 9. In its quae
aperte in Scriptura posita sunt, inveniri illa omnia quae continent fidem
moresque vivendi. Epist. 3. ad Vo. Iren. l. 2. 47. c. 46. In aperto and sine
ambiguitate, and similiter ab omnibus audiri possint. Tom. 8. in Ps. 16.
appertaining to Faith and Life are most evidently contained in the Scriptures.
And again elsewhere he tells us, it has the some notions in promptis, that it
has in reconditis, in the most clear, as it has in the most obscure places.

So Irenaeus long before him, Obscure places are consonant to plain ones. He
tells us the whole Scriptures Prophetic and Apostolical, are evident without
ambiguity; and may indifferently be read by all.

Saint Hierom says, to deny the perspicuity Epist. ad Cor. l. 12.
of the holy Scriptures, is all one or worse than wholly to supersede their
use. So thought the Orator. It Is better Mutum esse satius est quam quod nemo
intelligat dicere.
to be silent, than so to speak as none understand you. But we will end this
notion with the testimony of St. Paul, If our Gospel be hid it is hid to them
that 1 Cor. 4. 3.
are lost, i. e. to them who have deserved to perish.

In vain then do they cry the Church, the Church, Decrees of Councels, or
Cathedral decisions. Let us not hear, says Austin, Haec dico, haec dicis, but
haec dicit Dominus. Nor will I plead the Nicene, nor you the Council of
Ariminum; nor will I be concluded by this, nor you by that, but by authority of
Scriptures, not proper nor partial to any side, but witnesses indifferent to
both sides; that matter Austin. lib. de unitat. Eccl. c. 3.
may contend with matter, cause with cause, and reason with reason.

So Optatus: Between your licet and our non licet, the mind of the people
fluctuates; no one believes either you or us, but we are all contentious; In
this case we must look out for a Judge. If Christians, Quid de Coelo quaerendus
est judex, cum haebeamus hic in Evangello Testamentum, lib. 5.
they are partial; if Pagans, ignorant; Jews, they are enemies. Since then none
in Earth, let us to Heaven for a Judge, but to what purpose knock we at heaven
gates, seeing we have his last Will and Testament in the Gospel. So that the
Infallibility of the Church was not thought on in those days And for the
Spirit, I Will give you my sense in the words of a very learned and pious man.

As for those mavelous discourses of some, framed upon presumption of the
Spirit's help in private, in judging or interpreting of difficult places of
Scripture; I must needs confess I have often wondered at the boldness of them.
The Spirit is a thing of dark and secret operation; the manner of it none can
descry: as underminers are never seen till they have wrought their purpose; so
the Spirit is never perceived but by its effects. The effects of the Spirit, so
far as they concern knowledge and instruction, are not particular informations
for resolution in any doubtful case, (for this were plain Revelation:) but as
the Angel that was sent unto Cornelius informs him not, but sends him to Peter
to school; so the Spirit teaches not, but stirs up in us a desire to learn. A
desire to learn makes us thirst after the means; and pious sedulity and
carefulness makes us watchful in the choice, and diligent in the use of our
means. The promise to the Apostles of the Spirit which should lead them into
all truth, was made good unto them by private and secret informing their
understandings, with the knowledge of high and heavenly Mysteries, which as yet
had never entered into the conceit of any man; if the same promise be made to
us, it is fulfilled after another manner. For what was written by Revelation in
their hearts, for our instruction they have written in their Books to us for
information; otherwise than out of those Books the Spirit speaks not. When the
Spirit regenerates a man, it infuses no knowledge of any point of Faith, but
sends him to the Scriptures; so Mr. Jo. Hales.
when it stirs him up to newness of life, it does not exhibit to him an
inventory of his sins, but supposes them known by the light of Nature, or sends
him to the Rule of life. More than this in the ordinary proceeding of the Holy
Spirit, in matter of instruction, I could never descry. So that to speak of the
help of the Spirit in private, either in dijudicating or interpreting of
Scripture, is to speak they know not what. So he. And indeed the Spirit of God
nowadays works but by men, and is secret in its operation to themselves, and
no way evident to others, but by its effects in Reason, or Discourse, which are
nor different from reason it self. The Spirit supplants no man's reason on
Scriptures. Further, it is a dangerous principle, and at long run levelling; it
makes all Doctors, Dotards, Popes, alike: and serves for all designs,
absurdities, or contradictions; so that we have nothing ordinary now to argue
from, which is absolutely divine, but the very Doctrine of the Scripture in its
own proper sense.

And whosoever, without prejudice or partiality, shall take a view of that, as
it is laid down there, will easily perceive, See an excellent Sermon of the
most learned and pious Dr. C. on 1 Jo. 2. 34. p. 117.
there is no design to fill our heads with empty, and useless opinions; but to
reform the manners of Mankind, and to advance Virtue in the World. For which
reason, the Scriptures being popularly written, and descending to vulgar
capacities, take themselves altogether unconcerned in any accurate
determinations of mere speculative Articles. For example; they do not represent
God Almighty to us as he is in himself, but as he is toward us, viz. One,
Eternal, Just, Wise, and Omnipotent God; but in condescension to our
capacities, he is represented with the affections and members of a man,
confined to a place; and his Eternity is Erasmus. Atque utinam hic quoque
Paulus aliquanto plus lucis nobis aperuisset: qualiter extant animae semotae a
corpore, and ubinam extent, an fruantur immortalitatis gloria, an impioru^
animae jam nunc crucientur, etc. in his dedicatory of his Paraphrase to the
Corinth. Jer. 22. 16.
crasly described by being before the World, as his Immensity by filling the
Heaven and the Earth. And therefore it is that those divine Authors, entreating
not professedly of the Nature of Spirits, of the intermediate State of the
dead, of Infants, of the Heathen, of Antemundane durations, or Extramundane
spaces, have no ways assisted our curiosity, in those or such like
disquisitions. But on the other side they tell us, To do judgment and justice,
to judge the cause of the poor and needy, is to know the Lord; to be a son of
Belial is not to know him; that the fear Job 28. 28.
of the Lord is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding; and St. John
represents Charity to be the knowledge 1 John 4. 7.
of God.

You will further perceive that the scope of the Gospel was,

1. To break down the Partition wall between Jew and Gentile.

2. To scour up the Old Law, and fill up its vacuities, which the Scripture
calls Self-denial, Repentance, Righteousness, Charity, Obedience, mainly
insisted on in the Sermon on the Mount. And

3. To declare the remission of sins to penitents, i. e. such as reform
themselves according to the Law aforesaid, which supports our hope, in place of
the Ceremonial expiatory Sacrifices.

The first of these was last insisted upon as well became the prudence of our
Lord, and was the occasion of that Council Acts 15.
at Jerusalem, and of several discourses, and of some Writings of St. Paul. But
the second and third were the first and common argument of the Baptist, our
Lord, and his Apostles by commission from him; Repentance having reference to
the Moral Law, and Remission of sins superseding the Mosaic expiations. This
being the main substance of that form of Prayer, by which he assists us in our
duty: and summing up his design in coming into the World to his Disciples after
his Resurrection, tells them, all things must be fulfilled which were written
in the Law of Moses, in the Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning Luke 24. 44.
me. That it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day
(that by all those signs accomplished in him, and by him, he might give
sufficient assurance that he was the Son of God, and the Savior of the World)
and that Repentance and Remission of sins should be preached in his Name among
all Nations. St. Paul tells us indeed, Faith, 1 Cor. 13. 13.
Hope, and Charity remain, but how? as the Rock which followed Israel, in its
4. 14. 13.
effects; so their works follow the dead. These Virtues shall have their
reward, which the Lord the righteus Judge shall give at that day.

These are main Theological Virtues. Faith is as the Eye of Reason to direct,
and Hope as the Food, or the spirits to cheer us in this spiritual life; but
the Way we are to walk, and the main work we have to do is Charity, and that
answers to Repentance. If we consider Christianity as a Plant; Faith resembles
the root, Hope the stalk, but the fruit which is principally designed is
Charity. A right faith is an excellent foundation, and if it be operative, it
is all in all. It guides, and so raises our Hope and Charity; for a firm Hope
is an exalted degree of Faith in things of the same nature, and a degree
toward Charity. And this is the reason why the Scripture, supposing man (as he
ought to be) to be consentaneous to himself, does impute that sometimes to
Faith, sometimes to Hope, which is more peculiarly, and ultimately proper to
Charity; or at least to one of these Virtues, that which is but adequate to
all. But now if we compare these Virtues one with another, and so set them at
difference, (which men do too often, and the Scripture for our information
sometimes does) you will find Charity, the more final and public Good. The two
former, viz. Faith and Hope being but means to this end. They determine in our
selves, but this is extended beyond us, even as far as to God, to do him
honor, and to do our Neighbor good; the greatest of these is Charity, says
the Apostle; not only for duration, but for worth and dignity too; fruition
determines Hope, and Faith is that which bears up, and (...). G. Nyssen p. 646.
(...).
supports under the uncertainty of things hoped. But when they are obtained,
Charity remains, not having any thing to succeed it. Faith is so recommended
and enjoined for the light it yields, and for the fruit it bears; for there is
no walking without light, nor no fruit without a root. Wherefore our Obedience
So long as the Church looked upon her Faith as the foundation of her Obedience,
she made good the Title Christ gives her Cant. 6. of his love, his dove, his
undefiled. Causes of decay of Christian Piety, p. 247.
is built upon our Creed, and the dis-believing of some Articles, like the
failing of a foundation, may bring down all the superstructure with it. Such is
the denial of the Resurrection of the dead, or all future rewards, or the
Allegorizing away the history of the Gospel; or the making of it like an
Aesopick Fable, with a canting (...) or an unintelligible Moral hidden under
it. For although St. Paul supposes it in that enumeration the meanest Virtue,
yet of very great use, as the foundation of an house usually is; the builder
chiefly intending its strength; for the whole Fabric is raised upon it.

If we divide the Gospel into Laws and Miracles, which are the most substantial
parts of it, you will find much of the history spent in proving the Divinity of
Christ, that he was the promised Messiah of the World; the Prophecies of the
Old Testament being fulfilled, and the Types of the Mosaic Law having their
complement and period in him, and so warranting his Commission; but all the
signs accomplished in him, and all the wonders wrought by him, even his being
raised from the dead (by which the Gospel which was in a manner dead, and
buried with him, revived) though evidence of his Authority, and principal
motives to believe on him, yet are necessary to be known by us only in order to
his Doctrine, as they render his Precepts and his Promises the more remarkable;
as it is usual to satisfy our selves of the validity of a Commission, before
we yield obedience to it or take orders from it.

It is not God's work upon us by these signs and miracles, so much as his works
within us or by us, which we shall be Nihil mihi oblicitur, nisi quod dicor
plusculum laudare bona opera says Melancthon to Joachimus Camerarius. Epist.
193. page 742. Edit. Land. Hence the Christian Religion is called the
profession of our hope. Heb. 10. 23. 1 Pet. 3. 15.
judged by; which, because his doctrine regulates, and we cooperate in, are
therefore called our works.

Now the Doctrines of Christianity which concern us more nearly are of two
sorts; such as sustein our Hope, or direct our Charity.

1. Such as sustein our Hope: of them we make daily profession in the
Capitular, called the Apostles Creed, which particulars are not Articles of
simple Belief, so much as Objects to erect our Hope.

2. Such as direct our Charity, or obedience, comprised in that Digest of the
Law of Nature, called the Ten Commandments, together with some excellencies
and perfections of Morality superadded by our Lord.

So that you perceive Faith and Hope, Fides multa promissa habet, quia via est
ad dilectionem. Grot.
how much soever is said in advancing them, serve only in their places in order
to our main work, which is Charity or Obedience.

In a word, Repentance, or newness of life is the life of Charity; and the
Basis, or the Groundwork of that, is the abrenunciation or denial of our
selves. Now to a perfect Self-denial, because it is so thwart and
contradictious to flesh and blood, a very high Faith and Hope are requisite:
But for the measure or extent of Faith, or Hope, either in number of the
Articles, or their intensness, or degree, in such Articles as we believe, we
conceive we have no absolute Precept at all written, no more than for other
things which Jesus did, which are Et multae gentes barbarorum sine charta and
atramento, fidem sine literis crediderunt. Irenaeus 3. 4.
not written; so that they be but sufficient to produce sincere obedience to
the Precept of Christ.

Now if we would improve this Notion, let us diligently consider what connection
that Article of Faith has with our Christian practice which is propounded to
us; if it do neither support our Hope, nor direct our Obedience. Whether it be
true, or false, be sure it will never make amends for the loss of peace in our
Church; So that you have here an Authentic Standard, by which you may take the
worth of Opinions. If they entirely agree with the Doctrine of our Lord, and
are ministerial, and subservient to the advancement of Virtue and Piety in the
lives of men, we may well hope they are part of the Faith which was (...), at
once delivered, and is worthy to be contended for. But if opinions disserve the
great ends of the Gospel; if they render it unintelligible, consequently
incredible; if they be too srequent occasions of our remissness, and slackness
in running the Race of our Christian profession, of our deferring Repentance
and conversion to God, of our frequent relapses into sin, and Security in it;
if they put men in hope of Eternal happiness by any other means, save only the
narrow way of sincere and universal Obedience, grounded upon a true and lively
Faith, I fear their fautors and promoters, especially if they be contentious
for them, are too too lively characterized by pride, ignorance, corruption and
destitution of the Truth; and I could wish that nothing had happened within our
observation, to give us cause to suspect the malignant influences of some men's
Principles, into their lives and practices; otherwise I do not understand how
such gross Immoralities should be found in consort with such high Professions.
But what else must we expect from them that depretiate Morality, and
contradistinguish Religion to it; though St. James has told us Pure Religion
and undefiled before God, James 1. 27. Octav. in Min. Fell. apud nos religiosior
ille. qui justior.
is to visit the fatherless and the widow, and to keep thy self unspotted from
the world.

But I expect these zealous contenders should resent my elevation and
extenuation of Errors forsooth; to whom I Will only say, That when the learned,
and pious Abram Scultetus had not without a becoming resentment, reflected upon
the Chairs and Pulpits of Universities and Churches; from whence Satyrs, and
poinant invectives were wont to be slung, and often against imaginary enemies,
he adds, If you show your self but a little more In Tit. c. 3. Quod si paul^
benignius de Controversiis evangelicorum sentias, etc.
charitable to dissenters, and labor to reduce Churches divided in some few
Articles to an amicable concord, without an Imperious and Magisterial decision
of the Controversies, you shall instantly in all places be proclaimed an
Atheist; it seems the good man had found it by experience; (...) illico
proclamabere, expertus hoc scribo.
that you shame not forsooth, to join truth and falsehood, Christ and Belial;
nor are we any whit mollified, says he, in so long a tract of time; nor do we
lay aside that considerate Zeal and impotency of mind, notwithstanding the
inundation of public calamities which overwhelms us; but like the Cockles in
Aesop, rejoice and sing while our houses are on fire. So we exult in our Pride
and Folly, and think by renewing our holy Wars, to procure new Garlands, and
Triumphs, over our Brethren, whom we have blackned and deformed with our
uncharitable Pens. But what shall we say to that admirable Epistle of
Constantine to Alexander and Arrius, most likely not without the advice and
privity of Hosius, then Bishop of Corduba, whom the Emperor loved, and trusted
much, and employed in the delivery of the Letters. Thus summed up by an
excellent Prelate of our own.

First he calls it, a certain vain piece of a Question, ill begun, and more
unadvisedly published; a question which no Law, nor Ecclesiastical Canon
defines; a fruitless contention, the product of idle brains, a matter so nice,
so obscure, so intricate, that it was neither to be explicated by the Clergy,
nor understood by the people. A dispute of words, a Doctrine inexplicable, but
most dangerous; when taught least, it introduced discord or blasphemy. And
therefore the Objector was rash, and the Answerer unadvised; For it concerned
not the substance of Faith, or the Worship of God, or any chief Commandment of
Scripture; and therefore why should it be the matter of discord. For though the
matter be grave, yet because neither necessary nor explicable, the contention
is trifling and toyish; and therefore as the Philosophers of the same Sect,
though differing in the explication of an opinion; yet more love for the unity
of the Profession, than disagree for the difference of opinion. So should
Christians believe in the same God, retaining the same Faith, having the same
Hopes, opposed by the same Enemies, not fall at variance upon such disputes;
considering our understandings are not all alike, and therefore neither can our
opinions in such mysterious Articles. So that the matter being of no great
importance, but vain and a toy in respect of the excellent blessings of Peace
and Charity, it were good that Alexander and Arrius should leave contending,
keep their opinions to themselves, ask each other forgiveness, and give mutual
Toleration. So that excellent Emperor.

But I Will end all with one word to those Narrow men who think a System of dry
and useless opinions serviceable enough, if they be but the Shibboleth of a
Faction; that St. Paul had not so learned Christ, for he tells us that the end
of the Commandment, i. e. the Gospel, is Charity out of a pure heart, of a good
Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned.

Now to the King Eternal, etc.
THE END.

