

The Full Proceedings OF THE High Court of Justice against King CHARLES In
Westminster Hall, on Saturday the 20. of January, 1648. Together, With the
Kings Reasons and Speeches, and his Deportment on the Scaffold before his
Execution.

Translated out of the Latin. by J. C.

Hereunto is added, A Parallel of the late Wars, being a Relation of the five
years Civil Wars, of King Henry the 3d. with the Event of that unnatural War,
and by what means the Kingdom was settled again.

London, Printed for William Shears, at the Bible in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1654.

The First Days Proceeding of the High Court of Justice, etc.
THe Trial and the Execution of the last King of England, being still as much
the wonder as the discourse of Christendom: I shall endeavor to represent it
to you, with the exactest faithfulness that can possibly be desired; and
although others have gone before me on the same subject, by the benefit of
time; I doubt not but that I shall exceed them by the advantage of truth.

In the Supreme Tribunal of Justice sitting at Whitehall in Westminster,
Sergeant Bradshaw being President, and about seventy other persons, elected to
be his Judges, being present; the Crier of the Court, having Proclaimed his
Oyes, to invite the people to attention, silence was commanded, and the
Ordinance of the Commons in Parliament, in reference to the Examination of the
King, was read, and the Court was summoned, all the Members thereof arising as
they were called.

The King came into the Court, his head covered, Sergeant Dendy, being
remarkable by the Authority of his Mace, did Usher him in; Colonel Hatcher, and
about thirty Officers and Gentlemen did attend him as his Guard.

The Court being sat, the Lord President Bradshaw spoke thus unto him.

Charles Stuart King of England, the Commons of England assembled in Parliament,
being touched with the sense of the Calamities which have happened to this
Nation, and of the innocent blood spilt, of which you are accused to be the
Author, have both according to their office, which they ow unto God, this
Nation and themselves, according to the power and fundamental faith entrusted
with them, by the people, Constituted this supreme Court of Justice, before
which you are now brought to hear your Charge, on which this Court will proceed.

Mr. Cook the Solicitor General. Sir, In the Name of the Commons of England,
and of all the people thereof: I do charge Charles Stuart here present, as
guilty of Treason and other great defaults, and in the name of the Commons of
England, I require that his charge may be read unto him.


The King, Stay a little.


L. President, Sir The Court has given order, that the Charge shall be read:
If you have any thing afterward to plead for your self, you may be heard:
Hereupon the Charge was read.

THat the said Charles Stuart being admitted King of England, and therein
trusted with a limited Power, to govern by, and according to the laws of the
Land, and not otherwise; And by his Trust, Oath, and Office, being obliged to
use the Power committed to him, For the good and benefit of the People, and for
the preservation of their Rights and Liberties; Yet nevertheless out of a
wicked Design, to erect, and uphold in himself an unlimitted and Tyrannical
power, to rule according to his Will, and to overthrow the Rights and liberties
of the people; Yea, to take away, and make void the foundations thereof, and of
all redress and remedy of misgovernment, which by the fundamental constitutions
of this kingdom, were reserved on the peoples behalf, in the right and power
of frequent and successive Parliaments, or national meetings in Council; he
the said Charles Stuart, for accomplishment of such his designs, and for the
protecting of himself and his adherents, in his and their wicked practices to
the same ends, has traitorously and maliciously leavied war against the
present parliament, and the people therein represented.

Particularly, upon or about the thirtieth day of June, in the year of our
Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and two, at Beverly, in the County of
York; and upon, or about the 30th day of July, in the year aforesaid, in the
County of the City of York; and upon or about the twenty fourth day of August,
in the same year, at the County of the town of Nottingham (when and where he
set up his Standard of war;) And also on, or about the twenty third day of
October in the same year, at Edghill, and Keinton-field, in the Coun-of
Warwick; and upon or about the thirtieth day of November, in the same year, at
Brainchford, in the County of Middlesex: And upon, or about the thirtieth day
of August in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and three,
at Cavesham-bridge, near Reding, in the County of Berks; and upon, or about the
thirtieth day of October, in the year last mentioned, at, or near the City of
Gloucester; and upon, or about the thirtieth day of November, in the year last
mentioned, at Newbury, in the County of Berks; And upon, or about the one and
thirtieth day of July, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty
and four, at Cropredybridge, in the County of Oxon; And upon, or about the
thirtieth day of September, in the year last mentioned, at Bodmin, and other
places near adjacent, in the County of Cornwall; And upon, or about the
thirtieth day of November, in the year last mentioned, at Newbery aforesaid;
And upon, or about the eighth day of June in the year of our Lord, One thousand
six hundred forty and five, at the Town of Leicester; And also, upon the
fourteenth day of the same month, in the same year, at Nasebyfield, in the
County of Northampton. At which several times and places, or most of them, and
at many other places in the land, at several other times, within the years
aforementioned: And in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty
and six; he the said Charles Stuart, has caused and procured many thousands of
the Free-people of the Nation to be slain; and by Divisions, parties and
insurrections, within this land, by invasions from Foreign parts, endeavored
and procured by him, and by many other evil ways and means. He the said
Charles Stuart, has not only maintained and carried on the said War, both by
land and sea, during the year before mentioned; but also has renewed, or
caused to be renewed, the said war against the Parliament, and good people of
this Nation, in this present year, One thousand six hundred forty and eight,
in the Counties of Kent, Essex, Surry, Sussex, Middlesex, and many other
Counties and places in England and Wales and also by sea; and particularly, he
the said Charles Stuart, has for that purpose, given Commission to his Son the
prince and others, whereby besides multitudes of other persons, many such, as
were by the parliament entrusted and employed, for the safety of the nation,
being by him and his agents, corrupted, to the betraying of their Trust, and
revolting from the parliament, have had entertainment and commission, for the
continuing and renewing of war and hostility, against the said Parliament and
People as aforesaid. By which cruel and unnatural wars by him, the said Charles
Stuart, leavied, continued, and renewed as aforesaid, much innocent blood of
the Free-people of this nation has been spilt; many families have been undone,
the public treasury wasted and exhausted, trade obstructed, and miserably
decayed; vast expense and damage to the Nation incurred, and many parts of the
land spoiled, some of them even to desolation.

And for further prosecution of his said evil designs, he the said Charles
Stuart does still continue his Commissions to the said Prince, and other Rebels
and Revolters, both English and Forraigners, and to the Earl of Ormond, and to
the Irish Rebels and Revolters, associated with him; from whom further
invasions upon this Land are threatened, upon the procurement, and on the behalf
of the said Charles Stuart.

All which wicked designs, wars, and evil practices of him, the said Charles
Stuart, have been and are carried on, for the advancing and upholding of the
personal Interest of Will and Power, and pretended Prerogative to himself and
family, against the public interest, Common Right, Liberty, Justice and peace
of the people of the nation, by and for whom he was entrusted, as aforesaid.

By all which it appears, that he the said Charles Stuart, has been, and is
the occasioner, author, and contriver of the said unnatural, cruel, and bloody
wars, and therein guilty of all the treasons, murders, rapines, burnings,
spiols, desolations, damage and mischief to this nation, acted or committed in
the said wars, or occasioned thereby.

And the said John Cook, by protestation (saving on the behalf of the people of
England, the liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other Charge
against him the said Charles Stuart; and also of replying to the Answers which
the said Charles Stuart shall make to the premises, or any of them, or any other
Charge that shall be so Exhibited) does, for the said treasons and crimes, on
the behalf of the said people of England, impeach the said Charles Stuart, as a
tyrant, traitor, murderer, and a public, and implacable enemy to the
commonwealth of England: And pray, That the said Charles Stuart King of
England, may be put to answer all and every the premises, that such proceedings
examinations, trials, sentence, and judgment may be thereupon had, or shall be
agreeable to justice.

The King was oftentimes observed to smile in indignation, during the reading
of the Charge, especially, at the words: Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and public
enemy to the Commonwealth.



L. President Sir, you have now heard the Charge read, containing such matters,
as do appear therein, you have observed that in the Conclusion thereof, It is
required of the Court, in the Name of the Commons of England, that you answer
to your charge, which the Court does expect.


The King. I would be satisfied by what power I am called hither? It is not
long since that I was in the Isle of Wight, How I came thither, the story is
longer than I I conceive fitting, in this place to declare; But I there entered
upon a Treaty with both Houses of Parliament, with as much public faith, as it
is possible to be obtained from any people in the World. I there treated with a
number of Honorable Lords and Gentlemen, and I treated honestly and faithfully
with them; I cannot say, but they dealt very ingeniously with me; and we
proceeded so far, that the Treaty was even concluded. Now I would understand
by what Authority, (I mean lawful) I am brought hither. There are many
unlawful Authorities in the world, as Thieves and Plunderers in the
highways. I would know by what Authority I was taken from thence, and carried
from place to place, I know not where? When I have understood the lawfulness of
the Authority, I will make my Answer: In the mean time, remember that I am your
King, your lawful King; and weigh well with your selves, what sins you heap on
your own heads, and the anger and judgments of God which you will bring upon
this land, I say seriously, weigh it before you further do proceed from one sin
to a greater. Therefore declare unto me, by what lawful Authority I sit here,
and I will not refuse to Answer you. In the mean time I will not betray my
trust. I have a trust committed to me by God, by an ancient and lawful
succession, I will not betray that by answering to a new and an unlawful
Authority; wherefore satisfy me in this, and you shall hear further from me.


L. President. If you had but pleased to observe what the Court did suggest
unto you, when you first came hither, you had understood by what Authority you
were brought hither; which Authority does require of you, in the Name of the
People of England, by whom you are elected King, that you make answer to them.


King. No Sir, I deny that.


L. President. If you do not acknowledge the Authority of the Court, they ought
to proceed against you.


King. I tell them that England was never an Elective Kingdom, but hereditary,
for almost, these two thousand years. Therefore declare unto me, by what
Authority I am brought hither. I labor more for the liberty of my people then
any of you, who pretend to be my Judges; and therefore I say, declare unto me,
by what lawful Authority I am placed here, and I will answer you; otherwise, I
shall make no answer at all.


L. President. Sir, how well you have administered, the power committed to you,
is sufficiently known: The method of your Answering is to put Interrogatories
to the Court, which does not become you in this Condition. Twice or thrice it
has been represented to you.


King. There is present here a Gentleman, Lieutenant Colonel Cobbet, demand of
him, if he did not bring me from the Isle of Wight, by force: I come not hither
to submit my self to this Court. I will do as much for the Privileges of the
House of Commons, rightly understood, as any other. I see not here the House of
Lords, which is able to constitute a Parliament, and the King ought to be the
Super-intendent there. Is this to bring the King to his Parliament? Is this to
bring the public Treaty to an end, by the public Faith of the world. Either
show me your Authority established by the Scriptures, which are the word of
God, or confirmed by the constitutions of the Kingdom, and I will answer you.


L. President. Sir, you have propounded a question, and an answer has been
rendered, but if you will not answer to what they to propound, the Court will
take it into their consideration, how to proceed against you. In the mean time,
they who brought you hither shall return you back again. The Court desires to
be satisfied whether this be all the Answer that you will give them or not.


King. I desire that you would resolve me and all the world, in this one
particular. Give me leave to acquaint you, that it is a thing of no small
importance which you go about. I am sworn to keep the peace according to the
duty, which I do ow to God and to my Land; and I will here perform it to the
last breath of my Body: you shall therefore do well first to satisfy God, and
afterward the Land, by what Authority you do this. If you do it by an usurped
Authority, you cannot defend it. God who sits in the Heavens will call you,
and all those, who have conferred this power on you, to give him an account of
it. Satisfy me in this, and I shall answer you, for otherwise I should betray
the Faith, committed to me, and the liberties of my people: Wherefore consider
of it, and I shall be willing to answer you. For I do profess it is as great a
sin to resist a lawful Authority, as to submit unto a Tyrannical, or any
other unlawful Authority: wherefore resolve me in this particular, and you
shall receive my Answer.


L. President. The Court expects that you should give them a final Answer,
and will adjourn until Monday next: If you cannot satisfy your self; although
we tell you our authority, our authority will satisfy our selves; And it is
according to the authority of God and the Kingdom, and the peace (of which you
speak) shall be preserved in the administration of Justice, and that is our
present work.


King. I give you this for my answer, you have not shown me any lawful
authority, which may satisfy any reasonable man.


L. President. It is only your apprehension, we are fully satisfied who are
your Judges.


King. It is not my apprehension, nor yours which ought to determine this.


L. President. The Court has heard you, and disposed of you accordingly as
their discretions have thought expedient.

The Court adjourneth to the Painted chamber, until Monday at ten of the clock
in the mornning, and from thence hither.

Some thing that was ominous, ought not to be passed by in silence, when the
Charge was read against the King, the silver head of his staff did fall off,
which he much did wonder at, and observing no man so officious to assist him,
he stooping toward the ground did take it up himself.

As the King returned, looking on the Court, he said, I fear not thee, meaning
the sword. As he came down the stayres, the people who were in the Hall, cried
out some of them, God save the King; but the greater part Justice, Justice.


The second days proceeding against the King, January 22. etc.
THe Crier having thrice pronounced his Oyes, and silence commanded, after that
the Judges were called, and every one did particularly answer to his Name.
Silence was again commanded, under pain of imprisonment, and the Captain of the
Guards was ordered to apprehend any that should endeavor to make a tumult.

At the coming of the King into the Court, there was a great shout, and the
Court commanded the Captain of the Guards to apprehend and imprison those, who
should make either a noise or tumult.

The Court being sat, the Solicitor turning to the President said, May it
please your Lordship my Lord President. In the former Court, on Saturday, in
the Name of the Commons of England, I exhibited and offered to this Tribunal
the charge of high Treasons, and other grievous crimes against the Prisoner,
with which I did charge him, In the Name of the People of England, and his
charge was read, and his Answer demanded. My Lord, It pleased him at that time
to return no answer at all, but instead of answering, he questioned the
Authority of the High Court: My most humble motion to this High Court in the
Name of the People of the Kingdom of England, is that the Prisoner may be
compelled to give a positive answer, either by way of Confession or Negation,
which if he shall refuse, that the subject of his Charge may be taken for
granted, and the Court proceed according to Justice.

L. President. Sir, you may remember, that on the last convention of this
Court, the cause was expounded to you, for which you were brought hither, and
you heard the charge against you read, it being a charge of High Treason, and
other grievous crimes against the Kingdom of England: you heard likewise, that
it was required in the name of the people, that you should answer to your
charge, that there should be a proceeding thereon, as should be agreeable unto
Justice: you were then pleased to move some scruples concerning the authority
of this Court, and you desired to be satisfied in your knowledge, by what
authority you were brought hither: you several times did propound your
questions, and it was often answered to you, that it was by authority of the
commons of England Assembled in Parliament, who did judge it requisite to call
you to an account, for the great and grievous crimes of which you are accused.
After that the Court did take into their serious consideration, those things
which you objected, and they are fully satisfied in their authority; and do
conceive it requisite, that you should admit it; they therefore require that
you give a positive and a particular Answer to the charge exhibited against
you: they do expect that you should either confess it or deny it. If you shall
deny it, it will be proved in the behalf of the Kingdom, the whole World does
approve of their Authority. So that the kingdom is satisfied, and you ought
thereby to be satisfied your self; you ought not therefore to waste time, but
to give your positive answer.


King. It is true, that when I was last here, I moved that question; and
indeed, if it were only my business in particular, I should have satisfied my
self with that protestation, which I then interposed against the lawfulness of
this Court; and that a King cannot be judged by any superior jurisdiction on
earth, but my own interests are not only involved in it, but the liberties
also of the people of England; and pretend what you will, I do endeavor more
for their liberties, then any whatsoever. For if Power without laws, can make
laws and change the Fundamental laws of the Kingdom, I know not what subject
in England can be secure of his life, or of any thing which he does call his
own: Wherefore when I came hither, I expected particular reasons, that I might
understand by what law, and what Authority you would proceed against me. I
should then perceive what most especially I have to say unto you, for the
affirmative is to be proved, which seldom the Negative is capable of; but
because I cannot persuade you thus, I will give you my Reasons as briefly as I
can.

The Reasons for which in conscience and duty which I ow, first unto God, and
afterward to my people, for the preservation of their lives, their liberties,
and their fortunes: I believe I cannot answer until I am satisfied of your
legality of it.

All proceedings against any man whatsoever --


President. Sir, I must interrupt you, which I would not do, but that which you
do, agrees not with the proceedings of any Tribunal of Justice, you enter into
a controversy, and dispute against the Authority of this Court, before which
you appear a prisoner, and are accused as a great Delinquent. If you will take
upon you to controvert the Authority of this Court, we cannot give way unto it;
neither will any tribunal of Justice admit it; you ought to submit unto the
Court, and to give an exact and direct Answer, whether you will answer to your
charge or not? and what is the answer that you make.


King. Sir I know not the formalities of the law, I know the law and reason;
and although I am no professed Lawyer, I know the law as well as any Gentleman
in England, and I am more eager for the Liberties of the people of England then
you are? and if I should believe any man, without he gives me Reasons for what
he says, It would be absurd; but I say unto you, that the Reason which you
give is no ways satisfactory.


L. President. Sir I must interrupt you, for it cannot be permitted to you in
this manner to proceed: you speak of law and reason, it is fit that there
should be both law and reason, and they are both against you. Sir the Vote of
the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament, is the reason of the Kingdom,
and they ordained this law according to which you ought to Reign. Sir, It is
not lawful for you to dispute against our Authority. This again has been told
you by the Court. Sir, Notice will be taken that you contemn the Court, and
this contempt of yours will be recorded.


King. I know not how a King can be interpreted to be a Delinquent, but by any
law that I ever heard, all men, whether Delinquent or what you will, may
lawfully make objections against their Process; this is that which I require,
and I again desire that my Reasons may be heard. If you deny this, you deny
Reason.


L. President. Sir, you have objected something to the Court; I will declare
unto you their opinion. Sir, It is not lawful for you or any man else to
dispute against this Subject; It is Decreed, you ought not to dispute against
the jurisdiction of this Tribunal; If you shall yet do it, I must intimate unto
you, that they are above objections. They sit here by Authority of the Commons
of England; and all your Predecessors and you your self are bound to be
accountable to them.


King. I deny that, show me one example?


L. President. Sir, you ought not to interrupt, but attend whilst the Court
speaks unto you. This Subject is not to be disputed by you, neither will the
Court permit that you should object against the jurisdiction of it, they have
considered of their jurisdiction, and do approve it.


King. Sir, I say, that the Commons of England were never a Court of
Judicature; and I would fain know, how they came to be made so now?


President. Sir, It is not permitted to you to proceed in those discourses.

Then the Secretary of the Court did read, as follows.

Charles Stuart, King of England, you have been accused in the Name of the
People of England of High Treason, and other grievous Crimes. The Court has
determined that you shall answer to your Charge.


King. I will answer, as soon as ever I shall understand, by what authority you
do these things?


President. If this be all that you will speak: Gentlemen, you who brought the
prisonner hither, take him back again.


King. I demand, that I may be permitted to exhibit my Reasons, why I answer
not unto the Charge, and give me time to perform this.


President. Sir, It is not for prisonners to demand.


King. Prisonners, Sir! I am no ordinary prisonner.


President. The Court has considered of their own jurisdiction, and they have
also confirmed their jurisdiction: If you will not answer, we will give order
that your Default be recorded.


King. You have not yet heard my Reasons.


President. Your Reasons are not to be heard against the Supreme Jurisdiction.


King. Show me that jurisdiction in the world, where Reason is not to be heard.


President. Sir, We show it you here, the Commons of England; and the next time
you are brought hither, you shall understand further of the pleasure of the
Court, and peradventure their final sentence.


King. Show me, where the House of Commons was ever a Court of Judicature in
that kind.


President. Sergeant, take away the Prisonner.


King. Sir, Remember that the King is not suffered to declare his Reasons, for
the Liberty and Immunities of his Subjects.


President. Sir, That Freedom of speech is not permitted to you, how great a
friend you have been to the Laws, and the Liberties of the people; let England
and all the world judge?


King. Sir, By your leave, I have always loved the Liberty, the Immunities,
and Laws of the subjects; If I have defended my self by Arms, I have not taken
them up against the people, but for them.


President. You must obey the Decree of the Court, you give no answer to the
Charge against you.


King. Well Sir!

And so was he brought to the House of Sir Robert Cotton; and the Court was
adjourned to the Painted Chamber, until Wednesday following at twelve of the
clock, at what hour they intended to adjourn again to Westminster Hall, where
all whom it does concern are commanded to be present.


The third days proceedings against the late King at the High Court of Justice
Tuesday Jan. 23. 1648.
THe Crier according to the Custom, having with his Oyes commanded silence and
attention; the King being sat, Mr. Attorney General turning to the Lord
President spoke in these words,

May it please your Lordship: This is now the third time that by the great
grace and favor of this High Court, the prisoner has been brought to the Bar,
and yet by reason of his refusal to put in his Answer, there is yet no issue
joined in the cause. My Lord, I did at the first exhibit a Charge against him,
containing the highest practices of Treason, that were ever wrought on the
Theater of England. That a King of England, trusted to keep the Laws of
England, and who had taken an Oath so to do, and had tribute paid him for that
end, should be guilty of so wicked a design, as to subvert our Laws, and
introduce an arbitrary and tyrannical Government, and set up his Standard of
War against his Parliament and his people, and I did humbly pray in the
behalf of the people of England, that he might speedily be required to make an
answer to his charge.

But my Lord, instead of making an answer, he did then dispute the Authority of
this Tribunal, and your Lordship being pleased to give him a further day to put
in his answer which was yesterday, I did move again that he might be required
to put in a direct and positive answer, to his charge, either by denying or
confessing it, but he was then pleased to debate the Jurisdiction of the Court,
although he was commanded to give a positive answer.

My Lord, by reason of this great delay of Justice, I shall humbly move for
speedy judgment against him. I may press your Lordship upon the known Rules
of the Laws of the Land, that if a prisoner shall stand in contempt and not
plead guilty or not guilty to the charge given against him, it by an implicit
confession ought to be taken pro confesso, as I may instance in diverse who have
deserved more favor than the prisoner at the Bar has done. But I shall press
upon the whole fact. The House of Commons, the Supreme Authority of the
Kingdom have declared, (my Lord) that it is notorious. The matter of the
charge is true, and clear as crystal, or as the Sun that shines at Noon day,
in which my Lord President, if your Lordship and the Court be not satisfied, I
have several witnesses on the behalf of the people of England to produce, and
therefore I do humbly pray, and not so much I, as the innocent blood that has
been shed, the cry whereof is great for Justice and Judgment, that speedy
judgment may be pronounced against the prisoner at the Bar.

President, Sir, you have heard what has been moved by Mr. Solicitor on the
behalf of the Kingdom against you. Sir, you may well remember, and if you do
not, the Court cannot forget the delays which you have made. You have been
pleased to propound some Questions, and amply you have had your resolution on
them, you have been often told that the Court did affirm their own
Jurisdiction; and that it was not for you nor any other man to dispute the
Jurisdiction of the highest Authority of England, from which there is no
appeal, and touching which there must be no dispute; yet you did deport your
self in that manner, that you gave no obedience, nor did acknowledge any
Authority either in them, or the Supreme Court of Parliament, that constituted
this high Court of Justice. Sir, the Court gives you to understand that they
are very sensible of these demurres, and that being thus authorized by the High
Court of England, they ought not to be trifled withal, especially, seeing if
they please, they may take advantage of these delays, and according to the
rules of Justice, proceed and pronounce Judgment against you. Nevertheless
they are so favorable as to give directions to me, and therefore on their
behalf I do require you to make a positive answer to this charge, that has
been read against you. Justice knows no respect of persons. You are to give
your positive and final Answer in plain English, whether guilty or not guilty,
of the Treason laid to your charge.

The King having meditated a little, did answer in these words. When I was here
yesterday, I desired to speak for the Liberties of the people of England: I
desire yet to know, whether without interruption, I may speak freely, or not?


President, Sir, on the like Question, you had yesterday the resolution of this
Court; you were told that having a charge of so high a nature against you, your
work was to acknowledge the Jurisdiction of the Court, and to answer the
charge; after you have done that you shall be heard at large to make the
defense you can for your self; but Sir the Court commands me to make known unto
you, that you are not permitted to run into any other discourses, until such
time that you have returned a positive Answer to the matter that is charged
upon you.


King, I value not the charge a rush: It is the Liberty of the people of
England that I stand for. For me who am your King, and should be an example to
all the Courts in England, to uphold Justice, and maintain the old Laws; for me
I say, to acknowledge a new Court, that I never heard of before, is a thing
that I know not how to do. You did speak very well on the first day I came
hither, concerning the obligations that I have laid upon me by God, for the
maintenance of the Liberties of my people. I do acknowledge that I do ow the
same obligations to God and my people, to defend as much as in me lies, the
ancient Laws of the Kingdom: therefore until I be satisfied that this is not
against the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, I can put in no particulars to
the Charge. If you will give me time, I will show you my Reasons wherefore I
cannot do it, and Here being interrupted, he said. By your favor you ought not
to interrupt me. How I came here I do not know. There is no Law to make your
King your prisoner. I was in a Treaty upon the public faith of the Kingdom,
that was the known -- two Houses of Parliament, that was the Representative of
the Kingdom, and when I had almost made an end of the Treaty; I was hurried
away, and brought hither; and therefore I would --


President. Sir, you must know the pleasure of the Court.


King. By you favor Sir, --


President. Nay Sir, by your favor, you may not be permitted to run into these
discourses, you appear here as a Delinquent, you have not acknowledged the
Authority of the Court, the Court once more does command you to give your
positive Answer?


M. Broughton, Do your Duty.


King. Duty Sir.

M. Broughton reads, Charles Stuart, King of England, you are accused in the
behalf of the Commons of England of diverse high Crimes and Treasons, which
Charge has been read unto you. The Court now requires you to give your
positive and final answer, either by way of confession, or by denial of the
Charge.


King. Sir, I say again unto you, If thereby I may give satisfaction to the
people of England of the uprightness of my proceedings, not by way of answer,
but to satisfy them that I have done nothing against that trust, that has
been committed to me, I would do it; but to acknowledge a new Court, against
their privileges, to alter the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; you must
excuse me, if I shall refuse to do it.


President. Sir, This is the third time, that you have publicly disowned this
Court, and put an affront upon it. How far you have preserved the privileges
of the People, your actions have spoke: And truly Sir, If men's intentions can
be known by their actions, you have written your intentions in bloody
Characters throughout the whole Kingdom: But Sir, you are to understand the
pleasure of the Court -- Clerk, Record the Default --. And Gentlemen, you that
are a guard to the Prisoner, take him back again.


King. I will only add this one word, If it were only my own particular, I
would not say any more, nor interrupt you at all.


President. Sir, you have heard the pleasure of the Court, and notwithstanding
you will not understand it: you are to find that you are before a Court of
Justice.

The King going forth Proclamation was made, that all persons who then
appeared; and had further to do with the Court, might depart into the Painted
Chamber, to which place, the Court adjourned, being resolved to meet again in
Westminster Hall, by ten of the Clock, the next morning.


Wednesday January 24.
The Court being this day employed upon Examinations of Witnesses, and other
things, in order to their next proceedings, did appoint one of their Vshers to
give notice to the people there assembled to appear on further summons.

The last proceedings against the King wherein they pronounced Sentence upon
him, on Saturday, Jan. 27. 1648.
SIlence being commanded by the Crier, the Court was called, and Sergeant
Bradshaw the Lord President, was that day in a scarlet Gown. There were present
that day, sixty and eight Members of the Court.

The King, turning to the Lord President, said; I shall desire to be heard some
few words, and I hope I shall give no occasion of Interruption.

President. You may answer in due time, hear the Court first.


King. If it please you Sir, I desire to be heard; and I shall not give any
occasion of interruption, and it is only in a word. A sudden Judgment --


President. Sir, you shall be heard (as I have told you) in due time, but you
must hear the Court first.


King. What I am to speak will be in order, as I conceive, to what I believe
the Court will say, and therefore Sir, I desire to be heard, A hasty judgment
is not so soon recalled.


President. Sir, you shall be heard before Judgment be given, and in the mean
time, you ought to forbear.


King. Well Sir, I shall be heard before the Judgment be given.


President. Gentlemen, It is well known to all, or the greatest part of you
here present, that the prisonner at the Bar has been several times convented,
and brought before this Court, to make answer to a charge of Treason, and other
high crimes, exhibited against him, in the Name of the People of England, to
which charge being oftentimes commanded to Answer; he has been so far from
submitting to the Court, as he has undertook to object again, and dispute the
Authority of this Court, and of the High Court of parliament, who constituted
this Court to Try and Judge him; but being overruled in that, and commanded to
make answer; he was still pleased to persevere in his contumacy, and refused to
submit to answer; whereupon the Court that they may not be wanting to
themselves, and to the trust reposed in them; nor that any man's wilfulness
shall prevent the course of Justice; have considered of the contempt, and of
that consequence which in law does arise on that contempt. They have likewise
considered of the notoriousnesse of the Fact charged upon the prisoner, and
upon the whole matter are resolved, and have agreed upon a Sentence to be now
pronounced against him, but in regard he has desired to be heard before
Sentence be read and pronounced, the Court is resolved to hear him: yet Sir,
thus much I must tell you before hand, of which also you have been minded at
the other Courts, that if what you are to propose shall tend to dispute the
jurisdiction of the Court, you are not to be heard therein: you have offered it
formerly, and you have indeed struck at the root, which is the power and
supreme Authority of the Commons of England, of which this Court will admit no
debate; and indeed it would be an unreasonable thing in them so to do, being a
Court which does act upon that Authority, which they have received from them;
they will not presume to judge upon their Superiors, from whom there is no
appeal. But Sir, If you have any thing to say in defense of your self,
concerning the matter with which you are charged; the Court has given me
command to let you know, they will hear you.


King. Since I perceive, you will not hear any thing of Debate concerning that
which I confess, I thought most material for the peace of the Kingdom, and
the Liberty of the Subject; I shall wave it, and speak nothing of it, only I
must tell you, that these many days all things have been taken from me, but
that which I call more deer unto me, than my life, which is my Conscience and
my Honor; and if I had respect to my life more than to the peace of the
kingdom and the liberty of the Subject; I should certainly have made a
particular defense for my self, for by that at least I might have deferred an
ugly Sentence, which I expect to pass upon me. Therefore undoubtedly; Sir, as
a man that has some understanding, some knowledge of the world if that my true
zeal to my Country, had not over born the care of my own preservation, I should
have gone another way to work then now I have done. Now, Sir, I conceive that a
hasty Sentence once passed may sooner be repented then revoked; and truly the
same fervent desire I have for the peace of the Kingdom, and the liberty of
the Subject, more then my own particulars, does make me now at last move that,
having something to say concerning both, I may be heard before my Sentence be
pronounced, before the Lords and Commons in the Painted Chamber. This delay
cannot be prejudicial to you whatsoever I shall utter. If I speak not reason
those that hear me, must be my Judges; but if it be Reason, and really for the
welfare of the Kingdom, and the Liberty of the Subject; I am sure of it, it
will be well worth the hearing. Therefore I conjure you, as you love that which
you pretend (I hope it is real) the Liberty of the Subject and the peace of
the kingdom, that you will grant me the hearing before Sentence be past. I only
desire this, that you will take this into your consideration. It may be you
have not heard of it before hand. If you think well of it, I will retire, and
you may think of it; but if I cannot get this liberty; I do here protest, that
so fair shows of liberty and peace are but pure shows and no otherwise, if in
this you will not hear your King?


President. Sir, you have now spoken?


King. Yes, Sir.


President. And this which you have spoken, is but a further declining of the
Jurisdiction of this Court, which is the thing wherein you were limited before.


King. Pray excuse me Sir, for my interruption, because you do mistake me. It
is not a declining of it, you do judge me before you hear me speak; I say, I
will not, I do not decline it; although I cannot acknowledge the jurisdiction
of it. In this, give me leave, to say that though I would not, though I did not
acknowledge it in this; yet I protest, this is not to decline it, since I say,
If that which I shall propound be not for the peace of the Kingdom and the
Liberty of the Subject, then the shame is mine. Now I desire that you will take
this into your consideration; if you will, I will withdraw.


President. Sir, This is not altogether new, that you have offered unto us, I
say, it is not altogether new unto us, although it be the first time, that in
person you have offered it to the Court. Sir, you say, you do not decline the
jurisdiction of the Court.


King. Not in this that I have said.


President. I understand you well enough Sir, Nevertheless, that which you
have propounded seems to be contrary to what you have said, for the Court are
ready to proceed to Sentence: It is not (as you say) that they will not hear
their King: For they have been ready to hear you, they have patiently waited
your pleasure for three Court days together to hear what you would answer to
the peoples charge against you; to which you have not vouchsafed to give any
answer at all. Sir: this does tend to a further delay, and truly Sir, Such
delays as these, neither may the kingdom nor Justice admit: You have had the
advantage of three several days to have offered in this kind, what you were
pleased to have propounded to the Lords and Commons. This Court is founded upon
the Authority of the Commons of England, in whom rests the Suprem
Jurisdiction: That which you now tender to the Court, is to be tried by another
jurisdiction, a coordinate jurisdiction, I know very well, how you have
expressed your self, and that not withstanding, what you would propound to the
Lords and Commons, yet nevertheless, you would proceed on here; I did hear you
say so: but Sir, That which you would offer there, whatsoever it be, must needs
be in delay of Justice here; so as if this Court be resolved and prepared for
the Sentence, they are bound in justice not to grant that which you so much
desire; but Sir, according to your desire, and because you shall know the full
pleasure of the Court upon that, whilst you have moved, the Court shall
withdraw for a time.


King. Shall I withdraw?


President. Sir, you shall know the pleasure of the Court presently.

The Court withdraws for half an hour into the Court of Wards. Sergeant at
Arms, the Court gives command that the prisoner withdraw, and that about half
an hour hence the prisonner be returned again.

The time being expired, the Court returned, and the Lord President commanded
the Sergeant at Arms to send for his prisonner.

The King being come attended with his Guard, The Lord President said unto him,
Sir, you were pleased to make a motion here to the Court, concerning the desire
you had to propound something to the Lords and Commons in the Painted Chamber,
for the peace of the Kingdom. Sir, you did in effect receive an Answer before
the Court adjourned. Truly Sir, their adjournment and withdrawing was pro forma
tantum, for it did not seem to them, that there was any difficulty in the
thing; they have considered of what you moved, and have considered of their own
Authority, which is grounded as it has been often said, upon the supreme
Authority of the Commons of England, assembled in Parliament. The Court does
act according to their Commission. Sir, I have received an express Order from
the Court, to acquaint you, that they have been too much delaied by you
already, and that this which you have now offered, has occasioned some little
further delay; they are Judges appointed by the highest Judges, and Judges are
no more to delay than they are to deny justice; they are good words in the old
Charter of England, Nulli negabimus, nulli vendemus, nulli deferremus
justitium; There must be no delay, but Sir, the Truth is, and so every man here
observes it. That you have much delayed them by your contempt and default; for
which they might long since have proceeded to judgment against you; therefore
notwithstanding, what you have offered, they are resolved to proceed to
punishment and to judgment; and this is their unanimous resolution.


King. Sir, I see it is in vain for me to dispute, I am no Sceptick to doubt,
or to deny the power that you have: I do know that you have power enough. Sir,
I confess, I do believe it would have been advantageous to the peace of the
Kingdom, if you would have been pleased to take the pains to show the
lawfulness of your power. As for this delay, which I have desired, I do
confess, it is a delay, but it is a delay that is important for the peace of
the Kingdom: It is not my person, that I look on alone: It is the welfare of
the Kingdom, the peace of the kingdom. It is an old saying, that we should
think on long, but perform great matters suddenly. Therefore, Sir, I do say
again, I do put at your doors, all the inconveniences of a hasty Sentence. I
have been here now a full week, this day eight days, was the day in which I
made in this place, my first appearance; The short respite but of a day or two
longer, may give peace unto the Nation; whereas an hasty judgment may bring
such a perpetual trouble and inconvenience upon it, that is, the child unborn
may repent it. And therefore once more, out of the duty I ow to God, and to my
Country, I do desire that I may be heard by the Lords and Commons in the
painted Chamber, or any other place that you will appoint me.


President. Sir, you have been already answered to what you have moved, it
being the same motion which you made before, for which you have had the
resolution and the judgment of the Court in it; and the Court would now be
satisfied from you, whether you have any more to say for your self than you
have yet said, before they proceed to Sentence?


King. I say this Sir, that if you will but hear me, and give me this delay, I
doubt not, but I shall give some satisfaction to all that are present, and to
my people that are absent; and therefore I require you, as you will answer it
at the dreadful day of judgment, that you will, once again take it into your
consideration.


President. Sir, I have received Instructions from the Court.


King. Well Sir,


President. If this must be reinforced, or any thing of this nature, your
answer must be the same, as it was before, and they will proceed to Sentence if
you have no more to say?


King. Sir, I have nothing more to say, only I desire that this may be entered
what I have said.


President. The Court Sir, then has something else to say to you, which
although I know will be very unwelcome; yet notwithstanding, they are resolved
to discharged their duty.

Sir, you have spoken very well of a precious thing, that you call a peace; and
it were much to be wished that God had put it into your heart, that you had as
effectually endeavored, and studied the peace of the kingdom, as in words you
seem to pretend; but as the other day, it was represented to you, that actions
must expound intentions: Your actions have been clean contrary, and truly sir,
it does appear very plainly to the Court, that you have gone upon very
erroneous principles. The kingdom has felt it to their smart, and it will be
no comfort to you, to think of it; for sir, you have been heard to let fall
such language, as if you had not been subject to the law, or that the law had
not been your superior. The Court is very sensible of it: I hope, so are all
the understanding people of England. That the law is your superior: you ought
to have ruled according to the law, you ought to have done so, and your
pretense has been, that you have done so: But sir, the question is, who shall
be the expositors of the law, whether you and your party out of the Courts of
Justice shall take upon you to expound the law? Or whither the Courts of
Justice shall be the expounders themselves? nay this sovereign and high Court
of Justice, the Parliament of England, who may be well be obliged to be the
highest expounders of the law, since they are the sole makers of it. Sir, for
you to set your self with your single judgment, or for those who adhear unto
you, to set themselves against the highest Court of Justice, there is no law
for it? Sir, as the law is your superior, so truly, there is something that is
superior to the law, which is the Parent or Author of the law, and that is the
people of England: For as they are those who at first (as other countries have
done) did chose unto themselves this form of Government, that justice might be
administered and the peace preserved: so they gave laws unto their Governors,
according to which they were to govern; and if those laws should have proved
inconvenient or prejudicial to the public, they had a power in them reserved
to themselves to alter, as they should find cause.

It is very true, what some of your side have alleged; Rex non habet parem in
regno. This Court will affirm the same in some sense, that whilst King, you
have not your peer; for you are major singulis, but they will aver again, that
you are minor universis; and the same Author tells you that in exhibitione
juris, you have no power, but they are quasi minimus.

This we know to be law, Rex habet superiorem Deum and legem, etiam and Curiam,
and so says the same Author; and he makes bold to proceed further; Debent ei
fraenum ponere, they ought to bridle him. We know very well the stories of old:
we cannot be ignorant of those wars that were called the Barons wars, when the
Nobility of the land did stand out for the liberty and the propriety of the
subject, and would not suffer the Kings that did invade their liberties to play
the tyrants, but did call them to an account for it, and did fraenum ponere.
But sir, If the Nobility of the land, do forbear to do their duty now, and are
not so mindful of their own honor and the kingdoms good, as the Barons of
England of old have been; certainly, the Commons of England will not be
unmindfull of what is requisite for their preservation and their safety.
Justitiae fruendi causa Reges constituti sunt. By this we learn that the end of
having Kings or Governors, is for their enjoying of justice, that is the end.
Now sir, If the King will go contrary to that end, or if any governor will go
contrary to the end of his government, he must understand, that he is but an
Officer in trust, and that he ought to discharge that trust, and order is to be
taken for the animadversion and punishment of such an offending Governor.

Sir, This is not a law of yesterday (since the time of the division betwixt
you and the Parliament) but it is a law of old; And we know very well both the
Authors and the Authorities that acquaint us what the law was in that point on
the election of Kings, when they took their Oath to be true unto the people;
and if they did not observe it, there were those remedies instituted which are
called Parliaments. The Parliaments were they that were to adjudge (the very
words of the Authors, the plainness and wrongs done by the King and Queen, or
by their children; such wrongs especially when the people could have no where
else a remedy. Sir, this is the Case of the people of England, they could not
have their remedy else where but in Parliament.

Sir, Parliaments were instituted for that intent, it was their main end, that
the grievances of the people might be redressed, and truly, if the Kings of
England had been rightly mindful of themselves, they were never more in
Majesty or State, than in the time of the Parliament: but how forgetful some
have been, Histories have informed us; and we our selves have a miserable, a
lamentable, and a sad experience of it.

Sir, by the old Laws of England (I speak these things the rather to you,
because you were pleased to affirm the other day, that you thought you had as
much knowledge in the law as most Gentlemen of England. It is very well, Sir;
and truly sir, it is very fit for the Gentlemen of England to understand the
laws, under which they must live, and by which they must be governed; And then
Sir, the scripture says, they that know their Masters will and do it not; you
know what follows, the law is your Master, the acts of Parliament) the
Parliaments were anciently to be kept twice in the year, as we find in our old
Author, that the Subject upon any occasion might have a remedy and a redress
for his grievance. Afterward by several acts of parliament in the days of
your Predecessor Edward the third; they were to be but once a year. What the
Intermission of parliaments in your times has produced, is very well known,
and the sad consequences of it; as also what in the interim instead of
parliaments, there has been by you, by a high and arbitrary hand introduced
upon the people. But when God by his providence had so far brought it about,
that you could no longer decline the calling of a parliament, a parliament was
called, where it may appear what your ends were against your ancient and native
Kingdom of Scotland, but this parliament of England not serving your turn
against them, you were pleased to dissolve it. Not long after, another great
necessity occasioned the calling of this parliament, and what your Designs and
Endeavors all along have been for the crushing and confounding of it, has
been most notorious to the whole kingdom. And truly Sir, in that you did strike
at all, It had been a sure way to have brought about that which this Charge
does lay upon you; your intention to subvert the fundamental laws of the land,
for the great Bulwarks of the peoples liberty, is the parliament of England,
and to subvert and root up that, which your aim has been to do, would
certainly at one blow, have confounded the liberties and the properties of
England.

Truly Sir, It makes me to call to mind (I cannot forbear to express it) for
sir, we must deal plainly with you according to the merits of your Cause, for
so is our Commission, It makes me, I say, to call to mind what I have read of a
great Roman Emperor, a great Roman Tyrant, I may call him, Caligula by name,
who wished that the people of Rome had but one neck, that at one blow he might
cut it off: Your proceedings have been something like to this, the people of
England have been and are no where else to be represented but in parliament;
and could you have but confounded that, you had at one blow cut off the neck of
England: But God has reserved better things for us, and has been pleased to
break your forces and to overthrow your designs, and to bring your person into
custody, that you might be answerable unto justice.

Sir, we know very well, that it is a question which has been much pressed by
your side, By what presidents we shall proceed. Truly sir, for presidents, I
shall not at this present make any long discourse on that subject; howsoever, I
shall acquaint them that it is no new thing to cite presidents all most out of
all Nations, where the people (when power has been in their hands) have not
sticked to call their Kings to an account, and where a change of Government
has ensued upon the occasion of the Tyranny and misgovernment of those that
have been placed over the people. I will not waste time, to mention France or
Spain, or the Empire of Germany, or any other country; Volumnes may be written
of it: But truly sir, that president of the kingdom of Arragon has by some of
us been thought upon. The justice of Arragon, is as a man tanquam in medio
positus, it is placed between the people of that country and the king of Spain;
so that if wrong be done by the King of Arragon, the justice of Arragon has
power to reform that wrong and he is acknowledged, the Kings superior; and
bring the grand prisoner of the privileges, and liberties of the people; he
has prosecuted against the Kings for their misgovernment.

Sir, What the Tribunes were heretofore to Rome, and what the Ephori were to
the State of Lacedemon, we sufficiently know, they were as the parliament of
England to the English State: and though Rome seemed to have lost her liberty
when once the Emperors were constituted; yet you shall find some exemplar
Acts of justice even done by the Senate of Rome, on the great Tyrant of his
time Nero, who was by them condemned and adjudged unto death. But why Sir,
should I make mention of these Foreign Histories and Examples unto you. If we
shall look but over the Tweede, we shall find examples enough in your native
Kingdom of Scotland. If we look on your first king Forgusius, he was an
elective King, he died and left two sons, both in their minority: The elder
brother afterward giving small hopes to the people, that he would govern them
well; so because he endeavored to have supplant his Uncle, who was chosen by
the people, to govern them in his minority; he was rejected by the people for
it, and the younger brother was chosen, etc.

Sir, I will not take upon me to express what your Histories do at large
declare; you know very well that you are the hundred and nineth King of
Scotland; to mention all the Kings, which the people of that kingdom,
according to their power and privilege, have made bold to deal withal,
either to banish, imprison, or put to death, would be too long a story for this
time and place. Reges (say your own Authors) we created Kings, at first, Leges,
etc. we imposed Laws upon them, and as they were chosen by the Suffrages of the
people at the first, so upon the same occasion, by the same Suffrages they may
be taken down again; and of this, I may be bold to say, that no Kingdom in the
world has yielded a more plentiful experience, than your native Kingdom of
Scotland, on the deposition and the punishment of their transgressing Kings.

I need not go far for an Example, your Grandmother was set aside, and your
father an Infant crowned. This State has done the like in England. The
Parliament and people of England, have made bold to call their King to an
account therein, frequent Examples of it in the Saxons time, the time before
the Conquest, and since the Conquest, there have not wanted some presidents:
King Edward the second, King Richard the second, were so dealt with by the
Parliament, and were both deposed, and deprived, and truly Sir, whosoever shall
look into their stories, shall not find the Articles that are charged upon them
to come near to the height, and the Capitalnesse of the crimes that are laid to
your charge, nothing near.

Sir, you were pleased the other day to allege your Descent, and I did not
contradict it, but take all together, if you go higher than the Conquest, you
shall find that for almost a thousand years these things have been, and if you
come down since the Conquest, you are the four and twentieth King from William
called the Conqueror, and you shall find one half of them to come merely from
the State, and not merely upon the point of Descent. This were easy to be
instanced. The time must not be lost that way. I shall only represent what a
grave and learned Judge said in his time, who was well known unto you, the
words are since printed for posterity: That although there were such a thing as
a Descent many times, yet the Kings of England ever held the greatest assurance
of their Titles, when it was declared by Parliament. And Sir, your Oath, and
the manner of your Coronation, does planly show, that the Kings of England,
although its true by the Law, the next person in blood is designed, yet if
there were a just cause to refuse him, the people of England might do it. For
there is a Contract and a bargain made betwixt the King and his people, and
your Oath is taken, and certainly Sir, the Bond is reciprocal, for as you are
Liege Lord, so are they Liege Subjects, and we know very well that Legantis est
duplex, the one is a Bond of perfection, that is due from the Sovereign, the
other is a Bond of Subjection which is due from the Subject, for if this Bond
be once broken, farewell Sovereignty, Subjectio trahit, etc.

These things may not be denied, for I speak it the rather (and I pray God it
may work upon your heart) that you may be sensible of your miscarriages, for
whether you have been as you ought to be, a Protector of England, or a
destroyer of England, let all England judge, or all the world that has beheld
it; and though Sir, you have it by inheritance, in the way that is spoken of,
yet it cannot be denied, but your Office is an Office of Trust, and indeed an
Office of the highest Trust that can be lodged in any single person. For as you
were the grand Administrator of Justice, and others were but as your delegates,
to see it executed through your Dominions. If your great Office were to do
Justice, and preserve your people from wrong, if instead of executing Justice,
you will be the grand and public disturber of the peace, surely this is
contrary to your Office and your Trust. Now Sir, if it be an office of
inheritance (as you speak of your Title by descent) let all men understand,
that great Offices are seizable, and forfeitable, as if you had it but for a
year, or for your life. It will therefore much concern you to take into your
serious consideration, your great miscarriages in this nature.

Truly Sir, I shall not in this place undertake to give you the particulars of
the many miscarriages of your Reign, whatsoever they have been, they are
notoriously known. It had been happy for the Kingdom, and for your self also,
if they had not been so much known, and so much felt, as they are every where
complained on, and reported.

Sir, that we are now upon by the command of the highest Court, has been and
is to bring you to your Trial, and to judge you for these great offenses of
yours: Sir, the Charge has called you Tyrant, a Traitor, a murderer, and a
public enemy to the Common wealth; Sir, it had been well, if these terms might
rightly and justly have been omitted; nay, if any one of them all.


King, Ha!


President, Truly, we have been told, Rex est, qui been regit, Tyrannus qui
populum opprimit, and if that be the definition of a Tyrant, then see if you
come short of it in your Actions, and whether not the highest Tyrant by that
way of arbitrary Government, which you sought to introduce, and were putting
upon the people. Examine with your self, if that were not as high an act of
Tyranny, as any of your predecessors were guilty of, yea many degrees beyond
it.

Sir, the Term Traitor cannot be spared, we shall easily conclude that it does
enforce and denote a breach of Trust, and it must be supposed to be done by a
superior, and therefore as the people of England, might have encurred that
term, if they had been truly guilty of it, as to the definition of the Law; so
on the other side when you did break your Trust to the Kingdom, you did break
your Trust to your superior; For the Kingdom is that for which you were
trusted; And therefore when you are called to an account for this breach of
trust, you are called to account by your superior. Minimus Majorem in judicium
vocat: And Sir the people of England cannot be so wanting to themselves, (whom
God has dealt so miraculously and gloriously for) they having both power and
their great enemy in their hand, but they must proceed to Justice to themselves
and to you; For Sir, the Court could heartily desire that you would lay your
hand upon your heart, and consider, what you have done amiss, and that you
would endeavor to make your peace with God. Truly Sir, These are too high
Crimes, Tyranny and Treason. There is a third, if those two had not been, and
that is murder, which is laid to your charge also. All the bloody murders that
have been committed since the Division betwixt you and your people, must be
laid to your charge. Sir, It is a heinous and a crying sin, and truly Sir, If
any man will ask us what punishment is due unto a murderer, let Gods law, let
man's speak. I will presume you are so well read in the holy Scripture as that
you know what God himself has said concerning the shedding of man's blood, Genesis
9. and Numb. 35. will tell you what the punishment is, and this Court in the
behalf of the Kingdom are sensible of that innocent blood, that has been shed,
and the land indeed stands still defiled with that blood and as the Text has
it; It can no way be cleansed, but by the shedding of the blood of him who shed
that blood. Sir, We know no dispensation from this blood in the Commandment,
Thou shall do no Murder, we do not know but that it extends to Kings as well
as to the meanest peasants, the meanest of the people, the Command is
universal. Sir, Gods law forbids it, man's law forbids it; nor do we know that
there is any manner of execution, not even in man's laws, for the punishment of
Murder in you. It Is true, that in the Case of Kings, every private hand, is not
to put forth its self to this work, for their reformatian or punishment; but
the people represented having power in their hands (were there but one wilful
Act of murder by you committed) have power to convent you, and to punish you
for it.

The weight Sir, then lying upon you in all these respects, that have been
spoken, for your Tyranny, Treason, Breach of Trust, and the murders that have
been committed, surely it should drive you into a sad consideration concerning
your eternal estate. I know it cannot be acceptable to you, to hear any such
things as these mentioned from this Court, for so do we call our selves, and
justify our selves to be a Court, and a High Court of Justice, authorized by
the highest and solemnest Court of the Kingdom, as has been often already
said. And although you have indeavored, what lay in you to discourt us; yet we
do take knowledge of our selves to be such a Court, as can administer justice
to you, as we are bound in duty to it.

Sir, All I shall say, before the reading of the Sentence, is but this. The
Court does heartily desire, that you will seriously consider of those Evils,
that you stand guilty of. You said well the other day, you wished us to have
God before our eyes. Truly Sir, I hope all of us have so, that God whom we
acknowledge to be King of Kings and Lord of Lords, that God with whom there is
no respect of persons; that God who is the avenger of Innocent blood; that God
have we before our eyes, that God who bestows a Curse upon them, who in the case
of guilty malefactors that deserve death, do withhold their hands from shedding
of blood: Sir, That God we have before our eyes, and were it not that the
Conscience of our duty has called us into this place and this employment, you
should have had no appearance of a Court here. But sir, we must prefer our
respect unto God and to the Kingdom, above any respect whatsoever; and
although at this present, many of us, if not all of us are severely threatened
by some of your party, what they intend to do; yet we do here declare, that we
shall not decline or forbear the doing of our Duty in the administration of
Justice, even to your self; and that according to the merit of your offense;
although God should permit those men to effect all their bloody designs in
hand against us. Sir, we will say, and we will declare it as those Children in
the fiery furnace, who refused to worship the Golden Image, that Nebuchadonazar
had set up. That their God was able to deliver them from the danger they were
near unto; but if he did not deliver them, yet they would not fall down and
worship the golden Image. We shall make this application of it. That though we
should not be delivered from those bloody hands and hearts, who conspire the
overthrow of the Kingdom in general, and of our selves in particular, for
being actors in this great work of Justice; though I say, we should perish in
the work, yet by the grace and in the strength of God, we are resolved to go on
with it. And those are the entire resolutions of us all.

Sir, I say, for your self, that we do heartily wish and desire that God would
be pleased to give you a sense of your sins, that you may see wherein you have
done amiss, and that you may cry unto him, that God would deliver you from
blood guiltiness. A good King, David by Name, was once guilty of that
particular guilt; he was otherwise upright, saving in the matter of Vriah.
Truly Sir, the History does represent unto us, that he was a repentant King,
and and he had died for his sin, but that God was pleased to be indulgent to
him, and to grant him his pardon, Thou shall not die (says the Prophet) but
the child shall dye; Thou have given cause to the Enemies of God to blaspheme.


King. I would only desire to be heard, but one word, before you give
sentence, and it is that (to satisfy the world when I am dead) you would but
hear me concerning those great Imputations which you have laid unto my charge.


President. Sir, you must now give me leave to proceed, for I am not far from
your Sentence, and your time is now past.


King. I shall desire you, that you will take these few words into your
consideration; For whatsoever sentence you shall pronounce against me in
respect of those heavy imputation, which I find you have laid to my charge;
yet Sir, It is most true that --


President. Sir, I must put you in mind, I must Sir, although at this time
especially, I would not willingly interrupt you in any thing you have to say,
which is proper for us to admit; but Sir, you have not owned us as a Court, and
you look upon us, as a sort of people huddled together, and we know not what
uncivil language we receive from your party.


King. I know nothing of that.


President. You disavow us as a Court, and therefore for you to address
yourself to us, whom you do not acknowledge to be a Court for us (I say) to
judge what you shall speak is not to be permitted; and the truth is all along
from the very first, you have been pleased to disavow and disown us; The Court
needed not to have heard you one word; for unless they be acknowledged a Court
and engaged, it is not proper for you to speak.

Sir, We have given you too large an indulgence of time already, and admitted
so much delay, that we may not admit of any more. If it were proper for us, we
should hear you very freely, not decline to hear the most that you could speak
to the greatest advantage for your self, whether it were totally, or but in
part excusing those great and heinous charges which are laid upon you. But I
shall trouble you no longer, your sins are of so large a dimention, that if you
do but seriously think of them, they will drive you into a sad consideration;
and we wish that they may improve in you a sad and serious repentance. And it
is the desire of the Court, that you may be so penitent for what you have done
a miss, that God may at least, have mercy on your better part. As for the
other, it is our part and duties, to do that which the law prescribes, we are
not now here jus dare, but jus dicere; we cannot be unm^ndfull of what the word
of God tells us. To acquit the guilty, is of an equal abomination, as to condemn
the Innocent; we may not acquit the guilty, what sentence the law pronounces
to a traitor, a tyrant, a murderer, and a public enemy to the Country, that
sentence you are now to hear read unto you, and that is the Sentence of the
Court.

Hereupon the Lord President commanded the Sentence to be read; Whereupon M.
King, who was Crier of the Court, having commanded silence by his Oyes, the
Clerk read the sentence, which was drawn up in Parchment, and did run in these
words.

Whereas the Commons of England in Parliament, had appointed them an high Court
of Justice for the trial of Charles Stuart King of England, before whom he had
been three times convented, and at the first time, a Charge of High Treason and
other Crimes and Misdemeanors was read in the behalf of the Kingdom of
England; which Charge follows in these words:

This Charge being read (said the Clerk) Charles Stuart was required to give his
answer, which he refused to do, but expressed these passages, and many more
such as these are, in refusing to answer.

The Clerk (having repeated many passages, during the time of his trial, in
which the King showed an averseness to acknowledge the Court) did proceed to
read the Sentence, which was in these words.

For all which Treasons and Crimes, this Court does adjudge, That the said
Charles Stuart as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and a public Enemy, shall be
put to death, by severing his Head from his Body.

This Sentence being read, the Lord President said; This Sentence now read and
published, is the Act, Sentence, Judgment, and resolution of the whole Court.

Hereupon, the Court stood up, as assenting to what the President said.


King. Will you hear me one word Sir?


President. Sir, you are not to be heard after the Sentence.


King. No Sir.


President. No Sir, By your favor Sir, -- Guard withdraw your Prisonner?


King. I may speak after the sentence -- By your favor Sir, I may speak after
Sentence ever. The Guard drawing to him, he said unto them; by your favor
hold: and turning to the President, he said; the Sentence Sir, -- I say Sir, I
do -- but being not permitted to proceed, he said, I am not suffered to speak,
expect what Justice other people will have.


Crier. All manner of persons that have any thing else to do, are to depart at
this time, and to give their attendance in the Painted Chamber, to which place
this Court does forthwith adjourn it self.

Then the Court arose, and the Kings guard did bring him to Sir Robert Cottons
house, and he was afterward conducted to Saint Jameses.


The names of those who were present at that High Court of Justice, when the
Sentence of Death was pronounced against Charles the first Monarck of great
Britain.
Sergeant Bradshaw President. John Lisle. William Gray. Ol. Cromwell L. G.
Comissary Genesis Ireton. Sir Hardres Waller. Colonel Harrison. Colonel Haley.
Colonel Pride. Col. Ewer. Lord Gray of Groby. Sir John Danvers. S. Thomas
Malleneret. Sir John Bourchier. William Heavningham Alderman Pennington Henry
Martin. Col. Purefoy. Col. Berkstead. Col. Thomlinson. Mr. Blakston. Mr.
Millington. Sir Gregory Norton. Col. Harvey. Col. Ven. Mr. Scot. Alderman
Andrews. Mr. Cawley. Mr. Burrel. Col. Stapeley. Col. Domnes. Mr. Norton. L.S.
Hammon. Mr. Love. Mr. Potter. Mr. Garland. Sir William Constable. Col. Ludlow.
Col. Hutchinson. Sir Miles Livesey. Mr. Dixwell. Colonel Fleetwood of Bucks.
Mr. Main. Jacob Temple. Mr. Blagrave. Col. White. Col. Titchburn. Col. Rout.
Col. Scroop. Col. Lilburn. Col. Dean. Col. Okey. Col. Hewsen. L. Col. Goff.
Cornelius Holland. Mr. Carew. John Joanes. Miles Corbet. Mr. Allen. Peregrine
Pelham. Col. Moors. Mr. Eldicer. Mr. Smith. Mr. Edwards. Mr. Clement. Col.
Wogan, etc.
His Majesty's Reasons. Against the pretended Jurisdiction of the High Court of
Justice, which he had intended to have given there on Monday Jan. 22. 1649.
Faithfully transcribed from the original Copy of the King.
SInce I have already made my Protestation, not only against the illegality of
this pretended Court, but that no power on earth, can justly call me (who am
your King) into question as a Delinquent. I would no longer have opened my
mouth on this Argument, but have referred my self to those things which I then
spoke, if this only concerned my own particular; But the duty which I ow to
God, to preserve the true liberty of my people does not permit me at this time,
I should be silent; for how can any free born Subject of England call his life
or any thing he does possess his own, if power without law can daily make new,
and abrogate the old and Fundamental Laws of this Land, which I judge to be the
present case? Wherefore when I was brought hither, I expected that you would
have studied to satisfy me in these Fundamentalls which do hinder me from
putting in my Answer to the pretended charge, but since I do observe, that
nothing which I can allege can persuade you to it (although negatives are not
so naturally proved, as affirmatives) yet I have thought good to declare unto
you the Reasons for which I am confident, you are not in a capacity to judge
me, nor the vilest man in England, for without showing my Reasons, I will not
(as you) be so unreasonably importunate, as to exact either belief or obedience
from my Subjects.

Here was I restrained, and not suffered to speak any more of Reasons, there is
no just process against any man, which deriveth not its authority, either from
the Law of God, or from the municipall Laws of the Land.

Now I am most sure, that the Process at this day made against me, cannot be
confirmed by the law of God; for on the contrary the necessity of obedience is
clearly confirmed, and straightly commanded in the old and new Testament; which
if it be denied, I am prepared presently to prove it; and as for the question
now in agitation, it is said there, Where the word of a King is, there is
power, and who can say unto him, what do thou? Eccles. 8. v. 4. Then as to
the laws of the land, I am as confident that no learned lawyer will affirm,
that any charge can be brought against the King, since they all go forth under
his name, and it is one of their axioms, that the King can not do an injury.
Moreover the law on which you do ground your process, is either old or new, if
it be old, show that law unto me, if it be new, tell me what Authority
established by the Fundamental laws of this land did give it birth and when?
but how the House of Commons can erect a Tribunal of Justice, which was never
one it self (as all lawyers will confess with me) I leave it to God and to the
world to judge; and it will seem most strange to any who ever have heard of the
laws of England, how they can pretend to make laws without either the King, or
the House of Peers.

Nevertheless it be admitted, but not granted, that a commission from the
people of England, is able to confirm your pretended power, yet I see nothing
that you can show for it for I am confident that you never asked that question
of the 10th man in the kingdom; and in this method you do a most apparent
injury, even to the poorest ploughman, if you ask not his consent, neither can
you pretend any color to this your pretended Commission, if you have not the
concurring voices of at least the greatest part of this Nation, of every degree
and quality, which you are so far from obtaining, that I am confident you never
so much as sought it.

You see then, that I do not only speak for my own Right, as I am your King,
but also for the true liberty of all my subjects, which consists not in
dividing the power of Government, but in living under such laws, and such a
Government, as may grant them the best security of their lives, and the
propriety of their goods. In this I ought not to be forgetful, neither do I
forget the privileges of both Houses of parliament, which these proceedings do
not only violate, but give an occasion of the greatest breaking of the public
faith; and such (I believe) as the like was never heard of before, with which I
will not at all, charge both Houses, for the pretended crimes which they impose
upon me, are far before the Treaty at Newport, in which when I assented to, and
did conclude as much as possibly lay in my power, and did justly expect the
assent of both Houses, I was suddenly taken from thence and carried away as a
prisoner, and against my will, I was hurried hither; and since I came to this
court, I cannot with all my Endeavors, defend the ancient laws and liberties
of this Kingdom, together with my just privileges, and as much as I can
possibly discern the upper House, which is the House of Lords, is totally
excluded.

And as for the House of Commons, it is too much known, that the greater part
of them are either imprisoned, or affrighted from sitting, so that if I had no
other Cause, this was sufficient enough to make me to protest against the
authority of your pretended tribunal. Besides all these things, the peace of
the Kingdom, is not the least part of my cares, and what hope can there be of
establishing it, as long as power reigns without the Rule of the Law,
changing the whole frame of the Government under which this Kingdom has
flourished these many ages; neither will I speak what is likely to follow, if
these unlawful proceedings shall yet continue against me; for I believe the
Commons of England, will give you no thanks for this change, especially, when
they shall call into their minds, how happily they heretofore have lived in the
Reigns of Queen Elisabeth, and of the King my Father, and in my own Reign
before the beginning of these unhappy tumults; and they will have a just cause
to doubt, if they shall be so happy in any new Government.

In that time it will most evidently appear that I only took up Arms to defend
the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom against those who opposed my power, and
totally would have subverted the ancient Government.

Having so briefly declared my Reasons to you, for which I could not submit to
your pretended Authority, without violation of the Trust which God has
committed to me for the safety and liberty of my people. I expect from you
either clearer Reasons to convince my Judgment, by demonstrating to me that I
am in an Error, (and then surely, I shall be ready to give you an Answer) or
else, that you suspend your present proceedings.

This I had determined to have spoken in Westminster Hall on Monday, the two
and twentieth of January, but against Reason I was prohibited to pronounce my
Reasons.

In the year 1648. English style. 1649. vulgar style.

The End.
The Speech of King Charles upon the Scaffold at the gate of White Hall;
immediately before the execution. January 30.
ABout ten in the morning, the King was brought from Saint Jameses Court, he
did walk on foot through the Park, with a Regiment of Foot, one half before
him, and the other behind him, their Colors flying, and their Drums beating,
his private guard of Partisan with some of his Gentlemen did go immediately
bare headed before him, and some part of them behind him; but those who were
next of all unto him behind, were Dr. Juxon and Colonel Thomlinson, to the
last of whom the care and charge of his Person was committed, these two being
barehead did talk with him all along the Park, and as you go up the stairs into
the Gallery, and so into the Cabanet chamber, where he used to lie, in which
place, he continued at his Devotion and refused to dine, because he that
morning had taken the Sacrament, only about one hour before he came forth he
drank a Glass of Claret wine, and did eat a crust of bread about twelve of the
clock at Noon.

From thence he was accompanied by Doctor Juxon, Col. Thomlinson, and other
Officers formerly appointed to be his Guard, and with the private Guard of
Partisans, with musketeers on either side, through the banqueting house, at
the farther end, on the outside whereof the Scaffold was erected, near unto the
Gate of White Hall. The Scaffold was hung round with black, and the floor was
covered with black, and the ax and the Block laid on the middle of the
Scaffold. There were several Companies of Foot, and Troops of Horse placed on
the one side of the Scaffold, and the other, and multitudes of people that
thronged to see so rare a spectacle were very great.

The King was no sooner come upon the Scaffold, but he looked very earnestly on
the Block, and asked Col. Hacker, if there were no higher, and then spoke thus,
directing his speech chiefly to Colonel Thomlinson.

I Shall be very little heard by any of the people, I shall therefore speak a
word or two to you who are here. Indeed I could hold my peace very well, if I
did not think that my silence would make some men think, that I did submit to
the guilt, as well as to the punishment; but I conceive it is my duty, First
unto God, and afterward to my Country, to vindicate my self, as an honest
man, a good King, and a good Christian.

I shall begin first with my Innocence; In Troth I think it not very needful
for me to insist long upon this, for all the world knows that I never did begin
War with the two Houses of Parliament, and I call God to witness, to whom I
must shortly make my account, that I never did intend to incroach upon their
privileges: they began with me, It was the Militia they began upon, they
confessed that the Militia was mine, but they thought it fit to have it from
me, and to be short if any man will look to the Dates of Commissions, of their
Commissions ormine; and likewise to the Declarations, will find clearly, that
they began those unhappy troubles, not I; so that as for the guilt of these
enormous crimes, which are laid upon me, I hope in God, that God will clear me
of them.

I am in charity, I will not, and God forbid that I should lay it upon the
two-Houses of Parliament, there is no necessity of either; I hope they are free
from the Guilt, for I do believe that evil instruments between them and me
have been the chief cause of all this bloodshed, so that by way of speaking, as
I find my self clear of this, I hope, and I pray God, that they may too; yet
for all this, God forbid, that I should be so ill a Christian, as not to say
that Gods judgments are just upon me. Many times he does inflict Justice by an
unjust Sentence; this is ordinary; I will only say, that an unjust Sentence,
The Earl of Strafford
That I suffered to take effect, is punished now by an unjust Sentence upon my
self. This is to show you, (as I have said) how far I am an innocent man.

Now for to show you, that I am a good Christian, I hope there is a good man
Pointing at Doctor Juxon.
, who will bear witness with me, that I have forgiven all the world, and even
those in particular, who have been the chief causers of my Death; who they are,
God knows. I do not desire to know, I pray God forgive them: But this is not
all, my Charity must go further, I wish that they may repent; for indeed, they
have committed a great sin in that particular; I pray God with Saint Stephen
that this be not laid to their charge; nay, not only so, but that they may
take the right way to the peace of the Kingdom; for my charity commands me,
not only to forgive particular men, but my charity commands me to endeavor to
the last gasp the peace of the Kingdom. This Sirs, I do wish with all my Soul,
and I do hope, (there are some Turning to some Gentlemen who took his Speech in
short writing.
who will carry it further) that they may endeavor the peace of the Kingdom.

Now Sirs, I must show you both how you are out of the way, and I will put you
into a way: First, you are out of the way; for certainly, all the way in which
as yet you have gone, as I could ever find out by any thing, is in the way of
conquest; certainly this is an ill way, for conquest Sirs, in my opinion, is
never just, except there be a good, just cause, either for matter of wrong, or
to defend a just Title, and if in the prosecution of the quarrel, you shall go
beyond this, it will make that unjust at the end, which was just at the
beginning. But if it be only matter of conquest, therein it is a great
robbery, as a pirate said to Alexander, that he was a great robber, and that he
himself was but a petty robber: and thus Sirs, I do think, that the way you are
in, is much out of the way; Now Sirs, for to put you in the way, believe it,
you will never do right, nor will God ever prosper you, until you give God his
due, and the King his due, that is, in their course of time, my Successors, and
until you give the people their due; I am as much for them as any of you are.
You must give God his due, by regulating aright his Church according to his
Scripture; your church is now out of order, for to set you particularly in a
way now, I cannot, but only by a Synod of the whole Nation, who being freely
called, and freely debating amongst themselves, may by Gods blessing settle the
Ghurch, when every opinion is freely and clearly discussed.

For the King indeed, I will not much insist -- Then turning to a Gentleman
whose cloak he observed to touch the edge of the Ax, he said unto him, Hurt not
the Ax, meaning by blunting the the edge thereof, for that he said might hurt
him. Having made this short digression, he proceeded; For the King, the laws of
the land will clearly instruct you, what you have to do; but because it
concerns my own particular, I only do give you but a touch of it.

As for the People, truly I desire their liberty and freedom, as much as any
whosoever; but I must tell you, that their liberty and freedom consists in
having of government by those laws, by which their lives, and their goods may
be most their own. It is not for them to have a share in Government, that is
nothing Sirs, appertaining unto them. A Subject and a Sovereign are clean
different things; and therefore until that be done, I mean, until the people
be put into that liberty, which I speak of; certainly they will never enjoy
themselves.

Sirs, It was for this that now I am come here; If I would have given way to an
arbitrary power to have all laws changed according to the power of the sword; I
needed not to have come hither, and therefore I tell you, and I pray God that
it be not laid to your charge, that I am the martyr of the people.

In troth Sirs, I shall not hold you much longer, I shall only say this unto
you, that in truth, I could have desired some little longer time, because I had
a desire to put this, that I have said into a little more order, and to have a
little better digested it than I have now done; and therefore, I hope you will
excuse me.

I have delivered my conscience, I pray God that you do take those courses,
that are most for the good of the Kingdom, and your own salvations.


Doct. Juxon. Will your Majesty although the affection of your Majesty to
Religion is very well known; yet to satisfy expectation, be pleased to speak
something for the satisfaction of the world.


King. I thank you very heartily (my Lord) because I had almost forgotten it.
In troth Sirs, my Conscience in Religion, I think is already very well known to
all the world; and therefore I declare before you all, that I die a Christian,
according to the profession of the Church of England, as I found it left by my
Father; and this honest man Pointing at Dr. Iuxon.
I think will witness it. Then turning to the Officers he said; Sirs, excuse
me for this same, I have a good cause, and I have a gracious God, I will say no
more. Then turning to Colonel Hacker he said. Take care they do not put me to
pain, and Sir this if it please you; but then a Gentleman, one Mr. Clerk,
coming near the Ax, the King said, take heed of the Ax, pray take heed of the
Ax: Then the King turning to the Executioner, said, I shall say but very short
prayers, and when I stretch forth my hands -- Then the King called to Doctor
Juxon for his Nightcap, and having put it on, he said to the Executioner: Will
my hair trouble you? who desired him to put it all under his Cap, which the
King did accordingly by the assistance of the Executioner and the Bishop; the
King then turning to Doctor Juxon said, I have a good Cause and a gracious God
on my side.


Doctor Juxon, There is but one stage more, This stage is turbulent indeed and
troublesome, but very short, and which in an instant will lead you a most long
way from earth to Heaven, where you shall find great Joy and Solace.


King, I go from a corruptible to an incorruptible Crown, where can be no
trouble, none at all.


Doctor Juxon; You shall exchange a temporal Crown for an eternal one, it is
a good change.

The King then said unto the Executioner, Is my hair as it should be? He then
did put off his cloak, and his George, which he gave to Doctor Juxon, saying,
Remember It is thought to be delivered to the Prince.
. He immediately afterward, did put off his Doublet, and did put on his cloak
again, and looking on the Block, he said unto the Exkcutioner, you should make
it to be steddie.


Execut. It is so.


King, It might have been something higher.


Execut. It cannot be made higher now.


King, When I shall stretch forth my hands in this manner, then --

After that, when standing, he had spoke two or three words unto himself, with
his hands, and eyes lifted up toward Heaven, immediately stooping down, he
laid his neck upon the Block, and when the Executioner had again put all his
hair under his cap. The King said, Stay till I give the Sign.


Execut. So I do, if it please your Majesty; and after a very little respite,
the King did stretch forth his hands, and immediately the Executioner at one
blow did sever his head from his Body.


Sic transit gloria Mundi.
The present War parralel'd. Or A brief Relation of the five years Civil
Wars of Henry the the third, King of England, with the event and issue of
that unnatural War, and by what course the Kingdom was then settled again.
HEnry the third of of that Name, (a man more pious than prudent a better man
than King) swayed the Scepter of this Kingdom 56. years. The former part of
his Reign was very calm, the latter as tempestuous.

The main Tempest was thus raised, the King for many years during that high
calm, had sequestered himself wholly to his harmless sports and recreations,
and entrusted the whole managery of the State to his officers and Ministers.
These taking advantage of his Majesty's carelessness (the main fault of this
King) insensibly sucked and drained the Revenues of Crown and Kingdom; till
the King awakened by extreme necessity, began to enquire, not how he came in
(for his necessities would not permit that) but how he might get out.

The best way that his evil Counselors could find to relieve their Master and
save themselves, was (the ordinary way of supply in Parliament declined, to
have recourse to Monopolies, Patents, and other extraordinary and illegal
Taxations. But (praeter natural courses are never long-lived) the free born
English would not long endure such slavery.

When the King saw there was no other remedy, he throws himself into the bosom
of his people for relief and advise in Anciently called the wood or mad
Parliament ordinarily in History styled i^sanum Parlimentum. Fabian.
Parliament Chron. Norwic.
where they undutifully taking advantage of his Majesty's extremities, in stead
of relief outbrave him publicly, with a Like the Remonst. of December. 15. 1641.
Catalogue of all the mistakes, and all the misfortunes of his former
government; which coming to the peoples ears soon stole away their hearts, and
alienated their affections from their Sovereign, and left him wholly to the
mercy and will of his Parliament. They sensible hereof, and that the reins of
Government were now cast upon their necks, (like Apollo's Horses, when Phaeton
had the driving of them) ran violent by courses, till they set the whole
Kingdom on fire.

Matt. West. and Mat. Paris.
So far they went, as to make an Ordinance, That whereas there was a present
want of a through Reformation in the State, the Government whereof should be
put into the hands of four and twenty, Qui Regia potestate suffulti, who being
armed with Sovereign power, should take upon them the whole care and Government
of the Kingdom, should nominate and appoint the Chancellor, Treasurer, Chief
Justices, Governors of Forts, Castles, and Navy, and all other great Officers
and Ministers of State for all times to come.

To this traitorous Ordinance, the King, Metu incarcerationis perpetuae
compulsus est consentire, Mat. West.
for fear of perpetual imprisonment, was enforced to give his Royal assent:
and for further security, to be content to give it under the great Seal, and
upon Oath, that whenever he attempted to assume unto him his Regal Power,
Liceat omnibus de Regno nostro contra nos insurgere, Chron. orig. sub sigillo.
and ad gravamen nostram opem and operam dare, ac si nobis in nullo tenerentur.
It should be lawful for all his Subjects to rise against and oppose him, as if
they owed no allegiance to him.

Strange it is, that he should be content to be a mere Cipher, Nil nisi pro
umbra a nominis habebatur. Mat. West.
that so lately was the only Figure of the whole Kingdom, that he should be
content to part with at once with every tittle of Sovereignty, but the bare
title! but prodigious, that so many choice Senators, so many Fathers and Judges
of Law, and conscience, should so forget God and themselves, as to give their
assent for the total subverting of the Regal authority, when as they had all
taken their corporal oaths, De terreno honor dicto Regi and haeredibus ejus
servando. Mat. West.
Which Oath was well kept (says mine Author) Ordinando ne unquam regerent,
sed semper ab aliis regerentur: by making an Ordinance that they should never
rule again, but always be ruled by others.

These four and twenty thus settled, Regist. Roffen.
continue the Parliament during their pleasure, put the Kingdom in a posture
of Defense, place Governors of their own choosing, Such as they could confide
in, in the chief Forts, nominate and appoint Judges of Assize, Sheriffs of
Counties, Coroners, Bailiffe (discharging those that were made by the King)
Took an Oath of them all respectively.

And here they would make the people believe they should never be troubled with
licentious Soveraigntie again; (but never more as it proved:) for now every one
of them began to value his own worth, and to hammer his head on every design,
that might enlarge his own power and command. In brief of so many subjects they
became totidem tyranni, as the book of Saint Albanes speaks) so many Tyrants,
and for one bad King before, they have four and twenty worse.

But England (like old Rome) cannot long endure more Kings than one: great
faction and deadly feud arose between the chiefest of them; which the rest
taking into consideration, and perceiving that by so many heads, not only
Monarchy was dissolved, but faction and debate every day increased upon them,
so wrought, that all, but five, agreed that the foresaid Ordinance should be
repealed, and the King restored to his pristine power.

But those five Members stiffly oppose this agreement, and for the maintenance
of their cause, trahunt multos pseudo prophetas, lupos in ovium vestimentis,
qui contra Christi Vicaraos, M. Westminster. Preaching that Religion could never be
thoroughly reformed, or the differences fully composed sine gladio materiali,
and that all that should lose their lives in this cause were Martyrs. Rishang.
and Christu^ Domini Rege^ ipsum murmurant, non ut spiritus sanctus eloqui; sed
ut superioris potestatis contemptores obloqui dabant: they drew to their side
many lying Ministers (Wolves in the sheeps clothing) who murmr and speak evil
against the Lords anointed, not as the Holy spirit gave them utterance, but as
the despiser of dignities gave them their Lessons.

These Incendiaries by their sheeps clothing (a fair conversatio^) drew the
people every where to side with them against the K. and those that wished the
King his former power. Which the King perceiving, and how the multitude grew
every day more and more tumultuous, Chr. Dunst.
(for all things were now carried by tumults) was advised by his Privy Council
to withdraw himself (lest His person might be endangered) from the Parliament
(then held at Westminster) to His Castle of Windsore.

After some contestation at this distance, it was agreed upon by the King and
his adherents, and the five members and their adherents, that the difference
should be referred to the French Kings arbitrament. Rishanger
The King of France upon the day of hearing, gave sentence that the said
Ordinance, whereby the King was deprived of his Regal power, should be made
null.

The five members and their accomplices seeing this, (notwithstanding they had
bound themselves by oath to stand to his award) flew off, and resolving to have
their own wills, drew into arms, made choice of the Earl of Leicester for their
General (and for their own private interest, pretending the public good) drew
the greatest part of the Kingdom after them, Cotton.
so easy it is to draw the fickle multitude to the wrong side) crying every
where at first, Liberty and Religion, though toward the end of the war not a
word of either.

By their fair pretenses, they gained so far upon the Londoners, Hollinsh.
that they generally enter into a Covenant to assist the Earl: For which
purpose (besides a new Major or Bailiffe) they choose two Commanders, Thomas
Pywelsden and Stephen Buckerell, at whose command, by the towling of Saint
Paul's great Bell, they were to be in arms upon any occasion. Their first
exploit was a march to Isleworth in a tumultuous manner, where they plundered
and fired the Kings brothers Manor house.

The Earls Army by this time on their march, plundered all that were
disaffected to their cause and proceedings, and imprisoned them: Rishanger.
especially those that stood any way affected to the Queen: for they all (but
most of all the Londoners) were most maliciously bent against her; insomuch
that as she was passing the Thames near the bridge, For dissuading the King to
stand to the aforesaid Ordinance of Parliament.
a rude rabble of the City got together on the bridge, and with confused
yellings cried, Drown the witch, etc. and by throwing dirt and stones at her,
drove her back: which impious affront was punctually remembered in the first
fight; as you shall hear anon:

Besides this main army under the Earl of Leicester, Rishanger
they had another army under the command of the Lord Ferrers, of (whom
descended the late Lord of Essex) who behaved himself insolently toward the
King, in destroying his Parks as he marched, etc. which in the conclusion cost
him dear; yet to delude the people, the main army bore before them the Kings
arms, and to show they were for the King, when they had displaced the old
Governors of the Kings Castles and Forts, and placed in such as they could
confide in, they gave them an Oath to be true to the King, and to keep those
Holds to the use and benefit of the King and State; yet when the King demanded
entrance at one of his Forts, Dover chron. Dunst.
wherein they had placed a Governor, he was kept out.

At Sea the Barons of the Cinque Ports seized the Kings ships, took great
Prizes, but they that sat at the Stern upon Land shared in those Prizes as the
fame then went.

By this time the King began to rouse himself, and finding nothing now left
him, but a good Cause and the hearts of his wiser subjects, yet by that and
these, and the assistance of his Brother Richard, King of the Romans, in a
short space he had raised a considerable Army. (A King can never be so down,
but he will rise again) with these he marched (and like a snow-ball increased by
motion) plundering the Rebels lands as he went to Northampton, which was
fortified against him by some of the chiefest of the Rebels; yet by a furious
assault he soon gained it.

Thence continuing his march into Sussex, near Jews, he received a Message
from the Earl, the tenor whereof was, That as for his Majesty they intended no
harm against him, but only desired that he would remove his evil Counselors
that did advise his Majesty against them, against the honor of the King, and
welfare of the Kingdom. The King in his Answer charges them with Rebellion and
disloyalty, and commands them to lay down their arms, and to return to their
obedience, that they might be received to mercy: but the Earl rejecting the
offer ( Cambdens Observation in the case of Robert Earl of Essex.
when Subjects have once broken their fealty and trust to their Sovereign they
never dare trust their Sovereign again) resolves to give the King battle.

Near Jews both Armies meet: One wing of the Earls Army was made up of London
troops, which the Prince being then General of the Kings horse, observing, and
remembering, (not without indignation) the abuse offered by the Londoners to the
Queen his Mother, he claps spurs to his horse, and all his Cavalry after him,
Equites, haec haec seditionum scelerumque omnium capita sunt, nunc, nunc
fortiter adjicite tela.
crying, [ Here, here, (my brave Cavaliers) are the main contrivers of all
Rebellions and mischief; Now, now, if ever charge home,] and so fell on with
that fury, that they presently fly: the Prince in an eager and hot pursuit
does great execution upon them for four miles. But this prosperous beginning of
the fight on the Kings side was the utter overthrow of the Kings forces: for
when the Earl perceived that the Prince (a young fiery spirit) with all the
Kings horse was gone so far in pursuit of the Londoners, he fell violently on
the Kings foot and soon routed them; took the King (his horse being slain under
him) prisoner. The Prince at length retreating, (when he saw all lost)
surrendered himself. There were taken in this fight (besides those royal
prisoners, the King, the Prince, the Kings brother, and his eldest Son) above
twenty Noblemen that were for the King; and slain about Southwel.
3400.

The Earl having thus gotten a complete victory, forth with endeavors to seize
all the Militia, Rishang.
and power of the Kingdom, for which end he carries the King about with him to
countenance his actions; but the rest of the royal prisoners he disposes in
several Garrisons.

And now the Earl believes all his own, and the people dream of nothing but
Peace, but alas the war was not begun till now: For when the torn remainder
of the loyal army that escaped at Jews, now keeping Garrison in Bristow, and
other noble spirits saw how insolently the Earl dealt with his and their
Sovereign, in barring him of his liberty, etc. They soon raised a considerable
power under the command of Roger Mortimer Earl of March: unto whom many flockt
out of Shropshire, Cheshire Herefordshire, and Worcester, that were well
affected to the King.

Moreover the Queen (who was a French woman) got over beyond Sea, to try her
friends for their asistance to restore her husband to his former liberty and
authority, Quod ad laudem and magnificentiam Aelionorae Anglorum Reginae libet
intexere (says one of that age) quod Domino suo, and Edvardo filio tam strenue
and tam viriliter tanquam virago potentissima succurrendis fortiter insudaverit.

But before these Forces were well united, the Rebels Forces were as well
divided: for debate arising, (as is usual in all confederations, where all
parties must be pleased, or else the knot will dissolve) between his Excellency
the Earl of Leicester and the Earl of Gloucester, because his Excellency,
minding his own private, more than the public good of his fellow Rebels
(without any respect had to his adjutants) ingrosses all to himself, disposes
of the royal prisoners at his own pleasure, seized on the revenues of the
Crown, and composition of dilinquents for his own use, (whereas they had
privately agreed before, Ea omnia aequa sort inter eos dividenda fore) In
brief, he shared all places of power and profit between himself, his sons and
his allies. Whereat Gloucester, (as good a man as he) stomackt and fell off with
his followers to the Prince, who by this time ( disponente Domino clavigero
carcerum, every thing working for the King) had made his escape out of prison
at Hereford: (for being allowed by his keepers to air himself sometimes on
horse back in the town Meadow, after he had tired two or three, at length he
mounts a special flight Nag, and putting spurs Custodibus valedixit) and came
safe to Wigmore Castle, where the Lord Mortimer lay with his Forces raised for
the King, so marched on with a great prwer, taking in (as they went) some strong
Garrisons of the Rebels, plundered their houses, drove their Cattle, etc.

Here the war grew hot, each side fortifying towns, plundering and driving all
round about to store the Garrisons: Men's houses (which were wont to be their own
Castles) were now made Castles, but the owners were least masters; all left to
the mercy of the rude soldier, the poor Countreymans dwelling house, pillaged
every where and searched, Rishanger
usque ad lectorum stramentum, to the very bedstraw: nor only men's houses, but
even Gods houses, the very Churches were not free from the profane hands of
plunderers; the highwayes lay unoccupied, no passing from Town to Town without
danger of robbing.

When the Prince, the Earl of Gloucester, the Earl of March, with the relics
of the Royal Army were united and well ordered, they resolved to give his
Excellency (the Earl of Leicester) battle: At Evesham in Worcestershire, by a
speedy and unexpected march they came upon him. The Earl seeing himself engaged
to fight, gave order that his own coat armor should be put upon the King, who
was then a prisoner in the Army, and that the King for the safety of his person
forsooth) should be placed in the front of the battle, that so if the battle
went against him, the King might be aimed at as General, and his Excellency
thereby make his escape. But the King at the first Charge called out to the
loyal Army, that he was their King, and so was preserved; yet not without the
loss of some of his own, (being wounded by a javelin) as well as his subjects
blood: the battle was very violent, and went sore against the Rebels; at length
the Earl himself (the head of this Rebellion) was cut off; at the instant of
whose death there happened such extraordinary lightning, and thick darkness,
that it struck a general horror and amazement into the hearts of the Rebels,
as if the King of Kings would now at last visibly revenge the Kings quarrel,
or as if they had seen Gods immediate hand against them, as once against Corah,
and the 250 Assembly men, Number. 16. v. 35. for the like rebellious practices.

In this signal Battle were slain (besides the Earl and his son) sixteen Lords
and Knights, and about ten thousand more of the Rebels part.

The Earls Corpse was strangely (though not undeservedly) handled by the people,
who were so enraged against him, the chief actour and author of their so much
mischief and misery, that (in dispight of him) they lopt off his head, hands,
feet, and privy members, and sent them (in scorn) for tokens to several
places; his body was buried in Evesham Church. Notwithstanding this, there were
many ignorant people (who had been by specious pretenses abused, and seduced to
that side) that were of opinion for a long time after, that he dyed a Martyr,
because it was in defense of their holy (as they thought, but indeed impious)
Covenant and Oath.

Two of the Earls sons were at the same fight taken prisones: not long after
they made an escape out of Prison, but cold not escape Gods vengeance on
Rebels; for in France, In miseriis dies suos finiverunt.

The Countess being banished, died a Nun in France. All the Earls Honors
and Possessions were conferred upon Edmond Earl of Lancaster, the Kings second
son. And thus ended this great fiery Meter in a stench. Thus fell our English
Cataline (as M. Cambden styles him) a man in show fair and honest, but indeed,
Vir pravo ingenio, and profunda perfidia: of a perverse disposition and
treacherous beyond any man's suspicion; after his Sovereign had heaped upon him
many high favors, as the Earldome of Leicester, and that high and honorable
office of Lord high Steward, and (to endear him the more had given him his own
Sister in marriage: in token of thankfulness, he does his utmost endeavor to
diminish the Kings known authority, to subject him to the wills of his
Subjects, to pull down Monarchical government, and set up a factious
Oligarchy, and all under that fair common pretense of restoring Religion to its
purity, and the People to their liberty.

The K. thus happily, preserved and almost miraculously (all things considered)
set at liberty; about a Month after calls a Parliament at Winchester, (no more
at London, until it was more loyal and less tumultuous) where by a full
Convention it was enacted, Fabian.
That all Statutes and Ordinances made by the former Parliament (called the
wood or mad Parliament) should be repealed, and all writings and bonds then
sealed by the King for observing the same, should be cancelled and made void^
That the City of London, Rishanger.
ob suam Rebellionem, for this her Rebellion should be deprived of all her
ancient Privileges and Liberties, and the Ringleaders of them, Iuxta
voluntatem ipsius Regis plecti, to suffer such punishment as his Majesty was
pleased to inflict: Et ditiores Civitatis in carcerem truderentur ( says
Matthew. Westminster.) Pro eo quod Simoni, in Regis contemptum, and etiam damnum Regni,
fortiter adhaeserint: that the wealthier Citizens should be cast in Prison,
because they had in contempt of his Majesty, and great damage and mischief of
the Realm assisted the Earl. Furthermore it was there enacted that all such
as had favored the Rebels (were they now in Prison, or at large) should
forfeit all their estates.

Afterward the King marched with a great power to Windesore, resolving (as the
fame then went) to destroy the whole City of London: many of the Rabble and wild
Commonars (says Fabian) were as resolved to defend the City against him: but
the wiser sort thought better to become humble Petitioners for their padon of
what was past, then to incense his Majesty any farther; and to that end drew
up an humble Petition, and presented it to the King: but their late rebellious
carriage had so far provoked his Majesty's patience, that he would not so
much as admit of their Petition, or hearken to any that endeavored to mediate
for them.

Hereupon they were advised to draw up an instrument or writing, whereby they
should yield themselves wholly, both bodies and goods to the Kings mercy, which
was done accordingly, and sealed with the common Seal of the City.

His Majesty upon earnest suit unto him, accepted hereof, giving present
express command, that all the chains and Posts, which they had placed at every
street and lanes end, should be forthwith carried to the Tower, and that the
Mayor and forty of the chief Citizens should repair unto him the next day, and
confirm their said writing: this was done, and they all came accordingly; but
(contrary to their expectation, though not deserts) were all delivered into the
custody of the Constable of Windesore Castle, and shut up there in a large
Tower, where they had small cheer, and worse lodging. The next day toward
night, all (but five whereof the Mayor was one) had their enlargement. Those
five their bodies and goods, were as a boon bestowed on the Prince, the rest
were commanded to attend at Windesore for a long time after.

Sixty or seventy wealthy Citizens with all their Land, Goods, and Chattels,
did the King dipose to his household servant.

For the Government of this unruly City, the King appointed one O^hon a
forreigner, or stranger, first Constable of the Tower, and then Custos, or
Warden of the City, to pull down their haughty spirits, and that his Peace for
the future might be surely kept, he required the best men's sons in the City
for Hostages, these he clapped up in the Tower, and caused them to be there kept
at the cost and charges of their Parents.

Daily suit was made unto his Majesty for his Pardon and Favor, but in vain:
then they petition the King to know his gracious pleasure, what Fine he would
demand of the whole City, for their offenses against him. The King at length
signified unto them that the sum of fifty thousand Marks should be their
Fine. Whereto the Londoners return this humble answer. They had been of late by
this unhappy War, so exceeding impoverished, that a sum so great, (as it was
in those times) could not possibly be raised amongst them; wherefore they humbly
beseeched his Princely compassion might be so far extended toward them, as to
require and accept according to their abilities. At length, after much suit and
submission, and a Fine of twenty thousand Marks, the King received them to
mercy, and sent them under his great Seal a general Pardon (those only
excepted, whose Estates were already bestowed) granting and allowing, that
their former Charter and ancient Privileges should be restored unto them,
notwithstanding all the transgressions (they are the words of the Pardon) and
Trespasses done to us, to our Queen, to our noble brother Richard King of
Almain, and the Prince our first begotten son.

And here was the first pacification betwixt the King and the Londoners, for
whom we say thus much, That their foul Rebellion against their Sovereign, was
not more detestable, than their humble submission to their Sovereign was
commendable. And therefore in the Ordinance, called Dictum de Kenelworth, made
for the settling of the Kingdom, we find them (notwithstanding, all their
disloyalty) commended, as shall be seen in the ensuing Story.

After the proud stomach of this City was brought down, and all tumultuous
spirits quelled, the King calls his Parliament ( in festo sancti Edvardi Regis)
to Westminster, wherein those that aided and assisted the Earl, were all
(excepting the Londoners) attainted, and that all their Lands and Goods were
forfeited.

But this sentence (though it was less than they deserved) yet was more than
they would endure, and therefore the fire (that was not yet quenched, but
smothered) breaks forth again. Some fly into the Isle of Ely, and fortify
that. Some into the Isle of Axholm in Lincolnshire. Another party possess
themselves of Killingworth Castle. Another under the command of the Lord
Ferrers in the Northern parts. And amongst others, one Adam Gurdon lived as an
Outlaw in Hampshire ( Rishanger
tum rarus aut nullus locus in Anglia fuit tutus, eo quod terra erat
vespilionibus plena. Now scarce any place in England free from plunderers.

To reduce these to obedience, the King undertakes Killingworth Castle. The
Prince was sent against Adam Gurdon, Lord Edmond, the Prince's brother, against
those in Axholm; and Lord Henry King of Almains son, against the Lord This
Lord Henry, the Kings Nephew was a valiant Soldier, and having found out the L
Ferrers at Chesterfield, gave him battle, and overthrew him, and because he had
been pardoned once before it was decreed that he should be degraded, and
deprived of the Earldome for ever, and fined fifty thousand pounds.
Ferrers.

To the Rebels in Killingworth Castle the King sent first a gracious Message,
willing them to desist, and to return to their obedience. But they contrary to
all Law of Arms, contrary to natural civility, cut off the Messengers hand, and
sent him back with an uncivil answer. Then the King marched to Killingworth, and
sat down before it upon Midsummer Eve. During the siege (which lasted six
months) Clerus and populus convocantur, and duodecim eliguntur de
potentioribus Procerum, and prudentioribus Praelatorum, quibus datur potestas
ordinandi super Statutum exhaeredatorum, etc. The Clergy and Laity are
assembled, and out of the chiefest of the Peerage, and wisest of the Prelates
were chosen twelve, to whom power was given to pronounce sentence against the
Rebels, and to settle the Peace of the Kingdom; they, first taking an Oath, de
utilibus ordinandis, to decree nothing but what should be for the good of the
common weal.

Then the people take a solemn oath, Quod dictum ipsorum inviolabiliter
observarent; that they would stand to their Decree, which to this day by our
Lawyers is called, Dictum de Kenelworth; a severe; yet a good and wholesome
course (without effusion of blood) to punish Rebellious Subjects.

The Decree was as follows,

Dictum de Kenelworth
In nomine sanctae and individuae Trinitatis, Amen. Ad honorem and gloriam
Omnipotentis Dei Patris, and filii, Spiritus sancti, etc. Et ad honorem and
bonum prosperum and pacificum statu^ Christianissimi I rincipis Domini Henrici
Regis Angliae illustris. and totius Angliae Ecclesiae, Nos Wilielmus, etc. In
English thus.

In the name of the holy and individual Trinity Amen. For the honor and glory
of Almighty God, (...) tho^ pounds.
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, etc. And for the honor, prosperity, and
peace of the most Christian Prince our Sovereign Lord Henry, the most Renowned
King of England, and of the whole Church of England, We William Exon, William
Bath and Wells, Henry Worcester and T. S. David's, Bishops. Gilbert de Clare
Earl of Gloucester, Humphrey Earl of Hereford, Philip Basset, John Bailof,
Robert Wallop, Alan de la Souch, Roger de Somerie, and Warren de Basinghorn,
providing for the welfare of the Land, etc, have thought fit to order as
follows.

1. That the rebels be not wholly deprived of their estates, but shall have
liberty to redeem their lands by Fines in manner following.

1. That those that were in the fight at Chester-field against our Sovereign
Lord the King.

Item. All those that by force of arms impiously kept Northampton against the
King.

Item, Those that gave the King battle at Jews.

Item, Those that were taken prisoners at Kenelworth.

Item, Those that came to pillage Winchester, or were elsewhere against the
King, whom the King has not pardoned.

Item, Those that gave the King battle at Evesham.

Item, All those that freely and voluntarily and without any compulsion, have
contributed to the War against the K. or Prince

Item, The Officers and servants of the Earl of Leicester, that pillaged their
neighbors, or were the cause of any murders, firings, or other enormities,
that all these be fined five years Revenues of all their Estates respectively:
and that if they pay down their Fines presently, they may enjoy their Lands
presently: but if the land must be sold for the payment of the Fine, he, on
whom the King bestowed it, shall have the refusal, if he will give as much as
any other. And if the original owner will pay down the whole Fine, he shall
have the whole Land; and likewise if he will pay the moity, or third part, he
shall have the moity or thirds of the Land. And if at the end and term
appointed, the owner does not pay for the other moity, it shall be clearly
theirs on whom the King was pleased to bestow it.

And as soon as any one has paid down his whole Fine, such shall have liberty
to let, or set, or sell his land within the prefixed time.

Those that have Woods and would willingly make sale of them for the payment of
their Fines; He, on whom the King bestowed, and the original owner shall have
each one his Bailiffe to see it sold: and those two Bailiffes shall (as fast as
the money is made) pay it to whom the Fine was given by our Sovereign Lord the
King: this payment must be made within three years at the farthest.

All Officers and Reformades that were known to be common plunderers, and made
it their business to plunder, if such have no lands, but only goods; they
shall be fined one moity of all their goods, and shall find sufficient
sureties, that they shall keep the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, for
the time to come. They that have nothing shall be sworn upon the holy Gospel,
and find sufficient sureties, that they will keep the Kings peace for the time
forward, and shall make such satisfaction, and do such penance, as the holy
Church shall censure, excepting only banished persons, who are wholly left to
the will and pleasure of the King.

2. Moreover, as for Wards or young heirs, (that were in actual Rebellion
against the King during their minority) their Guardians shall pay their Fines,
and the said Wards (when they come to age) shall pay back the same to their
Guardians within two or three years, so that the Guardians shall have the
Wardship and their marriages (without disparagement) even till they be come to
full age, and all Wards shall pay their Fines after the same manner as those of
full age. Only the Kings own Wards shall be in the hands of those, to whom the
King shall give them until they come to years, and then they shall pay down
their Fines acording to the same manner as those of full years; Provided
always that there be no waste made by the Guardians upon their estates; If
there be, then the Guardians to be punished according to Law.

3. If any that were for the King before and since the battle at Jews, be now
fined for not assisting the Prince (when he was raising arms to rescue his
Father,) we leave him to the King to be censured or pardoned, as he shall think
fit.

4. That there be no sale or waste made of any Woods by those on whom they were
bestowed, unless the Fine be not paid within the time limited. Only it is
allowed that they cut so much as is necessary to keep the houses in
reparations; and if they shall exceed this allowance, to be severely punished.

5. If any be thought to be dangerous persons, and that they are like to move
sedition, and to revive the Wars; let the King secure their persons as he shall
think fit, either by sending them into foreign parts for a time, or what other
way shall be thought expedient; provided always, that if they be thereby
hindered from paying their Fines, they shall not forfeit their estates.

6. That if any will not submit to this Ordinance, he be left to be censured at
the King-Bench-Bar, before the Feast of St. Hillary next coming. All those that
live in foreign parts shall find sureties (according to the Laws and customs
of those States) to live peaceably, otherwise that they shall not be received
in a peaceable manner.

7. Whereas the Kings Majesty is engaged to many that served him in his wars,
and faithfully stuck to him, whom he has not yet sufficiently rewarded, and
some have been rewarded above their deserts, we desire that the King take
special care, that out of Delinquents estates they may be all rewarded to the
full, lest otherwise a new war should be occasioned.

8. That the Kings Majesty be graciously pleased to make choice of twelve able
men that may be authorized to see all this punctually and faithfully performed,
and that the Kings Majesty, his Heirs, or Successors take care that it be all
firmly observed and maintained, and to inquire into, and regulate, and see duly
executed, what shall be by the said twelve men ordered according to reason and
equity.

9. That all farmers and renters of lands that were against the King shall lose
their farms for all the term or time of their leases, that are to come,
provided that the landlords be no ways endammaged) and when the term of their
leases are out, then to return to the landlords again.

10. As for Castles and Forts built by the Kings grant and allowance upon any
delinquents ground, contrary to the will of the said delinquent; We decree that
(after the owner of that land has paid his Fine, which must be within three
years) for six years more the owner of that land shall pay such custom as was
imposed by the King, or else accept of a reasonable exchange for the land.

11. All Laymen who notoriously advanced the Earls designs, and assisted him,
or his adherents, Attrahendo homines per mendacia and falsitates parti Comitis
and suorum, and detrahendo parti Regis and filii sui, by drawing people through
lies and falsities, either to the Earl and his party, or from the King and his
party; it is ordained that they be fined as much as two years revenues of all
their estates.

12. That all such as were pressed; or out of fear went to the wars, but never
fought against the King, or did any mischief; also those that being not able to
go themselves, yet by force and fear were compelled to contribute toward the
Army against the K. or Prince or did any mischief also those that were informed
to be plunderers, or to aid and assist any plunder-masters, and yet did return
to their habitation as soon as conveniently they could, be all left In
misericordia Domini Regis.

13. That all those that wittingly bought any plundered goods, restore the
value of the goods, and be in misericordia Domini Regis; because they thereby
have offended against the Law, and done contrary to the Kings express command,
set for half a year before.

14. That all those that at the Earls command went into Northampton, yet never
gave the Rebels their assistance, or made any resistance, but as soon as they
perceived the King coming took Sanctuary (provided that this be attested by the
oaths of good and lawful men) likewise those that owed no suit or service to
the Earl, and yet came upon his command, be all fined half a years revenue of
every one respectively; but those that held of the Earl in Fee, let them be
only in Misericordia Domini Regis.

15. That impotent silly people, and all such as did no mischief, may enjoy
their estates as formerly, and recover damages at the Kings Bench, against
those that shall wrong them.

16. Those that accuse any of their fellow subjects out of malice, be punished
at the Kings pleasure, and that his Majesty thence forward, do not easily give
credit unto them. And we judge that they deserve the same punishment as the
accused, if the accusation were true, provided that they lose not life, limb,
or estate.

17. That all such as are accused upon mere malice, may still enjoy their
estates, and recover damage against their accusers in the Kings Bench, as
abovesaid.

18. That all women enjoy their own inheritances and dowries. but those lands
that came by their husbands, who have been against the King, shall be redeemed
by a fine; according as his Majesty shall impose upon them, etc.

19. That all such as are acquitted (so it be by those that have authority to
acquit them) remain and stand in such a condition as they are put into; and
that all that have paid their Fines, shall not be responsible for damages and
trespasses committed by them upon those, against whom they fought in the time
of the late troubles, but that all damages and trespasses be forgiven on both
sides, provided that the Church may have her dues.

20. That because it may be of dangerous consequence, that any Castles should
remain in the power of those, who were in actual Rebellion against the King;
We therefore decree and ordain, that for the Castles of Hardley, Bytham, and
Chertley, there be given a reasonable exchange.

21. As for the Earl Simon Monfort his Countess, and his sons, we decree
nothing, because our Sovereign Lord the King has referred them, and their
offenses to the King of France.

22. As for the City of London (taking notice, it seems of their humble
Submission) we commend it, and do make this motion to our Sovereign Lord the
King, that by the advice of his Privy Council, he take order for reforming the
state of the City, and settle their Lands, Revenues, Buildings, and Liberties,
and that this Order be presently debated.

23. For the L Ferrers we decree, that he be fined seven years revenues of all
his estate.

24. That all that now keep Killingworth Castle be pardoned, except Henry
Hastings, and those that had any hand in cutting off the Kings Messengers hand,
all which shall be Fined seven years revenues, of all their estates, or else
submit themselves to the Kings mercy.

25. That all men whatsoever endeavor to keep the peace of the Kingdom, that
none presume to commit any outrages, firings, murders, robberies, or by any
other means break the Peace. Which if any shall be so hardy, as not to observe,
and be thereof lawfully convicted, let him have sentence according to the Laws
of the Land.

26. Item. That all whom it may concern, take their oaths upon the holy Gospel
of God, that they will never take any revenge, be accessory, or consenting to
take any revenge, nor will suffer (as much as in them lies) that any revenge
should be taken against any one for any injury suffered in the late times of
trouble, and if any one shall presume to revenge himself, We decree that
punishment be inflicted upon him in the Kings Bench Court.

27. That the Holy Church receive full satisfaction from those that have
injured her.

28. But if there be any that will not submit to this Ordinance, or refuse to
be tried by their Peers before our Sovereign Lord the King, let them forfeit
their estates for ever. And if there be any that have gotten possession of the
Rebels Lands, and were himself a Rebel, he is thereby incapable of challenging
any right to the Land, or to have any title to the fine by the Kings Majesty's
gift.

29. Whosoever will not submit to this Ordinance, let him be accounted a
professed enemy to our Sovereign Lord the King, and to his sons, and to the whole
Realm, and let all the Laity and Clergy (as far as the Canon Laws and Common
Laws will reach) prosecute such an one as an enemy to the Peace of Church and
State.

30. Lastly, that all those that are imprisoned or any way debarred of their
liberty, upon reasonable and competent security, shall have their enlargement,
by putting in Sureties, or such other way as the King has allowed.

Dated and set forth from the Camp before Kenelworth the last day of September,
About the end of October the King assembled all the Lords spiritual and
temporal, and Knight of Shires, to Northampton where this Decree was confirmed
by Act of Parliament.
in the year of our Lord God 1266. and of the Reign of the most renowned King
Henry the third, 51.

Thus ends that famous Ordinance called to this day, Dictum de Kenelworth;
wherein are comprised the wisest rules that the wisest men of those times could
possibly devise, to uphold, compose and recover a tottering distracted, dying
Kingdom.

About two Months after the publication of this Ordinance, viz. upon Saint
Thomas Eve, the Castle was delivered up, upon conditions (too good for those
that had so barbarously used the Kings Messenger, The Barons of Cinque Ports
seeing the King prosper, made their peace with the King.
contemned the King, and impoverished the Country) to march away with their
goods, and to undergo no Fine for taking up arms.

This Castle had the K. bestowed upon the Earl of Leicester in frank marriage
with his sister Aelionor; but when the Earl by his Rebellion had forfeited, and
the King had now won it, he gave it to his own son Edmund Earl of Lancaster,
who by this time had reduced the Isle of Axholm, and all those rude ignorant
people, that flockt thither, pillaging and plundering the Kings friends round
about.

The Prince also met with Adam Gurdon, a famous sturdy Rebel that lay lurking
in Aulton Wood in Hamshire, Rishanger.
robbing and spoiling the adjacent parts, praeoipue terras eorum qui parti
Regiae adhaerebant; the Prince upon his approach, hearing of his valor, sent
him a challenge for a single Combat. Gurdon accepts it, and performed it so
Gallantly, that the Prince assured him of his life and estate, if he would
submit: which he did, and was received into great favor with the Prince; but
diverse of his men were there executed.

But now the Isle of Ely was strongly fortified by a great multitude got
together, that refused to submit to the Ordinance of Kenelworth. Upon the
natural strength of this Isle, and the plenty of all provision therein,
seditious Rebels have often presumed, and from hence have molested more Kings
than one, as they did now the neighboring Counties, robbing and pillaging
Norfolk, Suffolk and Cambridgeshire, plundering the City of Norwich, and
carrying away the richest Citizens, made them redeem themselves: at length a
Message was sent unto them requiring them to submit to the Ordinance of
Killingworth, to leave off robbing their fellow Subjects, and to return to
their allegiance: Hereto they return this insolent answer, that they had taken
up arms to defend the good of Church and State, and therefore ought to be
restored to their lands without paying any Fine. In brief they require Hostages
into the Island, and that they might hold it five years peaceably, till they
saw how the King would perform his promises, (perfidious Subjects ever suspect
their Princes fidelity) which high insolency of theirs (unheard of till our
times) so exasperates the King, that he resolves to try the utmost, to reduce
them to their obedience; for that purpose marches with a mighty army against
them, the Prince also joins with a considerable power; after many assaults, at
length (after they had held it above two years) by the help of new made bridges
and boats, they stormed it on every side, that they were forced to yield.

And now men thought that the fire was quite out. But there were yet some live
embers (which the Earl of Gloucester upon some distaste blowing) suddenly flamed
out again in London, where the Commons of the City forgetting their late
punishment, and as men (says mine author) without dread of God or the King,
Fabian
drew up in arms again, flock to the Earl of Gloucester, plundered the well
affected to the King, sequestered their estates, brake the prisons, chose a new
Mayor and Sheriffs, made Bulwarks and Barbicans, and fortified the City
wonderously, and were so confident of their strength and cause, that they durst
bid the King battle, appointing Hounsloe-heath for the field.

The King by a speedy march came to the place at the time appointed; but they
instead of meeting his Majesty, ran about the city in a tumultuous manner. Some
to Westminster, and there plundered the Kings Palace, fenestras and ostia
fregerunt, (says M. Weston) vix manus a combustione totius Palatii cohibentes;
brake the doors and windows, hardly forbearing to set it all on fire.

Then the King removed his Camp to the other side of the City, and had his
headquarters at Strafford, three miles off the City, the rest of the Army lay
at Ham, a village hard by. The wiser Citizens foreseeing the danger that hung
over them, desired a Treaty with the King, whereunto, (though they were
unworthy of so much clemency) His Majesty was graciously pleased to condescend,
and upon these easy terms, they were again received to mercy.

Imprimis, Salvo in omnibus dicto Killingworthi, That the Ordinance of
Killingworth, should be razed, and the Trenches filled up; lastly, that one
thousand marks damages should be paid down to the Kings brother, for his
Manor of Isleworth, fired by them long before.

Also his Majesty for some years following chose the Mayor and Sheriffs
himself: but toward the latter end of his Reign being fully reconciled, he
restored them their (often forfeited) Then did the King command, that peace
should be proclaimed all the Kingdom over, which was received with joyful
acclamations.
privileges.

Thus after the Almighty (whose judgments are unsearchable) had suffered
crafty seditious spirits, to seduce a whole Nation, to trample upon his
Anointed, and to tread his Honor in the very dust for a time, yet at length
all his enemies are clothed with shame, and upon himself his Crown flourishes
again.

And now after this furious dreadful Tempest, after so many storms and showers
of blood, began a joyful long-expected Calm, which that they might enjoy
without any intervening of more storms, and for the better settling and quieting
the Kingdom, the King gives express command for the razing of diverse inland
Castles; as Farnham, etc. That so if another Rebellion should be begotten, it
might no where find a nurse, and then it could not be long lived.

Also for the more quiet and secure traveling of his Subjects, he appoints a
Captain in every County, who with a Troop of Horse should always assist the
Sheriff, for the taking and punishing all straggling relics of the late
Armies, and highway robbers, wherewith the Kingdom did abound at that time, no
place free from them. In some places also, Ruricolae (says Rishanger, the
Country people would generally rise against them (as against Wolves or Bears;)
and at one time, they took and killed fifty of them, that were got together
near St. Albans in Hartfordshire.

Besides the King Proclamari fecit contra pacem Regni disturbantes set forth a
Proclamation against all such as should any way disturb the quiet of the Realm,
by plundering or stealing, etc. And that if any man should presume to steal but
a Cow or a Sheep, vel aliquid aliud (says mine Author) he should be surely
put to death.

These were the petty devises of that age, to pump and drain the huge sink of
the Kingdom: but the Staple policy was, by a Foreign expedition (like a wide
sluice) to let out all the filth at once: for which purpose therefore (among
others) it was resolved upon, that a great Army should be raised under the
command of the Prince, for a voyage to Palestine. And by this course especially
did his Majesty soon spend the insolences of his own, So at a late Diet or
Parliament in Germany (after they had undutifully strived with the Emperor;
and wasted the Empire) it was concluded that all should be reduced to the same
state as it was in the year 1618.
and the Rebels Soldiers, made Lawless by the late unavoidable Liberty of
civil Arms.

And here was an end of this wasting, groundles, unnatural war wherein the
subject having strugled and wrestled with Sovereignty, till they had wasted the
Kingdom and wearied themselves, at last are content to sit down by the loss,
to let the King have his own Rights again, and some of theirs according to the
usual event and issue of such imbroylments.

FINIS

