Lector, scias faetum hunc nostrum in ipso partu pry dolor nimio (sumptum
puta immodicum) expiraturu^ fuisse, si Maecenalu^ aliquot inanus benevolae
com^ode conatibus nostris non obstetricas-sent

A Pisgah-sight of PALESTINE and The CONFINES thereof, with the HISTORY of the
old and new TESTAMENT acted thereon.

By Thomas Fuller B. D.

Genesis 43. 11. Take of ye. best fruits in ye land in your vessels, and carry
down ye man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices and Myrrh,
nuts and Almonds.

Ierem. 8. 7. Yea, ye stork in ye heaven knows her appointed times, and ye
turtle, and ye Crane, and ye Swallow observe ye time of their coming, but my
people know not ye judgment of ye Lord.

Votum Authoris Terrestres Solymas mihi quiscripsisse de disti, Coelestes
tandem d^s habitare, Devs.

Printed by M. F for John Williams at ye Crown in^ St Paul's Churchyard



A PISGAH-SIGHT OF PALESTINE AND THE CONFINES THEREOF, WITH The History of the
Old and New TESTAMENT acted thereon.

BY THOMAS FVLLER B. D.

GENESIS 43. 11. Take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels, and carry
down the man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices and Myrrh,
nuts and Almonds.

JER. 8. 7. Yea, the Stork in the heaven knows her appointed times, and the
Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming; but my
people know not the judgment of the Lord.

LONDON, Printed by I. F. for John Williams at the sign of the Crown in Paul's
Churchyard. MDCL.

To the Right Honorable ESME STUART, Earl of March, and Darneley, Lord
Leighton etc. Son and Heir to the Illustrious JAMES Duke of Richmond and Lennox.
MY LORD,
COnsulting with my self about a Patron for this Book, I concluded to make
choice of such a Person as should be both of most noble extraction, and of
spotless innocence: So that in this captious Age, none should presume to charge
him with the least offense in thought, word, or deed. For justly fearing too
many faults might be found in the book it self, I desired to make some amends
by dedicating it to One free from all exception.

Your Honor is the first in our Nobility, whom I find qualified according to
my desire; descended from the best Houses in England, Scotland, and France. And
as it happens in a Constellation, that the Luster thereof, amounting from
many Stars together, darkeneth the light of those particulars, which produced
it: So in your Honors Pedigree, the collective splendor obscureth the
distinct brightness of those several families whence the same resulteth.

Now that your Honor cannot be taxed with any actual offense, your tender
Months not as yet completing a Year; do sufficiently evidence. Whose
innocence is the most entire Relic of our Primitive integrity; and most
perfect pattern of our future felicity. Yea some admiring what motives to mirth
Infants meet with in their silent and solitary smiles, have resolved (how
truly I know not) that then they converse with Angels, as indeed such cannot
amongst mortals find any fitter Companions.

One, or more of these three main Ends are aimed at by Authors in all ingenuous
dedications; Hope to receive protection; Desire to derive instruction; and Zeal
to express affection.

For the first, though you cannot by your Power, yet you may by your Innocence
be an excellent Patron to protect our ensuing Work. In these civil wars, some
have saved themselves from the sword, with no other shield then bearing a Babe
in their arms, which rebated their enemies fury into compassion. So, when some
shall be ready to wound our Book with their censuring Darts, they will be
mollified into mercy finding your innocent Name prefixed in the Front thereof.

As for deriving instruction, I confess your Honor as yet incapable thereof.
But seeing Infants clothes are providently made with the biggest, to which they
will grow up in process of time; why may not books (the clothes of the mind)
be proportioned above their present capacity, in hope they will seasonably
shoot up to the understanding thereof? And until such time as your Lordships
judgment can reap profit from our Descriptions herein, may your eyes but take
pleasure in the Maps which here are presented unto you.

But the last, not least consideration in my choice of your Honor, is my
ambition to tender my humble service thereunto; The rather because ESME Or
Amedcus the Topl^^ll Saint of Aul^igney.
your auspicious Name promises, in my apprehension, some good success, now at
the third return, as long since at the first imposing thereof on your Ancestour.

For Esme Lord Aulbigney (a place of great privileges in the Province of
Berry, first by the King of France bestowed on [and still possessed by] your
Family, in reward of their signal service to that Crown) about two hundred
years since proved the happy reviver of your family almost extinguished for
want of a Heir, and by his virtuous demeanor added much honor thereunto.

The same Name now returns on your Lordship, who found your Fathers house in
point of posterity in as low a Condition. Indeed your Grandfather left a
numerous offspring, whom I may fitly compare to the many strings of some
musical Instrument. But amongst his male-issue (for the rest I pass by as
silent strings, sending no sounds to posterity, but losing their own Surnames
in their matches) One was soon fretted in pieces with sickness; Three more, cut
off in these wars; One absent beyond the Seas, and not easily to be tuned to a
married estate; and the other single string remaining [ His Grace your Father]
left altogether issueless until your Lordships welcome Nativity.

But O! what melody can Heavens hand make on a Monochord? which since has sent
your Lordship on a good message I hope, to the Honest house of LENNOX.

But I grow tedious in a long Letter to a little Lord, and therefore turn my
Pen into Prayers, that Christ would be pleased to take you up into his Arms,
(whose embraces are the best swadling-clothes, as to streighten, so to
strengthen you in the growth of Grace) to lay Mark, 10. 16.
his hands upon you and bless you, that you may grow in stature and favor with
God and with Man; The daily desire of

YOUR LORDSHIPS humble Orator Tho. Fuller.
Waltham Abbey July 7. 1650.
To the READER.
WHen Jacob had served Laban full seven years for his daughter Rachel, and now
promised himself the possession of what he had long looked and much labored
for; his hopes were frustrated by the Genesis 29. 23.
substituting of Leah in the room of her sister. And although it may be pleaded
that Leah was not well qualified and highly meriting in her self, yet still
Leah was not Rachel, and Jacob remained both deceived and injured thereby.

Many have long patiently waited, that I should now according to my promise set
forth an Ecclesiastical History; who now may justly complain that their
expectation is abused, finding a Changeling in the place thereof, a Book of a
far different Nature tendered in stead thereof. And should I plead with Laban
the Custom of the Country, that it is not fashionable to Genesis 19. 26.
give the younger before the firstborn; should I allege for my self that this
Book, containing matter of more ancient date, ought to precede the other, yet
this, like Labans answer, will be taken rather as a (...), then solid
satisfaction.

But, Reader, let me plead in my just defense, that if you be pleased to peruse
my In my Epistle to the Reader before the Holy State.
promise, you will find the same conditional, and not obligatory, except
(besides other requisites there expressed) Peace be first settled amongst us.
And indeed the subject challenges the same, seeing Truth cannot be matched to
Safety in such Relations, till Peace shall first contract them.

Now herein I make my severest Creditour my sole Judge, appealing to him
whether the Premises be performed. True it is we have no Wars at this instant,
yet we have Rumors of wars; and though the former only does destroy, the
latter also does distract. Are these gloomy days already disclouded?(to use my
own expression in my Ibidem.
Promise) or rather is it not true in the Scripture phrase, that the Eccles.
12. 2.
clouds return after rain? Indeed I am sorry that I can say so much in my own
defense, and should account my self happy, if all other Breaches were made up,
and I only to be punished for my breach of Promise. Which, notwithstanding all
the difficulties of the subject, and distractions of our days, I hope in God,
in competent time to effect, might but my endeavors meet with a quiet
residence, and proportionable encouragement for such undertakings.

Mean time accept of these my Labors, which by Gods blessing, and the bounty
of my friends are brought into the light: Useful I hope for the understanding
of the Scriptures. What I have herein performed, I had rather the Reader should
tell me at the end, then I tell him at the beginning of the Book. For the
manifold faults herein, I doubt not but the ingenuous Reader (finding in
Palestinee six Cities of Refuge, by Gods own appointment, for the safeguard of
such as slew one unawares without malice prepense) will of his bounty build a
seventh in his own bosom for my protection, when guilty of unvoluntary
mistakes in so great a work. If thou reapest any profit thereby, give God the
glory; To whose providence thou art committed by Josh. 20. 7.


Thine in Christ Jesus THO. FULLER.

(...).
(...);
(...);
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
JOH. RIDLEY.



THE GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF JUDEA.
CHAP. 1. The Design asserted from causlesse Cavils.
^. BEing now by Gods assistance to undertake the Description of Judea, Three
grand objections against this subject.
my condition appears not unlike to the Israelites at Numb. 13. 23, and 28.
Kadesh-Barnea, who were much pleased with the report that the Spies brought of
the fruitfulness of the Country, until they told them of Ahiman, Sheshai and
Talmai, the three sons of Anak: which quite appaled their courage and deaded
their desire thereof. In the like manner whilst I am invited with several
pleasing considerations, and delightful motives, to adventure on this work,
three Giantlike objections, which must be encountered, do in a manner dishearten
me from further proceeding. For some will lay to my charge, that the
description of this Country 1 Has formerly been done by many. 2 Cannot
perfectly be done by any. 3 If exactly done, is altogether useless, and may be
somewhat superstitious.


2. Yet we fear not, No disgrace to adventure on the same work after many
others.
by Gods blessing, and the Readers favor, severally to enter the lists against
them all. For the first: Whereas it is objected, that many formerly have
performed the same; this cavil is not planted particularly against my
inde^vours, but is levelled against the industry of all Posterity, in any
future design. Eccles. 1. 9.
Solomon says, there is no new thing under the Sun. Except therefore men
were Gods to create new subjects to write upon, groundless is the first
exception against us. It never disheartened S. Luke to write his Gospel, for
as much as many had taken in hand to set it forth before. Yea the former
endeavors of many in the same matter, argue the merit of the work to be great.
For sure there is some extraordinary worth in that face, which has had so many
Suitors. Wherefore although we cannot with Columbus, find out another world,
and bring the first tidings of an unknown Continent or Island, by us
discovered, yet our labors ought not to be condemned as unprofitable, if
setting forth an old subject in a new edition enlarged and amended. This I dare
say, though many have written discourses without Mappes, and more Mappes
without discourses, and Adricom. puts Zabulun Issachar and Manasses in one
Map, Ephraim, Dan and Benjamin in another.
some both, (yet so that three tribes are joined in one Map) none have
formerly in any tongue (much less in English) presented us with distinct
Mappes and descriptions together.

3. But in the second place it is objected, 2. Object.
that certainty in this subject is unattainable; Certainty herein not to be
obtained.
so that the most studious therein, after they have traveled the whole day,
through many tedious difficultie^, must be fain to take their hard lodging at
night on a bare uncertainty. The bowels of the best Mappes are puffed up with
the humors of fancy, and a scepticall windiness, so that a conjecturall
Earthquake shakes the foundations of the strongest mountains, in the point of
their exact situation. Such are the irreconcilable differences betwixt
Geographers in their descriptions.

4. For answer: 2. Answ.
I could wish that this objection also, lay only against the work in hand,
This should not quench but quicken our industry.
and might not [almost] equally be enforced against other liberal
undertakings: for he that holds a reed in one hand to mete the Topography, and
an houre-glasse in the other to measure the Chronology of the Scripture, shall
meet with as many, if not more uncertainties, in the latter as the former. And
yet the learned pains of such-as labor therein, justly merit commendation. If
all conjecturall results should be cast out for weeds, few herbs would be left
in the Gardens of most Arts and Sciences. Saint Paul 1 Cor. 13. 9.
has a passage, We know in part, and prophecy in part; which is a good curb
for our curiosity: And the same Apostle has a precept, 1 These. 5. 21.
Prove all things, hold fast that which is good; which is as good a spur for
our diligence. As for the differences betwixt Geographers, they ought not to
make us careless to follow any, but careful to choose the best; except with
the fluggards drowzie fancy, we tune the Alarums to our industry, to be
Lullabies to our laziness.

5. In the last place it is objected, 2. Object.
that the design, if exactly finished, amounts but to a difficult trifle, It
is a difficult trifle.
hard to do, useless when done. And who will pity the aching of his teeth, who
has wilfully hurt them, with cracking that shell, wherein he knew was no
kernel? It matters not to any man's salvation, to know the accurate distance
betwixt Jericho and Jerusalem; and he that has climbed to the top of mount
Libanus, is not in respect of his soul, a hairs breadth nearer to heaven.
Besides, some conceive they hear Palestine saying unto them, as Samuel to Saul
endeavoring to raise him from his grave, 1 Samuel 28. 15.
Why have thou disquieted me to bring me up? Describing this Country is but
disturbing it, it being better to let it sleep quietly, intombed in its own
ashes. The rather, because the Revel. 21. 10.
New Jerusalem is now daily expected to come down, and these corporal (not to
say carnal) studies of this terrestrial Canaan, begin to grow out of fashion,
with the more knowing sort of Christians.

6. It is answered, 3. Answ.
though these studies are not essential to sal^ation, yet they are
ornamentall, It is ornamentall to divinity.
to accomplish men with knowledge, contributing much to the true understanding
of the History of the Bible. Remarkable is that passage of the Apostle, Acts
17. 26. And has made of one blood all nations of men, for to dwell on all the
face of the earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and the
bounds of their habitation: wherein we may see Divinity the Queen waited on by
three of her principal Ladies of honor, namely, skill in 1 Genealogies,
concerning the persons of men and their Pedegrees, of one blood all nations. 2
Chronology, in the exact computation of the times before appointed. 3 Geography,
measuring out the limits of several nations, and the bounds of their
habitations.


Our work in hand is a parcel of Geography touching a particular description
of Judea; without some competent skill wherein, as the blind Syrians 2 King. 6.
19.
intending to go to Dothan, went to Samaria; so ignorant persons discoursing
of the Scripture, must needs make many absurd, and dangerous mistakes. Nor can
knowledge herein, be more speedily and truly attained, then by particular
description of the tribes, where the eye will learn more in an hour from a
Map, then the ear can learn in a day from discourse.

7. But this last objection being forked, No danger of superstition in this
subject.
has the sharper point thereof still behind, challenging this our subject to
be guilty of superstition. A sin always detestable to God, but now adays
grown odious to man. And well it were if the edge of their Zeal were equally
whetted against Profaneness. Sure if this our work were faulty in this kind, I
my self would send it the same way with the Ephesian Acts 19. 19.
conjuring books. Not all the water of Kishon, of Jordan, of the Red, of the
Dead, of the Middle-Land Sea, described in these Maps, should serve to quench
the fire, but all should be burnt to ashes. But no such haste I hope, to
condemn this innocent book, wherein studiously we have abstained from all such
pictures as come within the bounds of danger, yea borders of offense, and have
only made choice of those, which the most precise approve useful for the
illustration of Scripture.

CHAP. 2. The different names and bounds of Judea.
1. THis Country which we now come to describe, Six general names of Judea.
was successively called by several names.

1 The Land Genesis 12. 5.
of Canaan, from the sons of Canaan that first possessed it. 2 The Land of
Promise, which name after four hundred and odd years honorably ended, and was
swallowed up in performance. 3 The Land of Judah and Israel, consisting of
these two Kingdoms. 4 Judea, so called of Judah the most puissant Tribe of the
twelve. 5 Palestine (from the Philistines.) In Clio. cap. 105. and in Thalia
cap. 5. and 91. and Polymnia cap. 8.
Herodotus being the first Author, which I find so tearming it, and all Greeks
and Latins after him. 6 The Holy Land, because our Saviors Passion was acted
thereon. But fear makes me refrain from using this word, lest whilst I call
the Land holy, this Age count me superstitious.
2. In bounding this Land, The bounds of the larger Canaan.
a necessary distinction must be premised, the neglecting (or at least not
observing) whereof has engaged many in inextricable difficulties.

Cannan was twofold, 1. The Larger. 2. The Lesser.


The Larger is described Deuteronomy. 11. 24. Every place whereon the soles of your
feet shall tread, shall be yours: from the wilderness, and Lebanon, from the
Exodus 23. 31.
river, the river Euphrates, even unto the uttermost sea, shall your coast be.
This Land in full latitude was never peaceably possessed by the Jews as proper
owners thereof any considerable time. Say not, God fell short of his promise.
Oh no: the Jews fell short of his precepts, who being narrow hearted in piety,
and straightened in their own bowels, contracted their soil by their sins; and
obstructed the bounty of God intended unto them, by their ingratitude. For the
Promise ran only conditionally, If ye shall hearken diligently to my Deuteronomy. 11.
13. and 22.
Commandments. And had not Gods mercy to them been more then their obedience
to him, their country had been narrowed to nothing, and shrunk to an
indivisible punctum: or at the best and biggest had been but a prison, fit for
the punishment of so rebellious a people.

3. And yet in somemanner in a qualifyed sense, In what sense the Jews
possessed it.
we may observe the Jews did stretch their dominion to the bounds aforesaid in
a double consideration.

1 By victorious Salleys and Incursions. Thus the Children of Reuben having 1
Chro. 5. 22.
conquered the Hagarites, inhabited eastward unto the entering in of the
wilderness, from the river 1 Chronicles. 5. 9.
Euphrates. 2 Per Gentes in amicitiam receptas. By the nations which by
amicable compliance (though having absolute command in themselves) accepted of
the Jewish King to be honourary feodaries unto him. Thus where 2 Samuel 8. 3, etc.
David took some Kings by conquest, as his Vassals, more took him by
composition as their Protector. And it is plainly said of 2 Kin. 4. 24. 2 Chronicles. 9. 26.
Solomon that he had Dominion over all the region on this side the river from
Tip^sa^ even to Azzah, over all the Kings on this side the river: and ^e had
peace (...) all sides round about.
See we here an Essay of Gods goodness made to the Israelites. That froward
people worshipped him by fits and girds, starting aside like a broken bow: and
therefore God to admonish them of the unconstancy of their service, vouchsafed
only to the (...) a cursory and unsettled Tent^dwelling to Euphrates. Whereas,
had that people solidly and seriously set themselves constantly to serve God;
no doubt, their Incursions had been turned into fixed Habitations, and the
whole Nation (not only by the Synecdoche of this one tribe) had pea^^ably
possessed the large limits allotted unto them. And whereas now only David and
Solomon (whom I may more fitly style Emperors then Kings of this larger
Canaan) rather commanded then possessed to Eupbrates, God, no doubt, had
extended their full Dominions to the same dimensions.

4. But the lesser Canaan was contented with na^rower bounds, The limits of the
lesser Canaan.
containing only those Nations which God had designed for utter destruction,
and is described, Genesis 10. 19. (...), and Admah, and Zebojim, even unto (...).
And whereas in the larger Canaan, when the Israelites besieged any City, God
Deuteronomy. 20. 10.
commanded them to pro^fer peace, before they proclaimed war against it, in
this lesser Canaan, they were finally to root Deuteronomy* 7. 24.
them out. And where God commands men to destroy people, (but first let us be
sure that God commands us to destroy them) the foulest quarter is too fair for
them, and those have not less pity, but more piety, which (...) their ^tter
destruction: as the Jews were to serve the Inhabita^^s of this lesser Cana^n,
without any ceremony of peace once tendered unto them.

5. This lesser Canaan extended from the wilderness in the South to mount
Lebanon in the North, The length th^reof 1600. furlongs.
and from Jordan on the East, to the Midland Sea on the West. The length
thereof sixteen hundred furlongs (so far the blood ran out of the wine press,
Revel. 14. 20.) which, allowing ten furlongs to the mile, according to the
Eastern account, (whereof largely hereafter) amounts to an hundred and
threescore miles. The breadth thereof generally fifty; to which if the kingdom
of Sihon and Og be added on the other side Jordan (parcels of Canaan the
larger, and possessed by Re^ben, Gad and half Manasses) it will make up the
breadth to eighty miles.

6. Having thus a^^igned the small bounds of Canaan, The matchless fertility
of the land.
some perchance will place their scorn, where they ought to plant their wonder;
and will begin to contemn, what they should justly admire: because all Canaan
seems but one Genesis 19. 20.
Zoar; Is it not a little one? Yea, some proud Geographer will scarce stoop to
take up so small a Ragge of land into his consideration. But let such know,
that extracted Spirits, and Elixars are small in bulk in comparison of great
and gross bodies; and the land may pass for the quintessence of fruitfulness
it self. So that what it lacked in length and breadth, it had in depth, as if
nature had heaped one acre upon another in the matchless Ezekiel. 20. 6.
fertility thereof. Our age barren in belief, affords not faith so easily to
the story, as this land afforded food to 2 Samuel 24. 9.
thirteen hundred thousand men, besides women, children, impotent persons, and
all the 1 Chronicles. 2^. 5, 6. See also 2 Chronicles. 13. 3.
Levites and Benjamites left unnumbred. In general, it is charactered to be a
country flowing with milk and honey, that is, having plenty of all things both
for necessity and delight.

7. More particularly it is described by Deuteronomy. 8. 7, 8, 9.
Moses, Moses his caracter thereof.
A good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains and depths that spring
out of valleys and hills, a land of wheat and barley, and vines and figtrees,
and pomegranates: a land of oile-olive and honey; a land wherein thou shall
eat bread without scarceness, thou shall not lack any thing in it: a land
whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou may dig brass. For the
further clearing of which description, we will exactly observe the several
commodities of Canaan, which nature bountifully bestowed upon it. Only the
land seems unhappy herein, that the fruitfulness thereof must come under our
barren style to describe it. And yet on second thoughts I perceive, lean pens
are fittest to describe fat Count^^es. The soil of the county of Armagh in
Ireland is so rank of it self, that if any compost or artificial improvement
be added unto it, it turns barren out of sullenness, and Camb. Brit. in
comitat Armach.
indignation, that men should suspect the native fruitfulness thereof: and Fat
upon Fat is false Heraldry in husbandry. Lest in like manner we should offend
this Country of Cannan with additionall ornaments of Rhetorique, and lest all
^lourishes of Eloquence be misinterpreted distrusts of the real worth of this
Country, a plain style and simple relation best becomes our present subject.

CHAP. 3. Of the underground wealth of Canaan.
1. SHips when sailing are generally conceived to have one moity of them
invisible under water, Iudaea's invlsible treasure.
and some countries in like manner are counted to have their wealth equally
within the earth as upon it. But the proportion holds not exactly in Canaan;
whose visible wealth far transcended her concealed substance, and yet we
find some minerals therein of considerable value.

2. First, Salt, Sa^t.
so necessary in it self, that without it neither sustenance is ^avoury to man,
nor Mar. 9. 49. Levit. 2. 13.
Sacrifice acceptable to God. Yet had not the Jews more use, then plenty
thereof. It seems it was a very cheap commodity, when Abimelech (not hoping to
reap any harvest thereby) sowed the city of Sech^m with Judge. 9. 45.
falt. This was of two sorts in Judea* sal fossilis, which was dug out of
the earth, whereof great store about the dead, otherwise called the Salt Sea,
and sal coctilis, which was boiled out of water, at Josh. 11. 8. and 15. 62.
Mizrepoth-maiim near Zidon.

3. Secondly, materials of Glass, Materials of glass.
whereof the best in the world, almost to the purity of crystal, is found in
the Plin. not. hist.
Cendevian lake, and river Belus, whereof largely hereafter in the tribe of
Asher. And yet we read not in Scripture that the Jews ever used glass for
drinking vessels, either because the invention of them was not so ancient, or
because of the plenty of cups they had of purer metal. We in England know that
glasses are but the seconds, which succeed on the Cupboard, when Plate the
principal is otherwise disposed of.

4. Brimsto^e. Brimstone and lapis Iudaicus.
How useful this is in Physique and fireworks I need not relate. It is one of
the parents of most metals and inclined the waters of Judea to be sovereign
Bathes, and have other medicinal qualities. Marble also was dug up in great
plenty in mount 1 King. 5. 17, 18.
Lebanon, conducing much to the adorning of Gods temple and many princely
palaces in Jerusalem. Precious stones they had none, except Lapis Iudaicus be
counted for one, commended by Galen, and is prescribed as excellent to cure the
Stone. Where by the way it will not be amiss to observe, that amongst the many
maladies to which the Jews bodies were subject, I find not the Stone mentioned
in Scripture, though I dare not ascribe it to the plenty of this stone, as a
preservative against it.

5. Brass and Deuteronomy. 8. 9.
Iron Brass and Iron.
abounded in this Country. Deuteronomy. 33. 25.
Moses blesses Asher, Thy shoes shall be Iron and Brass, prognosticating the
plenty of those metals in that tribe. If any except, that brass is no
original, but a compound metal of Copper and other ingredients; the answer is
easy, by a frequent and familiar Metonymie, it being put for the materials
whereof it was composed.

6. As for the two principal metals, Judea No gold in Judea, and why.
may say of them as Saint Act. 3. 6.
Peter to the Cripple, Gold and silver have I none. And it will be no less
pleasant, then profitable to recount the reasons thereof.

1 These metals are generally granted by nature in compensation to barren
countries. Now whereas Judea had plenty of other commodities, it was too much
that Leahs fruitfulness should shine with Rahels fairness, and glister with
the luster of gold and silver. 2 God would have his people Psalm. 121. 1.
look to the hills, from whence their help comes: Mat. 6. 19.
To lay up their treasure in heaven, where rust and moth do not corrupt:
sursum corda, sursum oculos, and not that their eyes by a retrograde motion
should be peeping and poring on the earth, where the treasures concealed, are
by Poets consigned to Pluto King of hell: and modern authors avouch, that
malignant Spirits haunt the places, where these metals are found. As if the
Devil did there sit abrood to hatch them, cunningly pretending an
unwillingnesse to part with them; whereas indeed he gains more by one mine
minted out into money, then by a thousand concealed in the earth. 3 Because it
stands not with the State of a Prince to be his own purse-bearer. God would not
have this Lordly land of Canaan to be encumbered with carrying such a burden.
Let Ophir, and Tarshish, and Havilah have the place of Judas, to bear the
bag for Judea. 4 Because there might be left unto the Gentiles an opportunity
to gratify the Jews, and to testify their duty and service to God and his
Temple. Psalm. 72. 10.
The Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles shall bring presents, the Kings of
Sheba and Seba shall bring gifts. Now these natitions would have been wholly
disheartened if they could have brought Judea no novelty, and only presented
her with such things, whereof she had plenty before.
And yet whosoever shall observe the 1 King. 10. 27.
abundance of gold and silver in Solomon's time in the city of Jerusalem, will
conclude this Country not to be the cistern, but fountain of those metals. As
if divine providence had so divided it, that other lands should be at the care
and cost to bear, dig out and refine, and Judea have the honor and credit, to
use, expend, yea neglect, such glittering need-nots to humane happiness. More
minerals no doubt were in the land of Judea, and let not either our ignorance,
or the Jews idleness be interpreted the lands barrenness, the upper
fruitfulness of whose soil made them the more negligent in digging into the
bowels thereof as those need not to play beneath board, who have all the
visible game in their own hands?

CHAP. 4. Of the wealth accruing to Judea from the vegetables therein.
1. AMongst the native and proper commodities of Judea, Balm, Balm a property
of Judea.
or Balsam most justly challenges the principal place. For when Jacob advised
his sons to provide a present for Joseph, Take (says he) of the best fruits
of the land in your vessels, a little Genesis 43. 11.
balm, and a little honey, spices etc. Ios. hist. Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 2.
Hereby appears the improbable error of such as report how amongst other rich
presents the Queen of Sheba brought to Solomon, the first plants of Balsam,
which afterward grew in Judea. Whereas indeed her bringing of those into that
Country, had been no better then carring of water to the fountain.

2. Hear the judgment of Pagan writers altogether unconcerned Commended by
heathen writers.
in this business. Pli^. not. hist. lib. 12. cap. 25.
Pliny says, Balsamum uni terrarum Iudaeae concessum, understanding that Judea
alone was the Primitive place where it grew, though afterward colonies thereof
were transplanted into Egypt and other countries. With him agrees
Theophrastus, Dioscorides and Gal. de Antid. li. 2. ca. ^3.
Galen, who professes that he went on purpose to Judea, to observe the
distilling thereof, and carried a small portion of balm about him, by comparing
thereof to discover and confute the frequent impostures of such as counterfeit
the same. This Balsame was principally twofold.

1 Xulo-balsamum, being the parent, namely the shrub, (or in complement call it
the tree) out of which it proceeded. 2 Opo-balsamum, being the daughter, which
trickled like tears from the former, useful for men Sound, making a most
odoriferous and pleasant perfume; Sick, being a sovereign salve for their
wounds; Dead, being an admirable preservative against corruption. So that their
embalmed bodies seemed in some sort to typifie the eternity of their soul.

3. But this Balm was not so fixed to Gilead or any other part of Judea, but
that it was moveable thence upon the sins of the people. For after some
flittings of this plant to Jericho (whereof afterward) it was first by Pompey,
and finally by Vespasian carried captive to Rome. Where it thrived so well that
it was never (says A^lor (...) and procerior. Plin. not. hist. l. 12. c. 15.
Pliny) fairer or fruitfuller. Which passage may serve as a parable, whereof
our Savior himself is the sense. Who being formerly confined to Palestine
alone, did afterward effectually extend himself for the good of all nations.
But enough hereof, if not too much. Yet seeing the reader, if being to fill his
vial with this precious liquor, would not complain of overmuch measure, I
trust he will not be displeased with our larger description thereof.

4. Deur. 8. 8.
Oil-olive, Oil-olive.
so called to difference it both from seed, and train-oile. Hereof three
kinds, or rather degrees. The coursest employed for lamps; a finer sort used
for meat, and the most refined of all compounded with various spices; whereof
ointment was made, wherewith great Persons on solemn festivals used to anoint
themselves, and upon other occasions, many others.

5. Honey. Honey.
Exodus 3. 8. and 1 Samuel 14 25. 26.
This was the Sugar, as Salt was the Pepper of the ancients. And although Sugar
canes grew in Judea (whereof some considerable store at this day) yet the use
thereof was either unknown to, or neglected by the Jews in Scripture,
preferring honey in their daily diet. And it may seem strange, that honey being
so delici^us in taste, and a staple commodity in Canaan, was Levit. 2. 11.
forbidden to be used in any sacrifice. Learned men trouble themselves about
the reason of this prohibition. Some conceive voluptuousness thereby is
forbidden; others, lip-lusciousnesse and hypocrisy in divine service; others,
pride and ambition; (because honey turns into choler) Hugo Gro^ius in locum
praedictum.
others, that it is forbidden in opposition to the Persian sacrifices, wherein
honey was principally offered. And whereas the varieties of fancies herein are
infinite, some soberly rest themselves on no other reason; but divine pleasure.
As for Wax, the cask of honey, it was used the less for lights, because lamps
were so much in fashion.

6. Wheat. Wheat.
They are called the Deuteronomy. 32. 14.
Kidneys of wheat, because the grains therein were so plump and swelling, as if
all out of Pharaohs seven full ears. Yea our modern Merchants will tell you
(provided they be first out of the Turkish dominions; otherwise it is death to
be caught in the manner) that even at this day they carry much wheat out of
Palestine into Italy it self. Say not, wheat was not so plentiful in this
Country, because our Saviors constant fare was on barley loaves: this argues
the humility of Christ, not the barrenness of the Country; otherwise by the
same consequence it might be inferred, that there were no houses in Judea,
because he wanted where to lay his head. These four aforesaid were the
elementall Commodities of Canaan, whereof that Country had not only a
self-sufficiency, but also sent plenty thereof to Ez^k. 27. 17.
Tire, thence to the whole world. Judah and the land of Israel they were thy
Merchants, they traded in the market wheat of Minnith, and Pannag, and Honey,
and Oil, and Balm.

7. Wine Wine.
may follow in the next place, whereof such plenty, that Jacob Genesis 49. 11.
Numb. 13. 23.
prophesied of Judah, that he should bind his foal unto the vine, and his
asses colt unto the choice vine etc. That is, having occasion to dismount his
Ass, and tie him for a time, vines should offer themselves as most obvious to
fasten him unto; and those so great (Adjectives in other Countries, but
Substantives here) that he might safely tie his beast to them, which with us
are tied to other trees for their support. Nor were their grapes less good then
great, as a Sidonius.
Poet (the most competent Judge of the matter in hand) does bear witness,

Vina mihi non sunt Gazetica, Chia, Falerna,
Quaeque Sareptano palmite missa bibas.
I have no Gaza, Chios, Falern wine,
Nor any flowing from Sarepta's vine.
Thus making a quadripartite division of good wine, two members thereof, that
of Gaza and Sarepta, the one falls in the tribe of Simeon, the other of Asher,
both in the country of Palestine.

8. Josh. 2. 6.
Flax. Hereof great plenty. And pity it was so good a commodity should be
prostituted to idolatry, which caused God to threaten that he would rescue and
recover his Hose. 2. 9.
flax again. The Jewish women were excellent Prove. 31. 13.
houswives, and hereof made great profit, venting it into foreign parts.

9. Wood of all sorts; so that Palestine was a continued grove of trees,
covered over with straight Cedars, strong Oaks, shady Palms, sweet Firres
etc. If the body of Hercules may be guessed from his foot, take the Mustard,
the little Toe of trees, into consideration, and thence collect the vast
proportion of great woods. Some perchance may count it a Rabbinicall vaunt what
Rab. Joseph. in the Babylonish Talmud, Ketab. fol. 3. 6.
one writes: A certain man of Sichem had bequeathed by his Father three boughs
of Mustard, one of which was broken off from the rest, and it yielded nine Kabs
of seed, and the wood thereof was sufficient to cover over the Potters house.
One may also suspect an Hyperbole in what Jerusalem Talmud.
another says, I had a stem of mustard in my garden, into which I could
climb as into a Figtree. However, our Mat. 13. 31, 32.
Saviors words of the extraordinary growth of this plant must needs be true;
and by the same proportion (surely the Jews had not more sauce then meat) other
trees must be allowed to be of unusual greatness.

10. Here I omit to speak of the Dates, Almonds, Nuts, (at this day called
Pistachioes, and most cordial in Physic) Figs, Pomegranates and other
several fruits, whose particular description I pass by on purpose, lest our
book should light on some hungry man or longing woman to read, whose appetites
I may unhappily raise, but cannot satisfy again. And to leave a good sent
behind at the close of the chapter, we must not forget the great store of
Frankincense, Myrrh, and other Genesis 43. 11.
Spices which were plentifully afforded in Palestine.

CHAP. 5. Of the store of beasts for food, service, and pleasure in Palestine.
1. WE step now a stair higher from vegetable to sensible creatures: wherein
this country was no less happy, such was the variety it afforded therein.
Which will appear, first, if we furnish forth a feast of the flesh, fish, and
fowl in Palestine; these particulars being premised. First, that no exception
be taken at our false ranking of dishes. The Apostles said, it was not their
office to Act. 6. 2.
serve tables, and such mistakes are none at all in Divines Secondly, we name
only solid and substantial meat, whereon a cunning Cook (besides sawces and
sallets) may with compounded and forced dishes descant to indefinitenesse.
Lastly, know the Law forbad the Jews the feeding on several meats, so that
their life was a Lent, to abstain from such food, to which Christianity allows
us a license: Levit. 11. 4. 5, 6. etc.
Hogges-flesh, Conies, Hares, Swans, Herons, Lapwings, all fishes in armor,
fenced with shells, recounted amongst the dainties of our diet, were prohibited
unto them. Which very prohibition speaks their plenty in that country,
otherwise the law had been needless to forbid such things which the land did
not afford.

2. Fetching Salt, Bread and Wine from the former chapter, (all of the Quorum
to every feast) first Veale is brought in, (food for Angels when Genesis 18. 6, 7.
Sarah dressed it) Beef of the bulls of Basan, or if that be too course, of the
stalled Prove. 15. 17.
Oxen; Lamb, Mutton and Kid, savoury meat, if Genesis 27. 9.
Rebecca have the cooking thereof; Venison both red and fallow, for so we find
in Solomon's bill of fare, 1 King. 4. 23.
Hearts, Bucks and Bugles.

3. Fowl of all sorts follow, Hens, and Mat. 23. 37. and 26. 24.
Chickens. Capons I dare promise none, as uncertain whether mutilating of birds
was then in fashion, to make them barren, that man's luxury might fructify the
more upon them. Next plenty of Levit. 14. 22.
Pigeons, the poor man's lambs; For such as could not go to the cost of the
one, was to provide the other for a sacrifice. Numb. 11. 31, 32.
Quails in abundance; for though their plenty in the wilderness was
miraculous, when a cloud of them tendered themselves to be taken by the hands of
the Israelites, yet ordinarily there was store of them in Palestine. Let
Locusts for their wings sake be ranked amongst the fowl, only to fill up an
empty place of the table, for otherwise none but the stomach of the mortified
Mat. 3. 4.
Baptist would feed on so course a fare.

4. Fishes come in the next place, whose several sorts in Sea, Rivers, and
lakes were so many, that only Adam, whose memory was the Nomenclator of the
names of all creatures by him imposed, can summon them by their proper
denominations. Of these all that had Levit. 11. 9.
Finnes and scales were permitted the Jews to eat. Butter the sawce-generall to
fish, must not be forgotten. A staple dish of our Saviors whilst an infant,
Isa 7. 15.
Butter and honey shall he eat. Cheese concludes all; such as 1 Samuel 17. 18.
David brought to his brethren, such as 2 Samuel 17. 29.
Barzillai provided for David. Let not any dainty dairy women object, that
Jewish cheese must needs be course, where milk of Deuteronomy. 32. 14.
sheep and Prove. 27. 27.
goats was so much in use: For a mixture of such milk is in Parmizan it self,
so delicious to the palate. And now for Grace before and after meat, might not
Palestine thankfully say with Psalm. ^3. 5.
David, Thou do prepare a table before me in the sight of mine adversaries,
thou do anoint mine head with oil, and my cup runs over? Yea, what is said
of the earth in general, is most properly applyable to this Country, O Lord
how Psalm. 104. 24.
manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all, the earth is full
of thy riches.

5. Besides cattle for food, there were others for labor, Asses, Mules,
Camels, Dromedaries, whereof in due place. Birds also and beasts of prey,
Eagles, Hawks, Lions, Bears, Boares etc. Some will say this was a mischief in
Palestine, whose inhabitants might be said to dwell daily like Daniel in the
Lions den, such the store of ravenous beasts freely roaving up and down the
country. But let such know, that by these beasts continued of purpose, God
kept his people in an awful dependence upon him; whilst they feared God,
these beasts Genesis 9. ^.
dreaded them; and man's piety muzled up the mouth of these ravenous creatures.
Otherwise when these Jews rebelled against their Master, the beasts (one of
Gods Ezekiel. 14. 21.
four sore judgments) were let loose, and became the just executioners of
divine vengeance on a wicked nation. To conclude, such the variety of cattle
herein, that from hence Noah might have fraught his Ark with a couple of most
creatures, some few only excepted (useless for mankind, save for rarity and
fancy) as Apes and Peacocks, (perchance rather Parrats) which Solomon's navy 1
King. 10. 22.
fetched in, and supplied from Tarshish.

CHAP. 6. Objections against the fruitfulness of Judea answered.
BUt seeing we live in so unbeleeving an age, that some have brought the
happiness even of heaven it self into question, no wonder if such as doubt of
the truth deny the type, and (though Scripture be positive in the point) flatly
argue against the fruitfulness of Judea. 1 Object.
The first sort of their objections are taken from some passages scattered from
pagan pens, sleighting Judea as an unconsiderable country. Thus Lib. 16.
fol. 523.
Strabo speaking of Moses, winning it from the first inhabitants, (...), easily
(says he) he obtained it, being a land of which none need be ambitious, and
for which none would studiously engage themselv^^ to fight: for it was a stony
country.

To which we answer first in general. Answ.
Heathen writers knew little, and spoke less good of the Jews, because of the
grand distance of Religions betwixt them. My people (says God) are like a Ier.
12. 9.
speckled bird; and therefore being of a different feather from other fowl in
point of divine worship, no wonder if their neighbors flocked about them, to
flout at them, hooting at their strange devotion: though such mocked at by men
for Owls, may be made of by God as Nightingales. Excellently Josephus in his
book against Apion the Grammarian does prove that no credit is to be given to
Pagan reports against the Jews. And as they loved not that people, so they
liked not their place, causlesly raising slanders upon it. More particularly
Strabo, in his rash censure counting Judea not a prize worth the contending
for, is confuted by the course of history. Let the Romans (too cunning
Merchants to venture on worthless ware) tell how much the City of Jerusalem
cost them, paying an ounce of blood for every inch of ground therein.

2 Object. 2 Object.
It is said in the Scripture it self, Numb. 13. 23. that it was a land which
eats up the inhabitants thereof. It seems it was a very lean, hungry, and
barren land, which in stead of feeding the dwellers therein, fed upon them.

Answ. Answ.
It is said so indeed, but by whom? The false spies whose tongues were no
slander. Now (whatsoever they meant by this their expression) certainly their
words intend not any barrenness in that country, having formerly (verse. 27.)
confessed the transcendent fertility thereof. Except any will say, that these
Spies did now revoke their former witness; and if so, we look no longer on the
land of Canaan as devouring her inhabitants, but on these unconstant liers as
eating their own words. However their first testimony (when, untampered with by
the people, they spoke their own sense, and gave in their true verdict, of the
Land) is to be believed, before their second character of this Country, when
infected with popular discontentments, they studied cavills against the same.
Besides, if the meaning of their words, [a land eating up the inhabitants
thereof] be, as it is generally See the Geneva note on the text.
interpreted, a land whose inhabitants by civil wars mutually destroy one
another, it tends more to the credit, then disgrace of the Country. It is no
fault in that rich pasture, if the grass thereof, be Provender in goodness,
so that the horses fed therein, wax so wanton as to fight one with another.

3 Object. 3 Object.
Water is a staple commodity for man's support, whose life, lame in it self,
soon falls to the ground, if not held up by the Staff of bread in one hand and
water in the other. Now Judea had great want of this Element, a Well being
counted such a treasure amongst them, that great Genesis 26. 18.
strivings have happened about it.

Answ. Answ.
Judea wanted no water, though dry in comparison of England. We northern
nations are ready to suspect the southern parts as afire with a Fever; whilst
southern Countries may fear lest our lands be drowned with a Dropsy; such the
superfluity of rain and Rivers amongst us. Let Judea be compared with her
neighbors in the same Climate, and she would be found not only to equal, but
to exceed them in convenience of water. The Scripture Deuteronomy. 8. 7.
describes it a land of brooks of water, of fountains and depths that spring
out of valleys and hills etc. And because many now adays will believe the Maids
word before the Mistresses, I mean, humane before divine testimony, hear how
Lib. 16. fol. 523.
Strabo speaks to this point, (...). The Country it self indeed was well
watered, but the coasts about were base and ill watered. Besides Rivers Judea
had constantly (save when the windows of heaven were miraculously shut up) the
former and the later rain, which like Trade winds on some seas, came at set
seasons, at Seed-time and before Harvest. So that heaven may be said to have
kept an Ordinary for Judea, and to have fed it at eating hours with set meals
of water, whereas other countries have no such standing Table kept for them,
being left at large to the uncertainty of weather, and not always drinking when
they were athirst, but when they could get moisture.

4 Object. 4 Object.
Ammianus Lib. 14. ^. 7.
Marcellinus reports, that therein were no navigable ^ivers, which must needs
be a great hindrance of commerce in the Country.

Answ. Ausw.
The term navigable must be distinguished on. Confess we that Judea had no
vast streams in it, like Nilus or the Dan^w, whose channels are capable of
Boats, ships f^llows; yet wanted it not Rivers to carry vessels of
considerable burdens. Every Tribe therein did border on the Mid-land sea, or
on the river of Jordan, up which river, even against the stream, they used to
sail, in vessels bearing burdens (not unlike our western Barges) by the
confession of other (...). Strab^, lib. 16. p. 7^5.
authors.

5. Object. 5 Object.
It was full of mountains, which gener^lly are conceived destructive to the
fruitfulness of a country.

Answ. Answ.
Such dwarf-mountains or Giant-hills made the land insensibly larger in exten^,
no whit lesser in increase. Was ever a great belly brought for an argument of
barreness* especially seeing these mountains in Judea did not swell with a
mock-mother Tympany, but were pregnant with special commodities. Some cattle,
as Go^tes; and plants* as Vines are never more triumphant on their throne, then
when advantaged on the sides of such hills. The Stra^o, li. 16. p. 755.
Geographer speaking of Trachonitis, the coursest list, and most craggy ground
about the country of Judea, acknowledges there were (...), grassie and fair
fruitful hills; which as they afforded a delightful prospect, so they
conduced much to make the cities impregnable which were built amongst them.

6. Object. 6 Object.
Mention there is in Scripture of many deserts in Judea, as if the country
were nothing else but a heap of wildernesses hudled up together.

Answ. Answ.
Indeed the word Desert sounds hideously to English ears: it frights our
fancies with the apparitions of a place full of dismal shades, salvage beasts,
and doleful desolation, whereas in Hebrew it imports no more then a woody
retiredness from public habitation; most of them in extent not exceeding our
greater Parks in England, and more alluring with the pleasure of privacy, then
affrighting with the sadness of solitariness.

7. Object. 7 Object.
Frequent famins are mentioned in this land, and some most prodigious. In the
siege of ^ King. 6. 28.
Samaria a woman eat her own child, unexampled almost in other histories, and
all things were sold at excessive rates.

Answ. Answ.
The instances alleged argue not the barrenness of the country, being
extraordinary Punishments inflicted immediately by divine Justice. This we
confess, that as merry men, when sad, are very sad; so this pleasant land,
when God frowned upon it, was extremely dejected, and the famins therein were
famins with a witness.

8. Object. 8 Object.
Saint On Isaiah cap. 44. v. 14.
Hierome, who lived himself long in Palestine, and must be acknowledged so
skillful in this matter, that others could not deceive him, and so honest, that
he would not deceive others, speaks very meanly thereof. It is ragged with
craggy mountains, and suffers the penury of thirst, so that it preserves
rain water, and supplieth the scarcity of wells by building of cisterns.

Answ. Answ.
Saint Hierome in the same place (and none fitter or abler to do it) answers
himself, Neque hoc dico in suggillationem terrae Sanctae, sed ut decutiam
supercilium Iudaeorum. etc. I say not this to disgrace the land of Judea, (as
the heretical Sycophant does belie^ me) or to take away the truth of the
history, which is the foundation of spiritual understanding, but to beat down
the pride of the Jews, which enlarge the straits of the Synagogue, further then
the breadth of the Church. This Father did de^ry the literal, to raise the
mystical Canaan; and they that know Saint Hierome, know that when he intends
to praise or dispraise, he will do it to the purpose.

9 Object. 9 Object.
Modern travelers which have lately surveyed the country, report it to be a
bare surface of sand at this day.

Answ. Answ.
Who can guess what Naomi was by what Ruth 1. 20.
Marah is? The stump indeed stands still, but the branches are withered; the
Skeleton remains, but the favor and flesh thereof is consumed. Judea is, and
is not, what it was before; the same in bulk, not blessing; for fashion, not
fruitfulness; the old Instrument is the same, but it is neither strung with
stock, nor played upon with the hand of skillful husbandry. The Cant. 2. 1.
Rose of Sharon is faded, her ^eaves lost, and now nothing but the prickles
thereof to be seen. See what sin can do, or undo rather, and the guilt of
our Saviors blood: A fruitful land makes he barren, for the wickedness of
them that dwell therein. As therefore the clear and lovely complexions, the
handsome and proper persons, the bold and valiant Spirits, the comely and
courtly behavior of the ancient Jews, are not to be measured by the suspicious
and louring looks, the low and crooked statures, the slavish and servil
conditions, the base and sordid demeanor of the Jews now adays; no more are
our judgments to contract the former fruitfulness of their soil to the present
sterility thereof. And yet as the sheep which fell to Genesis 30. 35.
Jacobs share, had strakes or speckles scattered here and there in their skins:
so, granting the generality of Judea barren, yet by the confession of Brocard
de terra sancta, and M. George Sands.
Travelers some spots and parcels of ground transcendently fruitful, are
every where to be found, retaining and transmitting to posterity the memory of
the universal fruitfulness of Judea, before God had justly cursed it for the
sins of the people.

CHAP. 7. Of the ancient division of the land betwixt the seven Canaanitish
Nations.
HAving done with the description of the commodities of this Country, we come
now to the serverall divisions thereof; which thing seriously considered
conduces much to the right understanding of the Scripture. In several ages
the land fell under different divisions.

1 In Abraham's time it was parted betwixt the seven Nations of Canaan. 2
Afterward the same was subdivided into one and thirty petty Kingdoms. 3 By
Joshua it was parcelled into twelve portions, betwixt so many tribes. 4 In
Rehoboams reign it was rent into two kingdoms, Judah and Israel. 5 After the
Captivity it was divided into three Provinces, Judea, Samaria, and Galile. 6 In
Christ's and his Apostles time it was carved into four Tetrarchies, and some
other appendent dominions.
We will first survey it in the original condition thereof, as it consisted of
a Heptarchy, or seven ruling nations of Canaan, whose number, names,
extraction, and several habitations require much care and diligence to rank
and order them aright.

The first difficulty we meet with, is in the number of these nations, so
variously reckoned up. They are counted up thus: two, Genesis 13. 7. three, Exodus
23. 28. five, Exodus 13. 5. six, Exodus 3. 8. 17. seven, Josh. 3. 10. ten, Genesis
15. 19. eleven, Genesis 10. 15. and 1 Chronicles. 1. 13. and seventeen, if a collective
number of them all be cast up. Now how come they to be so differently computed
where one and the same Spirit is the Auditour to state their account? It is
answered, that seven was the complete and solemn number, whereon God himself
emphatically insists when repeating his favors to the Jews, Deuteronomy. 7. 1.
Seven nations greater and mighter then thou. And perchance the beast in the
Revelation Revel. 13. 1.
with seven heads, bears some allusion thereunto. Wherefore when these seven
nations are summed up defectively, under that number, we must conceive such of
them as are omitted to be employed under the Genericall name of Canaanites. But
on the other side, when above seven are brought, then the inhabitants of the
larger Canaan, are cast into the account: whose country was promised too, but
never peaceably possessed by the Israelites, as we observed before. We find
three several Editions (as I may call them) of the nations of Canaan, whereof
the most authentic and common is Deuteronomy. 7. 1. which we will principally peruse,
as follows.

1 Hittites.
These come forth first as if it were to usher and make room for the rest; as
well they may, being Giants of such strength and stature, the Anakims being
descended from them: so formidable to their foes, that Sam. Bochartus Geog*
sacra. lib. 4. cap. 35.
some conceive them named from (...) hittah, which signifies to scare and
frighten: such the terrible impression of them on their enemies. As stout their
men, so their women were notable domineering dames, witness Rebecca's
complaint, that she was weary of her life for the Genesis 27. 46.
daughters of Heth which Esau had married. They lived about Hebron and
Beersheba, and their country was afterward possessed by Judah and Simeon.

2 Girgashites.
It is hard to determine their exact habitation. Wise Agur confesses that he
knew not the way of a Prove. 30. 19.
Serpent upon a stone, so invisibly he slides away on a smooth place. Such the
clear conveyances of the Girgashites going into Africa, as the Jews Talmud
Hie^os. tract. de ^uram. cap. 35.
will have it, after Joshua's, time* that they cannot be traced by any memory
left behind: except some relics of them remain in the country of the
Gergesens (whose swine the devils Man. 8. 28.
drawned by Christ's permission:) whence Sir Walter Raleigh la ca. 8. pa. 138.
Authors collect them to have lived on the east of Jordan near the Sea of
Cinnereth, afterward in the juncture of the tribes of Gad and Manasseh.

3 Amorites.
These sometimes are taken by a Synecdoche of eminency for all the seven
nations: The sins of the Genesis 15. 16.
Amorites are not yet full. Here we behold them as a particular people, so
called, as Grego^iu^ G^^gorii in verbo.
some conceive, from (...) Amar, to speak, as confident talkers, such as the
Psalm. 12* 4.
Psalmist describes, We ought to speak, who is Lord over us? Yea some carnal
cause they had to boast, being compared by the Amos 2. 9.
Prophet to Cedars for their height, and Oaks for their strength. Their
original habitation was in the mountainous Country, which fell afterward to
the lot of Judge. 1. 34.
Dan, and the west part of the possession of Judge. 1. 35.
Ephraim. Hence they made a ^ally over Jordan, and settled themselves under
Sihon their King eastward in the countries which they had gained from Moab and
Ammon, afterward possessed by Reuben and Gad.

4 Canaanites.
These also generally taken include all the seven nations, growing from the
root of Canaan. Consider we them here as one branch of that tree. Now though
the false report of the spies was in some respect but a libell of this land,
yet they may be believed for the situation of the people therein, that the
Canaanites dwelt by the Numb. 13. 29.
Sea, and the coast of Jordan, that is, all the breadth of the Country
northward, which came afterward to be possessed by Asher, Nephthali, Zebulun,
and Issachar.

5 Perizzites.
By interpretation Villagers, as dwelling in dorps and Hamlets, not walled
towns. Which as it abated their civility, so it advanced their manhood. Their
habitation not far from Genesis 13. 7.
Bethel, where the children of Joseph afterward received their portion; whose
land by Josh. 17. 15.
Joshua was bestowed upon them, in case the country allotted proved too little
for them. Judge. 1. 4.
Some of them also were dispersed in the northern part of the Tribe of Judah.

6 Hivites.
Their name in Hebrew signifies Serpents. So called, as the learned conceive,
from their delight to live underground in caves, whereof plenty in the sides
of mountains. I find two Colonies or plantations of the Hivites. One in the
center of the land, where afterward the tribes of Benjamin, and Joseph met
together. For the Gibeonites (who put a new cheat on the Israelites, with their
old clothes) were Josh. 9. 7. and 11. 19.
Hivites, as also the inhabitants of Sichem were of the same Genesis 34. 2.
nation. Their other plantation was under mount Josh. 11. 3.
Hermon, or in mount Lebanon, as Judge. 3. 3. Josh. 11. 17.
several Scriptures do place them. Now rather then any difference should
arise herein, Hermon will humbly confess it self parcel of Lebanon, and so the
seeming contradiction is reconciled.

7 Iebusites.
Their abode is notoriously known to have been in, and about 2. Sam. 5. 6.
Iebus or Jerusalem, where they defied all David's power to dispossess them, and
yet at last by Ioabs valor were ejected.

So much of the heathen Heptarchy in Canaan. Come we now to consider a second
edition of these nations, as God gave in a list of their names to Genesis 15. 19.
Abraham, promising withal to give his posterity their country in possession.
Here we find them ten in number, the Hivites being omitted, and four more
added, namely,

8. 1 Kenites.
Of these no mention ever after in Scripture. For the Kenites descended from
Iethro (part whereof Judge. 4. 11.
flitted from the South of Judah to the North of Nephthali) were a different
nation from these Kenites the subject of our enquiry: we conceive therefore one
of these two things most probable.

1 Either after Abraham's and before Joshua's time, by famine, sword, and
pestilence they were utterly deleted, and their land shared betwixt the former
seven nations of the Canaanites. 2 Or within the term aforesaid, being
perchance too few and feeble alone to maintain the dignity of a distinct
nation, they lost their names by listing themselves under some other people.
9. 2 Kenizites.
As deep silence of these in holy writ as of the former; as if they had lived
in Psalm. 88. 12.
the land where allthings are forgotten. And probable it is, that betwixt
Abraham's and Joshua's time (if a day may bring Prove. 27. 1.
forth much, what alterations may four hundred years produce?) they were
extinguished. All flesh is grass, and not only particular men, like single
blades, may be mowed down by death, but even whole nations plucked up by the
roots, never to grow again, being buried without other monument over or epitaph
upon them, then that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 9. 6.
their memorial is perished with them.

10. 3 Kadmonites.
That is, by the notation of the word, men of the east, or Easterlings if you
please. These a learned Bochartus G^og. Sac. l. 4. c. 36. p. 347.
man with great likelihood conceives to be the Hivites; both because (as
aforesaid) the Hivites are omitted in this Catalogue, and because they lived in
the eastern part of Canaan, under mount Hermon. As for the opinion, that Cadmus
the Phenician with Hermione his wife were Hivites (Serpents their name sounds
in Hebrew, as we observed before) and therefore fabled by the Ovid. Met. lib. 3.
Poet, to be turned into Dragons; such as exclude it their judgment, because no
solid truth, may admit it into their fancy as a pleasing conceit.

11. 4 Rephaims.
Their position is undoubtedly known, living about Ashtaroth Genesis 14. 5.
Carnaim in the half tribe of Manasseh beyond Jordan. But though here was their
principal nest, we find some of their feathers scattered in other places, in a
2 Samuel 5. 18.
valley near Jerusalem of that name, and another in the tribe Josh. 17. 15.
of Joseph, whither perchance they fled, when smitten at home by Genesis 14. 5.
Chedorlaomer.

But the last and largest volume of these nations of Canaan, is Genesis 10. 15.
where six more are added, dwelling in those parts of Canaan which the
Israelites never fully possessed. The former nations were as I may say under
the first qualification Deuteronomy. 7. 2.
to dye without mercy, but these had more favor afforded them, according to
the honor of Martial proceeding. These latter were never Servants in ordinary
to the Israelites, never wholly subdued by them, but were only retainers at
large, doing them homage at great solemnities, and high festivalls: understand
thereby all the victorious reigns of David and Solomon. We take them in order.

12. 1 Zidonians.
Eminently known by their famous City, whereof largely hereafter.

13. 2 Archites.
These dwelt at Arca, or Arce, a City in Libanus over against Tripoly, whereof
mention in Ptolomeus.

14. 3 Sinites.
In searching after their proper place, we are at a loss, like Joseph when
sent to seek his brethren; only he, when wandering, Genesis 37. 15.
met with a man to direct him, we with many to distract us. Some place them
near the mountain of Sinai. But that barren desert affords no more livelihood,
then the Law there delivered could give life unto men. Others seat them near
Sin (by Ptolomy Simyra) in the northern bound of the land. And a third
Bochartus ut prius.
sort, whom we will follow, in the very south point thereof, at the entrance of
Egypt, near Pelusium, called Sin in the Ezekiel. 30. 15, 16.
Scriptures, whence the desert of Sin has its name Exodus 16. 1.
.

15. 4 Arvadites.
These lived north of the Zidonians, whereof largely in the description of
mount Libanus.

16. 5 Zemarites.
More uncertain for situation then the former, because no more mention of them.
Had the land whereon they lived, like the floor of Bells Histor. Bell. ver. 14.
Temple, been strowed with ashes, some print of their footsteps would have
remained, whereas now no marks, to discover them. Learned men thus groping in
the dark, some seek (for lack of other light) to light a candle from a
glowworm; their conceit being no better, who from the vicinity of the sound,
make these Zemarites inhabit mount Shemir (afterward, Samaria) which is
confuted by the Hebrew Orthography. More probably they may be placed at Josh.
18. 22.
Zemaraim, a City afterward of Benjamin.

17. 6 Hamathites.
As formerly we had too little, here we have too much direction, finding two
eminent places equ^lly probable for their habitation* Hamath on the north of
Nepthali, and another many miles off, called Hamah the great, and afterward
Antiochia. And perchance they might remove from the one to the other. So much
of the nations descended from Canaan, amongst whom the Philistims are not
reckoned, (whose five Satrapies possessed the South-west part of the land)
because they came not from Canaan, but from Mizraim his elder Brother, of whom
God willing largely hereafter in the descriptions of the tribes of Dan, and
Simeon.

To conclude* Let the reader beware lest deceived with the similitude of
sounds, he condemn the generation of the righteous, and mistake true
Israelites by birth, to be Canaanites by descent; as namely, 1 Caleh the Josh.
14. 14.
Kenite, undoubtedly of the tribe of Number. 13. 6.
Judah, only his grandfathers name was Kenaz. 2 Vriah the Hittite 3 Ornan the
Iebusite so loyal so liberal to David: The first might be a Proselyte Hittite,
but more likely an Israelite whose Father was called Heth; and the latter of
the tribe of Josh. 15. 63.
Judah or Judge. 1. 21.
Benjamin, who lived promiscuously with the Iebusites in the City of Iebus or
Jerusalem.
4 Hushi the Archite, who out-achitophelled Achitophell in his policy, was
probably an Ephraimite of the Josh. 16. 2.
borders of Archi, otherwise unlikely that David would have chosen a stranger
to have been his Cabinet counselor. 5 Simon the Mat. 10. 4.
Cananite, Christ's Disciple, certainly a Jew, (otherwise our Savior would not
have entertained him in so near a relation) born it seems in John 2. 1.
Cana of Galile.


So much for caution, lest Demetrius who was well 3 John 1, 2.
reported of all men, suffer for Demetrius, Diana's silver-smith; and these
real Jews be misrepresented under the notion of heathen extraction.

CHAP. 8. The second solemn division of the land of Canaan into thirty one
Kingdoms.
1. NExt to the distinguishing of this land into seven nations, Anciently an
A^my of Kings in Canaan.
we must observe the division thereof amongst Io^h. 12. 9.
one and thirty Kings. Strange, that their scepters (except very short) did not
justle one another, in so narrow a Country. But, we must know, that the Genius
of that age, delighted not so much, in scraping much together, as in having
absolute authority in that little, which was their own. Pride is commonly the
sin of young men, covetousness of old folk. The world in the youth thereof,
more affected honor, then wealth, high titles, then large treasure. And these
Royolets contented themselves, that their crowns (though not so big) were as
bright, their scepters (though not so great) were as glistering, as those of
the mightiest Monarchs, being as absolute Sovereigns in their own small
territories.

2. Let us consider, The 31 kingdoms how dispensed to the several Tribes.
how these one and thirty kingdoms were afterward disposed of, and how they
were shared amongst the several Tribes. In reckoning up their names, we
observe the method in Josh, ibid.
Joshua, as he marshalls them upon order following; Kingdoms of
1. Jericho. 2. Ali. 3. Jerusalem. 4. Heb^o^. 5. Iarmuth. 6. La^hish. 7. Eglon.
8. Gezer. 9. D^ber. 10. G^der. 11. Hormah. 12. Arad. 13. Libnath 14. Adulla^^.
15. Makkeda^. 16. Bethel. 17. Tappuah. 18. Hepher. 19. Aphek. 20. Lasharon. 21.
Mad^n. 22. Ha^or. 23. Shimr^n-M^ron. 24. Achshaph. 25. Ta^^a^h. 26. Megiddo.
27. Kedesh. 28. I^^^eam of Ca^mel. 29. Dor in the coasts of Dor. 30. The
nations of Gilgal. 31. Tirza.
allotted to
1. Benjamin. 2. Benjamin. 3. Ben^amin. Judah. 4. Iuda^. 5. Judah. 6. Judah. 7.
Judah. 8. ^phraim. 9. Judah. 10. Judah. Sim^on. 11. Simeon. 12. Judah. 13.
Judah. 14. Judah. 15. Be^jamin. 16. Benjamin. 17. Manasseh cis I^r. 18.
M^nas^cis I^r. 19. As^er. 20. Zebulon. 21. Neph^hali. 22. Nephthali. 23.
Zebulon. 24. Asher. 25. Manas. cis I^r. 26. (...) cis^or. 27. Nephthali. 28.
Zebulon. 29. Manasseb. Issachar. 30. B^nja^in 31. Ephraim.


By the King of the nations of Gilgal, understand a Sovereign over a
miscellaneous company of people, the master-bee of a swarm not yet fixed in an
hive, having a sufficient territory for his men, but no considerable Metropolis
of his kingdom. In this Catalogue, Sihon and Og are not reckoned, whose
dominions lay ^ast of Jordan, and they make up thirty three Kings in all. So
much of these Cities for the present; whereof largely hereafter in those
respective Tribes to which they belong.

3. Amongst these Kings one may visibly discover two distinct combinations. Two
distinct combinations of these Kings.


1 In the southern circuit of Canaan, Adoni-bezek King of Jerusalem seems to be
chief of this knot, at whose Josh. 10. 3.
sending the Kings of Hebron, Iarmuth, Lachish, Eglon etc. assembled themselves
against Joshua, and were destroyed by him. 2 In the northern Association. There
Josh* ^^ 1, 2, 3.
I^bin the King had the precedence, with whom the Kings of Madon, Shimron, and
Achshaph etc. confederated themselves against Joshua with the same success.
Had all at once engaged against Joshua, the task had been hard; had he fought
them all severally, the work had been long to subdue them. For, these thirty
and one Kings, who made up a full month in their number, how many years would
they have made up in their resistance? Whereas now divine providence fitting
the strength of Joshua's arm, parcelled his foes into two bundles, that he
might the more easily at two blows, strike through both of them.

4. And here we present the Reader with a draught of the land, Necessary
difference betwixt the two maps of Canaan.
as it was in the days of Abraham, and continued till the time of Joshua; not
well satisfied, whether more properly to term it old, or new Canaan. If we
count from the beginning of the world downwards, it was young or new Canaan,
because nearest the creation; if we reckon backwards from our time, the old
Canaan. If the Reader discover any difference betwixt this, and the next Map of
the same land, as it was constituted after the days of Joshua, let him
consider, 1 How the same face is disguised by different dressing. Palestine
afterward (when divided betwixt the twelve Tribes) being tricked and trimmed
with many new Cities, had the favor thereof quite altered. 2 How the pictures
drawn by the same exact Artist, of the same person, first when a youth,
afterward when an old man, must have much difference betwixt them; and the
distance of some hundreds of years, causes a necessary variation in the
descriptions of the same Countries.


It will be objected, that though age and accidents may alter the old, and
induce new lineaments in men's faces, yet the Simile holds not in the
description of Countries, where the same channels of sea, courses of rivers,
falls of vales, flats of plains, ridges of hills, must remain. As for
mountains, time, for want of carriage, must be forced to leave such luggage
behind her; and therefore that such land, and water-marks, must always
continue, without any considerable alteration. But it is answered, that even
these seeming Standards of nature, are moveable with time and casualty,
inundations, tempests, and earthquakes; in the last (being the earths violent
cough) sometimes she spits up her own lungs, casting up great hills where never
were any before. What the Apostle speaks in an higher sense, is true of the
material world, and the several countries therein, 1 Cor. 7. 31.
The fashion of this world passes away; so that to the very view of the eye,
the shape, form, and garb thereof is metamorphosed. Besides, other Anagrams
happening in the land of Canaan, lands afterward transposed for water, and water
for land; one is most remarkable, namely, when the pleasant vale of Genesis 1^. 3.
Siddim nigh the banks of Jordan, was turned into the salt-sea, or noisome
Asphaltite-lake. This was the work of the Lord, and it may justly seem
mavelous in our eyes. But of the cause, time, and manner of this alteration,
largely God willing hereafter.

Here the Map of old Canaan it to be inserted.



CHAP. 9. The third division of the land into twelve Tribes, some of all which
Tribes remained until, at, and after the time of our Savior.
1. THe third solemn division of Palestine, was made by Joshua into twelve
Tribes, of whose several bounds largely in our ensuing discourse. This
partition remained until Shalmaneser 2 King. 17. 6.
carried ten Tribes away captive, and in exchange, brought in his own colonies
to possess their conquered Country. However, although the main body of the ten
Tribes were thus transplanted, without any hope to return to their native soil,
yet some competent representation of every Tribe, remained behind in their own
country, even until, at, and after the time of Christ, and his Apostles.

2. Allege not to the contrary, that it is said, after Shalmaneser's carrying
them away captive, 2 King. 17. 18.
there was none left but the Tribe of Judah only. Understand it, that Judah
only remained in the flourishing condition of a kingdom. That only was the
visible standing-corn, amongst which, others of Israel, like loose ears were
scattered. But to the point, that some gleanings of these ten Tribes, remained
in their country, after the Assyrian captivity, may be proved; 1 From the very
nature of a general calamity, which lighting on a populous nation, cannot so
particularly apply it self to every individual person, but that some will
escape. The Isai. 7. 20.
hired rasor made not such clean work, as to shave every hair, but that some
small down might creep under the edge thereof. That Isai. 14. 23.
Besome of destruction swept not so clean, but that some dust may be presumed
left behind in the small crevices of the country. Some (no doubt) by timely
flight, casual absence, especial favor, secret concealment, might escape;
and others, through age and sickness unable to travel, might be permitted to
remain behind. 2 Mention is made of a 2 Chr. 30. 6.
remnant which escaped out of the hands of the King of Assyria. And when
^iezekiah kept his solemn passover, he sent 2 Chronicles. 30. 10. 18.
messengers to Ephraim, Manasseh, Issachar, Zebulun, Asher, some of whom made a
mock at his courtesy, and others thankfully embraced his gracious invitation.
3 Josiah in his passover (celebrated in the eighteenth year of his reign,
ninety and odd years after the banishment of the twelve Tribes) assembled
there 2 Chr. 35. 18.
all Judah and Israel that were present, or found.


3. Such remnants of the ten Tribes, being afterward carried captive with
Judah to Babylon, returned thence with the rest of their brethren; as probably
is insinuated, 1 By the sacrifice at the dedication of the second Temple, Ezra.
6. 17.
A sin offering for all Israel, twelve hee-goats according to the number of the
Tribes of Israel. In expression (no doubt) of gladness, of some of every Tribe
present thereat. 2 By the number of such as returned, amounting to Ezra 2. 64.
forty two thousand three hundred and threescore. Now, whosoever shall be
pleased, to cast up the particular sums, of the several families of Judah and
Benjamin set down there, will find them fall short twelve thousand of the
foresaid number. Where therefore shall we supply the account? Hear how the
great Jewish-Chronicle (set forth not long after our Saviors time) resolves
this question; Vbi ^rgo sunt 12000? in iis sane qui ascenderunt dereliquis
tribubus. Seder olam Rabba. cap. 29.
Surely, they were made up of those who came up from Babylon to Jerusalem, of
other Tribes. 3 The 1 Chronicles. 9. 3.
Scripture says, after the captivity of Babylon that there dwelt in Jerusalem
(besides those of Judah and Benjamin) of the children of Ephraim and Manasseh.


Nor is the testimony of Josephus to be slighted herein, though Ios. In Animad
ver. in Eusebius. numero. 1734.
Scaliger causlesly condemns it, affirming that the King of Egypt employed
seventy two Jews to translate the Bible into Greek, taking six out of every
Tribe, which complete that number.

4. That such fragments of the ten Tribes returning from Babylon, were
reestated in their ancient possessions, I dare not affirm, but rather believe
the contrary. For there was no inducting them into their former inheritances,
because no vacancy or avoidance therein; terra plena, the land was still full
with the plantation of Medes and others brought in by Shalmaneser. So that this
remnant of the ten Tribes, were (for the main) fain promiscuously to make their
habitations where they might, whilst Judah and Benjamin were restored to their
ancient, entire, and distinct possessions. Yet there is some probability, that
some of Zebulun and Nephthali in our Saviors time had recovered part of their
ancient patrimony. Otherwise the force of Isaiahs prophecy, and Matthews
application is much impaired: Mat. 4. 14. etc.
The land of Zebulun and the land of Nephthali etc. The people that sat in
darkness saw great light. That is in a genuine and unstrained sense, their
posterity had the day of deliverance first dawning unto them, whose ancestors
were first overtaken with the night of affliction.

5. That in the time of Christ, and his Apostles, some pious people of all
Tribes, were extant in Judea, plainly appears, 1 By Luk^ 2. 36.
Anna the Prophetess, which was of the Tribe of Asher. 2 By Saint Paul's
expression, Acts 26. 7.
Unto which promise, our twelve Tribes instantly serving God day and night,
hope to come. This cannot be meant of those departed this life, before Saint
Paul's time, (which were past hope and in possession of the promise) but of such
as served God then, when this speech was uttered. 3 By the superscription of S.
James his Epistle, James 1. 1.
To the twelve Tribes which are scattered abroad, greeting. Being Christian
Jews probably, Acts 11. 19.
dispersed from Jerusalem, after the martyrdom of Saint Stephen.


6. To conclude, what in the Law God prescribed concerning the fields, he was
pleased graciously to practice upon the persons of the Israelites. Levit. 19.
10.
Thou shall not glean thy vineyard, neither shall thou gather every grape in
thy vineyard. He suffered a small racemation to remain, still preserving Acts
26. 7.
(...), and not wholly discomposing the solemn Jury of the twelve Tribes, which
until Christ's time were made the thinner, but not the fewer, by all their
calamities. For, although thorough continuance of time, sudden and great
changes in their condition, laziness and neglect, casual losing, and
spightfull embezeling of their Records, mixed marriages with heathens, and many
other accidents the intireness of their Pedegrees was much perplexed and
interrupted; yet by tradition from their parents, they knew in general their
extraction from those Tribes, though unable particularly, to clear the
immediate series of their descents.

CHAP. 10. Of Palestine rent into two kingdoms, under Rehoboam; and their
several strengths balanced.
1. THe next solemn division, the land of Canaan fell under, was, when it was
cloven by the ten Tribes 1 King. 12. 19.
defection, into the kingdoms of Judah, and Israel.

2. The kingdom of Judah consisted chiefly of the Tribe of Judah, which alone
was so powerful, and populous, that the men thereof, in the muster made by
King 2 Samuel 24. 9.
David, amounted in number to more, then the half of all the other Tribes there
expressed. Besides the body of this Tribe, very considerable were the
appurtenances thereof, namely,

Some of Simeon, Josh. 19. 1. 9.
whose inheritance was in the midst of the inheritance of the Tribe of Judah.
Dan, part of whose possession was taken out of what originally was assigned to
Judah.


These must be presumed, to bear a State-sympathy to the kingdom of Judah,
engaged thereunto by the position of their country. Yea, we find it expressed
in Scripture, that 1 King. 19. 3.
Beersheba a City of Simeon; and 2 Chr. 11. 8.
Gath, 2 Chr. 11. 10.
Zorah, and Ibidem.
Ajalon, Cities of Dan, did belong to, and were fortified by the Kings of Judah.

3. Besides these, two thirds of the Tribe of Benjamin, pertained to the same
kingdom; as also all the Levites 2 Chr. 11. 14
which left their Cities in Israel, and clave to the house of David. These,
though properly the eyes of the land, had hands also, and contributed to the
strength of the kingdom. Add hereunto all the well-affected, which out of all
the Tribes of 2 Chr. 11. 16.
Israel resorted to Jerusalem. For, the by-ditches of Dan and Bethel, did not
so drain the peoples devotion, but that much thereof ran in the right chanel to
the Temple; and no doubt, many violently kept at home, had their hearts at
Jerusalem, and their bodies in Israel, to which kingdom all the rest of the
Tribes did belong.

4. Here it will be richly worth our pains, to enter on a comparative estimate
of these two Kingdoms, which of them exceeded in puissance: Herein we shall
carry an impartial hand; and indeed, though the controversy be betwixt two
Kings, there is nothing to be got by flattering of either.

5. We will compare them first in that, wherein Solomon places the honor of a
King, Prove. 13. 28.
the multitude of their subjects. And here any clear judgment will find for the
Kings of Israel.

6. Secondly, if the extent of their dominions be surveyed, and our eye in the
Map made umpirer therein, the case is clear in view without measuring, that
Israel was the greatest.

7. Thirdly, if their Cities be numbered, the result will be this, Judah had the
Sun, Jerusalem; Israel had the Moon, Samaria, and most Stars of the first
magnitude, Ieri^ho, Iezreel, Mahanaim etc.

8. Fourthly, if their ports, and naval power be considered, neither will be
found very active that way, contentedly yielding their sea-trading to the
Phenicians. Yet Israel had the advantage of havens, and marine accommodations,
bordering most on the Mediterranean; Judah also (to hold the scales even) had
Ezion-Gaber, a considerable port on the Red Sea, as may appear by Ahaziahs
request to Iehosaphat, 1 King. 22. 49.
Let my servants go with thy servants in the ships; plainly importing, that
the men of Judah were the Cape-merchants and prime mariners in those seas, by
whose courtesy the subjects of the Kings of Israel, were admitted to trafique
there. However, Ezion-Gaber on the Red Sea was but a key to the backdoor
(little of the East Indies being then known, and less traded to) whereas the
havens on the Midland-sea opened the broad gates of commerce to the most and
best frequented parts of the world.

9. Fifthly, if the absoluteness of their Kings power be stated in their
respective dominions, here in the opinions of some the upper hand must be
adjudged to Judah. The Kings whereof in administration of justice (or rather
revenge) often exercised arbitrary power, making use of their prerogative above
law. As appears by Solomon's proceedings against the lives of Shimei, Ioab, and
Adoniah; and more plainly in Iehoram's 1 King. 21. 13.
executing his own brethren, by his peremptory pleasure, without legal
conviction of them. Whereas no monument is extant, of such arbitrary
proceedings in the kings of Israel, more confining themselves to legal
courses. Yea, the very murder of Naboth carried the face of a judicial
process, wherein legal n formalities of witnesses, though suborned, were
observed in a solemn Session. The reason why the Kings of Judah were more
unlimited in their power, was, say they, because they derived their title
immediately from the God of heaven, confirmed in David's family by several
descents. But the Kings of Israel, being Creatures of their own subjects, made
by popular election, on condition to remit their taxes and burdens, (and
seldom above three of the same stock in a direct succession) were fain to
ingratiate themselves, with remitting much of that royal rigor used by the
Kings of Judah. And this is assigned by a judicious Sir Walter Raleigh Hist.
World 1 part. 2600. cap. 19. Sect. 6.
Author as a principal cause why Israel never returned to their former
subjection to David's family, because the scepter of Judah was too heavy for
them, and they lived under more liberty in their own kingdom.

10. Sixthly, if their forain impressions, made by them on neighboring Princes
be considered, the balance is so even, it is hard to say, on which side the
beam breaks. For, as memorable were the victories of the Kings of Israel
against the Syrians, so no less fortunate the fights of some Kings Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14. 13. and Ichosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 23
of Judah against the Ethiopians, and other enemies. And as the kingdom of
Moab, till the death of Ahab, was 2 King. 3. 5.
tributary to Israel: so Edom, until the end of the reign 2 Chr. 21. 8.
of Iehosaphat, was in subjection to the crown of Judah.

11. Seventhly, if their home-achievements each against other, be recounted,
(the truest touchstone of their several strengths) God often made them
alternately hold up one another, whilst he whipped them both for their sins.
But although Abijah once got a remarkable 2 Chr. 13. 19.
conquest of Jeroboam, yet generally Israel worsted Judah, overpowering them
with multitude of men. Thus Baasha 2 Chronicles. 16. 1.
cooped up Asa in his own land; Ioash 2 Chr. 25. 23.
overcame Amaziah, and took Jerusalem; and Pekah almost utterly 2 Chr 28. 6.
consumed Ahaz, and his kingdom.

12. To conclude, if their lasting and continuance be measured, herein Judah
clearly carries away the pre-eminence. Grant, Israel beat Judah at hand, yet
Judah beat Israel at length, even out of distance. For, whilst the Babylonish
captivity did only snuff Judah, for seventy years, (blazing the brighter when
they returned from banishment) the Assyrian conquest utterly extinguished
Israel, from ever appearing again, in a formed Commonwealth, in their own
Country.

CHAP. 11. Of the partition of the Land into the Provinces of Galilea, Samaria,
and Judea.
1. WHen these two kingdoms had determined, and the division of the twelve
Tribes was out of date, Palestine began to be distinguished into three
Provinces, whose number and posture we find in the Evangelists, being traced in
order by the feet of our Savior, John. 4. 34.
1. He left Judea. 2. And departed again into Galilee. 3. And he must needs go
through Samaria. It being denied to our Savior himself, to travail per saltum,
a termino ad terminum sine medio, so that he could not ordinarily pass from
Judah in the south, to Galilee in the north, without traversing Samaria, which
lay in the midst betwixt both.

2. To begin with Judea, Judea with the appurtenances thereof.
or Jury; it is not taken here in that large acception, wherein it contained
the whole Country, and entire subject of this our book (in which sense Herod
the great is styled Luke 1. 5.
King of Judea) but is taken, as Ezra 5. 8.
elsewhere it is termed, the Province of Judea, for a third part of the whole
land, consisting of the ground formerly belonging to Judah, Benjamin, Simeon,
Dan, and Reuben. For, that this Province reached eastward, beyond the River,
plainly appears in the Mat. 19. 1. and Mark 10. 1.
Evangelists, affirming, that Christ came from Galilee into the Coasts of Judea
beyond Jordan. A spacious Country it was, and in our Saviors time, the proper
habitation of the principal Jews. Nor is it amiss to observe, that a portion
of land (with the governments of Lidda and Ramah) lying in the juncture of
Benjamin and Ephraim, was in the time of the Maccabees, taken from Samaria, by
King Demetrius, and by him 1 Macc. 11. 34.
assigned to Judea, in reward of the friendship, and faithfulness of the Jews
in his service; which gore, or gusset of ground, was called Apherema, that is,
a thing taken away, because parted from Samaria, and pieced to Judea.

3. Samaria succeeds, Samaria peopled with colonies of Medes etc.
whereby we understand not, the City of that name, for a long time, Metropolis
of the kingdom of Israel; but a country (formerly pertaining to Ephraim, and
Manasseh, and So D. Heyly^.
Gad) peopled after the Assyrian captivity, with colonies brought thither from
2 King. 17. 24.
Babylon, and the neighboring Dominions. At first this land did not fadge well
with these new inhabitants, Lions sent by God disturbing their quiet
possession; until a Priest of the Israelites was remanded, to teach them 2
King 17. 27
the manner of the God of the land. But, what betwixt an ignorant Master, and
indocible Scholars, nothing was learnt to purpose. He taught them no true
worship, but only Ieroboams divinity (as appears by their 2 King. 17. 32.
appointing out Priests of themselves for their high places) and they jumbled
together their own numerous Idols, with the service of God. In so much, as they
are said to 2 King. 17. 34.
fear the Lord, and in the next verse, not to fear the Lord: not that there is
any contradiction in the text, but an open opposition, betwixt their pretense,
and practice; seeing such as fear God otherwise, then his will in his Word
prescribes, fear him not in effect.

4. However, afterward the Samaritans quitted their multitude of Idols, The
Articles of the Samaritan Creed.
and patched up a religion amongst themselves, wherein, 1 They adored one
Deity, but him so erroneously, that Christ flatly told them, John 4. 22.
ye worship that which you know not. 2 They acknowledged only the five books
of Moses for Canonical. 3 They had a Temple on mount Gerizim, stickling for
the honor and holiness thereof to equal, yea exceed that at Jerusalem 4 They
expected a Savior, believing him as able, so willing to resolve all important
difficulties; John 4. 25.
When Messiah is come, he will tell us all things. 5 They falsely accounted
themselves extracted from the ancient Hebrew Patriarchs.


Thus the Samaritan woman had it rise in her mouth, John 4. 12.
our Father Jacob, though in very deed, he was no more her Father, then the man
she kept company with, was her husband, being neither lineally descended from
the one, nor lawfully married to the other. Hear what Josephus has to this
purpose; The Samaritans, says he, Ant. Ind. lib. 11. sub sinem, page 386. and
lib. 12. ca. 7. page 410.
are of this nature, that when the Jews are high in fortune and success,
presently they embrace society with them, and deduce the series of their own
descent from the Patriarch Joseph, and his sons Ephraim and Manasseb: But
when the Jews are depressed and low in estate, then they disclaim all kindred,
defy all affinity with them, professing themselves (as indeed they are) to be
originally Medes and Persians.

5. Generally great was the Antipathy betwixt the Samaritans and Jews. The
Antipathy betwixt the Samaritans and Jews.
The former persecuting every face that did but look toward Jerusalem; on
which bare account they churlishly denied our Savior entertainment in their
town, because Luke 9. 53.
his behavior was as though he would go to Jerusalem. Nor came the Jews
behind them in hatred, so far from familiar John 4. 9.
conversing with them, that a Jew would rather contentedly endure thirst, then,
to quench it, crave drink of a Samaritan, lest such hands should defile the
water, with the very drawing of it. Yea when the malice of the Jews meant
mortally to wound our Saviors reputation, they said, he was a John 8. 48.
Samaritan and had a Devil. However, the deluge of sin did not so generally
drown all the Samaritans, but that some dry Islands, some good men were found
amongst them. One eminent for his gratitude to God, being the tithe of the
lepers cleansed by Christ, who Luke 17. 16.
alone returned to give him thanks; and another no less commendable for his
charity to Luke 10. 33.
man, being Physician, Surgeon, Host, and in a word, neighbor to the unknown
traveller wounded by thieves in his journey to Jericho.

6. Galilee remains, so called (as Galilee twofold, why one of them surnamed
of the Gentiles.
Melanchthon will have it) because in Hebrew signifying a bound or limit, lying
in the northern marches of the land. It was twofold, The Upper formerly
belonging to the tribes of Asher, Nephthali, and Manasseh beyond Jordan. The
Lower, formerly belonging to the tribes of Zebulun, and Issachar.


The upper Galilee is also called Isa. 9. 1. and Mat. 4. 15.
Galilee of the Gentiles, or, Galilaea Gojim, whereof many reaasons are rendered
by learned men. These two most considerable, either that it was so called,
because very populous, in which consideration it is termed by Bell. Ind. li. 3.
ca. 4. page 833.
Josephus (...); affirming, that the least (...) village therein had fifteen
thousand inhabitants. So that, Galilea Gojim, or of the Gentiles, is the same
with populous Galilee. (If any except that Gojim in Scripture is only taken
for Heathen, never for the people of the Jews, may he be remitted to learned
Ex^^cit. 114. (...) 25. c. (...).
Rivet, by instances to the contrary to have his judgment rectified herein) or
else, it was called Galilee of the Gentiles, because it bordered on them, and
lay in the passage through which travelers journied to the Gentiles. Thus the
gate of 2 King. 14. 13.
Ephraim in Jerusalem got the name thereof, not that it stood in, but led
toward the Tribe of Ephraim.

7. The Galileans were high spirited people, The character of the Gali^eans
(...) Josephus ut pri^s.
(...), fighters from their infancy, impatient of wrong, lovers of liberty, and
prone to revenge. Much of their nature may be read in their countryman Saint
Peter, forward (not to say furious) in hot blood, to draw his John 18. 10.
sword though at great disadvantage, and after, at leisure to repent it. Apt
they were to raise tumults against the Romans, but always with ill success.
Witness especially, when they pretended sacrifice to cloak their Rebellion, but
Pilat was too quick and cunning for them, who subduing them, Luke 13. 1.
mingled their blood with their sacrifices. They were distinguishable by their
Dialect from other Jews, speaking a broader, or (as I may say) a Dorick
Syriack, whereof the maid minded Saint Peter, Thou Mar. 14. 70.
art a Galilean, and thy speech agrees thereunto. They were accounted courser,
and less refined Jews, as appears by the expression of the Evangelist, John 4.
45.
The Galileans received him, having seen all the things that he did at
Jerusalem at the feast, for they also went up unto the feast. Where those
words, for they also, though they admit the Galileans to the communion of the
same Religion with the Jews, yet set them at a second table, as inferior to
the other. Yea, the Jews called our Savior in disgrace, at least wise in
diminution, a Galilean. Might I presume to interpose my opinion, I should
conceive these Galileans were chiefly extracted from the remainder of the ten
Tribes, left behind in the land, after the Assyrian captivity, as we have
showed before.

8. If these three Provinces be in several respects, The three Provinces how
compared.
compared together, they behave themselves as follows,

For Antiquity; Galilee the first, (mentioned Josh. 20 7.
in Joshua) Judea the next, Samaria the youngest. Extent; Judea the greatest,
Galilee the next, Samaria the smallest. Honor; Judea the highest, (because
Jerusalem therein) Samaria the next, Galilee the meanest. Safety; Samaria the
first (best secured in the middle) Judea next, Galilee last, and most exposed
to enemies. Fruitfulness; Galilee the first, Samaria second, Judea mountainous,
and less fruitful, by the testimony of Saint Hierom.


This distinction of these three Provinces lasted till the destruction of the
second Temple, but abated in the solemnity thereof, by the ensuing partition
into Tetrarchies.

CHAP. 12. Of the division of this land into four Tetrarchies, and some other
small territories.
1. MUch about the time of our Saviors birth, The original and nature of
Te^rarchies.
this land was divided into four Tetrarchies. A Tetrarchy is conceived by
Suidas and Stephanus in Thesa^ro.
some to be a dominion, wherein are (...) (...) co^ors, (...).
(...): i.e. four squadrons and sixty four men. Others, with Pliny, take it to
be a country, with four Cities therein. But learned Plinian. exercit. ^ol. 576.
Salmasius, to whom we refer the reader, confutes these for erroneous, where he
proves a Tetrarchy to be a fourth part of a kingdom; be the men, or Cities
therein more or less. These Tetrarchies in Judea, took their original from the
Testament of Herod the great, who leaving several Sons, bequeathed unto them
parcells of his Kingdom.

2. Afterward, Why (...) Romans continued Tetrarchies.
with some alteration of their limits, these Tetrarchies in Judea were
continued by the Romans (as also elsewhere in the Country of Galatia) on very
politic considerations; 1. Hereby they had the advantage four to one, to
gratify and engage more friends, with Princely honor; seeing one kingdom
thus thriftily managed, afforded four Tetrarchies; as he may be charitable to
more, who changes his pence into farthings. 2 As they gratified more; so they
trusted less, it being no wisdom to venture too much power, in one and the
same person. 3 The restless nature of the Jews required many overseers; and a
small territory amongst them, would yield the Governor thereof plentiful
employment.


In Luke 3. 1.
Saint Luke, we find the number and order of these Tetrarchies, namely, when
John Baptist began to preach,

Pilate was Governor of Judea.

Herod was Tetrarch of Galilee.

Philip was Tetrarch of Iturea, and Trach^nitis.

Lysanias was Tetrarch of Abilen^.

Pilate is styled Governor, having precedence of the rest, as residing in
Jerusalem the principal City, and (perchance) had a superintendency over the
other Tetrarchs, by virtue whereof he suppressed the rebel^lious Luke 13 1.
Galileans, which were otherwise of Herod's dominion. Howsoever they observed
their distinct jurisdictions; for, Pilat hearing that Christ was of Galilee,
Luke 23. 7.
sent him to Herod, to be tried before him: either out of civility, because he
would not incroach on another jurisdiction; or out of policy, to decline so
distasteful, and dangerous employment; at leastwise to divide the Odium betwixt
them, that Herod should have his share, if not his half thereof.

3. Concerning the bounds of Judea and Galilee (Samaria being so swallowed up
betwixt them, Why Abilene mentioned by Saint Luke.
that the southern part thereof belonged to Judea, the northern to Galilee)
largely in the last Chapter. Of Iturea hereafter more fully in the Description
of Nephthali. As for Abilene, we are less solicitous in assigning the accurate
bounds thereof, because it lay wholly out of the land of Canaan, the proper
subject of our discourse. Abilene, called by Ptolemy Abilene Lysaniae, being a
fair City in Coelosyria, where the dominions thereof ranged far on the north of
Libanus. If any demand, why the Tetrarchy of Abilene is mentioned by Saint
Luke, seeing it was an exotic, and forain territory, out of the pale of
Palestine; let them know, it was done out of the over abundant exactness of
the Evangelist, for these reasons: 1 The more exquisitely to notify the
particular time of his history, not only by the date of the Governors of
Judea, but also of contemporary neighboring Princes. And the harmony in
chronology is the sweeter, the more are brought into the consort. 2 Because
many dispersed Jews, equally concerned in Christ, and the benefit of the
Gospel, lived scattered in Abilene. 3 Because having formerly mentioned three
Tetrarchs, the number had not been perfect, and entire, without adding the
fourth. Thus some English coins being quarter-pieces, cannot be put away in
payment without loss, except four of them be joined together. 4 Because, though
Abilene was not within the compass of the lesser Canaan, possessed by the Jews;
yet it was within the bounds of the larger Canaan, that Country once belonging
to the Archites, and Arvadites the sons of Canaan.


4. Now whosoever shall with a Compass in his hand, The inequality of these
Tetrarchies in extent and revenue.
survey the extent of these Tetrarchies, will find them to fall out very
uneven in their dimensions, some much larger then others. Indeed they were
measured with no other scale, then the favor and friendship of the Emperor,
so that the best befriended at Rome, got most dominion in Palestine. Yet were
these Tetrarchies as justly divided, as our English Hundreds, (and those
perchance equal in their primitive institution, for number of men) seeing we
count threescore and eight hundreds in See ^peeds Maps.
Kent, and but six in Lancashire, accounted little less in the compass thereof.
Nor was the Revenues of these Tetrarchies, less unequal then their extent, the
(...) or yearly income of Trachonitis, with the appurtenances belonging to
Philip, amounting, De B^ll. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 9.
as Josephus computeth it, but to an hundred talents; whilst Galilee, with its
appendents, returned two hundred; and Judea, advantaged with the friendly City
of Jerusalem, yielded four hundred talents yearly to the Governor.

5. Indeed exactness in observing the bounds of these Tetrarchies, The word
Tetrarchies variously taken.
is not to be expected; which, in process of time, passed under all parts of
numeration; Multiplied, Subtracted, Added to, new Divided, made more, made
fewer, made other then in their primitive establishment. Let not therefore the
Reader be moved, if sometimes he find more Tetrarchies, sometimes fewer then
four, mentioned by good Authors in Palestine, seeing as Salmasius ut prius.
Salmasius informs us, the word Tetrarchy in afterages was negligently taken,
for a part or parcel of dominion, without relating to the exact proportion of
a fourth part. Thus it is usual for barbarous tongues, to seduce words (as I
may say) from their native purity, custom corrupting them to signify things
contrary to their genuine, and grammatical notation. Who knows not, but that
the word Moity, both in Little^on ^ol. 135. and Cowels interpr. in litera C.
law, and true language* imports the just midst, and true half of a thing?
though small moity in ordinary discourse is taken for any Canton, or small
portion. And in a more proper instance, though the Cinque Ports are notoriously
known to be five, as the name signifies; yet reckoned up with their members
they make seven, as I doubt not, but six, yea more Tetrarchies, may sometimes be
told in Palestine.

6. And now to take our farewell, Idumea, Per^a, and Decapolis.
of the several divisions of this land, mentioned in Scripture, (for on such
only we insist) it will not be amiss to mind the Reader, that besides the
foresaid partitions, we find some other territories in Judea, having proper
names and bounds to themselves, but the latter so excentricall, that they fall
out neither even with any one Tribe, nor adequate to any of the Provinces, or
territories formerly described. Such are, 1 Idumea, sometimes taken more
strictly, for the south part Mark 3. 8.
of Judea; sometimes more largely (as always in the old Isay 34. 5. and Ezekiel.
35.15.
Testament) for the land of Edom, and the adjacent Dominion. 2 Perea, ((...) to
cross the water is frequent in the travels of our Savior) being a country
containing all the land once belonging to Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh on the east
of Jordan. 3 Decapolis, that is, a land with ten Cities therein; the just
proportion of command given to the good servant, who improved his five to ten
pounds, Take thou authority Luke 19. 17.
over ten Cities.


However, such is the variety even betwixt good authors, that amongst them the
ten Cities of Decapolis, are almost ten several ways reckoned up. We will
only set down two, the most authentic computations of them.

Pliny Not. Histor. lib. 5. c. 18.
his account.
1 Damascus. 2 Opoton. 3 Philadelphia, once Rabba. 4 Raphana. 5 Seythopolis,
once Bethsan. 6 Gaddara. 7 Hippon. 8 Pella. 9 Galasa, for Gerasa. 10 Canatha.
Brochard Itin* ab Achone versus Eurum.
his account.
1 Tiberias. 2 Sephet. 3 Kedesh-nepthali. 4 Hazor. 5 Capernaum. 6 Caesarea
Philippi. 7 Iotopata. 8 Bethsaida. 9 Chorazin. 10 Scythopolis.
The reason of their great difference may be this, that in continuance of time,
some of these ancient Cities fell into decay, or disfavour to forfeit their
franchises, whilst later places might succeed to their lost immunities.

7. Here we pass over in silence, Hil-countrey, and low country in Judea.
the division of Judea into the Luke 1. 3^.
Hill-countrey, and the 2 Chr. 26. 10.
Low Country; because this distinction is not appropriate to Palestine, but
usual, and obvious in all other kingdoms. I remember whilst I lived in the
West of England and confines of Summerset-shire, hearing a labourer speak much
of his long living in the low countries, I demanded of him, whether he had ever
been at Amsterdam? He answered, that he had never been there, but often at
Taunton. Whereby I plainly perceived, what low countries he meant, namely the
flat and level of Summerset-shire, under Quantock-hills, according to the
language of the people in those parts. Thus when the Tribe of Judah is said to
conquer the Can^anites in the Judge. 1. 9.
low country, we understand the champion and plain-field in Judea, which lay
at the foot of the mountains.

8. We meet in Scripture with many other petite tracts of ground, Petite lands
in Palestine.
honored with names of lands; as, the land of 1 King. 4. 10.
Hepher, the land of 1 King. 4. 11.
Dor, the land of 1 Samuel 9. 5.
Zuph, the land of 1 Samuel 13. 17.
Shual etc. and in the new Testament the land of Mat. 14. 34.
Gennesareth, with many other. These may be compared to our Gilsland in
Cumberland, Cleveland in Yorkshire, Marishland in Norfolk, Lovingland in
Suffolk, Portland in Dorset-shire: places which sound so big, that if measured
by the ear, and length of syllables, they would be accounted Kingdoms, or
Counties at least, whereas surveyed by the sight, and scale of miles, they
appear like the aforesaid lands in Palestine, very small, and little parcells
of ground, whereof largely as we light on them hereafter in our several
descriptions.

CHAP. 13. How the Hebrews measured places. Of their cubits, furlongs, miles
and Sabbath-days-journeys.
1. THe Hebrews distanced their places by several measures, Hebrews distanced
places, by paces, and bowshoots.
some arbitrary, casual, and uncertain; others certain, as reduced to a
constant standard. Of the former was their measuring of land by paces, for we 2 Samuel 6. 13*
read, when David solemnly brought the Ark into Jerusalem, when he had gone six
paces he offered oxen and fallings. But here we are left at a loss in point of
certainty, taking it rather for an ambulatory, then a Geometrical pace, and
then how vast the difference herein? For Saul being higher from the shoulders 1 Samuel 10. 23.
upward, then the rest of Israel, by the symmetry of parts, his pace must be
presumed proportionably longer then other men. Nor more certain was the Hebrews
measuring their land by a bow-shoot, as Hagar is said, to set her son I^hmael a
good way off, as it were Genesis 21. 16.
a bow-shoot; which if at rovers, or random, admits of variation, according to
the strength of the bow, might or sleight of the archer, weight or fashion of
the arrow.

2. As little certainty is also to be had, by measuring of ground by
days-journeys. And by days-journeys.
Moses in the name of his contrymen requested Pharaoh, that they might go
Exodus 5. 3.
three days journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice unto the Lord their
God. And I have seen some Dutch-maps, in their Scale, in stead of miles,
measured by days-journeys. A computation most uncertain, especially when it is
not agreed, whether the day be in Summer, or Winter; the traveller on
horseback, or on foot: not to speak of the goodness, or plainness of the way,
(by which advantage, 2 Samuel 18. 23.
Ahimaaz beat Cushi) the speed and diligence of the traveller. For instance;
Jacob being in the prime of his youth, sole and single with God, and his
staff, traveled in a day from Beer-sheba to Genesis 28. 10.
Bethel, no less then sixty English miles; a tough journey, and yet the wonder
is lessened, if we observe, 1 No doubt, he set forth early (probably in the
dark to prevent discovery) and traveled till after the Sun Genesis 28. 11.
was set. 2 He fled from his brother Esau; and fear makes good footmen. 3 He
went to fetch a wife; and so welcome an employment made him mend his pace.


Thus early up, and active in himself, and assisted by God, and driven with
fear, and drawn with love, and freed from any luggage; no wonder, if he went
fast and far in a day. But the same Jacob, when he returned from Padan-Aram,
bringing with him flocks, children, and the impediments of a family, found See
the Map of G^d.
fifteen miles from Mahanaim to Peniel (if he went so far in one day) to be a
sufficient journey. However, I deny not, but perchance anciently, the foresaid
paces, bow-shoots, and days-journeys were reduced to a certain proportion,
though now to us unknown. And yet hence no imperfection in Scripture-History is
justly inferred, because the point is of no such concernment, and the holy
Spirit intended not exactness therein, as not important to the truth of the
story.

3. Come we now to their certain measures of ground: Cubits the current measure
of the Hebrews.
amongst which the cubit challenges the pre-eminence, as most common and
current in all Judea, yea and in other eastern countries. For we find even in
Persia, that the gallows provided by Haman for Mordecai (but hanselled by
himself) was fifty Esther 7. 9.
cubits high. Except any will say, this was extraordinary, that in the greater
scorn and derision, that the gallows might the better fit a Jews body, it was
framed and fashioned according to a Jewish dimension. By cubits they were
commanded, to measure the suburbs and lands of the Levites, which were to reach
from the Numb. 35. 4.
wall of the City, and outward, a thousand cubits round about. Say not this
was a long and tedious work, to mete by so small a measure, God hereby showing,
that the least parcel of so fruitful a land, was of conside^able valuation.
Thus precious drugs are not weighed out by hundreds, or pounds; but by drams,
scruples, and grains; so sovereign is the smallest particle thereof.

4. A cubit (in the Hebrew (...), Two kinds of C^bus.
Amah) is so called from cubitus the elbow (as that from cubo to lean, or (...)
to bow) because properly the space betwixt the elbow, and tip of the middle
finger. It was twofold, the great, and the less, which may be cleared out of
Scripture, against such as level all cubits alike, and conceive this
distinction lies not in the thing it self, but men's bare opinion. For, 2 Chronicles. 3. 3. we find cubits according to the first measure, and the Prophet
(...) 41 8.
expressly mentions a full reed of six great cubits. The lesser cubit
generally is adequate to our foot and half, or half yard, the great double as
much, commensurate to our full yard or three foot. But Rabbi Cam^i in his
comment on Cap. 46* v. 2. cited by Arias Montanus de Mensur. Sac^.
Ezekiel assigns the great cubit a larger proportion, so that a thousand
Emoth, or cubits make a mile, whom we have followed in laying out the bounds of
the Levites suburbs.

5. Forbear we here to speak of fathoms, Furlongs how long.
but once mentioned in Scripture Acts 27. 28.
(and then in the Adriatic sea) because only used to sound the depth of
water, nor measure the length of land. A furlong comes next to be considered,
so called quasi furrowlong, being so much as a teme in England plougheth going
forward, before they return back again. I say in England, otherwise in the east
parts of Poland, where Lords have large lands in a continued champion-countrey,
uninterrupted with inclosu^es, they make but two ^urlongs (and those some miles
in length) in a whole day, the one going forth, the other coming back, so to
save time and toil of often turning. We find no mention of furlongs in the old
Testament, and indeed the Grecian sheers first cut the land of Canaan into the
fashion of furlongs, after Alexander and the Asian Kings became Masters
thereof. Hereupon we first meet with them in 2 M^c. 12. ^.
Macca^ees, which afterward in the new Testament, became the constant
computation of distances, both by sea and land. Now although some difference be
in the dimension of several ^urlongs, the Italian is concluded to contain an
hundred and five and twenty paces, and to be the eight part of a mile.

6. A mile consists of a thousand paces, A R^man m^le made the sam^ wi^h* (...)
H^brew B^rah.
whence in Latin it takes its denomination, and is a measure of pure Roman
extraction. However some learned men conceive, that the Hebrew Berah, answers
to the proportion of the Roman mile, and so (says In m^^suris sac^is.
Montanus) is always rendered by the Rabbis; namely, when Jacob is Gen 35. 16.
and 48. 7.
twice said, to want but a Berah to come to Ephrath; and when Naaman is said,
to have departed 2 King. 5. 19.
a Berah from the Prophet Elisha. In all which places Tremelius has it exiguum
terrae spatium, whom our translation following, reads it, a little way. A
mile is said to contain eight furlongs, though others in these eastern parts,
H^w (...) Saviors precept ^s to b^ understood.
will have ten to concur to the completing thereof.

7. But, be a mile more, or less; longer, or shorter; the sense, rather then
the sound, is to be heeded in our Saviors precept, Mat. 5. 41.
And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. Not that
hereby he meant to make Christians the lackeys to every man's insolence, but
only to beat down in them vindicative dispositions, to gain on their
oppressors, by submission, not violence, seeing resistance would invite ruin
upon them, during their present condition. Indeed, clothes are straitest when
first put on, which afterward widen with wearing; and so some think the
strictness of this precept, was only at the first giving thereof. Yea, they
compare this, and the like prudentiall counsels, rather then positive
commands, to the shells of birds, which when they are hatched fall off of their
own accord, conceiving only infant Christianity obliged to the keeping
thereof. Whereas an eternal tie is therein contained; but, with what
circumstances it is to be observed, comes not within the Scale of miles in our
Maps to determine.

8. The Sabbath Days journey remains, A Sabbath Days journey how much.
and great difference there is amongst good authors about the proportion
thereof. Some count it so much as was betwixt each man's proper habitation, and
the next Synagogue, or place of public worship, to which he was to repair;
Others, that distance, which one might go after the Morning, and return before
the evening sacrifice was offered. But let us attend to the text which directs
us to some certainty therein; Acts 1. 12.
Then returned they to Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is from
Jerusalem a Sabbath Days journey. By the Mount here we understand not the
verge, or bottom; but the summity, top, or ridge thereof, whence our Savior
made his ascension. Secondly, both going thither, and returning thence are
computed in the compass of the journey. Now, Bethany which was on mount Olivet,
is elsewhere said to be nigh to Jerusalem John 11. 1^.
about fifteen furlongs, two miles on the matter; all which put together, the
result is, that four miles, or there-abouts, make up a Sabbath Days journey.
Provided, it was leasurely, and moderately paced, coming under the notion
rather of recreation, then toil; a walk, then a work, both to man and beast;
otherwise the day might be broken as well in going too fast, as too far.

9. It will here be demanded, Whereon Sabbath Days journeys were grounded.
seeing this was flatly against the letter of the Law, (if not only meant for
the gathering of Manna) positive, and negative; Exodus 16. 29.
Abide ye every man in his place, let no man go out of his place on the
seventh day: Whence then did this indulgence, or dispensation arise? Some
ground it on Joshua's Josh 3. 4.
ordering, that the Ark should in its removal be distanced from the people
about two thousand cubits by measure; which space is presumed, might be gone
forward and backward by any on the Sabbath Day without offense. But others
conceive this equity included in the very words of the Ordinance. For, surely
God intended not, that the Sabbath should nail the Jews as fast to their houses
as the darkness did the Egyptians Exodus 10. 23.
when none arose from their place; seeing such a sedentary stupidity had been a
rack, not a rest; and a poor refreshing to the Jewish servants, that those who
had been laborers six days, should be prisoners the seventh. Some necessary
motion therefore must be allowed. And when the Disciples walked through the
corn on the Mat. 12. 2.
Sabbath Day, the Pharisees found fault, not with their feet, but their hands,
not with their going, but gathering ears of corn as they went. As for the Pars
quota, how far people might go on that day, custom and tradition had decided
it, about the days of our Savior.

10. For in the age of Elisha the nice restriction of a Sabbath Days journey
was unknown. Unknown in the age of Elisha.
For when the Shunamite requested of her husband, 2 King. 4. 22.
to send her one of the young men, and one of the asses, that she may run to
the man of God, and come again, he rejoyned, Wherefore will thou go to him to
day? It is neither new Moon, nor* Sabbath. Intimating, that had it been Sabbath
either weekly or annual, it was her duty, and had been her custom to repair
to the place where the Prophet lived; though Carmel, where Elisha resided, was
from Shunem at least fifteen miles. As for the Jews in our Saviors time, they
persisted in the rigorous observation of the Sabbath, even till, and after the
destruction of the Temple, insinuated in our Saviors counsel, Mat. 24. 20.
Pray that your flight be not in winter, nor on the Sabbath Day. Christ in the
latter pitying that conflict, which would happen in the scrupulous conscience
of ceremonious Jews, betwixt their love of saving their lives, and keeping the
law; lest that, while the one spurred them to fly, and the other bridled them
to stay, they would be at such a stand, that their enemies might easily knock
them down in that stound of amazement, and their life be determined in this
world, before the question decided in their conscience.

11. As for latitudes and longitudes, Difference in the longitudes and
latitudes.
the light and life of all great Maps, we have only observed them in our
general descriptions of Palestine and Egypt, omitting them in the draughts of
particular Tribes, whose smalness render them incapable thereof, without very
much pains, and with very small profit. In the latitudes we may attain a
tolerable certainty, but so different are good Authors in assigning the
longitudes, that they accord no better in their testimonies, then the witnesses
brought against Christ, Man. 15. 29.
not any two of them agreeing together. Nor does this discord only arise from
the different meridians, whence the ancients and moderns do start their
computations, because this being easily arbitrated according to just
proportion, the difference almost remains as much as ever before. However, we
have followed authors of the best authority, as In our answer to the objections
of the Map general of Pales^ine.
hereafter God willing we shall give the Reader a particular account thereof.

CHAP. 14. Directions for the use of the Scale of miles in our Maps.
1. WIthout a Scale of miles, The vast diff^rence between miles of several
countr^ys.
(or degrees equivalent) the livelyest draught of a Country is no regulated
Map, but a paper full of names of places. However, vast is the difference
betwixt the miles in several Countries. An Italian mile contains seven, an
English eight furlongs. A French is equal to two, a vulgar Dutch to three
English miles, the large Dutch to four, the miles in Swizerland to five, not to
say six of our English computation: so that, in that mountainous country,
travelers have a double disheartning, the worst of ways, and longest of miles.
Yea upon the Alps in the juncture of Germany and Italy, in the self same
mountain, on the north side the miles are the longest, on the south side the
shortest in Christendom.

2. Come over into England, And betwixt miles of the same country.
and what difference is there betwixt a Middlesex and a Yorkshire mile? The
former the shortest, because (as some will have it) every London-Lady when
weary with walking, concludes the space though never so short to be a mile:
whilst the well mounted Rank-riders in the northern country, insensible of
the length of the way, because of the swiftness of their horses, make miles of
the largest proportion. Our scale of miles presented in all these Maps, is
according to the English mile containing eight furlongs; to which we have
reduced (a task rather troublesome then difficult) the measures of other
authors, giving allowance according to the standards of the several countries
whereof they were.

3. Here (if my complaint might find any pity, and that pity give me any ease)
I would complain of the irreconcilable difference betwixt Authors (proceeding
on one and the same scale of miles) in making their distances betwixt their
several places. We read of Saul that he so scattered the army of the Ammonites
so that 1 Samuel 11. 11.
two of them were not lest together* Such a dispersion we find in the judgment
of learned men, not two of them generally concurring in the measuring of miles
betwixt eminent places.

4. Now as Jurie-men, when several witnesses swear point blank one against
another, make bold to believe his testimony who appears most credible unto
them, such power we have assumed to our selves in these differences, to follow
those, who we conceive have the best authority. Herein having a special regard
to those that lived upon the place, and preferring their judgments above
others, though otherwise of greater learning, because in matters of fact done
in his presence, the eyes of a child are to be believed before the ears of a
man.

5. Where both authors appear of equal authority in themselves, and number of
followers, we have umpired the difference by pitching on a middle number
betwixt both. For instance, Patest. Seig. f. 19.
Seiglerus makes it fourteen thousand paces or fourteen miles betwixt Zidon and
Tire (eminent Marts, and therefore the distance betwixt them might be
notoriously known) whilst Vadian. Phax. f. 271.
Vadianus makes it two hundred furlongs, or twenty miles. Here to part the
difference equal, we have insisted on 17 miles.

6. However when this, and much more caution is used by us, our Scale of miles
is so far from pretending to the exactness of those left handed Gibeonites
Jud. 20. 16.
to hit the mark at an haires-breadth and not miss, that a large and
charitable latitude must still be allowed us in a subject so hard and full of
uncertainty. Yea the holy Spirit it self speaks not positively of distances of
places, but with words of qualification. Luke 24. 13.
About threescore furlongs from Jerusalem to Emmaus; John 6. 19.
About five and twenty or thirty furlongs they had rowed on the Sea; as if five
in thirty made no considerable difference. If the same favor may be but
allowed our scale of miles, I doubt not but it will acquit it self against all
just exception.

7. Now for the further managing of our Scale of miles we request the Reader
not to extend it, therewith to measure all the properties, or History-pictures
in our Map (for then some men would appear Giants, yea monsters, many miles
long) expecting him rather to carry a scale in his own eyes, for surveying such
portraitures. Yea in general I undertake nothing in defense or excuse of those
pictures, to be done according to the rule of Art, as none of my work,
ornamentall, not essential to the Maps: only this I will say, that eminency
in English Gravers, is not to be expected till their Art be more countenanced
and encouraged. Nor would I have the Scale applied to Cities drawn in
Prospective, as to Rabbah in the Tribe of Gad etc. which then will fall out
bigger then indeed they were; desiring the Reader only to understand them to
be fair and populous Cities, and therefore made more large and conspicuous then
the rest.

8. Such Towns as stand (as one may say) on tiptoes, Towns on the upstroke how
to be accounted.
on the very umstroke, or on any part of the utmost line of any Map (unresolved
in a manner to stay out or come in) are not to be presumed placed according to
exactness, but only signify them there, or thereabouts. Nor is this without
precedents in the best Geographers, so in their maps to make the general
continuation of neighboring countries clearer thereby.

9. If any difference, What Maps most to be credited in matters of difference.
on accurate comparing, arise in the distances betwixt the same places
presented in several Maps, (some such will escape in defiance of all
diligence) we hope the same will appear inconsiderable, and such moats (not
being before the sight, but in the corner of the eye) will little, if at all,
hinder the light of a Geographical truth. Surely as in the strictest laws of
Horse-racers, some wast of weight is allowed to the Riders: so me thinks some
favor ought to be afforded an Author, in measuring and making many Maps, were
it but for the shaking of his weary hand in so tedious a work. But if such
differences appear somewhat great, let those be relied on as the truest, where
such places are set down data opera, of set purpose; so that it is the very
work of that Map to describe them: let those I say be credited before the
distances in other Maps, where such places come in only of complement, or are
brought in by the by, to fashion and fill up the (otherwise empty) borders
thereof.

CHAP. 15. How the different qualities of places in our Maps, are distinguished
by their several Characters.
1. MAy the Reader be pleased to learn the language of the several Characters
of the places used in our Map, How places are known by their s^verall
characters.
which speak much in little, and are very useful for the clearing of the
history.

1 All Cities marked with Coronets were anciently the Royal seats of the thirty
one Kings of Canaan, at and before the time of Joshua 2 All Cities surrounded
with double circles (the reason whereof hereafter) belong to the Tribe of Levi.
3 All Cities having banners or flags placed upon them, show the conjecturall
position thereof, when we have no assurance of their exact situation. One side
of which flags humbly confesses our want of certainty, the other as earnestly
craveth better information. 4 When places are noted with Asterisks it imports
difference of Divines, some making them proper names, others merely
appellative. 5 Places which have both flags and Asterisks upon them, are as I
may say doublehatcht with uncertainty, not only their position being
doubtful, but it is questionable whether they be proper names or no. 6 Places
mentioned only in the Apocrypha are signed with a Crescent or half moon
inverted, The b^dge of Apocrypha Cities.
in some allusion to the difference of Arms of younger brethren, such books
being accounted of the Fathers but of a second rank, and reputed but
Deutero-canonicall by learned Romanists. Say not that a Bar of bastardy
better befitted them being taken out of Apocrypha writings. For what though
those writings were never penned by Prophets (of whom none betwixt Malachi and
John the Baptist) never written in Hebrew, never owned by the Jews, Gods
people, for Canonical, to whom the oracles of God Romans 3. 2.
were committed, (and, which is mainly material, Christ reproved them not for
this neglect) never prophesied of Christ to Acts 10. 33.
whom all the Prophets bear witness, never solemnly quoted by Christ and his
Apostles; yet because ancient, and because it may be said of them as of Abijah
the son of Jeroboam, ^King. 14. 13.
in them there is found sone good thing toward the Lord, they deserve from
unprejudiced judgments a reverent respect. 7 Places noted with ^ cross in a
circle, are such whereof no mention in Scripture, but only in humane writers,
Josephus, Pliny, and the like. 8 Such as have on them an half moon with the
points upward are modern places in the possession of the Turk.
Of these very few, and those either of high note in themselves, or because
seated on high rodes. We confess these no essential part, but conceive them a
fit copartment for our subject in hand. And thus among the flock of cities in
our Map, by looking on their brand, their owner and nature are quickly known.

2. Some will conceive these had better been thrown together without any
distinction, seeing the learned do not need, and the unlearned will not heed
the differences aforesaid. However we had rather offend on the right hand, and
be censured for overmuch caution. Others will adjudge it fitter, that the
several towns had been set forth in sundry maps, not putting the new piece to
the old so to make the rent the worse, not mingling modern with ancient places,
but presenting them apart in entire descriptions. But this being a matter of
great expense, we leave such men's judgments to be rectified by their purses,
when they seriously consider the price thereof.

3. And now what remains, but that we humbly beg a measuring reed out of the
Sanctuary to be lent us, that so by heavens assistance we may be enabled to
perform this survey of the land of Canaan? This in the first place implored, we
proceed to our task. It was Saint Paul's advice to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1^.
11.
Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ: my humble request to the reader is,
that while I go before him in this my description, he would follow me in his
own pace, at his own pleasure, so fast, and so far as I follow the truth, at
least the most probability grounded on Scripture, ancient Authors, and modern
Travelers who have been eyewitnesses of the country.

Finis Libri primi.
To the Right Honorable HENRY LORD BEAVCHAMPE, Son to the Right Honorable
WILLIAM MARQUIS OF HARTFORD.
MY LORD,
AMongst many other meditations, my serious thoughts have made enquiry,
concerning Government and Nobility, whence each of them derived their original.

For the first, I find it as ancient as Man, and extracted from God himself.
Who because he was a Spirit, (and therefore invisible) the better to try what
Tribute of obedience, Men out of Conscience would pay unto him, stamped a
character of dominion, as his own visible Image (in the infancy of mankind) on
the Father of the family, that so honor and duty might be given to God in
yielding subjection to him who represented him. These first Governors were
termed Patriarchs, that is, Father-Princes, their compounded name, speaking
their mixed authority. And Ant. Iud. ^^. 1. cap. 2.
Josephus writing of the death of Methuselah, says (...), He left, or passed
over his principality to Lamech his son; and this Prince-ship continued in the
Primogeniture for many Ages, till the method thereof was discomposed, partly by
the numerosity of mankind, partly by their far dispersed habitations.

Thus was Government the Mistress, first born in the world, whilst Nobility
her Maid came in not long after to attend her. For such Persons, whose
virtuous dispositions commended them to the special favor of Princes in
Power, had in reward of their worth; marks of Honor fixed upon them: which
afterward by succession descended unto their posterity.

Of these, some imitating their Ancestors goodness, continued in the splendour
of their Nobility, whilst others degenerating by their vicious courses,
invited neglect and contempt upon themselves. Insomuch that in some the valor
and spirit of their Progenitors (which advanced them by the sword in time of
war) evaporated all into empty air; turning into a wild and riotous animosity;
And in others, the gravity and wisdom of their Grandfathers (which promoted
them by the Gown in the days of Peace) settleth into feculent earth, leaving
nothing but a tame and unactive stupidity behind it.

Herethe Nobility of such had expired, save that some of them seasonably
perceiving the desperate Consumption thereof did follow the prescription of
Physic, and returned into the Native air which first gave Honor her birth
and being; and did so repair their lost reputation by practicing the Primitive
virtues of Piety, Courtesy, Hospitality; Valor, Wisdom, and Learning; thus
going home to the Climate wherein Nobility was first conceived.

But thanks be to God, your Lordship is none of those personally guilty of any
decay of dignity; whose virtues preserve your Honor in the perfect health and
strength thereof, which has been the main motive to make me so desirous to
present my book to your Honor, as a proper Patron, even to the height, for all
purposes and intents. Whose Judgment can examine the whole, Clemency Pardon
what is amiss, and Greatness Protect the rest in defiance of opposition.

Indeed Sir, besides desire to shelter my self under your Patronage, gratitude
obliges me to tender my service to your Honor. For all my Books, being my
nether and upper millstone, (and such by the Leviticall Law, might not be taken
to pledge, because a Man's Deuteronomy 24. 5.
life) without which I had been rendered unable to grind any Grist for the
good of my self or others, had been taken from me in these civil wars, had not
a Letter from your Lady-mother preserved the greatest part thereof. Good reason
therefore that the first handful of my finest meal should be presented in
thankfulness to your family.

And now my Lord, bethinking my self of a blessing for your self and worthy
Lady, that she-pattern of Meekness, Modesty Piety, and Patience; no fitter can
be found then what the Psalmist pronounces, that you may see your childrens
children, and Psalm. 128. 7.
Peace upon Israel. Here is the finest of wares, and withal the largest of
measures, length of days, to enjoy them. Well may this prayer be read at
Marriages, there being a marriage in the Prayer, wherein Long-life coupleth
Posterity and Peace together. Otherwise it is woeful to multiply for war to
subtract; and only to be fruitful for the Sword or Famine. May this
Benediction of the Psalmist light on you and yours in the highest performance
thereof: which is the desire of

Your Lordships most humble servant THO. FULLER.

Here follows the Map of Reuben.



THE TRIBE OF REVBEN. The second Book.
1. REuben eldest Son of Jacob by Leah, forfeited his Birthright by Genesis 35. 22.
defiling his Fathers bed. For which fact he was cursed, Genesis 49. 4.
that he should not excel. Whereupon came such a dearth of eminent Persons of
this Tribe, that neither King, Judge, Priest, nor Prophet descended thereof.
Yea, few men of fame, only two notoriously infamous, Numb. 16. 1. and 26. 5,
8, 9.
Dathan and Abiram, Generals of the mutineers against Moses: happily in hope,
because of their extraction, to recover the lost Birthright unto their Tribe.
Yet these Reubenites, though not springing high, spread broad; little puissant,
very populous, counting no fewer then forty six Numb. 1. 21.
thousand five hundred at the general muster in mount Sinai: all which dying
in the wilderness for their infidelity, their children descended Numb. 26. 7.
from them, being forty three thousand, seven hundred and thirty, possessed
this land, east of Jordan.

2. A land, that five times exchanged her owners in the old Testament. First,
her original inhabitants were the Deuteronomy. ^. 10.
Emims, a younger house of the Anakims: accounted Giants, being great in
stature and many in number. Secondly, Moabites, who, though less and lower, yet
advantaged by divine Deuteronomy. 2. 9.
assistance, did overtop and overcome these voluminous Emims, and possessed
themselves of their land. Thirdly, Amorites, under Sihon their King who
(somewhat before Moses conducted the Israelites hither) acquired the
sovereignty of this country, Numb. 21. 26.
beating out the Moabites, and banishing them south of Arnon. Fourthly,
Reubenites: on whom Moses bestowed it, after Sihon was conquered and killed.
Fifthly, Moabites again. For it seems after the captivity of the Reubenites by
Tilgath Pilneser 1 Chronicles. 5. 26. they made a re-entry on their old possessions:
seeing those cities (formerly inhabited by the Reubenites) are prophesied
against by Isa. 15. and 16. ^a. ler. 4. 8.
Isaiah and Jeremiah, under the notion of places belonging to the people of
Moab, to be destroyed by Shalmaneser, and Nabuchadnezzar.

3. This Country had Jordan on the west, (dividing it from Ephraim and
Benjamin) the River Arnon on the east and south (parting it from the kingdom
of Moab) and on the north confined on the Tribe of Gad. The extent thereof from
east to west may be allowed forty two miles, not exceeding thirty five from
north to south. A Country excellent for grazing, not as if defective in corn
and wine, wherein it shared with the rest of the Tribes, (besides the benefits
of some Mineralls, and medicinal waters, whereof in due place) but because
exceeding in conveniences for Cattle: Numb. 32.1.
Pastures to feed, Woods to shade, and Rivers to wate^ them. Therefore was it
bestowed upon the Tribes of Reuben, Gad, and half Manasseh, which much abounded
in cattle. In which three we may observe some shadows of Primogeniture,
(which might imbolden them to petition to be first served) Reuben the eldest of
Jacob by his wife; Gad eldest by Zilpah his concubine, and Manasseh first born
of Joseph. But these Tribes as first planted were first plucked up. God carved
unto them the first cut of the Land, and after called for the Voider to take it
first from them. For they falling from the house of David, and following
Jeroboam through rebellion to Idolatry, and not being warned with the terrible
blow 2 King. 10. 33.
Hazael gave them, shroudly shrubbing their branches, God rent them up by the
roots in the days of 2 King. 15. 29.
Pekah, by the hand of 1 Chr. 5. 6. 26.
Tilgath-Pilneser King of Assyria; some twenty years before the general
captivity of their brethren, at the end of the reign of Hosheah, 2 Kings 17. 6.

4 Leaving the people, come we to survey the places, and memorable actions in
this Tribe. In the north^east corner thereof, near the banks of Arnon, we find
the tract or territory of Aroer. For though Aroer the City was undoubtedly
entire in the Tribe of Gad; yet it 1 Chronicles. 5. 8.
plainly appears, that at least a Moity of the country adjacent (so called
from the city) was possessed by the Reubenites. A populous place it was, the
Isa. 17. 2.
Prophet mentioning the cities of Aroer, though their names or number is not
expressed. Probably Arnon one of the principal, Tell ye it in Arnon ( Icr.
48. 20.
says Jeremy:) surely not to the fishes in the River, but to a City seated on
the brink thereof, and thence denominated: as Hull in Yorkshire, so commonly
called from the Rivolet running by it.

5. Going south-west, having the stream of Arnon for our guide, we leave
Kedemoth, not far from the north bank thereof. The Septuagin^ read Kedson for
Kedemoth, and the Vulgar, without any warrant, read Iethson for Kedson: so
procreative is one error of another. This Kedemoth was Josh. 21 30. 37.
one of the four Peculiars of the Levites, wherein they were accommodated with
Safety, Pleasure, and Profit. Safety, in the City it self, within whose walls
they dwelt in secure habitations: Pleasure in their suburbs, reaching a Numb.
35. 4.
thousand Cubits from the wall round about, (little less then an English mile)
where they had houses of retirement, with stalls and stables for their cattle:
Profit in their glebe land, extending two thousand Cubits from their suburbs on
every side, improved for pasture, tillage and vineyards. For thus the survey of
the Levites lands, Numb. 35. 4, 5. (though the difficult place is capable of
several senses) is expounded by learned Rabbi Maimonie, and we in our Maps
have described them accordingly. Now though herein we have given the Levites
lands the largest and most favorable bounds (seeing I am unable to endow them,
they shall lose nothing by my restrictive measuring thereof) yet know that
narrower limits are assigned them by Tremellius, as shall hereafter be
presented in In our answers to the objections on Reuben.
Diagram we have prepared for that purpose.

6. Behold here Levi's curse turned into a blessing, Genesis 49 7.
Divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. Now the dividing of them
proved the disposing of them, for their own and others advantage. Their
scattering was their ranking for the best behoof of the people, for whose
instruction they were intended. They were the Salt of the earth, and therefore
God sprinkled them here and there, the more conveniently to season the whole
nation. Insomuch that some English Parishes are more remote from their
Mother Church, then most places in Canaan were distant from the Cities of the
Levites. We must not forget that in Ieroboams apostasy, the religious Levites
forsook their Cities and 2 Chr. 11. 14.
fled to Jerusalem, preferring voluntary exile before wealthy homes, on the
condition of an Idolatrous compliance. It appears not in Scripture, how these
Cities and lands thus left were disposed of. Whether Jeroboam himself seized on
them, converting them into demeans of his Crown, or whether he suffered them to
revert to those respective Tribes, from whom they were taken: so fastening his
subjects affections unto him with nails of gold of their own profit. Either
course may be conceived a cause to hasten the captivity of the people; it being
just that those, who swallow Gods morsels, should be spewed out of their own
possessions.

7. Round about this City, is the wilderness of Kedemoth, not wholly abandoned
to solitariness, but as the rest of this kind, more thinly inhabited. It
abounded with wild beasts, Lions, Bears, Bores, Wolves, Foxes, where the
pleasure in hunting the game, did not recompense the pains and dangers of the
shepherds lying constant Perdues in defense of their flocks. From this
wilderness, Moses sent messengers to Deuteronomy. 2. 26.
Sihon King of the Amorites, for peaceable passage through his country. But
Sihon (path-wise and land-foolish) by denying a civility, drew destruction on
himself and subjects. For seeking in fight to traverse it, for their pedibus
ambulando, he was by a firm Ejection outed of his whole kingdom.

8. To return to Arnon. Hereabouts the children of Israel passed over it,
miraculously with dry feet, says Adri. in theat. ter. sanct. fol. 51.
Adricomius. But the miracle seems rather of his, then Gods making, the
Scripture being silent therein, and the river not of that depth or breadth, but
that it was fordable, especially with the help of Camels, Mules, and Asses.
Many miles hence this river solitarily runs on as sensible of its sad fate
suddenly to fall into the dead-Sea, at Ashdoth-pisgah. Where all his comfort
is, to have the company of two other Brooks: whereof the eastermost runs near
to Josh. 20. 8. and 21. 36. and ^ Chron. 6. 78. Ier. 48. 24.
Betzar or Bozra: A City of refuge belonging to the Levites Merarites, whereof
there were six in the whole Country of Canaan, with a Deuteronomy. 19. 8, 9.
provision that they should add three more (man's mercy must increase
proportionably with his means) if God enlarged their coast; though we read of
no such addition, either in David's or Solomon's time. The Cities were so
conveniently distanced by Gods appointment, that in half a day (men for their
lives will take wide and thick strides) some one of them might be recovered
from the remotest corner of the land. Let Historians relate the Laws of such
Sanctuaries, whereof these most fundamental.

1t. Numb. 35. 15.
Strangers and sojourners in Israel were capable of the privilege thereof, as
well as native Jews. 2ly. Any murderer that could, might fly thither without
any hindrance or interruption; Deuteronomy. 19. 3.
Thou shall prepare thee a way: Otherwise such obstructions would have
frustrated, and defeated the main intent of such privileged places. 3ly. If
the murderer could but reach the Number. 35. 27. and Rabbi Maimo. lb. cap. 8. sec.
11.
border of such cities of refuge (the very hemme of Christ's garment had
sovereign virtue in it) distant as is aforesaid from the City it self, it was a
sufficient protection for him till his cause was examined before the Judges.
4ly. Upon examination, those were denied the benefit of refuge, and Deuteronomy. 19.
12.
delivered up to Justice, who had committed murder out of malice prepense, or
had killed one (as we may say) with a malicious weapon: namely, if the bigness
or sharpness thereof, be it Numb. 35. 17, 18, 23.
iron, wood or stone, was mortal in view, carried death in the sight thereof,
as probable, enforced with ones hand, to kill a man. 5ly. Others, who casually
had killed their neighbor, might live safely in the City, till the death of
the High Priest: typifying the suffering of our Savior, whose execution is our
jail-deliver. 6ly. If the murderer Numb. 35. 26, 27.
wandering out of the suburbs, was found by the avenger of blood, he forfeited
his protection, and might be killed with indemnity. 7ly. After the Highpriests
death (say the Maimo. on Numb. ca. 35. ver. 2^. ca. 7. Sect. 14.
Rabbines without Express from Scripture) the party was remitted to his
innocence, not honor; restored to his liberty, not luster; clouded the remnant
of his life, because of the scandal that came by his hand.
Forget we not here, that besides these six Cities, the Exodus 21. 14. 1 King.
2. 29.
Altar in the Tabernacle or Temple, was reputed the seventh and paramount place
of murderers protection.

9. The brook from the west, begins at Machaerus: one of the strongest inland
Forts in the world, nature having prevented Art therein, so impregnable is the
City and Castle upon the top of a steep Iosep. 13. Aati. Iudae. cap. 22.
hill, with a deep valley round about. Hither Ios. 18. Antiq. cap. 10.
Josephus says, Herod the Tetrarch sent John the Baptist to be beheaded. For
which fact, his great army was af^terwards overthrown by Aretas King of Arabia.
Hereabout, Idem bell. Iud. lib. 7. cap. 25.
two springs arise of contrary natures. One hot and sweet, the other cold and
bitter. Both which meeting together make a most excellent Bath, cordial for
several diseases. As if nature thereby would lesson us, that moderation,
wherein extremities agree, is the best cure for all distempers. These waters
are approved excellent for the contraction of the nerves, either inwardly
taken, or outwarldly applied. Herod the King being sick, (newly come out of a
Bath of blood, of the innocent Bethlehem-babes) was hither directed in vain by
his Physicians, the water refusing to be guilty of such a Tyrants recovery. On
this stream stood Hier. quaest. Hebr. in Ge^e.
Lasha mentioned Genesis 10. 19. afterward called Callirrhoe or the Fair
stream. And now what pity is it that such percious water should presently be
spilt into the the Dead Sea! But what remedy? Fair and foul faces must meet
together in the grave.

10. As for the Dead sea, which only peeps into a corner of this Tribe, but
steadfastly faceth a whole side of Judah more properly thereof hereafter. And as
for Josephus his valley of Lib. 7. bell. Iudae. cap. 25.
Baaras, with the strange growing, gathering, and working of the famous root
therein, we mention it, not to seem wholly ignorant thereof; and but mention
it, not to seem over credulous therein. Hereabouts is plenty of Alum and
Brimstone, the latter probably some straggling drops of that direful shower,
which was rained on Sodom, and Gomorrah, leaving some tincture in the adjacent
Country as a remembrancer of so great a Judgment.

11. It is now high time that we survey the west of this Tribe, which Jordan
(as we have said) divides from Ephraim, and Benjamin. This is the true meaning
of Deborah's complaint, uttered and repeated, for Judge. 5. 15, 16.
the divisions of Reuben were great thoughts of heart, namely because that
Tribe separated by Jordan from the western continent of Canaan, could not come
seasonably to the succor of Barak, and subduing of Sisera. This River used to
overflow all his banks in the first month. 1 Chronicles. 12. 15. (parallel to the
end of our March, and beginning of April) or, as it is said Josh. 3. 15. at
the time of harvest. Which vast distance in our English Climate (as much as
betwixt Spring and Autumn) is easily reconciled and made to meet in Judea;
where the Harvest ^t large is dated from the first fruits, and those ripe in
April in that hot country. Let Naturalists discuss the cause, whence this
inundation of Jordan proceeds; whether from the violence of winds, then blowing
on its stream, and angring it beyond his banks; or from the influence of the
Moon, Commandress over moist bodies, and their motions; or from the confluence
of Snow dissolved from the mountains. But my discourse like Jordan overflowes,
it shall return within its banks.

12. In the northwest corner of this Tribe, Jordan first entering into it, is
fordeable at Bethbara or Bethabara, that is, the house of passage. For Gideon
having the Midianites in chase, sent messengers to all in mount Ephraim, (a
service most proper for them, cause in their confines) to Judge. 7. 24.
take before them the water unto Bethbara and Jordan, which there with good
guides and high Camels might be waded over; but more southward the river is
fenced by its own breadth and depth against all Passengers. And here afterward
did Ioh. 1. ^8.
John baptize our Savior. As for Josh. 13. 4.
Aphek hard by, we place it here rather in conformity to Adrich. theat. Ter.
sanc. pa. 126.
others, then convinced in our own judgment of the true situation thereof.

13. The altar Ed, or witness, was hereabouts erected by the Reubenites,
Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh, returning from the conquest of Canaan.
This Altar was a bridge in effect, to conjoin these divided Tribes with the
rest; severed by water, the same in worship; on the other side Jordan in
position, on the same side with the other Tribes in Religion. But though there
was a noonday of Innocence in their intentions, yet because (though not a
night of guiltiness) a twilight of suspicion obscured their actions, it
occasioned jealousies in their brethren, as if they had hatched some idolatrous
design. But when the matter came to be disputed in a military way, the
controversy was ended by the right stating of the question, and a seasonable
distinction well applied, that it was an Altar only of memorial, and Josh.
22. 23* 24.
not for any burnt meat or Peace Offering. O that all differences between
brethren might wind off, in so welcome a conclusion!

14. And now he that shall cast his eye over the Plain on the east of Jordan,
shall find it well stockt with multitudes of goodly sheep, which caused
Deborah's Judge. 5. 16.
expostulation, Why abodest thou Reuben amongst the sheepfolds, to hear the
bleating of the flocks? And yet no wonder if he preferred such music, before
the clashing of swords, and sounding of trumpets in the battle against the
Canaanites: seeing naturally men choose profitable ease, before honorable
danger. The tails of those sheep, both for fat and wool, were incredibly
great, some of them a Syriae cubitales ovium caudae, plurimumque in ^a par^e
lanicii. P^m Not. hist. lib. 8. cap. 48.
Cubit long. So that nature who has tied the tails to other creatures, may
seem to have tied the Syrian sheep to their tails, which with great difficulty
they drag after them. This is the reason, why it is expressly commanded in the
law, that when a sheep is sacrificed for a Peace Offering, the fat thereof and
the whole Levit. 3. 9.
tail (not observed in Kine, or Goats) taken off hard by the backbone was to be
offered: that part being for bulk and value considerable in their sheep, which
is contemptible in other creatures.

15. To go back to the River, having left that place behind us, where the 2 Samuel 19. 18.
Ferry-boat passed over to carry David and his household, after his conquest of
Absalom. We are now arrived at that memorable place, where God magnified
Joshua, heartened his own people, and shrivelled up the hearts of their
enemies, by drying up the waters of Jordan, whilst the Israelites passed over
in this admirable Equipage.

1 The Priests went into the river bearing the Ark; in homage whereunto Jordan
reverently retreated; (very far from the river Adam, which is besides
Zaretan) and they stood on firm ground in the Josh. 3. 17.
midst thereof, till all the Israelites were passed over. 2 Reuben, Gad, and
half Manasseh led the Van, about Josh. 4. 13.
forty thousand men of Arms, the residue of them (in all about Number. 26. 10.
18. 34.
an hundred thousand) remaining at home to husband their ground, guard their
houses, govern their families. 3 After them the other Tribes followed: and it
is observed that they Josh. 4. 10.
hasted, not with a distrustful haste (as suspicious that the returning waters
might drown the hindmost of them) but an industrious speed, and mannerly
quickness, as not willing to make God wait upon them in continuing a Miracle
longer then necessity did require. 4 When all were over, the Priests with the
Ark, who first entered, last left the water, (all dangerous designs are begun
and finished by Gods assistance) and then Jordan, whose streams hitherto
suspended, returned into his channel. 5 A duplicate or double monument was
erected to perpetuate the memory hereof, being a Grand Jury of great stones. Of
these, twelve were solemnly set up on the land in the Tribe of Benjamin at
Gilgal, and the other twelve (the counterpart of this deed) were left in the
midst of the river.
Some perchance may admire that Joshua should set this latter invisible
monument, in a place where it is drowned both in water and obscurity. But this
River-mark was such, as possibly the tops of the stones might appear at low
water; or if wholly hidden, and dangerous for boats to approach, the ^ailers
constant care to avoid them in their passage, called the occasion of placing
them there to their daily remembrance.

16. We must not dissemble the difference betwixt Authors, about the situation
of the aforesaid City of Adam, but once mentioned in Scripture, and therefore
(as the Hebrews have a Proverb of words but once named, that they have no
kindred and alliance) more difficult to know the true posture thereof. The best
is, this Adam, though having no kindred has some company to notify it; Adam
besides Zaretan: and one Zaretan is sufficiently known to have been in the half
Tribe of Manasseh west of Jordan, not far from the sea of Galilee. Hence
learned In Josh. page ^6.
Masius concludes, that the waters of Jordan were cut off, full seventy miles
together, north of the peoples passage over it. To which opinion, under favor,
we can in no wise consent. Conceiving rather that just against Jericho, the
river was dried up, for whereas the station of Jordan was most wonderful, the
Israelites had lost all the sight of this wonder on their right side, if done
out of distance so many miles from their view. Place we therefore on these
reasons (and the Adric. de Ter. sanct. pa. 129.
example of others) both Adam and Zaretan in the Tribe of Reuben.

17. Some difference also there is betwixt Divines concerning the latitude of
their passage over the river: Some conceiving it only to amount to the
proportion of a fair alley, lane, or path of such receipt alone as admitted the
Israelites in a full and free march a competent number a breast, and that the
waters, as in the Red sea, standing still on both sides, Exodus 14. 2^.
were a wall to them on the right hand and on the left, as the Graver in our
Map has designed it. Others do not only make a gap, through Jordan, but
pluck down the whole hedge thereof, maintaining that all the water of that
river on the left hand, (betwixt their passage over, and the Dead sea) failed
and were cut off, or dried up. Which latter opinion is most agreeable to Josh.
3. 16.
Scripture, and reason: for seeing the stream of Jordan south of their going
over, was not supplied with any reciprocal or refluous tide out of the Dead
sea, the stopping of the waters above must necessarily command their defection
beneath, and that the channel by consequence for the time being was dried up.

18. Jordan, having now closed his streams together, runs by Livias, a City
which Herod Eus^b. in Chron. Hi^^o. in Joel and (...).
built, and so named, in honor of Livia the Mother of Tiberius Caesar. For to
enfavour themselves with the Emperor, the Jewish Kings called many Cities by
their names (Augusta, Tiberias, two Cesarea's, Iulias, Livias) as if Palestine
had been a Register book of the Imperial Roman family.

19. Let us now take an account of the inland Parts of this Tribe, and return
to the place where the Israelites passed over Arnon. Betwixt Egypt and Arnon
they had forty several stations, and then entered into the Promised land. In
comemoration whereof, probably God did order, that an offender should receive
but forty stripes (what Judge soever counts them too few, would think thirty
too many, if he felt them himself) and then be freed from further punishment.
Coming into Canaan, their one and forty and first fixing there was at the foot
of mount Abarim, and edge of the wilderness of Ked^moth. Hence they removed to
Abelshittim, where Deuteronomie was made, the second Edition of the Law
revised, and enlarged by God, the Author thereof. Here the people of Israel
were numbered the second time. And although some particular Tribes were
increased, amongst whom those three that pitched on the east side of the
Tabernacle, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun, (God and the rising Sun make any
thing fruitful) yet in the whole, they were diminished Compare Numb. 2. 3^.
with Numb. 26. 51.
one thousand eight hundred and twenty. Let such, as admire hereat, that people
being in slavery should multiply more then when they were at liberty, consider,
1 Some Plants, (Palm trees and Camomile) the more deprest, the further they
expand themselves. 2 Infant Nations, like infants, grow more discernibly at the
first, then when they approach their full stature. 3 God purposely to defeat
the design of Pharaoh, to destroy the Israelites, blessed them with
transcendent fruitfulness. 4 The breeders in the wilderness, were visited with
many casualties, bringing them to untimely ends; whereas all those in Egypt,
though painful in their livings, were healthful in their lives.


But the most memorable Accident in this place, was the Idolatry of the
Israelites to Baal-peor an Idol, conceived by most learned men to be Priapus.
And who could worship him with piety, whom none with modesty can describe? It
seems that Moab and Midian (perceiving S^hon King of the Amorites overthrown in
battle) counterfeited amity with them, and pretending to show them (being
strangers) the courtesy of the country, made them an entertainment, which
could not be courtlike and complete without the company of their women. The
Israelites beholding the Midianitish women, first liking their faces, then
tasting their feasts, stepped from their Boards to their Beds, thence to their
Altars, adding spiritual to corporal fornication. This was done by the Numb.
31. 16.
advice of Balaam, whose counsel did more hurt then his curse. All his charms
could have done them no harm, had he not raised these female spirits to improve
them, which cost the lives of twenty four thousand Israelites, dying of the
Plague; till the Javelin of Number. 25. 8, 9.
Phinehas executing of judgment, stopped Gods fiery sword amongst them.

20. Let us now request the Reader, to climb up the hills of Abarim, Nebo, and
Pisgah. These are a ledge of mountains rising by degrees from east to west. So
that some have compared Abarim to the Chancell, Nebo to the Church, and Pisgah
to the steeple. In mount Nebo the Author of the 2 Macc. 2. 5.
Maccabees, speaks of a Cave, wherein Jeremy laid the Tabernacle, and the Arc,
and the Altar of Incense, and so stopped the door. But the same Author in the
conclusion of his book confesses, that his work is like 2 ^ac. 15. 40.
wine tempered with water: and we take this story to be no genuine juice of the
grape, and value it accordingly. On Pisgah, Moses surveyed the whole land of
Canaan, and although he was advantaged by the height of the place, and
clearness of his eyes (no whit abated in their sight at an Deuteronomy. 34. 7.
hundred and twenty years of age) yet much of miracle must needs be admitted,
in so plain and far discovery. Here Moses was buried, being privileged above
other servants of God (whose souls Angels convey to heaven) that an Angel was
his Sexton, to cover his body in earth. Here he concealed Moses his grave, lest
the Israelites should go a whoring after it. Destroying Idolatry is a pious,
but preventing it a more provident Act, crushing it in the occasions thereof.
Let none condemn this for a needless caution, as if no fear that they who
sometimes would stone Moses while living, should adore him when dead. For the
crooked nature of the Jews was bowed to Extremes, and had no mean betwixt
hating, and adoring. Besides, when the memories of eminent men, hated or envied
when living, have passed the purgation of death, it is usual for their former
enemies to fall in love with them.

21. May the reader now conceive himself standing on the top of mount Pisgah.
Where (though content with a narrower compass, then what Moses discerned) he
descrieth a fair Prospect round about him. Not to repeat the places of the
west, because mentioned before, looking south ward behold the City of Nebo, at
the foot of its namesake mountain: and both of them so called from Nebo and
Idol God, hereabouts worshipped. We read indeed how Number. 22. 38.
Reuben changed the names of the Cities of Nebo, and Baalmeon (because their
old names taken from false Gods resented of Idolatry.) But so hard it is to
unhabit men's mouths from old ill customs, that it seems their ancient names
still prevailed in common discourse. Voss. de origi. and progres. Idol. lib. 2.
pa. 346.
Critics start many controversies concerning this Idol of Nebo; as: First,
whether not originally Isa. 4^. 1.
a Babylonish Deity. Secondly, whether under it the Moon (as the Sun under
Bell) was not mystically adored. Thirdly, whether the same with Chemosh and
Baal-Peor (which is the opinion of Saint Jerome) and if not, wherein lay the
difference? But it shall never trouble me, whether the fictitious Serpents of
Iannes and Iambres the Egyptian enchanters, were made alike, or did differ in
some particulars, seeing the real serpents of Moses Exodus 7. 12.
devoured them all up. And seeing long since the service of the true God has
confuted and confounded all worship of false Idols, I list not to trade in the
curiosities of distinctions betwixt them.

22. Eastward behold Kiriathaim, or the two-towns (like Bridge-North in
Shropshire) two lesser Cities being modelled into one. Here lived the Emims,
shrowdly smote by Gen.14. 5.
Chederlaomer, which probably did facilitate the Moabites in their victory over
them. Iahaza, a City of the Levites, where the Israelites in battle vanquished
Deuteronomy. 2. 32.
Sibon King of the Amorites. A little further see the City of Medeba, before
the walls whereof a 1 Chr. 19. 7.
double battle was fought and won at once, by Ioab against the Aramites, and
Abishai against the Ammonites. And it seems that the latter of these had at
this time the City in their possession, whither they retreated after their
overthrow. For what else do those words import; The children of Ammon likewise
fled before Abishai his Brother, 1 Chr. 19. 15.
[and entered into the City,] except any (conceiving it inconsistent with the
present potency of David, to have any of his enemies nestled in his dominion)
will by the City understand Rabbah the Metropolis of Ammon, next year besieged
and sacked by Ioab. As for Medeba, there needs no other evidence to speak her
ancient greatness, then that Ptolemy by name takes notice thereof (though
placing it in Arabia) which name it retained in the days of Saint Jerome.

23. But northward is the most pleasant Prospect over the fair and fruitful
Plains of Moab. Nor need any wonder why the Plain is so called, seeing Moab had
nothing on the north of Arnon (after the time of Moses) when they recollect,
how lately all this land was possessed by the Moabites, before Sihon Number. 21.
26.
forcibly expulsed them. Now to prove that places sometimes are termed by their
ancient Inhabitants, though some hundred years after: we that live in London,
need not go no further then the Old Jury; so called from the Jews once
dwelling there, now banished thence three hundred years ago. But we keep the
Reader too long upon the top of this bleak and cold mountain. It Is time to come
down, when we have told him, that though Pisgah here be taken for a proper
name, yet it is often used as an appellative, for any eminent ridge of a hill,
which aspires above his fellows. Know also that all the Country hereabouts
was called Hiero. de loc. Hebr.
Pisgah in the days of Saint Jerome.

24. Having now for a while reposed our selves in the pleasant Plains of Moab,
let us not tire when our task in this Tribe grows so near to an end. Going a
little northward we cannot miss the three Stations whither Balak brought
Balaam to curse the Israelites. For having first freely feasted Balaam at
Kiriath-Huzzoth, his chief City in the land of Moab, he brought him over Arnon,
only to see the utmost skirts of the people, hoping if he could but kindle his
curse in any corner, it would quickly burn all the house of Israel. But thrice
he struck fire to no purpose.

1t. In Bamoth Number. 22. 41.
Baal or the high places of Baal. 2ly. In the field of Number, 23. 14.
Zophim at the top of the hill. 3ly. In the top of Peor, which looks toward
Number. 23 28.
Ieshimon: building in each place seven Altars, and sacrificing a Bullock, and
Ram on every of them.
What was the design of the Sorcerer? Conceived he that heaven was covetous
like himself, and might be bribed with sacrifices? Surely the stench of his
hypocrisy out-sented all the smell of his burnt offerings. Or thought he by
often changing the scene to act the more upon God? He that is the same
yesterday and to day, and for ever, receives no more impression from the
shifting of place, then from the changing of time. Or did he hope with the
mystery of his numbers, Thrice seven Altars; to flatter heaven into a consent?
All numbers are but bare Ciphers to him, that is infinite. O how he sweats for
the wages of iniquity? How is his tongue distracted between the Spirit of God
and the spirit of gold. All in vain; the further he goes, the worser he speeds:
but the better he speaks, falling at last from ^lenting, to down right blessing
of Israel. However, though he did not his work, he received his wages. And if
Balak at that time did not pay him with gold; yet afterward the Israelites did
with steel, justly slaying him with the Number. 31. 8.
sword.

25. Pass we now, still more northward, by the place, where Elias ascending to
heaven in a Chariot of fire, left his mantle and a double portion of his spirit
to 2 King. 2.
Elisha his servant and successor: and by Mephaah a City of the Levites, to
Sibmah, so famous for her fruitful vinyards. Going through which, the Reader
may eat grapes to the full at his own Deuteronomy. 23. 24.
pleasure: A liberty lawfully allowed him, but beware putting up any into his
vessel, lest he be apprehended for a trespasser. For the same law which
provides for his necessity, punishes his covetousness. And what is this whole
world with the wealth thereof, but a vinyard, wherein happy he, who has enough
to serve his turn, seeing when he dies, he shall Psalm 49. 17.
carry nothing away with him. It seems in Sibmah there was some one signal
vine eminent for greatness above the rest, or else that all her vines grew so
close and uniform, that they resembled one entire and continued tree: The Isa.
16. 8, 9. and Ier. 48. 32.
Prophets always addressing themselves unto it in the singular number, O vine
of Sibmah, I will weep for thee, etc.

26. Our work is ended, when we have viewed the north part of this Tribe, where
it confineth on Gad. Where we only meet with one place of note Heshbon,
anciently the royal Palace of Sihon King of the Amorites, and afterward a
City of the Levites. Which the Scripture places sometimes in Number. 32. 37.
Reuben, and sometimes in Josh. 21. 39.
Gad. To accommodate this difference without making of two Cities of the same
name (such multiplication unwarrantable, save where absolute necessity
enforces it) I find no fitter expedient, then by setting Heshbon so equally
between these two Tribes, as partially in both, and totally in neither. Thus
Bristoll is situated betwixt Gloucester and Somerset shires; and yet challenges
to be an absolute Liberty of it self; as this Heshbon also was an entire
demeans of the Levites. One fair gate it had, called Beth Rabbim gate, nigh to
which were most clear and pleasant fishponds, to which the Cant. 7. 4.
eyes of the Spouse are compared by Solomon. Not that she was troubled with
watery eyes like Leah, (the resemblance being recounted amongst her
perfections, not defects) or that her eyes (as some may fancy) are compared to
Pools, moistened with tears for her sins, but because of her clear and
perspicuous vision and apprehension of heavenly Mysteries.

27. As for the mountains of Emek, which Mr. More in his Map, without alleging
any warrant from Scripture, (otherwise his constant custom) makes the bounds
betwixt Reuben and Gad; I have placed them accordingly, yet so that the Reader
(without a miraculous Faith) may remove these mountains to some other place,
when he finds just cause for the same. At which time also, when proceeding on
more infallible principles for their situation, let him take down our
conjecturall Flags from the tops of Mephaah, ^osh. 13. 19.
Zerethshahar, etc. now placed but by guess, and let him dispose of them, if
he can, in a more exact position.

28. So much for Reuben, not forgetting how in the days of Solomon when the
land was divided into twelve Purveyer-ships to make monthly provisions for his
Courts 1 King. 4. 19.
Gebar the son of Uri had all the country once of Si^on King of the Amorites
(but then possessed by Reuben) in his circuit whence no doubt plenty of good fare
out of this Pasture-countrey so abounding in cattle, was brought to Jerusalem.
Now we have placed the name of Amorites on the sinister front of this our
description, because they were the old inhabitants of this Country: our
constant custom through this Book in the adverse page opposite to the Tribes
name to insert one of the seven Nations of Canaan, (former owners of that land)
conceiving it to conduce much to the illustration of Scripture.

29. Modern Heralds, by Commission authorized from the Jewish Rabbines, assign
to Reuben for arms, Argent, three Bars wavee azure, in allusion to Jacobs
Legacy, Genesis 49. 4.
Unstable as water, thou shall not excel. For as water cannot hold it self,
but as it is held in a vessel, so Reuben could not contain himself within the
bounds of chastity, till shame and sorrow did reclaim him. Besides, as water
once shed, is never to be gathered up again; so Reuben could never after
recollect his lost credit, to recover the full favor of his Father. Though
once he endeavored to gather up some spilt drops of his reputation by
projecting the deliverance of Genesis 37. 21.
Joseph from his brethren: but his design miscarried.

30. For mine own part, I cannot concur with the common opinion, that these
three Bars wavee were the Arms of Reuben; principally because Arms are
honorary ensigns, assigned, or assumed for the greater grace of the bearer*
Improbable therefore, that this Tribe to perpetuate the infamy of their
ancestour would always have water running in their shield, as if Reubens crime
were the Reubenites credit; like such whom the Philip. 3. 19.
Apostle reproves, that glory in their shame. Rather let us hearken to Aben
Ezra, who allots to the banner of Reuben a man or male child (others a
mandrake, others put mandrakes in his hand) relating to Leahs words at his
birth, calling him Reuben, that is, Genesis 29. 32.
See a Son, causing her to forget her pain, for joy that a man child was borne
into the world.

31. The proper place for the standard of this Tribe was to be the Number. 2. 10.
first of the three Tribes which pitched on the south of the Tabernacle. Thus
though Reuben lost the Primacy of power over all, he still kept the precedence
of place before one quarter of his brethren. Whence parents may be taught, that
though on just ground they disinherit, yet not so wholly to dishearten their
eldest sons, but still suffer some remembrances of a birthright ever to remain
unto them.

FINIS.
Here the Map of Gad is to be inserted.



The third Book. THE TRIBE OF GAD.
1. GAd eldest Son of Jacob by Zilpah, so increased in Egypt, that Numb. 1. 14,
25.
forty five thousand six hundred and fifty males of twenty years old and upward
of this Tribe were numbered at Mount Sinai: all which falling in the wilderness
for their tempting of God with this disobedience, a new generation of forty
thousand Number. 26. 18.
and five hundred entered the Land of Canaan. This Tribe affords very martial
men. For such of them as repaired to David in Ziglag are described, 1 Chr. 12.
8.
Men of war, fit for the battle, that could handle shield and buckler, whose
faces were like to the faces of Lions, and were as swift as the Roes upon the
mountains. Yet I meet not with any public Magistrate extracted from Gad,
though the Sea Speeds genealogy of Gad extracted from M. Broughtons.
Genealogists rank Iehu with four of his Posterity successive Kings of Israel
amongst the Gadites; but on no other ground, then because at the first time he
is found mentioned in Scripture he was 2 King. 9. 1, 2.
employed a Commander at the siege of Ramoth Gilead a City Josh. 20. 8.
in this Tribe. It seems that as the English-law makes a charitable provision
for children left by their parents, that the Parish wherein they are first
taken up, must maintain them: so Genealogists, the better to methodize the
pedegrees of the Jews in Scripture, reduce Persons of unknown Parentage, to
those respective Tribes, in whose grounds they first light on the mention of
them. But let Iehu pass for a Gadite: the rather because so puisant a Prince,
will prove a credit, rather then a charge to that Tribe to which he is related.

2. The land of this Tribe was of a double nature. For what lay north of the
river Iabbok was anciently the possession of Og King of Basan. But what lay
south of the river, had its property more intricate and encumbered with often
exchange of her owners, and on the right understanding thereof depends no less,
then the asserting of the innocence of the Israelites, the confuting of the
cavil of the Ammonites, and the reconciling of a seeming contradiction in
Scripture; Take it thus briefly.

1t. It was the Land of certain Giants called Deuteronomy. 2. 20.
Zamzummims. 2ly. It was possessed by the Seriously peruse Josh. ^3. 25.
Ammonites, who destroyed those Giants, and this Country was accounted a moity
or one half of their dominion. 3ly. It was subdued by Compare Number. 21. 26. with
Judge. 11. 21.
Sihon King of the Amorites, who cast out the Ammonites (when also he destroyed
the Moabites) such as were south of Iabbok, and dwelt in their stead. Lastly,
after the overthrow of Sihon, Moses gave it to the Tribe of Gad, for their
inheritance. Thus God by ringing the Changes of successive Lords in this Land
made music to his own glory.
Behold we here what the Psalmist Psalm. 80. 9.
says, Thou have brought a Vine out of Egypt, thou preparest room before it;
the method and manner of which preparation is most remarkable. First, God in
his providence foresaw that the Country of the Canaanites was without other
addition too narrow, to receive the numerous people of Israel. Secondly, God in
his goodness resolved out of love to righteous Lot, that his posterity should
not totally lose their possession, nor would he suffer the Israelites their
kinsmen to deprive them of any parcel thereof; giving them a flat command to
the contrary. Deuteronomy. 2. 9. 19.
Lastly, God in his justice permitted Sihon King of the Amorites should win
part of the Country from Moab and Ammon; and suddenly sends the Israelites to
conquer the conqueror; and now lawfully to inherit, what the other had
wrongfully taken away: And thus he prepared room for his Vine.

3. By this time we plainly perceive, that in the Ammonites demand to Iephtha,
there was some truth blinded with more falsehood, that the countenance of the
former might pass the latter unsuspected. Judge. 11. 13.
Israel took away (says the King) my Land when they came out of Egypt from
Arnon even unto Iabbok, and unto Jordan; now therefore restore these Lands
again peaceably. True it was, that this Land was once theirs (and so it is
plainly called Joshua 13. 25.) but most false, that ever the Israelites took
Inch of ground from them, save only mediately and at the second hand, taking
it from Sihon, who took it from the Ammonites. We report the rest to Iephtha's
answer (who first with a fair ambassie, and then with a famous victory confuted
the Ammonites antiquated title to this territory) pleading that the Israelites
had three Judge. 11. 26.
hundred years peaceably possessed the same. Now, if upon a strict account,
some years fall short of that sum, the matter is not much, because soldiers
love to fill their mouths with a round number, and too hundred fifty and odd
with a good sword may well be counted three hundred years current, though not
complete.

4. The Tribe of Gad had the kingdom of Ammon on the east, the half Tribe of
Manasseh on the north, Reuben on the south, and the river Jordan on the west.
The length thereof from Aroer to Jordan may be computed thirty five miles: and
the breadth thereof from Mahanaim to Dibon, falls out a little less. A Tribe
inferior to none for fair rivers, fruitful Pastures, shady woods: superior
to most for populous Cities, and memorable actions achieved therein. As for
Balm or Balsame, it was a peculiar commodity of this Country. Thus the
Prophet betwixt grief, anger, and pity demands, Is Ier. 8. 22.
there no balm in Gilead? and again, Go up into Gilead, and take Ier. 46. 11.
balm O virgin. In describing this Country we will follow the streams of
Arnon, Iabbok, and Jordan, which (with some little help lent us besides) will
afford us the convenience to behold all remarkable mounts in this Country.

5. In the eastern part of this Tribe the rivers of Arnon and Iabbok (though
running contrary ways) arise not far asunder: according to the exact
observation of (...).
Josephus, who says that the land of Sihon King of the Amorites, lay in nature
and fashion like an Island, betwixt the three rivers of Jordan, Arnon, and
Iabbok, so near are the fountains of the latter together. The heads of their
springs are found in a mountainous and rocky soil, affording great plenty of
Iackalls; mungrell creatures of equivocall extraction, deriving cruelty from
the Wolves their sires and craft from the Foxes their dams. These Iackalls are
meant by our translatours Psalm 63. 10. Let them fall by the edge of the sword,
that they may be a portion for Foxes: not for ordinary Foxes, which indeed are
so dainty mouthed, that they will not feed on any carcass, but what they kill
themselves: but for these Iackalls (which may pass for Foxes, because so by the
surer side) so ravenous, that they will not only feed on carrion above ground,
but even dig holes into the earth, fetch forth, and feed on dead bodies of men,
if not deeply interred.

6. The river Arnon running full south passes by Number. 32. 34.
Aroer, a fair City whereof frequent mention in Scripture, but in no other
notion, but only as the eastern boundary of Canaan. Here Arnon entertaineth a
river from the west, called the river of 2 Samuel 24. 5.
Gad, because rising, running, and falling within the compass of this Tribe.

7. This river of Gad had formerly received into it another stream called the
waters of Nimrim, threatened by the Isa. 156. Ier. 48. 34.
Prophets to be dried up: on the banks whereof Bethnimrah a City was seated. At
the conflux of these two, the Sea of Iazer is found, being no other then a Lake
(about our Whittlesey Mere in Hungtingtonshire, for greatness) as the Jews call
the meetings of all waters, whether fresh, or salt, Seas. Nor let their
language herein be challenged for impropriety, having a warrant from God
himself, Genesis 1. 10.
who at the creation, called the dry land Earth, and the gathering together of
the waters called he Seas. Conformable hereunto is the expression of the modern
Dutch; for in Helvetia a Province of Germany, yea in Argow (as I may say) a
County of See Mercators Atlas in Helvetia.
Helvetia, I have told above sixteen Seas, Zugersee, Thuner-see, Ober-see,
Rot-see, etc. though the biggest of them but lakes in effect. Yea the Jews did
so far extend, or rather, so straightly contract the word Sea, that, that capable
vessel of brass, used as a Lavatory for the sacrifices in the Temple, was
termed the 1 King. 7. 23.
Molten Sea. Iazer, which gave name to this Sea, was a Jo^h. 21. 39.
City of the Levites hard by, whereat some sad accident had happened, though
the particulars thereof are not discovered in Scripture, for the Jer. 48. 32.
weeping of Iazer passes in the Prophet as the expression of great lamentation.

8. Hence the river of Gad passes by Civitas interammis, or the City in the
midst of the river, wherewith on all sides it is environed, never mentioned in
Scripture but with the company of Deuteronomy. 2. 36. and Josh. 13. 9.
Aroer: a clear evidence both of their distinction and vicinity. Hereabouts
Ioab 2 Samuel 24. 5.
pitched his tent, when sent to number the people. Wonder not that having the
convenience of three Cities so near to receive him, he preferred rather to
reside in a tent during that employment. For (besides that such movable
habitations comply best with military men) it was fittest for the work in hand;
where the people to be reckoned might have full and free access in open air;
both wholsomer for the persons, and speedyer in dispatch, then when pent within
the streets and walls of a City. Nothing else memorable remains in the
southeast corner of this Tribe, save Dibon, a City sometimes assigned to Josh.
13. 17.
Reuben, and sometimes to Number. 32. 34.
Gad. To reconcile this, some make them different and distant Cities; which in
my apprehension is rather to set up two marks then to hit the right one. For
seeing these two Tribes confine together, and both lay claim to Dibon (like the
two mothers challenging the living child) we have only, in stead of a sword,
made use of pricks, setting it equally in the bounds of both. Here we advise
the Reader (not out of distrust of his skill, but desire of his good) to
beware, neither to confound this Dibon in Gad, with Number. 33. 45.
Dibon-Gad, the thirty ninth station of the Israelites as they came out of
Egypt; nor with another Neh. 11. 25.
Dibon, which seems to be in Judah, wherein the Jews dwelt after their
captivity.

9. The river of Iabbok arising out of the aforesaid stony country, first runs
directly northward, and strengthened with an acce^^ion of waters from the
Kingdom of Ammon, turns his stream full west. In which course ere long he
comes to the ford which Jacob with his family passed over: and where we crave
the Readers leave for a while to discontinue our discourse of this river, and
to attend that worthy Patriarch in his travels through this Tribe, which in
form of a Belt crossed Gad athwart from northeast to southwest. Jacob first
entering into this Tribe came to Nahanaim, that is, the two camps, because
there the Genesis 32. 2.
Angels digested into two armies (probably behind and before him) appeared to
Jacob. Now as Genesis 2. 19.
Adams naming the Creatures argued his dominion over them; so the Patriarchs
naming of places in Canaan, was an Earnest that their posterity should possess
them. Who no doubt, as curious to enquire, so were careful to continue those
names which their Ancestors had given them. Mahanaim was afterward a Josh. 21.
38.
City of the Levites, and in the reign of 2 Samuel 2. 8. 12
Ishbosheth the son of Saul, it was made the chief City of his kingdom. But
with his 2 Samuel 4. 7.
life within three years expired the Metropolisship of Mahanaim, which
afterward afforded refuge and residence to 2 Samuel 17. 24.
David, when flying from Jerusalem for fear of Absalom. Hither the news of
Absoloms death was brought to King David (joyful to the King, but doleful to
David) which caused his patheticall 2 Samuel 18. 33.
lamentation over the gate, till the heat of 2 Samuel 19. 7.
Ioabs anger dried up David's tears; persuading him with cheerful looks to
countenance the conquerours.

10. From Mahanaim, let us go fairly, and softly on with an easy pace in the
company of Jacob (not overdriving his children and cattle to the above named
Genesis 32. 22.
fords of Iabbok) and thence to Peni^l, where Jacob (the youngest warrior Genesis
25. 22.
fighting before he was born, and the strongest Conqueror) prevailed with God
appearing like an Angel. Who in admonition to Jacob, that he overcame not with
his own striving, but his opposites yielding, gave him a gentle touch, being
pleased, where he could have broken the bone, only to shrink the sinew,
whereupon Jacob carried an upright heart, and lame leg to his grave. Indeed
learned In Genesin ex^rcitatione 139.
Rivet is of opinion, that God presently healed his halting, chiefly grounding
it, because Esau at his meeting took no notice of his lameness: but does not
the negative follow with more probability, because the Scripture takes no
notice of his curing? Besides, had the cure come so quick, the hurt had never
left so deep and long lasting impression in the practice of the Israelites,
abstaining, for that cause, from eating the Genesis 32. 32.
sinew in the thigh. Yea modern Jews (oh that they were as observant of the
substantial as ceremonial parts of the old Testament!) not certain which
sinew it was (so many meeting in the thigh) refrain from feeding on Rivet ut
supr^ ex Rabbinis.
all Nerves in the hinder parts of a beast.

11. From Peniel going southwest Jacob being to meet Esau his brother, thus
marshalled his company. In the forefront his Concubines with their children,
next Leah with hers, Rachel and Joseph, first in his love and last in place,
because furthest from danger; before all, like a valiant Commander taking the
worst service on himself, marched Jacob in person, having sent before him his
presents to Esau, and dispatched before them his prayers to God. See what gifts
and good words, a fair tongue and full hand can do. Esau in stead of killing
falls a Geu. 33. 4.
kissing him. Behold how they hug! being now more twins, then in their mothers
womb: for there they strove, but here they embraced. From Peniel Jacob
traveled to Genesis 33. 17.
Succoth, in English Boothes, because there he erected tents for himself and
his cattle: and so he went over Jordan, into the Tribe of Ephraim to the City
of Sichem; whither (God willing) hereafter we will follow him. And now seeing
the way which we have come is both plain and pleasant, let me request the
Reader not to begrutch his pains to go some part of it back again, only
exchanging the company of plain dealing Jacob, for valiant Gideon: who in his
march traversed this Tribe from the west to the east thereof.

12. Gideon pursuing the flying Midianites with his soldiers, as faint as few
for want of victuals, coming to Succoth, desired food from the inhabitants
thereof. The Succothites were so far from granting him provision, they would
not give him good words, not more niggardly of their victuals then prodigal
of their Judge. 8. 6.
taunts unto him. Wherefore Gideon in his return (not then at leisure, that his
wrath should hinder his work) with briars and thorns of the wood hard by, tare
their flesh in pieces. The original says, he taught them with thorns, or made
them to know, namely their own folly and his power. Dull Scholars must have
sharp ^eachers: or rather like unto like, churlish crabbed dispositions, and
prickly crooked thorns well agree together. Hence Gideon marched to Peniel,
whose Citizens (neighbors to Succoth both in place and peevishness) churlishly
entertained him; which cost them at his return the breaking down of their Judge.
8. 17.
tower, which was afterward 1 King. 12. 25.
reedified by King Jeroboam. From Peniel Gideon went forward, by the way of
them that dwelt in Judge. 8. 11.
tents, on the east of Nobah and Iogbehah against the Midianites, unto Karkor,
which being out of the Tribe of Gad, we shall hear more of it in our
description of Midian.

13. The mention of those that dwell in tents, puts me in mind, that it is as
much my duty here to tender my conjecture to the Reader, as it is his liberty
to receive or reject it. There was a Country, undoubtedly in this Tribe,
called the 2 Samuel ^4. 6.
Land of Tahtim-hodshi, that is, newly inhabited, where Ioab made his second
station, when sent to number the people. Now may not this in probability be the
very place, where the Israelites formerly dwelled in tents, and in David's
victorious reign were reduced to more stability, and encouraged to turn their
tents into houses, more certain and solid habitations?

14. To return now to the river Iabbok, half impatient for our long deserting
it, save that running westward, it glides cooly and calmly under the shade of
the forest of Ephraim, so called, as learned men conjecture, (for otherwise
Ephraim possessed not any thing on this side Jordan) because there Judge. 12. 4.
Iephtha defeated the Ephraimites for their insolent mutiny against him. But
afterward a greater slaughter happened in the same place, when Ioab, Abishai,
and Ittai Generals for David, routed Absaloms army, and 2 Samuel 18. 8.
when the wood devoured more then the sword. Wonder not that sticks had a mouth
more voracious then steel, understand it that some were devoured by beasts,
others famished as lost in the labyrinths of the forest, and some staked on
sharp piles in the fierceness of their flight. Well might such sad fate befall
the common soldiers, which happened to Absalom himself. This was he that
boasted how upright he would be when made a 2 Samuel 15. 4.
Judge, whereas now, if the length of his hair conduced any thing to his
execution, it was the best, yea only piece of justice performed by him. Yet
more probable it is, that running in have (not so minding which way to go, as
to be gone) he was snatched up by the neck in a forked 2 Samuel 18. 9.
bough: How did the officious Oak act three parts, being the Gallows, Halter,
and Hangman for a traitor? But this accident rather occasioned then caused his
death: the Oak was rather his Gaolor then his Executioner. It was Ioab that
dispatched him with three darts through his 2 Samuel 18. 14.
heart. Wherein through a treble orifice were discovered Disobedience to his
Parent, Treason to his Prince, and Hypocrisy to his God, pretending a 2 Samuel
15. 7.
Sacrifice and intending Rebellion.

15. Hard by was Absoloms Tomb, consisting of a great 2 Samuel 18. 17.
pit to hold, and a great heap of stones to hide a great Traitor under it. May
they there lie hard and heavy on his Corpse, and withal (if possible) sink
down his rebellious example for ever having a resurrection. No methodicall
monument but this hurdle of stones was fittest for such a causer of confusion.
Indeed in his life time he had erected a stately 2 Samuel 18. 18.
Pillar near Jerusalem, intending it no doubt for the place of his burial. But
just it was that his dead carcass should be deprived of his own grave, who
endeavored to dispossess his living Father of his kingdom.

16. And now a little to acquaint the Reader with the adjacent Country, two
several ways led hence to the City of Mahanaim. The one through the mountains,
shorter but harder, which Cushi chose: The other 2 Samuel 18. 23.
by the way of the plain, which the furthest about was the nearest way home.
Ahimaaz took this as the most ready Road, who being a messenger volunteer,
would confess to David no more news then what he knew would be welcome, whilst
Cushi a pressed Post must relate the full of his message. And now the river
Iabbok, who hitherto may seem to run slowly, as attending in suspense the issue
of the Battle, certified of the success thereof hastens with all possible
speed to fall into the river Jordan.

17. Jordan had now some distance of miles escaped out of the sea of Kinneroth
or Sea of Galilee: the edge whereof Josh. 13. 26. is assigned for the utmost
border of this Tribe. Through this lake (as Tacitus observes) this river kept
his ready course, preserving his stream entire from incorporating with the
waters of the Lake. A thing no whit incredible to those Welshmen in
Merioneth-shire, who have beheld how the river Dee running through Camdens
Brit^n. in Merioneth shire.
Pimble-meer continues his channel without mixing with the Mere. On the east
side of this Sea stood the City of Gadara; (the first syllable whereof is
argument enough to place it in this Tribe) where the Legion of Devils cast out
of the man entered into the herd of Swine: where a threefold difficulty
appears in the relation of the story.

1 Whilst other Mar. 5. 1. and Luke 8. 27.
Gospells mention but one, Saint Mat. 8. 28.
Matthew makes two men possessed with a Devil. 2 The same terms them
Gergasens whom other Gospells name Gadarens. 3 Seeing Swine till killed, return
their owners no profit, and then their flesh was forbidden to the Jews to eat,
how came the Gadarens, being undoubtedly Jews (otherwise Christ would not have
conversed with them) to keep such a company of useless cattle?
But these difficulties accept of their several solutions.

1 Though two were possessed, one of them being Paramount in torture and
unruliness eclipsed the mention of the other, the second not being named in the
presence of the principal. 2 Gadara and Gerazen, though distinct, were
neighboring Cities, and so might have joint commonage of cattle betwixt them.
3 They kept Swine to truck and barter with other nations. Though their flesh
was unclean in the mouths, yet their money was clean in the purses of the Jews.
But if any conceive they kept Swine not only ad usum but ad esum, such must
acknowledge the drowning of them to be the owners just punishment for their
breaking Gods commandments.
But when those Hogs were sunk in the sea, a greater herd of them remained in
the City: swinish people, who preferred to wallow on the dunghill of their own
wealth, rather then to possess the pearl of Christ's presence, whom they
requested to depart out of their coasts. So much of the Gadarens, and their
neighbors the Gergasens, only let me add, that from the affinity of sound
some have collected, the Girgashites anciently to have inhabited this country,
(as we have formerly observed) and therefore in the title of every leaf we
have divided this Tribe betwixt them and the Amorites, as the old possessors
thereof.

18. Strabo G^og. lib. 16. col. 764.
reports how there is a little Lake near to the City of Gadara infected with
such malignant and pestiferous qualities, that it scaldeth off the skin of
whatsoever is cast into it. This may seem an effect of the Devils in the hogs,
(Satan when he departs uses to leave such perfumes behind him) and semblably
the possessed man stripped himself of all his clothes and went naked. But
seeing the Scriptures say expressly that the hogs ran into the Sea, and not into
this petty Lake, I dare not assign this as the cause of those mischievous
waters.

19. Jordan having got out of the aforesaid Sea of Galilee is presently crossed
over with a stately Bridge. I conceive it of no great antiquity (no stone
thereof appearing in the Scripture) but Mercators Maps take notice thereof. And
a moderate Jesuit tells us (observe it Reader against the time thou travellest
into those parts) that the way over this bridge, though somewhat further about
and less frequented, is an easier and safer rode from Damascus to Jerusalem,
then what is commonly gone over Jacobs bridge in the Tribe of Naphtali, whereof
God willing hereafter.

20. And now Jordan being enriched with the tributary waters of Iabbok g^ows
fair and large, yet not so deep but that it is fordable, especially at that
place so fatal to the Judge. 12. 6.
Ephraimites, where forty two thousand of them were by Iephthah put to the
sword. Four-sold was the offense of these Ephraimites.

1 They neglected on seasonable Judge. 12. 2.
summons to assist Iephthah against the Ammonites. 2 They falsely retorted the
fault on Iephthah, and being wilfully deaf at his call accused him for dumb
not calling them. 3 They gave the Gileadites reproachful language, calling
them Judge. 12. 4.
Runnagates. 4 They menaced to burn Iephthah and his house with fire.
Hereupon Iephthah defended himself, and defeated them in a memorable
overthrow. The Ephraimites being routed fled to these fords of Jordan, so
hoping to recover their own country on the other side. But all in vain. Jordan
indeed might here be waded over; but no passage over the swelling Surges of
their enemies anger* How willingly would those who called others Runnagates
have been now Runnaways themselves; but could not be permitted? The Gileadites
pursued, yea prevented them, and arraigned them all for their lives. Shiboleth
is their neck-word (and as rattling in the throat is generally to sick men) so
lisping of their tongues was a certain Symptom of their death.

21. Some will accuse Iep^thah of cruelty, that not contented with the honor
of the Conquest he followed the Chase so furiously, as to suffer his sword not
only to drink to mirth, but to swill to drunkenness in the blood of his
brethren. But happily this execution without order from him might be done by the
Gileadites in heat of anger: Soldiers in the Precipice of their passion being
sensible of no other stop but the bottom. If done by Iepthah's command, surely
his own security enforced this severity, as a doleful, but needful, a sad,
but safe way to prevent the growth of another war, the seeds whereof Iephthah
foresaw in the revengefull disposition of the Ephraimites. However some actions
in the old Testament as they may not be imitated, so they must not be
condemned, whose Actors might have immediate commission of divine inspiration.

22. From hence Jordan casts a glancing eye at the fair City of
Iabesh-Gilead, sweetly seated at the bottom of Balm-bearing mountains. The
Inhabitants hereof engaged not with the rest of Israel against the Benjamites,
for which offense they were all slain save four hundred young Judge. 21. 12.
Virgins, which were given to the Benjamites to wife. Thus the Benjamites being
Gileadites by the mother side, it was not only protection to his subjects, but
also love to his kindred which invited Saul to succor this City, when Naash
the Ammonite besieged it. Painful and shameful were the conditions of Peace
which Naash offered them, namely 1 Samuel 11. 2.
if he might thrust out their right eyes, which was to render their Soldiers
stark blind in effect. For whereas the Jews were wont to wear in war broad
shields on their left arm, which as it sheltered their body, so it hindered
their sight on that side) when their right eye was put out by their enemies
sword, and the left blinded by their own shield, they were, during the fight,
deprived of the best fence of their body. But 2 Samuel 11. 11.
Saul saved all this harm by a speedy march, suddenly surprising the Ammonites,
and delivering the City of Iabesh-Gilead.

23. Gratitude to Saul for so great a benefit probably did afterward put the
people of this City on that honorable, but dangerous design to rescue Saul
and his sons bodies from the wall of Bethshan, where the 1 Samuel 31. 10.
Philistines had hanged them up. It was no pleasant prospect to these men of
Iabesh, Bethshan being opposite on the other side of Jordan over against them,
some eight miles off. (Loialty has a quick sight and a tender heart, at a
distance to behold and bemoan affronts to her Sovereign) Did Saul preserve
their right eyes to this end, contentedly to behold his body abused? Out march
all the valiant men in the City in the night over Jordan: Saul's and his sons
corpse they took down from Bethshan, bring them home, burn the flesh, and bury
the bones thereof under a 1 Samuel 31. 13.
tree near the City. The Jews generally interring their dead under some Oak,
pleased perchance with the parallel, that as those plants seemingly dead in
winter, have every spring an annual resurrection: so men's dry bones shall have
new sap put into them at the day of Judgment. 2 Samuel 21. 14.
David afterward removed the bones of Saul and Jonathan, and buried them in
the sepulcher of Kish their father in Zelab in the Country of Josh. 18. 28.
Benjamin.

24. From the fords of Ephraim, Jordan takes his course by the Cities of Number.
32. 34.
Ataroth and Josh. 13. 26.
Debir, of which we can say neither more nor less, but that they are called
Ataroth and Debir. For these places (let Number. 32. 35.
Ataroth-shophan, Number. 32. 36.
Beth-haran etc. march in the same rank) are so short-lived in Scripture, that
they live only to be named, and presently vanish away, without any more
mention of them. Not long after Jordan leaving this Tribe runs into Reuben.

25. More inland in Gad lay the large and fruitful Country of Gilead, whereof
more fitly and fully in the next Tribe. For though this Tribe of Gad had
South-Gilead in her borders; yet under favor I conceive that North-Gilead
(which belonged to Manasseh) was the firstand best Country of that name. Now
whereas we read in Josh. 13. 25.
Scripture, that Gad had all the Cities of Gilead, and few verses after, that
Manasseh had half Josh. 13. 31.
Gilead; know that Gilead is taken restrictively in the former, and generally
in the latter acception.

26. Ramoth-Gilead (called also Josh. 13. 26. vide Tremellium in locum.
Ramo^h-mizpeh) was metropolis of Gad-Gilead. It belonged to the Levites, and
was also a City of Josh. 20. 8.
refuge, afterward won by the King of 1 King. 22. 3.
Aram. Then, (alas) that city, which so often had saved others from the pursuit
of their enemies, could not preserve it self from the sword of the Syrians.
Here it was verified, Quod non capit Christus, 2 Chr. 11. 14.
rapit fiscus. For upon Ieroboams introducing of Idolatry, the pious Levites
were outed of their possessions, and now the pagan Syrians, revenging their
quarrel, ejected Israel out of this City, wrongfully wrested from the Levites.

27. However not long after Ahab and Iehoshaphat with joint forces besieged it,
when the army of the Syrians bad them both battle. Iehoshaphat at Ahabs 1
King. 22. 30.
persuasion (pretending his honor, but intending therein his own safety)
appeared in his Princely equipage, whilst the other disguised himself in the
army. Now the Syrians having received special orders, 1 King. 23. 31.
to fight neither against small nor great, save only with the King of Israel,
mistake Iehoshaphat for the King of Israel, directed in their conjectures unto
him by the luster of his royal Robes. Bravery betrays men to danger, and not
only sets up a fair mark, but gives malice the right ground to throw at it.
And was it not just with God, that Iehoshaphat, who in complement had professed
to Ahab, I am 1 King. 22. 4.
as thou art, should in realty be taken to be the same indeed? But upon his
crying out the Syrians apprehend their error, and desist from further pursuing
him.

28. But divine Justice continues the chase of Ahab. Guilt cannot hide it self
in a crowd, and there is no way for a notorious sinner, to disguise himself
from Gods eye, but by his sincere repentance. A man draws a bow at 1 King. 22.
34.
adventures, and all-seeing providence guiding blind chance to the joints of
Ahabs armor, mortally wounds him. It seems not only the Corselet, but also
the putting on thereof must be of proof to fence death out, which otherwise
will creep in at a small cranny. Yet Ahab was staid up in his chariot til even,
and then the Sun and his life set together. Some years after King Iehoram Ahabs
son at the same place received 2 King. 2. 14, 15.
wounds of more honor and less danger, when forcibly he recovered this
Ramoth-Gilead from the Kings of Syria. But of all Iehorams hurts here received,
none went so near his heart, as that in this 2 King. 9. 1.
City, a son of the Prophets sent by Elisha, did anoint Iehu, a Captain of the
Host, to be his successor and King of Israel.

29. We had wholly forgotten (no shame to confess and amend our faults) the
small Country of Sharon in the north-east part 1 Chr. 5. 16.
of this tribe. It seems it was parcel of the demeans of the Crown in the days
of King David, where his herds 1 Chr 27. 29.
were fed under the care and charge of Shetrai the Sharonite. David we see was
not only a good man, and good King, but also a good husband, stocking this his
land to his best profit, knowing full well, soon would the State of his
Court-hall be abated, if the thrift in his country Kitchen were not preserved.
Nor was Sharon a place less pleasant then profitable, where plenty of fragrant
roses grew, to which Christ (the Churches spouse) is pleased to ^ say 35. 2.
Cant. 2. ^.
resemble himself; not for any fading condition, but fair sight, sweet smell,
and cordial virtues wherein he excelled.

30. Here some will inquire, In what capacity did David hold his land in Sharon
(and elsewhere) where his cattle was grased, 1. Chron. 27. 25, 26. etc.
seeing being Iesse's youngest Son, little land was left him from his Father,
and none at all in the Tribe of Gad. The difficulty is increased, because in so
pent and populous a country, scarce a foot thereof, but related to some owner
not having power to alienate it from his heirs, to whom at the farthest it was
to revert at the year of Iubilee when all dead possessions had a resurrection
to their proper owners. We conceive David held this land by one of the
following Titles.

1 By the fundamental establishment of the Crown. For sure when that Kings
were made, public provision was made for their Princely support, who (as Lords
of Manors have commonage sance number amongst their Tenants) might feed their
cattle any where in their own dominions. 2 By improvement of wast grounds,
which fell to the King as Lord of the Soil. Yea seeing God made provisionary
Laws for the Kings behavior, ( Deuteronomy. 17. 15, 16.
four hundred years before any King was in Israel) why might not a reserve of
land be also left, at the partition of the country by lot, for their Kings
future maintenance? 3 By mutual compact: some subjects on valuable
consideration, (as perchance the relaxing the tribute due from every person to
his Prince) 1 Samuel 17. 25.
might part (not with the propriety, but) present profit of their land for the
Kings convenience. 4 By attainder of Traitors: whose lands it seems were (at
least for some term of time) at the Kings disposal; witness David's granting
all 2 Samuel 16. 4.
Mephibosheth had unto Ziba. 5 By conquest, as most probable it is this Sharon
was won from the Ammonites, when 2 Samuel 1^. 29.
Rabba was taken from them.
However we may prefume that David's title (though unknown to us) was undoubted
in it self, free from the least suspicion of injustice, according to his own
counsel: Psalm. 65. 10.
Trust not in oppression, become not vain in robbery. Otherwise his tender
conscience would as well have smote him for cutting off a lap of his subjects
ground, as of his 1 Samuel 24. 5.
Sovereigns garment.

31. We have finished the description of this Tribe and all places therein
mentioned in Cononicall Scripture, only there remains behind some Cities which
we find in the Apocrypha, in one 1 Maccab. 5.
chapter whereof we may spring a whole Covey of Cities, namely these following:
1 Dathema, a fortress. 2 Bosora. 3 Bosor. 4 Alema. 5 Chasphor. 6 Mached. 7
Carnaim. 8 Ephron.


The general character given of these places consists principally in these
particulars.

1 1 Mac. 5. 26.
All these were Cities strong and great. 2 Situated al in the 1 Mac. 5. 25.
Land of Gilead, yea in this Tribe of Gad, Carnaim only excepted, whereof more
properly in our next description. 3 Inhabited by Jews, and threatened by the
pagan Host under Timotheus, that they would take and destroy them all in 1
Mac. 5. 27.
one day.
From which last clause we collect that these Cities must be placed somewhat
near together, otherwise, how could an army probably propound to dispatch them
all in one day? And though the Pagans might mingle much pride with their malice
in projecting things high and hard to effect, yet surely they mixed some policy
with their pride, not to propound to themselves mere impossibilities. But the
seasonable coming of Judas Maccabeus with his host frustrated all the Pagans
designs.

32. But the City of Ephron deserves serious consideration, for the singular
situation thereof. For in Maccabeus his return from Carnaim this strong City
stood so in his way, that he could not turn from it either to the right hand or
to the left, 1 Mac. 5. 46.
but must needs pass through the midst of it. A place in so tyrannical a
position may seem an affront to man's natural liberty. Yet such was the
situation thereof near the Vide tabulas Adrichomii.
confluence of Iabbok and Jordan (where perchance the way railed with Morasses
on either side) and being a pass of importance, Maccabeus was only free to go
this or no way. The Ephronites sen^ible of their advantage undiscreetly deny
him passage. Surely if a flying enemy deserve a bridge of gold to be given him,
a potent foe seriously proffering peaceably to depart, may merit a bridge of
silver to be lent him. But Maccabeus being denied forced his way through the
city 1 Mac. 5. 51.
over them that were slain.

33. In the partition of the Land of Canaan into several months for Solomon's
provisions the Tribe of Gad fell under three Purveyer-ships.

1 Of Gebar the son of Uri, who ranged over most of that land, once the
kingdom 1 King. 4. 19.
of Sihon. 2 Of the Son of Geber, to whose jurisdiction 1 King. 4. 13.
Ramoth-Gilead did belong. 3 Of Abinadab the Son of Iddo, 1 King. 4. 14.
to whom Mahanaim did pertain.
By Mahanaim here I understand not only the Levites City so named, (poor
purveying for victuals within the walls of that alone) but a large Territory
of the same name round about it. And although to us it is unknown how far the
bounds thereof extended, yet they must be concluded either very large or
extraordinary fruitful, acquitting it self as a twelfth part of the Kingdom,
and affording Court fare for one month of the year. In the passage to this
Mahanaim on the south (to retreive a place which otherwise had escaped us) lay
Bithron, a petty Country it seems, through which Abner passed 2 Samuel ^. 29.
when by night he fled from Ioab.

34. It will here be demanded, that seeing the land was by Gods own appointment
formerly divided into twelve parts, (the twelve Tribes) adequate to the twelve
months of the year, why did not Solomon rather make use of this partition,
which was jure divino, then make a new model out of his own fancy. It is
answered, this later division of the land, was found most convenient for
housekeeping, and so more subservient to this particular end for which it was
ordained.

If that any urge me to give a reason why in this division into Purveyerships
Ramoth-Gilead distanced some miles off, was added to the jurisdiction of the
Son of Geber, who was overseer in Manasseh, thereby mangling and mutilating the
intireness of the Country; let such first satisfy me, why so many shreds and
parcells of land (especially in Worcester See Camdens and Speeds Maps.
and Hereford shires) are cut off from those Countries in situation, (yea are
surrounded with other shires) yet belong unto them in jurisdiction as accounted
members thereof. In all these Querees an ordinary eye might at the first
institution discover an apparent reason of such fractions, though now, because
long since time out of mind, the quickest sight cannot perceive the cause
thereof.

35. The Arms usually assigned to Gad are Gules on a Banner erected argent a
Lion rampant sable: grounding their fancy (I can afford it no better term) on
Moses his blessing; Deuteronomy. 33. 20.
Blessed be he that enlarges Gad, he dwells as a Lion etc. Bu^ how to
accommodate the prophecy of Jacob to this Tribe of Gad, Genesis 49. 19.
a troop shall overcome him, but he shall overcome at last, much imployeth the
industry of Divines. Most apply it to the situation of this Tribe, much exposed
to the incursion of the Ammonites their vexatious neighbors, till at last
under Judge. 12. 11.
Iephthah, 1 Samuel ^1. 11.
Saul, and chiefly 2 Samuel 12. 31.
David freed from foreign foes, they possessed their country in peace. Others
in a mystical meaning make Gad the emblem of Gods children, who after many
intermediate frights, fights and failings, come off with the conquest at last;
I say at last, a word which fully recompenseth its long delays in coming, when
come with eternity of continuance.

Here follows the Map of the half Tribe of Manasseh beyond Jorda^.
MANASSEH beyond JORDAN. CHAP. 3.
1. MAnasseh eldest Son of Joseph by Asernath daughter of Potipherah
Prince-priest of On, was by his prophetical grandfather Genesis 48. 14.
Jacob placed behind Ephraim his younger brother. Not that Reuben-like he was
disinherited for any misdemeanour, but only so it pleased al-disposing
Providence to transpose him. However (though inferior to Ephraim in power) he
grew so great that thirty Numb. 1. 35.
two thousand two hundred of his body from twenty years old and upward as able
men to go forth to war came forth of Egypt, all which digging their graves in
the wilderness by their own infidelity Number. 26. 34.
fifty two thousand seven hundred entered the land of Canaan. Many Worthies were
extracted from this Tribe (for this Country was 6^sh. 17. 1.
conferred upon them in Intuition to their valor) as Gideon, and Iephthah the
warlike, Iair the younger, the peaceable Judge of Israel, Eliah the Prophet;
nor must the five Josh. 17. 4.
daughters, and coheires of Zelophehad, be forgotten, who argued their case so
strongly about their inheritance. Bashfulness it self will be bold rather then
lose a rightful possession, and a good cause when plainly told, is learnedly
pleaded, especially if a meek Moses or just Joshua be the judge thereof.

2. We are now only to describe that part of Manasseh which was east of
Jordan. Some will say, was it not pity the possessions of this Tribe should be
thus dismembered? Was it not enough that Joseph was Genesis 49. 26.
separated from his brethren, but Manasseh his Son must also be parted from
himself? How came that wisdom who pronounces it Psalm. 133. 1*
good and pleasant for brethren to live together in unity, to cleave this Tribe
asunder? But let such know, that unity in affection may consist with local
separation. Besides, divine Providence might seem to have a design herein,
that this Tribe of Manasseh having a joint interest on both sides of Jordan,
might claspe these Countries together: and the Manassites being (as I may say)
Amphibii, on both sides of the River, might by visits amongst their kindred,
continue a correspondency and civil communion one with another.

3. Manasseh had mount Hermon and Gilead on the east, parting it from the
Ammonites, and Ismaelites, Jordan on the west, Gad on the south, Syria, and
particularly the kingdoms of Geshur and Maachah on the north. In which compass
of ground, Deuteronomy. 3. 4, 5. and Josh. 13. 30. and 1 King. 4. 13.
threescore Cities with high walls, gates and bars, besides unwalled towns,
were contained. Many will be amazed at this number, and the wonder will seem
the greater when they shall reckon but Josh. 19.
two and twenty Cities in Asher, nineteen in Naphtali, seventeen in Simeon,
sixteen in Issachar, and but twelve in Zebulun: unproportionable that half a
Tribe should have treble the number of Cities to those that were bigger. All we
can say herein is this, that being a frontier Country, and being exposed on
the north and east to heathen enemies, it must have more fenced Cities, then
the Tribes on the other side Jordan, which were better secured by their
situation. Thus the hem is turned in, and sowed double, to prevent the
ravelling out thereof. And if I reck on right, there be more Castles in our
marches betwixt Scotland and Wales, then in all England besides. However, our
eye shall not be evil at Manasseh because Gods was good unto it, who are so
far from repining at, that we rejoice for the plenty of strong places therein;
only grieving that we cannot give the Reader an exact account of their names,
though we will endeavor our best in the following description.

4. Mount Hermon is the north-east bound of this Tribe, called by the Sidonians
Deuteronomy. 3. 9.
Syrion, by the Amorites Shenir, by humane Prolemee and Strabo.
writers Hippus, and Trachones, being a branch of Lebanon bended southward. A
stately strong mountain fixed on firm foundations, and yet the voice of the
Lord (understand the thunder with an earthquake) makes Psalm. 29. 6.
Syrion to skip as an Unicorne; and well may mountains dance when God himself
shall pipe unto them. The Psalm. 133. 3.
dew of Hermon is highly commended by David, and brotherly love is compared
thereunto, because (whilst heat of hatred like a drought parcheth all to
nothing) fraternall kindness dewlike gives refreshment and increase. But how
this dew of Hermon fell upon the hill of Sion (mountains an hundred miles
asunder) so troubled Saint Augustine, that at last leaving the literal sense,
he is fain to fly to a mystical meaning. Others interpret that the dew of
Hermon fell upon the hill of Sion, because the fruitful flocks fatted on that
mountain came afterward to be sacrificed at Jerusalem; which is but a harsh
construction; as if one should say, The fruitfulness of Linconcolne-shire which
falls on London, because the fatted cattle thereof are sold and eaten in the
City. But whilst sundry Interpreters have several wit-engines to draw these
two mountains together, our last translation saves their needless pains,
rendering it, As the dew of Hermon, and as as the dew that descended upon the
mountains of Zion. Indeed it is the same specificall, though not individual
dew which lights on both mountains, flowing from heaven the same fountain,
though falling on earth in several channels.

5. Now as Hermon is a chain of continued hills, so a principal link thereof
is the mountain Amana. Christ courting his Spouse inviteth her to look from the
top of Cant. 4. 8.
Amana. Adricho. in thea^^. Ter. san^. in Manass^h.
Some conceive thereby Amanus a mountain in Cilicia is meant; but seeing
Solomon clean through that Poem, makes use of only native similitudes
(whereof a self-sufficiency in his own land) it is improbable that herein he
did borrow a foreign and exotic expression. Know also, that the region
hereabouts is called Trachonitis or Sharp^land in English, from the steepness
of many pointed hills (in shape not unlike the Rocks called Needles near the
Isle of Wight) wherewith this country abounded; and it was a moity of the
Luke. 3. 1.
Tetrarch-ship of Philip the brother of Herod.

6. South of Hermon lay mount Gilead, famous for the interview of Laban and
Jacob: the former keen with anger (save that God in a Genesis 31. 24.
vision took off his edge) overtaking Jacob charged him with a double action of
felony, for stealing himself, and his Gods away without his privity. The first,
Jacob confessed, yet pleaded not guilty to the second, but traversed his
innocence. Hue and Cry is made in vain after the thief and felons goods, (or
Gods if you please) for she, whose conscience would permit her to carry away,
cunning did persuade her to conceal them. Jacob thus cleared (as it were by
Proclamation) of Defendant turns Plaintiff, accusing the Accuser for his false
accusation. At last all winds off in a good agreement, and an Instrument is
drawn up betwixt them, not in paper but in stone, interchangeably sealed with
solemn oaths. The Condition whereof, was to this effect; That if either of them
should pass that place to do any act of hostility to other, he should forfeit
his fidelity, and be liable to divine justice for his perjury.

7. This Pillar and heap of stones had a threefold name imposed on it, called 1
By Laban, Genesis 31. 47.
Iegar Sahadutha, that is in the Aramite tongue, A heap of witness. 2 By
Jacob, Ibid.
Galeed, the same in effect in Hebrew. 3 By both Mizpah; that is, a
Watchtower, Jacob giving the name, and Laban the occasion thereof by that his
expression, The Lord Genesis 31. 49.
watch betwixt thee and me.


Here was abundant caution, three names and two languages, and yet nothing too
much. For Jacob having formerly been sensible of Labans notorious shuffling
with him, knew the best way to find sure was to bind sure; and Laban being
guilty, and therefore jealous, thought no security sufficient. And therefore in
their mutual suspicions a Triplicate was used in naming the places, that a
threefold cable might not be broken.

8. Gilead was at first only appropriated to that heap and pillar, whence the
name may seem to be translated to the adjacent mountains, and thence
transmitted to the valley in the east of those mountains, and thence imparted
to some eminent persons born in that valley. For as 1 Chr. 7. 14.
Gilead Son of Machir, grandchild of Manasseh, being born in Egypt, so called
by a Prophetical Prolepsis, foretelling that his posterity should possess the
Country of Gilead; so Judge. 11. 1.
Gilead the Father of Iephthah, Gilead of Gilead, seems to take his
denomination from the Country possessed. Thus as the Psalm. 49. 11.
Psalmist observes some called their lands after their own names, and some it
seems were called after the name of their lands.

9. A fruitful Country Gilead was, till the people thereof were infected with
Idolatry, grown so frequent therein, that the Prophet complains, Their Hos.
12. 11.
Altars were as heaps in the furrows of the field. Thus falling into Gods
displeasure they quickly fell under their enemies disposal. The Syrians of
Damascus threshing them with Amos 1. 3.
instruments of Iron, and the Amos 1. 13.
Ammonites ripping up their women with child that they might enlarge their
border. This latter cruelty seems done in revenge of David's usage of the
Ammonites in taking of Rabbah, 2 Samuel 12. 13.
putting them under saws and harrows etc. And although some hundreds of years
were betwixt that action of David and this of the Ammonites, yet we know malice
has a strong memory, long to retain and at last to return injuries offered
unto it.

10. Under the hills of Gilead (famous for flocks of goats, to which for
thickness and whiteness the hair of the Spouse is Cant. 4. 1.
compared) lay Rogelim a Manor of Barzillai the Gileadite. This was he who so
bountifully victualled David at Mahanaim, so civilly waited on him to Jordan,
so equally requested, and so easily obtained a Writ of ease from Court
attendance, being now 2 Samuel 19. 35.
fourscore years of age: having first bequeathed his Court-pleasures to Chimham
his Son (neither covetous to keep them himself, nor envious that another should
enjoy them) because such excusable vanities might become his green youth, which
would be burdensome to the withered winter of his Father. Pella seems to be
hereabouts, whither many Christians warned by many prodigies fled for shelter
from Jerusalem, before the Romans besieged it. As we congratulate their thus
preventing persecution according to Christ's Mat. 14. 16.
precept, so we cannot but condole, that the same Vid. Epiphani um Haeresi 29.
persons were afterward poisoned with heretical opinions, contrary to the
express word of God, and became Apostate Nazarites. Somewhat more north is 2 Samuel 17. 27.
Lodebar the possession of Machir, a bountiful benefactor to David during his
distress, and Guardian to 2 Samuel 9. 4.
Mephibosheth in his minority; and Thisbe the birthplace of Eliah the Prophet,
the John Baptist of the old Testament. Great was the resemblance betwixt their
persons and preaching (all similitudes run like Pharaoh's Charets in the
red sea, Exodus 14. 25.
wanting some wheels) especially because both were born in bad times, when the
world was generally infected with wickedness, both contented with plain
clothes, and course fare, undaunted in reproving the faults of Princes, and
implacably persecuted for the same.

11. But the principal City in Gilead was Mizpah the place of Iephthah's Judge.
1. 34.
habitation. This is he whom his brethren banished for a Judge. 11. 2.
Bastard; but the elders of Gilead oppressed by the Ammonites, brought back for
their Judge. 11. 9.
General. When they felt their own woe, they began to see Iephthah's worth,
formerly exiled for his Fathers fault, but now restored for his own abilities.
Virtue once in an age will work her own advancement, and when such as hate it
shall chance to need it, they will be forced to prefer it. To Mizpah Iephthah
returned, though a conqueror, yet a captive and a prisoner to his own rash
vow, to sacrifice whatsoever came first forth of the doors of his house; it so
happening that his only daughter met him with a virgin-quire and music, which
was sad in the close. Here Divines both for number and learning are almost
equally divided, Joseph. lib. 4. anti. Iud. ca. 9. August. l. 7. quaest Iud.
quaest. 47. Ambro. l. 3. de o^^iciis. cap. 12. Chrysostom. hom. 14. ad popu A^ti.
Origin. fo. 9. in lo^n. pa. 308. Peter Martyr in locum. Capellus in Diatribe.
Forbes or Perkins his case. Brodman Theog. Syst. tom. 2. 4034. etc.
some avouching her really sacrificed according to the letter of the text,
whereof some footsteps in the Fable of Agamemnon sacrificing Iphigenia (happily
corrupted for Iephthagenia or Iephtha's daughter:) others Nicolas Lyra in
locum, with most Roman commentators since his time in hope to found Nunnery
thereupon. I^m. and Tremel. in locum. M. Perkins li. 1. cas. con. ca 15.
Scharpius. Symph. p. 171. etc.
maintaining that she was only sequestered to perpetual virginity. If any
demand my judgment in this difference, I seasonably remember how one being
asked in the Massacre of Paris, whether he was a Catholic or an Hugonite,
answered he was a Physician. My return must be in this work, I am only a
Chorographer, and the controversy in hand concerns matter of fact, not of
place, proper only to us for this present.

12. East of Mizpah lay the plain of Mizpah. Joshua having conquered the Kings
of Canaan (at the waters of Merom in the next Tribe) pursued them hither on the
east and to Josh. 11. 8.
Mizrepoth^maim near Sidon westward. A chase with a vengeance all the latitude
of the land, the Canaanites flying as far as sea or mountains would give them
leave: so that their flight may pass for a Scale of miles for the breadth of
this Country, so smitten until they left them none ibid.
remaining, understand it, not in a considerable body to make any resistance.

13. So much of Gilead. We come now to Bashan: for these two provinces did the
Tribe of Manasseh Josh. 17. 1.
contain, though it is impossible accurately to distinguish their bounds.
Bashan was a grazing country (as indeed all Canaan east of Jordan was fitter
for Abel then Cain, for pasturage then tillage) anciently called the Land Deuteronomy.
2. 20. and 3. 13.
of Giants; which though now extirpated, Og being the last of that race, yet
retained some footsteps thereof in the strength and greatness of her 1 Oaks,
whereof ^ zek. 27. 6.
oars were made for the galleys of Tire. 2 Rams, Deuteronomy. 32. 14.
of the breed of Bashan, being the fattest and fairest of their kind. 3 Bulls,
so often mentioned in Scripture. But by Psalm. 22* 12.
David's metaphorical bulls of Bashan, strong, sturdy, cursed, cruel men are
understood.


This Province was subdivided into several petty lands: as, first, the La^d
Deuteronomy. 3. 14. and 1 King. 4. 13.
of Argob on the north next Syria. Secondly, Deuteronomy. 3. 14.
Bashan-avoth-Iair: where taking the first word for the Genus and the two
latter for the Difference, we have the exact definition of the Country.

14. Iair was a fortunate name in the family of Manasseh, and we must be
careful not to confound two eminent men of that name.

1 Iair the elder, contemporary with Moses, who, when the field-forces of Og
were utterly destroyed, smote the Number. 32. 41. and Josh. 13. 30.
small towns thereof (being threescore in number, as Joshua counted them) and
called them Bashan-Avoth-Iair, that is, the Cities of Iair in Bashan. 2 Iair
the younger, a peaceable Judge in Israel immediately before Iephthah, who as he
came many years in age short of the former, so the number of his Cities were
but half so many, viz. Judge. 10. 4.
thirty, which he left to his thirty sons, calling them also Avoth-Iair.
It is further recorded of his thirty sons that they rode on thirty Ibid.
Assecolts, i. e. they were itinerant Judge. 5. 10.
Judges, say some, in their respective places, it being improper that they in
their several circuits should 1 Go on foot. Authority would be contemned if
not somewhat heightened above the common people. 2 Or ride on prancing steeds.
Marshall law may be so mounted, where the heels of the horses are as terrible
to poor people, as the face of the rider. 3 Or ride on swift Coursers; seeing
no such have to execute suspected innocence. 4 Or be housed in covered
chariots; which is a kind of engrossing of justice, shutting that up, to which
all ought to have open access. 5 But ride on Asses: partly that Petitioners,
though lame and weak, might keep pace with them on the way when relating their
grievances; and partly by that patient creature to show the slow but sure
proceeding of justice; and indeed the Judges foot-pace to the sentence is the
accused parties post-speed to his grave.


We find among these thirty cities, but one of them named, which is Judge. 10.
5.
Camon, wherein the body of Iair was buried. And it is probable, that Ira the 2 Samuel 20. 26
Iairite so high in favor about King David, was an inhabitant of this country.

15. More south lay Ashteroth-karnaim, or in English, the two horned Ashteroth,
either so named from some forked building, or street therein; (Horn-church in
Essex, and Horn-castle in Lincolne-shire so called on the like occasion) or
because the Idol Ashteroth, that is, the Moon horned in her waxing or waning,
was worshipped therein; or lastly because a fair and gallant City, and all
strength, mirth, and jollity are called horns in the Hebrew. Yet may we say to
the men of Ashteroth in the words of the Psalm. 75. 5.
Psalmist, Set not up your horns so high, neither speak presumptuous words.
Horns, which first were well blunted by Chedorlaomer, when he Genesis 14. 5.
smote the Rephaims or Giants in Ashteroth-karnaim, and afterward were broken
quite off, when Deuteronomy. 1. 4.
Og King of Bashan who reigned in this City was overthrown. For hard by is
Edrei another City wherein Og resided, and near which he bid battle to the
children of Israel when he with all his Giant-like race, which peopled this
place, was extinguished. For though the Country of Pigmies be a Poets-tale,
this Deuteronomy. 2. 20.
Land of Giants is a Scripture-truth. However, no eye can now distinguish
betwixt the ashes of Giants, and dust of dwarfs, death having long since
levelled all alike in the grave.

16. Such remarkable places as remain in this Tribe, will easily be found out,
if we follow the stream of Jordan, and such rivolets as pay tribute thereunto.
Jordan having newly recovered himself out of the waters of Merom into a
competent channel, receives from the east Vide Tabulas Mercatoris.
Hermon a small brook running by Golan, a Deuteronomy. 4. 43. and Josh. 20.
Levites City of refuge, (whence the neighboring country in Josephus called
Gaulonitis) and after Jordan falls betwixt Capernaum and Chorazin into the
sea of Galilee. This Chorazin was the place where Christ's miracles and
preaching were sown so thick; and where the peoples thankfulness for the one,
and practice of the other, came up so thin, that it caused that curse, Mat. 11.
21.
Woe be to thee Chorazin etc. A woe, which at this day has wasted it from a
populous city to a ruinous village. As for their conceit, that Antichrist Vide
Adrichomium in Manasse tit. C.
should be born in Chorazin, I take it to be a mere Monkish device, to divert
men's eyes, from seeking him in the right place where he is to be found.

17. More southward the brook Cherith (having viewed at some distance Josh.
21. 27.
Beeshterah, afterward called Bosrah, a city of the Levites; called also 1
Chr. 6. 71.
Ashtaroth; And it is questionable, whether this, or Ashtaroth-Carnaim (whereof
formerly) were the Metropolis of Og King of Bashan) runs into the Sea of
Galilee. By the banks hereof the Ravens brought Eliah 1 King. 17. 3. 5, 6.
bread and flesh in the morning and evening, and he drank of the river. It
seems Dinners are but innovations; whilst break-fasts, and suppers are men's
most ancient and natural meals. Here Eliah having the sub^^ance of
sustenance, cared not for the ceremony of a Table, or complement of a Carpet.
How little will preserve life, but how much must maintain luxury! After a while
this River dried up. Collect not thence that the brook was inconsiderably
little, but that the drought had been extraordinarily long. 1 King. 17. 7.


18. As for the cities of Hippus, Iulias, and Gamala, whereof as deep silence
in Scripture, as frequent mention in Josephus, it is enough to name them. In
the last of these Iud Ant. lib. 18. cap. 1.
Josephus reports Judas of Galilee to be born, that grand impostor, who Act. 5.
37.
in the days of the taxing pretended himself the Champion of popular liberty,
to protect them from such unreasonable payments. Multitudes of men flocked
after him; for, spare their purses, and win the hearts of the Vulgar. But Judas
having go^ten power, fell a pillaging all people, taking from them the whole
griest of their estate, so to save the owners from paying toll unto Caesar. How
smooth and tender are the gums of Infant-treason, but oh how sharp are the
teeth thereof when once grown to full greatness! However, he and his followers
came afterward unto confusion, and is the second instance alleged by Gamaliel
to prove, that Act. 5. 38.
counsels which are not of God will come to naught. 1 King. 4. 13.
The Son of Geber was Solomon's purveyer in this half Tribe of Manasseh.

19. The Arms assigned to Joseph are, a tree proper growing by a Well, founded
on the words of Jacob Genesis 49. 22. David may seem hence to have borrowed his
Simile of a blessed man, Psalm. 1. 3.
He shall be like a tree planted by the waters side. But Joseph had more, not
only a Well before to refresh, but a wall behind to support him, and his
boughs (may Heralds word it in their own language) grew over the wall. Partly
foretelling the fruitfulness of Joseph's posterity, and partly pointing at the
particular posision of his inheritance. For, as some think, Jordan was the wall
on the east of the Land of Canaan properly so called; and the children of
Joseph having their root planted, and main body growing on the other side of
the river, spread their branches over this wall, half Manasseh having his
portion on the east side of Jordan. To conclude, though those Arms did
generally belong to the whole house of Joseph, yet custom has appropriated
them to Manasseh alone: other Ensigns being assigned to Ephraim, whereof God
willing hereafter.

Here the Map of Naphtali is to be inserted.
THE TRIBE OF NAPHTALI. CHAP. 4.
1. NAphtali Son of Jacob by Bildah his Concubine was multiplied during the
abode of his posterity in Egypt, to fifty and three thousand Numb. 1. 43. and
2. 30.
four hundred. All which dying in the desert, their Sons being forty five
thousand four Number. 26. 50.
hundred entered the Land of Canaan. A Tribe acquitting it self considerable in
relation to the rest, though we meet but with two, or rather but with one and a
half Glories thereof. The former Judge. 4. 6.
Barak the son of Abinoham, who (acted by Deborah) did act so valiantly against
Sisera. The half-one Hiram (a 1 King. 7. 14.
Naphtalite though his See the description of Da^. 1. part.
Father was a man of Tire) that curious Artificer in Solomon's Temple. Other
eminent persons (though unknown) doubtless were of this Tribe, for in their
martial addresses to David in Hebron, none appeared in more excellent equipage
for number and warlike accoutrements: 1 Chr. 12. 34.
And of Naphtali a thousand Captains, and with them with shield and spear,
thirty and seven thousand.

2. This Tribe bordered (plainly intimated though not expressed in the bounding
thereof) on mount Libanus on the north, Josh. 19. 34.
and reaches (as is plainly expressed) to Zebulun on the south side, and to
Asher on the west side, and to Judah upon Jordan toward the Sunrising. True
this must needs be, for Truth has said it; the last words present us with a
seeming impossibility. For how long an arm must Naphtali make to reach to
Judah, over the Tribes of Zebulun, Issachar, Manasses, Ephraim, and Benjamin
interposed, Naphtali being distanced about an hundred miles from Judah? Here
some Commentators being not able to quell, never raise this objection: a
commendable discretion in them, if unconcerned to meddle therewith; but seeing
they profess their calling to be a satisfaction of difficulties, it is in them
an unexcusable laziness. But let us hear what the learned resolve in this case.

1 Tremel. in loca praedict.
Some fancy a small Lace of land (or rather a thread for the narrowness
thereof) whereby (though invisible in Maps) Naphtali is tied unto Judah. 2
Mas^n Josh. 19. 34. Nic. Scra^^. in (...). Quaest nona.
Others, that Naphtali reaches to Judah upon Jordan, not immediately in
confines, but mediately by commerce; because the river Jordan runs thence
unto Judah, and so they had the convenience of Traffic into that Tribe. 3
Others more likely, that Naphtali reached to M. Arthur Iackson. in locu^.
Judah on Jordan; because Judah as a Tribe in chief had the Royalty of the
river Jordan, as fishing, fowling, and perchance the impost on all vessels,
sailing from the fountain to the fall thereof. 4 Let me cast my Mite into this
Treasury. What if this Judah was but the name of a town or village, and
therefore that addition, Judah upon Jordan, given for distinction sake?
However Masius no less learned, then modest, pleases me with this resolution.
In rebus tanta vetustate obliteratis, and quae explorate percipi nulla jam
ratione possunt, satius est non multa dicere, quam incertissima pro veris
absque ulla dubitatione afferre. Such difficulties were not casually scattered,
but purposely placed to improve our industry, and teach us humility. For the
best answer man's wit can produce, is no salve to the Text, which of it self is
whole and entire, but a plaster only to our own craized understandings.

3. For the fruitfulness of this country, hear what Moses prophecyeth. Deuteronomy.
33. 23.
O Naphtali satisfied with favor, and full with the blessing of the Lord. See
also what was performed. For the land about Laish, which was in the confines of
this Tribe is thus charactered, Judge. 18. 10.
A place where there is no want of any thing that is in the Earth. Ios. de
bell. Judah. li. 3. (...).
Josephus being almost this Countryman, says, (...): One may call this
Country the Ambition of nature. Strabo Lib. 16. in Syria. pa. 755.
a Pagan gives it the Epithets of (...), A well natured land and bearing all
commodities. But the best fruit it bare was our Savior himself: by his
corporal presence much conversant here; this Tribe being the Theater whereon
his most remarkable Miracles were acted.

4. From the foot of Libanus to the sea of Galilee may be allowed thirty five
miles. Equal whereunto, by the favor of Jordan running crooked, (though
northernly more narrow) is the breadth thereof, from east to west. In the time
of our Savior this Tribe was parcel of two Tetrarchies. The north-east part
thereof, belonged to Iturea. The Virgill.
Poet takes notice of the plenty of Yew in this Province. -- Itureos taxi
torquentur in arcus.
Yew which in Iturea grows
Is neately bended into Bows.
Hence their inhabitants became excellent Archers: and pity it was, rhat their
arrows were so often shot at a wrong mark, to kill and rob passengers in their
journey. Strabo calls the Itureans generally (...), and their Country in some
sort may seem accessory to their felonies (the Receiver is bad as a thief)
which, as the foresaid Author observes, in her caves, woods, and inaccessible
mountains protected those Robbers from justice proceeding against them.
Insomuch that the Romans were fain to keep Soldiers in Garrison against them
(but who kept any against the soldiers?) So that betwixt both, Iturea at that
time may be conceived sufficiently miserable.

5. The south-west of Naphtali was accounted part of Galilee the upper,
otherwise called Galilee of the Gentiles, because, as some conceive, the people
therein were commixed with heathens, and (being far from Jerusalem) were more
drossie Jews then the rest. Which is a most erroneous opinion. For how
improbable is it, that our Savior, who sending his Disciples to preach gave
them instructions, Mat. 10. 5.
Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans
enter ye not, and himself never stayed in Samaria, save as he took it in his
necessary passage in or from Joh. 4. 4.
Judea; should choose Galilee, if so debased with the mixture of Gentiles, for
the place of his principal and constant residence? Far more true is it that it
was called Galilaea Gentium, that is, Galilee the populous, because of the
multitudes of people, especially near the sea, wherein was Decapolis (a member
of Galilee.) And there one city, for want of room, may seem to tread on another.

6. Before we come to the particular description of this Tribe, we will first
dispatch out of the way, nine limitary Towns (which accordingly are figured in
the Map) and this will much facilitate our proceeding in the rest.

1 Heleph, Josh. 19. 33, 34.
in the northern bounds of this Tribe, from which the eastern coasts thereof
southwardly are described. 2 Allon, that is in English, oak (as Oakeham in
Rutland) so named from plenty of those trees growing therein. 3 Zaanaim. Note
that Tremellius makes these two latter, but one entire place, reading it the
Oake-wood of Zaanaim. 4 Adami. Which as Ruthland in Flint-shire, probably was
so named from the redness of the earth. 5 Nekeb: this is a ditch, where we may
conceive Jordan was let out for the more convenient watering of other ground.
And have we not more then twenty Dittons or Ditch-tons on the same occasion in
England? 6 Iabneel: different from one of the same name in the Tribe of Dan. 7
Lakum. 8 Aznoth-Tabor. 9 Hukkok.
We are not bound to believe all these nine to have been Cities of considerable
strength, or greatness, as not so note-worthy in themselves as in their
situation. Because (though perchance otherwise poor villages) they stood in the
borders of this Tribe. Thus low shrubs growing on high hills, or crooked
thorn-trees set by the highway side, are more conspicuous in the eye, and
frequent in the mouths of travelers, then streighter and fairer trees which
are obscure in the midst of the wood.

7. To come to the particular description thereof; Amongst the mountains of
Libanus, we meet with one of eminent note, not only having a name peculiar to
it self, but which from it has also denominated the adjacent Country. This is
mount Paneas, wherein there is a deep hole or cave. And though places of this
kind commonly have more horror then pleasure in them, this, besides its
natural beauty, was adorned with artificial structures in, and about it.
Herein also was an unsoundable spring of water, conceived by some to be the
primitive fountain of Jordan. Yet Ios. de bell. Judah. li. 3. (...).
Josephus tells us of Phiala, a spring above two hundred furlongs off (and
therefore out of the bounds of this Tribe) into which Philip the Tetrarch cast
cha^^e to try the experiment, and it was rendered up again in the stream of
Jordan. Whence he concluded, that this river entertained an underground
intelligence with that fountain. But we are not to take notice where rivers are
secretly conceived, but where they are visibly born: and therefore date the
original thereof from the apparent heads of Ior and Dan: which keeping
themselves sole and single for a short time, are soon wedded together. And from
the confluence of their names and streams, Jordan is begotten.

8. To pass by Scripture commendations, it is called by S^lin. Polyhist. cap.
35.
^olinus, eximiae suavitatis amnis, a river of excellent sweetness. But as if
Rivers, as well as Men, were too prone to be proud of their good properties, it
is very subject to Josh. 3. 15. Ier. 12. 5. and 49. 19. etc.
overswell the banks; in which notion perhaps, it is also called by the
aforesaid Solinus, Ambitiosus amnis, an haughty and ambitious river. But what
says the Zach. 11. 3.
Prophet? The pride of Jordan is spoiled: namely, in some extraordinary drought
(and thence dearth) which he there foretells. To keep the golden mean; As
Jordan sometimes must be acknowledged to mount too high, so Naaman depressed it
too low in his valuation: whose ignorance and passion preferred 2 King. 5. 12.
Abana and Pharphar, the rivers of Damascus, before it.

9. At the aforesaid confluence stands the famous city of Laish, which at first
it seems was a free State, living in subjection to none, and yet in slavery to
their own intemperance. They were Judge. 18. 28.
far from the Zidonians, that is, as Sir Walter Rawleigh Hist. World.
one measures it, about thirty miles: half that distance being too much to
receive thence seasonable succor in their sudden surprise by the Danites. In
taking which town, the Deuteronomy. 33. 22.
prophecy of Moses was fulfilled, Dan is a Lions whelp he shall leap from
Bashan. It seems that the Danites came on the east side of the City, and might
for a time secretly repose themselves in Bashan. Whence, on a sudden,
Lion-like (saliant in his Posture, when he seizes on his prey) they leaped on
the city, and were felt being on them before seen coming toward them. The City
was afterward called Dan, and the Danites possessed a tract or territory of
ground, which otherwise seems to lie within the Tribe of Naphtali, but was not
possessed by them.

10. But as we must praise the prowess and policy, so we detest the Idolatry
of these Danites, who hither brought, and here erected, the graven Image stolen
from Judge. 18. 30.
Micah, worshipping it until the day of the captivity of the land: that is, as
Vid. ejus annot. in loc. praedict.
Tremellius well expounds it, till the Ark was taken captive and restored,
when there followed a general reformation in the days of Samuel. This place
Judge. 7. 4.
then purged, was not long after defiled again with the same sin. For here
Jeroboam set up one of his golden Calves, 1 King. 12. 29. and 13. 33.
making Priests of the meanest of the people. And although where a Calfe is the
God, a wispe of Hay is good enough to be the Priest, yet heinous was the
offense, because done by Jeroboam in the disgrace of Religion. The erection of
these Calves was pretended for the ease of the people of Israel, to spare their
tedious travel thrice a year to Jerusalem; but in effect occasioned that they
were sent a longer journey on a worse errant, even into irrecoverable
captivity. Thus to spare a step in the path of piety, is to spend many in the
ready road to misery.

11. In the time of our Savior, this Dan was called Cesarea-Philippi, built in
honor of Tiberius Caesar by Philip the Tetrarch. Who in so nameing it, as wise
to remember himself, was also mannerly to prefer the Emperor. This Philip
being Tetrarch of Luke 3. 1.
Iturea, and Trachonitis, made this Cesarea (as conveniently seated betwixt
both) the place of his principal residence. Near this Mar. 16. 13. and Man.
8. 27.
place, Peter gave Christ that excellent testimony, of his being the Son of
God. As for the two statues of melted brass which here are said to be set up
by that woman, whose Flux of blood Christ cured, the one resembling our
Savior, the other her self, in humble posture touching the hem of his garment,
I had rather the Reader receive it from the Eusebius. hist. eccles. lib. 7. cap.
14. and Niceph. hist. eccles. lib. 6. cap. 15.
Authors themselves, then my relation. Chiefly because it seems improbable,
that she, who so lately had Mar. 5. 26. and Luke 8. 43.
sepent all her substance upon Physicians, should so quickly recrute her self,
as to be able to go to the cost of such a Monument.

12. Leaving now the territory of Dan, we enter on Naphtali; and Jordan running
hence, after some miles expatiateth it self into the waters of Merom or the
Samoc^onite-lake. This was a Sea in winter, and in Summer a thicket of reeds,
affording shelter to Lions, and Wolves, and (which now a days are more
dangerous to travelers, then either) wild Arabians. Behold (says the Ier. 50.
44.
Prophet) He shall come up like a Lion from the swelling of Jordan, that is,
most fierce and furious; who having lodged there quietly all summer in the
shade, is vexed to be rouzed by the rising of the waters in winter: and,
therefore is ready to revenge this wrong on the next object he meets. Near
these waters, Joshua gave that famous overthrow to Josh. 11. 1. 4, 5
Iabin senior King of the Canaanites pursuing the chase as far as Zidon. On the
west of this lake, where Daphnis a rivolet falls into it, they place Riblah,
accounted a terrestrial Paradise, for the sweet situation thereof. But grant
it pleasant in it self, it was a sad place to King 2 King. 22. 6.
Zed^kiah, who having first beheld the slaughter of his Sons, had here his own
eyes bored out. Thus man's tyranny accomplisheth Gods justice, whilst Zedekiah
had now leisure enough to bethink himself how he deserved this punishment, who
indevored to put out the eyes of Israel, by persecuting the Prophets, and Ier.
38. 5, 6.
imprisoning the Seers thereof. Afterward, Jordan recovering it self out of
the lake, and contented with a competent stream, is passable at the ford of
Jacob, so called because tradition reports that Patriarch there to have Genesis
32. 10.
gone over this river with the company of God and his staff. At this day there
is a Biddulph's T^av.
beautiful bridge built over, retaining the name of Jacobs bridge, kept in
excellent repair (as being the highway betwixt Damascus and Jerusalem.) And
well may the Turks afford it, seeing the unconscionable toll, which they
extort of Christian passengers for Caphar or custom, will serve almost to
build all the arches thereof with silver.

13. Here let us hold a while, and desiring to please all palats, let us temper
the harshness of old matters, with the mixture of a modern passage. If the
Reader should ever travel this way from Damascus to Jerusalem and so into
Egypt, he may repose himself for a night in the Cave east of this bridge, on
the other side Jordan. A Cave is a public building erected by some devout Turk
in nature of an Inn, for the benefit of travelers, of more or less receipt
and convenience according to the bounty or fancy of the founder. But here the
guest must be his own host to entertain himself, seeing generally nothing but a
bare lodging and water, is provided for him. And though we pity the Readers bad
lodging this night, where (if not bringing better accommodations with him) he
and his Camel must be bedfellowes in straw; yet we promise him next day a
pleasant way and handsome entertainment. For about seven miles off he shall
pass by Cave Joseph, where a Well will be showed him full of Biddulph's trav.
p. 103.
water, and adorned with marble Pillars, which common tradition avoucheth to be
the pit wherein Joseph was put, and a learned (...) elucidat. Te^. sanc. lib.
7. cap. 10.
Friar very zealously stickleth for the truth thereof, though indeed the story
is confuted both by the distance and nature of the place. For it is sixty miles
from Dothan near Genesis 37. 13. 17.
Sechem, where Joseph's brethren kept their sheep. Besides, that pit had no
moisture in it (save what fell from the eyes of Joseph) whereas this is full of
water, so that Joseph's dreams* had been but dreams if put therein. But it is as
good as a bait to tired travelers (whose credulity is swifter then the Camels
they ride on) to be refreshed in the way with such relations. Some twelve miles
off, the reader may lodge in a convenient Cave called Minium by the Moors, but
by the Turks B^ddu^ph. ut p^tus.
Missia: and if early up next morning, may, going south-westward, before noon
enter the Tribe of Zebulun. Where we may in due time overtake him, and
hereafter give him larger direction for his travel.

14. From Jacobs bridge the river Jordan sees nothing memorable besides rich
meddows and pleasant pastures, until he falls into the sea of Cinnereth, so
called (say some) because in form not unlike a Hen. Bunt^u. Trav. of C^hrist.
pa. 446. Kinnor in Hebrew a harp.
harp: as indeed an active fancy in point of resemblance will fashion any thing
to any thing. How well the similitude suits, the Reader will best judge when
hereafter he shall behold the entire proportion of this Sea in the Tribe of
Zebul^^, where he may feed his fill on the dimensions and several names
thereof; till which time to stay his stomach, we here present him with such a
parcel of this sea-lake, as falls to the share of Naphtali. At the influxe of
Jordan into this Sea, stood the once famous City of Capernaum, called Christ's
Mat. 9. 1. compared with Mar. 2. 1.
own City. Note by the way, Christ had three Cities which may be called his own
(if seven contended for Homer, well may three be allowed to Christ) Bethlehem
where he was born, Nazareth where conceived and bred, and Capernaum where Mat.
4. 13.
he dwelt, more then probably in the house of Simon Peter though born in
Bethlehem.

15. This Capernaum was the Magazine of Christ's Miracles. Here was healed the
servant of that good Mat. 8. 5.
Centurion: who though a Gentile outfaithed Israel it self, concluding from his
own authority over his Soldiers, that Christ by a more absolute power, as Lord
high Marshall of all maladies, without his personal presence, could by his
bare word of command, order any disease to march or retreat at his pleasure.
Here Simon Peter's wives mother was cured of a Mat. 8. 14.
Fever, and Mark. 2. 1.
here such as brought the man sick of the Palsy, not finding a door on the
floor, made one on the Roof (Love will creep, but Faith will climb where it
cannot go) let him down with cords, his bed bringing him in, which presently
he carried out being perfectly cured. Mat. 9. 18. and Mark 5. 22.
Here also Christ restored the daughter of Iairus to life, and in the way as he
went (each Parenthesis of our Saviors motion is full of heavenly matter, and
his obiter more to the purpose, then our iter) he cured the Woman of her flux
of blood, with the touch of his garment. But amongst all these and more
wonders, the greatest was the ingratitude of the people of Capernaum, justly
occasioning our Saviors sad prediction, And Mat. 11. 23.
thou Capernaum which art exalted to heaven shall be brought down to hell; for
if the mighty works which have been done in thee, had been done in Tire and
S^don, they would have repented long ^goe in sackecloth and ashes. O sad
strapado of the soul, to be hoised up so high, and then cast down suddenly so
low, enough to disjoint all the powers thereof in pieces! ^. Hieron. de loc.
Hebr.
Capernaum at this day is a poor village scarce consisting of seven fishermens
Cottages.

16. Some furlongs westward from this City stood the Receipt of custom,
whence Matthew was Mat. 9. 9. and Mar. 2. 14.
called from a Publican to be an Apostle. In Capernaum afterward the Mat. 17.
24.
Toll-gatherers did civilly demand of Peter, Does not your Master pay tribute?
It being questionable in point of law, whether Christ were legally liable to
such payments. And let us inquire whence the doubt did arise.

Was it because he 1 Being a Physician, (such persons of public employment for
general good were often exempted from taxes) who gave his pains gratis to
others, it was but equal he should be privileged from such pecuniary burdens?
2 Being poor, was under value in the Excise-book? And where nothing is to be
had the Emperor must lose his right. Yea generally Alms folk who live on the
charity of others (such the condition of our Luke 8. 3.
Savior) are not to be rated. 3 Being an inmate or under-tenant in the house
of Peter, the question was, whether Peter or Christ was to pay the taxation?


This last is most probable. For our Savior taking order for the discharging
of the debt, Give the money (says he to St. Peter) unto them Mat. 17. 27.
for me and thee. As rates in London are divided betwixt Landlord and Tenant.
Hence Peter was sent to sea, where a fish, which probably had plundered a piece
of money out of the Pocket of some shipwracked fisherman, lost his life for the
fact, and the felons goods found in him were justly forfeited to Christ, Lord
Paramount both of sea and soil.

17. Going forward along the shore, some will be so positive as to point at
the place where after his resurrection, Christ took his repast with his
Disciples on bread and broiled fish; yet we find no express mention of his
drinking after he rose from the grave; and that, as some will have it, either
in reference to his promise to his Disciples, Mat. 26. 29.
I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine until that day, when I
drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom. Or because (though accepting of
meat out of voluntary conformity) yet he refrained from moisture, to manifest
himself, though no less then a true, yet much more then a mere man: but this we
leave with the Authors.

18. Some miles hence toward the north is a mountain of a moderate ascent and
pleasant prospect, generally known by the name of Christ's mountain. Here our
Savior made that excellent Sermon in the mount, which was the key of the Old
Law. And here he chose his twelve Disciples, frequently repairing hither, when
he affected retiredness. Here also (...). ca. 63. Concordance.
learned men on good likelihood (Scripture being silent of the particular
place) conceive the miracle of loaves multiplied wrought by our Savior. And to
avoid confusion, we must carefully observe that this was twice wrought. Place.
Guests. Meat. Fragments: Gospels. A desert nigh Tiberias 5000 men. 5 loaves,
two fishes 12 baskets full Mat. 14. 20 Mar. 6. 43. Lu. 9. 16. 10. 6. 23 Christ's
mountai^^ 4000 men 7 loaves a few little fishes 7 baskets full. Mat. 17. 37. Mark
8. 1.

Behold in the latter though the meat was the more, and the mouths fewer, yet
fewer fragments did remain. And good reason that our Savior in working of
miracles, should observe no other proportion then his own pleasure.

19. Following still the Sea shore and going westward, we light on the City
Josh. 19. 35.
Cinnereth, which some conceive gave the name to the lake adjoining, and also
to the land thereabouts. For when Benhadad in favor to King Asa, to remove
Baasha from besieging Ramah, inroded Israel, he smote 1 Kin. 15. 20. John 12.
21.
all Cinneroth, with all the land of Naphtali. Some five miles westward we meet
with Bethsaida of Galilee, in English a ^r sishing house rather, be^aus^ on the
lake; this word (...) will bear both.
hunting house. Nor is it unlikely, that at first it was a Mansion merely made
for recreation, the neighboring Desert (frequently visited by our Savior when
desiring privacy) affording the pleasure of the Game. From a house it grew to
be a village, so called by Saint Mark, and thence proceeded to be a City so
graced in other Luke 9. 10. Ioh. 1. 44.
Gospells. Nor need learned men so trouble themselves about the difference,
seeing in a short time (Hague in Holland may be an instance) a great town with
addition of walls, may at pleasure commence a small City. It was the John 1. 44.
native place of Peter, Andrew and Philip, and another staple City of Christ's
miracles, whose ingratitude forced our Saviors expression, Woe unto thee
Chorazin, woe unto thee Mat. 11. 21.
Bethsaida etc.

20. In the confines of Bethsaida Christ by the hand led forth a blind man out
of the town, spat on his eyes, so restoring him to a confused and imperfect
sight to see men walking as Mar. 8. 25.
trees, (well might his spittle give half sight, whose Genesis 2. 7.
breath gave man whole life at the Creation) and then putting his hands upon
his eyes completely cured him. But how came it to pass that he, who other
whiles healed at distance by the Proxy of his word, Subveniens prius quam
veniens, curing before coming to his Patients, should here be so long, not to
say tedious, in working a miracle? Even so Savior, because it pleased thee.
Let us not raise cavills where we should rather return thanks, seeing Christ,
that our dull meditations might keep pace with his actions, did not only go
slowly on set purpose, but even stayed in the mid way of a miracle, doing it
first by halves, that our conceptions might the better overtake him.

21. To clear this Corner before we go hence: north-east of Bethsaida, on a
tridented mountain stands Saphetta, two parts whereof are inhabited by the
Turks, and one by the Jews, and is at this day a very considerable Place. Here
the Jews live in the greatest liberty (or rather in the least slavery) of any
place under heaven: having some tolerable Privileges allowed them by the Turk.
So that they who get wealth enough elsewhere, here seem to have some show of a
commonwealth. Yea here there is a Biddulph trav. pa. 105.
University of Jews. And though commonly that Nation count their children to
have learning enough, if able to cheat Christians in their bargains, here they
give them studious education: and the pure Hebrew tongue (as also at
Thessalonica, now Salonichi in Greece) is here usually spoken, but
industriously acquired, the Jews being neithe^ born to foot of land nor word of
language then what they purchase by their pains. What shall we say if this
little place be left still to keep possession, as an earnest that God in due
time upon their conversion may possibly restore the whole country unto them?

22. Three Cities follow southwest, Naphtali, a city properly so called; Thisbe
different from the native place of Eliah; and Naasson; all their credits
depending on the two first verses of the book of Tobit. Now as Comoedians,
though often they adorn their interludes with fancies and fictions; yet are
very careful always to lay their scene right, in a true place, which is
eminently and notoriously known: so grant the book of Tobit guilty of
improbabilities and untruths, surely the author thereof would be punctual in
describing the place, past possibility of confutation. Yet since the same book
presents us with the pedigree of the Angel Raphael, with Tobit 5. 12.
Ananias the great his Father, and Tobit 5. 13.
Sammajas his grandfather, contrary to our Saviors character, that they
neither Mat. 22. 30.
marry, nor are given in marriage, and so by consequence can neither get, nor
can be begotten; we may as justly suspect his Geography, as Genealogy, and
conceive him false in the position of towns, who is fabulous in the extraction
of Angels. And if Naphtali and Thisbe pass for real places, yet not only
doubtful, but desperate is the case of the City Naasson, not being founded on
the rock of the Greek text, where no such town appears, but on the quick-sand
of the erroneous Vulgar Latin translation.

23. Having thus surveyed the east and south parts of this Tribe, lest the
other coasts thereof should justly complain of neglect, we return to mount
Libanus to give an account of the remainder. In this Map, though not in this
Tribe (no trespass I hope to look over the hedge) behold Heliopolis, in
English, the City of the Sun. But how well it brooks the name, they can best
tell, Sir Walter Rawleigh hist. World. lib. 2. 1 part. pa. 290.
who of certain report, that the height of the mountains adjoining shadow it
from the Sun the better half of the day. Was it therefore by the same figure,
that the mountains are so called from moving, that Heliopolis got this name? Or
because the Sun (as all other Blessings are valued) is most worshipped, where
it is most wanted. Not far hence, the river Cant. 4. 15.
Fons hortorum Libani, or the fountain of the gardens of Libanus, (with which
the banks thereof on either side are enamelled) fetches his original; running
thence by Hamah, afterward called Epiphania, often mentioned in Scripture.
Thus far came the twelve Number. 13. 22.
spies, sent to search the land; and this place passes in Number. 34. 8. and
Josh. 13. 5. and Iud. 3. 3.
Scripture from the entering of Hamah for the northern Boundary of the land of
Israel, not only before the expression of Dan came into request, but also long
after the Ezekiel. 47. 20.
mention thereof in holy Writ was disused. We shall in due place speak, as of
Hamah the great, so named by the Amos. 6. ^.
Prophet, (since called Antiochia in Coelosyria, and by vulgar unskilfulness
often confounded with this Hamah in Naphtali) so also of 2 King. 17. 30.
Ashimah, the topicall or peculiar Idol of this place.

24. Hence that river runs by Hazor, anciently the Iost. 11. 10.
Metropolis of the Canaanites, where very many of their Kings met together
against Joshua, to his great advantage. Had he sought them in their several
Cities, to what expense of time and pains would it have amounted? Whereas now
their malice did his work, all of them meeting together, having but one neck in
effect, which here they tendered to the Axe of divine justice. Hazor by Joshua
was burnt, and more then an hundred years after was probably reedified by Iabin
the Second, into whose hand God is said to have sold his people. Not far off
this river of Gardens leaves Naphtali, and vis^teth the Tribe of Asher.

25. But before we leave the river, let this memorandum be entered, that
Adricho. in theat. Ter. sanc. in Naphta.
some hold this is the same with the Sabbatariam river mentioned in Not. hist.
lib. ^^. cap. 2.
Pliny; which is said to run six days, and lie still the seventh, whence it
gained the name. Were this true; as Solomon sent the sluggard to the Prove. 6. 6.
Pismire to learn industry, well might profane persons be remitted to this
river, thereby to be instructed in the Sabbaths due observation. But most
listen to it, as to a fable, and the Hurlers in Cornwall (men Camb. Brit. in
Cornwall.
metamorphosed into stones, as tradition reports, for playing on the Lords day)
may fitly serve to build a bridge over this river. It much shakes the credit of
this report, because Ios. de b^ll. Judah. ^^. 7. c. 24. in latin and ca. 13. in
gre^k.
Josephus relates it clean contrary, namely that this river lies still six
days, and only runs the seventh: adding how Titus the Emperor going from Jury
to Antioch took a journey by the way to behold the same. But indeed learned
Ex^r^. 15. Diat^. 20. advers. Baronium.
Casaubon not only observes herein the Copies of Josephus to be corrupted,
but also gives his advice for the amendment of the same. So that by right
pointing his words, and some other small alteration, Josephus and Pliny, may be
made to agree. However modern travelers bring us no intelligence of such
alternation or intermitting course of any river hereabouts, and some perchance
will be ready to say, that since the Jewish Sabbath has been swallowed up in
the Christians Lords day, this river has discontinued his former custom, lest
what anciently was ceremonious, be now adays censured for superstitious.

26. Let us now traverse this tribe southeast: where we c^not miss Abel a City,
sometimes single, sometimes double represented unto us, namely 1t. 2 Samuel 20.
15.
Abel of Bethmaacah; as if the former were but parcel of the latter. 2ly. 2 Samuel 20. 14
Abel and Bethmaacah; as if different, but bordering Cities. 3ly. 2 King. 15.
29.
Abel-Bethmaacah; as if both made up one and the same place.


In this City, Sheba the rebel, pursued by Ioab and his own guiltiness, took
covert, so that the storm of a furious assault was ready to fall upon it, when
the breath of a wise woman blew it clear away, who so ordered it, that 2 Samuel
20. 22
Sheba's head was cast over the wall See how his head, which thought to turn
all Israel upside down, when whirled in the air, was tossed and tumbled about.
And pity it is any bullets should be shot into that city, which would cast such
fireballs out of it. We know the wicked man's, not the wise woman's name, and yet
when his vertueless name shall rot, her nameless virtue shall remain. But Abel
wanted such another wise woman to protect it, when furiously 1 King. 15. 20
taken by Be^^hadad, and at last finally destroyed by 2 King. 15. 29
Tiglath-Pilesar.

27. But in the very midst of this Tribe the Judge. 4. 11.
oake-trees of Zahanaim fair and far spread themselves: For Tremellius reads it
Quercetum Zahanaim, The oake-tree place of Zahanaim, where our translations
render it the plain of Zahanaim. A difference not so great but that our age can
accommodate, which being wastfull in woods has expounded into plains, many
places which formerly were dark with the thickest oake-trees. Here Iael the
wife of Heber the Kenite dwelt in her tent, whither Sisera (who went forth with
nine hundred charets, but was glad to come home on two legs) fled for security,
having quitted his chariot. Not that he thought himself swifter, but safer
without it; seeing his chariot which in fight was the strength to cover, in
flight was the mark to discover him. And here Iael with a hammer and nail
dispatched him, for which she was blessed by Deborah.

28. The mention of her blessing minds us of the curse of Meroz, and
consequently to inquire, where the same was seated. Well may we look for it in
any Tribe, which we find in no Tribe. Yea learned men do so differ in their
verdict, that some will have Meroz to be, 1 The Devil himself, as In his not^s
on Judge. 5. 23.
Nicholas Lyra, whose opinion is rejected and refuted by all that mention it. 2
A potent Magell. in textum.
Person in these parts having many Tenants and Reteiners. 3 A Country full of
populous inhabitants. 4 A Pet Martyr. S^^rar. and major pars comment.
City near the place where the battle against Sisera was fought Grant the last
as most probable, new Quaere's are engendered; whether a City of Caananites or
Israelites; and where to be placed. For the exact position whereof we refer the
reader to those our learned Divines, which in these unhappy dissensions have
made that Judge. 5. 23.
Text so often the subject of their Sermons. We have placed it in this tribe
not far from Kedesh, whence Barak first went forth with his men, in the place
where Mercators Maps have a city called Meroth (a rush-candle is better then no
light) our only motive for the situation thereof. Mean time consider, that as
the Disciples observed that the figtree cursed by our Mat. 21. 20.
Savior, was in their return withered away; so this city after Deborah's
execration so dwindled by degrees, that nothing is left of Meroz, but Meroz,
nothing surviving of the thing but the name. Which name, let the reader behold
in our Map as the mast of that ship, whose keel is swallowed up in the
quicksands. A Sea-mark to all posterity to beware, and not to be negligent when
they are called to be auxiliaries to Gods cause in distress.

29. And now our hand is in about conjecturall places, we must not forget Madon
once a royal city, Josh. 12. 19.
certainly hereabouts, because, Josh. 11. 1.
Iobab the King thereof, was conquered by Joshua at the waters of Merom, though
all our industry cannot discover the particular position thereof. Happy our
condition that in things concerning salvation we have Christ's gracious promise,
Mat. 7. 7.
Seek and ye shall find, though in these meaner matters our search often
wants success. We are bold to place it near Dan one of the fountains of
Jordan, the rather because 1 I^^n. (...). 2.
Brocard finds a place thereabouts called Medan by the Turks at this day.
Where I pray let it stand till better information, for rather then with
Adrichomius we should leave it out of our Maps, it is better to put it under
any penthouse, then quite shut it out of doors. Let Dan-javan, 2 Samuel 24. 6.
the third station where Ioab pitched his tent when he numbered the people, be
joined unto it.

30. To return to the place where Meroz is set, with far more certainty we
place Judge. 4. 2.
Harrosheth of the Gentiles, the native City of Sisera. But if the reader
should chance to overlook the low situation thereof, he cannot oversee Kedesh
Naphtali the habitation of Judge. 4. 6.
Barak, and a city of refuge belonging to the Levites; for observable it is
that all the cities of refuge on this side Jordan were advantaged on very high
foundations. And they Josh. 20. 7.
appointed K^desh in Galilee in mount Naphtali, and Sechem in mount Ephraim,
and Kirjath-arba (which is Hebron) in the mountain of Judah. Whether because
those towns were to typifie Christ himself, who like the brazen Serpent was to
be listed up, or to comfort the flying and fainting offender, whose eyes were
at his journeys end long before his feet, which could not but much revive his
spirits. Say not, that it damped them again when his tired legs after a long
and tedious journey must at last ^limb up a steep mountain to the city of
refuge: For (as has been observed See the description of Kedemoth in the Tribe
of Reuben.
before) if the offender got but within the verge of the suburbs on either side
of the city, he was secured from the Avenger of blood.

31. Kedesh was attended on each side with two smaller cities, Bethshemesh on
the west, Beth-anath on the southeast, both assigned to, yet neither possessed
by the Naphtalites, because the Judge. 1. 33.
Canaanites though tributaries dwelt therein. Much is pretended in the excuse
of the Israelites why generally they drove not these heathens out of their
Country.

1 None can act above their strength, and they were not able to drive out the
Canaanites. 2 Had they strength, it had been cruelty, not valor, in cold blood
to kill quiet enemies. 3 God gave them a kind of toleration being only to drive
them out by degrees. 4 Much good accrued by this remnant of Canaanites being
touchstones to prove the Jews faith to their God.
But these and many more palliations notwithstanding, unexcusable was the Jews
connivence at them contrary to Gods flat command, and the foresaid pleas of no
validity. For 1 The weakness of the Jews chiefly consisted in their want of
industry, and uniting themselves against those heathen their common enemy. 2 It
is only cruelty to a man's own soul to disobey Gods positive command. 3 What Is
to be done by degrees, is to be done. Whereas the Jews not only reprieved these
Canaanites for a time according to Gods permissio^, but finally pardoned their
lives contrary to his injunction. 4 The good accidentally accruing from the
remains of the Canaanites, argues not the innocence of the Israelites, but the
exceeding goodness of God, ordering their negligence to his own honor.
Yea the sad success showed Gods displeasure with his people herein; these
Canaanites eftsoons rouzing themselves from being couchant under tribute to be
rampant in tyranny, and the mixture of their persons infected the Israelites
with their Idolatrous practices. Nor know I any thing else considerable in this
tribe except Josh. 21. 32.
Karthan or 1 Chr. 6. 76.
Kiriathaim, a city of the Levites Gershonites, of whose posture we are not so
well assured as we could desire.

32. Ahimaaz 1 King. 4. 15.
was Solomon's Purveyer in Naphtali, and had Basmah his daughter to wife. Say
not it was poor preferment for the daughter of so mighty a Monarch to marry her
Fathers subject. For Gods law forbad, heathen matches, and hereby she might
keep a clear conscience and lead a comfortable life. Kings children too often
wed where they neither affect nor are affected, to forain Princes (strangers as
well in their lands as loves unto them) whilst here Solomon's daughter, might
have a softer Pillow, though not so sumptuous curtains in her home-marriage. By
the way observe, we find an army of Solomon's wives and concubines, and but
three scattered scouts of his children, Rehoboam, Basmah and Tashah. 1 King. 4.
11.
a son and two daughters. Multiplying wives in man's sin, children, Gods
blessing, and Solomon laid too many foundations at once, to build much
posterity upon them.

33. The usual Arms of Naphtali are Vert a Hind trippant proper according to
Genesis 49. 21.
Jacobs prediction: Naphtali is a Hind let loose; he gives goodly words. But
how this character conformes to the Tribe, learned men much disagree; In his
comments on the place.
Luther finds the analogy in Deborah, where in deed both her feminine sex is
proper, as also because she was an excellent Judge. 5. 1.
spokeswoman; all the error is, she was rather extracted from See our
description of Ephraim. Paragraph the second.
Ephraim then Naphtali.

34. Others read the resemblance in Barak, because Hindelike he was so fearful
to come out to war. But surely these blessings were give^ by prophetical Jacob
to his children as future badges of their honor, not brands of their infamy,
and therefore the similitude is to be sought not in the disgraceful but
commendable qualities of a Hind, and more probably to be fetched not from
their fear but fleetness in several performances. Besides some conceive it too
restrictive an interpretation of Jacobs blessing to confine it to any
particular (though eminent) person, which speaks rather the general
disposition of the whole Tribe, and may thus more largely be expounded Naphtali
is a Hind. No ravenous or beast of prey (cruel like the Benjamites, churlish
like the Ephraimites) but a quiet creature: intimating the Naphtalites nature
disposed to peacefulness. Let loose. Not pent within the pales of a Park, but
having room enough to range in: implying the large and spacious possessions of
this Tribe. He gives goodly words. They were men of fair speech and loving
discourse, not querulous, nor captious, but preferring friendly compliance
before brawles and contentions. The Standard of Naphtali in the Israelites
pitching about the Tabernacle, was the last in the Rear on the northside
thereof.

Here the Map of Asher is to be inserted.
THE TRIBE OF ASHER. CHAP. 5.
1. ASher youngest Son of Jacob by Zilpah his Concubine, carries blessedness
in his name, and was so prospered in his posterity, that Numb. 1. 41.
forty one thousand and five hundred were reckoned of this Tribe in the
general rendezvous at mount Sinah. All which punished in the wilderness with
death, for provoking God with their disobedience, their sons being Number. 26. 47.
fifty three thousand four hundred entered the land of promise. Many no doubt
were the eminent Grandees extracted from Asher, though we mee^ with none of
them in Scripture, save one, and that a woman in the new Testament, Luke 2. 36.
Anna the Prophetess, that property of the Temple, as constant therein as the
pillars thereof, she departed not thence but served God with fasting and prayer
night and day.

2. Asher had mount Libanus on the north, Naphtali on the east, Zebulun on the
south and southeast, the sea on the west containing welnigh forty miles in
length, the breadth not exceeding sixteen. A fruitful country, Genesis 49. 10.
Ashers bread shall be fat (so hearty as if it were bread and flesh too) and he
shall yield royal dainties. Moses foretold that he should be wetshooed in
oil, he should dip his Deuteronomy. ^3. 24.
foot therein. Adding moreover that his shoes should be iron and brass. Not
that the ground in this Tribe parched by drought proved impenetrable, and
rebellious to the commands of the plough, (as elsewhere God threatens the
disobedient Jews, Deuteronomy. 28. 23.
the earth that is under thee shall be iron) but that this land should afford
plenty of those metalls, according to the testimony of Eumaeus in Odyss^o. 425.
Homer, (...)
In Sidon I ^oast to be born where is brass in abundance.


Besides the great commodities of the sea, with the convenient havens thereof,
Debora complains that when Zebulun and Naphtali (most concerned as nearest
danger) engaged themselves against Sisera, Judge. 5. 17.
Asher continued on the Seashore, and abode in his breaches. And no wonder if
being Merchants they preferred profit before peril, especially being in a safe
place where the iron chariots of Iabin King of Canaan could not approach them.

3. The worst mischief in this Tribe was, that after the death of Joshua, the
Canaanites quartered so hard on the men of Asher, that they detained no fewer
then seven Judge. 1. 31.
great cities from them. Yea perchance something may be picked out of the
expression of the holy Spirit, for whereas the Canaanites are said to dwell
amongst those of Judge. 1. 30.
Zebulun, the Asherites (the phrase being altered) in the following verse are
said to dwell among the Canaanites, as if those pagans were the principal
Landlords (engrossing all memorable places in this Tribe to themselves)
whilst the Asherites lived amongst them as Tenants at will by the others
leave. Nor was this fully remedied until the victorious reigns of David and
Solomon.

4. In the north-west part of this Tribe near the sea side, Salt and glass
made in Asher.
we first meet with Josh. 11. 8.
Misrepothmaim, that is, the boiling of waters, though uncertain whether done
artificially by fire, or naturally by the Sun. Here great plenty of salt was
made in brine-pits, a necessary, and gainful commodity. However, Tremellius
renders Misrepothmaim fornaces vitrarias, Glass-furnaces; and we know, store
of the Plin. (...). 36. Not. hist. ca. 2^.
best sort of that brickle ware was made hereabouts. Joshua having foiled the
Kings of Canaan at the waters of Merom, pursued them thus far to the shore of
the Mediterranean, where his foes had the free choice, whether they would be
killed with the sword, or drowned in the sea. Hard by is Mearah, which
signifies a cave, (and so some translations render it, though others retain
the Hebrew word) being the Josh. 13. 4.
northern boundary of the land of Canaan, and an impregnable underground
fortification of the Zidonians. Yea many hundred years after in the Holy War,
when the Christians possessed Palestine, they manfully defended it until the
garrison therein Tyr. li. 19 Bell. Sacr. ca. 11.
corrupted with money, basely betrayed it unto the Saracens.

5. Observe by the way, Vast caves in the land of Canaan.
that the hills in Palestine generally had in their sides plenty of caves, and
those of such laxity and receipt, that ours in England are but conny-boroughs if
compared to the palaces which those hollow places afforded. Neither wonder that
the cave of Makkedah could contain five Josh. 10. 23.
Kings together, or that Obadiah could hide an hundred Prophets by fifty and
fifty in a 1 King. 18. 13.
cave, or that about four hundred men abode with David in the cave of 1 Samuel
22. 2.
Adullam, or that six hundred Benjamites lurk't, for four months, in the rock
of Judge. 20. 49.
Rimmon, when G^og li. ^6.
Strabo has reported, that toward Iturea, (which begins not far off) there
be sharp mountains, having deep de^s in them, whereof one is able to receive
four thousand Men. These caves (being only a cellar by nature) were by Art
contrived into several rooms, and by industry fortified even unto admiration.
So well manned, they could not be stormed, well victualled, they could not be
starved, and (not having any combustible matter about them) fire-free they
could not be burned, so thick, they could not be battered, so high, they could
not be scaled, and so low, they could not be undermined. But these Inns gave
entertainment to any guests, and as sometimes they gave shelter to pious people
in persecution, so often they afforded harbor to thieves and vagabonds. The
Psalmist glanceth on such places, in that his expression, Thou art of more
honor and Psalm. 76. 4.
might then the hills of the robbers; and our Savior directly points at
them, when he complains, that they had turned the house of God into a Mat.
21. 13.
den of thieves.

6. To proceed, The city Enoch wrong placed.
hereabouts we can quickly discover an ancient City, wrongfully placed by the
presumption of Authors, namely Enoch, built by Cain in the land of Nod, which
Io. Viterbien. apud Naucler. Vid. Adricho. in Asher. number. 39.
one tells us was at the foot of mount Libanus, and that vast foundations
thereof are at this day to be seen. Surely Cains wandering humor (bloody hands
are always attended with roving feet) seems to have possessed these Authors
brains, straggling in the position of this place so far from the truth, and the
text, which describes it east of Genesis 417.
Eden. But we may seek the City Enoch with more probability to find it amongst
the Henochii, a people seated by Not. hist. li. 2. cap. 16.
Pliny near the Bactrians in the east country.

7. But before we go farther, we will alter our former method, (hoping such
variety will prove the more pleasant) and because most memorable Places in
Asher, are mentioned in Joshua, where the Possessions of this Tribe were first
allotted him; we will briefly comment on those verses, wherein the Bounds of
his Inheritance are described.

Joshua 19. 24. And the fifth lot came out for the Tribe of the Children of
Asher according to their Families. To prevent all Quarrels, the Land on this
side Jordan was divided by lot, betwixt the nine Tribes and an half, much of
providence being couched under the seeming casualty thereof; for although their
Portions fell not to them in such seniority as they sat down at Pharaoh's Genesis
43. 33.
Table, the firstborn according to his Birthright, and the youngest according
to his youth, yet an excellent method was observed therein: For, The first
Josh. 15. 1.
Lot fell to Judah the Tribe Royal, of whom the 1 Chronicles. 5. 2.
Chief Rulers and Christ himself was to descend. The Josh. 16. 1.
second, to the sons of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasses, to whom (on Reubens
forfeiting thereof) the Birthright belonged. 1 Chronicles. 5. 2.
The third to Josh. 18. 11.
Benjamin, Jacobs youngest, but next best beloved son, by Rachel his dearest
wife. The fourth, fifth and sixth for Simeon Josh. 19. 1. 10. and 17.
Zebulun and Issachar, his sons by Leah, so that all Jacobs children by his
wives were provided for first, before those he had by his Concubines received
any Possessions. The seventh for Asher Josh. 19. 24.
Jacobs son by Genesis 30. 13.
Zilpah handmaid to Leah his first wife, and therefore her child in seniority
preferred, Gad his elder brother being already provided for on the other side
Jordan. The eight and ninth for Naphtali and Josh. 19. 32. 40.
Dan born of Bilhah handmaid to Rachel, the younger sister, and Jacobs second
wife.


We know who said in another case, Cant. 5. 2.
I sleep, but my heart awaketh. So see here, though drowzie Chance in the Lot
is commonly challenged to have slept out her eyes, and to become stark blind,
yet is there a concealed vigilance therein, ordered by divine Providence.

Verse 25. And their border was Helkah, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph. In
expounding these words for the maine we follow learned Masius, though loath to
err with any, willing to venture sooner on his then any other Authors
judgment herein. May the Reader find out Helkah in our Map (in the
South-east part thereof, not far from the Sea) thence let his eyes start, and
with good success (following the names in the Text, and the pricks in our
Map for his direction) surround the Borders of this Tribe. Helkah was
afterward given to the Levites Gershonites, to be one of their Josh. 21. 31.
and 1 Chr. 6. 75. where it is called Hukok.
four Cities in this Tribe, had Achshaph and formerly been a Royal City of
the Canaanites whose King had been conquered by Joshua Josh. 12. 20.
.

Verse 26. And Alamelech, and Amad, and Mishael, and reaches to Carmel
Westward, and Shihor Libnah. Mishael or 1 Chr. 6. 74.
Mashal was another City of the Levites. By this the Border of Asher ran
Southwestward to Carmell; understand thereby not the mountain so called (lying
more South in Zebulun) but the Plain lying under the same, more toward the
North. Shihor Libnah, that is, the white Or white Nilus.
River. Now for streams to take their names from their colors, is no news to
them that have heard of Albis in Germany, Melas in Thracia, and two Rivers
called Blackwater, the one in the South, the other in the North of Ireland. But
whether this River in Asher took the whiteness from the foaming water therein,
or Chalk-banks (like our Albion) on both sides, or from the materials of glass
or crystal growing there, let others dispute, whilst we only observe that
Album Promontorium or the white Promontory, is by Not. hist. lib. 5. cap. 19.
Pliny placed hereabouts.

Verse 27. And turns toward the Sun rising to Beth Dagon, and reaches to
Zebulun, and to the Valley of Iiphthabel toward the Northside of Bethemek, and
Neiel, and goes out to Cabul on the left hand. The Map will make all these
flexures plain. Beth Dagon, that is, the Temple of Dagon; but how came this 1 Samuel 5. 2.
Idol of the Philistims to travel thus far almost to Phoenicia? Surely it
never came hither on its own legs, as the Psalm. 115. 7.
Psalmist observes, Feet have they, but they walk not, but was brought by the
Superstition of the Canaanites, which borrowed this Idol from their neighbors.
Concerning Cabul, quaere whether it were the name of a particular place, or the
same with the Land of Cabul, which I conceive lay more Northward, which 1 King.
9. 13.
Solomon afterward bestowed on Hiram King of Tire.

Verse 28. And Hebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and Kanah, even unto great Zidon.
Hebron differing from a greater City of the same name in the Tribe of Judah.
Rehob, that is, large or spacious, this name speaking it a City of great
receipt. Unto this Numb. 13. 21.
place came the twelve Spies sent to discover the Land, and this City was
afterward bestowed upon the Josh. 21. 31.
Levites. This Kanah the great is conceived by some the birth place of Simon
the Mat. 10. 4.
Canaanite, the disciple of Christ. Great Zidon was given to, never gained by
this Tribe, whose Borders reached to Zidon exclusively, so that Ashers lips
might touch the cup, but not taste the liquor of so sweet a City.

Verse 29. And then the Coast turns to Ramah, and to the strong City Tire,
and the Coast turns to Hosah, and the outgoings thereof are at the Sea from
the coast to Achzib. Turns, namely toward the South; Rama^, that is, an high
place, as the name imports, therefore seated by us on a Mountain; Such Maps
as place Ramah in a valley are guilty of as great a Solecisme in Geography, as
he in gesture, who speaking, O Heavens, pointed to the Earth. Wonder not that
in Palestine we meet with so many Ramahs (Towns seated on a rising or advantage
of ground) seeing it was so mountainous a Country: Equivalent whereunto we
have the frequent name of Upton in England, whereof I have told, (Smile good
Reader, but do not jeer at my curiosity herein) no fewer then three and thirty
in the Alphabeticall names of Speeds descriptions. Tire like Zidon was never
possessed by the Asherites, neither was Achzib near to Helkah where we first
began our preambulation about this Tribe, and now redit labor actus in orbem,
we have walked the Round, and encompassed the Bounds thereof.

Verse 30. Ummah also and Aphek, and Rehob, twenty and two Cities with their
Villages. This is the inheritance of the Tribe of the children of Asher,
according to their families, these Cities with their Villages. All the former
were limitary places in the Tribe of Asher, these three last were more Inland
Cities in the heart of the Country. To avoid tautology, ^ehob here, must be
allowed a distinct City from that mentioned before.

8. But of all these Cities, Aphek was most remarkable, whose King Josh. 12. 18.
was killed by Joshua, and near whereunto Benhadad (lately beaten by Ahab on
the Mountains of Samaria) with his new modeled Army in a new place hoped for
new success. For in stead of the thirty two 1 King. 20. 1.
Kings, of more pomp then puissance to his Army, he placed so many Captains,
seeing it is not the shining of the hilt, but the sharpness of the edge of the
sword must do the the deed. And resolved to fight in the Plain, conceiving the
Gods of the Israelites (though by Benhadads swelling words and lofty 1 King.
20. 10
language one might rather have collected the Syrian Gods to have been) the
Gods of the Mou^tains. Then appeared he with a mighty Host, against whom the
Israelites marched forth like two little flocks of 1 King 20. 27
Kids. Behold here a wonder, the Kids kill the Wolves, and a hundred thousand
Syrian footmen were killed in one day. From the field they fly into the City
of Aphek. What, was it to try whether the God of Israel (concluded now God of
the Country, be it hilly or plain) were God of the City also? They found it so
by sad experience, when the wall of the City fell on twenty and seven 1 King.
20 30.
thousand of them that were left, which wall if cruel to kill, was charitable
to bury them.

9. Yet Ahab afterward lost the advantage of this victory, when contrary to
Gods flat command, on Benhadads feigned submission he indulged life unto him,
which caused his own death 1 King. 22. 31.
and destruction not long after. Thus foolish pity, in stead of breaking, whets
the knife for it is own throat: and they who only take out the teeth and sting
of such serpents which they should kill outright, shall find the very stumps
and tail remaining enough to bite and sting them to death.

10. Baanah the son of Hushai was Solomon's purveyor in Asher and in 1 King.
4. 16.
Aloth; What this Aloth should be, a deep silence is in all Comments. I
conceive it a hilly Country, appendent to Asher, ascending with mountains,
according to the notation of the Hebrew word. Herein our guess is seconded by
plenty of Se^ Ni^* Full^r Misce l. lib. 4. cap. 6.
Gradati montes, Staired mountains, which go up by degrees, found in these
parts, and one most eminent, whereof Bell. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 9.
Josephus takes especial notice, being an hundred furlongs north of Ptolemais,
called scala Tyriorum, or the Tyrians Ladder. How near our conjecture is bowled
to the mark I know not, but hope the Reader before he knocks this away will lay
a better in the room thereof. So much of Asher, whose country was much
straightened by the Phoenicians, their mortal enemies (lying within his bounds,
though never subdued) which we now come to describe.

11. Phoenicia is often mentioned Act. 11. 19. 15. 3.
in Scripture, and is so called as some will have it (...), from plenty of palm
trees growing therein; as others (...) from the many slaughters formerly made
in that warlike Nation. To omit other antiquated deductions thereof, prettiest
(because newest) is that of a modern Boch^. Geog. Sanc. part 2d^. lib. ^. cap.
1. page 362.
Author from (...) bhene-Anak, Pheanak, Phoenik, the sons of Anak, as the
fathers and founders of the people of this Country. A long slender Country it
is, having the bounds thereof by several Authors variously assigned; but
generally extended from the Sea to Mount Libanus in breadth, and in length from
Carmel to the River Canis in the north; a tract of an hundred miles and upwards.

12. The inhabitants hereof were transcendently ingenious; whose wits (like the
gold wire they so much dealt with) were ductile and pliable to all inventions.
From a pin to a pillar, nothing was so small but their skill could work,
nothing so great but their industry could atchieve. Whatsoever was pretty for
children to play with, or neat for women to wear, or necessary for man to use,
in any one of these the Phoenicians were so expert, nature might seem to design
them for that alone, and so dextrous in all of them, it were hard to say
wherein they excelled. They could weave clothes with the smallest thread, dress
them with the finest work, dye them with the freshest colors, embroider them
with the richest cost, and then either sell them to others to their great
profit, or wear them with as much pride themselves. They were excellent
Architects; Solomon himself (who well knew the most cunning workmen in every
craft) confessing to Hiram, 1 King. 5. 6. 18.
There is not amongst us any that can skill to he^ timber like the Sidonians.
They are also conceived the first founders of Letters, Arithmetic, Astronomy,
with the working in glass, and several other rare devices.

13. Tire was the chiefest city in Phoenicia, Ezekiel. 27. 3.
situate at the entrance of the Sea. Elegantly the Isa. 23. 3.
Prophet terms the harvest of the river her revenue: an harvest lasting all
the year long, every day sowing at the setting forth, and reaping at the
return of her Ships. Tire said of her self, Ezekiel. 2^. 3.
I am of perfect beauty, which coming out of her own mouth was rather proudly
then falsely spoken. If it be accounted one of the stateliest sights in the
world, to see a stout Ship under sail, how beautiful was it to behold the
Tyrian Galleys with all their accoutrements; Planks of Ezekiel. 27. 5.
the Fir-trees of Senir, Masts of the Cedars of Lebanon, Oars of the Oaks of
Bashan, Hatches of the ivory of Chittim, Sails with broidered work (oh vanity
top and top gallant!) out of Egypt, blue and purple Carpets for covering from
the Isles of Elisha, with Giblites for Calkers, Arvadites for Mariners, Persians
etc. for Soldiers, and Tyrians, her own Townsmen for Pilots, so keeping the
honor, and happily seeking to preserve the mysteries of their harbor to
themselves?

14. Pass we from their Ships to their Shops, which we find fraught with
commodities of all kinds. Whose Isa. 23. 8.
Merchants are Princes, says the Prophet; and it seems that Tyramus a good
word for a good King (till customary using thereof in the worst sense infected
it) had its original from the Pride and Magnificence of the Tyrian Merchants.
This city is termed Isa. 23. 3.
a Mart of Nations, both because all Nations were there to sell, and there to
be sold: Ezekiel. 27. 13. Joel 3. 46.
they traded the persons of men, and not only arms but armies, were here to
be bought, and Ez^k. 27. 14.
horsemen as well as horses were chaffered in their markets.

15. Now as Tire was dispersed all over the world in the several Colonies
planted by her in foreign parts; so the World was contracted into Tire, whither
Merchants from all countries did repair. Compare Ezekiel. 27. with Genesis 10. and it
will appear, that most of those nations which departed from Babel in a
confusion, met in Tire in such a method as now enabled through industry,
observation, and intercourse, they could understand the languages and traffic
one with another. We intend a little to insist both upon the commodities and
countries of such as hither resorted. For though I dare not go out of the
bounds of Canaan to give these Nations a visit at their own homes, yet finding
them here within my Precincts, it were incivility in me not to take some
acquaintance of them. In setting down of their several places, I have wholly
followed (let my candle go out in a stink, when I refuse to confess from whom
I have lighted it) Bochartus in his holy Geography. Their several trades we
rank according to the twelve great Companies in London. Let not the comparison
as ominous offend any, Tire since being reduced to a ruinous heap; seeing the
Parallel is only intended to show the like latitude of commerce betwixt them.
However, it is neither unseasonable on this occasion, nor improper for my
profession (every Minister in this respect being the Cities Remembrancer) to
mind London 1 Timothy 6. 17.
not to trust in uncertain riches; seeing pride and unthankfulness may quickly
level the highest bank of wealth, yea strongest mountain of outward greatness.

1 Merchant-Mercers.
Such as traded in Silks (Byssus in latin, though rendered fine-linnen in our
translation) blue and purple, being Ezekiel. 27. 7.
Egyptians, Ezekiel. 27. 16.
Syrians, and from the Isles Ezekiel. 27. 7.
of Elisha. By Elisha Genesis 10. 4.
understand Peloponnesus, wherein an ancient and ample country called Elis,
and part thereof termed Alisium by Homer, where the adjacent Islands Co,
Carpathus, Cythera, Rhodes, Gyarus etc. are eminent for plenty of purple. Here
some will object it was a real tautology to bring purples to Tire, seeing by
general confession the best of the world were made in that place. In answer
whereunto, know that these Elishian purples being of a different die and dress
from those of Tire, were a distinct commodity. It is so far from being needless
pains, that it may bring considerable Profit, to carry Char-coals to
New Castle. And these courser purples, though not for the Tyrians own wearing,
might be for their barter with other Nations. Not to say, but that the peevish
principle might possess the people of Tire, to slight homebred, and prize
foreign wares, so that the Tyrians Ladies might prefer those purples best for
their own use, which were fetched the farthest off.

2 Merchant-Grocers.
Such as traffiqued Ezekiel. 27. 22. Genesis 10. 7. Psalm. 72. 10.
with the chief of all spices being those of Sheba, and Raamah, both being
places in Arabia the happy. Great no doubt was the fragrancy of these spices
brought over land to Tire, whereas such as are conveyed into England by ship
from India, have the less vigor of that land where they grow, and the more
moisture of the sea through which they are brought. The men also of Dan and
Iavan (of whom hereafter) furnished Tire with Ezekiel. 27. 19.
Cassia and Calamus, drugges of high worth and value.

3 Merchant-Drapers.
Such as brought Ezekiel. 27. 20.
precious clothes for (or with) chariots being the men of Dedan, which is an
eminent country in Idumea.

4 Merchant-Fishmongers.
Many of these must be presumed in Tire, where fish was a staple commodity,
which they transported into other countries, and vented for their own gain
without any other respect of time or place. This caused Nehemiah's complaint
that in Jerusalem there dwelt men of Tire which brought N^h. 13. 16.
fish and all manner of ware, and sold them on the Sabbath.

5 Merchant-Gold-smiths.
Such as occupied in her Fairs Ez^k. 27. 22.
with all precious stones out of the Country of Sheba and Raamah aforesaid.
Besides Ezekiel. 27. 16.
Emeralds, Corals and Agate brought out of Syria, Silver from Tarshish. i. e.
Spain (as our Bochar. Geog Sanc. l^b. 3. c. 7.
Author irrefragably proves plenty of that metal therein) and Ezekiel. 27. 22
gold from Arabia. Yea, as some observe that though the body of the Sun arises
in the East, yet his shining by reflection is first discovered in the Just. l.
18. p. 196.
west, so granting gold originally to grow in lands east from Tire, yet in this
City most gorgeous and glittering was the luster thereof, beaten and drawn out
in most artificial embroideries and embosments.

6 Merchant-Skinners.
Although no mention of their trade in this City, where the heat of the climate
made furs not only useless but burdensome, yet we may be confident there
wanted not those therein which traded in such skins which were in valuation in
these parts.

7 Merchant-Taylours.
Such as dealt in Ezekiel. 27. 24.
all sorts of things, in blew clothes and broidered work, and in Chests of rich
apparel bound with cords and made of Cedar. Those that traffiqued in these
commodities were Ezekiel. ut. pri.
of Haran and Canneh and Eden and Sheba, Ashur and Chilmad, all near one
another (as appears by their bundling up together) about the confluence of
Tygris and Euphrates.

8 Merchant-Haberdashers.
Great their number who by whole^sale sold ^he fine manufactures wrought here,
of Gold, Silver, Ezekiel. 27. 15.
Ivory and Ebony, brought from Dedan (different from the former country of the
same name in Idumea) at this day called Daden, situate on the Persian gulf. But
oh the infinite varieties of precious toys made thereof! Well did Iliad. 23.
743. and 6. 289. Odys. 15. 114. and 4. 54.
Homer give the Sidonians the Epithet of (...), or very much ingenious. Their
fingers might seem all of bone, so strong and hardy to endure any labor; and
yet all of flesh, so flexible and limber to any employment. Those mysteries in
manufactures which English men in our age gaze on as rare discoveries, the
Phenicians of Tire would but smile at as rude recoveries of what by them was
most perfectly performed.

9 Merchant-Salters.
Store of these may be concluded therein, not only because salt is so needful
a commodity, but also because at Josh. 11. 8.
Misrepothmaim or the boiling of waters, hard by Sidon, great store of salt was
made.

10 Merchant-Iron-mongers.
Such as bartered Ezekiel. 27. 12.
in Iron, Tin, or Lead Brought from Spain or Tarshish, as also in 13.
vessels of brass from Iavan, Tuball and Mesech, that is, Ionia, Pontus and
Moscovia, as our Brochart. Geog. Sanc.
Author will have it, though we are not at leisure severally to examine his
judgment therein.

11 Merchant-Vintners.
Such as traded in Ezekiel. 27. 18.
Wine of Helbon (no doubt most delicious to the Palate) brought hither by the
Merchants of Damascus. Helbon we conceive the same with Calybon a City in Syria
whereof mention in Ptolemy, and from which the Country about it is denominated
Calybonidis.

12 Merchant-Clothworkers.
Such as from the Whitewooll brought from Damascus transmitted the same from
the Spinsters wheel, to the Weavers loom, to the Fullers sheares, to the Dyers
vat, and so to be worn by the greatest Princes in the world, who were beholding
to Tire the center of rich clothing, for all their holy day apparel. Thus was
their City fraught with commodities of all kinds, to say nothing of their
Smithfield full of Ezekiel. 27. 14.
horses, horsemen and mules from Togarma, or Cappadocia; their East-cheap full
of the flesh of Ezekiel. 27. 21.
Rams, Lambs, Goats, etc. from Arabia: their Leaden Hall where a market was
kept with the wheat of Ezekiel. 27. 17.
Minnith, and Pannag out of Judea, so that all things save piety, humility, and
thankfulness to God, were to be had in this City.

16. Thus sat Tire on her throne in a Princely posture, no less envious then
proud: witness her rejoicing at the destruction of Jerusalem (the breaking of
one Merchant is the making of another) when she said to her self, Ezekiel. 26. 2.
Jerusalem is turned unto me, I shall be replenished now she is made waste;
meaning that all trading divided before, should now be engrossed to her self
alone. But God marred her markets, threatening by Isaiah to Isa. 23. 9.
stain the pride of her glory, alluding to Tyres masterpiece which was to fix
fair and fresh colors, which God would soil and blur, notwithstanding all her
curiosity in that kind. Ezekiel uses two maritime expressions as most proper
for a Port; first that her enemies should come up against her as the Sea
causes his Ezekiel. 26. 3.
waves to come up, and then that an east wind should break her, meaning
Nebuchadnezzar (living north-east from this place) who afterward besieged and
sacked the City.

17. It seems the taking thereof, called elsewhere the strong City Tire Josh.
19. 29.
did not quit cost for the taking thereof, the profit received by it not
countervailing the pains expended upon it; God himself confesses that
Nebuchadnezzar served a great service against Tire and yet had Ezekiel. 30. 18.
no wages. Sir Walter Rawlegh. 2 book 76. page 285.
One tells us that the Tyrians after thirteen years siege, despoiled of all
hope of relief, abandoned their City, and in their ships transported their
wives, children, and portable wealth to Carthage, Cyprus, and other Colonies,
leaving Nebuchadnezzar their empty nest, when all the birds worth pluming, were
flown away. However God afterward gave him the spoil of the Ezekiel 29. 19. 20
land of Egypt for wages for his army. Thus, not only those who do Gods will
in a direct line, but also such, who collaterally (not to say casually) work
his pleasure shall find a reward, seeing in sacking of Tire, Nebuchadnezzar
went in the path and pace of his own pride and covetousness, though happily in
his own way he met with Gods will, not only besides his intention, but without
the knowledge thereof.

18. As the ruins, so the Esaias 23. 15.
restoration of Tire was foretold by the Prophet; not the same numericall Tire
in place and position (for Paletyrus or old Tire ever after remained desolate
according to the prediction, Ezekiel. 26. 14.
thou shall be built no more) but the same in name, country, convenience of
site, wealth, and wickedness. Yea, she exchanged and improved her place for
commodity and strength, removing from the entrance to the midst of the Sea,
from the continent to almost an Island. Here to use the Prophets expression,
Esaias 23. 15.
after seventy years (the end of the Babylonish kingdom) Tire began to sing as
an harlot; Siren songs to allure Merchants to be her lovers, as before;
counting trade and profit t^ be her richest pleasure. And so she did flourish
again as much or more then ever, during the Persian Monarchy, about two
hundred six years; till Alexander the great made her change her tune, alter her
notes, and turn her merry love songs into mournful Elegies on her self. For
being denied by the Tyrians in their City to sacrifice to Hercules the Tutelar
God of that place, Alexander not so superstitious as ambitious, with vast pains
and expense (as one whom no peril could affright, nor labor weary) sacked the
City, putting such to the sword as resisted, and causing two thousand more to be
hung up in rank on the sea shore. At which time he built a Castle of his own
name (now corruptly called Sandalium) two miles south of the City.

19. Yet Tire afterward recovered it self to considerable greatness, like a
cunning Broaker, though often proving quite bankrupt, she set up again, though
having nothing to give her credit but the convenience of her situation: as
indeed an harlot needs no other wares then her self to set up her trading.
Insomuch that the Poets fiction of the Phoenix springing again out of his own
ashes, being disclaimed by natural History for a falsehood, may mythologically
find a truth in, and probably fetch its ground from this Phoenix or Phoenician
City of Tire, always arising fresh and fair out of his own ruins. In our
Saviors time it was a stately place, and yet though with Dives it was Luke ^6.
19.
clothed in purple; Tire could not with him fare deliciously every day, unless
beholding to Herod's land of Galilee to afford it constant provision, because
its country was Acts 12. 20.
nourished by the Kings Country. Sensible hereof when Herod was highly
displeased with these of Tire and Sidon, they politickly compounded the breach
(knowing that to fight with him who fed them, was the ready way to be famished)
and opening the breast of Blastus the Kings Chamberlain with a golden key,
through that passage they made their access to pacify King Herod.

20. 1 King. 16. 31.
Tire at this day is reduced almost to nothing. Here it is seasonably remembered
that Ethbaal Father of Iezebel was the King, as Tire was the chief City of the
Sidonians, and I find a great conformity betwixt the fortunes of his daughter
and this place:

In their 1 Outward happiness. She a crowned Queen, and Tire a Esaias 23. 8.
Crowning City, whose Merchants were Princes. 2 Inward wickedness; both of them
styled Esaias 23. 15. Revel. 2. 21.
Harlots in Scripture. 3 Final wofulness; she eaten up by the dogs to the
short reversion of her 2 King. 9. 35.
skull, feet and palms; and Tire Sands Trav. li. 3. p. 216.
so consumed by all-devouring time, that now no other then an heap of Ruins,
yet have they a reverent respect, and do instruct the pensive beholders with
their exemplary frailty.


Enough of Tire, if not too much: fearing that long since the Reader has sadly
sympathized with the sufferings of Nebuchadnezzar and Alexander, guessing their
pains to be great in the long siege of this place by the proportion of their
own patience in reading our tedious description thereof. All I will add is
this, that though Tire was a sink of sin, yet is this Mat. 11. 21.
recorded in excuse of her profaneness, and mitigation of her punishment, that
if the miracles done in Chorazin and Bethsaida had been done in Tire and Sidon,
they would have long since repented in sackcloth and ashes.

21. Two bows shoot from the east gate of Tire the place is showen, where the
woman made that spirituall-carnall exclamation, Luke. 11. 27, 28.
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck; when
Christ not disproving her words diverted his Auditors from this, and directed
them to a more necessary trut^, Yea rather blessed are they that hear the word
of God and keep it. A little mile south of old Tire are Bradenback de Te^.
Sanc. and Sand. Trav. page 217.
four fair pits, the least twenty five cubits square, commonly called Solomon's
Cisterns. Surely the water of them is more clear then is the place alleged out
of the Cant. 4. 15.
Canticles, to prove Solomon the Author thereof, where but obscure and oblite
mention is made of those waterworks. More probable some King of Tire made
these and the neighboring Aqueducts, for the use of the City.

22. Seventeen miles north of Tire lay the City of Sidon, so named from the
eldest Genesis 10. 15.
son of Canaan. A city of great antiquity, seeing Tire is termed by the Esaias
23. 12.
Prophet, the daughter of Sidon. Sure here the Hebrew proverb held true, Ezekiel.
16 44.
As is the mother, so is the daughter, both of these Cities being of great
wealth and wickedness. Insomuch that to live careless, quiet, and secure, is
in Scripture phrase Judge. 18. 7.
to live after the manner of the Zidonians.

23. It was also a place of very great extent, therefore termed in Josh. 11. 8.
and 19. 28.
holy writ, Zidon Rabbah, or great Zidon. Not that there was ever a lesser
Zidon, (though there be one grand Cairo, it follows not there is also a pety
Cairo) but it is emphatically so named in comparison of other Cities. Yea Lib.
16.
Diodorus Siculus and Lib. 1. ^. 12.
Pomponius Mela make Sidon the greatest city of all Phenicia; understand then
anciently, whilst as yet she suckled Tire, her little infant, which afterward
outgrew her mother in greatness. This happily is the reason why Homer so often
making honorable mention of Sidon, is so silent of Tire, because reputing this
latter a parcel of the former.

24. Many and great were the fortifications of Sidon: but in vain was the arm
of flesh with it, when God himself says, Ezekiel. 28. 22.
Behold I am against thee O Zidon; whereupon in general it felt the same
destruction with Tire, which here we forbear to repeat. Only we will add,
that as bad a place as Sidon was; after Christ's resurection a Church was
quickly converted therein; and Saint Paul sailing to Rome touched here, and was
courteously refreshed by his Act. 27. 3.
friends.

25. Near the eastgate of Sidon they show the place, where the Syrophenician
woman begged so importunately for the cure of her daughter, not disheartened
though likened to a Mat 15. 21.
dog, by our Savior. In deed she showed one of the best qualities of a dog in
keeping her hold where once she had well fastened, not giving over or letting
go, until she had gotten what she desired.

26. So much for the City of Sidon. The Country of Sidon was larger, adequate
almost to Phenicia, and full of many fair harbors. Amongst these Obad. ver. 20.
Zarephah or Zarepta, styled both in the 1 King. 17. 9,
old and Luke 9. 26.
new Testament, a City of Sidon. The land round about it was fruitful of the
best Wine, as we have Lib. 1. cap. 4.
formerly observed. During the three years drought in Israel here dwelt that
widow, whose thrift had so evenly ordered her bread and oil, that a little of
both were left, till she got a spring in her cruse by entertaining the Prophet
Elijah. As for her son King. 17. 20
restored to life by Elijah, that he was Jonah that eminent Prophet, it may be
ranked with the making of Dinah Jacobs daughter to be Jobs wife, and with Ruth
her being daughter to Eglon King of Moab; all which three traditions are
equally improbable in themselves, altogether ungrounded on Scripture, and yet
peremptorily affirmed of the Jewish Doctors. Nor have I ought else to observe
of this City, save that the Hebrew name of Zarephah, signifies a conflatory or
melting place, where metals, (whereof plenty in this Province) were made fu^il
by the fire in their furnaces.

27. Judge. 1. 3^.
Accho remains to be observed in the south part of this Tribe, and confines of
Zebulun. A learned Stephanus (...). vid. Nic. Full. lib. 4. Misce. cap.
writer conceives it called Ace by Grecians from affording medicine ((...) in
Greek) to Hercules, when hurt in his conflict with the Lernaean Serpent.
Whereas indeed Ace is plainly derived from Accho the Scriputre name of this
City. Thus those who take aim from the Greek tongue to shoot at the
Etymologies of Hebrew places, come wide of the mark. This city was afterward
called Ptolemais from one of the Kings of Egypt. Here I forbear to recite how
Jonathan, through the perfidiousness of Tryphon and his own over credulity, was
1 Mac. 12. 4.
trained into this city, taken and murdered. Saint Paul sailing from Tire
touched here, Act. 21. 7.
saluted the brethren, and abode with them one day. As for Achzib a city of
Asher whence they could not expel the Canaanites, it was seated nine miles
north of Ptolemais, being a tolerable harbor, and called Ecdippa afterward.

28. Many were the rivolets in this Tribe, but those no sooner delivered out of
the womb of their fountains, but devoured in the grave of the Ocean; only
Belus has got a name (though not in Scripture) running through the Cendevian
Lake, famous for its Plin. l. 5. c. 19.
inexhausted sands, turning all things it touches into glass. As for the
sepulcher of Memnon, whom the Poets feign the son of the Morning, and L. 2.
Bell. Iud. cap. 9.
Josephus erects his monument near the river Belus; we take no notice thereof,
being hereafter to find his tomb, Psalm. 110. 3.
the dew of whose birth is as the womb of the morning, in a far distant place.

29. The Arms usually assigned to Asher are azure, The Arms of Asher.
a standing cup covered Or, relating to Jacobs blessing, Genesis 49. 20.
he shall yield royal dainties. A cup being taken here by a Synedochicall
metonymie for all plentiful Provisions, Asher otherwise affording dishes as
well as cups, and esculents as well as variety of beverage. But should the
shield of this Tribe be as full of charge as the land thereof was fruitful of
commodities, what was the credit of the country would be the disgrace of the
Coat of Asher.

Here the Map of Zebulun is to be inserted.
THE TRIBE OF ZEBVLVN. CHAP. 6.
1. ZEbulun tenth son of Jacob by Leah his wise had his posterity so increased
in Egypt, The populousness and puiss^nce of Zebulun.
that Number. 1. 31.
fifty seven thousand four hundred were extracted from him. All which dying in
the wilderness for their manifold disobedience, their next generation being
Number. 26. 27.
sixty thousand five hundred possessed the land of Canaan. Honorable mention
on all occasions is made of this Tribe in Scripture. How forw^rd were they in
their expedition against Sisera, in so much as Judge. 5. 14.
out of Zebulun they came down that handled the pen of the writer; Gown-men
turned Swordmen, Clerks became Captains, changing their penknives into swords.
Thus the peaceableness of their profession can bail none to stay at home, when
eminent danger arrests all at the suite of the Commonwealth to serve in person
abroad. David calls them the Princes Psalm. 68. 27.
of Zebulun etc. and well might he afford them that style of dignity, who
attended him at Hebron with an army so absolutely accomplished

For 1 Number, 1 Chr. 12. 33.
fifty thousand. 2 Skill, expert in war, which could keep rank. 3 Weapons,
with all instruments of war. 4 Loyalty, they were not of double hearts.


Yet in all ages, of all the numerous Tribe of Zebulun, we find but two
Grandees expressed by name, Judge. 12. 12.
Elon a peaceable Judge, and Jonah an eminent Prophet. But what shall we say? A
greater then Jonah was here, even Christ himself, the honor and dishonor
(though not of the tribe) of the land of Zebulun: honor, because here
miraculously conceived, poorly and painfully bread and brought up, here
frequent in preaching and working of miracles: dishonor, because carelessly
neglected and scornfully contemned, yea dispightfully persecuted of his own
countrymen.

2. Zebulun had Asher on the north-west, The situation and sea conveniences
thereof.
Naphtali on the north-east, Issachar on the south, the Mediterranean on the
west, and Galilean sea on the east thereof. This maritime position of this
Tribe Jacob foresaw in his Prophecy, Genesis 49. 13.
Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the Sea, and he shall be for an haven of
ships, and his border shall be unto Zidon. Which Charter of sea conveniences
is renewed, and enlarged by Moses in his blessing, Rejoice Deuteronomy. 33. 18, 19.
Zebulun in thy going out, and Issachar in thy tents. They shall call the
people unto the mountains, and there shall they offer Sacrifices of
righteousness, for they shall suck of the abundance of the Seas, and treasures
hid in the sand. Where though these two Tribes be made Partners, and joint
sharers in marine interests, and are promised equal profit thereby, yet
Issachar it seems loved land and an home life best, employing his canvase
rather for Tents, then Sails, whilst the sea and going out in long voiages was
rather Zebuluns delight. So have I seen chickens and ducklings hatched under
the same hen, no sooner unhoused out of their shells, but presently the one
falls a pecking on the ground, the other a padling in the water.

3. Nor let any be staggered at the close of Jacobs Prophecy, Zebulun how
bordering on Sidon.
wherein he foretells, Zebuluns border shall be unto Genesis 49. 13.
Sidon, finding this Tribe to fall many miles short and south of that place.
For Sidon is not there to be taken for the City but Country Bochar. Geog.
Sacr. par. pri. page 342.
so named. And the land of the Sidonians or Phenicians, extended to Accho or
Ptolemais a city thereof, on which the north bound of Zebulun did confine.
Greater will be the difficulty to assign a clear reason, why in the first
book of Chronicles, where the Pedegrees of all the other Tribes are reckoned
up; Zebulun and Dan (as considerable and deserving as the rest) is omitted. The
best is, places not persons concern our present subject, and I hope I shall not
betray such indiscretion to leave the plain and ready Rode of my work in hand,
to enter into the wood (not to say the bog) of an impertinent question.

4. We begin with the sea of Galilee the eastern boundary of this Tribe, The
several measures and names of the Galilean Sea.
called always a sea by three of the Evangelists, but generally a Lake by Saint
Luke. Indeed amongst lakes it may be accounted for a Sea, such the greatness;
amongst seas reputed for a lake, such the sweetness and freshness of the water
therein. The extent thereof is most variously reported amongst Authors.

Ios. l. 3. de bell. Iud. ca. 18.
Josephus makes it an hundred furlongs long, and six broad. Lib. 5. c. 15.
Not. hist.
Pliny measures it to be sixteen miles long, and six broad. De Ter. sa^c.
Munster assigns it to be twenty German miles (eighty English) in compass.
Trav. of Patriarchs. p. 446.
Bunting contracts it to twelve in length, four miles and somewhat more in
breadth. Trav. p. 104.
Biddulph a late English Divine, and eyewitness thereof computes it eight
leagues in length and five in breadth (three miles to all leagues) whom for the
main we have followed.
Others assign it other dimensions, all agree it is not very great. But what
it wants in bigness, it has in variety of names, called the Sea of 1 Cinnereth
only in the old Josh. 13. 27. and Josh. 19. 35.
Testament from a City of that name in the Tribe Naphtali. Others conceive it
so named from Kinnor, an Harp in Hebrew, which it is said in shape to resemble:
sure the high winds, sometimes make but bad music (to the ears of mariners)
when playing thereupon. 2 Luke 5. 1.
Gennesareth 3 John 6. 1.
Tiberias. cities of note in our Saviors time flourishing thereon. 4 Mat. 15.
29.
Galilee, the country which almost on all sides surrounded it.


Small vessels sometimes termed Luke. 5. 2.
(...) Ships, sometimes (...), Ma^ke 3. 9.
Boats or Barges, went to and again in this sea, Gally-like Luke 8. 23.
sailing or Mark 6. 48.
rowing (or perchance both) as they saw their advantage. They were little of
strength, (because no Pirates to molest them) and not great of burden, not
comparable to the ship wherein Saint Paul sailed on the Mediterranean Sea,
carrying two Acts 27. 37.
hundred threescore and sixteen souls, which for the greatness thereof might be
Admiral of all the Navy in the new Testament. The river of Jordan runs
through the midst of this Sea, and mingleth not therewith, but preserves his
own stream entire: which some impute to the swiftness, yea rapidness of his
course, not at leisure to take notice of (much less to unite with) any water he
meets in the way, before he come to his journeys end at the dead Sea.

5. This was the only and all the seas, Why our Savior traversed sea as well
as land.
that ever our Savior sailed upon. It is reported of wise Cato, that he
repented he ever went thither by Sea, whither he might have gone by land. But
see here Wisdom it self (who by going about might have passed to any place on
the other side of the Sea) preferred the use of a ship, not to spare his own
pains, (whereof none more liberal) but to 1 Show natures intent of the Sea,
made as well to be sailed, as the ground to be gone upon. 2 Take occasion to
manifest his Deity in working of miracles thereon. 3 Comfort seafaring-men in
their distresses, praying to such a Savior as had an exprerimentall knowledge
of the danger on both elements.


And here, amongst the many voyages of our Savior (who often crossed the
length and breadth of this sea-lake) let us take account of some most
remarkable. And first in general we may observe, that after the working of
some extraordinary miracle, (which might have great influence on peoples
affections) as the feeding of so many thousands, Christ presently put to sea
(clouding himself in obscurity) and shunning popularity so far, that it should
venture a drowning, if offering to follow after him.

6. The first voyage we will insist on, Christ's first voyage.
was when our Savior sailed in Simons Luke 5. 7.
ship, who formerly had fished all night, getting nothing save a drowzie head
and empty hands, until casting his net at Christ's command, he caught such
store of fish, both his and his partners ship began to sink. O when will any
earthly thing fall out even to our desires! We always find fish, either none
at all, or too many; and a surfeit of wealth is as dangerous as a famine
thereof. The fish were now ready to return into the water from whence they
came, and not by their wit, but weight had caught their fishermen, had not
Christ by miracle brought all safe to shore.

7. A second when the Disciples put to sea at the command, The second voyage
saves Peter.
but without the person of their Master. Tossed they were on the waves, rowing
with great pains to little purpose, for the wind was contrary, till looking at
last M^t. 14. 24.
they see Jesus walking on the water; Then were the words of the Psalmist
literally true, Psalm. 77. 19.
Thy way is in the Sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy footsteps are
not known. The Disciples unable to conceive such a mystery conclude it was a
Ghost. It is not worth our enquiry, what Ghost, or whence, good or evil, of
man or devil, this wild guess being the effect of their fright, then which no
more professed foe to a clear judgment. Christ quickly discovering himself,
Peter requests a commission to meet him: which granted, he walks for a while on
the water, till his Faith first, then feet failing him, he began to answer the
name of Cephas, proving himself a stone, not by the stability, but the
heaviness thereof, and began to sink, till Christ saved him. Nor was Christ
sooner in the ship, but the ship was John 6. 21.
at the land. Thus those many strokes at the oars which the Disciples had
taken before, were not merely lost, but only laid up, and now restored them in
their speedy arrival. Yea the sails of the ship were not now on the mast, but
in the keel thereof, Christ's person did the deed. Thus projects driven on
without Gods gracious presence are but driven on, whilst such designs fly to
their wished end, which take God along with them.

8. The third and last voyage we will insist on, The third voyage when Christ
was fast a sleep.
was when the ship was not upon but under the sea, Mat. 8. 24.
covered with the waves. Yea, it was now full of Mark. 4. 3. 7.
water, and the Disciples of fear, whilst Christ him self was fast asleep,
having a pillow under his head, and a softer under his heart, a clear
conscience. See we here our Savior a perfect, because an imperfect Man, his
infirmities speak the reality of his humanity. Working had made him weary,
weariness had caused him to sleep much out of a desire to be refreshed, more
out of a design to be awaked. Here all cry out, Master save us, we perish.
Danger will make the profane to pray, the wilfull-dumbe to speak, who will
find a tongue, rather then lose a life. No doubt Judas himself, who
afterward sold him, was now as clamorous as any to be saved by him. Christ
awakes, and rebukes first the Disciples Mar. 4. 39, 40.
for being too fearful, and despairing, then the winds and waves, for being
too bold and presumptuous. Both obey, owning their Creatours voice; as well may
his words, who made them at first, make them now to be quiet.

9. Many more were the voiages our Savior made on the Sea, Why Christ never
sailed after his resur^ection.
as when after the feeding of so many thousands, they had but one Mar. 8. 14.
loaf in the ship, and on our Saviors caveat of the leaven of the Pharisees,
their jealousies grew solicitous for food. Had they not besides that one loaf
in their Cup-board, twelve more in their memory (five at one batch, and seven at
another) on the recollection whereof their minds might feed, to depend on
providence, especially whilst the founder of the feast was in their company.
But we who condemn them, are too likely to commit the like distrust, if left
to our selves, upon less occasion. To return to our Savior, it is observable
that after his resurrection, we read not that he sailed any more upon the Seas.
For such a fluctuating and turbulent condition, which necessarily attends
sea-voyages, was utterly inconsistent with the constancy, stability, and
perpetuity of Christ's estate when risen from the grave. The firm land
therefore better agreeing with his fixed and immovable happiness, thereon he
stood, and only gave the word of command to his disciples at Sea, on which
side they should cast forth their net, when they caught so John 21 4.
many fishes. And so much for the Sea of Tiberias, hoping that if the weakly
reader be sea-sick by staying so long on the water, he will instantly be well
upon our arrival on the main land, to which now we proceed.

10. As this Tribe did overflow in sea conveniences; The method of the future
description.
so it fell not short in the commodities of the land. The country thereof was
enamelled with pleasant rivers, whose banks were adorned with fair Cities. We
will follow the chanells of those rivers, which will direct us to the most
considerable places in Zebulun; beginning with little Jordan. Indeed so little,
that there is no mention thereof at all in Scripture, and little in other
Authors, Vid. Tabulam Ter. Sanc.
Mercator being one of the first in my observation that takes notice thereof.
It arises in the south part of the vale of Iephtael, and running full east is
augmented from the south with the tribute of another brook, fetching his course
by Nazareth an eminent place, and famous in the new Testament.

11. Nazareth Luke 4. 29.
was seated on the brow of an hill, in the very center of this Tribe: The
situation and denomination of Nazareth.
so called (as Saint Tom. 1. epi. 17. ad Marcellam.
Hierom will have it) from a flower which it signifies in Hebrew, because
Christ, that Prime Cant. 2. 1.
Rose and Lily, had here his conception. For though he saw his first light at
Bethlehem, he sucked his first breath in Nazareth, where his mother lived till
very near the time of her delivery. Also here he afterward had his poor and
painful education, working on his Fathers trade (as it is probable from the
words of the Evangelist, Mar. 6. 3.
Is not this the Carpenter?) though who would not have rather looked for a
Scepter, then an Axe in his hand, who was born King of the Jews?

12. His short and secret abode at Bethlehem, A Vulgar error.
long and public living at Nazareth, gave the ground to the then vulgar
error, that he was born in this place. To foment this popular mistake, and
disguise the truth of Christ's nativity (so to leave the Jews at the greater
loss concerning their Messiah) the devils (who knew full well that he was
Jesus of Bethlehem by birth) publicly called him Jesus Luke 4. 34.
of Nazareth, the reputation of that place running so low in common account,
that John 1. 46.
no good could thence be expected. This nickname of Nazareth, first publicly
fastened (as some conceive) by Satan on our Savior, stuck by him all his life,
yea at his death, (fixed by Pilate in his title on John 19. 19.
the Cross) yea after his ascension, so that such as believed on him, and
embraced his doctrine, were opprobriously termed, the sect of the Act. 24. 5.
Nazarens.

13. Here also some (otherwise good and learned) men, Christ no ceremonious
Nazarite.
are guilty of another mistake, in making Christ one of the Legal Nazarites
(whence grows the length of his hair in most pictures) who by virtue of their
Numb 6. 2.
vow were tied to many ceremonious observances. Whereas our Savior frequently
Mat. 11. 19.
drank wine, familiarly touched the dead and took Luke 8. 54.
them by their hands, (and probably therefore a Rasor touched his head) both
the former being expressly forbidden the Mosaicall Nazarites, during the days of
their separation. Yet how our Savior is termed a Nazaren Mat. 2. 23.
in reference, it may seem, amongst others, to that Prophecy, Isay 11. 1.
And there shall come out a Rod out of the stem of Iesse, and a branch [(...)]
shall grow out of his roots, we leave to the learned Commentators on that Text.

14. During our Saviors living at Nazareth after he entered into the
Ministry, The first fruits of Christ's preaching in Nazareth.
he bestowed a Sermon on this place of his education, and having found out his
text Luke 4. 20.
, Isa. 61. 1. 1 He closed his book. Not in any vain ostentation of his memory;
but because either his Auditors were so well versed in the letter of the
Scripture, that they could tell by heart any quotation he should cite therein:
or rather, because out of his fullness of divine knowledge and wisdom, himself
had no more need of it; and he would thereby fasten the more their ears, and
his tongue to that one text which was of so maine concernment and importance
unto them. 2 And he gave it again to the Minister. Of him he received, to him
he restored it, and coming in Reader by his leave, he would not undermine the
Incumbent, of the place, but honored him in the presence of his people. Hereby
also he might happily show that Ministers are to keep Gods word, not as hucksters
in gross, but as Stewards to dispense it. 3 And sat down. Professor-like, to
show his authority, and the steadiness of his doctrine. In England the Pastor
only stands, whilst the people sit; yet we envy not their ease, nor begrudge
our own pains; any posture shall please us, which may profit them. 4 And the
eyes of all were fastened on him, (advantaged likely thereunto by the round and
pillar-less structure of their Synagogue) not sleeping there, nor gazing about,
nor reading, an action (like Achitophel his 2 Samuel 17. 7.
counsel) good, but not at that time:
But thus fixing their eyes to help their attention, and express their longing
desire to know how he would interpret that famous place of Scripture; as also
for the fame that they had heard of him, who without study and ordinary means
became so incomparable a Teacher John 7. 15.
. And yet curiosity as much as true devotion may seem to cause this their
attention; seeing they who out of novelty were ready to eat his words, soon
after out of cruelty were more ready to devour the speaker, contemning him for
the poverty of his parentage, person and kindred, and hating him for the truth
he delivered, that a Prophet is not without honor but in his own Country.

15. How this comes to pass, Why Prophets without honor in their own country.
let others largely dispute. We may in brief conclude, it is partly because
their cradles can be remembered, and those swadling-cloathes, once used about
them, to strengthen them whilst infants, are afterward abused against them,
to disgrace them when men, and all the passages of their childhood repeated to
their disparagement. Partly because all the faults of their family (which must
be many in a numerous alliance) are charged on the Prophets account. Wherefore
that Prophet who comes at the first in full growth from a far foreign place (not
improving himself amongst them from a small spark, to a fire, to a flame; but
sunlike arising in perfect luster) gains the greatest reputation amongst
people: Because in some respect he is like Melchisedek, Heb. 7. 3.
without Father, without Mother, without descent, whilst the admiring vulgar,
transported with his preaching, and ignorant of his extraction on earth, will
charitably presume his Pedigree from heaven, and his breeding, as calling, to
be divine.

16. The cruel Nazarites brought Christ to the brow of the hill, The murdering
intents of the Nazarites defeated.
with full intent to cast him down headlong. All in vain. For Christ's death
was to come a clean contrary way, not by throwing him down, but by John 3. 14.
lifting him up. And he passing through the midst of them went his way. Not that
(as the Sea them on the place.
Rhemists interpret it, to make way for their transubstantiation) he penetrated
contrary to the nature of a body, through the very breasts of the people, but
that either he smote them with blindness, that they did not see, or else struck
them with fear, that they dared not to stay him, the power of his Person
wedge-like cleaving its way, and forcing a lane for his passage in the midst of
the people.

17. Expect not here that I should write any thing of the opinions of the
heretical Nazarenes, The travels of the chapel of Lauretto.
taking their name from this City of Nazareth, and are commonly (but corruptly)
called Nostranes at this day. Much less will I trouble my self and the reader,
with the several stages of the Chapel of the Angelical-salutation. A Chapel
which well may pity the pains and perils of such pilgrims as repair thereunto,
having it self had an experimental knowledge how tedious travail is in its own
often removealls: flitting first from See T^re^llinus his historia La^rettana.
Nazareth to Flumen a City in Illyrium, thence for the unworthiness of the
inhabitants translated to a wood in the Picene field, and thence again (because
the wood was infected with thieves) carried by Angels into the ground of two
brethren, who falling out about parting the profit thereof, was the fourth and
last time conveyed into the high way, where ever since (not because weary but
welcome) it is pleased to make its abode. But I remember the precept of the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. 4.
nor give heed to fables; and therefore proceed to more profitable matter.

18. To return to Nazareth, the nameless rivolet arising near thereunto,
Joseph sold by his brethren.
runs north betwixt Dothan on the east, and Sephoris on the west. At the
former Joseph was conspired against by his brethren. The cause of their hating
of him (besides his Fathers loving him) was the reporting what he saw in his
sleep, (dreams of his future preferment) and what he saw waking, (no dreams
of his brethrens present Genesis 37. 2.
debauchedness) who resolved to murder him. O how they Genesis 42. 21.
saw the anguish of his soul, made visible in his bended knees, held up hands,
weeping eyes, wailing words, and all to no purpose! Into the pit he is put,
whilst his brethren Genesis 37. 25.
fall a feasting: oh with what heart could they say grace, either before, or
after meat, whilst it was so sad with Joseph! Stars they say are seen the
clearest (even in day time) by those that are in deep pits. Surely divine
providence appeared brightest to Joseph in that condition. Indeed verse 22.
Reuben endeavored his restitution to his Father; verse 26.
Judah his preservation from death; but neither being privy to others design,
unwittingly countermined one another, had not God wrought all for the best.
Ishmaelitish Merchants, and Midianites in their company, pass by, bearing
Spices, and Balm, and myrrh to carry down into Genesis 37. 25.
Egypt. To them Joseph is sold, of whom we take our leave for the present; not
doubting in due time and place to meet him again. Mean time may those merchants
be careful to carry him safe; for among all the spices they were laden with,
none more fragrant and precious, then the perfume of this captives innocence.
So much for Dothan, only I will add that I have placed it here, out of a
peaceable compliance with the judgments of learned men, otherwise I shall not
spare to manifest my private opinion See description of Ephraims Tribe.
Sephoris the greatest city in Galilee.
on just occasion.

19. On the west of this rivolet, was Sephoris, afterward called Dio-caesarea;
not to be omitted (though not mentioned in Scripture) because accounted by De
bell. Iud. lib. 3. (...).
Josephus, the greatest City in Galilee, where the Jewish Sanhedrin for some
time had its residence. Let the same Author inform you, how this City was
burned by Varus, how molested by the seditious, how basely it deserted
Josephus, was bravely recovered by him, plundered by his soldiers, and the
spoil thereof restored again, with several passages of high concernment in
the Jewish history. A little more northward, this brook falls into Jordan the
less, which afterward pays its tribute to the sea of Galilee.

20. Which sea runs Southward by Josh. 19. 13.
Gittah-hepher, or Gath-hepher as most place it, the birthplace of The birth
plac^ of Jonah. 2 King. 14. 25.
Jonah the Prophet. His name in Hebrew a Dove, to which he answered rather in
his speedy Jonah 1. 3.
flight from Gods service, then in any want of Gall, whereof he manifested too
much in his Jonah. 4. 9.
anger without cause or measure. Iona^ therefore being born here in the heart
of nether Galilee, no less untrue, then uncharitable was that assertion of the
high Priests and Pharisees; John 7. 52.
Search and look, for out of Galilee comes no Prophet. Except their words
herein referred to the future, not to what was passed, and that also only in
relation to the Prophet Paramount, the Messiah of Israel. More south, the sea
ran by Magdala a turreted town (as the name thereof imports:) and common
tradition is all the argument we have, that Mary surnamed Magdalen that eminent
penitent, was so called from this place, because living (others say richly
landed) therein. Into the coasts Mat. 15. 39.
of Magdala Christ came from sea, when the Pharisees tempted him to show them a
sign from heaven. In the parallel place in the Gospel of Saint Mark the same
Country is called Dalmanutha; Mar. 8. 10.
different names (it seems) for the same territory.

21. Going forward on the sea side, Bethulia the stage of the tragedy of
Holofernes.
still southward, we meet with the influx of a riyolet thereunto, fetching his
fountain from the heart of the Country, near the City of Bethulia, nigh unto
which was acted the atchievments of Judith against Holofernes.

22. Form Bethulia the rivolet running full east, is swallowed up in the
Galilean Sea, beholding the high seated City of Iotopata, The high seated city
Iot^pata.
some two miles distant from the inlet thereof. The stout defending of this
place against the Romans, with no less wisdom, then valor, was the
masterpiece of Flavius Josephus, in the behalf of his Contrymen. And now
having made necessary mention of his name, pardon a digression in giving a free
Character of his writings, whereof, next holy writ, we have made most use in
this book.

23. It must be confessed that he was guilty of some unexcusable faults: The
character of Flavius Josephus Jew and Priest, son of Ma^tathias.
namely of Boasting immoderately of his own birth, valor, learning, piety.
Levity, inserting frivolous fables of the root Boras etc. And yet we will not
confine natures power to our belief, concluding that impossible which we
conceive improbable. Flattery of the Roman Emperors Vespasian and Titus, (a
catching disease, wherewith the soundest Authors in that age were infected)
and that so gross, that it seems not limn'd with a Pencill, but daubed with a
Trowell.


But all these may be winked at, with a charitable eye, were he not also guilty
of falsity: appearing first in his faults of Though in his Proeme he promises,
(...), without adding or diminishing any thing.
omission, not mentioning the Jewish Idolatry, in making the Calfe, nor the
disobedience of Moses their Ministerial Legislator in smiting the Rock, which
Moses himself, writing of himself, thought fitting to relate. Secondly, of
Commission, stuffing his history with improbable tales of Moses loving the Lady
Tarbith etc. and some mistakes contradictory to holy writ. When we meet with
any such in him relating to this present work, we have made bold (the Sun is
not to be set by dials, but dials by the Sun) to alter and rectify his
extravagancies according to Scripture. Notwithstanding all these faults, the
main bulk of his book deserves commendation, if not admiration; no doubt at the
first compiled, and since preserved by the special providence of God, to
reflect much light and luster upon the Scriptures. His last book De bello
Iudaico is the best Comment on that part of the twenty fourth Chapter of Saint
Matthew, which concerns the destruction of the City and Temple. As for the
censure of Baronius, it is too harsh and uncharitable, charging him with In
Apparatu, numero 84.
absurda and portentosa mendacia, seeing that it cannot appear, that Josephus
willingly and wittingly made those mistakes. Wherefore such chance-medly
amounts not to manslaughter, much less to wilful murder; not to say, that the
charitable Reader ought to be a City of refuge to such Authors, who rather
unhappy, then unfaithful, fall into unvoluntary errors. In a word,
historians, who have no fault are only fit to write the actions of those
Princes and people, who have no miscariages, and only an Angels pen taken from
his own wing is proper to describe the story of the Church triumphant.

24. We still follow the Sea shore southward, Christ's Sermon on this sea.
and light on the place where our Savior standing in a ship taught the people
on the land in his Mat. 13. 2.
Sermon full of parables. A Sermon not unlike the pillar of cloud and fire,
which gave light to the Israelites at the red sea, Exodus 14. 19, 20.
but was a cloud of darkness to the Egyptians: because his preaching then
obscure and parabolicall to the common people, was privately expounded, and
made plain unto his disciples.

25. At last we are come to the City of Tiberias, Tiberias, nigh to which
Christ multiplied the loaves.
so named by Herod the Tetrarch in honor of Tiberius the Roman Emperor. A
populous City, and which gave the name to the neighboring sea, thence termed
John 21. 1.
the sea of Tiberias. Near to this place Ioh. 6. 22, 23.
Christ fed five thousand men with five loaves and two fishes. Afterward he
went over the sea, but how and which way, grudge not Reader to peruse this
following account given us b^ a M Biddulph in his Trav. p. 104. M. Biddulphs
eye-comment on our Saviors sea-voiage.
learned man, an eyewitness of the place.

26. It is said John 6. 1. that Jesus went over the sea of Galilee: and in
another place that he went beyond the lake: and Luke 9. 10. it is said that he
went into a solitary place near unto a City called Bethsaida; which place of
John I learned to understand better by seeing it, then ever I could before by
reading it. For seeing that Tiberias and Bethsaida, were both Cities on the
same side of the sea, and Christ went from Tiberias to or near unto Bethsaida:
I gather thereby that our Savior Christ went not over the length or breadth of
that sea, but over some arm, bosom, or reach thereof, viz. so far as Tiberias
was distant from Bethsaida, which is also confirmed in that it is said
elsewhere, M^^. 6. 33.
a great multitude followed him on foot thither; which they could not have
done, if he had gone quite over the sea, to the other side among the Gergesens.
So far our author, with whose judgment I am moved to concur.

27. More southward, The ancient river of K^shon.
the sea of Tiberias leaves the Tribe of Zebulun, and enters into Issachar.
Come we therefore now to describe the remaining places of note in this Tribe,
most of them being seated on, or near the river of Kishon, whose course we will
observe. It is called by Judge. 5. 21.
Deborah, the ancient river the river Kishon. And why ancient? are not all
rivers of equal antiquity, and the same seniority, seeing Genesis 1. (the
Register book of the age of all creatures) they were made in the third day,
when this lower globe was distinguished into earth and water Genesis 1. 9.
? No surely, though this be true of original and primitive rivers, many since
have been of a second edition, occasioned by Noah's flood, earthquakes,
eruptions of waters after long rain; not to speak of many o^thers derived by
art and industry. Thus we discourse with our selves whilst Vid. eum in locum.
Tremellius takes away the subject of the question rendering (...), or the
Ancient river, torrens occursuum, or the river of meetings. Not that many
tributary rivolets met therein (a probable sense on the first sound) but (as he
Ad quem utrique exc^^citus concur^entes manu conseruer unt: Tr^m. ibid. The 2
streams of Kishon running into several seas.
expounds himself) because the army of Israel there against Sisera appeared in
their general Rendezvous.

28. However, Kishon was a fair River, and surely the same which is termed by
Ptolemy Choriaeus. Entering with a full and large stream (next to Jordan in
breadth, depth, and swiftness) into the land of Zebulun, it divides it self
according to the observation of our B^^eiden bachius in ter. Sacr.
Author (if not hypercriticall herein) into two channels, the one, and that the
lesser, running east (commonly called Kadumim) and falls into the sea of
Galilee, the other rushing northwestward, and emptieth it self into the
Mediterranean. Nigh the banks of the former stands the famous mountain of
Tabor, generally conceived to have been the place of Christ's transfiguration,
where Mat. 17. 1. Mark 9. 2. Luke 9. 30.
Moses and Elias were seen talking with him. Origin (according to his
allegorising of the text) says that thereby was signified, the harmony betwixt
the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospel, all agreeing together. But here I
cannot but smile at what In his de^cription of Palestin which is neither
divided into l^aves, p^ges, columns, nor chapters.
Breidenbachius reports (who traveled up this mountain) Ibi etiam hodie
ostenduntur ruinae trium tabernaculorum secundum desiderium Petri
constructorum, there (says he) even at this day, are showed the ruins of
those three tabernacles built according to Peter's desire. In very good time no
doubt. I confess one Scripture says, Ask and ye shall have M^t. 7. 7.
, but another Text answers it, Ye ask and Iam. 4. 3.
because ye ask amiss; and improbable it is, that God would grant the desire
(or rather distempter) of Peter; and that his wish should come to him, who was
not come to himself, by reason of his great fear, amazement, and ecstasy of
joy. Besides, Tabernacles or Tents, being light, slight occasional structures,
make small visible impressions in the earth, when set up; and leave no durable
footsteps to be seen so many hundred years after. So that herein, Breiden^ach
seems to speak (as S. Peter did in the same place) not Luke 9. 33.
knowing what he said. More likely it is, that there may at this day remain
some ruins of Oratories erected many years since, seeing there was there a
Monastery inhabited by Friars, until they being molested by the Arabians (to
use my Biddulphs Trav. p. 101.
Authors expression) took their holiness away with them, and left the mountain
behind them.

29. The greatest stream of Kishon runs northward through the midst of this
Tribe, The city Naim and Judge Elons sepulcher.
not far from the City of Naim, where Christ meeting the widows only Child,
carried forth to be buried, miraculously restored him to Luke 7. 11.
life. Hereabouts also was the City Aijalon, where Judge. 12. 12.
Elon Judge of Israel was buried, of whom nothing else is recorded save his
name, time of his rule, ten years, and place of his interment. Slight him not
because so little is reported of him, it tending much to the praise of his
Policy in preventing foreign invasions, and domestic commotions, so that the
land enjoyed peace; as far better then victory, as health is to be preferred
before a recovery from sickness. Yea times of much doing, are times of much
suffering, and many martial a^chievements are rather for the Princes honor,
then the peoples ease.

30. From Naim the river Kishon glides by the northern skirts of mount Carmel,
The place where Baals pr^est^ were slain by Eliah.
beholding the place where Eliah did execution on Baals Priests, on this
occasion. All Israel met on mount Carmel, concluding him the true God, who
answered by fire unto their sacrifices. Baals Priests being vainly clamorous in
invoking their Idol, whose petitions find no answer from heaven, except the
echo in the air descanting in derision on their importunate bawlings;
discontented hereat they 1 King. 18. 28.
cut themselves with knives and lancers, the ready way to make blood, but not
fire to come. Then enters Eliah on his work, and to prevent all suspicion of
fraud, he three times caused four barrels of water to be powered on the Altar.
If any here demand how they came by such plenty of water, a precious commodity
after three years and six months drought, when springs, wells, and brooks were
1 King. 17. 7.
dried up: it is answered, it was fetched from the sea hard by, whose brackish
water, though useless to quench the thirsts of men and beasts, was proper
enough therewithal to try the present experiment. Hereupon at Eliahs prayers,
fire from heaven licked up the water, and consumed the Sacrifice. The Prophet
taking advantage of this juncture of time, whilst the people of Israel were
possessed with an high opinion of his power and person, King Ahab stood
admiring at the miracle, Baals Priests stood dispirited with guiltiness and
wonder, and Iazebel their active Patroness absent at great distance, being a
single man, slew four hundred and fifty of them without any resistance.
Formerly their flattering hands rather acting and doing, did theatrically in
superstitious formalities let out some drops of wild blood in the surface of
their flesh, whereas now Eliah in true earnest, with an unpartial arm, gave
vent to their heart blood by the brook Kishon, which presently carries both
their gore, and its own water into the Mediterranean Sea.

31. However though Satan then was silent, The God Carmelus.
(when in credit most concerned to speak in answer to Baals Priests) it seems
he found his tongue afterward, and here pretended to inform people of their
fortune. Suetonius tells us In V^sp^siano cap. 5.
that Vespasian in Judea took counsel from the oracle of the God CARMELUS, which
foretold his good success in whatsoever he should undertake, which God we
conceive was some Spirit of delusion, (though then speaking truly) having his
residence in or nigh this mountain of Carmel.

32. As for Carmel in general, The pleasure of Carmel.
it was so delicious a place* that more pleasure was hardly to be fancied, then
here to be found. It consisted of high hills, (where the wicked thought in vain
by Amos 9. 3.
hiding themselves in the height thereof, to be secured from divine justice) a
fruitful vale, pleasant river of Kishom, and a goodly forest, so that the
feet of Sennacherib did itch to 2 King. 19 32.
enter it, as his fingers did long to fell the fair Cedars in Lebanon. From
this Carmel, the platform of pleasure, other delightful places are so named
(as copies and transcripts of this the original) yea the name is sometimes
Ibid in the marginall note.
rendered appellatively for any fruitful field.

33. From the top hereof we may easily discover two neighboring towns Cain
and V^de ^abulas Adrichomii.
Caiaphas, Cain, Caiaphas, (...), etc.
the one named from the murderer of Genesis 4. 8.
Abel; the other from the Joh. 11. 49.
active contriver of his death, Heb. 12. 2.
whose blood speaks better things then that of Abel. But neither appearing in
Scripture, it is enough to name them. More northerly we behold the valley of
Iiphthah-el, or river thereof, the same (...)
word in Hebrew expressing both, as indeed it is hard to find a vale,
especially in winter, without a rivolet therein. And if I mistake not, the
BOURNE in Wilt-shire, and the west, signifies both the river and the dale down
which it runs. In the vale nigh the river of Iiphthah-el stood the city
Zebulun, so beautifully built, says De bell. I^d. li^. 2, cap. 32.
Josephus, (let him forfeit his fingers when he measures any thing to loss
which concerns his own country) that Cestius the Roman Governor who burnt it,
admired the houses therein as corrivalls with those of Tire, Zidon, and Berytus
in magnificence. More southward is Cana called commonly the less, though
greatened with Christ's first miracle wrought there at a marriage, turning John
2. 1.
water into wine. How many matches have been made, to which Christ was never
invited guest; yea the riot and revels thereat, would fright his gracious
presence from the place. Hence the rivolet Josh. 19. 11.
runs to Iokneam, surnamed Josh. 12. 22.
of Carmel from the vicinity thereof; the King whereof was destroyed by Joshua,
and the City afterward bestowed upon the Josh. 21. 34.
Levites.

34. Having mentioned the Levite-cities, A ch^rlish difficulty
an importunate difficulty (whilst I hoped silently to slip by it) plucketh me
back in my passage: It resulteth from the ensuing parallel.

Joshua 21. 34, 35. And unto the families of the children of M^r^ri, the rest
of the Levites, out of the Tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs, and
Kartah with her suburbs, Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalol with her suburbs:
four cities.

1 Chronicles. 6. 77. Unto the rest of the children of Merari, was given out of the
Tribe of Zebulun, Rimmon with her suburbs, Tabor with her suburbs.



The difficulty is double: first four Cities are mentioned in Joshua, and but
two in Chronicles. Secondly, those two fall out by their different names,
nothing like the four formerly assigned them.

35. In solution hereof, Rather waved then s^tisfied.
some will say that the Levites might have six cities in Zebulun. But why
should this tribe being not the biggest be most bountiful unto them? Was it
because Zebuluns lot advantaged by the sea-situation thereof, was larger in
worth then in view; and so the Merchant adventurers of this tribe, making
gainful voyages and profitable returns, were obliged in conscience to be more
liberal to the maintenance of Gods Ministers? Or are two of the Levites cities
left out in Chronicles (omission in such cases for reasons to us unknown is no
contradiction) and the other Tostatus, and Trem^llius in locum Chroni^o^um, who
makes Dimnah the same with Rimmon, Tabo^ with Nahalol.
two the same (though unlike in sound) with the two last mentioned in Joshua.
Indeed I deny not, but the towns at the same time may have two names nothing
alike, (Medena, alias Newport, in the Isle of Wight may be an instance
thereof.) But for all I can find, still I languish in expectation of a better
solution. Yet let not his good will be slighted, who though unable to cure the
wound; (whilst Commentatours on the place suffer it to lie festering in
silence) desires to wash it and keep it clean, till a more skillful hand apply
an effectual plaster thereunto.

36. In Solomon's division of the land into twelve purveyour-ships, The arms of
Z^bulun.
Zebulun had no distinct officer over him, but belonged to the territory of
Baanah the Son of Ahilud; who, besides many places he had in Manasseh, extended
his Jurisdiction 1 King. 4. 12.
even beyond Iokneam. The Arms of Zebulun, confirmed unto him by custom, and
Rabbinicall tradition, were Argent, a ship with Maste and tackling sable. An
honorable Bearing, the same with the Coat armor of Albertus free Baron of
Alasco in Poland, ^ave that his ship is without sails, (with this Motto, Deus
dabit vela, God will send sails) and Zebuluns accomplished with all the
accoutrements thereof.

Here the Map of Issachar is to be inserted.
THE TRIBE OF ISSACHAR. CHAP. 7.
1. ISsachar, Issachars numbers and em^nent persons.
the fifth Genesis 30. 17.
Son which Jacob begat on Leah his wife, had his posterity so increased in
Egypt, that from thence came forth of this Tribe fifty Numb. 1. 29.
four thousand and four hundred. All which falling in the wilderness, for their
frequent tempting of God, their Sons grew (Judah and Dan excepted) more
numerous then any other Tribe, insomuch that sixty four Number. 26. 25.
thousand and three hundred, of twenty years old and upward, appeared at their
second solemn muster in the plains of Moab. Tolah the Judge was of this Tribe;
Baasha and Elah Kings of Israel 1 King. 15. 27
fair Abishag the Shunamite, wife (or 1 King. 1. 4.
rather bedfellow) to aged David; with another Lady (if in beauty, not in
goodness her inferior) of the same city, who so kindly entertained the Prophet
Elisha.

2. Issachar had the sea Deuteronomy. 33. 18, 19.
on the west, Jordan on the Josh. 19. ^2.
east; His bounds and fruitfulness.
Zebulun on the north, Manasseh on the south. A fair fruitful country; for,
as all Canaan is called the pleasant Psalm. 106. 24.
land: so it is particularly observed of Issachars portion, he saw the land
Genesis 49. 15.
that it was pleasant, and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant
unto tribute. This Tribe better acquitted it self in the Subsidy, then in the
Muster-book, they were the best Yeomantry of Israel, toward the advancing of
ra^es and taxes. They loved rest, and a sedentary life. Blame them not, if
sensible of the goodness of their soil, they were loath to leave home, because
certain to remove to their loss, and are compared to an Genesis 49. 14.
Ass couching between two burdens.

3. Yet were not the men of Issachar of such servile natures, Not defective in
valor.
but that they could be valiant, when just occasion was offered them. They were
as willing, and resolute as any other, in Judge. 5. 15.
helping Barak in the battle against Sisera. Yet even then we may observe,
they marched not far from their own habitations, the field being fought in the
bowels of their country. And well might his Ass, find both heels and teeth,
to kick and bite such, as offer to take his Hay from his rack and Provender a
way from his manger.

4. Nor let the resembling of Issachar to an Ass; Excelling in Chronology.
depress this Tribe too low in our estimation. The strength of his back, not
stupidity of his head, gave the occasion thereunto (...) in one point of
excellent skill, this Tribe surpassed all others, being men that had
understanding of the times, 1 Chr. 12. 32.
to know what Israel ought to do. Now seeing time Ianus-like has two faces,
one looking backward [Chronology] the other forward [Prognostication] the
question will be, in which of these lay the learning of the Issacharites? A
learned man Riv^t Exer^. in 49. Gen^sios.
conceives them only like husbandmen, weather-wise by their own rural
observations. Sure more is imported in that expression, and not only Almanac,
but Chronicle-skill contained therein; so that from deductions from former,
they could make directions for the future times. Oh for a little of Issachars
art in our age, to make us understand these intricate and perplexed times, and
to teach us to know what we ought to do, to be safe with a good conscience. So
much of the persons in this Tribe; come we now to survay the eminent places
contained therein.

5. In the south confines thereof stood the regal city of Josh. 19. 18.
Iezreel. Iezreel a regal City.
For though the valley of Iezreel belonged to Josh. 17. 10.
Manasseh, the city it self must pertain to Issachar, otherwise the sixteen
cities assigned him Josh. 19. will fall short of that number. In Iezreel Ahab
had a Princely Palace (happily the joynter-house of Iezebel) besides a 2 King. 9.
27.
garden-house adjoining; and here in the city lived Naboth, as hard by lay his
vineyard, which Ahab could not obtain from him, either by purchase or ^ King.
21. 3.
exchange.

6. Some will find more equity in Ahabs offers, then discretion in Naboths
Naboths refusal defended.
refusal. But, blame him not, if loath to offend his God, to accommodate his
King. Being (no doubt) in his conscience persuaded that his earthly possession,
was the earnest of his heavenly inheritance, and that his parting with the
former, voided his title to the latter. Besides, his vineyard (six hundred
years since the partition of the land by lot) had pertained to his ancestors
(probably) more ages, then Ahabs new erected palace had belonged years to his
family.

7. On the denial Ahab falls sullen-sick. No meat will down with him for lack
of a salad, because wanting Naboths Iezebels murdering of Naboth.
vineyard for a garden of herbs, till Iezebel undertook the business. A letter
is made up of her brains, her husbands hand and seal to the Elders of Iezreel,
enjoining them to set up two 1 King. 21. 10
men of Belial, to accuse Naboth of blasphemy against God, and the King. She
took it for granted, plenty of such persons were to be found in so populous,
and vicious a place. Oh the ancient order of Knight of the post, for money to
depose any falsehood. Hereupon Naboth is stoned to death, and his 2 King. 9. 26.
Sons also, flatly contrary to Gods command, which in this case had provided,
The Deuteronomy. 24. 16.
children shall not be put to death for their fathers, but every man shall be
put to death for his own sin. But this was done, to clear all claims, and
prevent all pretenders of ti^les unto the inheritance.

8. Thu^ Naboths vineyard was for Ahabs use turned into a garden of ^erbes.
Divine just^ce.
Surely the bitter wormwood of Divine revenge grew plenti^^lly there^n. For in
the same place his Son Ioram, and gran-child Ahaz^ah had a martial interview
with Iehu, and were both worsted by him. Here Iehu with a shot out of a bow
(archery fatal both to 1 King. 22. 34.
Ahab and his Son) wounded Iehoram to the 2 King. 9. 24
heart, and by special order to Bidkar ^ Captain, commanded that his corpse
should be cast into the field of Naboth the Iezr^^lite. Oh the exact Topography
observed in divine justice! so accurate is God, not only in the time, but
place of his punishment.

9. Greater is the difficulty about the death of King Ahaziah slain about the
same time. Abaziahs double death reconciled.
For, whereas it is Heb. 9. 27.
appointed for all men once, he seemed twice to die, and that in far distant
places.

2 Kings 9. 27. But when Ahaziah the King of Judah saw this, he fled by the way
of the Gardenhouse, and Iehu followed after him, and said, Smite him also in
the charet [and they did so] at the going up to Gur, which is by Ibleam: and he
fled to Megiddo, and died there.

2 Chronicles. 22. 9. And Iehu sought Ahaziah, and they caught him (for he was hid
in Samaria) and brought him to Iehu, and when they had slain him, they buried
him: because said they, he is the Son of Iehosaphat, who sought the Lord with
all his heart.



But all is reconciled, if we take Samaria, not for the city so named, but for
the whole kingdom of Israel, in which notion Ahab is styled King of 1 King 21.
1.
Samaria, that is, the ten Tribes, whereof Samaria was the Metropolis. In this
acception, Megiddo, and all the passage thereunto was in Samaria, where Ahaziah
hoped in vain, by his flight to hide, and conceal himself.

10. All thus agreed concerning the death, And his doubl^ ^^riall.
I hope no difference will arise about the burial of Ahaziah. Though in one
tex^ his 2 King. 9. 28.
ow^ servants, in another Iehu 2 Chr. 22. 9*
his men are said to bu^y him. The one might do it by the leave and license of
the other, and Iehu his soldiers did deliver Ahaziah's de^d corpse to his own
servants, to interre it in Jerusalem.

11. Iezebel survived not long after. The manner of lezebels death.
As Iehu was entering Iezreel, she (newly painted) entertains him with a taunt
out of the window, to try whether her tongue, or his sword were the sharper. We
meet but with three principal speeches of her in Scripture; the first an
Idolatrous oath and curse, The 1 King. 19. 2*
Gods do so to me, and more also: the next, a mortal threat, and loud lie, If
I make not Elijah's, like Ibidem.
one of their lives by to morrow this time: the last an impudent and
unseasonable jeer, Had Zimri 2 King. 9. 31.
peace that slew his Master? Presently she is thrown down headlong, and the
dogs eat her up to the ^eversion of her Ibid. verse. 35.
skull, palms of her hands, and feet. What, h^d the poison of her painting,
(...) deeply pierced into these the naked Feet, in thos^ parts, naked i^
^andal^.
parts of her body, that the dogs were afraid to feed o^ them? However it came
to pass, Iezebels skull may be worn as a deaths-head in the memories of all
wicked persons, abusing their power, to mind them of their certain ruin,
without serious repentance. The heads also of Ahabs children killed in Samaria,
were laid in two heaps at the entrance of the gates of 2 King. 10. 8.
Iezreel.

12. It may seem strange, The blood of Iezebel why requ^red of Iehu.
that seeing Iehu was warranted by commission from heaven, in the execution of
Ahabs family, and friends, that God should afterward threaten by his Prophet,
I will Hose. 1. 4.
avenge the blood of Iezreel upon the house of Iehu. But it seems, though
herein Iehu his chariot went in the path of Gods command, yet he did drive it
on furiously, the pace of his own cruelty, vainglory, and ambition. Thus, that
officer is a murderer, though acting the sentence of the Judge, if withal he
pleases his private malice, in executing persons condemned to die. The matter
of Iehu his act was rewarded, the manner revenged by God.

13. The river Kishon runs through the midst of this Tribe, The brave
battle against (...).
which entering in at Naboths vineyard, takes his course northward with a
winding channel, not far from Shamir in mount Ephraim, wherein Tola the Judge,
or rather, the Justice of peace in Israel (nothing of war being achieved in his
government) both dwelt, Judge. 10. 1, 2.
and was buried. Hence on his western bank, Kishon beholds the place, where
Barak fought that famous battle against Sisera. It is recorded to the
commendation of such Israelites, Judge. 5. 19.
as assisted him, that they took no gain of money. Indeed they of Zebulun were
by their calling Judge. 5. 14.
such as handled the pen, though now turned swordmen, in case of necessity.
And when men of peaceable professions, are, on a pinch of extremity for a short
time, forced to fight, they ought not, like soldiers of fortune, to make a
tradeto enrich themselves thereby, seeing defense of religion, life, and
liberty, are the only wages they seek for in their service.

14. In this most eminent battle, S^ars wa^^curs
the Stars in their courses fought against Sisera. What, are the numerous
people of Israel meant thereby, whom God Genesis 15. 5. and 22. 17.
promised to multiply as the Stars in heaven? or, are only the principal
officers in their Army intended therein? Sure, it is safest to embrace the
literal sense, that those celestial lights, frowning with their malignant
aspects, caused frights and fears in the hearts of the Canaanites. Such, as
utterly deny all influences of Stars on men's minds, show therein, that the
moon has made too much impression on their crazy judgments, and lunatic
opinions.

15. But, the river of Kishon Kishon Gods besome.
was not only a spectatour of this fight, but also an actour of a principal
part therein: For, when the Canaanites routed in the battle, essayed to wade
this river, so to recover their country on the other side, the stream
thereof, probably lately made more deep, and rapid with extraordinary rain
(the largess of some wa^ry Planet which fought for Israel) Judge. 5. 21.
swept them away. So that what fragments of these Canaanites, were left by the
Israelites swords glutted with slaughter, Kishon was the voider to take them
clean away.

16. Hence Kishon Kishon and Enga^^im.
runs on by Kishion (the vicinity of the name is argument enough, to place
it on the banks of this river) elsewhere 1 Chronicles. 6.
called Kedesh, being one of the four cities in this Tribe, belonging to the
Levites Josh. 21 28.
Gershonites. More east whereof lay another of the same nature, Engannim,
called Ienine at this day, being now a very pleasant Biddulphs ^ravells. p. 113.
place, having fine gardens, orchards, and waters about it, as it has its
Hebrew name from a fountain. And that we may know, that the country
hereabouts, still retains more then the ruins of its former fertility, a
judicious Idem ibidem.
modern traveller tells us, that in his whole journey from Damascus to
Jerusalem, he saw not more fruitful ground, and so much together, then he did
in two and twenty miles riding, betwixt mount Tabor and Engannim.

17. Hence Kishon continuing his course northward, Sh^nem Abishags birthplach.
leaves the city Josh. 19. 18.
Shunem at some distance from his western bank, the birthplace of Abishag,
wife-nurse to King David, to procure 1 King. 1. 3.
heat to his decayed age. Time was, when he boasted, that his youth was Psalm.
103. 5.
renewed as the eagles, but eagles (notwithstanding the often casting of their
bills, and years therewith) are at last seized on with age, and death, as it
fared then with decrepit David. Adonijah, David's Son, afterward lost his
life, for petitioning to have this Abishag 1 King. 2. 23.
for his wife. What was his fault? Incest, or treason? Surely, neither
effected, no, nor attempted in any clandestine way, without leave from the
King. Let it suffice, Solomon saw more, then we, in this matter; his eyes also
not wanting the magnifying-glass of State-jealousie, to improve his discoveries
herein. But, this accident was only the hilt or handle, for Solomon to take
hold on; Adonijah's former fault was the edge, to cut off his life. Thus, let
those, who once have been desperately sick of a Princes displeasure, and
recovered, know, that the least relapse will prove deadly unto them.

18. In Shunem dwelt that worthy woman, Elisha his honorable land^lady.
who prevailed with her husband, to harbor Elisha in his passage this way.
Gods Prophets are no lumber, but the most profitable stuff wherewith an house
can be furnished. Landlords prove no losers by such Tenants, (though sitting
rent-free) whose dwelling with them, pays for their dwelling with them. At
Elisha's prayer God made this woman (barren before) the happy mother of an
hopeful 2 King. 4. 17.
Son. Somes years after, this child grown a stripling, and going into his
Fathers field to see his reapers, was there smitten with a deadly sickness. So
that the corn on the land might pass for the emblem of this child's condition,
save that that being ripe, and ready wooed the cycles to cut it, whilst this
green grain was mow'n down in the blade thereof. At noon 2 King. 4. 20.
the child dyed. Had one the same morning beheld the Sun arising out of the
east, and this child coming forth of his fathers house in perfect health, he
would not have suspected, that the noon of the one would prove the night to the
other. But by the prayers of Elisha he was restored again unto her.

19. This Shunamite was afterward seven years absent, Restored to her lost
possession^.
in the land of the Philistines, during which time, the profits of her estate,
as appears by the text,x were seized on by the Kings officers. 2 Kin. 8. 1. etc.
Custom (it seems) entitled the Crown to their revenues, which resided not on
their lands, especially (if living as she did) in the land of a foreign foe. She
addressed her self by petition to King Ioram, for restitution of her means.
Formerly she had no use of the Prophets profer, to 2 King. 4. 13.
speak for her to the King, or to the Captain of the host, who now was fain to
prefer her suit in her own person. None know what hereafter may befall them.
Such, whose young feet were only taught to traverse their own ground, may in
their old age be learnt a harder lesson, to trudge abroad in attendance to
others. Gehazi happily there present, attests her the woman whose Son was
restored to life, and by the Kings command, her lands and profits were restored
to he. Let her, under God, thank Elisha for this favor; for, that place in her
house, where his 2 King. 4. 10.
bed, table, stool, and candlestick stood, kept possession for her in her
absence, of all the rest of her Demesnes, and procured the speedy restitution
thereof.

20. To return to Kishon, Tabor a city.
which somewhat more northward leaves this Tribe, and enters into Zebulun,
having first divided it self into two streams, whereof the easternmost (being
the north-boundary of Issachar) runs by Josh. 19. 22.
Tabor, a city so called, from the vicinity of the mountain we formerly
described. Hereabouts Zeba Judge. 8. 18.
and Zalmunna, made a massacre of many Princelike Israelites, for which fact
Gideon ordered their execution. And here we take notice of two neighboring
mountains lovingly agreeing together. 1 Tabor on the north (whereof formerly in
Zebulun) of so eminent note, that it passed for a proverbiall expression, of
any unquestioned certainty, As Ier. 46. 18.
sure as* Tabor is among the mountains. This place was in after ages much
profaned with Idolatry, as appears by the Prophet Hos. 5. 1.
complaining of the priests, that they had been a net spread upon Tabor. 2
Hermon, hard by on the south of this Tribe (the top-cliffe whereof is called
Hermonium Brocardus in Descrip. Terrae Sanc. Itin. ab Acone versu^ Eurum.
as a modern Traveller does describe. Psalm. 89. 12.
David puts them both together, The north and the south thou have ^reated them,
Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in thy name.


However others understand the Psalmist of another Hermon, that famous mountain
formerly described in Manasseh beyond Jordan, being the east-border, as Tabor
was in the heart of the land of Canaan; meaning thereby, that, middle, and
marches; outside, and inside; center, and circumference; all the whole world
must rejoice in Gods power which made; and providence, which preserves them.

21. This east-stream of Kishon, Da^arah and Tarichea.
in modern Maps called Kedummim, runs to Daberah in the confines of Josh.
19. 12.
Zebulun, but belongs to this Tribe, out of which Josh. 21. 28.
it was assigned a city for the Levites. Then falls it into the sea of
Cinnereth, or Tiberias, somewhat south of Tarichea a famous city, whereof
frequent mention in Josephus, but none in Scripture, to which we chiefly
confine our description.

22. The east part of Issachar is wholly taken up with the mountains of Gilboa,
where the Armies of the Isra^lites, and the Philistines met, having formerly
measured most part of this Tribe, with their military motions. The Philistines
marching first from 1 S^m. 28. 4.
Shunem to 1 Samuel 29. 1.
Aphek; thence to 1 Samuel 29. 11.
Iezreel, (backward and forward to find an advantageous place for fight)
thence to mount Gilboa, where they encountered, and conquered the Israelites in
battle. Saul being here grievously wounded, desired his Armor-bearer to slay
him, who refused it, as bearing his Arms for the defense, not destruction of
his Master. Hereupon Saul slew himself, and his Armor-bearer followed his
example. Both which, having since cast up their* Audit, can tell, what is
gotten by the prodigal thrift of throwing away ones life, to prevent the
losing thereof. Then a fourfold division was made of what remained of Saul. His
1 Samuel 31. 9, 10.
head sent into the land of the Philistines; body hung up upon the walls of
Bethshean; Armor offered in the Temple of Ashtaroth; 2 Samuel 1. 10.
Crown, and bracelets brought by the Amalekite to King David. For though his
tongue spoke lies, his hands told truth, presenting the very regalia of King
Saul. Wonder not, that Saul should wear these ornaments in battle, where an
helmet had been more proper then a Crown; seeing we read in our English Speed
in the life of Richard the third toward the end.
Chronicles, that in Bosworth-fight King Richards Crown-ornamentall was found
among the spoils in the field, and then, and there set by the Lord Stanley on
the head of King Henry the seventh.

23. David, Rain on mount Gilboa.
on this dysaster of Saul's death, cursed Mount Gilboa, 2 Samuel 1. 21.
Let there be no dew or rain upon you. But, Descrip. T^r. Sanc. ab Acone versus
Notum.
Brochardus traveling over them Anno Dom. 1283. found, and felt both, being
well wetted in his journey. What! were David's words guilty of infidelity,
seeing it is easier to withhold rain from a mountain, then to remove it from
its foundation, and cast it into the sea? and yet our Savior Mat. 17. 20.
assures us this shall be done, if in faith desired. But, be it known, David
intended not his curse should take effect, but merely to manifest his great
grief, and to show, how far he was from delighting at the death of his greatest
enemy. Better to fall under David's Dirae, as he was a Poet, then as he was a
Prophet, the latter lighting heavily indeed, as Act. 1. 20.
Judas in Psalm. 109. 7.
Achitophel could witness the weight thereof. Nor remains any thing more
observable in this Tribe, save in the east part thereof, on Jordan they show
Pilgrims the place where 1 King. 5.
Naaman (patient at last by his servants persuasion) washed seven times, and
was cleansed of his Leprosy.

24. Thus all the remarkable places of Issachar, Manass^h in Issachar.
but not all those in Issachar, are already by us described. For, (as the text
Josh. 17. 11.
expressly says) the Tribe of Manasseh had in Issachar, and in Asher, even
three Countries; that is, lying in Issachar, and Asher, but environed round
with those Tribes possessions, yet pertaining to the portion of Manasseh. Let
none blame Divine Providence of ill Architecture, for not well contriving the
rooms in the house of Israel; the division of the land by lot, not being well
designed, wherein Issachars Chamber [his portion] was made a thorough-fare,
Manasseh having three closets [three small countreys] within the same. So that
neither Tribe could enjoy his own with privacy, and intireness; and Manasseh
(if but stepping out of the highway) must in a manner trespass on Issachar, or
crave leave of him, to come, through his, to his own inheritance. But know, all
was ordered by the Ephesians. 1. 11.
counsel of Gods will, for reasons best known to himself; who would not have
his children Churles, to ingross habitations by themselves; but, by such
mixture of their portions, invited, yea, engaged their persons to mutual
intercourse, seeing the very lots of their Tribes gave loving visits, and their
Countries (by Gods own appointment) came so courteously, and confidently, one
within another.

25. But very hard it is to conceive, And how in Asher.
how Manasseh could have any land within Asher, which Tribe lay many miles more
northward, and beyond the Tribe of Zebulun interposed. The Jewish Rabbis being
much perplexed at the Pedigree of A^zel, why it is twice reckoned up in Viz. 1
Chr. 8. 38. and 1 Chr. 9. 44.
Chronicles, use to say, that they Opus est quadring^ntis camelis onustis
Commentariis, rationem reddere. Mar. Sutra cited by Buxdors. in Thesauro. sol.
202.
need four hundred Camels laden with Commentaries to give the true reason
thereof. But their expression is more appliable to this present difficulty, how
Manasseh could have any ground in Asher, except (as we have presented it in our
Map) some part of Asher lay southward at distance, dis-jointed from the main
body of that Tribe, which we have formerly described. Who knows not that pieces
of Parishes, parcells of Manors, portions of Counties, though far off
dismembered, relate unto them, notwithstanding the intermediate distance betwixt
them?

26. But let not Issachar, or Asher repine, that Manasseh had so much land in
their Countries, seeing though the right was assigned unto them, the Canaanites
for a long time (till about David's reign) kept all the same in their
possession, as will appear by the ensuing parallel.

Joshua 17. 11. And Manasseh had in Issachar and Asher, Bethshean, and her
towns, and Ibleam, and her towns, and the inhabitants of Dor, and her towns,
and the inhabitants of Endor, and her towns, and the inhabitants of Taanch, and
her towns, and the inhabitants, of Meggido and her towns, even three Countries.
Judges 1. 27. Neither did Manasseh drive out the inhabitants of Bethshean, and
her towns, nor Taanach, and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor, and her
towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam, and her towns, nor the inhabitants of
Megiddo, and her towns: but the Canaanites would dwell in that land.

Of Bethshean more conveniently hereafter. By Ibleam, 2 King. 9. 27.
Ahaziah was wounded, as was formerly observed. Dor (mentioned for a sea-town
in Ptolemy) had the King thereof conquered Josh. 12. 23.
by Joshua. Endor, whither Sisera's soldiers defeated in fight, not far off at
Judge. 5. 19.
Taanach, (which also^was a regal city in the days of Ios^. 11. 21.
Joshua, and afterward belonged to the Levites) fled, were pursued, Psalm. 83.
10.
perished and became as the dung of the earth. Hither Saul repaired to a witch,
to raise Samuel, and received cold comfort from the dead, or Devil rather,
informing him of his future destruction: so that Saul, formerly sick with fear
of the worst, lived to hear Satan toll his passing bell in his sad predictions.

27. But Josh. 17. 11.
Megiddo Megiddo an eminent city.
was the most eminent City Manasseh had in Issachar. The King hereof was
destroyed by Joshua, and many years after Josiah was slain in the vale of
Megiddo, bidding Pharaoh Necho battle, in his march against Charchemish by
Euphrates. Never Prince showed more devotion in his life, or less discretion in
his death, courting that danger which declined him, seeing Pharaoh desired 2
Chr. 35. 21.
peaceably to depart. But happily Josiah conceived himself engaged to fight him,
in point of 1 Honor; because without leave he had made his land an high way to
pass through it. 2 Policy; suspicious, though Pharaoh went forth as a friend,
he would return as a foe, especially if puffed up with success in his
expedition.


But what shall we say? it was the sin of his subjects would not suffer Josiah
to keep quiet at home. Their impieties made him to march, thrust him into the
field, forced him into the fight, yea, shot the fatal arrow, which wounded him
at the heart.

28. Now let none be troubled, because Josiah (who rather deserved two lives)
seems to have two deaths, Josiah his death reconciled.
one text making him to die 2 King. 23. 29.
at Megiddo, another 2 Chr. 35. 24.
at Jerusalem. Understand it, death arrested him with a mortal wound at
Megiddo, but did not imprison him till he came to Jerusalem, where he expired.
Much less let any challenge God, as worse then his word with Josiah, having
promised him by his Prophet 2 King. 22. 20.
to be gathered to his Fathers in peace; for besides that that promise
principally related to the captivity of Babylon (from which Josiah was
exempted) even such may be said to die in peace, which swim to their graves in
their own blood, if withal imbarqued in a good conscience.

29. All Israel, General grief thereat.
and principally the Prophet Jeremy, dropped many a precious tear on his
hearse, whose See the Sep^u^gints preface on the Lamentations.
Lamentations are an Elegy on Iosiah's death; yea, their grief was no
land-flood of present passion, but a constant channel of continued sorrow,
streaming from an annual fountain, it being made an 2 Chr. 35. 25.
Ordinance in Israel. The Prophet speaking of a grand, and general grieving
for men's sins, Zech, 12. 11.
compares it to the mourning of Hadadrimmon (conceived to be a place hard by)
in the valley of Megiddon.

30. Iehosaphat the son of Paruah was Solomon's purvey our in 1 King. 4. 17.
Issachar, The Arms of Issachar.
but the dis-jointed piece of Manasseh in this Tribe pertained partly to Baanah
the son of Ahilud (to whom belongs Taanach; Megiddo, and all Bethsh^an 1 Kin.
4. 12.
) and partly to Aminada^ husband to Taphath Solomon's daughter, purveyour alone
in the land of 1 King. 4. 11.
Dor. An argument of the great fertility of that little land, because the land
of Dor alone, was a sign for a whole month in the Zodiac of Solomon's yearly
provisions. An Ass (formerly observed) argent, in a field vert, was Issachar's
Arms, cou^hing between two Genesis 49. 14.
burdens. Some by these understand Zebulun, and Manasseh, which bounded
Issachar on both sides. But, why was their neighborhood more burdensome, then
any other Tribes? Such perchance, are nearer the truth, who expound the two
burdens, Tribute and Tillage; betwixt which, Issachar, quietly cocuhed, never
meddling with wars, but when forced thereunto in his own defense.

Here the Map of Manasseh on this side Jordan is to be inserted.
THE DESCRIPTION OF MANASSEH on this side JORDAN. CHAP. 8.
1. MAnasseh his numbers and worthies have formerly been described on the east
of Jordan, The remainder of Manasseh.
as also such Cities as being environed with Issachar, yet belonged to this
Tribe. It remains that we survey that portion of Manasseh west of Jordan,
lying entire in it self, and having Issachar on the north, Ephraim on the
south, the Mediterranean Sea on the west, and Jordan on the east thereof, a
fruitful Country divided betwixt Josh. 17. 2.
six male-families of the Manassites, and the five daughters of Zelophehad.
Zeloph^h^ds daughters plea.


2. These were those Virgins, who pleading before Numb. 27. 2. and 36. 12.
Moses, got a right to, before Josh. 17. 4.
Joshua got possession of their inheritance. Silence was injoined their Sex in
the 1 Timothy 2. 1^.
Church, not Court, where they handled their own cause so well, it is pity any
Counsel should be retained for them. Nor was it the worst part of their
Rhetoric, the good Character they gave their dead Father, which might serve
for an Epitaph to be inscribed on his monument.

Here lies the man, who Numb. 2^3.
was not in the company of them who gathered themselves together against the
Lord in the COMPANY OF KORAH, but died in his OWN SIN. Meaning he died a
natural death for his personal offenses, and was no sharer in the guilt of
Rebellion against God in Moses. This instance of Zelophehad his coheirs, let
Lawyers judge how justly it is alleged of some against their practice, who by
entailes on the Heir male, dam up inheritances from running in that general
channel into which God and nature has derived them.

3. In the west of this Tribe on the sea, Cesarea built by Herod.
we meet with Cesarea Stratonis, built and beautified (with a fair haven called
Drusus) by Herod the great in the honor of Augustus Caesar. Amongst other
edifices therein, Act. 23. 35.
Herod's judgment hall by him built was a most remarkable structure. Indeed all
Cesarea might be termed Gods judgment hall, from an exemplary piece of justice
here executed on Herod Antipas. Who coming hither from Jerusalem clad with
gorgeous raiment, (and the guilt of Saint Act. 12. 2.
James his blood) made an eloquent oration, more gaudy then his apparel, unto
the people, who cried out in approbation thereof, The voice of a God, and not
of a man: here Herod in stead of rejoining The voice of lying flatterers, and
not of sober men; in stead of reclaiming what they exclaimed, embraced and
hugged their praises as proper to himself, and thereupon an Act. 12. 23.
Angel and worms, the best and basest of creatures, met in his punishment, the
one smiting, the other eating him up: and no wonder if Worms quickly devoured
him, whom those flesh-flies had blown up before. If any ask, seeing the people
were equally guilty in that their sacrilegious expression, (yea they were the
thieves, Herod but the receiver) why fell not the pun^shment also on the whole
multitude? It is answered, First, because they were the whole multitude; and
God in such cases mercifully singles out some singall offenders for punishment
to save but fright the rest. Secondly, more discretion was expected from a
Prince, then from a rabble of people. Lastly, what in them was but a
blasphemous complement, was by Herod's acceptance thereof made in him a reality,
usurped by him as due to his deserts.

4. But leaving profane Herod, Inhabited by pious people.
many pious people lived in Cesarea, as Act. 10. 1.
Cornelius the Centurion, the first fruits of the Gentiles; Act. 21. 10.
Agabus the Prophet, foretelling Saint Paul's bonds and Martyrdom; and Philip
the Evangelist, famous for his four daughters Act. 21. 9.
Virgins-prophetesses. This I firmly believe, whilst my faith demurres at
what I read of Brechin a Lord in Camdens Brit. in Brecknockshire.
Wales, who had four and twenty daughters all Saints begotten of his own body.

5. Here Saint Paul eloquently defended his innocence, Saint Paul his behavior
in Cesarea.
against the salable tongue of Tertullus, and afterward reasoned of
righteousness, temperance Act. 24. 25.
and judgment, before Felix the corrupt, vicious and debauched Deputy of
Judea, till Felix, (his foundred feet feeling the Pincers) began to winch and
to prefer Saint Paul's room before his company. In the same place the Apostle
pleaded for himself before Festus, Agrippa and Bernice his Joseph. lib. 20.
incestuous wife-sister, entering into the place of hearing, Act. 25. 23.
(...), with much fancifulness, or great pomp. Perchance this Bernice ware
then about her, that eminent Gem, whereof the Heathen Poet I^venal Satyr. 6.
took especial notice.

-- deinde adamas notissimus, and Berenices
In digito factus preciosior; hunc dedit olim
Barbarus, incestae dedit hunc Agrippa sorori.
And Translated by Sir Rob. Stapil^on.
the famed diamond the richer showed
On Berenices fingers, this bestowed
The barbarous Agrippa, he to his
Incestuous sister once presented this.
But be Bernice never so brave, the Act. 26. 29.
bonds of Saint Paul, (worn by him then in Cesarea) were in the Judgment of
God, and all good men the most glorious ornament.

6. South of Cesarea stood Antipatris, The river Kanah.
named in the honor of Antipater father to Herod the great. Hi^her Saint Paul
came guarded in state by night with more then Act. 23. 23.
five hundred soldiers, and hence the footmen were sent back to Jerusalem
whilst the seventy horse advanced forward with him to Cesarea. South of
Antipatris the river Josh. 17. 9.
Kanah (which divides this Tribe from Ephraim) runs into the sea, so called
from reeds KANAH in Hebrew, (whence our English Canes or walking-staves fetch
in both the name and thing from the east Countries) growing plentifully
thereabouts, and many Maps present us with a valley of Reeds in this place. Say
not this debaseth the land, that so course a commodity should take up a whole
valley therein, (for besides as London watermen will tell you, an acre of
reeds on the bank side is as beneficial as one of wheat) these Canes were to
make arrows and staves, yea some to make Sugars thereof: an M. Sands in his
travels page
eyewitness affirming that plenty of sugarcanes grow in Palestine at this
day. Surely formerly growing there, (though little known to* and less used by
the ancients) seeing that Country has gained no new plants, but rather lost
much fertility it had before.

7. Sugar (pardon a digression) was anciently less used, S^gar a modeer
invention.
either because their masculine palats were not so liquorish as ours now adays;
or because they preferred honey, plenty whereof was extracted and refined to
their hand. Yea our modern Sugar, as it is boiled and baked, is not above two
hundred years old; and the art of refining it was found out long since by a
Panci^ollus de r^bus in^ent. lib. 2. ^it. 5.
Venetian, getting above an hundred thousand crowns thereby, leaving them to
his son afterward made a Knight, who wasted all to nothing.

8. In the north of this Tribe lies the vale of Iesreel and Well of Herod,
Gedeon of a thresher made Judge.
where Gedeon conquered the Midianites ^ncamping by the hill of Moreh. Indeed
the achievements of Gedeon take up almost this whole half-tribe, and therefore
we will attend on him from his call to be a Judge unto his summons to his Grave.

9. Sad in his time was the condition of the Israelites, Isreal's sad cond^tion.
oppressed by the Midianites, who swarmed Judge. 6. ^.
like Grass-hoppers, for number and noisomeness, over the land of Canaan:
Grass-hoppers were formerly a Plague for Egypt, but now for Israel, these Judge.
6. 3.
Midianites devouring all which the other had sown. Time was, when the
Israelites reaped the fields they did not sow, whereas now they sowed what they
did not reap. See what woeful inversions sin can make. In this doleful estate
the Angel found Israel, when he sat under Judge 6. 11.
an oak in Ophrah in the east of this Tribe near Jordan, and saluted Gedeon
threshing by the winepress, The Lord is with thee, thou valiant man. Much
concealed valor may lurk under a plain and painful outside, whcih a just
occasion may produce into public view. Yet let none turn their flailes,
aker-staves, sheep-hooks, shuttles, needles, into swords, till first with
Gedeon they have a warrant from God for the same. Gedeon having thus a call from
God, and confirmed with many miracles, first by night cast down the Altar
(erecting one to God in the same place) and cut down the grove of Baal, then
gathered an army of thirty two thousand therewithal to fight the Midianites.

10. But his army must be garbled, Gedeons army abridged.
as too great for God to give victory thereby: all the fearful return home by
Judge. 7. 3.
Proclamation, leaving the Perons, not the Men in the army, fewer for their
departure. The good liquor was no less for the loss of such froath, though two
and twenty thousand then went away. Yea the body of his men remaining, was
still too big, and must pass another decoction. Their valor, hardiness and
industry must be tried by a Purgatory of water, and those only were admitted
to march on, (proving but three hundred) who bowed not down on their knees, in
a lazy posture, (as if they meant to make a set meal^ in drinking) but loath to
lose so much time, Judge. 7. 5.
doglike lapped water out of their hands, (their dishes, as their tongues, were
their spoons,) manifesting thereby, (quick at meat, quick at work) the activity
of their spirits, taking all refreshing, only in passage to their farther
employment.

11. With these three hundred Gedeon advances against the Midianites, Gods
condescension to Ged^on.
and (as formerly by the deeds of his friends) is now confirmed afresh with the
dreams of his foes, and their own Judge. 7. 14.
interpretation thereof. Strange that God should condescend so much, and so
often for Gedeons satisfaction, working miracles backward and forward for his
sake: fleece only wet, and ground dry, Judge. 6. 37. 39
fleece only dry, and ground wet. Heavens real miracles, will endure turning,
being lining, and facing, inside and outside both alike. Yea after these and
other confirmations, God the night before the battle gave Gedeon a new sign
out of his enemies own mouth. He that spurneth at the presumptuous, how low
will he stoop to take up a weak but true faith! Thus the wise mother beats
the sound and froward, but bemoaneth and cherishes her sick and froward child.

12. The Midianites lay secure in their tents when the word was given, The
Midianites assaulted.
The sword of God and Gedeon. Excellent mixture, both joined together;
admirable method God put in the first place; Where divine blessing leads up the
Van, and man's valor brings up the battle, must not victory needs follow in
the rear? Gedeons men by order from him brake their lamp-lined pitchers,
whereby night is turned into light, silence becomes a loud sound in an instant.
We have this treasure in earthen vessels, and what miracles may the light of
Gods word in the pitchers of poor preachers bring to pass?

13. The sudden shining and sounding fills the eyes and ears of the Midianites
with amazement. Whence came these spirits walking in the dark, dropped from
heaven, or raised from the earth? The text was terrible, but oh what dis^all
descants did their affrighted fancies make thereon? Every man's fear, single in
it self, was doubled by reflection from his next neighbor. For, hearing so
many Trumpets, together, if so many Trumpeters, then how many soldiers in
proportion unto them? Hereupon the host ran, Judge. 7. 21.
and cried, and fled to Bethshittah in Zererah, and to the borders of
Abel-meholah, unto Tabbath. Thus, great Armies, once struck with amazement, are
like wounded whales, give them but line enough, and the fishes will be the
fishermen to catch themselves, and beat themselves ^ame by their own violence.

14. Hereafter let none term Gideon (as Ulysses Sene^. in Troad.
is disgracefully called) Nocturne miles, Improves his victory.
the night Knight, because he conversed with the Angel, cast down Baals Altar,
conquered the Midianites, all by night; seeing now in open light he pursued his
conquest, chasing Zebah and Zalmunna with the rest of their Army, home to their
own Country, where he overtook and destroyed them. Mean time the Ephraimites
were active in stopping the passages on Jordan, and slew Oreb and Zeeb, the one
at a rock, the other at a Judge. 7. 2^.
wine press, first colored with their blood, then called after their names to
all posterity.

15. What remains of Gideon, Gideon occasioneth Idolatry.
I would willingly conceal, that his Sun might not set in a cloud. But, man
must not smother, what God will have seen, especially because tending to his
honor, our instruction, though Gideons disgrace. Who, refusing a Crown,
accepted the earrings of the people, and thereof made an Judge. 8. 27.
Ephod: surely only as a civil memorial of his valor, and their
thankfulness. But, what had Gideon a Manassite, to do with an Ephod, a
Leviticall vestment? Such a monument was neither of divine institution, or
benediction, and therefore through man's corruption, easily subject to be abused
to superstition. If Gideon walks but on the brink, the next generation will
fall to the bottom of Idolatry, as here it came to pass. Posterity went a
Ibidem.
whoring after this Ephod, which caused the massacre in, and destruction of the
f^mily of Gideon, whom we leave buried in Ophrah in the Ibid. v. 32.
grave of his father Ioash, and so proceed.

16. And now his history finished, Abel-meholah the place of Elisha.
we shall soon dispatch the remainder of this half Tribe. First we resume
Abel-meholah (lately mentioned) which was the habitation in after ages of
Elisha. Here he was plowing with twelve 1 King. 19. 19.
yoke of oxen before him, and he with the twelfth. What in several teames, or
all in the same, to draw one plough? The latter is most likely, whilst our
English husbandmen will not wonder at such an herd of oxen, (twenty four)
haling at one plough, when they shall read, that the Vale of Jordan (wherein
lay Abel-meholah) is noted for 1 King. 7. 46.
clay ground, and therefore such stiff land, (especially at the first tilth
thereof) must needs require a great strength thereunto. But had his oxen been
as many more Elisha would willingly have left them, when Eliah his man^le was
once cast upon him. Mo^^le, which could, stop rivers in the full speed of their
^ King. 2. 8.
course, and therefore might stay a man in the height of his calling. Hereby we
perceive that the words of our Savior, No Luke 9. 62.
^an having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the
kingdom of God, are not literally, but spiritu^lly, to be expounded, of such
as having well begun, apostate from their religious Resolutions.

17. In the aforesaid vale of Jordan The Vale of Jordan.
lay Zarthan, betwixt which and S^ccoth (on the other side of Jordan in the
Tribe of Gad) the two brazen pillars, (Iachin, and Boaz) with all the vessels
of the Temple, were made by Hiram, of bright brass, in the clay 1 King. 7. 46.
ground, which probable served him for moldes to run the melted metal therein.
And somewhat more toward the north, lay Aenon near to Salim, where John was
baptizing, because there was much John 3. 23.
water there. Here his Disciples complained to John, concerning Jesus eclipsing
him with his luster. John truly stated the controversy, and modestly
determined it against himself, how he must decrease, whilst Christ must
increase.

18. As these places lay on the east of this Tribe, Gath. Rimmon, and the land
of Tappuah.
in the vale of Jordan. so in the western part thereof in the vale of Iezreel,
lay Josh. 21. 25.
Gath-Rimmon (in Chronicles called 1 Chr. 6. 70.
Bileam) the sole City which the Levites had in this entire part of the Tribe
of Manasseh; seeing Taanach (called Anar in Chronicles) lay (as is aforesaid)
in that part of Manasseh which was surrounded with Issachar. The land of
Tappuah belonged also to this half Tribe, though Tappuah the City pertained to
Ephraim. Thus the town, and late Castle of Belvoir stands in Lincolne-shire,
though the vale thence denominated lies in three shires round about it.

19. Amongst the mountains in Manasseh, The mountain of O^adiah.
we take especial notice of Gilead (so called from Gilead the grand son of
Manasseh) Judge. 7. 3.
whence Gideon's cowards departed; the hill Moreh, Judge. 7. 1.
nigh which the Midtanitish Army was encamped; and above all the mountain of
Obadiah, so called because therein in two caves he hid an 1 Kin. 1^. 13.
hundred Prophets, so close, that neither foes nor friends knew thereof,
neither Iezebel nor Elijah getting intelligence of their being there, the
latter erroneously conceiving himself alone left of all the Prophets in the
land. Their bill of fare was bread and water, precious liquour when it had not
rained in Israel for three years and an half; hereto our Savior reflected,
that none should lose his reward that gave his little ones a cup of cold water,
yea, that such who received a Prophet, should receive a Prophets M^t. 10. 41.
reward, as here it came to pass. For the sparks of his guests spirit catched
hold on Obadiah their host, so far inflaming his breast with inspiration that
the short prophecy bearing his name, is by learned men referred to him, as the
Author thereof. Saint In Epitaphio Paulae and Epist. ad ^^arcellum.
Hierome tells us, that the Lady Paula (as weak as she was) climbed up this
mountain, to behold those monimental caves therein.

20. In this land we also meet with the woody hills of the Perizzites, The
Rephaims their iron chariots.
and of the Rephaims, or Giants, mingled amongst them, much affright^ng the
Manassites with their Iron chariots. Not as if all made of massy iron* (such
would have been slugs in fight, and so heavy, that they needed horses of steel
for strength to draw them) but that they were plated and armed with iron hooks,
mischievous instruments of execution, especially in the pursuit of a broken
army, men being as grass whereof whole swathes were mowed down with these
crooked sithes in chasing a routed enemy. Enough almost to make one suspect our
ancient Britones akin to these Canaanites, seeing such chariots were so
fashionable in their Caesar de B^llo (...).
fights; were it not that we find the like Diod S^c l. 17 Pluta^chus in
Artax^^xi and ali.
(...), frequently used in all eastern Countries. However Joshua gave the
Manassites both a promise and prophecy, that (notwithstanding those Ironmoving
forts of the Canaanites) they should in process of time certainly overcome them.

21. We must not forget Beths^n Bethsan where Bacchus hisn nur^e was b^i^d.
belonging to M^nasseh (but Josh. 17. 11.
seated and environed with Issach^r) whence for a long time they could not
expel the Canaanites, therefore called it Bethsan, that is, the house of an
Enemy. Here the bodies of Saul and Jonathan were hung up by the 1 Samuel ^1. 12.
Philistines Bethsan was afterward called Nysa by Plin. Not. hist. lib. 5.
cap. 18.
humane writers (and at last Scythopolis) from Nysa Bacchus his nurse, whom he
is said there solemnly to have buried. A jolly dame no doubt, as appears by the
well battling of the plump boy her nursery. But seeing wine was Bacchus his
milk when a child, meat when a man, food when well, physic when sick, we may
justly conceive the history mythologically true, the burying of Bacchus his
nurse in this place plainly importing plenty of the best wines in the Country
hereabouts.

22. As for Bezek Bezek.
I name it last of all* because ambiguously placed in the confines of Manasseh,
and Ephraim, different from a City of the same name, nearer See the des^ription
of the land of Moriah.
Jerusalem, where the Tyrant Adonibezek lived. In this Bezek 1 Samuel 11. 8.
saul numbered the Israelites (being three hundred and thirty thousand) and
thence marched to the relieving of L^besh-Gilead from the Ammonites. The Arms
of Manasseh have been formerly blazoned, and expounded in our Description of
the half Tribe beyond Jordan, and in the Solomon's Purveyourships this land,
with some of Zebulun, fell under the care of Baanah the Son of Ahilud.

Here the Map of the Land of Ephraim is to be inserted.
THE TRIBE OF EPHRAIM. CHAP. 9.
1. EPhraim the younger Son of Ios^ph was blessed by his grandfather Jacob,
Ephraim why accounted the eldest.
laying Genesis ^8. 14.
his right hand on his head (the print of whose fingers remained visible in the
happiness of Ephraims posterity) that behind Manasseh in age, he should prove
before him in honor; which came to pass accordingly. Such was his increase in
Egypt that they amounted to forty Numb. 1. 33.
thousand five hundred men, all whose carcasses fell in the wilderness, and a
new generation of thirty two Number. 26. 37.
thousand five hundred entered the land of Promise.

. 2. A Princely and puissant Tribe. Ephraim (says David) is the strength of
Psalm. 60. 7.
my head, A princely and puissant Tribe.
and is often put by a honorable Synecdoche for all the ten Tribes or whole
Isa. 7. 2.
Kingdom of Israel. The people thereof were active, valiant, ambitious of
honor, but withal hasty, humorous, hard to be pleased, forward enough to
fight with their foes, and too forward to fall out with their friends, counting
other men's honor to be their injury, except they might be admitted joint
purchasers with them in all gallant undertakings. This caused their contest,
first with Judge. 8. 2.
Gideon, who pacified them with his compliance, and afterward with Iephthah,
where their Braul was hightned into a Battle, (how quickly do hot spirits
hatch words into blows!) of which we have In Gad 20.
spoked before.

3. This Tribe was subject to a natural imperfection of lisping, The
Ephraimites had a natural lisping.
the cause whereof we leave to others to dispute, whether got by imitation, or
some heredit^^y defect in their tongue, or proceeding from some secret quality
in their soil, as it is observed in a village at Charleton in Camd. Brit. in
Lecest.
Leicestershire, that the people therein are troubled with wharling in their
utterance. The best is, men must answer to God for their vicious habits, not
natural impediments, and better it is to lispe the language of Canaan; then
plainly to pronounce the speech of Ashdod.

4. Sure I am, But were valiant and fortunate.
no Tribe, Judah excepted, can vie eminent persons with Ephraim, as Deborah and
Abdon, both Judges of Israel, the one by he^ Judge. 4 5.
habitation whilst living, the other by his Judge. 12. 15.
sepulcher when dead, truly collected to be of this Tribe, as also 1 Kin. 11.
26.
Jeroboam and all the Kings of Israel (...)

5. (...) The bounds of Ephraim.
Dan on the south, (...) But as for the particular (...) and flexures (...)
borders of this Tribe, they are so many, and so small, they will be scattered
out of our memories, except bound together as, we find them in the text.

6. Condemn not this our diligence for needless curiosity, Exactness why
necessary herein.
but know, that every meer-stone that stands for a landmark, though in
substance but a hard flint, or plain pibble, is a precious stone in virtue, and
is cordial against dangerous controversies between party and party, and
therefore it is of great consequence to be well skilled in the out-limits and
boundaries of this, or any other considerable (...).

7. The particular bounds therefore of this Tribe (...) exactly as follows.
Ephraims particular bounds.
South. West. North. East. 1 From Jordan by (...) to the (...) 2 Thence to the
wilderness that goes up from (...), throughout moun^ (...). 3 Thence to (...),
thence to be bord^^s Hereof no doubt was Hushai the Archite.
(...) Ataroth. 4 Thence westward to the coasts of Iapble^i. 5 Thence to the
coasts of Beth-horon (...). 6 Then^e (...) Gezer, thence to the sea.
The Medditerranean Sea. Northwest.
1 From the sea to (...) K^na. thence to (...)*
Northeast.
2 Thence to Beth-hor^n the upper, thence to Michm^^ha 3 Thence went about unto
(...) eastward. 4 And passed on the east to (...). 5 Thence to At^roth. 6
Thence to (...), and so to (...).
The river (...). We reserve the satisfying of such difficulties as in^umber
these borders, to our fifth and last book, intending it shall serve our four
former in the same office wherein the Spleen attends on the Liver. For, as
that is the drain or sewer of the feculent and melancholy blood: so we design
our last book of objections for the Repository of all hard doubts and
difficulties, that the rest of our work may be more cheerful and pleasant in
the reading thereof.

8. Amongst these limitary towns, Gezer given to the (...).
besides the B^th-horons, both of them with Uzzen-Sherah, 1 Chr. 7. 24.
founded by Sherah the daughter of Ephraim the younger (the greatest Buildress
in the whole Bible) Gezer is most remarkable. The King (...) was (...) by
Ioshu^, Josh. 12. 1^.
and the City was given to the Levites, but kept by the Canaanites in defiance
of all the powers of Judge. 1. 29.
Ephraim, until Pharaoh taking it, burning it, and killing the Canaanites
therein gave it for a 1 King. 9. 16.
present to his daughter Solomon's wife. Behold here two titles on foot at once,
and the question is which should take effect. Whether the title of the Levites
deriving it from Gods Josh. 21. 21.
grant, though (a main matter) they never had the possession of Gezer given
them, or that of Pharaohs daughter claiming it as a donative from her father.
The best is, the cause was to be tried before the wisdom and integrity of
Solomon, who no doubt, being so bountiful to the Temple, would not be
injurious to the Ministers thereof, but that as he gave the child to the true
mother, he would ad^udge the City to the original owners thereof, though
making his Queen some reparation otherwise. Proceed we now to the description
of this Tribe, and will begin with two eminent Cities in the south part thereof.

9. Rama, Ramathaimzophine
otherwise 1 Samuel 1. 1.
Ramathaim-Zophim (because consisting of two towns, and seated in the land of 1 Samuel 9. 5.
Zuph) was the place, where Samuel was 1 S^m. 1. 19.
born wonderfully, of a long barren mother, 1 Samuel 7. 17.
lived unblamably, (as appears by the 1 Samuel 12. 14.
national testimony of his integrity) died peaceably, and was 1 Samuel 25. 1.
buried honorably. Naioth nere Rama was the name of his house, where David
sometime conversed with Samuel, two eminent Prophets then living together under
the same roof.

10. Yea, Saul prophectes.
the very air of this place seems prophetical, seeing Saul coming hither to
attach David, was by the great well that is in S^chu (the Helicon of heavenly
raptures) strangely inspired, and stripping himself, fell a 1 Samuel 19. 21.
prophesying a day and a night together.

11. This Saul continued constantly a carnal man, though we meet with many
spirits, which successively possessed, and deserted him, 1. The spirit of
prophecy, which 1 Samuel 10. 10.
twice ravished, then finally forsook him. 2. The Spirit of the Lord, fitting
him for government, which 1 Samuel 16. 14.
departed from him after David was anointed. 3. An Ibidem.
evil spirit which troubled him, partly allayed by David's music. 4. His
vital and animal Spirits, which partially forsook him at the witches sad
news, when he fell all along on the earth, and there was no 1 Samuel 28. 20.
strength in him. 5. His spirit, or soul, finally forced from him by his own
sword on mount Gilboa. What need then have men to try the 1 John 4. 1.
Spirits before they trust them, seeing so many of them may be in one and the
same person?

12. In the new Testament this Rama is called Arimathe^, Arimathea.
whereof was Mat. 27. 57.
Joseph that honorable counselor, who so freely resigned his own sepulcher to
the body of our Savior, and with Nicodemus provided for the decent interring
thereof.

13. Shiloh succeeds (in a narrow southern spong of this Tribe) where after the
conquering of Canaan, Shiloh why the f^rst place of the Ark^s ^^sidence.
the Tabernacle was solemnly set up, and remained there almost four hundred
years. This place was for that purpose preferred before others, partly because
almost the center of the land, and partly in honorable respect to Josh. 18. 1.
Joshua, extracted from, and living in this Tribe of Ephraim; and pity it was
that God and the Prince should be parted. Perchance the allusion of Shiloh with
Is^. 8. 6.
Shiloah, or John 9. 7.
Siloam, (which is by interpretation sent, clearly pointing at our Savior)
might promote this place for the erection of the Tabernacle therein.

14. At Shiloh there was an anniversary dancing of the daughters thereof
(probably collected out of all Israel coming then to the Tabernacle) where the
Benjamites as yet unprovided for wives, Here Benjamites (...) them wives.
lying in ambush in the vineyards, violently Judge. 21. 23.
seized some of those maids for their brides, (happy man be his dole) making
strange matches, if each interest concerned therein be seriously considered.

15. First for the Fathers of these virgins. Equivocation.
Did this equivocating expedient satisfy their consciences, who had formerly
Judge. 21. 1.
sworn not to give their daughters to the Benjamites to wife, and yet now by
laying the design Judge. 21. 20.
themselves did in effect give these women in marriage to these men?

16. Secondly, Match-lottery.
for the young men. What assurance had they, they could love, not choosing the
fittest whom they liked of, but catching the first they lighted on? Or that
they could be beloved, storming their wives with violence, in stead of taking
their affections by mutual composition?

17. As for these Brides of fortune, Goldenchance.
may we not presume that many of them which danced this day, wept on the
morrow? Yet one thing might comfort them, they were all richly married to
mighty matches of landed men, seeing the fair and fruitful Tribe of Benjamin,
with all the Cities therein was to be shared amongst their six hundred husbands
alone, as the sole survivers and absolute heirs of the whole Country.

18. In Shiloh Eli lived Priest, Eli at Shiloh connives at his wicked sons.
and Judge of Israel, whither Elkanah and Hannah, Samuels parents, repaired to
Gods public worship. This Hannah though silent 1 Samuel 1. 7.
when twi^ted by Peninnah for barrenness, found her tongue when here Ibid. v.
15.
taxed by Eli of drunkenness: because a mere sufferer in the former, but in the
latter a sinner, had the accusation been true. Samuel (here prayed for)
afterward here served God in a linen Ephod, and though generally there was a 1 Samuel 3. 1.
dearth of visions in this age, here he had many revealed unto him. But Eli's
dim eyes connived here at his sons impieties. Whose servant with his 1 Samuel 2.
13.
Trident (an Innovation, no doubt, and none of the utensils made by Moses
according to the pattern of the mount) would have raw flesh for his Master; so
that, what between the raw flesh here sacrilegiously stolen, and the strange
flesh wherewith those Priests Ibid. v. 22.
abused themselves at the door of the Tabernacle of the congregation, any pious
ears would now 1 Samuel 3. 11.
tingle to hear their faults, as hereafter at their punishment.

19. For soon after happned the destruction of Hophni and Phinehas, Afterward
sadly destroyed.
(slain in battle) the Arkes captivity, Eli's heartbreaking with the news,
neck-breaking with his fall, the death of Phinehas his wife newly delivered,
whose son got the sad name (not of Benoni, a name calculated for private pangs,
but) of 1 Samuel 4. 21.
Ichabod from this sorrowful accident, because born in this grand eclipse when
the glory was departed from Israel.

20. Yea the very city of Shiloh it self, Shiloh sinkes in silence with the
Tabernacle.
may seem in some sort to expire on the same occasion, which, as it owed its
life and luster to the Tabernacles residence therein, so sinks down in silence
at the captivity thereof. For we find no after mention of any eminent act
therein, only that Ahijah the Prophet long after lived 1 King. 14. 2.
there. He was the Jewish Tiresias, though blind, a Seer, who discerning
Ieroboams wife through her disguise, foretold the death of her sick son Abijah.
So much of Shiloh; proceed we now to the more northern and mountainous part of
this Tribe.

21. Amongst the remarkable places in mount Ephraim, The possession given to
Joshua.
we find Timnath Serah, or Timnath Judge. 2. 9.
Here Is (by inversion of the letters) on the northside of the hill Gaash, where
Josh. 19. 49, 50.
when they had made an end of dividing the land, the children of Israel gave an
inheritance to Joshua. See here his public spirit, not improving his power,
though Coma^nder in chief, to pickout the fattest pastures, fairest meadows,
fertilest fields for himself, but (as if he counted it possession enough for
him to have gained possessions for others) when the meanest man was first
served, he was contented to stand to the peoples courtesy, what they would
bestow upon him. If it sound to the praise of a Generals valor, to come last
out of the field when it is won, no less is the commendation of his temperance
to come last into it when it is divided. In Timnath Serah, asked and built by
him, Joshua afterward was Josh. 24. 30.
buried; and as Saint Hierome reports that in his time the Sun was depicted on
his monument. This I dare boldly say, that whereas modern Heralds blazon arms
by the specious titles of Planets, their fancy is with most truth appliable to
Joshua's shield, bearing Sol and Luna indeed, having made both Sun and Moon
stand still by his pr^yers. Also Eleazar the High priest was Josh. 24. 33.
buried in mount Ephraim, in an hill which pertained to Phinehas his son.

22. Tirzah was another city near mount Eph^aim, Tirzah once Metropolis of the
kingdom of Israel.
whose King was conquered by Josh. 12. 24.
Joshua. In the days of Solomon it was a place of great repute, Thou art
beautiful, o my Love, as Cant. 6. 4.
Tirzah; comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an army with banners. Jeroboam chose
it to be his 1 Kin. 14. 17.
Royall-seat (perchance because near 1 King. 11. 26.
Zereda his native place) where he and his successors lived for welnigh sixty
years. Indeed Baasha had a project to make Ramah the place of his residence, as
nearer to Jerusalem, and therefore more convenient to mark the motions of the
Kings of Judah; but frustrated of his design he was fain to 1 King. 15. 21.
return to Tirzah, 1 King. 16. 9.
reigned and was buried here. Elah, Baasha's son, was here drinking in the
house of Azzah his steward, when a dear reckoning was brought in, and no less
then his life extorted from him by Zimri his successor. Afterward, when
Tirzah was taken, Zimri either out of envy that the royal Palace should
survive him, or desire to prevent a more shameful death, burnt himself, and
the Kings house together. We read of King Asa, that after his death, his
subjects made a very great 2 Chr. 16. 14.
burning for him; but Zimri exceeded, making a bone-fire for and of himself
when alive; herein standing alone, except seconded by Justin. lib. 1.
Sardanapalus, who in like manner destroyed himself on the same occasion. Thus
dyed Zimri, a King only for a week, whose Reign like a winters day was short
and dirty; yet long enough to leave this taunt for Iezebels mouth, 2 King. 9.
31.
and Proverb to posterity, Had Zimri peace, that slew his Master? Hard by is 2
King. 15. 16.
Tiphsaph, where King Menahem barbarously ripped up the women with child,
because the city opened not to receive him.

23. Besides cities, many private dwellings were sprinkled on mount Ephraim;
Private houses on mount Ephraim.
as the house of that Judge. 19. 1.
Levite, whose concubine the men of Gibeah abused to death: the house of Micah,
well stored with Idols, where first the five spies, then the six hundred men
of Dan, took up their lodgings, when marching to Laish: Ungrateful guests! who
in stead of discharging their quarters, plundered their Iud. 18. 2. 24.
Landlord, taking his Images and priest away with them. Thirdly, the house of
Deborah under a Iud. 4. 5.
Palm Tree betwixt Ramah and Bethel, where she judged Israel. A tree then the
Westminster Hall of the whole Land, made the seat of justice in an open place,
partly that all people might have free access with their Petitions thereunto,
without doors or porters to exclude any; partly that so public a place might
mind Judges, parties, and witnesses of fair and clear proceeding without
secret or sinister reservations, having heaven Gods Throne in view, and before
their eyes. This Palm was preferred for this purpose before other trees,
because far and fair spreading, it afforded much people a shady convenience
under the branches thereof; not to insist on (a text rather for fancy to
descant, then judgment to comment on) the resemblances betwixt the growth of
Palms and judicial proceedings. Which, as that plant improves it self by
pressures, ought in fine to flourish in defiance of all opposition.

24. But the most Esaias 7. 9.
observable place in the north of this Tribe is the City of Samaria, Samaria
built by Omri.
built by Omri, (because the royal Palace was burnt at Tirzah, as is
aforesaid) on an hill bought by him for two talents of silver, and called by
him Samaria, from 1 King. 16. 24.
Shemer the former owner of that place. Strange, it should take the
denomination rather from him that sold it, then him that bought it: except this
was part of the bargain, which appears not in Scripture. Sure we are, though
the name of Omri was not preserved in the place, the Statutes of Omri were
observed by the people, according to the Mic. 6. 16.
Prophets complaint, and his impious injunctions obliged men to the practice
thereof. Samaria proved afterward a beautiful City, and was the principal
place of the residence and burial of the Kings of Israel.

25. Stately was the Kings Palace therein. The stately buildings in Samaria.
Hence King Ahaziah Ahabs son had a mortal fall through a lattice in his upper
2 King. 1. 2.
chamber: possible this mischance had been prevented, had the house or chamber
been built according to Gods direction, De^t. 22. 8.
with batlements, that men might not fall from thence. But likely it is, the
Fabric thereof was fashioned according to the Mode of the Sidonian
architecture. Hard by Ahab built an 1 King. 22. 39.
Ivory-house. Conceive it chequered, inlaid, and adorned therewith; otherwise
all the Elephants in India and Afric would not afford materials for such a
structure: not to say, the crookedness and smalness of their teeth, made them
useless for beams in that building. A frequent Synecdoche, to denominate the
house from the principal materials therein, like Leaden Hall in London; not
because wholly built, but only covered with that metal. But alas, what good
would an Ivory-house do Ahab, whilst he had an Ebony soul in the midst
thereof, blacked over with impieties. Baals temple 1 King 16. 32.
built by Ahab, and turned by 2 King. 10. 25. 27.
Iehu into a Iakes, was a structure of great State, into which Baals Priests
were trained by a device, and slain. The greatest place of receipt in Samaria
(which might serve them for a market-stead, or rather for a seat of Justice)
was that void 1 Kin. 22. 10.
place at the entering of the gate; of such a latitude, that it was able to
receive at once the Kings of Israel and Judah, with their royal retinue.

26. But amongst all the structures in Samaria, The King of Syria's streets in
Samaria.
none more eminent then the streets built therein by the King of Syria. A thing
scarce to be paralleled, that a foreign King should be permitted to erect
streets in the Metropolitan City of another Kingdom. If any allege that Peter
Earl of Savoy built his palace in the Strand (known by the name of Savoy at
this day) and that there is a street betwixt Aldersgate and Smithfield called
Britons street, from the ancient lodgings of the Duke of Britain therein;
neither of the instances amount to the matter in hand. The former palace being
erected, as I take it, for the Earls abode here when in banishment. And as for
the latter, it appears not that the Dukes of Britain were at any cost in
building it: whereas the Kings of Syria founded the Fabrickes of those streets
in the city of Samaria, and never inhabited therein. It seems when Omri began
the new building of Samaria, either he requested the assistance of the King of
Syria (as a neighboring Prince in amity with him) to help him in the work; (no
shame to beg the first clouts of friends, for an infant-city) or else the
Syrian Kings civilly tendered their service, to give it as good handsell to so
good a work, or as a Royal Largess amongst the inferior builders thereof. For
mine own part I conceive that the Kings of Damascus, got some conquest of
Samaria not mentioned in Scripture, and then built these streets, as a monument
of their victory and bridle to overawe the city. The rather because Benhadad
being afterward overcome by Ahab proffered the like favor and freedom unto
him, if it pleased him to accept thereof, 1 Kin. 20. 34.
And thou shall make streets for thee in Damascus, as my Father made in Samaria.

27. We meet in Scripture with three famous sieges of Samaria. First siege of
Samaria.
Once when Benhadad not content with Ahabs submission, (profering to hold all
he had by homage from him) would have all the wealth of the city in specie
surrendered unto him, vainly vaunting that 1 King. 20. 10.
the dust of Samaria could not suffice for handfulls for all the people that
followed him. Surely the Scavengers were very diligent in sweeping so populous
a place, or else it was a most hyperbolicall expression. But grant Samaria
could not yield dust enough to fill the hands, the mountains near unto it could
afford dirt enough to stop the mouths of most of his army, who few days after
were thereon miraculously 1 King. 20. 21.
defeated.

28. A second siege was in the reign of King Ioram, when the famine was so
great, The second siege of Samaria
that an Asses head, and a cab of dung was sold at unconscionable rates: the
former for food, the latter most probably for fuel, and surely not to drain
peter to make powder thence, an invention unknown in that age. Nor was the
sudden plenty, occasioned by the Syrians flight, less admirable, all provision
being brought down in an instant to a very unexpected low price. So that he
that here knew beforehand what would be cheap or dear, needed but a few minutes
to make him a rich Merchant. But this shower of plenty caused a flood of people
to flock to the gates of Samaria, where that infidel Prince, who despaired of
Gods power and Elisha's prophecy, was 2 King. 7. 17.
overwhelmed in the multitude; living so long to have his eyes confute his
tongue, but not to have his taste confirm his eyes; beholding, but not
partaking of the plenty.

29. The third and last siege when the city was taken and destroyed by
Salmaneser King of Assyria, The third and last siege of Samaria.
in the reign of Hosea King of Israel, a King who was the best, or rather the
least bad of all that sat on that throne. Of whom it is said, he was evil in
the sight of the Lord, but 2 King. 17. 2.
not as the Kings of Israel, that were before him. It may therefore seem
wonderful that the ruin of the kingdom should happen in his reign: but what
shall we say? When a vessel is already brimfull, the addition of the least
drop more, will make it run over.

30. Afterward Samaria was peopled with Colonies of the Assyrians; A Christian
Church in Samaria.
great back friends to the rebuilding of Jerusalem, as the books of Ezra and
Nehemiah do sufficiently declare. Our Savior therefore gave in charge to the
disciples, when sent to preach, Into Mat. 10. 5.
any city of the Samaritans enter ye not. But this was but a temporary
prohibition, for after Christ's ascension and the persecution about Steven,
Samaria quickly received the Gospel by the preaching of Act. 8. 5. 14. 25. and
9. 31.
Philip the Evangelist. Here afterward happened the great contest betwixt the
two Simons, Peter and Magus. The latter Act. 8. 19.
profering money to buy the gift of bestowing the holy Ghost. But leaving them
we may observe Gods gradation in giving his holy Spirit. First, to those that
were purely Jews in Act. 2. 4.
Jerusalem; Then to such as were partly Jews in Samaria; Lastly, to such as
were purely Gentiles Act. 10. 44.
in Cesarea, where Cornelius was baptized.

31. Near Samaria was a fountain to wash, Memorable places near Samaria.
and house to sheare the sheep. Nigh to which in the rode to Iezreel, Iehu met
two 2 King. 10. 14.
and forty men coming on a visit of respect, to salute the late slain sons
of the King of Israel. Wherefore because the persons they came to wait on were
not in this world, Iehu took order to send them all to the grave, that they
might be more perfectly informed how it fared with those, whom they came to
salute. Hard by is the Lazar-house, wherein lived those 2 King. 7. 3. 4. Levit.
^3. 46.
Lepers, who being bandied betwixt two deaths of the famine and the sword,
preferred to put themselves on sudden and doubtful, rather then on slow but
certain destruction; and first brought to Samaria the tidings of the Syrians
tents left empty of men, and full of provision.

32. We must not forget the people near Samaria, The pool of Samaria.
wherein Ahabs chariot was washed, though some difference appears betwixt the
prediction and performance thereof. Prediction. 1 King. 21. 19. Thus says the
Lord, In the place where the dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick
thy blood, even thine. Performance. 1 King. 22. 28. 2 King. 6. 25. 26.
And one washed the chariot in the pool of Samaria, and the dogs licked up his
blood, and they washed his armor according to the word of the Lord, which he
spak.

The difficulty is this; the dogs licked the blood of Ahab at Samaria whereas
Naboth was stoned at 1 King. 21. 1.
Iezreel, twenty miles and more northward. To reconcile which difference, Rabbi
Solomon conceives that though Ahabs chariot was washed at Samaria, his armor
was washed at Iezreel, where (says he) the royal armory was kept. Others
fancy an outlet of the poole of Samaria in the river Kison, which many miles
off glided by the vineyard of Naboth, so that his blood might be carried
thither down the stream. Lastly, it is generally answered, that those words, In
the place, are not to be taken restrictively for the same numericall spot of
ground, but extensively for the same Land, country, and kingdom, which then
was fulfilled according to the Prophets prediction. Not to say, that some
understand, In the place where the dogs licked, that is, pro eo quod, in stead,
in lieu, or in requital of thy cruelty, dogs shall lick thy blood, etc. Nor
have I ought else to observe of Samaria, save that Herod called the name
thereof Sebaste from a fair Temple erected here, in the honor of Augustus
Caesar.

33. Hard by, Curs^g and blessing on Ebal and Gerizim.
are Ebal and Gerizim, twin-mountains of equal height, on which, in the days
of Josh. 8. 34.
Joshua, after the conquest of the land, the people of Israel, according to
Gods Deuteronomy. 11. 29.
command, assembled themselves, with their Josh. 8 35.
women, little ones, and strangers, in manner and method following, On mount
Gerizim to bless.
1 Deuteronomy. 27. 12.
Simeon. 2 Levi. 3 Judah. 4 Issachar. 5 Joseph. 6 Benjamin.
On mount Ebal to curse.
1 Reuben. 2 Gad. 3 Asher. 4 Zebulun. 5 Dan. 6 Naphtali.


See we here, both the Royal and Sacerdotall tribes (Judah and Levi) on the
blessing side; all cursings and imprecations (save when of absolute necessity)
ill becoming the mouths of Magistrates and Ministers. In this action, the
Levites appeared in a double capacity; as public officers, so they spoke to
the men of Israel with a loud Deuteronomy. 27. 14.
voice; and as private persons, so they contributed their Amen, with the rest
of the people.

34. Here it will be demanded, How they might be heard form one mount to another
seeing the sides of this Quire were so far asunder, how could the Levites
voices be distinctly heard from one mountain to another, especially if the
whole city of Sechem (as the Benjamin in (...). pa. 38.
Rabbin will have it) lay interposed betwixt them: and may not divine service
as well be warranted in a language unknown, as unheard; both being equally
understood? For answer whereunto, we must know, that the very make, and fashion
of these mountains (picked out by Gods providence for that purpose) might
advantage much the articulate audibility of the Levites voices, especially if
(as some fancy them) they bended tops, hanged over and leaned inwards, so, as
it were with mutual consent, more conveniently to reach the sound from the one
to the other. We know what Giraldus Cambrensis. See Camdens Brit^in
Merionith-shire.
some have written of the mountains in Merionith-shire, so even in height that
the shepherds may talk together on the tops of them, yet so, that if happily
they appoint to meet together, they can hardly do it from morning to night.
Besides, the people knew before hand, the very numericall words, both of the
blessings, and cursings, which the Levites were to pronounce, and this rendered
their voice intelligible at the greater distance. For, our ears and eyes
quickly own those objects far off, with which formerly they have been
familiarly acquainted. Lastly, the Levites uttered no long continued orations,
but short speeches severally distinguished, with the full periods of the
peoples Amen, which gave fair notice to their neighbors on the next mountain,
when to begin, and end their attention; and sentences so plainly pointed, are
more easily understood at greater distance.

35. On mount Ebal, A solmn Altar built on mount Ebal.
where the curses were pronounced, a solemn Altar was, according to Deuteronomy. 27. 5.
Gods command, set up by Joshua; and burnt, and Josh. 8. 31.
peace offerings, were sacrificed thereon. No more then needed, for otherwise,
the maledictions had no sooner been uttered, but condemnation, and execution
had instantly ensued, if these sacrifices, with the merits of Christ typified
therein, had not seasonably interceded. This altar was made of whole stones,
without Iron lift upon it, and was plaistered over, serving also for a
table book (the stones being the leaves, and in the plaistering were the
letters thereof) wherein, by Gods command, all the Deuteronomy. 27. 8. 32
words of the law were written very plainly: not that all Deuteronomy, much
less all the Pentateuch was registered thereon (where should they find, and how
should they fetch stones in folio for so voluminous a work?) but, either the
thirteen cursings (with their opposite blessings) mentioned there; or else the
ten Commandments, the Breviate, and abstract of the whole law.

36. But mount Gerizim was the Holy of holies to the Samaritans, Two sects of
Samaritans the first Idolaters.
in after ages commonly calling it the blessed mountain, and confining their
public service, and sacrifices, to that place. Here, to avoid confusion, we
must take notice of two distinct sorts, or sects of Samaritans, differing much
amongst themselves, in. 1 Antiquity. 2 Extraction. 3 Religion. 4 Place of their
worship. One from Hez^kiahs time. Heathens by descent. Heret^call. Any where in
the province of Samaria. Another from (...) ti^e. Mongrel- Jews. Idolatrous. In
mount Gerizim alone.

We begin with the former, being colonies of Assyrians, planted by Salmaneser
in the place of the ten Tribes, which he had carried away into final
captivity. These at first were devoured with Lions, says the 2 King. 17. 25.
Scripture, though Antiq. lib. 9. cap. 14.
Josephus affirms, that the plague; the Samaritan Chronicle, that the famine
destroyed them. Presumption in them to deviate from Gods word; for though both
plague and famine may in some sense be allowed to be Lions, that is, devourers;
yet such as confound them, destroy Gods solemn Quadripartite of his
punishments; making three members, of his four sore judgments mentioned in the
Ezekiel. 1^. 21.
Prophet, coincidere, to interfeer, yea run all into one. Afterward, a Jewish
Priest was at their request sent out of Assyria, to teach these Samaritans the
2 King. 17. 27
manner of the God of the land. He is called Ezdras by Contr. Haeres. lib. 1.
page 5. ^^
Epiphanius, by others ^bn. Patrik. in (...). Arab.
Lun, and by some Zacharias; but seeing God has concealed his name, it is no
whit material to know it, especially, except he had taught them better
divinity. For he instructed them not to serve God as they ought, in his Temple
then extant at Jerusalem, but in their own country, according to the direction
of Jeroboam; and then, no wonder, if the Samaritans were guilty of abominable
impieties. For, as water neither will, nor can naturally ascend higher, then
just level to the spring, or fountain, whence it is derived: so these people
were capable of no purer service of God, then as they were principled by this
superstitious Priest, who either did not know, or would not teach them the true
Religion. Yea, their practice fell short of his precepts, not worshipping one
God alone, but every city had also a several 2 King. 17. 29, 30, 31.
Idol to themselves, according to the nations, whence they were descended.
These were the ancient Idolatrous Samaritans, which, as Chrysostom says, did
(...), mingle what was not to be conjoined, and which in process of time were
well wasted, and few (if any of them) extant in the days of our Savior.

37. These were succeeded with a second sort of heretical Samaritans, The
second Sect heretical.
beginning in the government of Nehemiah, who Nehe. 13. 28.
reports, that one of the sons of Iojada, the son of Eliashib the
high priest, was son-in-law to Sanballat the Horonite, and therefore I chased
him from me. This Priest is by Josephus Anti. Iud. li. 11. cap. 7. 8.
called Manasse; who thus driven away from Jerusalem, went with other Jews,
guilty of the like mongrell-matches, to the Samaritans their wives kindred, and
there (as the Jewish Zemach. David part. prim. page 26. ^. b.
writers relate) built an Anti-temple on mount Gerizim, where a medly nation
devised a miscellaneons worship of God, rejecting all the Scriptures, save the
five books of Moses, and maintaining many abominable superstitions. And yet
they were not so bad, as Epiphanius Haeres. 9.
makes them, charging them by a far-fetched consequence, to worship heathen
Gods, because placing sanctity in that mountain, wherein Jacob buried his
Idols, Genesis 35. 4.
whilst some tax them to adore a Dove, the Arms of the Kings of Babylon, and
others unjustly accuse them, utterly to deny the resurrection; we remit the
Reader to our learned Hotting. Exercit. Anti-mor.
Author, who clears them from these false aspersions; and, though we our
selves will not take the pains to plead their cause, let us have the patience,
to hear others speak for the worst of men, when unjustly traduced.

38. But the main difference in matter of Religion, Samaritans for their own
advantage falsify the text.
betwixt the Samaritans, and Jews, is no less briefly, then clearly, and truly
stated in those words of the woman to our Savior, John 4. 20.
Our Fathers [Samaritans] worshipped in this mountain [Gerizim,] and ye [Iews]
say, that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship. The contest
grew high betwixt them, each zealous to assert the transcendent holiness of
their Temple; insomuch, that the Samaritans made the text false, to make their
title true, wilfully depraving the original. For, whereas we read in the
Hebrew, both that Deuteronomy. 27. 12.
Moses directed, and Joshua Josh. 8. 30.
erected an Altar on mount Ebal, the Vid. Sam. Pent. Deuteronomy. 27. 4.
Samaritan Pentateuch make the same built on mount Gerizim, in the very place
where afterward their mock-Temple was set up, so to gain thereunto the greater
reputation of holiness. This false foundation laid, they proceeded thereon, to
vaunt of the excellency of their divine service, exceeding the Jews in 1
Antiquity, 1 King. 6. 1.
it bearing date from this solemn Altar, four hundred and odd years before the
structure of the Temple by Solomon. And, if the Jews once offered to plead the
original of their Temple from Abraham sacrificing his son Isaac on mount
Moriah, then the Samaritans to outvy them, derived the seniority and sanctity
of their mountain, from the first apparition God made to Genesis 12. 6, 7.
Abraham, and first Altar Abraham made to God in the land of Canaan, both in
this, before Isaac was ever promised. 2 Constant continuance, pretending an
uninterrupted succession of divine service in this place, whilst they objected
the long intermission of Gods worship in Jerusalem, lying wast during the
seventy years of the captivity in Babylon.


But, oh how light and slight, how few and feeble are the Samaritan arguments
for the place of their worship, if compared to the numerous, ponderous,
pregnant proofs Jews can produce, for Gods presence fixed in Jerusalem! The
Samaritans therefore were wise in their generation, to admit alone of the five
books of Moses for canonical (wherein all their supposed evidences, for the
matter in controversy, are contained) seeing otherwise, had they accepted of
the rest of the Prophets in the old Testament, their witness had utterly
overthrown the fundamentals of their Religion, which so frequently make
Jerusalem the proper center of all pious men's devotion. One instance for many;
Psalm. 78. 67, 68, 69.
Moreover he refused the tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the Tribe of
Ephraim; but chose the Tribe of Judah, the mount Sion which he loved. And he
built his sanctuary like-high palaces, like the earth which he has established
for ever. Here Ephraim is singled out by himself, as of all the Tribes, most
probable in after-ages to justle with Judah, for the place of Gods public
service (in whose portion was mount Gerizim, besides Josh 18. 1. Josh. 16. 6.
Shiloh where the tabernacle so long resided) and yet he is clearly cast, and
the cause adjudged against him, by the immediate determination of God himself.

39. We have no more to say of the Samaritan temple on mount Gerizim, The
testimony of the son of Sirach.
save only that 2 Macc. 6. 2.
Antiochus afterward turned it for a time into the temple of Jupiter that
keeps hospitality. Sure I am, the Samaritans practiced small hospitality in
the country hereabouts; denying to give our Savior entertainment in their
towns Luke 9. 53.
because he was going to Jerusalem. The truth is, this temple was destroyed,
somewhat before the time of our Savior, by John Zemach. David part 1^. page
26.
Hyrcanus, after it had flourished above two hundred years: but, when the
temple was taken away, the mountain remained, in which the Samaritans continued
their adoration. We conclude all with the words of the son of Eccles. 50 25.
Sirach, There be two manner of nations which my heart abhors, and the third
is no nation: They that sit upon the mountains of Samaria, and they that dwell
amongst the Philistines, and that foolish people that dwell in Sichem. Meaning
by the first, the Idolatrous, by the last, the heretical Samaritans, who
indeed were no distinct nation (as Leopards, and mules, are properly no
creatures) but a mixture of Jews, and heathen, blended together.

41. Expect not here from me (as alien from our work in hand) any arguments,
Impudency to prefer the Samaritan, before the Hebrew Pentateuch.
against their presumption, who have dared to compare, yea prefer the Samaritan
Pentateuch, for authenticalness, before the Hebrew Original. For three things
(says Prove. 30. 21. 23.
Solomon) the earth is disquieted, and the fourth it can not bear, namely, an
handmaid that is heir to her mistress. How much more intolerable then is it,
when a translation, which is, or ought to be, the dutiful servant to the
original, shall presume, (her mistress being extant, and in presence,) to take
the place and precedence of her? As here, apographum does of the autographum,
when the Samaritan transcript is by some Vide Exercit. Hottinge^i contra
Mori^um.
advanced above the canonical copy in the Hebrew. All I will add is this,
that to the Jews (...), were Romans 3. 2.
committed the oracles of God: and, to give them their due, they were careful
preservers thereof, being never reproved by our Savior, (though often for
falseglosses thereon) of any forgery in corrupting, depraving, or altering the
Letter of the text: whereas no such trust appears, delivered to the charge of
the Sama^itans. In a word, such as defend, that the Pentateuch coming from the
heretical (not to say apostate Samaritans) is purer then that in Hebrew,
transmitted to us from the Jews, in that age the only Amos 3. 2.
true Church of God in the world, may with as much truth maintain, that breath
proceeding from putrefied and corrupted lungs, is more healthful and
wholesome, then what comes from vitals sound and entire.

42. Shechem, Dinah d^flowred in Shechem. Genesis 34. 1.
which we lately mentioned, lay betwixt the aforesaid mountains; a place
stained with many treacherous practices, which were acted therein. Here Dinah
went out to see the daughters of the land, so to please her fancy with gazing
on foreign fashions. O where was the tent, wherein her great-grand-mother Gen
18. 9.
Sarah lived, that now she had left it? Where was the Genesis 24. 65
veil, wherewith her grandmother Rebekah covered her face, that now she had
lost it? Her own mother L^ahs Genesis 29. 17.
eyes, which were weak and tender, (those worse) were better then Dinahs, which
were wanton, and wandering. She sees, and is seen, and is liked, and lusted
after, and (whether by force, or fraud) defiled, and still passionately
affected; contrary to what commonly happens, that the snuff of lust goes out
in the stink 2 Samuel 13. 15.
of loathing. Yea Shechem was so honest in his dishonesty, that he desired to
make Dinah the best amends he could give, or she receive, and on any rate went
about to purchase the vine to himself, so to color a title to those unripe
grapes, which he had snatched from it. The agreement is made, on condition all
the Shechemites should be circumcised; which done, on the Genesis 34. 25.
third day (when commonly wounds are more painful, then when first given)
Simeon and Levi kill all the males of the city, and the rest of their brethren
fall on the spoil thereof.

42. Long after, Abimelech made King by the Shechemites
Abimelech, the base-born and bloody-minded son of good Gedeon, was by the
Shechemites (his townsmen by his mothers side) here at the Judge. 9. 6.
stone in the plain, made King of I^rael; whilst Iotham (which of his seventy
brethren had only escaped his cruelty) from the top of mount Judge. 4. 7.
Gerizim, uttered his parable of the Bramble, kinging it over the trees of the
wood. Bramble; which he applied so home to the men of Shechem, that for the
present, he left the pricks thereof in the ears of his auditors; the pain
whereof they found and felt afterward in their hearts, when God put a spirit
of discord betwixt them, and Abimelech.

43. We find not the particular cause, Shechem sacked by Abimele^h.
but the effects of the discord betwixt them. Insomuch that Abimelech sacked
the city of Shechem, and Judge. 9. 45.
sowed it with salt. A formality usual in that age in execration of peoples
perfidiousness: but whence fetching its original, it is hard to decide. I dare
not say, in imitation of God himself, who when he destroyed the wicked cities
of Sodom and Gomorrah, turned the fruitful vales wherein they stood, into the
Genesis 14. 3.
salt-sea, in token of their perpetual desolation. Sure I am, the custom has
been imitated in these western parts. For Frederick Barbarossa, for some
affronts offered to his Empress by those of Millan, razed the city, and sowed
it with Munsters Cosm. in descr. Italy.
salt.

44. The Shechemites retreated into the house of Baal-berith their God, hoping
in vain to make it good for their defense. Ab^melech slain at ^he tower of
Thebez.
For Abimelech fetching fuel from the neighboring mountain of Zalmon Judge. 9.
48.
(whence the Psalmist fetched his expression of spotless purity, white as snow
in Psalm. 68. 14.
Zalmon, which commonly candied the top of this mountain, being the Jewish
Albion) and firing the tower of the Temple, slew therein a thousand men and
women. Then no doubt the Judge. 9. 20. 6.
house of Millo was destroyed: which I take not for any building in the city of
Shechem (though there was a fair street of that 1 King. 11. 27
name in Jerusalem) but for a potent and puissant family therein, (as the house
of the Fuggers in Auspurge) who first advanced Abimelech, and sought, when too
late, to suppress. But the weaker sex revenged on Abimelech his cruelty to
them, when besieging the tower of Thebez, which we conceive hard by Shechem,
(having no other indication, but this single mention for the posture thereof) a
woman broke his brain-pan with a piece of a Judge. 9. 53.
millstone.

45. Though not the salt which was sown, The people petition R^hoboam at
Shechem.
yet the city of Shechem, grew up again to its former greatness. Hither
repaired Rehoboam for the people to make him King. One may happily sent Ieroboams
policy and his hand in appointing the place, in his own Tribe of Ephraim, where
his party was most puissant: 1 King. 11. 31. 37. ^^.
who intending to run a race with Rehoboam for a Crown, chose out the ground
most advantageous for himself. Here the people presented Rehoboam with a
Petition for the mitigation of the intolerable burdens, whether personal, or
pecuniary, which Solomon imposed upon them. How came he to be behind hand who
was the most wealthy Prince in the world? Surely not the building of Gods, but
his Idols temples impaired his treasure; and women impoverished both his wealth
and his wisdom. Seven hundred 1 King. 11. 3.
Queens, and not unlikely so many Courts; and three hundred Concubines, which
though lesser then the former in honor, might be greater in expense (as the
Thief in the Candle wastes more then the burning of the wiek) were able to
bankrupt the land of Ophir, with Tarshish given in to boot* Rehoboam requires
three 1 King. 12. 5.
days respite for his answer: the only act almost wherein he showed himself
wise Solomon's son; seeing in matters of such consequence, extemporary returns
give men leisure afterward to meditate their Repentance.

46. The old men advise Rehoboam for remission and mitigation of taxes.
Rehoboam follows the young men's advice.
What harm was it if He being now to be married to a Crown should wait on his
Bride the wedding day, that she might obey him all her life after? Especially
they counseled him to 2 King. 12. 7.
speak good words to the people, though his good deeds might follow at a
distance. And truly fair speeches cost the giver nothing, and do ease, though
not cure the discontented receiver. But Rehoboam followed the advice of the
young men (hot heads, enough to set a kingdom on fire) not to satisfy, but
suppress the peoples desires, threatening to make his little finger heavier then
his Fathers loins; (more happy if he had made his head but half as wise) so
that the people deserting the house of David, clave to Jeroboam for their King.

47. During this distemper, Adoram stoned by the people.
Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was over the Tribute, unto the people. No doubt in
hope that they would reverence his gray-haires, not abating much of an hundred
years in age, (having enjoyed that office above threescore years, from the
midst of the reign of King 2 Samuel 20. 24.
David;) or else to give them some orall satisfaction, how all sums had
formerly been expended for the public good. But his sight was offensive to the
people, whose very looks seemed to demand a tax, and his eyes to exact tribute
of them: insomuch that the 1 King. 12. 18.
people stoned him to death. To lesson all money-officers from public
appearance in popular tumults, being persons most obnoxious to the spite and
spleen of the Vulgar. Thus in Jack St^awes Rebellion, their fury fell first and
fiercest on Sir Robert Hales Lord of Saint John's, and then Lord Treasurer, whom
they drew out of the Chapel in the Tower; and without any reverence of his
estate or degree, with fell noise and huge cries struck off his head on Hollir
shead. page 431.
Tower Hill. Nor did Sir ^ames Fines, Lord Say, and Treasurer of England, fare
better in ^he Rebellion of Jack Cade, whom without any judicial proceedings,
before his confession was ended, they Ide^ (...) 634.
executed at the standard in Cheapside. And now it was high time for Rehoboam
to call for his Chariot, and have to Jerusalem.

48. Jacobs purchase and Ios^phs portion.
Near to Shechem was the parcel of ground which Jacob bought of the children
of Hamor for an hundred pieces of money, whereon he spread his tent, and
erected an Altar called God the Genesis 33. 20.
God of Israel. Afterward Jacob gave it as a portion to his son Joseph, whose
bones brought out of Egypt were Josh. 24. 32.
buried therein. But how Jacob, when he bequeathed this land to Joseph, could
properly call it, A portion. Genesis 48. 22.
which he took out of the hands of the Amorites with his sword and by his bow,
is a difficulty much perplexing Divines in the solution thereof, meeting only
with Jacobs staff (though Esau had a bow) in the Tenor of Scripture: We will
present the Reader with their best answers, leaving him to choose which he
conceives most probable.

Some conceive 1 That Jacob being a peaceable and plain dealing man, in reproof
of such as delight in force and violence, called his money his sword and his
bow. And indeed in all ages money is the sharpest sword, and bow that best hits
the mark yea Eccles. 10. 19.
answers all things. 2 That thereby he meant his prayers (the Arms of the
Patriarchs and Primitive Christians) whereby he obtained of God, that his
posterity being now in his loins, in due time should by their martial
atchievments conquer the country; and speaks of the conquest as already made,
because of the undoubted assurance of it upon Gods promise. 3 That his sword
and his bow import no more then his industry and endeavors. Thus the Latin
phrase, Fecit proprio mart, carries a warlike sound, but a peaceable sense,
when one acquires a thing, though in a legal way with his own might, without
the assistance of others, as Jacob purchased the foresaid heritage. 4 That his
sword related not to his purchase, but to the city of (...) in locum.
Shechem, which Simeon and Levi won by their sword, and the sons conquest is
reputed to their Father.
Now let none be troubled because Jacob is said to purchase this land of the
Amorites, Hamor of whom he bought it being an Genesis 34. 2.
Hivite: Amorite being there taken in a genericall sense, as all the
inhabitants of the eight united Provinces, are commonly called Hollanders.

49. Near to this parcel of ground which Jacob gave to Joseph, (...) and
Shalem c^ties nigh She^hem.
stood the city of Sychar; wherein was the well, at which that excellent
discourse passed betwixt our Savior and the John 4. 5.
Samaritan woman, who came thither to draw water. Some also place hereabouts
the city Shalem founding it on the words of the text, And Jacob came to Genesis
33. 18.
Shalem a city of Shechem. Which the Chaldee and other translations read, and
Jacob came safe or sound and entire to a city of Shechem. Not that here he was
healed of his halting (as some will have it) but rather that hitherto no
notorious or eminent dysaster befell his family, which afterward fell thick
and threefold upon it. As the defiling of Dinah; Simeon and Levi slaughtering
the Shechemites; Reubens incest; Rachels death; Er and Onan slain by God;
Judah's incest with Tamar; Joseph sold by his brethren.

50. And now to take our farewell of the country about Shechem, Two eminent
oaks near Shechem.
anciently called the Genesis 12. 6.
plain of Moreh: two eminent oaks grew therein. One, under which Jacob buried
his heathen Gods, with the superstitious Genesis 35. 4.
earrings of his family, wherein no doubt, Idols were engraven. Another, under
which was a great stone solemnly set up by Joshua with the words of the Law
Io^^. 24. 27.
written thereon, to be a witness against the Israelites, in case afterward
they should deny that God, whom then they generally resolved to serve But the
question will be how this latter oak was termed to be Josh. 24. 26.
by the Sanctuary of the Lord; seeing the Tabernacle, and the Sanctuary Lieger
therein resided at Josh. 18.1.
Shiloh in those days. If any say that every place where men seriously set
their souls to serve God is his Sanctuary; they speak rather an Evangelicall
truth, then a proper answer to the present question. This inclines me to
conceive, either that by Sanctuary is meant that place of the Altar, which
Jacob long before thereabouts erected; or that the Tabernacle not far off, was
brought hither for the instant occasion, and afterward returned back unto
Shiloh.

51. Dothan lay east of Shechem, Doth^^ where the Syrians were smitten with
blindness.
wherein the Prophet Elisha for some time made his abode. Here he was
complained of to the King of Syria, for being the pick-lock of his
Cabinet-councels: and therefore an army was ordered to apprehend him. But why
so many to attach a single person and his servant? Indeed no more then needed.
For Elisha alone was an army in himself 2 Kin. 13. 14.
being the horsemen of Israel and chariots thereof* His servant seeing
themselves surrounded cries out, till having his eyes opened, he discovers
themselves guarded with a fiery army on the tops of the mountains. Thus Angels
are good men's Janissaries to protect them, and those Natives of heaven grudge
not to guard those, who are only free Denizens thereof. The Syrians are 2
King. 6. 18.
smitten with blindness; and they that came for the destruction, are glad to
follow the direction of Elisha. Indeed to whom should blind men go, but to the
Prophet, the Seer, to guide them? He leads them, for the present, the wrong way
to their intents and desires, but in fine the right way to Gods glory, and
their safety; in stead of Dothan, bringing them to Samaria. How easily are
those misled who lack the use of eyes? And (alas!) whither will implicire
faith, and blind obedience steer the followers thereof? Yet here all came off
in a peaceable close; so that their lives being saved, sight restored, bodies
feasted, and minds better informed, they returned to Damascus. If I must be a
captive, may I be a prisoner to a pious Prophet, so shall I be best used, and
my ransom easiliest procured.

52. This Dothan I take to be the very place, Dothan where Joseph was sold by
his brethren
where Joseph found his brethren, and there was put into the pit, and sold to
the Merchants. For being sent by his Father to Genesis 37. 12.
Shechem, he was by a man directed to Dothan, whither his brethren had removed
their flocks, and which probably was not far off, but some few miles from the
former place. Wherefore, when formerly in the description of Zebulun, we placed
Dothan in the northern parts of that Tribe, threescore miles from Shechem,
therein we were carried away with the common current of other men's judgments,
and now have watched our advantage to swim back again, and show our private
opinion in the position thereof. And besides the aforesaid text, settling Dothan
near Shechem in this Tribe of Ephraim, it is proportionable to divine
providence, that the place whereon Joseph was betrayed, and pit wherein he was
put, should in after ages fall to the possession of the sons of Ephraim
descended from him.

53. But here a material Question will be started, How this country was
called the land of the Hebrews.
how Joseph could properly say, that he was stolen away out of the Genesis 40. 15.
land of the Hebrews; when the Hebrews at that time, had none inheritance in
it, no not so Act. 7. 5.
much as to set their foot on? Say not that Joseph being a child when taken
away might be allowed to speak incongruously; for we behold his words as
uttered by him when a man. And surely he, who then could expound dreams, could
express himself in proper language. Some conceive it was termed the Land of the
Hebrews, 1 From those few Hebrews, the family of Jacob, living there, though
not as inhabitants, but only as sojourners therein. 2 It was the Land of the
Hebrews by promise, and in due time should be theirs by possession. 3 The Land
of the Hebrews, though not in lineage, in language; the Canaanites speaking the
same tongue with Jacobs family. 4 Some conceive this land anciently belonged to
Heber, (as all Asia to the sons of Shem,) and that the Canaanites had before
Abraham's time encroached on that Country.


To strengthen this last conjecture, we must remember that Melchisedech King of
Salem, who generally is conceived to be Shem, the ancestour of the Hebrews,
still retained his Genesis 14. 18.
kingdom in the land of Canaan. And it might be that the other Hebrews were
ejected by the Canaanites. If so, the Israelites afterward got the land under
Joshua by a double Right, of Conquest, and Recovery.

54. In this Tribe no doubt was the city Ephraim, The City Ephraim.
in a Ioh. 11. 54.
Country near to the wilderness: where our Savior that Sun of righteousness
clouded himself for a time when the Jews took counsel to kill him. Wonder not,
that we cannot find the exact situation of this place. For Christ chose it on
purpose for the privacy and obscurity thereof. Thus though willing Ioh. 10. 15.
to lay down, he was not willing to cast away his life: unfit to be a Savior
of mankind, if a destroyer of himself. And though he knew well, that all the
weights of man's craft and cruelty, could not make the clock of his time strike
one minute before his Ioh. 12. 23.
hour was come; yet he counted it his duty, by Prudentiall means to endeavor
self-preservation.

55. Two eminent places remain, The mount of Phinehas.
which we have reserved for the last, because of the uncertainty of their
particular situation, though both of them certainly in this Tribe. One, the
hill of Phinehas, which was given him in mount Josh. 24. 33.
Ephraim. Let no sacrilegious hands hasten hither with their Spades, and
Mattocks, to pare and abate this hill as too large a possession for the high
Priest, seeing a greater had been too small for his deserts, who Psalm. 106. 30.
stood up, and executed judgment, and so the plague ceased. This Hill of
Phinehas certainly was with in the circumference of some Leviticall city in
this Tribe, and we conjecturally have placed it within the circuit of
Beth-horon the upper. Here, religious Eleazar the son of Aaron was Josh. 24. 33.
buried, in this hill belonging to his son Phinehas.

56. The other the Mount of Amaleck Judge. 12. 25.
in the land of Ephraim. Mou^^ Amalek
But how came the Amalekites, to have any thing in the heart of Ephraim, whose
own country lay two hundred miles more southward near the Red Sea? And yet it
is no wonder to find thieves, and robbers (such were the Sea our Description
of Paran-parag. 20
Amalekites) in any place, who like the Devil their father, Job. 2. 7.
go to and fro in the earth, walking up and down therein. But we are
confident, this mountain was so called from some eminent thing, here done, or
suffered by the Amalekites. For we find them joined with the Midianites in the
days of Judge. 6. 3.
Gedeon, to destroy Israel, and find afterward this Tribe of Judge. 7. 24, 25.
Ephraim very succesfull in doing execution on the remains of the Midianitish
Army when defeated. Why then might not this mountain of Amalek be so named from
some Amalekites then slain in this place? As Danesend, in the west side of
Hartford-shire, took its name from a See camd. Map* of Hartfordshire.
battle thereby, wherein the Danes were overthrown. In Pirathon, a town on
mount Amalek, Abdon one of the peaceable Judges in Israel, was interred.

57. I conceived all memorable places described in this Tribe, Baal-Hazor
stained wi^h Absoloms c^uelty.
but on review do discover a guilty town lurking besides 2 Samuel 13. 23.
Ephraim as if conscious of the treachery committed therein, it endeavored to
escape our observation, namely Baal-hazor, where Absalom sheared his sheep. If
any demand, how he came by any land in this Tribe to feed cattle therein; no
doubt he held it by gift or grant from David his Father; and how David when
King, became possessed of demesnes in all Tribes, has In Description of Gad.
page 84.
formerly been largely resolved. Nor was it any disgrace to a Kings son to be
master of sheep, seeing the Eccles. 5. 9.
King himself is maintained by husbandry. As commendable the thrift: so
damnable the cruelty of Absalom in this place, causing the murder of his
brother Amnon just 2 Samuel 13. 28.
when his heart was merry with wine, as if his wild revenge would imitate
divine justice, to kill both Mat. 10. 28.
body and soul together. This Amnon was he that 2 Samuel 13. 6.
feigned himself sick when he was well, and now dyed before he was sick.

58. Let Archelais not be forgotten, Archelais and Iscariot.
half ashamed to bear the name of wicked Archelaus the builder Josephus Antiq.
l^. 17. cap. 19.
thereof, son and successor of Herod in Judea, whose cruelty Mat. 2. 22.
frighted Joseph from returning to Beth-lehem, and diverted him to Nazareth. As
Archelais took its name from a wicked man: so Iscariot (a village not far from
it) gave name to a worse; that traitor of his Master being born in this place,
as Adrichomius out of Saint Hierome will have it. But other reasons are
rendered of Judas his syrname, and the place of his exemplary Act. 1. 18.
death is more certainly known, then that of his obscure nativity. As for
Apollonia by the sea side, 1 Macc. 13. 13.
Addida over against the plain, with some other petite places in Ephraim, they
are well known by their several marks, not to be mentioned in Canonical
Scripture.

59. The Son of Hur was Solomon's monthly Purveyour in mount 1 King. 4. 8.
Ephraim. The Arms of Ephraim.
The standard of Ephraim was pitched first on the Number. 2. 18.
west side of the Tabernacle: Arms anciently depicted thereon, an Ox sable
passant, in a field argent, founded on Deuteronomy. 33. 17.
Moses his words, His beauty shall be like the firstling of a bullock, to which
we may ad the prophecy of Hosea, Hos. 10. 11.
Ephraim is as an heifer that is taught, and loves to tread out the Corn.
Which perchance gave occasion to the postnate arms usually assigned to this
Tribe, though later by twelve hundred years then their ancient standard erected
in the wilderness.

Here the Map of DAN is to be inserted.
THE TRIBE OF DAN. CHAP. 10.
1. DAN was eldest Son of Jacob by Genesis 35. 25.
Bilhah Rahels maid and his concubine. Of his body but one, [Hushim] went down
into Egypt, yet of his Posterity came forth thence no fewer then Numb. 1. 39.
threescore and two thousand and seven hundred males of twenty years old and
upwards: all which falling in the wilderness, for their faithlesness in Gods
promises, Number. 26. 43.
threescore and four thousand and four hundred entered the land of Canaan.

2. There passes a general tradition taken up by some Fathers, Irenaeus lib.
5. Ambros. de benedict. Patriar. cap. 7. August. quaest. 22. in Ioshu. Prosper.
de promis. Dei par. 4. Theodoret. quaest. 109. in Genesis Gregor. lib. 31.
moralium etc.
continued by some middle, to modern Popish writers, that the Antichrist should
descend of the Tribe of Dan. And why conceive (or conceit they rather) so
uncharitably of this Tribe? Confess we, that Dan hears ill, on several
occasions in the Scripture. 1 Dan, Father of this Tribe, had a foul mouth,
which made Genesis 37. 2.
Joseph bring in a complaint thereof to So had all the sons of Bilhah and
Zilpah.
Jacob. 2 The first personal blasphemy recorded amongst the Israelites was
committed by a Mongrell L^vit. 24. 11.
Danite, being the son of Shelomith, for which he was stoned. 3 The first
tribuall defection to idolatry Dan was guilty of, publicly Judge. 18. ^0.
setting up This was Ieroboams not the T^^bes act.
and worshipping a graven Image. 4 A moity of the national apostasy of the
Idolatrous Jews was solemnly acted on the theater of this Tribe, one of 1 Kin.
12. 29.
Ieroboams golden calves being set up at Dan. 5 When twelve thousand of Gods
sealed ones are reckoned up out of every Tribe Rev. 7.
, Dan is omitted, as consigned to malediction, say some: as formerly in the
first of Chronicles, no mention of Dan, So also is Zebulun, as Simeon is
omitted in Moses his blessings, Deuteronomy. 33.
where the genealogies of all other Tribes are recounted.
The reader may judge whether these roots be deep enough to bring and bear the
branches of so far spread report, that therefore the Man of sin must derive his
pedigree from this Tribe. Little probability of Antichrist coming from Dan
literal (long since carried captive with the rest of his brethren into Africa)
but as for Dan mystical many have sought, and many conceive they have found
him in another and nearer place. But leaving the uncertainties of Antichrist,
most sure it is, that Samson, one of the liveliest types of Christ, was
descended of Dan. And so was Exodus 31. 6.
Aholiab that excellent artist: who was joint master of the fabric of the
Tabernacle: as Hiram also in the work of the Temple, was a Danite on the
mothers side.

3. The land allotted to Dan, Josh. 15. 1 -- 13.
seems, for the most part, first to fall to the share of Judah at the partition
of the Country. And because the bounds of Judah were too great, the surplusage
thereof by a new grant was made over to the Danites. Some will wonder, that
God, who divided Manna so equally, a homer for every man, should part the land
so unevenly, that one Tribe should leave and another lack: so that the thirst
of Simeon and Dan was quenched with those few drops, which overflowed out of
the cup of Judah. May such remember, Judah was the Princely Tribe, out of which
Messiah was to arise, and his portion cut out in state; leaving the superfluous
reversions thereof to others; may typifie Christ himself, who is Psalm. 45. 7.
anointed with oil of gladness above his fellows: of whose fullness (not only
of sufficiency and abundance, but even of redundance) we have all received,
grace for grace. Nor will the reader be moved when he finds some cities
ensuing, sometimes mentioned as belonging to Judah, other whiles to Dan:
because to the former by original assignation, and to the latter by actual
possession.

4. This Country was bounded with Ephraim on the north, Judah on the east,
Simeon on the south, and the Mid-land-sea on the west. From above Lydda to the
brook Soreck, some thirty miles; and little less east and west, from the sea to
the edge of Judah. A land at the best, but half Judah's leavings, and that not
entirely possessed of the Danites. For herein the Amorites did both cut and
choose for themselves, reserving the fat and flesh thereof, (all the fruitful
Judge 1. 34.
valley) for their own use, whilst the Danites were glad to pick the bones,
crowded up into the mountains. Besides, three of the Satrapies of the
Philistines, are found in this Tribe; A puissant nation, and at deadly fewd
with the people of Israel. This put the Danites on the necessity (men over-pent
will some way vent themselves) of seeking new Quarters, Josh. 19. 47.
in that their memorable expedition, whereof formerly in Nephthali. If any
ask, why they did not endeavor the enlargement of their bounds at home against
the Amorites and Philistines, before a far adventure, an hundred miles off. Let
such know, the design was conceived easier, suddenly to surprise the secure
Leshemites, pursie with long peace, then to undertake those two warlike
nations, well breathed daily in military Discipline: And Gen 49. 17. Deuteronomy. 33.
22.
sudden surprisals were foretold in this Tribe.

5. But grant the measure in this Tribe but short, the ware thereof was very
fine, the Country being passing fruitful in commodities. Herein grew that
bunch of Grapes of prodigious greatness, in gathering whereof, by the hand of
the spies sent to search the Land, the Israelites took Livery and Seisin of the
fruits of the Country. Besides, this Tribe did drive some sea-trade (Deborah
complains, Why did Dan Iud. 5. 17.
remain in ships?) though the Jews generally were mean Mariners and Merchants.
Partly because the fatness of their soil so stuck by their sides, it unactived
them for foreign adventures: and natures bounty unto them gave their industry a
Writ of ease to sit at home. And partly because, being divided (as an Island
from the Continent of the World) in Religion from other Countries, it cut off
their comfortable commerce with other nations: though since their woeful
Posterity have proved the Capemerchants of the world.

6. First to survey the west side on the sea, Io^^. 19. 46.
therein we are accosted with Ioppa, a strong City, seated on an high rock, so
that Strabo reports, that Jerusalem may thence be discovered: which a modern
Sand. his trav. page 152.
Traveller concludes impossible. At the bottom thereof a haven [formerly] most
convenient. So ancient a place, that some make it first founded, and so named
from Iapheth before the Adricho. in theat. Ter. Sanc. page 23.
flood. But it is utterly improbable that Noah being himself busied about
building an Arc, which threatened the worlds destruction, would suffer his son
to erect a City, as promising a fixed habitation. Hither all the timber of the
Temple, cut down and carved in mount Lebanon, was brought by the Tyrians in 2
Chro. 2. 16.
floates, and hence by Carts conveyed to Jerusalem. Hither Jonah fled, and took
shipping for Tarshish Ion. 1. 3.
, conceived by some to be the Country of Cilicia; by others the city Tarsus
therein. But be it Sea or Land, Country or City, sure it was not Niniveh,
whither God had sent him. Here charitable Act. 9. 36.
Dorcas which made coats and garments for the poor widows whilst she was with
them, (the lanthorn of men's good deeds cast the best light, when carried before
them, and done in their life time) lived, dyed, and was revived by Saint Peter.
Here he lodged in the house of Simon a Tanner by the seaside, Act. 3. 43. and
11. 5. 13.
water we know is very necessary in that occupation (though salt water only
useful to wash raw hides) and therein beheld that vision, wherein the Epitome
of all creatures were in a sheet represented unto him. Of this great City, at
this day only two old towers do survive, it being questionable, whether the
place be more ruinous, or the poor Moors more ragged, that dwell therein. A bad
haven, much obstructed with sands, and exposed to the fury of the north wind.
The best commendation of this harbor is, that Jury had no better, scarce
another, as if God condemned the seacoasts thereof to danger, as the Continent
to barrenness.

7. Act. 9. 38. 32. 33, 34.
Near unto Ioppa is Lydda (some six miles North-west) where Peter cured En^as
(truly pious) of the palsy, which eight years had afflicted him. Here Saint
George is Guilel. Tyrius.
reported to have been beheaded, and his tomb is showed in this place. All I
will add is (I hope without offense) this ensuing Parallel, In Ioppa. In
Lydda. The valor of Pliny Not. his. lib. cap.
Perseus is celebrated for freeing Andromeda daughter to King Cepheus, Et Pomp.
Mela. Ovid. lib. 4.
tied with chains to the rocks, Metam.
from the fury of a sea monster to which she was exposed. The puissance of
Saint George is remembered for delivering the nameless and Ioh. de Vorag. in the
golden Legion.
only daughter of a certain King of Libya, from a fiery Dragon, to whom she
was tendered by lot, to be devoured.

It is pity these two stories should be parted asunder, which will both in full
latitude be believed together. Hard to say, whether nearer, the two places, or
two reports. He that considers the resemblance of their complexions, will
conclude, Fancy the father, Credulity the mother of both; though we need not
presently reject all the story of Saint George for fictitious for some
improbable circumstances appendent thereunto. Nor have I ought else to observe
of Lydda, save that in Saint Hieroms time it was called Diospolis.

8. To return to Ioppa, the port of Jerusalem. And let us a little way
accompany the Pilgrims in the road thitherwards. Take the character of the
Country on the credit of a late Morisons trav. part 1. c. p. 215.
eyewitness: A most pleasant plain yielding Time and Hyssope, and other
fragrant herbs without tillage or planting, growing so high, that they came to
the knees of our Asses. Nor need any wonder at the stature of this ground
Hyssope in Jury (different from wall-Hyssope or moss rather, the last and
lowest step of natures storehouse, and 1 King. 4: 33.
Solomon's study) seeing good Hugo Groti. in Ioha. 19. 29.
Authors have affirmed, that haec planta in Iudaea arborescit, hyssope does
tree it in Judea. And what is called by Mat. 27. 29. Mar. 15. 26.
Matthew and Mark Calamus, a reed, cane, or spear, is rendered an
Hyssope-stalke by Ioh. 19. 29.
Saint John. Because as a learned man concludes, Hyssope here sprouted so high,
that thereof an instrument might be made to lift up the sponge to our Saviors
mouth hanging on the Cross. And thus we see that as always one of Job's
messengers escaped, to bring the sad tidings of their fellows destruction; so
even at this day, some straggling valleys in Palestine, have made hard shift by
their own fruitfulness still continuing) to inform the world, how plentiful
this Country was, before barrenness by Gods appointment, seized on the
generality thereof.

9. To proceed in the road to Jerusalem (as the best guide to direct us in the
survey of the north of this Tribe) It passes not far from Shaal^im a City of
Josh. 19. 42.
Dan, but in the confines of Ephraim. Where though the Amorites dwelt in
despite of the Danites, yet the Tribe of Ephraim Judge. 1. 35.
made them tributaries. A little further, this highway takes its farewell of
the Tribe of Dan, but with full intent shortly to visit it again. For having
passed over a corner of Ephraim, which baggeth into the south, it returns into
Dan, and goes forward by Modin, the City of Mattathias and his sons, where the
seven 1 Macc. 13. 27, 28, 29.
sepulchers of the Maccabees (each a high Pyramid on a square basis, and all
mounted on a steep hill) are a conspicuous sea-mark to the Mariners many miles
distant. Charitable monuments, which being erected for the honor of the dead,
are employed for the safety of the living! Few miles hence this highway
finally leaves this Tribe. And therefore we leave it, only wishing the
passengers therein a prosperous journey to Jerusalem. That such as go thither
about business may dispatch the same to their own contentment; such as travel
out of curiosity may have their expectation so satisfied, as to countervaile
all their pains and charges: and such as go thither out of superstitious
opinion to merit, may have their erroneous judgments better rectified and
informed.

10. Nor does ought else observable offer it self in this corner of the Tribe,
save Josh. 21. 24. Josh. 10. 12.
Aijalon, (where Joshua's Josh. 21. 24. Josh. 10. 12.
prayer arrested the Moon to stand still) assigned by God to the Levites. But
the Amorites took the boldness to keep possession thereof. Hear the words of
the Iud. 1. 34.
Scripture, And the Amorites forced the children of Dan into the mountains:
for they would not suffer them to come down into the valley, but the Amorites
would dwell in mount Herez, in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim. The genuine sense is,
that though the Amorites generally pent the Danites up in the mountains; yet in
these three places (though mountainous in their situation) they crossed their
common custom; not out of necessity, but design, as sensible of their own
profit that these transcended the valleys in fertility, and therefore placed
themselves therein. Let others dispute, how it came to pass, that the Priests,
whom God intended men of peace, by their profession, had a controversiall City
appointed them, encumbered with enemies so that they must win it before they
could wear it. As also how the Levites could live, when the Land allotted them,
was sequestered in the hand of a foreign foe. It will be for enough us to
observe, that in all ages the Church being embarked in the same bottom with
the State ran an equal hazard therein, according to her proportion. And when
the whole Tribe of Dan, like the Parish in general, was straightened in its
processions, well might the Priests maintenance be abated accordingly.

11. We go back now to Ioppa, where standing on the rocks, an indifferent
fight may easily discern those ships, into which the heathen people of Ioppa,
with much courtesy, but more craft, invited the Jews with their wives and
their children to go aboard: for they made them pay their lives the freight
for their voyage, wilfully drowning two hundred of them. Whose blood Maccabeus
revenged with a contrary, but as cruel an 2 Macc. 12. 3, 4, 5, 6.
Element, burning all their ships in their harbor, with such as were found
therein. Hard by is Iamnia, a little haven (which may be rendered Seaton in
English) whose mischievous intention against the Jews, Maccabeus punished by 2
Mac. 12. 8, 9.
burning their town by night. Which bone-fire was beheld, two hundred and
forty furlongs off, as far as Jerusalem. A thing not incredible, that fire it
self should be seen so far, by the light whereof other things in darkness are
discovered, especially when mounted high on its throne, with the advantage of
pitch, cordage, and other navall and combustible matter. See Moors Mapof
Palestine
Some do conceive that this Iamnia is the same with Iabneh, the wall whereof
was broken down by 2 Chr. 26. 6.
Uzziah the puissant King of Judah.

12. Hence the sea running southward provides it self to entertain a nameless
brook: which Mercator calls Naphtoah, and Adricho. in theat. Ter. Sanc. page 24.
number. 59
others (making signs, as unable to speak the true name thereof) the brook of
the land of the Philistines, because otherwhiles the northern boundary of their
dominion. We had rather give it no name, then a nickname. And because the
course thereof affords us convenience to visit the middle parts of this Tribe,
we will accept of his courtesy, and follow the guidance thereof.

13. This brook has its birth and infancy in the Tribe of Judah, whence
flowing into Dan, he runs through the desert of Modin, which is full of
rocks, and those of holes, and those [once] of men, flying out of the
neighboring Cities from the persecution of the Pagans. Herein a thousand of
them were slain by the fury of their enemies, or rather by the fondness of
their own superstition, 1 M^c. 2. 38.
refusing to make resistance on the Sabbath day. A sad accident. But the parent
of a good event, because putting the surviving Jews in a posture of defense,
and teaching them more wise and valiant resolutions. Yea not long after,
hereabouts they obtained a victory over the numerous army of 1 Macc. 16. 4.
Cendebaeus. Nor will any slight this brook as inconsiderable, when they read
how it ran in the midst betwixt the armies of the Jews and Pagans, and was so
deep, that the hardiest of the former durst not adventure to wade it, before
first encouraged by the example of their 1 Macc 16. 5, 6
General. Except any will say, they did not so much fear the depth of the
river, as the height of the banks of the other side, to wit, the puissant army
of their enemies.

14. Going further on the river, we come into the Country of Makats, that is
(as learned Vid. ^jus (...). in 1 King. 4. 9.
Tremelius well observes) the border or boundary (if you please, the Marches)
betwixt this Tribe and their professed enemies the Philistines. It is
impossible to define the limits thereof, seeing the Country was the constant
Cockpit of war: and the ground thereof, sometimes marched forward, sometimes
retreated backward, according to the variety of martial success. Great is the
difference betwixt the same sea, at high and low water mark: and so this
Country must needs be much disproportioned to it self, when extended in a full
tide, and when contracted in a low ebb of success.

15. In this Country of Makats Bethshemesh was a principal City, belonging to
the Levites, and reputed part of Judah, but (except some Labell of land tacked
to Judah) surrounded about with the Tribe of Dan. A case obvious in the
dividing of Countries. Who knows not how Worcestershire has speckled all the
adjacent Counties with snips and shreds belonging unto it, though environed
with other shires, and that at considerable distance? Hither the kine drawing
the Cart, and lowing as they went to their Calves at home, (nature in them was
not rooted out, but overruled) brought the Arc, and rested it near a great
stone in the field of 1 Samuel 6. 18.
Joshua a Bethshemite. At what* time the Bethshemites were reaping their
harvest in the valley. Instantly at so good news, their Sicles lost their
edges, and could cut no more corn that day. The Arke-home is to be preferred
before Harvest-home. But oh! how hard is it to keep hungry eyes from feeding on
forbidden objects! All the Bethshemites were Levites, but not Priests, much
less Highpriests: to whom alone (and that only anniversary) the survey of
those mysteries did belong. Besides at this time Bethshemesh from a City, was
enlarged to be a Country: (such the confluence of Israelites from all places)
Otherwise no back of one City might seem broad enough for so great a rode, 1 Samuel 6. 19.
whereby fifty thousand and threescore and ten men were destroyed by the
Plague, for their Curiosity, in prying into the Arc.

16. Gibbethon is another prime place in Makats: allotted by God to the Josh.
19. 44. and 21. 23.
Levites of Kohath, and no doubt by them peaceably possessed for many years,
seeing nothing to the contrary does appear. But after the days of Jeroboam it
is said to 1 King. 15. 27 and 16. 15.
belong to the Philistines. Probably, when the Levites loyal both to God and
their King, upon the idolatrous defection of Israel, willingly 2 Chr. 11. 14.
deserted their own Cities, the Philistines taking advantage thereof (when much
good blood is let out, bad humors are nimble to supply the place) seized on
this City. To recover the same, Nadab the son of Jeroboam besieged it: but was
so far from taking the City, that before it he lost his own life, by the
treachery of Baasha conspiring against him. This siege continued more then
twenty years, (no doubt with intervalls of cessation) for 1 King. 16. 15, 16,
17, 18.
here Om^i a great Commander was in service, when by the soldiery voted King
of Israel. After which election he had not so much mind to take the City, as a
Crown, vigorously to prosecute his new title, and to suppress Tib^^ his
Corrivall. So much of the siege, but nothing of the taking of Gibbethon, so
that it was still violently possessed by the Philistines.

17. The south-east part of this Tribe is still to survey. Iud. 16. 4.
Where the brook Zorek creeps faintly out of the Tribe of Judah. Not far from
whose banks we light on Zorah and Eshtaol: two twin-cities, the one seldom
mentioned in Scripture without the other. Except one will call them man and
wife: because Machaneh-Dan (betwixt Zorah and Eshtaol) was joint issue of them
both. For when six hundred men out of these two cities marched toward the
taking of Leshem, here they Judge. 18. 2. 8. 11. 12.
met (probably by mutual agreement the most convenient place betwixt them)
behind (that is, west) of Kiriath-jearim. These did call this the first place
of their station Machaneh-Dan; and the last Dan (both from Dan their Ancestour)
without naming any intermediate places. As in all undertaking, the first motion
which founds and the last which finisheth it, are most memorable. It seems that
afterward, a town was built in that place, where their tents were pitched, as
a fortunate ground handselled with good success, where Iud. 13. 25.
Samson seems to have had his education.

18. But his birth at Zorah. Where he was the son of a long barren mother (a
regiment in Scripture of such eminent Persons, Isaac, Jacob, Samuel, Samson,
John Baptist etc.) as if (besides higher causes) nature had long thriftily
reserved her utmost strength, to expend it at last with more credit. Here an
Angel appearing to Manoahs wife, both Iud. 13. 4, 5.
told her that she should be a mother, and taught her how she should be a
nurse; with the ceremonious breeding of her son. No Wine must come in, no rasor
on him. Hercules the Pagan-Samson in some sort may seem, by the luxury of Poets
wits, to ape this Jewish Hercules. Neither of them otherwise mounted, then on
their legs: otherwise defensively armed, then with their skin and clothes. A
^aw-bone a sword to the one, a Club, to the other. Both of them very like for
their valor, and too like for their wantonness, women being the destruction of
them both.

19. But as Samsons luster did rise, so it did set in this Tribe. Hereabouts
born and Iud. 16. 31.
buried in the grave of his Father Manoah, betwixt Zorah and Eshtaol. Reader,
let me invite thee with me solemnly to behold his sepulcher, that therein both
of us may bury all our vain thoughts of eternity here. He that hereafter shall
presume on his own might as immortal, has not stronge^ brains, but a weak^^
back then Samson.

20. To go back to (...), Number. 13. 24, 25. and cap. 32. 9 Deuteronomy. 1. 24.
which now grows confident and bold with the accession of the brook (...), so
named (as the vine in Hampshire) from bunches of grapes there growing, whereof
one was the load for two men. Surely Bac^hus ^id not so drown Ceres in this
Country, nor did God the wise master of the feast, entertain the Jews his
daily guests, with suc^ liquid diet, but that we may justly presume the land
afforded bread and meat in a plentiful proportion to their wine. But when the
spies brought this home to the camp of the Israelites at Kadeshbarnea, they
like^ the wine, but not the reckoning which was to be paid for it* not so
pleased with the bigness of the grapes, as frighted at the bulkes of the Giants.

21. Nor is there any other considerable City remaining in this Tribe, save
Tim^ah, where Judah sheared his sheep, and at Pethah-enaim (or the opening of
the ways) committed incest with Thamar his unknown daughter-in-law, whom after
wards he commanded to be brought forth and Genesis 38. 24.
burnt. Thus easier i^ ^s for one to cause another to be consumed to ashes,
then to quench the least spark of lust in our own soul. Afterward Samson going
with his Parents to woo his wife, killed a young Lion in the vineyards of
Timnah, and the Iud. 14. 5, 6.
text says, he told not his Father or ^other what he had done. Herein his
silence no less commendable then his valor. But indeed true prowess pleases
it self more in doing then reporting its own achievements. Verse 8.
Not long after the Bees made a hive of the Lions body. And did not this land
flow with honey, when it was powered into a carcass for want of other vessels
to receive it? Honey which in fine proved gall to the Philistines. For though
they read his riddle by plowing with his heifer, Verse 16.
he paid his forfeit by killing their Country men. Hence afterward Samson,
Iud. 15. 4.
to revenge the injuries offered unto him, sent forth his Foxes, which proved
incendiaries of the corn and grain of the Philistines.

22. So much for the places of this Tribe, of whose situation we have any
certainty from Gods word, or good Authors. On the rest we hang out our
conjecturall Flag. Which whilst some censure for the Ensigns of our
ignorance; others I hope will approve as the colors of our modesty. Especially
having done our best endeavor in ranking them; and in default of
demonstrations, the most probability has ever been accounted the next heir
apparent to Truth. The best is, such places are only of name, not of note; but
once mentioned in Josh. 19. 41, 42. etc.
Joshua, without any memorable actions done in them, and so any mistake in the
false posture will prove less dangerous. Mountains of eminency this Tribe
affords none, save Josh. 15. 10.
mount Seir (puny hills far different from those in Edom) and mount Josh. 15.
11.
Baalah. Both parcels of the south-west bounds of Judah, as originally they
were assigned. But seeing those limits were afterward discomposed by a new
division and re-assignment of them to this Tribe (the out-list of Judah fell
into the midst of Dans whole cloth) those antiquated borders are (...) the less
remarkable. And as for other mountains, although this whole was mountainous,
yet there was a parity in her hills, none exceeding high* one^^ such advantages
of ground swelling above the plain, seemed to be the full breasts and fair
nipples of that land, which flowed with milk and honey.

23. A fair reserve of land in, not of, the Tribe, is still behind, long
expecting our company to come and describe it; namely; Philistia, or a part of
the land of the Philistines. These were a warlike people; none of the seven
nations of the Canaanites, which God drove out before Israel, but descended
from Genesis 10. 14.
Mi^zraim, the son of Cham. In the race of military achievements, they started
with the first, ran with the swiftest, and held out with the longest. Having a^
King in the days of Abraham, and continuing themselves in a considerable
condition till after the captivity. Returning almost as many forcible
impressions, as they received from the Israelites. What though Iud. 3. 31.
Sh^^gar smote, Samson (...), and 1 Samuel 7. 14.
Samuel humbled them? yet they grew so great in the reign of Saul, that they
left all the Israelites 1 Samuel 13. 22.
swordles^: though afterward there was one sword too many in Saul^ hand,
wherewith he slew himself when overcome by the Philistines. Indeed 2 Samuel 5.
18. and 8. 1. and 21. 15. etc.
David brought them, and Solomon kept them under. But in the days of Ioram they
so recovered themselves, that they plundered Judah, rifled the Kings palace, 2
Chr. 21. 17.
killed and carried captive the seed royal. Uzziah after ordered them into
obedience 2 Chr. 26. 6.
. but under Ahaz they regnined their lost cities, and wan more unto them. In a
word; of the heathen people left for Josh. 23. 13.
thorns in the sides of the Jews, none had sharper prickles Ezekiel. 25. 15.
or pierced nearer to their hearts then the Philistines. Yea such their
puissance, that from them the Greeks and Latinos called all this land
Palestina^ because the Philistines lived on the seacoast most obvious to the
notice of foreiners. As in deed a small Port makes a greater report in the
ears of strangers far off, then a land-locked place though far greater in
proportion.

24. The bounds of Philistia are not precisely to be set down. For whilst tame
cattle are kept in pastures, beasts of prey (such this warlike people) are
only bounded by their own ravenous appetite. The best way to measure the
borders of the Philistines is to behold the sins of the Israelites. For when
they were increased, then the Country of the Philistines. was accordingly
enlarged. Thus in the days of King Saul they roved, and 1 Samuel 31. 10.
ranged as far as Dor and Bethshean in the half Tribe of Manasseh, and had
Garrisons in the heart of most Tribes of Israel. But their constant habitation
(their den, as I may term it) was atract of ground from Gath in the north to
Gaza in the south. Some fifty miles in length and about half as broad, in the
lands allotted to Judah, Dan, and Simeon. Their government was a mixture of
Monarchy, and Aristocracy. For as their chief Cities had Kings over them,
which seem absolute in their own dominions; so these kingdoms were but Cantons
in relation to the whole, as members making up one entire Commonwealth.

25. There need no other evidence be produced to prove the fruitfulness of
their Country, then the vastness of their bodies, whereof the rankness of
their ground must be allowed a partial cause. Our English Proverb says, show
me not the meat, but show me the man. The well batling of the Giants bred in
Philistia (chiefly in Gath their Seminary) being Heteroclites, 2 Samuel 21. 20. 21
redundants from the rules of nature, sufficiently attests the fertility of
their soil. Some of these Giants had their hands branching out into 1 Chr. 20.
6.
six fingers, though they who had one fewer had enough to kill them. Let
Naturalists curiously inquire, whether or no this stock of Giants be wholly
spent in our age. And if so, what the true causes thereof. Whether intemperance
of diet, or over early marriage; seeing every one that is raw to work, count
themselves ripe to wed. Let them consult whether nature has not some other way
recompensed in our age that want of strength, by giving them quicker wits;
whereas in voluminous men commonly there is much empty margent. However men's
lesser strength and stature amounts not to a proof of an universal decay in
nature, Dr. Hakwels apology for divine providence.
as a most learned pen has unanswerably demonstrated.

26. One thing more we must observe of the Philistines, that they are also
called Cherethims or Cherethites in 1 Samuel 30. 14. and Ezekiel. 25. 26 and Zeph.
2. 5.
Scripture. Know also that the 2 Samuel 8. 18. and 1 King. 1. 38.
Cherethites were a kind of lifegard to King David. Now because it is
improbable that so wise a Prince would entrust his Person in the protection of
the Philistines his conquered enemies: therefore learned Vid. ejus annota in
locum pradicta.
Tremellius by Cherethites understands such Israelites as afterward possessed
the Country of the Philistines expulsed by David. Which seems to some but a
forced interpretation. For what unlikelyhood was it, that David might entertain
Proselyte Philistines, converts to the Jewish religion, if there were such, to
be attendants about his body? Not to instance in the French Kings double guard
of Scots, and Switzars, as improper to this purpose; (because though foreign,
yet free and friendly nations;) David out of policy might retain such to wait
upon him, both for their present encouragement, and future engagements of the
fidelity of the Philistines. Whose service might not only be free from danger,
but full of advantage, especially when they were under the conduct of so wise
and valiant an Israelite as 2 Samuel 20. 23.
Benajah the son of Iehojada placed governor over them. To render this still
more probable: Consider how Ittai the Gittite, with six hundred men of Gath,
was no native of Israel, as appears by David's words, 2 Samuel 15. 18, 19.
thou art a stranger and an exile; and yet was entrusted with the Command of a
2 Samuel 18. 2.
Terce of the army, in the battle against Absalom. Wherein he excellently
acquitted himself according to his loyal resolution to attend the Kings
fortunes whether in life or death.

27. Come we now to describe the Country Philistia, where in the north part
thereof, we find Gath a regal City: 1 Samuel 21. 10.
before Achish the son of Maoch the King whereof, David to save his life
counterfeited himself mad. But whether guilty or no in so doing, Divines have
not yet determined. It would incline me to the more charitable side, that he
had good warrant for what he did, because at the same time (understand it
immediately before or after) he composed Psalm. 34. and 56
two Psalms. Which show his soul not out of tune solemnly to serve God. But
David went to Achish a second time, with six hundred men; (it seems upon
better assurance beforehand, then formerly) and was with great kindness
entertained by him, dwelt with him in Gath, and after obtained Ziklag from him;
and by Achish his mind should have been the 1 Samuel 27. 2, 3 5, 6. and 2. 82.
keeper of his head. Achish the son of Maachah (tributary no doubt to Solomon)
was King of Gath. For Shimei confined to Jerusalem by Solomon's command, and
his own consent, did fetch from 1 King. 2. 39.
him his fugitive servants. Time was when Shimei's 2 Samuel 16. 7.
tongue ran too fast in railing on David his Master, and now his feet moved too
far in running after his servants, so that breaking the Tedder of his
Commission, of the pieces thereof a Halter was justly made for his execution.
This City of 2 Chr. 11. 8.
Gath was afterward fortified by Rehoboam, and many years after taken 2 Kin.
12. 17.
by Hazael King of Syria, and in the next age had the wall thereof broken down
by Uzziah King of 2 Chr. 26. 6.
Israel.

28. Betwixt Gath and Ekron (lying thence south west) we are as certain there
were Cities as ignorant how to call them. For the present let them pass by the
name of Samuels Cities: because by his devotion, the Cities, which the
Philistines had taken from Israel, were restored to Israel from 1 Samuel 7. 14.
Ekron even unto Gath. See the difference betwixt Priest and Priest, both in
service and success. Vicious Hophni 1 Samuel 4. 4.
brings forth the Arc into the field, fights, falls, loses his own life, and
part of Isreal's Land to the Philistines. Pious Samuel stays and prays at home;
the Arc is brought back to him: he both saves himself, and as a bountiful
benefactor regaineth the former loss of his Country.

29. Ekron was a stately City; and commendable was the discretion of her
Inhabitants, who learning wit from their neighbors woe, would not keep the 1 Samuel 5. 10.
Arc and Gods anger therein, but with the speediest convenience returned it
home to Bethshemes. Of these Ekronites, David afterward killed two hundred, and
tendered their Foreskins a Dowry for Michal Saul's daughter. For, though by the
condition of his Espousals he contracted but for an 1 Samuel 18. 25.
hundred Foreskins, yet such was the supererogation of his valor (Love and
Loyalty never give scant measure) that he 1 Samuel 18. 27.
doubled the number. And what injustice was it that he that paid her dowry
double should enjoy her but half? seeing Saul afterward took her away, and
gave her to 1 Samuel 25. 44.
another. Beelzebub was the grand Idol of 2 King. 1. 2.
Ekron, whose name imports a Lord of flies. Scaliger conceiving it to be a
nickname which the Jews gave it in derision, so that the terming it a God of
flies, was in effect to say, a fly for your God. In the new Testament
Beelzebub passes for the Mat. 12. 24.
Prince of the Devils. It seems that Hell it self, that place of confusion,
would wholly be confounded, if some superiority were not therein observed.

30. More south we again come to the river Sorek, on whose banks grew Grapes of
goodly greatness; yea the Hebrews report them to have been without any Hieron.
in 5 tom. cap. Isa.
kernels. But that hereabouts Lust did not grow without shame and sorrow to
attend it, Samson will sadly witness. For in the house of Dalilah by the brook
of Judge. 16. 4.
Sorek, he betrayed his strength to her, she his person to the Philistines.
Thus those that sleep on a harlots lap for their Pillow, are overtaken with
destruction before they dream thereof. Hence they carried Samson to Judge. 16.
21.
Gaza, which is welnigh forty miles off. And why so far? Partly to render
their triumph more glorious, baiting him with all eyes gazing on him, and
partly the more safely to secure him, bringing him far from his friends, and
beyond the reach of any rescue.

31. But as here was the place where Samsons purity was polluted, so hard by
was the the fountain or water wherein the Ethiopians pollution was purified.
This was he, who being Treasurer to Candace Queen of Ethiopia, rode in his
chariot and read Isaias, when, (always some unexpected good surprizeth such as
are studious in the Scripture) Act. 8. 29.
Philip was sent to expound it unto him. Can a Ier. 13. 23.
Blackamore change his skin, says the Prophet? But see here the virtue of
baptismall water, washing away the black hue, and vicious habits of his
natural Corruption, and making him a true Christian convert.

32. But Philip was found at Azotus: and Azotus or Ashd^d hardby is easily
found, (for a City seated on a Hill cannot be hid.) This was the third Satrapie
of the Philistines, in our definition, but first in honor, as famous for Dagon
an Idol there adored: who yet had the manners in homage to the Arc to put off
his head and hands, and fall flat on the ground; And hither first they brought
the Ark of God 1 Samuel 5. 1. and 6. 17.
. This was allotted to the Tribe of Judah Josh. 15. 47.
; but left unconquered by Joshua. King Uzziah brake down the wall of it: and
built Cities in the coast of it Chap. 13. 3. ^ 2 Chr. 26. 6.
. And soon after Tartan sent by Sargon King of Assyria, took it Isa. 20. 1.
. The Maccabees had diverse battles near Azotus. Here Judas overthrows Gorgias
1 Macc. 4. 15.
, And spoils Azotus Chap. 5. 6^.
; And again pursues Bacchides. But himself is slain Cha. 9. 15. 18.
. Here Jonathan overcomes Demetrius the younger, and burns Azotus; and the
Temple of Dagon 1 Mac. 10. 78. 84.
; And hereabouts Judas and John prevail against 1 Mac. 16. 10.
Cendebeus. As for Dagon here adored, some make him Patron of grain, (and he is
translated (...) by Philo Biblius) others the President of the sea; and we may
safely believe his Power as much over the one as the other. His shape (save
that it was masculine for sex) resembled the Antic laughed at by the Poet.
Desinit in piscem, mulier formosa superne.
Upwards man-like he ascended,
Downwards like a fish he ended.


And yet this Fish had also See the S^ptuagint.
feet under the tail thereof, (...).
which feet of a fish seem not to stand with any proportion. But what shall we
say? The uglier his shape, the handsomer for an Idol; and to keep a Decorum, it
was fit that he should be as misshapen in his form, as monstrous in his worship.
Far handsomer no doubt were the women of Ashdod, or else the Israelites would
never have been so enamoured with them, as after their return from the
captivity, by marrying with them to beget a mongrell offspring, whose tongues
(as if divided Part per Pale) spoke half Nche. 13. 24.
Ashdod and half Hebrew. But surely God was afterward better pleased with the
Jews solemn submission, and fair putting away of their wives, then with the
cruelty of the Britons (if true what Nennius Elvodug.
reported) which marrying French women in Armorica (now called little Britain)
out of a zeal to preserve their native Language, they cut out their wives
tongues for fear they should infect their children with a mixture of French. As
for 2 Samuel 8. 1.
Metheg-Ammah in Philistia, because the learned are not resolved whether
thereby a place be designed; and if so, many take it for Gath; or else that
thereby is signified, that David took the Bridle of Power, from the hand of the
Philistines; see it signed with an Asteriske, enough to tell the Reader, that
we do not show, but seek a certainty therein.

33. So much for the land in this Tribe. Jonah on the sea.
If we look on the sea, bounding it on the west, see Jonah in his ship, flying
as fast as he could, Jonah 1. 3.
from the presence of the Lord, that is, from the performance of his
Prophetical function in Niniveh. Otherwise he was better principled then to
conceive it probable, in any place to avoid Gods presence; and (if so
erroneously opinioned) made the worst of choices, Psalm. 107. 23.
to go down into the sea, where Divine power most effectually appears. Many
carnal reasons might cause his flight; as, fear to he murdered for delivering
so unwelcome a message to that Nahum 3. 1.
bloody City; suspicion, that his preaching little regarded in Israel, would be
less in Niniveh; zeal to his Country, as perceiving the conversion of the
Gentiles, would prove the rejection of the Jews; and a Jealousy (as himself
Jonah 4. 2.
confesses) his Prophecy should be disproved on the peoples repentance.

A terrible tempest persuing the ship, ^ wonder working tempest.
works wonders in the mariners: 1 Out of the bold came fear; They were Jonah 1.
5.
afraid. 2 Out of the profane came piety; Cried every man to his God. 3 Out of
the covetous prodigality; Cast their ware into the sea.
Mean time Jonah was fast asleep in the botome of the ship. It is hard to make
sense of his actions, his flight spoke fear, his sleeping showed security;
formidat and audet. How does sin distract men, making them as contrary to
themselves, as to Gods commandments!

34. At last, the Master of the ship (now vassal to the winds) awakes him; and
Jonah detected by lot, and his guilty* conscience, is cast as a peace offering
into the sea, where a Whale is provided, after three days to bring him safe to
the shore; who amongst many Land-types, was the only Sea-type (as the John 3.
14.
Serpent the Aire-type) of our Mat. 11. 39.
Savior.

35. The son of Dekar was Solomon's 1 King. 4. 9.
purveyour in Machats, and in Shaalbim, and Bethshemesh, and Elon-Bethanan, all
places in or near this Tribe. The Arms vulgarly assigned to Dan, are Vert a
Snake or adder argent nowed, b^ting, as some add, (let Heralds translate it
into the proper terms of Blazonry) the heels of an horse, whereby the Cavalier
mounted on him falls down backwards. All grounded on the Genesis 49. 17.
Blessing of Jacob; intimating the sly and subtle disposition of the Danites,
whose slight was above their might, policy more then their power, verified in
their sudden and unexpected surprisall of the City of Laish. Nor know I how
herein to reconcile the particular fancy of Aben Ezra to this received opinion,
who allots an Eagle for the arms of Dan: a creature of most contrary posture
and practice to a Snake: (nothing creeps lower then the one, or soars higher
then the other) except agreeing in the general qualities of quick-sight and
subtilty. Here if some say that the Eagle might have been the crest of Dan,
they will quickly retract their opinion, considering crests a modern device,
and could not be born in that age, which was scarce conceived three hundred
years since. The standard of Dan Numb. 2. 25.
was erected foremost of the three on the north side of the Tabernacle.

Here the Map of Simeon is to be inserted.
THE TRIBE OF SIMEON. CHAP. 11.
1. SIMEON second son of Jacob by Leah his wife probably was active in the
persecution of his brother Joseph; (therefore singled out in Genesis 42. 24.
Egypt to be a prisoner) certainly imbrued his hands with Levi in the blood of
the Genesis 34. 25.
Shechemites: Whereupon Jacob jointly cursed them, Genesis 49. 7.
I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. Which prediction took
a threefold effect in this Tribe, namely in their 1 Paucity. Scarce any Tribe
came Numb. 1. 23. and 26. 14.
more out of Egypt, not any by much entered fewer into Canaan. So sensible was
their diminution, that of fifty^nine thousand, but twenty two thousand two
hundred possessed their inheritance. It seems that the many mortalities in
the wilderness did light heavy on the Simeonites. Yea after they were settled in
their possessions, the Text says, they had 1 Chr. 4. 27.
not many children, neither did all their family multiply, like to the children
of Judah. And although 1 Chr. 4. 38.
immediately after it is recorded, that the house of their Fathers increased
greatly; yet the proportion is to be measured, not in relation of this to other
Tribes, but in the reference of these families to others in the same Tribe of
Simeon. 2 Obscurity. Neither Judge nor Prophet extracted from this Tribe: save
that in this dearth of eminent persons (famine will make those crumbs to be
taken up, which otherwise would be cast away) we must take in Iudi. 9. 3.
Judith, with her Apocrypha achievements. But most sure it is that one
notoriously infamous, namely Number. 25. 14.
Zimri, the son of Salu, who defied justice, and boldly avouched his adultery
with a woman of Midian, was son to a Prince of Simeon. 3 Dispersedness. Their
Country was but a jagged Remnant originally belonging to, and still surrounded
with Josh. 19. 1. 9.
Judah on all sides, save on the sea, amongst whom their towns were scattered.


2. Yet in process of time, as the dispersion of the Levites was turned
totally, so the scattering of the Simeonites was changed partially into a
blessing. Their local mixture with Judah begat a political confederacy with
them, Judge. 1. 3.
Come up with me into my lot, and likewise I will go with thee into thy lot.
Whence a double benefit accrued to the Simeonites.

1 Spiritual: they were hedged in by their habitation, in the right way of
Gods worship: so that, when the ten Tribes made their idolatrous defection
under Jeroboam, many of the Simeonites persevered in Gods true service: and
they fell to King Asa in 2 Chr. 15. 9.
abundance. 2 Temporal. When the rest of their brethren were finally carried
away captive under Hoshed in the sixth year of the reign of King Hezekiah,^ 2
King. 17. 6.
probable it is that a considerable number of the Simeonites remained, as has
been proved before, by their habitation within the lot of Judah.
3. The Lot of Simeon was transcendently fruitful* having a most temperate
air, insomuch that Saint Hierome (...), in his time it was termed Regio
salutaris, the healthy Country. No marvel then if the Patriarchs Abraham and
Isaac having their choice of the whole Country, preferred to live so long in
these parts. And the latter of them sowing grain near Gerar reaped Genesis 26. 12.
an hundred fold, which was the greatest increase which that Corn returned,
which fell into good ground, in the Mark. 13. 8.
Gospel.

4. In the north-east corner of this Tribe we find^ that mountain before
Hebron, to the Judge. 16. 3.
top whereof, full twenty miles from the City, Samson carried the gates of
Azzah. There he laid them down, not in a plain but steep place, partly in the
gallantry of his strength, that not faintness, but his free pleasure made him
lay them down, and partly, that in so conspicuous a place the Gazites might
easier find their gates there, then fetch them thence. A little more westward,
not far from the banks of the river Sorek, stood the City Ziglag, which 1 Samuel
27. 6.
A^hish King of Gath, bestowed on David during his abode there. If any demand
why David, when King of Israel, did not restore Ziglag to Achish again; let
such know, that (besides that Cities once passed into a potent hand, are too
precious things to be parted with) David being crowned King of Israel had an
undoubted right derived unto him by Gods grant, not only to this City, but to
the whole Kingdom of Gath, and land of the Philistines, which God had given to
Judah, though hitherto they were not able to recover it.

5. Afterward, whilst David was marching (at least wise in presence) with
Achish against Saul, the Amalekites in his absence burnt Ziglag, carrying away
all the people therein captive. Grief hereat so prevailed in David's men at
their return, that in anguish of their hearts, they were ready to 1 Samuel 30. 6.
stone him. Could better be expected from them? Behold their original, they
were at first, 1 Samuel 22. 2.
men in debt and distress, whose several discontents made them generally
contented to join together; so that not David, but his necessities chose them
to attend him, who now in adversity discovered their impious dispositions. But
David to avoid this shower of stones ready to rain upon him, run for shelter to
God his Rock, in whom he comforted himself. Thus, as it is always darkest just
before the Day dawneth, so God uses to visit his servants with greatest
afflictions, when he intends their speedy advancement. For immediately after,
David not only recovered his loss with advantage, but also was proclaimed King
of Israel: though some war arose for a time between him and Ishbosheth.

6. But the most memorable places of this Tribe are seated on or near the brook
of Bezor, which arising in Judah takes his course southwest, not far from Josh.
19. 7.
Ethar or 1 Chr. 4. 32.
Etan in the north-east corner of this Tribe. In the rock of Judge. 15. 11.
Etan near the City of that name Samson reposed himself, whence the men of
Judah brought him down, bound with two cords, and delivered him to the
Philistines: but he presently found his spirits, and in that place the jaw bone
of an Ass. Bad weapons are better then none; and it matters not what they be,
so that they be weilded by Samsons arm, that, guided by Gods hand. This
jaw bone which used to feed on grass, here eat up a Judge. 15. 15.
thousand men. Hereupon the place was called Rama-Lehi, the lifting up of a
jawbone.

7. Thus Samsons thirst of revenge was allayed with the blood of the
Philistines, but the quenching of one thirst was the kindling of another. How
quickly can God tame fury into faintness with want of water! In this straight
he has his recourse by prayer to God, who Judge. 15. 17.
cleaves a hollow place in the jaw. Heaven can make dry bones Ezekiel. 37. 3.
live, yea give life to others, as here to Samson, water presently flowing out
thereof. Let poets fondly brag of Hippocrene, a fountain from a horses hoof;
most true it is that a spring did flow from the jawbone of an Ass. Except any
be pleased (which indeed is most probable) not to take Lehi in Hebrew for the
material jaw bone, but for the Country thereabouts, so newly named by Samson,
out of a hollow place of the earth whereof, God produced this fountain.

8. Hence Bezor runs by Ain, the only City belonging to the Josh. 21. 9. 16
and 19. 17.
Levites, in this Tribe. Indeed both Genesis 49. 7.
Simeon and Levi were cursed to be scattered in Israel, and this City of the
Levites scattered in Simeon, may seem to be dispersed in a dispersion. One City
it seems was proportionable to this small and mangled Tribe. Thus even the
poorest must have some Preachers to instruct them, and afford those Preachers
maintenance for their instruction. At Gerar, the brook Bezor receives from the
south a Tributary rivolet, fetching its fountain out of the wilderness of
Kadesh, a place full of strong and stately trees. But what says the Psalm. 29.
8.
Psalmist? The voice of the Lord shakes the wilderness, yea the Lord shakes
the wilderness of Kadesh. As if this of all other was most sturdy and stubborn
to withstand the summons of Gods voice: but all in vain, the least whisper of
his mouth sending a palsy into the foundations thereof.

9. In the confines of this wilderness stood three remarkable Cities, which
(lest the Reader should mistake) we have marked with circles on the tops of
them. Not that any evil spirits moved therein, seeing these were the places
where David haunted, whilst Saul persecuted him, and to whose inhabitants he
sent part of his spoil taken from the Amalekites for a present. An act no less
politic then just, with the same both discharging the shot of his former
entertainment, and for the future obliging them by his bounty to be really
sensible of his right of succession to the Crown. The first of these 1 Samuel 30.
30.
Corashan ( Josh. 19. 7.
elsewhere only called Ashan.) 1 Char. 4. 32.
The second Josh. 19. 8. 1 Samuel 30. 27.
South-Ramoth, and 1 Samuel 30. 30.
Hormah the last and most observable, because of three eminent places of that
name in or near the Land of Canaan, 1 Number. 14. 45.
Where the disobedient Israelites were destroyed by the Canaanites. 2 Where the
Canaanites were destroyed by the penitent Numb. 21. 3.
Israelites. 3 Where the Tribes of Judge. 1. 17.
Judah and Simeon associating together destroyed the Canaanites, 1 Char. 4. 30.
being properly in this Tribe.
We see that destruction (so Hormah sounds in Hebrew) gives the name to them
all. And wonder not then, that in a Country the Seat of war, there were so
many towns of this sad denomination, but pray rather that God would seasonably
settle a peace in England, lest therein be found more Hormahs then were in
Israel.

10. As for Gerar the City above mentioned, it was anciently a kingdom of the
Philistines, whose Kings seem all to be called Abimelech's. To one of these
Abraham falsely affirmed that Sarah his wife was his Genesis 20. 2.
sister: and afterward Isaac (see the powerful influence of Parents faults on
their childrens practice!) to another of the same name offended in the like
falsehood. This latter Abimelech looking out of his window, beheld Isaac Genesis
26. 8.
sporting with Rebekah, (gestures not unlawful as done, but as seen) and from
this familiarity (greater his charity then Isaacs caution therein) interpreted
her to be not his harlot, but his wife.

11. Afterward Isaac outed of the City dwelt in the neighboring valley of
Gerar, and whithersoever he removed, Gods blessing, and the Philistines envy
followed him. He grew fat in estate, his enemies lean at the fight thereof,
which made them spitefully stop the Genesis 26. 15.
wells which his Father had dug. Happy that they could neither dam up nor
drain dry the dew of Divine blessing, from falling upon him, which, if possible
to effect, their malice would have attempted. But Isaac afterward sunk these
wells the second time, and he Genesis 26. 18.
called their names after the names by which his Father had called them. See
his humility herein, not varying from his Fathers will in an indifferent
matter, whereas many now adays count it the greatest honor of this age, in all
things to diffent from the former. Besides these renewed wells, Isaac had new
ones of his own making, as namely 1 Genesis 26. 20.
Esech: that is stri^e, so called because his heardmen, and the Gerarites
strove about it. 2 Genesis 26. 21.
Sitnah, that is hatred, so named on the like occassion. 3 Genesis 26. 22.
Rekoboth, that is enlargement, which he peaceably possessed; God making room
for him.
The two former pass for the emblems of our militant condition in this life,
the last typyifieth our happy estate in a better, and more roomthy place; In my
Fathers house there be many Ioh. 14. 2.
mansions.

12. This vale of Gerar was the Granary of Canaan, whither the Patriarchs
retired in time of famine; for plenty dwelt there, when penury was elsewhere.
Nor will it be amiss to insert the testimony of a Geor. Sands. trav. 3. b. 150.
p.
Modern traveller, to show how the Country hereabouts, even at this day,
retains an indeleble character of its former fruitfulness. We passed this day
through the most pregnant and pleasant valley, that ever eye beheld. On the
right hand a ridge of high mountains (whereon stands Hebron) on the left hand
the Mediterranean Sea bordered with continued hills, beset with variety of
fruits. The Champion between about twenty miles over, full of flowery hills
ascending leasurely, and not much surmounting their ranker valleys, with groves
of Olives and other fruits dispersedly adorned. Yet is this wealthy Bottom (as
are all the rest) for the most part uninhabited.

13. From the vale of Gerar the brook Berzor runs by the grove near
Beersheba, Genesis 21. 33.
planted by Abraham for the more convenient performance of his devotion.
Collect we hence that Abraham resided some considerable time in these parts,
seeing trees grow not up as Jonas his gourd in a night, but must have some
competent season to come to maturity. But what was piety in Abraham in planting
this grove, was profaneness in his posterity to imitate. For after that God had
made choice of a fixed place (Tabernacle, or Temple) to put his name there,
such as elsewhere sacrificed unto him were not only guilty of Schism
(separating themselves from the public worship) but flat Idolatry, serving the
true God in a false manner, namely, in a place prohibited. And now it is
seasonably remembered, that many ages after, Beersheba was an eminent place of
Idolatry. The Amos 5. 5. and 8. 14.
Prophet threatens final confusion to such that say, in nature of an oath,
The manner of Beersheba lives. It being probable that as the 2 King. 18. 4.
brazen serpent set up by Moses, was afterward abused to Idolatry, so this
grove of Abraham's planting near Beersheba was by his posterity perverted to
some solemn superstition, the manner or way whereof, secundum usum Beershebae,
was a precedent, or leading pattern for other places to imitate: as Act. 9. 2.
and 18. 25. and 24. 14.

14. But the City of Beersheba it self stood hard by on the brook Bezor. The
name imports, The well of an oath. First so called from Genesis 21. 31.
Abraham's, then from Genesis 26. 33.
Isaac's ceremonious swearing and covenanting with Abimelech in that place. Now
if Scarlet keep color because twice died, and therefore called Dibaphon, well
might Beersheba retain her name, twice on the same occasion imposed upon it.
Genesis 46. 4.
Here God comforted Jacob in his journey down into Egypt, promising him safety
and sight of his son Joseph. Many hundred years after, Samuel at 1 Samuel 8. 2.
Beersheba set up his Sons for Judges, who degenerated from their Fathers
integrity. In the division of the land into two kingdoms, Beersheba belonged
to Judah, where 2 Chr. 19. 4.
Iehoshaphat set up Judges, and whither 1 King. 19. 3.
Eliah persecuted by Iezebel fled for succor. Hence he fled into the
wilderness, leaving his servant at Beersheba. Not that he carelessly cast him
off, but as the case stood with Eliah, life was to be preferred before
attendance, and one alone might shift with more secrecy then two together.
Besides, by the avoidance of this servant (probably no person of extraordinary
performance) divine providence made a way for Elisha (one of more desert) in
this vacancy to be inducted into Eliah's service.

15. Coming still westward on the bank of Bezor, we find the place where two
hundred of David's foot being faint stayed with the 1 Samuel 30. 10.
baggage, whilst the rest of their brethren pursued and conquered the
Amalekites. But these at their return denied the two hundred staying by the
brook, any part of their spoil, till David ordered it as a leading case, that
these which attended the baggage should be equal sharers with such who fought
in the battle. And very good reason: 1 It was not laziness, but weariness kept
them behind. A stout heart sometimes cannot help a fainting body. Wherefore to
punish sickness in them for a sin, had been height of tyranny. 2 Grant their
tired bodies could not keep pace with their souls, yet no doubt in desire they
marched along with their brethren, and perchance by their prayers facilitated
their victory. 3 During their staying behind, their employment was as
necessary, though not so honorable. The stuff could not secure it self, and
the keeping of it in the others absence was a good piece of defensive service.
Now from hence it appears, that in cases not provided for in the judicial
Law, the Princes of Israel were entrusted with power to enact Statutes, in a
prudentiall proportion to Gods word, binding all in their dominions to the
observation of them. This ordinance of David may from the place be termed the
Statute of Bezor. Nor is it any news for Laws to be made in open fields by
rivers sides, our English Laws having had their birth in so plain a place in
Ronny-mede near the river of Thames, where King John and his Barons first drew
them up together. Yea, no fitter place for such solmn acts then a rivers side,
where the sight thereof may be the remembrancer, that Amos 5. 24.
Judgment may run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream. Hence
Bezor glideth into the Land of the Philistines, whither in due time we will
follow it.

16. South of this brook lay the wilderness of Beersheba, often mentioned in
Scripture. Herein Hagar and Genesis 21. 14.
Ishmael wandered when the bottle of water was spent, the last Legacy which
Abraham bequeathed him. Oh how she weeps, as if intending to refill the same
from her eyes! but alas, that moisture so brackish would rather increase then
allay any thirst. And now what should she do? It was death to her to see her
son die, and yet that pity which would not suffer her to tarry by him, would
not permit her to depart from him. In this Dilemma of affection she resolves on
the distance of a bow-shoot, Genesis 21. 16.
as a competent mean betwixt presence and absence, and disposes her self under
one shrub, her son under another. Here Ishmael cries and God hears. The very
worst in extreme want are the object of pity, and though Ishmael had mockes for
Isaac, heaven had mercy for Ishmael. An Angel sent shows Haga^ a fountain, not
now newly created, but newly discovered to her sight. The object was there
before, but the Organ not rightly disposed to behold it. How near may men be to
their own happiness and miss it; touching it, yet not seeing it, till God open
their eyes! More south in this wilderness was the Iuniper-tree under which 1
King. 19. 4.
Elisha sat so highly discontented. Coals of Juniper we know are extremely
hot, but is there any secret quality in the shade of that tree, to put Eliah,
sitting under, into such passions, as that nothing but death would please him
for the present? Sorrow bought him asleep, and afterward awaking, being
refreshed with a cake of bread, cruse of water, and comfort of an Angel he
undertook his journey to Horeb.

17. Not far off betwixt Kadesh and Bered is Beer-laha-roi, that is, the well
of him that lives and sees: so Genesis 16. 14.
named by Hagar, because there an Angel catechized, comforted, and counseled
her to return and humble herself to Sarah her mistress. By this well Isaac was
walking and meditating, Genesis 24. 62.
when Rebekah brought from her Fathers house first met him, in her most modest
behavior. For at the sight of him, though at some distance, she Genesis 24. 64.
lighted from her Camel, counting it ill manners to ride, when her husband and
master went a foot: as also to give an earnest of her future good housewifery,
that she would prefer industry before ease, honest pain before pleasure. The
she Genesis 24. 65.
veiled her self, partly to show that the beams of her beauty were hereafter to
be appropriated to Isaac alone, and partly in confession of subjection, being
now under covert-baron, the command and protection of a husband. Well, I dare
compare, yea prefer this veiled wives chastity, before the virginity of many
veiled votaries.

18. More south is the river of Egypt the utmost limit, not only of this
Tribe, but of all Israel. Indeed by the river of Egypt (...) (often mentioned
in Exodus) only Nilus is intended. But this stream (which some conceive is
particularly called Shichos) is termed the River of Egypt, not because it is
in, but is in the high way to Egypt. Otherwise, the traveller who sits down on
the banks thereof, shall never come thither. In the Septuagint, Rhinocolura is
put for this river of Egypt, being a long named city of short note, seated on
the influxe thereof into the sea. Only this Rhinocolura is famous in heathen
History, because hither (as into an Hospital) all those malefactors were sent,
whose noses were cut off for their offenses: a punishment inflicted on the
Egyptians by an Ethiopian King who conquered them Hence had it the name of
Strabo Geog. lib. 16. p. 759.
Rhinocolura, or the place of nose-maimed people. But o how great must that
city be which in our age should contain all those, whose faces are nose-less,
not by others cruelty, but their own luxury!

19. As for other cities in this Tribe of Simeon they were many, but obscure.
It is observable that most of them are written with an Alias first, as they are
named Josh. 19. secondly, as they are called 1 Chronicles. 2. None need to wonder at
their different denominations. Here I interpose nothing of the several writing
of the same places 1 According to exact Critics in spelling them. 2 According
to vulgar tongues in pronouncing them.
Only we commend to the Readers notice, that the book of Chronicles was
written after the return from 1 Chr. 3. 19.
Captivity; and about eighteen generations after the days of Joshua. And
therefore some difference of letters after so large a time is no strange thing.
For seeing here we have no continuing Heb. 13. 14.
city, it cannot be expected that any city should have a continuing name. And
yet great places longest retain their names unaltered, (as London from Taeitus
to our times) whereas small cities like these in Simeon are as often alterable,
as passed into the possession of several owners. Yea seeing it was the custom
of the Jews, to Psalm. 19. 11.
call their lands after their own names, this happily might change Josh. 19. 6.
Beth-lebaoth in this Tribe, into 1 Chr. 4. 31.
Beth-birei, when it came into the possession of a new landlord.

20. So much of this small Tribe, whose portion was too little for his people,
and therefore they made two happy expeditions to enlarge their quarters: one in
the reign of 1 Chr. 4. 39.
Hezekiah to the entrance of Gedor, even unto the east side of the valley, a
place of good and fat pasture; for they of Ham (Canaanites) had dwelt there of
old. Mice sometimes may be men's tasters, to teach them which is best for their
palate: and those heathen were wise enough to settle themselves in the richest
soil, whence now the Simeonites expelled them. This Gedor was in the division
of the land allotted to the Tribe of Josh. 15. 58.
Judah. Now if any demand by what right the Simeonites might invade this which
was assigned to Judah, they may know that in case a strong hold could not be
reduced into subjection by that Tribe to which it belonged, it was not an act
of injustice, but valor, for the next Tribe to Iud. 1. 34. 35.
undertake the conquest thereof: As by their judicial law if one dyed not
having issue by his wife, the next of kin might (...), and was heir (as I may
say) to marry his Mat. 22. 24.
brothers wife; so when Judah through some defect or debility was unable to
improve his Patrimony in Gedor to profit, by casting out the heathen who
violently detained it, Simeon (his next neighbor in situation) suecceding to
the right of his brother, attempted and effected the conquest thereof: Herein
only it holds not proportion, because the seed so raised up was accounted to
his dead brother, whereas here Simeon made bold himself quietly to possess what
victoriously he had acquired. Wonder not that this petty Tribe in overcoming
Gedor did more then puissant Judah could perform; for always the battle is
not to the Eccles. 9. 11.
strong, and weaker means watching advantages may perfect what more powerful
have left uneffected. This Gedor (grudge not reader to sally with thine eye a
little out of this Tribe, being still in this map) lay on the north of the
river Sorek, and was one Josh. 12. 13.
of the 31. regal cities of the Canaanites. As for the Simeonites second
voyage against the 1 Chr. 4. 42.
Amalekites in mount Seir, more proper thereof hereafter in the description of
Edom.

21. Now that which straightned the portion of Simeon, was the multitude of
Philistines inhabiting the sea coasts, allotted to, but never possessed by this
Tribe. Askelon was a prime city in those parts, once won by Judge. 1. 28.
Judah assisting Simeon, but after recovered by the Philistines. Samson, being
cast to give his companions thirty change of raiment, went neither to the
Merchant for the stuff, nor Tailor for making of them, but (knowing the
Philistines garments would best fit Philistines bodies) he marched directly to
Judge. 14. 19.
Askelon, where finding thirty Philistines, he bestowed their corpse on the
earth, and their cases on their fellow-countrey men. This caused that active
antipathy betwixt Askelon and Israel, Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in 2 Samuel 1. 20.
Askelon. Near to this city there was a Diod. Siculus. libro 13.
lake, by which Semiramis is said to be born, there fed and relieved by Doves.
Hence the Poet Tibullus. Alba Palaestino sancta columba Syro.
The milke-white Dove esteemed divine,
By Syrians of Palestine.
But because no mention of this in Scriptures, we forbear further prosecution
thereof.

22. Going along south by the sea side (here styled the sea of the Philistines)
we come at last to Azzah, ^ Exodus 23. 31.
or Gaza the fifth satrapy of the Philistines, once Judge. 1. 18. Judge. 16. 3.
21. 25.
conquered by Judah, but soon after returning to the former owners Samson, who
carried the gates thereof away, could not bring himself hither again, without
the guidance of another. Pain here was added to his blindness, when set to
grind in a mill; scorn to his pain, when sent for, at a solemn feast to be the
musician to make sport, or rather the Instrument ready tuned for every wanton
eye, tongue, and hand to play upon. But such as mock at other men's miseries,
sometimes laugh so long till their own hearts ache. For Samson applied himself
to the two pillars most fundamental to the roof of Dagons Temple, and by the
strength of his arms and Judge. 16. 30.
prayers, pulling them down, killed and died together. Strange that his enemies
knowing his strength resided in his hair, prevented not the second growth
thereof. But God first stupefies whom he intends for destruction: Samson had
lost his sight, the Philistines their foresight at the same time.

23. Many ages after Gaza was smote by Ier. 47. 1.
Pharaoh King of Egypt, and not warned thereby to repent, utter desolation was
denounced against it. There needs no clearer comment on the Prophets
prediction, Zeph. 2. 4.
Gaza shall be forsaken, then that passage in the Acts of the Apostles, the way
unto Gaza which is Act. 8. 26.
wast. This vastation was caused by Alexander the great, when he utterly razed
the city, fulfilling what Ier. 47. 5.
Jeremy had foretold, Baldness is come upon Gaza, whereby not only the hair,
but skin and flesh of this proud place fell away, scarce any signs of a city
remaining. Out of the ruins hereof, some two miles westward (where Bezor
falls into the sea) Majuma or Sea-Gaza once a proper port-town took its rise
and increase, called afterward Constantia by Constantine the great, and Gatzra
at this day, where simple roofs supported with carved columns, and broken
pieces of Parian Sand. trav. lib. 3. p. 149.
Marble, serving for thresholds, jambes of doors, and sides of windows almost
to every beggarly cottage, testify its former better condition. So much for
these Philistines, who are taxed for their soothsaying by Isa. 2. 6.
Isaiah, accused of spightfulness and old hatred by Ezekiel. 25. 15.
Ezekiel, challenged for cruelty by Amos 1. 8.
Amos, arraigned for pride by Zach. 9. 6.
Zachary, condemned by all to unavoidable destruction. Think not that these
Philistines, fox-like, fared the better for being cursed, surely though slow,
sure vengeance overtook them; and we undoubtedly believe the same, although it
be hard in history to show when, where, and how their particular extirpation
was accomplished.

24. Simeon has usually assigned him for his arms, Gules, a sword in pale,
with the point thereof erected argent; alluding to Jacobs words, Instruments of
cruelty are in his habitations, because of their perfidious massacring of the
Shechemites. None of Solomon's Purveyours in the Tribe of Simeon, the reason
whereof shall be rendered in our description of Judah. If any demand, why
Simeon alone is omitted in Moses his solemn Deuteronomy. 33.
blessing of the other Tribes, let them remember how Jacob coupled Simeon Genesis
49. 5, 6.
and Levi in a curse; since which time the Levites had unstrained their credit
by their exemplary Exodus 32. 26.
zeal against the Idolaters, but the Simeonites had not recovered their
reputation by any eminent act by them achieved. Moses therefore having no
commission to recall Jacobs curse, and loath to repeat it, (lest the
double-cursed Simeonites should be utterly disheartened) thought it in pious
policy best to pass them over in silence. Of such persons, of whom we would
willingly say no bad, and cannot truly say any good, it is the wise^t way to
say nothing. As for their tradition that the Simeonites were employed to be
Scribes and Notaries to the Tribe of Judah, it is enough to mention it, knowing
no sound authority, whereon the same is grounded.

Here the Map of Benjamin is to be inserted.
THE DESCRIPTION OF THE TRIBE OF BENJAMIN. CHAP. 12.
1. BEnjamin youngest son of Jacob by Rachel, Ben-oni his name changed to
Benjamin
was by his mother dying of him in childbirth named Ben-oni, that is, the son
of sorrow, but by his Father called Benjamin, that is, the son Genesis 35. 18.
of the right hand. Say not Jacob did ill in altering the Will of his wife, and
revoking the name, the last legacy she bequeathed to her child, seeing the
alteration was perfective, and for the advantage of the Legatee; not to say
that Rachels pangs imposed that name, and might be presumed scarce compos
mentis in what she did. But the main reason of the alteration was, because
Jacob could not call his son, but must recall his lost wife to his mind, so
that his very name constantly carried a coffin in the mention thereof. Highly
he was beloved of his Father; and good reason; First, because begot in his old
age. Secondly, because the youngest: and affection, which always descends, when
it can go no lower, settles it self. Thirdly, because he was motherless.
Lastly, because brotherless, Joseph being conceived dead, and so the portion of
affection due to him, fell to Benjamin as the right heir thereof.

2. Of this Tribe came out of Egypt Numb. 1. 37.
thirty five thousand four hundred, The dysaster and recru^t of Benjamin.
all which dying in the wilderness, forty Numb. 26. 4.
five thousand and six hundred of their children entered the land of Canaan.
Afterward an heavy dysaster befell this Tribe (of the cause and manner whereof
hereafter) insomuch that no. Judge. 21. 16.
women and only six hundred men were left of Bemjamin. Yea none of Benjamin
were left above ground, being destroyed from being visible on the face of the
earth, and the six hundred remaining all Judge. 20. 47.
hid in the rock of Rimmon. Thus Benjamin was cut off from the body of Israel,
and only hung dangling by one small sinew, which by the careful Surgery of
their brethren, and Gods blessing upon it, in short time recovered it self to
be very considerable in Israel.

3. Herein the words of the Psalmist deserve to be observed, The words of the
Psalmist well to be weighed*
There is little Psalm. 68. 27.
Benjamin with their ruler. Little Benjamin: It was therefore no
court-complement, or modest excuse, but a downright truth. Saul said unto
Samuel, 1 Samuel 9. 21.
Am I not a Benjami^ of the smallest of the Tribes of ^srael? It is added, with
their Ruler: no Tribe (Judah excepted) more trading in Commanders then Benjamin
did. Hereof were Saul and Ishbosheth both crowned Kings, Jonathan the eldest
son; Esther 2. 5.
Mordecai the Favorite, Esther the wife of a King; Judge. 3. 15.
Ehud the Judge, and Abner the General of Israel, with diverse others. And
among Ecclesiastical Rulers, let not him be forgot, who had the care of all
the 2 Chr. 11. 28.
Churches, even Phil. 3. 5.
Saint Paul the Apostle. But beside these Rulers, Benjamin bred some enemies to
authority, Ziba that false cheater, Shimei that foul railer, Baanah and 2 Samuel
4. 2.
Rechab privy traitors, Sheba a professed Rebel; so impossible it is, all
should be good herbs which grow in great gardens.

4. The lot of Benjamin came forth Josh. 18. 11.
betwixt the children of Judah and the children of Joseph. Benjamin placed
between Joseph and (...).
If Mat. 10. 29.
a sparrow falls not on the ground, surely ground falls not to any owner
without Gods immediate providence. Benjamin joined with Joseph to day the
possession of Rachels children entire together; and joined to Judah, that
vicinity of habitation might invite them to unity of Religion. And indeed
commendable was the constancy of the Benjamites both to God and their King,
following the house of David at the disloyal defection of the rest of the
Tribes. Say not that little Benjamin was thus placed in the middle to be ground
betwixt the mill stones of two potent Tribes; for it matters not who lies on
our sides, so be it God dwells on our shoulders. Remember we the blessing Moses
bequeathed to this Tribe, Deuteronomy. 33. 12.
The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him, and the Lord shall cover
him all the day long, and he shall dwell between his shoulders; particularly
pointing at his habitation in Jerusalem built in the borders of Benjamin.

5. Now though Benjamins mess, The small comp^ss of this Tribe recompensed with
the goodness of the ground.
when he sat at Joseph's table, was Genesis 43. 34.
five times as much as any of his brethren, yet here it happened his portion
was less then all the rest: except any will say, that only Benjamins dish was
less and meat more, because, though small the compass of ground allotted to
him, yet fair and fruitful the soil, many and memorable the cities contained
therein, (...), The lot of this Tribe was straightned (says Anti I^d li. 5.
cap. 1.
fosephus) because of the virtue of the soil thereof. Yet as little as the
land of Benjamin was, it was big enough to be divided betwixt two kingdoms,
the south-west part thereof belonging to the kingdom of Judah, the north-east
to Israel, with the cities of Gilgal, Jericho, and Bethel, as shall be made
plain in the respective description of those places.

6. Jordan is the eastern boundary of this Tribe Josh. 18. 20.
: David returning victoriously from Mahanaim, Eminent act^ons on the banks of
I^rdan.
having 2 Samuel 19. ^8.
ferried over this water, partly brought thither, partly met here, a
miscellaneous multitude, Barzillai and Shimei, Mephibosheth and Ziba, that is,
loyalty and treachery, faith and falsehood mingled together in the same
Country. Here (once railing) now begging Shimei obtained pardon from him;
because bringing along with him (the best argument in his excuse) a 2 Samuel 19.
17.
thousand men of Benjamin. Some will say, David showed Shimei too much mercy,
and did Mephibosheth too little justice, not righting him against the false
accusations of Ziba, who better deserved a whole halter, then half of the lands
of Mephibosheth. Such do not seriously consider the present condition of
David; who, had his hand struck with the sword of justice, before his feet (in
his renewed kingdom) were firmly fastened on the throne of authority, it had
been the ready way to have overturned him and his posterity. Here 2 Samuel 20. 1.
Sheba a Benjamite taking the advantage of the unseasonable contest betwixt
Judah and Israel, which should have most interest in David, with his trumpet
blew rebellion into the ears and hearts of the people; had not the dangerous
consequence thereof been seasonably prevented by the vigilance and valor of
David, and his servants.

7. More south on the banks of the river the children of the Prophets
straightned for dwellings, Pitiful provisions for a College.
went about to enlarge their habitations, but meanly provided for that purpose,
if we consider the 1 Architect, a son of the Prophets, little skild (no doubt)
in such employment. 2 Timber, green wood, and growing on the banks of Jordan. 3
Tools; a borrowed hatchet, the iron whereof fell into the river.
Alas, how comes it to pass, that when houses of the Prophets are to be built,
the iron forsakes the handle, which sticks too steadfastly thereunto, when they
break them down Psalm. 74. 6.
with axes and hammers! But 2 King. 6. 6.
Elisha made all things whole, the hatchet came unto the helve swimming above
the water.

The alter Ed succeeds next, Controversies concerning the position of the Altar
Ed.
more southward on the river. Formerly we have placed it in the Tribe of
Reuben on the east of Jordan, but others (...) it west of that river in this
Tribe. Hear the arguments for both.

For Benjamin. 1 It Josh. 22. 10.
was set up in the borders of Jordan which are in the land of Canaan, which
land strictly and properly taken was on the west of Jordan. 2 It was erected to
show the contesseration of their religions. And therefore most probable and
proper on the west side of Jordan, in the main continent of the land, to claim
right, or rather continue a title of those separatist-Tribes, Reuben, Gad, and
Manasseh in point of Gods worship with other Tribes. 3 In lo^is Heb. lit. E.
Saint Hi^rome, and since him learned In locum.
Tostatus (to whose arguments in this controversy we refer the reader) with
many other Commentators, are very positive in placing this Altar west of Jordan
in the Tribe of Benjamin.
For Reuben. 1 It was set up Josh. 22. 11.
over against the land of Canaan. Which in proper construction imports it to be
on the other side opposite thereunto. 2 It had been a mere trespass, for the
two Tribes and an half in aliena Republica, to build an altar on the ground of
other Tribes: and therefore no doubt, they did it on their own ground east of
Jordan. 3 Josephus Anti. Iud. l. 5. cap. 1. p. 143.
says (...). Therefore the Tribe of Reuben and Gad going over the river etc. 4
Another M. Joseph M^de in his Sermon of the reverence of Gods house.
Joseph (though a modern, yet a learned writer) believes, that in those elder
times, that Country or territory was counted unhallowed, or unclean which had
not a place set apart for Gods worship, and proves from the words of Phinebas,
that the altar was set up on their side, lest otherwise having no place
consecrated, they might be concluded to live in an unhallowed habitation.


Thus as this altar caused a difference betwixt brethren, about the cause why
it was erected: so has occsioned a dissension amongst learned men, concerning
the place, where the same was set up. The best is, the controversy is not of
such moment, as to concern salvation. Let us take heed, we be not of that
Generation Psalm. 78. 9.
which set not their hearts aright, and then the danger is not great, though we
set this altar on the wrong side of the river. However, as the devout Jews in
the primitive times, when the Sabbath was newly changed into the Lord's Day,
kept both Saturday and Sunday holy, observing both ex nimia cautela, to be sure
to keep the right day of Divine worship: so for more certainty we have erected
two altars, one one each side of the river, leaving it to the discretion of the
judicious Reader, to accept or refuse which of them he pleases.

9. The Jewish Stone henge.
Come we in the next place to the Josh. 4. 20.
twelve great stones set up by Joshua in memorial that there they passed over
the river Jordan on foot Tremellius conceives probably, that these were the
quarries in Gilgal mentioned Judge. 3. 19. whence Ehud returned back, when he
went to kill Eglon King of Moab. Others likewise conceive, that John baptizing
hereabouts, did particularly point at these stones, in that his expression to
the Pharisees, Mat. 3. 9.
God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. They were set
up in the Country Gilgal, the city so called lying some five miles west of the
river.

10. Gilgal (rolling in Hebrew) was so called by Joshua, Remarkables happening
at Gilgal in the days of Joshua.
because the reproach of Egypt was there rolled away from the Israelites, and
circumcision suspended during their travel, being Jo^h. 5. 9.
here administered, and the Passover solemnly observed; here also Manna ceased,
the Country affording plentiful provisions. Miracles and means never shine
together in the same Horizon, but the former sets, when the later arises.
It will perchance be demanded, why Manna rained so long, seeing the Israelites
long ago were come into the plentiful Country of Canaan, all the while they
had remained in the land of Reuben, ever since they came over the river of
Arnon. It is answered, God hitherto continued his largess of Manna, 1 Because
formerly they were only come into the skirts of the country, (unsufficient to
maintain so numerous an Army) whereas now they were entered into the very heart
and middle of the land. 2 The land of Reuben though very fruitful, Numb. 32. 1.
was a place for cattle, fit for grazing, and better for beasts, then men to
feed upon. 3 God to manifest his liberality, would not only have his
provisions to meet even, but to lap over, continuing Manna till his people were
otherwise plentifully provided for, both with new corn on the ground (coming
hither in As may be collected by the overflowing of Jordan, and by comparing
Josh. 3. 15. with 1 Chr. 12. 15.
the beginning of harvest) and Josh. 5. 12.
old in their Granary.
Thus the Jews did not begin housekeeping on ^are walls, but were set up with
full stock aforehand: victualled in a manner, with two years provision, that
with the good housekeeper Mat. 13. 52.
they might bring forth out of their treasure things new and old.

11. In the days of Samuel and Saul, Gilgall a Court or a College.
this was a place of principal credit, where Saul was solemnly invested with a
crown, Come, let us go up unto 1 Samuel 6. 14.
Gilgal, and renew the kingdom there. Yet here at the same time to show Gods
displeasure with the people for their tumultuous desiring of a King, 1 Samuel 12.
18.
Thunder in harvest (in Judea Summers thunder old men's wonder) exceedingly
afrighted the hearers thereof. Afterward Saul stained this place with a double
deed of disobedience, 1 When in Samuels absence he presumed to offer 1 Samuel 18.
9.
sacrifice. Once the proverb was, Is Saul also amongst the Prophets? Now it may
be, Is Saul also amongst the Priests, invading the Sacerdotall function? 2 When
contrary to Gods command, he spared and brought hither the best of spoil of
Amalek, so that Samuel was fain to supply what justice was wanting in Saul, who
hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord in 1 Samuel 15. 33.
Gilgal.
In after ages here was an Academy or Seminary of the sons of the Prophets, 2
King. 4. 38.
brought up here in learning preparatory to their profession. Acquired, are so
far from hindering infused abilities, that the stock prepared by industry, is
fittest to be graffed on by inspiration. Eliah and Elisha were successively the
Presidents, or rather the Visitors of this College, the latter being both
food, and physic for the students therein: 1 Food, when with twenty small 2
King. 4. 43.
Barley loaves he fed an hundred of the children of the Prophets. 2 Physic,
when his meal was 2 King. 4. 41.
Antidote against the malignity of the wild gourd in their pottage.
It seems the sons of the Prophets were no expert Herbalists, whose learning
moved in an higher and holier sphere, and they more skillful to discern betwixt
true doctrine and heresy, then betwixt pot herbs and poison.

12. Gilgal was afterward a sink of Idolatry, Gilgall a sink of Idolatry.
and belonged to the Kings of Israel, as appears by the Prophets counsel,
though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend, and come ye not
into Hos. 4. 15. and 9. 15.
Gilgal etc. At Gilgal men multiplied Amos 4. 4. and 5. 5.
transgression, whereupon destruction was denounced against this place, and
Gilgal was afterward rolled up in her own ruins. To return to the river
Jordan, which a little southward falls into the Josh. 18. 19.
Salt-sea, the south boundary of this Tribe. The epithet Salt is not here
superfluous, but emphaticall, partly to distinguish it from the sea of
Cinneroth or Galilee, which was a fresh-water-sea; and partly because the water
hereof was salt with a witness, fire-salt, as I may say. Let Philosophers
demonstrate the cause of the brackishness of the Ocean, though it is to be
feared, they will be posed nearer home, how rivolets of tears which flow from
their own eyes, come to be so salt. But a peculiar reason may be certainly
assigned, why the water in this sea was transcendently salt above all others,
whereof largely hereafter in the description of Judah.

13. Having done with the channel of Jordan, The south-bound of Benjamin.
the certain and unmovable bound of Benjamin on the east, come we now in our
perambulation to surround the other three sides of this Tribe, and at first
will only take notice of the limitary places, and so proceed from the rine to
the core, from the marches to the middle of this country. The south of
Benjamin ranged from Kiriath-jearim by the well See Josh. 18. 15. etc.
of the waters of Nephtoah, to the valley of Hinnon, and so on the south of
Jerusalem descended to Enrogell. All which places shall hereafter be presented
in a peculiar map, and therefore no more for the present.

14. Hence it went forth to Enshemesh, i. e. The fountain of the sun.
the fountain of the Sun. Either so called from the clearness of the waters
thereof, or because in Idolatrous days, when the host of heaven was Act. 7. 42.
worshipped (whereof the Sun the General) it was dedicated thereunto, or
because the suns extraordinary influence thereon endued it with sovereign
virtue. And now it is well remembered, that Bath in England is called by Camd.
Brit. in Summersetshire p. 233.
Antoninus Aque solis or the waters of the Sun. Hence the bounds of Benjamin
stretched to Geliloth near Compare Josh. 25. 7. with Josh. 18. 17.
Gilgal (over against the going up to Adummim) and thence descended to the
stone of Bohan the son Josh. 18. 17.
of Reuben, so called no doubt from some memorable act by him there atcheived,
for otherwise the Reubenites had no part of possession on the west side of
Jordan. Hence this Tribe extended through Arabah to Beth-hoglah, i. e. as In
locis Heb. lit. B.
Saint Hierome interprets it, Locus gyri, or the place of a circle, because (as
he will have it) in this place Joseph with his brethren set in a round (the
form of mourners) bewailed the corpse of Jacob brought hither out of Egypt.

15. But leaving this as a conjecture, The Egyptians passionate bewail^ng of
Jacob.
most sure it is, that hereabouts was the floor of Atad, where so solemn a
lamentation was made for Jacobs death, that the place long after did wear
mourning in the name thereof, therefore called Genesis 50. 11.
Abel-mizraim, i. e. the sorrowing of the Egyptians. Strange, that strangers,
being Genesis 50. 7.
the Elders of Pharaohs Court and kingdom, should so affectionately bemoan the
death of a man no whit related unto them. Surely the Egyptians did not
weep-Irish with feigned and mercenary tears, much less was their passion only
State-sympathy and politic compliance, sighing and smiling with the sighs and
smilings of Joseph. Rather it was because the endearing disposition, and
obliging goodness of old Jacob, living fifteen years with them in Egypt, had
gained the general love of the land. Besides, they lamented his loss as the
death of their own grandfather, because he was Father to Joseph, the Father,
founder and preserver of them and theirs in the time of famine. If any demand
why the Egyptians mourned for Jacob Genesis 50. 3.
threescore and ten days, whilst Joseph made a mourning for him but for Genesis
50. 10.
seven days? I can tell the common answer, that the former ignorant of heavenly
happiness lamented him totally lost, whilst Joseph not 1 These. 4. 13.
mourning without hope was more moderate in his lamentation. But whether this
solution be sound in it self, or the question exactly conformable to the text,
we remit it to the examination of others. I would rather know the reason why
this solemnity of sorrow, was performed in this place, rather then at the cave
of Machpelah forty miles hence, where the corpse were interred; surely the
Master of the Ceremonies in those days could give an account thereof.

16. But here it will be objected, that Joseph coming out of Egypt, had a
nearer way by many miles to carry Jacobs corpse to Hebron, then by going over
Jordan. It is confessed, but this fetching a compass was conceived more for the
state of the funeral. Unfitting it was, that the body of that worthy Patriarch
(to whom all the land belonged by promise) should steal into that Country in
a clandestine way, and privately enter in at the postern door, rather let it
solemnly surround the Country, and be brought in at the broad gates. Thus the
corpse of men of quality, though the Chancell-door be nearer, are borne through
the porch and middle-alley to the place of their interment.

17. So much for the south-marches of Benjamin, The north borders of Benjamin.
we come now to visit the north-limits thereof. Those began from Jordan (says
our English translation.) In divertigio Iardenis quo magis adhuc ad orientem
divertit (says Tremellius in his note on the place) i. e. in the winding of
Jordan as it turns still more to the east; and we could wish, that this eastern
flexure of that river, had been made a little more visible in our Maps. Hence
they went up to the side Josh. 18. 13.
of Jericho, understand thereby the confluence of the waters afterward running
to Jericho (as appears by paralleling Josh. 16. 1. with Josh. 18. 12.) and so
through the mountains westward, Josh. 19. 12.
the goings out thereof are at the wilderness of Beth-aven. Whence it turns
toward Luz which is Bethel, southward, which now I come to describe.

18. Beth-el, Beth-el why so called.
that is, Gods house, was so named by Jacob (for formerly it was called Luz)
who here lying on a stone (it matters not how hard our bed, if so heavenly our
dreams) saw a Genesis 28. 12.
Ladder with God on the top thereof, and Angels ascending and descending
thereon. Going down to attend on Gods children according to their commission,
and up to give an account of their attendance, and receive farther
instructions. Here Jacob by vow indented with God solemnly to make this place
his house, and to give to him at his safe return Genesis 28. 22.
with bread and water, the tenth of all his substance. But though God over
performed his counterpart herein, Jacob neglected his promise, and when his
staff was swelled into Genesis 32. 10.
two bands, set down his staff at Shechem, and turned there a purchaser of a
parcel of ground, till God minded him of his former obligation, Arise Genesis 35.
1.
, go up to Bethel, and dwell there etc.

19. Most happy that man who runs the way of Gods commandments, Deborah buried
near Beth-el.
and next him he is the best, who answers the spur, and with Jacob goes, when
almost driven. Hither he comes (having first reformed his family of Genesis 35. 4.
Idolatry) and here built an Altar called El-beth-el. During his abode here
died Deborah Rebekahs nurse, venerable for her old age, having seen her
nurse-childs childrens children, to the fourth generation. Surely she was well
loved whilst living, because so much lamented when dead, buried under Genesis 35.
8.
Allon Bachuth, or the oak of mourning. As if Jacobs children desired, that
their eyes should return that moisture to her in tears, which her breasts had
bestowed in milk on their grandmother. Thus, though the Hebrews did not so
doat on their nurses, as the wild-Irish (who love them better then their own
Camd. Brit. page 787.
mothers) yet they had them in an high estimation.

20. In the division of the land, ^eth-el jointly belonging to Ephraim and
Benjamin.
Beth-el fell to the lot of Josh. 18. 22.
Benjamin. Yet we find that the house of Joseph (understand the Tribe of
Ephraim) wan Judge. 1. 25.
and possessed it. It seems the City was divided into two parts, the northern
pertaining to Ephraim, the southern to Benjamin. In the days of Samuel we
find, how 1 Samuel 7. 16.
he went from year to year in circuit to Beth-el, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and
judged Israel in all these places; which were all three in this Tribe, and in
the heart of the Country, conveniently seated for Termers to resort hither
from all parts thereof.

21. Here Jeroboam set up one of his golden calves: and how busy was he about
sacrificing unto it, Ieroboams calfe, set up in Beth-el.
when a Prophet sent from God denounced the destruction of his Altar, which
presently clave asunder, according to his prediction? An Altar, which (were it
of brass or stone) was softer then the miracle-proof heart of Jeroboam, which
neither was broken, nor bruised thereat; as also he was no whit moved to
repent, with the drying up, and 1 King. 13. 6.
restoring of his hand, which happened thereupon. Indeed he conceived, that his
kingdom must have Idolatry for the pillars, which had Rebellion for the
foundation thereof: and though Baalisme began and ended with the family of
Ahab, Calfe-worship was rivetted into the Crown of Israel. As for the Prophet
that foretold the future ruin of this place, a Lion 1 Kin. 13. 24.
slew him in his return, because he credited a pretended Revelation Parole unto
another man, before a Commission from God to the contrary, solemnly signed and
delivered unto himself. See Gods finger in the Lions paw, how rationally did
the brute-beast work his Masters will, being sent not to prey, but to punish?
He killed the Prophet, filled not himself, but with the 1 King. 13. 25.
Ass; stood by the corpse, if not as mourners for, as waiters about it. Behold
his life spilled, whilst wicked Number. 22. 33.
Balaams was spared in journey, so uncertain it is for any to conclude Gods
love Eccles. 9. 1.
or hatred from outward events.

22. Eliah and Elisha Children of Bethel why curled and killed by Elisha.
often visited this City of Beth-el; the latter going up hither was mocked by
the children thereof, for lacking the comely excrement of hair on his head,
whereupon came two bears out of the wood, and tare two and forty of them. Some
will say, Elisha had better have called for two rods, then two Bears out of
the wood, therewith to drive out that folly which was bound up in the heart of
these children. But his severity will appear needful herein, if all
circumstances be considered, 1 Probably (though termed children) they were
striplings of some bigness, who durst adventure out of the city by the
wood-side. 2 No doubt the chickens crowed as the cocks had learned them, and
followed the precedents of their Idolatrous parents. 3 The gemination of their
offense, Go 2 King. 2. 23*
up thou bald-head, go up thou bald-head. 4 They mocked him as he was going up
the way, and it is said, the Prophet turned back, so they continued their
taunts whilst he came to them, yea till he was at them, yea when he was past
them. 5 He looked on them, so that had any ingenuity or remorse been legible in
their countenances, no doubt he would have suspended his sentence. 6 He cursed
in the name of the Lord, not out of spite, but with Gods Spirit, and the
judgment followed accordingly.
Probably some of them escaped to the City, and there might instruct their
mothers and nurses, never more to fright children with fond tales of Bug-bears,
but seriously to inform them of the truth of this sorrowful accident.

23. In this City Beth-el there was also a nursery of the Sons 2 King. 2. 3.
of the Prophets. A College of Prophets at Beth-el.
Alas, what heart had they to live here! Could the Stall of the golden calfe be
a convenient place for them to study in? The frequent and abominable impieties
here committed, they could neither behold with silence, nor reprove with
safety. However, it seems, they were especially desirous of, and delighted in
this place, where God had immediately manifested his gracious presence to
Jacob: and we may charitably believe, by the privateness of their lives secured
themselves both from pollution and persecution. But for the main, Beth-el was
changed into Beth-aven, Scala coeli into Gradus inferni, the Devils then
dancing for joy, where once Angels (those holy Agitators) went up and down
betwixt heaven and earth. Yea in after-ages it was penal for any pious Prophet
to approach this place, such the strictness of the prohibition herein, Amos 7.
13.
Prophecy no more at Beth-el, for it is the Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings
Court. As if it were against the Law of the Verge for one to draw a sword
(though of Gods word) within the bounds and precincts of the Palace of the
idolatrous Kings of Israel.

24. The last memorable mention that we find of Beth-el, Josiah burns the dead
bones at Beth-el.
was when Josiah burnt the bones of the idolatrous people on the 2 King. 23. 16.
Altar there. Some will say, he showed little wisdom, and less valor therein,
to encounter dead corpse. Yea the living found more offense by the stinking,
then the dead felt pain by the burning of these bones. Nor was the alteration
thereby produced of so great moment, seeing otherwise it would have been dust
to dust, and now was ashes to ashes. But we must know that Josiah herein was
not acted with principles of cruelty, but moved in obedience to Gods command,
to fulfill that prophecy some hundred years before foretold 1 King. 13. 2.
of him. Whilst here they were ransacking the sepulchers, behold one solemn
grave (the house of the dead) with a stone thereupon, (the door of that house)
with an Epitaph on that stone, (the Porter of that door) wherein, on enquiry
appeared, that Prophet lay interred, who long since forespake these passages
now come to pass. His corpse were 2 King. 23. 18
spared by special command, and with him quietly rested the old Prophet* so
good is it, (as we have Holy State cap. of Company.
elsewhere observed) to keep good company both in life, and after death. So
much of Beth-el, whence the border of Benjamin Josh. 18. 13.
descended from Ataroth-Adar near the hill which lies on the south side of the
nether Bethoron.

25. In assigning the west border of this Tribe, Quere how Benjamin westward
could boder on the Sea.
we meet with a churlish difficulty in the text, drawing the bounds thereof so,
as to Josh. 18. 14.
compass the corner of the sea southward. Here the Quere arises, how any part
of Benjamin could approach the sea, the Tribe of Dan being interposed betwixt
it and the Mediterranean. Rabbi Solomon seeking to salve it, by Sea understands
some great water in the west of this Tribe: and what he affirms, is
proportionable enough to the Hebrew language, terming all watery confluences a
Sea, as we have formerly Description of Gad number. 7.
observed. And indeed what is our English word Mere used in the samesense more
or less then Mare, or a Sea? I should be inclined to the opinion, that the 2 Samuel 2. 13.
pool of Gibeon so eminent in Scripture, and styled by Jeremiah, the Ier. 41.
12.
great waters which are in Gibeon, should be the Sea herein intended. Or if the
words of the Text calling it the sea, without any other addition, must be
understood of the best and biggest in that kind, (and then can be no other
then the Mediterranean sea) then I shall embrace the judgment of learned Vid.
Macium in locum.
Macius, interpreting ^ jam, not the Sea, but the west only; which the
propriety of the tongue will well endure.

26. From this western compass (alias Sea in other translations) the limits of
Benjamin range to Kiriath-jearim, Vzzah slain for his presumption. 1 Samuel 7. 2.
in the confines of this Tribe, where the Arc was Leiger for twenty years, and
whence David in a new cart intended to convey it to Jerusalem. This kind of
carriage was but 1 Samuel 6. 7.
Philistine divinity, and a Pagan precedent; not so ordered by Moses in the
mount. When the Arc was removed from Shilo, it was 1 Samuel 4. 3.
set on the Levites shoulders; and I see no reason, why they now should be too
good to bear it. Uzzah and Ahio drive the cart. The former with his hand held
it from shaking, such his store of good intention, and shaked it with his
holding, such his want of due qualification. God strikes him 2 Samuel 6. 7.
with death, and David is startled thereat. Is this the Arc placed so near the
Mercy-seat? Oh how terrible then is the throne of divine Justice! For a time
therefore the Arc is set to sojourne in the house of Obed-Edom, where the
Landlord was blessed for go good a guest. Divine ordinances, according as
their subject receives them, are either cordials or poisons, and the Arc
brought ^ither a curse or a blessing, whithersoever it came.

27. The place where the former dysast^r happened was called by David
Perez-Uzzah, Jewish several inventions to thresh out their grain.
nigh 2 Samuel 6. 6.
Nachons threshing-floor. We meet with many such places in the Bible, distant
from Cities, where husbandmen housed, and beat out their grain, with several
inventions: namely, 1 With the feet of Deuteronomy. 25. 4.
Oxen treading out the corn. 2 By the Prove. 20. 26.
wheel running over them. Make them O Lord like etc. 3 With flailes, which
having wooden handles, had their ends Amos 3. 4.
armed with iron.
But amongst all their devices, the lazy ^rick of the Camd. Brit. p.
wild Irish, never entered into their brains, who to save pains, burn the
straw, so to part the grain from it.

28. So much for the borders of Benjamin. Ierich^ a pleasant place.
Come we now into the middle thereof, and first we find the waters of Jericho
arising in the confines of Ephraim. The naughtiness of this water was
m^raculously healed by Elisha putting salt into the 2 King. 2. 21.
fountain thereof. I say miraculously, otherwise that ingredient would rather
have made it more brackish, then less bitter. 2 King. 2. 19.
Hence those waters run southward to the City of Jericho; whose name (as
Munster interprets) signifies having a good savor. Indeed so delicious the
situation thereof (after the cure aforesaid wrought by Elisha) that, had Profit
and Pleasure been disposed to solace themselves together, no fitter place could
be found for that purpose. Fragrant the flowers, sweet the herbs hereabout;
especially the garden of Balsame, which in the days of the Romans, occasioned a
quarrel betwixt them and the Jews, who manfully defended it. Happy had the
latter been, if as zealous for the substance, as for the shadow, losing their
own lives to maintain the type, and taking away his life, who was the truth
thereof. Then balsame intended by nature for the curing, was the causing of
many wounds, such deadly blows passed betwixt them.

29. Joshua took this City with the sound of Rams horns, Miraculously taken.
whereat the wall fell down to the ground. It troubles me not to conceive, how
the rest of the wall falling flat, Rahabs house built thereon should stand
upright: seeing divine power, which miraculously gave the Rule, might
accordingly make the Exception. A solemn Josh. 6. 16.
curse was by Joshua imposed on those who should rebuild the walls of Jericho,
so to obliterate the monument of divine power and justice.

30. But Jericho thus dismantled, maintained the reputation of a City, Jericho
termed a city of Palms
and though not walled with stone for defense, was shaded with trees for
pleasure. It is called the Deuteronomy 34. 3.
City of Palms (where Judge. 3. 13.
Ehud killed Eglon the corpulent King of Moab) growing so plentifully round
about it. These Palms, or Date-trees had scaly barks, and the boughs were
generally used, in all combats of manhood, to crown the conqueror. For, as
Vid Adagium, Palmam far.
Erasmus observes, though several countries, on sundry occasions, had
distinct garlands of victory, made of Laurel, Olive, Myrtle, Oak etc. yet the
Palm Tree carried away the palm from them all, and was universally
entertained as the Emblem of triumph. The worst I wish these trees is, that
they may never want store of weight, seeing Naturalists observe, the more they
are depressed, the more they flourish.

31. But to return to Jericho; The walls of Ierich^ unhappily built again.
it is ill hollowing in the ears of a sleeping Lion, and worse awaking that
dust, which God would have dormant in eternal obscurity. See this in the walls
of Jericho, which Hiel the Bethelite affronting heaven built again: and
according to Joshua's execration, 1 Kin. 16. 34.
laid the foundation thereof in Abiram his first borne, and set up the gates
thereof in Segub his youngest son; that is, both the one and the other were
then destroyed by untimely deaths. Strange that seeing his first son drop away,
he desisted not from that design; but such the precipice of bad projects, once
step in, and seldom stop in the way of wickedness. Nor can Hiels presumption
herein be excused, whatsoever is pretended in his behalf, being led to this act
of contempt, by one of these considerations: 1 H^ mistook Joshua's curse rather
for a patheticall expression, then prophetical prediction. 2 He conceived the
virtue thereof worn out and antiquated, after five hundred years continuance. 3
He chose rather to bottom his memory on so famous a structure, then to build
it on his posterity, as sooner likely to decay.
However Hiel got a curse, and Jericho walls thereby, which afterward grew to
be a potent, and populous City.

32. When the twelve Tribes were divided into two kingdoms, Jericho first
belonging to Israel, afterward to Judah.
Jericho probably pertained to Israel, as may app^ar, 1 By the frequent
conversing of Eliah and Elisha in this City, sufficiently known to have been
subjects of the crown of Israel. 2 Because Hiel the Bethelite (Beth-el
belonging to Israel) built the walls thereof. 3 Because that building bears
date in the 1 ^in. 16. 34.
days of Ahab, and is not accounted according to the reign of Iehoshaphat, the
contemporary King of Judah.
Afterward it was in the possession of the Kings of Judah, because in the
reign of Ahaz, the captives of Judah are said to be brought back to Jericho
unto their 2 Chr. 28. 15.
brethren. When carried into Babylon, no more then three Ezra 2. 34.
hundred forty five of this City returned home, whose zeal Nehe. 3. 2.
was very forward in repairing the walls of Jerusalem.

33. Here Christ cured blind Bartimeus; and Zacheus the Publican (one of more
state then stature) dwelt in this City. Zac^eus converted at Jericho.
Long had he wished for a sight of Christ: and curiosity in this kind may
sometimes open the door for devotion to enter in. But alas, he was so low,
more likely in the crowd to loss himself, then find his Savior, till on a
sudden he grows a proper man, by getting up into a Luke. 19. 4.
Sycamore tree. Who dares say Sycamores are always barren? See one here laden
with good fruit. Christ seeing him invites himself to his house, and down he
comes (with more speed no doubt then he gat up) to welcome his guest with good
cheer, though the last-course he brought in, was the best; protesting a
fourfold restitution of what he had wrongfully gotten, and giving the half of
his remaining estate unto the poor.

34. Jericho was surrounded with plains on every side. Plains of Ieric^^.
Hither King 2 King. 25. 5.
Zedekiah fled, and here was taken by the forces of Babylon. The highway
betwixt Jericho and Jerusalem is infamous for theeving, because of the covert
the neighboring wilderness affords; and great roads are the best rivers for
robbers to fish in. Wonder not, that so short a way betwixt two such eminent
Cities, was no better secured, seeing some hundred years since, little safer
was the road betwixt London and Saint Albans: till an Abbot of that place, cut
down the woods, that afforded them shelter. Reader, if thy occasion should call
thee to go from Jericho to Jerusalem, I wish thee well guarded; but if it be
thy hard hap, with the man in the Gospel (be it history or parable) to be
robbed and wounded with thieves, may thou meet with some good Luke 10. 33.
Samaritan, to convey thee to the Inn, and provide necessaries for thee.

35. West of the waters of Jericho stood Ai, Ai at last taken by Joshua.
a small City, but great enough to give a check to the full speed of Isreal's
victories. Their loss here was inconsiderable Josh. 7. 5.
in it self (no more then thirty six men) but dangerous in the consequence
thereof. Such a flaw in their orient success, made them cheap in the worlds
valuation; and the Canaanites (who hitherto had charactred them invincible in
their apprehension) began hence to collect, and conclude a possibility of
conquering them. Yet not valor too little, in such as fought, but sin too much
in some who staid at home, caused this defeat. Achan was the man, who in fine
proved no whit richer for the gold, or warmer for the garment he had stolen.
Detected by lot, accused by his conscience, convicted by his own confession,
condemned by Joshua he (with his Josh. 7. 24.
children and cattle) is stoned by the Israelites. The place of his execution
was called, the vale of Achor, or the vale of trouble, both because Achan
actively had troubled Israel with his sin, and because here he was justly
troubled by them in his punishment. As for the promise of the Prophet in after
ages, that the Hosea 2. 15.
vale of Achor should be a door of hope, understand it mystically, that the
most deplorable, and seemingly desperate estate of the Church, is capable of
comfort, and may in Gods due time be changed into a prosperous condition. Achan
thus punished, how active are the Arms of the Israelites, when freed from the
fetters of Sacrilege! Ai is quickly conquered, the inhabitants thereof being
trained by a dissembled flight of their foes, into their own destruction. Now
although such ambushes are now adays unambushed, by the general suspicion all
have of them, yet in the infancy of the world, when battles were merely
managed by main might, and downright blows* (men bringing all their forces
above board) such lying in wait was an unusual stratagem, and perchance may
justly be referred to Joshua, as the first inventor thereof.

36. West of Ai, The melli^^uous wood near Beth-aven.
betwixt Bethel and Ai, was the Genesis 12. 8.
mountain, where Abraham and Lot long lived lovingly together, until the
contest betwixt their Genesis 13. 9.
heardsmen, when the land was grown too little for their substance. Poverty
preserves amity, when riches oft-times make rents among friends. Hard by was
the City and wilderness of Beth-aven, which signifies the house of vanity.
Strange, that any should impose on a place (except in derision) so ill, and
unlucky a name. Yet, has not Solomon in effect set the same on the whole
world? Eccles. 1. 2.
Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. But Beth-aven seems emphatically so called,
for some eminent Idolatry committed therein. Near this place 1 Samuel 14. 23.
was the wood, wherein when it rained honey from heaven, the Israelites being
in pursuit of the Philistines, wanted hands to receive it, having them bound up
by Saul's adjuration, not to eat before night. I see neither piety, nor policy,
but humor and headiness in Saul's resolution, the way to increase their
stomach, and not their valor. Might not a cursory meal been allowed them, in a
running march, a snatch and away? Here Ionathans eyes were opened with tasting
a little honey, and presently his eyes were opened again in a sadder sense,
seeing himself liable to death for breaking his Fathers command. Nor was it his
own innocence, and invincible ignorance of the law, but the peoples 1 Samuel 14.
45.
interposing, which preserved him alive. Yet will not this one good act of
popular violence, make amends for those many mischiefs, which their impetuous
exorbitances in other cases have produced.

37. Still westward of Beth-aven stood Gibeon, Gibeo^ites overreach the
Isr^^lites.
termed a Josh. 10. 2.
royal City in Scripture, that is, a fair and princely place; otherwise, in
all the transactions, betwixt this City and the Israelites, we meet with no
King thereof, which may almost persuade us to believe it a popular State. The
inhabitants thereof with clouted old shoes, moldy bread, and a lie farther
fetched then their journey, (pretending their dwellings at great distance)
deceived the congregation of Israel, then camped at Gilgal. For the smoke of
those ovens, wherein their bread was baked, might almost be perceived from
Gibeon to Gilgal, which space Joshua marched over with his foot-army in one
Josh. 10. 9.
night. However, hereby they saved their lives, only for their cheat were
condemned to be Nethinims or Deodands, that is, people given to God, to hew
wood, draw water, and do the drudgery of the Tab^rnacle and Josh. 9. 27.
Temple, a condition which they gladly accepted of; so sweet is life in it
self, though sawced with servitude.

38. Afterward Joshua with a miraculous victory here conquered the five Kings
of Canaan, which assembled themselves to besiege Gibeon, in revenge of their
defection to the Israelites. Never had battle more of God therein; for, he
himself brought up, or rather let down the train of Artillery, killing the
Canaanites with hailstones from heaven, as they Josh. 10. 11.
fled in the going down to Bethoron unto Azekah. Here Joshua by his faithful
prayer stopped a Giant in his full career, as he was running his race, staying
the Sun in Josh. 10. 12.
Gibeon, to attend his execution on his enemies. This was (as I may say) the
Barnady day of the whole world, the very longest, which that climate ever did,
or shall behold, when time was delivered of twins, two days joined together
without any night interposed. How the heavens (this extraordinary accident
notwithstanding) were afterward reconciled to their regular motions, and how
the expense of so much delay, was repaired by future thrift, (I mean this
staying of the Sun made up in the years account, by his swifter moving
afterward) I leave to be audited, and cast up even by Astronomers. Mean time,
the foresaid five Kings, were first hid, then stopped in the cave of Josh. 10. 16.
Makk^dah, till Joshua commanded them to be brought forth, and his soldiers to
set their feet on their necks; and David in his expression many years after,
reflecteth hereon, Thou Psalm. 8. 40.
have given me the necks of mine enemies etc. Then were those five Kings hanged
by Makkedah a regal City of the Canaanites, which at that time was taken, and
the Josh. 10. 28.
King thereof destroyed by Joshua.

39. To return to Gibeon* Gibeon the Cockpit of war though a city belonging to
the L^vites.
it was afterward one of the four Cities in this Tribe, which were allotted to
the Josh. 2^. 17.
Levites, and yet we find it the Theater chiefly of martial achievements;
for, by the great pool in Gibeon, in Helkath-hazzurim, or, the field of strong
men, was Abner with the host of Israel worsted by Ioab General for David; when
Asahel like a wild Roe (wild for his rashness, Roe for his swiftness) would not
be persuaded from pursuing of Abner, until nigh the hill Amnah which 2 Samuel 2.
24.
lies before Giah, he taught Asahel the great difference between a nimble leg,
a and vigorous arm, smiting him with his spear under the fifth rib.

40. Under the same rib, Amasa basely murdered by I^ab.
at the great stone 2 Samuel 20. 8.
which is in Gibeon, Ioab jealous of Amasa his cousin-german (Ambition owns no
alliance, and is only of kin to it self) bas^ly murdered him in this manner.
Ioab had a sword hanging on his loins, and as he went it used to 2 S^m. 20. 8.
fall out, as if it sought for another sheath, besides what it had already.
Surely he had put his sword in this careless posture, thus to play at in and
out, to cover his intended murder, under some pretense of casualty, as if in
his embraces his weapon had hurt Amasa by unhappy accident. Vain excuse, for
certainly his sword could not of its own accord have gone so quickly, and so
deeply to Amasa's fifth rib, had not Ioab's steady aim, both dispatched it on
that errand, and directed it to that place. Amasa thus slain, all the people
passing by make an halt at his corpse, and every 2 Samuel 20. 12.
one that came by him stood still, until his body was removed. Where amongst
so many gazing on his corpse, it is hard, if the active thoughts of some did not
light on this observation of divine justice, that he now was treacherously
slain, who 2 Samuel 17. 25.
so lately had been the General to a Traitor.

41. In the beginning of the reign of King Gibe^n a place of public worship.
Solomon, Gibeon was a public place of divine worship, where part of the
Tabernacle resided. Here two things are carefully to be observed: 1 The Arc it
self. This being taken out of the Tabernacle at Shiloh, by 1 Samuel 4. 4.
Hophni and Phinehas, never returned thither again. But from the land of the
Philistines was brought back, first to 1 Samuel 6. 18.
Bethshemesh, thence to 1 Samuel 7. 1.
Kiriath-jearim, thence to the house of 2 Samuel 6. 10.
Obed-Edom, and at last fixed and settled by David in Zion under the cover of a
Tent 2 Samuel 6. 17.
which he had pitched for that purpose. 2 The Tabernacle of the Congregation,
made by Moses in the wilderness, wherein the Priests attended about their
public sacrifices. This about Solomon's time was translated from Shiloh to
Gibeon 2 Chr. 1. 3.
as a place of more eminency, and convenience for divine service, because a
City of the Levites.
Herein on the high place in Gibeon, Solomon offered to God a thousand burnt
offerings, and (which was most acceptable) a zealous prayer requesting wisdom
of God, who bestowed both it, and wealth, and honor upon him. Thus those who
chiefly desire grace, receive it, the jewel, and at least a competency of
outward provisions, for a cabinet to keep it in. Some hundred years after, by
the great waters which are in Gibeon, Iohanan the son of Karcah, recovered the
remnant of the poor Israelites (left in the land after the captivity of
Babylon) from Ismael a Prince of the blood royal, who had a design to carry
them away captive unto the Ammonites.

42. Next Gibeon, Gihea^ distinct from Gibeon, a wicked city.
we take the City of Gibeah into our serious consideration, not as nearest in
situation, but in sound of like name, insomuch that some have unwarily
confounded them, as the same place. Gibeah lay in the south-west part of this
Tribe, whose inhabitants were bad men, but good Judge. 20. 16.
markes-men, right shooters ( at an hairs breadth and fail not) but
unrighteous livers. A Levite coming with his concubine, and servant from
Bethlehem, declined to lie at Judge. 19. 12.
Jerusalem, because then an heathen City, and (though late) recovered this
Gibeah for his lodging place. Alas, what was this, but from the fire into the
furnace? so excessive hot was the lust of the people of this City. But charity
therein was as cold, none inviting this Levite to his house, until an old man
(and he also no inhabitant, but a stranger of mount Ephraim) coming from his
work Judge. 19. 16.
out of the field at even, (Industry is the fuel of hospitality) kindly
entertained him in his house. In fine, the Levites concubine was by violence,
and variety of lust of the men of this City abused to death. Oh the justice of
divine proceedings! She had formerly been Judge. 19. 2.
false to her husband. Culpa libido fuit, poena libido fuit.
By lust she sinned, and 'twas just
She should be punished by lust.
This villainy being declared to all Israel, a consultation thereon, and first
in a fair way the offenders are demanded to justice, which denied and all the
Tribe of Benjamin engaging themselves to defend the damnable deed of those of
Gibeah, all Israel resolves in a national war, to revenge so foul a murder.

43. Here let us stand still and wonder, Israel twice worsted by Benjamin.
that an army united amongst themselves as one man, most in number, best in
cause, wisest in counsel (as who had asked, and obtained the advice of God
himself, to go on in this war) should once, and Judge. 20.
again be defeated, by those who were weaker, and wickeder then themselves. I
cannot challenge the army of Israel, for any eminent sin at this time, yet it
is very suspicious, they were carnally confident of the conquest, as accounting
the victory eleven to one on their side. However the next battle made amends
for all, wherein all the raveno^s wolves of Benjamin, with their dams and
whelps at home, were utterly destroyed, except six Judge. 20. 47.
hundred, and those cooped up in a grate, and hid in the rock of Rimmon. Thus,
what once was sadly said of Joseph, was now more true of Benjamin, Genesis 41. 13.
One is not. And the whole Tribe had finally been extinguished, had not
provision been made to supply them with wives, as formerly has been
Description of Ephraim.
observed.

44. Afterward this Gibeah Gibeah why surnamed of Saul.
got the surname of 1 Samuel 11. 4.
Saul, because he was born, lived, and buried here. In this Gibeah 2 Samuel 21. 6.
of Saul, five of his sons (amongst whom a Mephibosheth, but not the
Mephibosheth) were in David's reign hanged up on the hill before the Lord, to
expiate Saul's murdering of the Gibeonites. How strangely was his zeal
transposed, turning the back of his sword toward the 1 Samuel 15. 9.
Amalekites, whom God commanded him to destroy, and using the edge thereof
against the Gibeonites, whom by oath he was bound to preserve? Here Rizpah
Saul's concubine, covered the corpse of such as were executed, with sackcloth, to
keep birds and beasts, from feeding upon them.

45. Her kindness to the dead is 2 Samuel 21. 11.
told to King David, Saul buried by David in Gibeah.
who not only gave the hearing, but the practicing of so good an example, and
thereby is put in mind, to show mercy to the bones of Saul, and Jonathan,
which he fetched from Iabesh-Gilead, and buried hard by in Zelah, in the
sepulcher of Kish his Father. Showing thereby, that his former severity to
Saul's sons, proceeded from a public desire of his subjects good, no private
design of revenge upon Saul, whose corpse he so solemnly interred. Corpses,
which were but wanderers, whilst hung up by the Philistines in their City of 1 Samuel 31. 10.
Bethshan; were but sojourners, when buried by the Gileadites in the land of
Gad; but now became housekeepers, when brought home to the proper place of the
sepulcher of their Fathers.

46. Hard by Gibeah was Migron, Migron and Ramah.
a small City, where Saul for some time abode with his men under a 1 Samuel 14. 2.
Pomegranate-tree. Say not, that such a tree was a simple palace for a Prince,
for in those hot Countries, pleasant was the residence for some short time,
under the shadow thereof. Yea, our Countryman Lib. 2. cap. 2.
Bid can tell you, how in our cold climate Anno Domini 601. Augustine the
Monk held a Synod under an Oak (called Augustines Ache in old English) which
tree our learned Camd. B^it. fol. 436.
Antiquary places in the confines of Worcestershire. Nor far from Migron is
Ramah a City, built by Baasha (jealous that Israel would revolt to Judah, 1
King. 15. 17
on Asa's reformation of Religion) to stop all intercourse betwixt the two
kingdoms. Not that the arms of so small a City, could reach seventy miles
from the sea to Jordan, but because Ramah was greater in command, then compass,
as advantageously seated on some road, or pass of importance. But Baasha
diverted by the invasion of Benhadad King of Assyria, desisted from his
building; for which he had made so large preparation, that Asa afterward
repaired the neighboring cities of Geba and 1 Kin. 15. 22.
Mizpah, with the stones provided for the fortifying of Ramah.

47. Mizpah now mentioned lay some eight miles hence, full north. Mizpah for a
long time the seat of Ju^ice.
When in the days of Samuel, the seat of justice was annual for the time, and
tripartite for the place, Mizpah had a fair share thereof, 1 Samuel 7. 16.
Samuel went from year to year, in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpah,
lying in a kind of triangle, and judged Israel in all those places, and his
return was to Ramah, for there was his house. State Affairs made not the good
man to forget his family, spending three Terms abroad on the public, and the
Vacation at home, on his private occasions. At Mizpah was a general
reformation of the people, when conscious of their sins, and sensible of Gods
anger, they drew 1 Samuel 7. 6.
water, that is, plentifully powered forth tears before the Lord. Say not, that
their weeping was a labor in vain, and such drawing of water (like the
bottomless buckets of the Belides never to be filled) ineffectuall for the
expiation of sin, because no sorrow for the same is sufficient, seeing, not the
intrinsecall worth of their tears, but Gods gracious appretiation of the
sincerity thereof, gave the value to their weeping. Afterward at 1 Samuel 10. 17.
Mizpah, Saul out of modesty, or policy, was hid among the stuff; when found
there, fetched thence, and presented to the people for their king, appearing so
proper a person, that nature might seem to design him for supremacy, and mark
him out to be the 2 Chr. 2. 18.
Overseer of Israel, who was higher then any of the people, from the shoulders,
and Sam. 10. 23.
upwards.

48. In the days of King Baasa, Asa Asa his pit in Mizpa^ employed otherwise
then it was intended.
King of Judah frighted with fear, made a Ier. 41. 9.
pit in Mizpah for his retreating place. No doubt though the entrance, and
orifice thereof, did promise no more then a plain pit, yet it was See our
description of Asher. 5.
contrived into rooms, and fortified with substructions therein, fit for the
receipt of a Prince. Wonder not, that he would prefer to trust his person here,
rather then within the walls of his royal City Jerusalem; for surely this was
not provided for a place of long residence, but for present privacy, and sudden
safety, if extremity required it. After the Babylonish captivity, when Gedaliah
was made governor of those poor Jews, which were left to till the land, he
made Ier. 40. 6.
Mizpah the seat of his short government. Thus have I often seen fishermen,
when they have caught store of fish, cast the young fry (worth neither the
keeping, nor killing) into the river again, to be breeders, in which
consideration the King of Babylon preserved these poor Jews from destruction.
Slight not Gedaliahs place, as disgraceful to be Prince of beggars, for they
were in a thriving way, and probable to improve themselves to a considerable
condition, had not Ismael (an unhappy name to persecute Gods children) a Prince
of the blood, killed him, with his followers, casting them into the midst Ier.
41. 9.
of the pit that Asa made, now employed to bury the dead, but first intended to
preserve the living. In the days of the Maccabees, whilst Jerusalem was
possessed, and profaned by the heathens, they repaired to 1 Macca. 3. 46
Mizpah, as a place formerly fortunate for that purpose, to fast, pray, and beg
Gods blessing on their undertakings against their enemies.

49. South of Mizpah lay the place called Eben-ezer, Different success of the
Israel^tes at Eben-Ezer.
that is, the stone of help, so named, by way of Prolepsis in Scripture, 1 Samuel
4. 1. for otherwise for the present, this place was no help, but an hindrance
to the Israelites, who here were twice beaten in battle by the Philistines. At
the second time they brought their Reserve, I mean the 1 Samuel 4. 4. and cap. 5.
ver. 1.
Ark, into the field, and carnally conceited, that victory would fly along with
them, on the wings of the Cherubims over the Mercy^seat. But the sanctity of
the Ark did not so much invite, as the profaneness of the managers ( Hophni and
Phinehas) did repel Gods gracious presence, from going along therewith;
insomuch as the Ark it self was taken captive, and carried into the land of the
Philistines. Some years after the Philistines again charge the Israelites in
the same place, presuming on their former victories, that in so fortunate a
place they might prescribe for conquest, but God turned the tide of their
success. At the importunate suit of Samuel (whose prayers were more potent,
then formerly the presence of the Ark, to obtain victory) the Philistines were
routed, and smitten until they came under 1 Samuel 7. 11.
Bethcar. Whereupon Samuel set up a stone, between Mizpah and Shen, and called
it Eben-ezer, the stone of help, to perpetuate so memorable a conquest.

50. Hard by is Beeroth, Ionath^ns Scylla and Charybdis.
once a City of the Josh. 9. 17.
Gibeonites (with Chephirah not far off) afterward the 2 Samuel 4. 2.
birthplace of Baanah and Rechab, the murderers of Ishbosheth. Gittaim,
whither those of Beeroth 2 Samuel 4. 3.
fled for fear of the Philistines (says Tremellius when Saul was slain) and
west thereof Bozer and 1 Samuel 14. 4.
Seneh two famous rocks; which Jonathan, and his armor-bearer clambred up upon
their hands and 1 Samuel 14. 13.
feet. They found it more hard to come at, then to conquer their enemies, and
yet when on the top of the rock, they were but at the bottom, and beginning of
their work. They lay about them, and kill many in a little space: so that they
climbed not up the hill so slowly, but their enemies more swiftly ran down the
same. Yet such as will justify Ionathans act herein, for pious and prudent,
must retrait to Divine inspiration, and plead, that his undertaking, as his
success, was extraordinary; otherwise, his tempting of God, had been higher
then the rock he climbed up, to adventure himself on such visible disadvantages.

51. Anathoth Anathoth the Country House of the Highpriests.
remains, lying hence south-east; a city of the Levites, yea of the Priests,
yea of the Highpriests, as a country house, or retiring place for them out of
the populous city of Jerusalem. Abiathar being deprived of the priesthood, for
practicing with Ioab, without the privity of David, to promote Adonijah to the
Crown, was sent hither by Solomon, and confined to live 1 King. 2. 26.
privately on his own lands. Hence plainly appears the power of the Kings of
Israel over the Priests; which on their misdemeanour in civil matters were
subject to secular punishment. But Jeremy the Prophet was the honor of
Anathoth, that man of mourning, famous for his book De Tristibus, or most
poetical Lamentations, (though therein not bemoaning his own, but the public
calamities) born Ier. 1. 1.
in this city. As here he drew his first; so he was likely to have drawn his
last breath, by the Ier. 11. 21.
conspiracy of the people against him, had not God frustrated their wicked
design. Herein the observation of our Savior was verified, Mat. 13. 57.
A Prophet is not without honor, save in his own country, and his own house.
Afterward, Jeremy at Anathoth, bought the ground of his uncl^ Hanameel, with
all the formalities of bargain and sale, most Jer. 32. 10.
sol^mnly passed betwixt them. Is a Prophet amongst the purchasers? commonly
they are as clear from money, as the Apostles Act. 3. 6
were: but this was r^ally, yet mystically done, to fore^ell the future
felicity of Israel, after the captivity of Babylon, that men should have settled
estates, with good title to, and t^nure of their land therein.

52. Michmash is still behind, which we name last, The Philistines design to
destroy smiths in Israel.
because not entirely in this Tribe, but in the confines of Benjamin and
Ephraim. It lay 1 Samuel 13. 5.
cast from Beth-aven, often mentioned in Scripture as the Rendesvouz, sometimes
of the Israelites in the reign of Saul, and sometimes of the Philistines. The
latter marched hence three several ways, on design to extirpate all the smiths
in Israel* Mark their motions, 1 One party went the 1 Sa^. 13. 17.
way that leads to Ophrah, to the land of Shual, that is, north-east. 2
Another turned the way to Bethoron, that is, full west. 3 The third to the
border that looks to the valley of Zeboim, that is, south-east.
Thus dividing themselves they compass their ends, and destroyed that necessary
profession in all the land. For the music of the harp may better be spared in
a commonwealth, then the noise of an hammer. Indeed, I have heard, that ther^
is an house on London Bridge, built entirely of wood, without any mixture of
iron-nailes therein, therefore commonly called Nonesuch, for the rarity of the
structure thereof: but if any could show a civilized State extant on earth,
without the use of smiths therein, it deserves the name of N^ne^such indeed.
Yea, the very Philistines themselves, (though they suppressed the military use
of smiths, for matter of Arms) permitted by way of lone their use to sharpen
instruments of 1 Samuel 13. 20.
husbandry. This not their bounty, but policy suffered, as being confident,
when the Israelites had ploughed, harrowed, and sown their ground, reaped,
housed, and threshed their grain, then they at pleasure could come up, to take
bake, and eat it themselves.

53. So much for the cities in Benjamin, The massac^e of the Priests at Nob by
D^^g.
of whose situation we have any certainty. A second sort succeeds, known by
their conjecturall flags to be of doubtful position. Amongst these Nob justly
claims the precedence (made by us within the compass of Anathoth) a city of
the Priests, where Ahimelech victualled David, and his men, with 1 Samuel 21. 4.
shewbread, and armed him with the sword of 1 Samuel 21. 9.
Goliath, there kept for a monument. Let others enquire, why David's sling was
not rather preserved for that purpose, seeing it overcame the other. A false
brother was present, by name, Doeg; nation, an Edomite; office, master of the
Kings heardsmen; who told al, and more then all to Saul, adding of his own
head, that Ahimelech 1 Samuel 22. 10.
enquired counsel of the Lord for him. Sure I am, Doeg enquired not of the
Lord, when he told so damnable an untruth. Hereupon, Saul condemned the Priest
to death, and others declining so savage a service, Doeg undertook it, killing
fourscore and five persons, which wore a linen Ephod, besides women, children,
sucklings, and cattle: so voracious was the appetite of his sword, and so
active his cruelty, when in commission, and armed with authority.

54. The Readers eye may easily discover such places of uncertain position, as
remain; Zemaraim, the vale of Craftsmen, and Zeboim.
and amongst them Zemaraim, so named in Hebrew, for plenty of wool
thereabouts, as Woollwich in Kent, and Woollton in Dorset-shire are so called,
upon the same occasion. We set Zemaraim next Bethel because named Josh. 18. 22.
next unto it, where some place the Genesis 10. 18.
Zemarites ancient inhabitants of Canaan, as we have formerly Lib. 1. cap.
observed. Nigh this city was an hill 2 Chr. 13. 4.
of the same name, whereon King Abijah stood, and made his excellent oration
(wanting nothing but a better man to utter it) immediately before his
miraculous victory, over the Army of Jeroboam. The Valley of Craftsmen, which
though it sounds like a Country, yet, because going in Nehe. 11. 35.
equipage with other cities, may be concluded a city it self. And what are
Valladolit, or Vallis Olitana in Spain, and Vale-royall in Cheshire, but the
former a fair city and the latter (lately an Abbey) now a village? I am almost
of opinion, that this Valley of craftsmen, took its denomination from Solomon's
workmen, of whom we 1 King 7. 46.
read, that in the plain of Jordan in the clay ground, they cast all the brazen
vessels of the Temple, did not the position of that place, (whereof before) lie
a little more northward. We conclude with Zeboim, not the same with that city,
first De^^. 29. 23.
burnt, then drowned in the Daed-sea, but another probably built not far
thence, near the influx of Jordan into the dead-sea.

55. 1 King. 4. 18.
S^imei the son of Elah was Solomon's Purveyor in Benjamin: A Wolf Benjamins
Arms.
The Arms of Benjamin were Gules, a Wolf salient argent, in allusion to
Jacobs words, He shall Genesis 49. 27.
ravin as a Wolf, in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at night he
shall divide the spoil. Surely the conformity hereof was not found in the
person of Benjamin, who appears rather lamb-like, then wolvish, in that little
left of him in Scripture. Some conceive, they have found the resemblance in the
two Saul's of this Tribe, the one persecuting David, the other the Son of David
(Christ in his members) with raging cruelty. But to wave the various
Rabbinicall conceits hereof, certainly, this (as al other similitudes of this
nature) is not to be sought, in the disgraceful, but commendable qualities of a
Wolf. Thus, when God says of himself, Revel. 16. 15.
Behold I come as a thief, it is not meant, injuriously, fraudulently,
mischievously; but secretly, suddenly, irresistibly. This premised, though
wolves and foxes generally hear ill in Scripture, yet the former excel in
sight, descrying things at great distance; in slight, of excessive agility of
body; and in might, very strong, in proportion to the bulk thereof. All which
properties discover themselves in the Benjamites, quick sighted, steady Judge.
10. 16.
handed (witness their good mark-men) and stout-hearted; in a word (...), so
that both their valor and success are foretold, in this blessing bestowed upon
them.

Here the Map of Judah is to be inserted.
THE TRIBE OF IVDAH. CHAP. 13.
1. JUDAH, Judah and his good qualities.
fo^rth son of Jacob by Leab his wife, was generally a well-natured man, Genesis
37. 26.
endeavoring preservation of his brother Joseph, and an excellent speaker,
being the Genesis 44. 18.
mouth for the rest of his brethren, in his eloquent oration to Ios^^h. Not
that these his good qualities (which otherwhiles were allayed with lust Genesis
38. 16. and 24.
and cruelty) were the causes, bu^ rather the effects of Gods preferring him
above the rest of his brethren. Of this Tribe, threescore Numb. 2. 4.
and fourteen thousand and six hundred can out of Egypt; all which deservedly
dying in the wilderness for their disobedience, the next generation descended
from them, being threescore and sixteen thousand and five hundred, possessed
the land of Canaan.

2. Judah (says the 1 Chronicles. 5. 2.
Scripture) prevailed above his brethren, The Sovereignty of this tribe.
and of him came the chief rulers, so that he may be traced all along by the
footsteps of his sovereignty. Whilst they were in the wilderness, God ordered,
that the standard of Judah should pitch first o^ the Numb. 2. 3.
east side of the Tabernacle toward the rising of the Sun. Perchance, to
denote that the Mal. 4. 2.
Sun of righteousness arising with healing in his wings, should be extracted
from that Tribe. When Joshua was dead, and the children of Israel asked of the
Lord, Who shall go up first for us to fight against the Candanites? It was
answered, Judge. 1. 2.
Judah shall go up. Othniel the first Judge was hence descended, and David, in
whose royal line the Crown lasted for above four hundred years: and after the
return from captivi^y, Zorobabel of the Tribe of Judah is honored with the
style of Hagg. 1. 1.
Governor, which office for some time continued in his family. In a word
(besides Princes) so puissant was the Tribe in Generals, Ioab, Abishdi, Amasa
etc. Statesmen, Caleb, Ahitophel; and Prophets, Nat^an, Amos, Micah; that in
dignity, as in strength and number it surmounted all the rest. Yea, Napthali's
fearful Hind durst not bellow; nor Issachars patient. Ass bray; nor Ephraims
strong Ox low; nor Benjamins cruel Wolf howl; nor Dans cunning Serpent
hiss, if Judah's Princely Lion was pleased to roar, as Commander of all the
beasts of the field and forest.

3. However, How the scepter departed not from Judah.
I dare not (with some) interpret Jacobs solemn prophecy, the Scepter Genesis 49.
10.
shall not depart from Judah, nor the Lawgiver from between his feet, until
Shiloh come, of a constant Sovereignty immoveably fixed in this Tribe till the
birth of our Savior: a Tenet unteinable with truth, seeing of the many Judges
in Israel, but two of this Tribe; Saul, the first King, of Benjamin, and the
Maccabees of the Tribe of Levi, who after the captivity attained to Kingly
honor amongst the Jews. Rather we understand Jacobs words of the whole nation,
(whom he in the Spirit foresaw, should in process of time be called Jews, as
the land Judea, from Judah) and expound them to be a prediction, that the Jews
should never totally, and finally lose the visible being of a kingdom, or
commonwealth, with a form of government amongst themselves, (though often
changed and altered in the manner, obscured and eclipsed in the luster,
confined and emparied in the power thereof) until Messiah should be manifested
in the flesh. Which came to pass accordingly, when the Jews at our Saviors
birth (and more completely at, and after his death) had lost all shadows of a
free State, totally inslaved to the Roman Emperor. To whom alone b^longed, 1
The Militia with the Castle, giving martial-law to the Temple it self. 2 Coin,
stamped with the image and superscription of Mat. 22. 2.
Caesar. 3 Customs, collected, yea extorted by his Publicanes. 4 Power in
causes capital, by the Priests own confession, John 18. 31.
It is not lawful for us to put any man to death.
And the prophecy of Jacob thus expounded, is both clear in it self, and
according to the interpretation of the Justin Martyr in dialog^ cum Triphone
Iudaeo.
Ancients.

4. This Tribe had Dan and Simeon on the west, The limits of the Land of Judea.
Benjamin on the north, the wilderness of Paran o^ the south, and the Dead-sea
on the east. Extending east and west, welnigh forty miles; but from
Cadesh-Barnea to Jerusalem was about sixty six. Where in this country was
contained a mountainous land, but fruitful with all commodities for pleasure
and profit. We begin with the Dead-sea, Judah's eastern boundary, and so shall
proceed to ^^rround it in our description.

5. This was Genesis 14. 3.
once a fruit^ull country, The Dead-sea once a fruitful country.
called the vale of Siddim, even Genesis 13. 10.
as the garden of the Lord, Paradi se it self. Too like indeed thereto, both
for the pleasure thereof, and Se^pent therein, the spreading wickedness of the
vicious Sodomites. Lot chose to live here, not because the people were well
nurtured, but the place well ^vatered; though better watered (no doubt) during
his living there, with his tears, from a soul 2 Pet. 2. 8.
vexed with their filthy conversation. He lost by his dwelling among them, for
whose sins he was carried Genesis 14. 12.
captive by Chedorlaomer; They gained by their dwelling so near him, for whose
sake they were rescued by his uncle Abraham. Yea, afterward Abraham endeavored
to save the whole city of Sodom, beating down the price of Gods justice as
low, as possibly it might consist with his honor, to Genesis 18. 32.
ten righteous men: and yet that too high a rate for the piety of Sodom to
reach, so general was the wickedness therein. Hereupon, Sodom, with three
neighboring Cities, Deuteronomy. 29. 23.
Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim, was destroyed with fire and brimstone from
heaven, and thereby the whole Country turned into a standing stinking lake.

6. Some will say, How fire le^t water behind it
it was strange, that fire should beget water, a combustion produce an
inundation. More proper it had been, that such an inflammation should have left
and Aetna, Hecla or Vesuvius behind it, fuming, if not burning always. The
rather, because next morning this place presented it self to the eyes of
Abraham, as the smoke of a Genesis 19. 28.
furnace. But such must know, that when the fire was once out: 1 The Country
by nature was low and level, being a depressed plain, and so more subject to
drowning. 2 Jordan (running through this vale, and there sinking into the
ground) had a quality in the first month to Josh. 3. 15. etc 1 Chr. 12. 15 and
Eccles. 24. 30
overflow his banks, and so prone to occasion a deluge. 3 Probably, the river
was formerly bridled with artificial banks, which either were then broken down
with that tempest, or afterward decayed by degrees, when the people were
destroyed. 4 Jordan, in the vacancy of the inhabitants, having got violent
possession, fenced and fortified himself in the slime-pits, (as in so many
castles) whereof great Genesis 14. 10.
plenty in that place, and could not afterward be ejected.
Thus his title to this plain, though at first an unjust usurpation and
incroachment, is made lawful by the prescription of three thousand years
possession.

7. This sea is known by several names. 1. The Dead-sea, Several names of
this sea.
either because the Charnel-house of so many dead carcasses then destroyed
therein; or, because it kills all creatures coming into it; or lastly, because
dull and dead, not enlivened with a tide, or quickened with any visible motion,
one main cause of the offensive savor thereof, laziness disposing men to
lewdness, and waters to putrefaction. 2. The Genesis 14. 3.
Salt-sea salt indeed, from the sulphurous combustions first occasioning it. 3.
By Greek writers it is termed the Asphaltite-lake from (...), or Bitumen,
growing plentifully thereabouts. This Bitumen (we are fain to retain the Latin
word, our land neither affording the thing, nor our language the name to
signify it) is a clammy, glutinous substance, useful in Physic to astringe,
in Surgery to consolidate. Used by the rich as mortar to build, (as in the
tower of Genesis 11. 3.
Babel) by the poor as oil to burn, therefore called (...) in hebrew; quickly
kindled, hardly quenched, flaming far and long, as partaking much of pitch, and
more of brimstone in the nature thereof. And such as could not go to the cost
of richer spices, used it for imbalming their dead, being a great drier, and so
preserver from corruption.

8. This Salt-sea was sullen and churlish, Neithe^ ships nor fish in the
Salt-sea.
differing from all other in the conditions thereof. David speaking of other
seas, says, there go the ships, Psalm. 104. 26.
and there is that Leviathan which thou have made to play therein: so
instancing in the double use of the sea, for ships to sail, and fishes to swim
in. But this is serviceable for neither of these intents, no vessels sailing
thereon, the clammy water being a real Remora to obstruct their passage; and
the most sportfull fishes dare not jest with the edged-tools of this Dead-sea;
which if unwillingly hurried thereinto by the force of the stream of Jordan,
they presently expire. Yea, it would kill that Apocrypha-Dragon, which Daniel
is said to have choked with lumps of Histor. of the Dragon ver. 27
pitch, fat, and hair, if he should be so adventurous to drink of the waters
thereof; so stifling and suffocating is the nature of it. In a word, this sea
has but one good quality, namely, that it entertains intercourse with no other
seas; which may be imputed to the providence of nature, debarring it from
communion with the Ocean, lest otherwise it should infect other waters with its
malignity. Nor does any healthful thing grow thereon, save only this
wholesome counsel, which may be collected from this pestiferous lake, for men
to beware how they provoke divine justice, by their lustful and unnatural
enormities.

9. Heathen writers, Solinus his testimony of the Dead-sea.
Tacitus and Pliny, take notice of this lake, with the qualities thereof, but
especially Solinus, whose testimony (but with some variations from Scripture)
we thought fit to insert, and translate, though the latter will scarcely be
done, without some abatement of the native elegancy, and expressiveness
thereof. Longo Solin. Polybist. cap. 38.
ab Hierosolymis recessu tristis sinus panditur, quem de coelo tactum testatur
humus nigra, and in cinerem soluta. Duo ibi oppida, Sodomum nominatum alterum,
alterum Gomorrhum. Apud quae pomum gignitur, quod habeat speciem licet
maturitatis, mandi tamen non potest. Nam fuliginem intrinsecus favillaceam
ambitio tantum extimae cutis cohibet: quae vel levi tactu pressa fumum exhalat,
and fatiscit in vagum pulverem. A good way side of Jerusalem lies open a
melancholy Bay, which the black soil being also turned into ashes* witnesses
to have been blasted from heaven. In it are two towns, the one called Sodom,
the other Gomorrah. Wherein grows an apple, which though it seem fair and ripe,
yet cannot be eaten. For, the compass of the outward rind only, holds within
it an ember-like soot: which being but lightly pressed, evaporates into smoke
and becomes flittering dust.

10. But Lot was preserved, Lots wi^e turned into a pillar of salt.
and God is said therein to have Genesis 19. 29.
remembered Abraham, though he might have seemed to have forgotten him, in
refusing to grant to spare Sodom at his request. Thus, though divine
providence may deny good men's prayers in the full latitude of their desires,
he always grants them such a competent proportion thereof, as is most for his
glory, and their good. Lot with his wife are enjoined only not to look back,
wherein she disobeyed the commandment, either out of 1 High contempt: Yet
seeing for the main she had been a good woman, accompanying her husband many
miles from his native to a strange Country, merely depending on Gods
providence, our charity believes her fact proceeding rather from 2 Carelessness,
or incogitancy, having for that instant forgotten the command; or 3 Curiosity,
to behold the manner of so strange, and sudden a destruction; or 4 Infidelity,
not conceiving it possible, so great a City could be so soon overthrown; or 5
Covetousness, when she thought on the wealth she had left behind her; or 6
Compassion, hearing the whining of swine, braying of Asses, bleating of sheep,
lowing of kine, crying of children, shrieking of women, roaring of men, and
some of them of her own flesh and blood.
Were they any, or all of these, back she looked, and was turned into a Genesis
19. 26.
pillar of salt, which, Saint Hierome says, was extant in his age-Mean time,
how sad a case was Lot in, bearing about him life and death? one half of him
quick, lively, and active; the other half, (his wife, both making but one
flesh) so strangely, and suddenly, senseless, dead, and immovable.

11. Not far off is the City of Zoar (Littleton in English) so named by Lot,
Zoar spared at Lots request.
whereas formerly it was called Belah. I say by Lot, who was the best
benefactor to this place, which otherwise had been sent the same way of
destruction, with the other four Cities, had not his importunity Genesis 19. 21.
prevailed with God, for the sparing thereof. Yet I find not any monument of
gratitude made by the men of Zoar, to the memory of Lot their preserver; yea,
they would not afford him a quiet and comfortable being amongst them, insomuch
that he Genesis 19. 30.
feared to dwell in Zoar. Either suspecting that they would offer violence to
his person, or infect his soul with their bad example, or that he might be
involved in their sudden destruction, as a wicked place spared, not pardoned
by God, and allowed to himself for his present refuge, not constant habitation.
Their ill usage of so good a man, minds me of Solomon's observation, Eccles. 9.
14. 15.
There was a little City and few men within it, and there came a great King
against it, and besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it. Now there was
found in it a poor wise man, and ^e by his wisdom delivered the City, yet no
man remembered the same poor man. No more then Lot was remembered in Zoar, though
the tutelar Saint thereof. But his clear conscience, in free doing this
courtesy, rewarded it self in doing it; whilst mercenary souls, working only
for the wages of thanks, often lose their labor, especially in this
ungrateful age.

12. From Zoar, Lots incest with his daughters.
Lot removed to a neighboring Genesis 19. 30.
mountain, and dwelt in a cave therein, which is shown to travelers at this
day. Now, an hole in an hill could hold him, and all his family, whose substance
formerly was so great, the whole Country could not afford room for his flocks
and heard-men, without Genesis 13. 7.
striving with those of his uncle Abraham. Here made drunken by his daughters
practice upon him* with them he committed incest. It is grace, not the place,
can secure men's souls from sin, seeing Lot fasting from lust in wanton and
populous Sodom, ^urfeited thereof in a solitary cave; and whilst he carefully
fenced the castle of chastity, even to make it impregnable against the battery
of foreign force, he never suspected to be surprised by the treachery of his own
family.

13. So much for Pentepolis, The utility of crit^cisme in boundaries.
once a country of five cities, now all turned into one lake. Come we now to
survey the particular limits of this Tribe. That Maxim, Qui been distinguit,
been docet, holds most true herein: the well distinguishing of bounds,
conduces much to the true knowledge of this Country; especially, seeing the
Holy Spirit has been so exact in assigning them. Where God is pleased to
point, for man not to vouchsafe a look, shows, that proud earth valueth his
eyes, as more worth then the hand of heaven.

14. The borders of Judah with all their particular flexure are thus The
borders of Judah.
described in Josh. 15. 3. etc.
Joshua. East. South. North. West. The Salt-Sea. 1 From the south side of the
salt-sea, to the going up of Acrabbin. 2 Thence to the wilderness of Zin. 3
Thence to the south side unto Kadesh-Barnea. 4 Thence to Hezron. 5 Thence it
went up to Adar. 6 Thence fetched a compass to Karkaa. 7 Thence it passed to
Azmon. 8 Thence unto the river of Egypt. 9 Thence went out at the Sea. Observe
we, that these south bounds of Judah, are for the main the same with the south
limits of the whole land, assigned Numbers 34.
1 From the end of Jordan at the salt-sea to Beth-hoglah 2 Thence by the north
of Beth-araba. 3 Thence it went up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben. 4
Thence toward Debir from the valley of Achor. 5 So northwards looking to
Gilgal, before the going up to Adummin, on the south side of the river. 6
Thence toward the water of Enshemesh. 7 Thence to Enrogel. Thence by the valley
of Benhinnom unto the south of Jerusalem. 8 Thence to the top of the mountain
at the end of the valley of Rephaim. 9 Thence to the fountain of Nephtoah. 10
Thence to the cities of mount Ephron. 11 Thence to Kiriath-jearim.
1 From Kiriath-jearim westward it compasses unto mount Seir. 2 Thence it
passes along to the side of mount Iearim, or Chesalon. 3 Thence went down to
Bethshemesh. 4 Thence passed on to Timnah. 5 Thence unto the side of Ekron
northward. 6 Thence was drawn to Shichron. 7 Thence passed along to mount
Baalah. 8 Thence went out unto Iabneel. 9 Thence the west border ended at the
Great Sea. These west bounds of Judah, were afterward altered, falling into
the midst of the Tribe of Dan.
Now, as in the body of a man, if an inspection might be made into it whilst
he is alive, every nerve, and artery therein (then flushed up with the spirits)
is easily to be discerned, which after death shrink almost invisible, past
discovering: so each small angle, and turning of Judah's bounds in Joshua's
time, was then plainly to be perceived, which now adays (the land long since,
being in a manner dead, and desolate) are not at all conspicuous, nor fall they
under any accurate observation.

15. Amongst all these limitary places, Kadesh-Barnea in the edge of Canaan.
Kadesh-Barnea is only of eminency, whither the children of Israel Number. 32. 8.
came, and where they stayed some time, after their coming out of Egypt, in the
very edge and entrance of the land of Canaan. Thus that land was like a rich
robe, whose utmost hem the Jews were permitted to touch (only that their
fingers might feel the fineness thereof) but were denied to wear it, and
remanded to wander another way many years, for the punishment of their
infidelity. And thus many come to the Kadesh-Barnea of common illumination, who
never attain to the true Canaan of holiness here, or happiness hereafter.

16. In describing this spacious Tribe, Method propounded.
we will begin with the eleven royal Cities therein, whose Kings were
destroyed by Josh 10. 10, etc.
Joshua. These according to their dignities may thus be reckoned up: 1
Jerusalem, whereof largely hereafter. 2 Hebron. 3 Debir. 4 Libnah. 5 Lachish. 6
Adullam. 7 Geder. 8 Iarmuth. 9 Eglon. 10 Arad. 11 Hepher.
These royal Cities, though scattered here and there in this Tribe, need no
other Herald in our map, to proclaim them to the Readers notice, being
quickly found out by their coronets graven upon them. From these we shall
proceed to other towns of eminency, reserving the rivolets, and wildernesses,
to close this our description.

17. Hebron was the principal royal city belonging to Judah, Hebron anciently
Kiriath-Arba.
seven years Number. 13. 22.
senior in its building to Zoan a City in Egypt; more anciently it was called
Kiriath-Arba, that is (say Adricho. in de^^r. of Judah. number. 145.
some) the City of four men, because of four Patriarchs (as they reckon them
up) Adam, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob buried therein. But, I wonder any should
delight in their own wild conjectures, when the text tendereth us a certainty
herein, assuring us that this Arba (from whom Kiriath-Arba, or Hebron was
named) was Josh. 14. 15.
a great man among the Anakims. This City stood in the vale of Mamre, so called
from Genesis ^4. 24.
Mamre a person of quality in this place, who with Aner and Eshcol were
Abraham's loving associates, and valiant assistants, in conquering
Cheder-laomer, and rescuing the captive Sodomites. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
lived here successively, and from the vale of Hebron, Joseph was Genesis 37. 14.
sent on a loving visit to his brethren, when for his good will they sold him
to the Ishmaelites.

18. Hereabouts was that great entertainment made, Entertainment of Angels.
wherein the covert of a Genesis 18. 8.
tree was the dining room, the ground (probably) the board, Abraham the
Caterer, Sarah the Cook, veal and welcome their cheer, Angels in the shape of
men, Christ in the notion of an Angel, the guests, and the last promise of Genesis
18. 10.
Isaac the free-offering they gave for their entertainment. Yea, in Hebron
Isaac was born, suckled, weaned, persecuted by Ishmael, till at last he mocked
both himself, and his mother Ha^gar quite out of his Fathers family.

19. Near Hebron was the cave of Machpelah, The cave of Machpelah.
purchased by Abraham of Ephron the Hittite (with the field about it, and all
the trees therein) at the price of four Genesis 23. 16, 17.
hundred shekells of silver, for the burying of Sarah, himself, and his family.
For, here, Isaac Genesis 25. 9.
Ishmael
though formerly the one perscuted the other lovingly agreed to bury Abraham
their Father. Jacob Genesis 35. 29.
Esau
though formerly the one designed the others death lovingly agreed to bury
Isaac their Father. Joseph Genesis 50 13.
and his brethren, though formerly they envied and sold him, lovingly agreed to
bury Jacob their Father.
And thus, though branglings, and brawlings may happen betwixt brethren when
young; all animosities ought to be buried in the grave of their Fathers.

20. In the time of Joshua Josh. 10. 37.
Hebron had a King, whom he conquered, Royal turned into Sacerdotall Cities.
and subdued; and afterward this place was made a City Josh. 20. 7.
of Refuge, and assigned (with twelve more in this Tribe, and Benjamin) unto the
Josh. 21. 13.
Priests, the sons of Aaron, who were above common Levites, as employed in
ordinary attendance about the Tabernacle. Herein God provided not only for
their convenience, accommodating them with habitations near Jerusalem (as the
place hereafter intended for his public service) but chiefly for their
conscience, placing them in these two Tribes, whom he foresaw would alone
persevere in, when the others would apostate from the true Religion. Yea the
Priests had the best and biggest places in Judah, as Hebron, Debir, Libnah,
formerly Royal, afterward Sacerdotall Cities: God allowing his Ministers
large maintenance; and indeed a beggarly Clergy, is the forerunner of a
bankrupt Religion.

21. But although the City of Hebron pertained to the Priests, The suburbs of
Hebron g^ven to Caleb.
the suburbs thereof by Gods appointment belonged to Josh. 14. 13.
Caleb and his posterity. This Caleb was that young-old man, whose strength
contradicted his years, so able and active at Josh. 14. 11.
fourscore and five, either for advice, or execution. But here he eat not the
bread of idleness, being first to clear and conquer Hebron (before he could
possess it) from the Giant-Amorite-Anakims dwelling therein. These Amorites,
Amos. 2. 9.
though (as the Prophet describes them) high as the Cedars, and strong as the
Oaks, had notwithstanding (to follow this Metaphor) much wastfull sap in their
mighty big bodies: whilst Caleb (all heart, as his name imports) though less
and lower, by Gods assistance easily overcame them. If any demand, How came
Anakims hither, seeing Hebron so lately was smitten by Joshua? A learned
Bon^rerius in locum Ioshu^.
author answers, that it is probable, whilst Joshua afterward was employed in
the north in conquering the Josh. 11. 7.
Canaanites, some remnant of the Anakims which escaped his hand, did in his
absence return, possess Hebron, and put Caleb to a new task of a second
subduing them.

22. David afterward made Hebron the Metropolis of this kingdom (as being the
most eminent City of his own Tribe of Judah) and reigned almost seven years
therein. Ioabs cruel killing of Abner.
In the third year of his reign Abner repaired hither, with full intent to
reduce all Israel to his obedience, had not Ioabs sudden murdering him
frustrated his design. Probably some mixture of jealousy might put Ioab on
this foul action, fearing to be outed of his office, that if Abner made David
King, David would make Abner General over all Israel. Certainly, revenge of
his brother Asahels blood prompted him thereunto. Ioab sending messengers to
fetch Abner back from the well of Siriah, slew him treacherously as he was
entering the 2 Samuel 3. 27.
gates of Hebron.

23. Forget we not that Hebron, Aggravation of Ioabs murder.
in the gate whereof Ioab so basely and barbarously murdered him, was a City of
Refuge, Josh. 30. 7.
appointed by God for the saving of such, as had killed one unawares. Did not
Ioab therefore, in such a place acting wilful murder, in an high hand rely on
his own greatness to bear him out in so bloody a deed, as if he neither feared
the justice of man, nor needed the mercy of God? No wonder then, if many years
after he 1 King. 2. 31.
flying to the horns of the Altar, was denied the protection of that place, who
formerly so cruelly, despightfully, and presumptuously had defiled the City of
Refuge with innocent blood.

24. Thus died Abner, very loyal to Saul, Abner and Ishbosheth buried to ^
either.
whilst Saul was living, and too loving to his 2 Samuel 3. 7.
concubine, when he was dead. Never man was killed more cowardly, or buried
more honorably: David himself Ibid. v. 31.
following the b^ere, weeping as chief mourner at his funeral. In the same
sepulcher the 2 Samuel 4. 12.
head of Ishbosheth was afterward interred. Though some jars were betwixt them
whilst living, their dust well agreed in the same grave. Nor durst the ashes
of Ishbosheth cross the others, who when alive (though checked, and chidden by
him) 2 Samuel 3. 11.
could not answer Abner a word again, because he feared him. As for the bodies
of Baanah and Rechab the murderers of Ishbosheth, they had, by order from
David, their hands and feet cut off, and they hanged up over the 2 Samuel 4. 12.
pool in Hebron.

25. After the death of Ishbosheth, Numbers repairing to David in Hebron.
all Israel repaired to Hebron to make David their King, whose several numbers
deserve our observation. 1 Out of 1 Chr. 12. 24.
Judah six thousand, and eight hundred. 2 Simeon, seven thousand and one
hundred. 3 Levi, eight thousand and three hundred twenty two. 4 Benjamin, three
thousand. 5 Ephraim, twenty thousand and eight hundred. 6 Half Tribe of
Manasseh on this side Jordan, eighteen thousand. 7 Issachar, two hundred
officers, and all their brethren at there commandment. 8 Zebulun, fifty
thousand. 9 Naphtali, thirty seven ^housand, besides a thousand Captains. 10
Dan, twenty eight thousand and six hundred. 11 (...), forty thousand. 12
Reuben, G^d, and Manass^h beyond Jordan, an hundred and twenty thousand.
Behold here those Tribes which lived farthest from Hebron, appearing in the
highest equipage; as if they endeavoring to be revenged on the distance of
their habitation, purposely advanced with the greatest number. Here it will be
enquired, why Judah largest in dominion, next in position, nearest in relation,
(as David's native Tribe) made here the slenderest appearance of all the rest,
Benjamin alone excepted; the thinness of whose numbers are excused in the text,
because Ibid. v. 29.
hitherto the greatest part of them kept the ward of the house of Saul. What!
does it fare with Princes, as with Prophets, that they are not Mat. 13. 57.
without honor save in their own Country, and in their own house, that David
found fewest attendants from his own Tribe? Oh no, he was abundantly loved, and
honored therein. But, Tostatus answers 1 David's daily attendance (both civil
in his Court, and military in his camp, and garrison) hitherto chiefly
consisted of the Tribe of Judah. 2 The rest of Judah remained at home, to make
So says the text (1 Chr. 12. 39.) For their brethren (meaning Judah) had
prepared for them.
provision, and give entertainment to this confluence of people from all parts.
Add hereunto 1 Six thousand eight hundred were a sufficient representation of
Judah, and more not only needless, but burdensome for the present, to pester
Hebron too populous already. The rest keeping home, and living hard by, were
ready (no doubt) on competent warning, to come quickly, if need required, or
David commanded their attendance. 2 Iudahs main work was done two years before,
when David was solemnly made their King. And they now, rather spectators, then
actors at his second Coronation over all Israel.
Now no less politic then thrifty were the other Tribes in bringing their
Ibid. v. 40.
victuals along with them, lest otherwise they should be held as occasioners
of scarcity in Judah, and enhauncers of the prices of provisions.

26. Afterward Absalom, Absalom repaireth to Hebron.
when he intended a rebellion against his Father, chose Hebron as the fittest
City, from whence he meant to mount into the Throne. Hither he came under
pretense to do sacrifice, 2 Samuel 15. 1.
with his chariots, and horses, and fifty men running before him: but, which
was most to be pitied, he brought with him from Jerusalem Ibid. v. 11.
two hundred men, which were (as one may say) Loyal traitors, coming in the
simplicity of their hearts, and merely drawn-in to treasonable practices. But
Hebron proved not a place so succesfull to Absalom the son, as formerly
fortunate to David his father. This Traitors sovereignty soon expired, when
forsaken of God, Man, and Beast (his own Mule going away from him) he was slain
of Ioab, as In our description of Gad. Debir a Canaanitish University.
formerly related.

27. Some ten miles south of Hebron lay Debir, anciently called Kiriah-Sepher
Judge. 1. 11.
, the City of a book, conceived a Canaanitish University. And although the
Giant Anakims dwelling hereabouts, may be presumed but little bookish, yet
civilized Countries, in all ages, have allowed such places for the education of
youth, who are better unborn, then unbred. Caleb proffered Number. 1. 12.
Acsah his daughter in marriage to any one that should conquer this City, which
was accordingly performed by Othniel his younger brothers son, and first Judge
of Israel. What, were not the glory of God, and good of his Country, enough to
set an edge on his valor, but the promise of a wife needed also to whet his
resolution? No doubt the scales of his resolution went down formerly on the
right side, before this match was cast in as overweight. It is no unlawful
Bigamy of the soul, when wedded to Gods glory in the first place, to embrace
also therewith the Heb. 11. 26.
recompense of reward: and grand is the difference betwixt an John 10. 13.
hireling whose mind is merely mercenary, and him that works for his hire;
with Othniel taking it (not as the main motive, much less as the end, but)
only as a welcome encouragement of his undertakings.

28. Thus all parties were pleased; The south of Judah called Caleb.
Israel recovered Debir, Othniel got Acsah to wife, she gained a blessing from
her Father, that blessing brought the possession of the upper, and nether
springs along with it. Know also, in after ages the south part of Judah was
called Caleb, probably from the large inheritance, Caleb obtained in these
parts, and puissance of his posterity therein. Thus the Egyptian giving an
account of the passages of the army of the Amalekites, confesses they had been
roving upon the coast that belonged to Judah, and upon the south of 1 Samuel 30.
14
Caleb.

29. Libnah is the third in honor, Libnah a rebellious city.
of the nine royal Cities in the days of Joshua, assigned afterward for the
Priests habitation. Long it continued loyal to the Crown of Judah, until in
the days of Iehoram (that ungodly, unmercifull, unsuccesfull, unbeloved,
unlamented King) Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, unto this day,
then Libnah 2 King. 8. 22.
revolted at the same time. Was it casualty, or confederacy (by mutual
intelligence) that both their defections bare the same date? Surely, breach of
faith is a catching disease, yea infectious from one to another. But, how could
the inhabitants of Libnah, being Priests, (whose best livelihood depended on
their personal officiating in the Temple at Jerusalem) subsist, being cut off
from their service, and the salary thereof? Yea, did they not thereby
necessarily apostate from their religion to God, desert his Temple and their
own profession? Except any will say (easier spoken, then proved) that at this
present, not the Priests, but some other persons were possessours of Libnah. We
find not this City afterward reduced to the Kings of Judah, whereupon some Dr
Heylyn Microc. in Palest. p. 571. Libnah how it might subsist a free State.
conceive, that henceforward it stood on its own bottom, as an absolute
Commonwealth.

30. If any object it impossible, that Libnah so small a City, should subsist
here as a free State against all the powers of the Kings of Judah; let such
look on little Lucca, in Italy, and less Geneva, in France, defended by their
foes from their foes; environed with enemies on all sides, yet so, that rather
then any one shall subdue them, all the rest will assist them. Such probably,
was the position, and politic State-poizing of Libnah, seated in the vicinity
of the Kings of Judah, Israel, and the Philistines, (not to say, Egypt, though
far off, might come in as a protector thereof) that it might make a Cordial
of a self-subsistance, from the Antidotes of its enemies. Afterward we find 2
King. 19 8.
Sennacherib fighting against Libnah (whence he sent a railing message to
Hezekiah) but read nothing of the taking thereof; yea, probably here the 2
King. 19. 35.
Angel by night did that memorable excution, slaying an hundred fourscore and
five thousand of his numerous army.

31. Lachish must not be forgotten, Lachish an Idolatrous one.
whose Josh. 12. 11.
King was destroyed by Joshua. King Amaziah conspired against by his subjects
in Jerusalem, fled hither in vain; for, They sent after him to Lachish, and
slew him 2 Kin. 14. 19.
there. It was a leading City in Idolatry, infected from Israel, and infecting
of Judah. Micah 1. 1.
Micah prophesied in particular against this City, warning it to prepare for
speedy captivity from its enemies. Mic.1. 13.
O thou inhabitant of Lachish, bind the charet to the swift beast; she is the
beginning of the sin to the daughter of Zion: for the transgressions of Israel
were found in thee. And although we find not Lachish taken by Sennacherib who
Isa. 37. 8.
warred against it, yet it escaped not the fury of Nebuchadnezzar, though one
of the Ier. 34. 7.
last Cities by him subdued.

32. But Ad^llam, Adullam David's retra^^ing.
another regal City in Judah, was more ancient; where Genesis 38. 1.
Hirah, Judah's fast friend, dwelt, though employed by him but as a pandar post
factum, to carry Tamar the hire of her whoredom. In a cave hereabouts repaired
to 1 Samuel 22. ^.
David, every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and
every one that was discontented, and he became a Captain over them. Was this
well done of him to be Protector General of Outlaws, thereby defying justice,
defrauding creditours, defeating Gods command, which provided, that the deb^er,
if not solveable, should be Exodus
sold for satisfaction? Alas, his need is all that can be alleged in his
excuse. Sure I am David Psalm. 101. ad Sinem.
promised (when in power to make his own choice) that his household, or Court,
should consist of persons better qualified. However these men freely resorting
to him, were better then those hired by Abimelech, Judge. 9. 4.
vain and light persons, and as far to be preferred before them as want is more
excusable then wickedness. Yea, we may charitably believe David's consorts
impoverisht not by their own carelessness, but their creditors cruelty.

33. As for Gedar it has formerly been described in Simeon, Baal-Hanan
inverted Hannibal.
only we will add, that 1 Chr. 27. 28.
Baal-hanan the Gederite was of this place, David's Overseer over the Olive
trees, and Sycamore trees in the low plain. This name of Baal-hanan inverted is
the same with Hannibal that great General of the Carthaginians. See here the
affinity of the Hebrew, with the Phoenician, or Carthaginian tongue. Wonder not
that Baal-hanan, or Hannibal was a fashionable name for potent persons in these
parts, (we find also a King of Edom Genesis 36. 38.
so called) seeing it signifies a Lord in grace, or, favor; and our Savior
has told us, such as exercise authority over others are called Luke 22. 25.
Gracious Lords. As for I^rmuth, Eglon, and Arad, we read nothing of them
remarkable, since their several Kings were destroyed by Joshua. Of Hepher we
shall speak more properly in the close of this Description.

And now, Carmel Naboths Manor.
what a fall must our Description have, from the Cities of Kings, to the Manor
of a clown; the fruitful Carmell not far from the Dead-sea? Here folly, and
wisdom dwelt under the same roof, sat at the same table, slept in the same
bed, Nabal and Abigail. Are matches made in heaven, and was Abigail so ill
beloved there, to be condemned to such a choice? Surely, God saw it most for
his own glory and her good, for the emprovement of her patience. This Nabal
proved himself a perfect Miser, both by his niggardliness to David, and
prodigality of the 1 Samuel 25. 36.
King-like dinner he made to his shepherds. But both he and his family had
been utterly destroyed by David, had not the discreet mediation of Abigail been
seasonably interposed.

35. After his gluttonous supper Abigail next morning serves Nabal with a
thrifty breakfast, The death of Nabal.
telling him of the great danger he so narrowly had escaped. Hereupon Ibid. v.
37.
his heart dyed within him. Thus some drunkards have been said to have swooned
when sober, at the serious review of such perils they so nearly escaped in the
fits of their distemper. Probably fear increased his sadness, suspecting to
fall into a relapse of David's disfavour, and that his anger might revert to
give him another visit hereafter. Thus the wrath Prove. 19. 12.
of a King (though but in reversion) is as the roaring of a Lion. Yea, Nabal
became as a stone, and no wonder, being little better then a stock before, such
his senseless stupidity. But, though he was a churl in his miserable living, he
was bountiful in his seasonable dying, freeing Abigail from an unequal yoke,
and fitting her with an husband better suiting with her deserts, even David
himself.

36. But, Giloh the po^^ession of Ahithophel.
Carmel had not such a fool, but that 2 Samuel 15. 12.
Giloh hard by had as wise a man for the owner thereof, even oraculous
Ahithophel. This was he that gave the wholesomest, but Hushai the toothsomest
counsel to Absalom, best pleasing the palate of a vainglorious traitor.
Ahithophel advised as a cruel hunter, that David should presently be 2 Samuel 17.
2.
pursued, not giving him any breath, but either running him down outright, or
killing him in the form, where they should find him: Hushai Ibid. v. 11.
counseled to prolong the sport for their greater pleasure; and, seeing all
the game was surely in their own hand, to give David the larger law, to shift
away a while for himself, that so he might be put to death in the greater
state, and with more ceremonious magnificence. Ahithophel seeing his counsel
neglected at Court, and foreseeing (in the causes) Absaloms ruin, and David's
return, to prevent farther shame, and save the executioner the pains, fairly
went home, set his house in order, and Ibid. v. 23.
hanged himself.

37. Tekoah is not far off, Tekoah the birth place of Amos.
where a wise woman once lived (the subtilest subtilest 2 Samuel 14. 2.
manager of Ioabs design to David, for the bringing back of Absalom) and a
wiser man Amos. ^. 1.
Amos, called from an heardsman, and a gatherer of wild figs to be a Prophet.
Near Tekoah Iehosaphat obtained a memorable victory against the children of
Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, though at the first hearing of their coming,
Iehosaphat is said to have been 2 Chr. 10. 2.
afraid. Did he not discover much cowardice herein, considering what
multitudes of men Iehosaphat at that time did command? Namely, 1 Under 2 Chr.
17. 14.
Adnah the chief of Judah three hundred thousand mighty men of valor. 2 Next
to him Ibid. v. 15.
Iehohanan captain over two hundred and fourscore thousand. 3 Next him Ibid. v.
16.
Amaziah with two hundred thousand mighty men of valor. 4 And of Benjamin
Ibid. v. 17.
Eliada with two hundred thousand armed with bow and shield. 5 Next him Ibid.
v. 18.
Iehoshabad with an hundred and fourscore thousand ready prepared for the war.
What need then Iehosaphat fear (except as in Gideons case suspecting he had
too Judge. 7. 2.
many for God to give victory by) having an Army (if well disciplined with
advantage of time and place) able to to encounter all mankind, especially on
the defensive side, to make good their own Country against any invasion?

38. It is answered, Why Iehosaphat might justly fear.
the suddenness of the news might add much to his fright, that an enemy was
come into the bowels of his Country 2 Chr. 20. 2.
[ Behold they be in Hazeron-Tamar, which is Engedi] before the first
intelligence was brought thereof. Secondly, Iehosaphat feared not so much his
foes, as his faults, guilty to himself of great offenses, (good men the less
sinful; the more sensible thereof) and chiefly of his matching at home, and
marching abroad with the Idolatrous family of Ahab. Lastly, those vast numbers
of his soldiers lately specified, were not all at any Sir Walter Rayleigh li.
2. part ^. pa. 440.
one time, but severally, and successively, during the five and twenty years of
Iehosaphat his reign. Wherefore those words in the list of Iehosaphat's
Generals thrice repeated, Next him, Next him, Next him, imply not a gradation
in honor, as if all of them, though subordinately, were extant together, but
import a succession of time, the latter entering with his men on the office of
a General, after the displacing, or death of the former.

39. However, Iehosaphats admirable victory.
Iehosaphat puts his people into a penitent posture, falling to fasting and
prayer, and obtains a memorable conquest, which was purely heavens Donative,
Sine cura, without man's care, cost, or charge to atchieve it. Prince and people
stand still, look on, believe God, sing Psalms, accounting their conquest
gotten, because promised by the Prophet. Mean time, their enemies amazed with 2
Chr. 20. 22.
ambushments of Gods setting, fall foul one on another, till Moab, and Ammon
had destroyed, first the Edomites, then themselves. Three days are the men of
Judah employed in gathering the spoil, and so return to Jerusalem with wealth
in their hands, joy in their hearts, music in their mouths, having left behind
them the name of Ibid. v. 26.
Berachah, or blessing, imposed on the place, where this celestial victory was
bestowed upon them.

40. But now it is high time that we enter on the several Stages and removalls
of David in or near this Tribe, David's several removals.
after that he (having formerly suffered much from Saul as a private person)
began to Prince it, and to stand on his guard. The text says he and his men
went 1 Samuel 23. 13
wheresoever they could go. David herein being like the Son and Lord of David,
who Luke 9. 58.
had not where to lay his head. Indeed David confesses that God made the stony
rocks for the Psalm. 104. 18.
Conies, but yet he himself was glad to be their In-mate, and share with them
in their 1 Samuel 23. 25.
habitations; and yet his soul was never so discomposed in any hole or cave,
but that in the darkest of them he could see to make Psalms, and praise his
Maker. No place came amiss to his pious soul, above or under ground, all alike
to him to serve his God therein. Now seeing it is David's expression of himself,
that he was hunted as a 1 Samuel 26. 20.
Partridge on the mountains: Partridge, a bird innocent whose fine flesh is its
greatest guilt, and importent, (not armed with beak or talons) whose chief
might consists in the flight thereof: Now whilst Saul followed him, we will
follow David's Metaphore in our ensuing description. But be it premised, that
Saul was no fair Faulconer, who more desiring the prey then the sport, came
with his nets and setting dogs, with full intent to kill David wherever he
might catch him.

41. We begin at the cave of Adullam (which we may call his nest) wherein he
composed the fifty seventh, From Adullam to Mizpah.
and the hundredth forty second Psalm. Hence he made wing, taking a long and
strong flight to Mizpah in the land of Moab. Here the Partridge showed much of
the Stork in him, feeding his parents, and taking order with the King of Moab
for the maintenance of his 1 Samuel 22. 3.
Father and mother.

42. Hence (by the advice of the Prophet 1 Samuel 22. 5.
Gad, To Keilah.
not to trust himself again in the cave of Adullam) by the forest of Ibid.
Hareth to the City of Keilah. The Inhabitants whereof David had lately obliged
to himself, by saving them from the Philistines, notwithstanding which favor,
God assured him of their intentions to 1 Samuel 23. 12.
betray him to Saul. If a skillful Gardener can in the depth of winter, by
beholding the bare root, and knowing the kind thereof, foretell when and what
flowers the same will bring forth many months after, well may the God of
heaven, the searcher of hearts, know men's Psalm. 139. 2.
thoughts afar off, and infallibly conclude what they will be, before they have
any being. Base Keilites, who had rather pick thanks with Saul, then pay thanks
to David to whom they were due! Thus deliver an ungrateful man from a danger,
and he will be the first to bring you into the same condition. This sad
occasion did spring the Partridge hence.

43. To Hachilah hill in a wood in the wilderness of Ziph, To Hachilah hill.
south of Iesimon. 1 Samuel 23. 16.
Here Jonathan came and renewed his amity with David. Behold how they two is
embracing one another, (Reader my phrase trespasseth on the rules of Grammar,
no^ of friendship) and made a Covenant before the Lord Nor was it a small
comfort to David, (though Saul, and Doeg, and Keilites, and Ziphites were
against him) that, besides his own innocence, he had the Prince, the Priest,
and the Prophet, Jonathan, Abiathar, and Gad, good men's prayers, and Gods
providence on his side. Here the Ziphites, Saul's setters, having winded David;
Saul; to catch him, comes with his net, but either made too much noise, or too
little speed, for before he came thither the Partridge was flown.

44. To the wilderness of Maon. To the rock of Division.
Here only a mountain was betwixt David and Saul, and that not long likely to
keep them asunder, seeing Saul's men, being many in number, began to compass
David round about. But seasonable ill news was brought that the 1 Samuel 23. 27
Philistines had invaded the land, which made Saul turn his forces another way
against a foreign foe. Commendable his ingenuity, that he preferred rather to
oppose an enemy of another Religion, then to dispatch a domestic adversary,
whom he now had at advantage. However judicious eyes behold not this as an act
of Saul's pity, but Gods providence: hereupon David called the place
Sela-hammahlekoth, or the rock of Division.

45. Hence he fled to the holds at Engedi: To the cave in Engedi.
Here he had Saul in a cave, and was seemingly courted by heaven, certainly
urged by 1 Samuel 24. 4.
men to destroy him, and yet he refused. O why is a golden opportunity put into
a leaden hand, which wants activity to make use of it? What hard heart could
have thrust away so fair an advantage? But oh, (though all things else were
here) one thing was wanting, a Lawful command. A Crown is over bought which
costs a sin. David durst not kill him, only he cut off the skirt of his
garment, and withal felt a greater gash in his 1 Samuel 24. 5.
conscience, then he made in Saul's clothes, for being too bold with Gods
Anointed. This courtesy of David in sparing his life, made Saul half a
convert, drawing 1 Samuel 24. 16.
tears from his eyes, fair words from his mouth, but what intentions from his
heart, He only knows, that knew the secrets thereof. It is suspicious that
Saul's truth therein was not much, because David's trust therein was none at all;
who (notwithstanding the Court-holy-water of Saul's tears) gat him and his men
again up into the 1 Samuel 24. 22.
hold.

46. Hence David took a voluntary flight unto Carmel. To Carmel.
Here the Partridge was like to turn Hawk, and become a Bird of prey, to kill
all the the innocent family of 1 Samuel 25. 22.
Nabal, (as we have already observed) had not that God who formerly protected
him from Saul's, here preserved him from his own sword, and from 1 Samuel 25. 33.
avenging himself with his own hand.

47. Hence he fled back again to Hachilah hill, Again to Hachilah-hill.
which is before Iesimon. Here the Ziphites bring Saul second tidings of his
being there. So boundless was the stock of their malice, no danger of breaking,
who though they failed at their first return, would adventure again. Only
their malice did this good, that it gave David the occasion to make the fifty
fourth Psalm. Here he had Saul at a second advantage, finding him with Abner
and his men round about him fast 1 Samuel 26. 7.
asleep, even as still as the Spear and Cruse of water that stood at his head.
These David took away, but with intent truly to restore them after he had kept
them a while (...) monuments of his own integrity. Hereupon Saul* a second
Convert, clears David, charge himself, prays for pardon, and promises
amendment, whilst David having had experience of his former falsehood, gives
him the hearing, not the believing. For

48. Hence he flew to Gath in the land of the Philistines, To Ziglag.
and 1 Samuel 27. 4.
Saul sought no more again for him, leaving off his pursuit now the Partridge
had took Covert in an enemies Country; whence he removed to Ziglag, and thence
made many incursions against the 1 Samuel 27. 8.
Geshurites, Gezrites, and Amalekites* but withal telling King Achish that he
matched the clean contrary way against Judah and the friends thereof. Here the
Partridge had in him too much of the Lapwing, which by its hypocritical
fluttering pretends its nest far distant from the true place thereof. Such
dissimulation in David cannot be excused, must not be imitated. From Ziglag he
marched along with Achish King of Gath to Aphek in the Tribe of Issachar, where
he was dismissed and 1 Samuel 29. 3.
cashiered by the Philistines from any further service. Returning home he found
Ziglag his nest spoiled, yea all his Covie therein (wives and children) catched
in a snare, as has formerly been described in the Tribe of Simeon. After the
recovery of his losses, from Ziglag

49. He flew to Hebron* Lastly to Hebr^^.
Here the Partridge turned Eagle, being solemnly made Sovereign first of Judah,
then of all Israel. And now being quietly settled in his Throne, he may joyfully
sing, Many are the afflictions of the Psalm. 34. 19.
righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all.

50. But besides these eminent and noted Gests of David he had many more which
were obscure and intermediate, David's other haunting places.
as appears by the list of the places 1 Samuel 30. 31.
where he haunted, and to whom he sent part of his spoils taken from the
Amalekites, viz. 1 Bethel in Benjamin. 2 South Ramoth in Simeon. 3 Iattir in
Judah a Levites City. 4 Aroer in the tribe of Gad. 5 Possibly the same with
Si^ma in the tribe of Reuben.
Siphmoth. 6 Eshtemoa a Levites City in Judah. 7 Rachal. 8 Cities of the
Ierahmeelites, ( descended from Iarahmeel an 1 Chr. 2. 26.
eminent man in Judah.) 9 Cities of the Kenites. 10 Hormah in Simeon. 11
Chorashan in Simeon. in Judah. 12 Athach. 13 Hebron, eminent in Judah.
As for Siphmoth, Rachal, and Athach, because they appear not again in
Scripture, their position is unknown, but may be presumed in or near the Tribe
of Judah. The best is, though our tracing of David's travels may be imperfect,
and we fail in the reckoning thereof, yet Gods Arithmetic is exact, and what
is defective in our's, is supplied in his observations: Psalm. 56. 8.
Thou tellest my wanderings, put my tears in thy bottle, are they not written
in thy book?

51. Now besides the Cities mentioned in our description* The total sum of
Judah's Cities.
many more remain which were obscure, without any memorable act achieved in
them: and are thus reckoned up in Joshua. 1 Toward the coast of Edom
southward, Josh. 1^. 21.
twenty nine. 2 In the vale, Josh. 15. 36.
Fourteen in the first* Ibid. v. 41.
Sixteen in the second, Ibid. v. 44.
Nine in the third, Catalogue.

3 On the Sea two, Ibid. 46.
Ekron and Ashdod. 4 In the mountains, Ibid. 51.
Eleven in the first, Ibid. 54.
Nine in the second, Verse. 57.
Ten in the third, Verse. 59.
Six in the fourth, Catalogue.

5 Two by themselves, Kiriath-Baal and Rabbah. 6 In the wilderness, Six.
In all an hundred and fourteen.

So that the Tribe of Judah alone had more Cities then all the Island of Crete,
which had but just an hundred, and therefore called Hecatompolis. But many of
these Cities were small, and a good share of them was given to the Tribes of
Dan and Simeon, as formerly has been observed. But amongst such as remained to
Judah let not Josh. 15. 44.
Maresha be forgotten, (in the north-west part of this Tribe) both because
thereby, in the valley of Zephathah, Asa conquered 2 Chr. 14. 9.
Zerah the Ethiopian, whose army consisted of more then a million of men, and
because the Prophet Micah 1. 1.
Micah was born therein.

52. In Saint Hieromes time somewhere in Judah flourished a fair City called
Eleutheropolis: Eleutheropolis uncertain in situation.
from which that In his book de loci^ H^braicis.
Father measures the distance of most southern places in Palestine; as he
computeth the northern from Legion a City in Galilee. But (the more the pity)
that Father has not acquainted us with the exact location of either of these
two places. Whilst Adrichomius and others condemn Saint Hieromes carelessness
herein, it better befits us to condole our own unhappiness, who cannot read the
accurate distance of places in his book of that subject, because though he have
lent us his Characters, he has not left us the true Key thereof.

53. The Tribe of Judah had no great river therein, Rivolets in Judah.
saving a little piece of gasping Jordan now ready to expire in the dead-sea;
but with rivolets it was sufficiently stored, lending the brooks of Sorek and
Bez^r to Dan and Simeon; borrowing Kedron from Benjamin, whence it fetches its
fountain* and keeping the brook before the wilderness of 2 Chr. 20. 16.
Ieruel wholly for its own use, as rising, running, and falling entirely in
this Tribe. Nor must that brook be forgotten, which I may call the brook of
David, because being to encounter Goliath, he took thence 1 Samuel 17. 4^.
five smooth stones (store is no sore, especially not being sure, but his first
might fail) and furnished his scrip therewith.

54. This was that Goliath whose strength was equal to his stature, Bit^ell
betwixt David and Goliath.
his arms suitable to his strength, but his Pride above all. Betwixt him and
David first passed a tongue-combate. The one discharging ostentation, and
presumption, which the other as quickly returned with faith and confidence in
Gods promises. Come they then to encounter: see the lower man had the longer
arm, who with his sling could reach death at distance to his adversary. The
beaver of Goliahs helmet was open: not that he thought his brazen brow
sufficiently armed with its own impudence, but either that he might see,
breath, and boast the more freely, or because he disdained to buckle himself
against so unequal a match: The stone from David's sling flies directly to his
forehead, whereby the Giant is mortally wounded, and notwithstanding his spear
was as great as a 1 Samuel 17. 7.
weavers beam, his life was swifter then a Job. 7. 6.
weavers shuttle; so soon passed it away and he was gone, David cutting off his
head with his own sword.

55. Many were the wildernesses in this Tribe, Many wildernesses in Judah.
as those of Josh. 15. 1.
Zin, 1 Samuel 23. 14.
Ziph, 1 Samuel 23. 24.
Maon, 1 Samuel 24. 1.
Engedi, 2 Chr. 20. 16.
Ieruel, Ibid. v. 20.
Tekoa, and Judge. 1. 16.
Judah lying south of Arad. Now as once it was the question of the Disciples to
our Savior, From Mark. 8. 4.
whence can a man satisfy these men with bread here in the wilderness? So here
it may materially be demanded, Where did the men of Judah find food to sustain
themselves, whose country seems a heap of wildernesses cast together? Here we
must know that the whole land of Palestine was dressed and kept like a garden
plot, and enclosed into Olive-yards, Vine-yards, and arable fields, save some
extravagant places which lay common, where wild beasts did harbor in the
woods, commonly called Wildernesses. Such notwithstanding were full of
fruitful Joel 1. 19.
pastures, and had fair Josh. 15. 61.
towns, though more thinly inhabited then other parts of the Country; so that
this Tribe was more frighted then hurt with the multitude of Wildernesses
therein.

56. Paramount over them all was The wilderness, John Baptist preaching in the
wilderness.
having six Cities therein, and was part of the Mark 3. 1.
wilderness of Judea, (extending also into Benjamin) wherein John the Baptist
preached: feeding here on Locusts (flying insects, Levit. 11. 22.
whereof four kinds were clean, and permitted the Jews to eat) and wild
honey. Either such as fell down in 1 Samuel 14. 26.
dews from heaven, or was made by wild Bees, not civilized in hives, but
nesting on the ground or in hollow trees. In a word, he was content with such
course fare as the Country afforded, his rough clothes being suited to his
homely diet, and both to his hard doctrine of Repentance. Hereupon scandalous
tongues condemned him for having a Mat. 11. 18.
Devil, as afterward they belyed our Savior (using a more liberal diet) to
be a Winebibber, so impossible it is to please affected frowardness either full
or fasting.

57. Some make John Baptist the first founder of Eremites. Nothing befriendeth
the Eremites.
But how little his precedent befriendeth their practice, who, not out of any
impulsion, but mere election, delight to dwell in deserts, will appear by the
ensuing Parallel. He,
1 By immediate command from God to fulfill the prophecy of Isa. 40, 3.
Isaiah. 2 Went into a wilderness; a place more thinly peopled then the rest of
the land. 3 Where he daily busied himself with preaching to multitudes of
people repairing unto him. 4 And at last did end his life in a place of greater
concourse, even the Mark 6. 20.
Court of King Herod himself.
They,
1 By dictates of their own fancy, following the principles of will worship. 2
Go into a wilderness indeed, conversing with solitariness, and shunning all
society. 3 Where they bury themselves alive in laziness with the talents God
has bestowed on them. 4 And bind themselves with a vow to live and dye in
that solitary condition.
Behold here the large difference betwixt him and monking Eremites. Who, if men
of parts, ought to help others with their society; if of no parts, need to be
helped by the society of others. Yea whatsoever their endowments were, this
running into the wilderness was but a Bank-rupt trick, to defraud the Church
and Commonwealth their Creditours, to both which they stood bound by specialty
of Gods command to discharge all Civil and Christian relations to the utmost
proportions of their abilities. In a word, though we steadfastly believe, that
Iabal was the father of all such as dwell in tents, because the Scripture Genesis
4. 20.
affirms the same, yet for the reasons aforesaid, we utterly deny John
Baptist the founder and Author of all those which live wilfully in hills and
holes an eremiticall life.

58. The Son of Hese^ was Solomon's Purveyor in 1 King. 4. 10.
Aruboth, to him belonged Sochoth, Judah for the ma^n freed from Solomon's
Purveyours.
and all the land of Hepher. A land which lay, as we gather by other
proportions, in the north-west part of this Tribe. And indeed we find a King
of Hepher amongst those which Joshua Josh. 12. 17.
destroyed, but dare not confidently aver him to have been of the Tribe of
See more hereof in our objections against the tribe of Judah.
Judah. However, it appears that for the main, the whole body of the Tribe of
Judah (with Simeon lying therein) fell not under any of Solomon's
Purveyour-ships. The reason whereof, if inquired into, may perchance be reduced
into some of these considerations. 1 It was referred to defray extraordinaries,
on casual entertainments, and occasional solemnities; or 2 It was kept for
the expenses of the thirteenth, or intercalary month (the product of the
eleven supernumerary days) which commonly was every third year inserted into
the Hebrew Vide Kalendarium Hebrai cum Munsteri. page 62.
Calendar. 3 Judah might by special indulgence be exempted from such
taxations; either because Jerusalem, the royal City, was principally seated
therein; and therefore to prevent scarcity of victuals in so populous a place,
the Court-purveyours went further off, that the City might be better provided;
or, because Solomon did ease, and favor that Tribe, whence he himself was
extracted.
This very probably was some cause, why, when the other ten Tribes, grinded
with grievous oppressions, deserted the house of David, Judah alone, as having
formerly tasted of his Fathers favor, entirely clave to Rehoboam.

59. The arms of Judah are Gules, a Lion couchant Or, The arms of Judah.
according to Jacobs prediction, Judah he stooped down, he couched as a Genesis
49. 9.
Lion, and as an old Lion, who shall rouse him up? This is a posture which that
princely beast is pleased to accept for his own ease: otherwise no chastisement
shall impose it on him, no force but his own free pleasure can make him to
crouch. The Analogy is obvious to every eye, the Lion being the Prove. 30. 30.
strongest amongst beasts, which turns not away for any. As Judah was the
chief of Tribes for number, strength and largeness of possessions, and the
Tribe of Chiefes, so many Kings, yea Christ himself according to the flesh
deriving his extraction from the same.

Here the Map of the Land of Moriah is to be inserted.
THE LAND OF MORIAH. CHAP. 14.
1. BEcause the Country about Jerusalem is very fruitful of observable
places, The adjacent parts to Jerusalem.
it is therefore here presented in an entire Map. Nor do we meet with a fitter,
and more adequate name to express the same, then to style it The land of
Moriah, as it is named in Scripture: Genesis 22. 2.
Herein we shall only insist on signal places of certain truth; otherwise the
work would be almost infinite: for what is said of the people of Israel, Exodus
23 26.
There shall not one be barren amongst them, is true of every petty place near
Jerusalem, not a Hill, Hole, Stick, Stone, Cave, Grave, but is pregnant with
some History, and vulgar belief is the Midwife to deliver it; we will
therefore confine our selves to Scripture alone in our following description.

2. We begin with the Brook of Kidron: The brook Kidron.
which we may call the Brook of Reformation; for often the current thereof
carried away the Relics of Idolatry; once when the Idol of his grandmother
Maachah was by King Asa 1 King. 15. 13 2 Chr. 30. 14.
burnt by the banks thereof; Again, when 2 King. 23. 6.
in Hezekiahs time the people (no doubt by his command) threw the Idolatrous
Altars therein. Thirdly, when the dust of the Altars erected by King Manasses,
was by Josiah, cast into the channel of 2 King. 23. 12
Kidron. I dare boldly say that the water of this brook, was no whit the less
the sweet in taste, or clear in color for washing away these monuments of
superstition. However this Kidron may be ranked amongst those Rivolets whereof
Job 6. 15.
Job speaks, My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook and as a stream of
brooks which passes away; not that the water only slideth away, other
succeeding in the room thereof (which is common to the greatest channels) but
this very Brook it self slides away in the Summer and is dried up, as having no
fountain to feed it, but the waters running down from Mount Olivet; Thus Kidron
is the too lively emblem of our ^ouls, which having no natural spring of
goodness in themselves, flow no longer then they are watered from above, with
the infusion of celestial Grace.

3. This Brook runs through the Valley of Iehosaphat, The valley of Iehosaphat.
being a hollow dale interposed betwixt Jerusalem and Mount Olivet, but why so
named I find no satisfactory reason alleged; for I cannot agree to what
generally is reported, that in this place Iehosaphat got his miraculous victory
over the 2 Chr. 20. 20.
Edomites, Moabites and Ammonites: because on serious perusal of the text,
that battle appears fought far off in the wilderness of Tekoah. Many are of
opinion, that as Mount Olivet shall be the Tribunal, erected for the Judge; so
this Vale of Iehosaphat shall be the Gaol and Bar where all offenders at the
last day shall be arraigned, founding their conceit partly on the words of the
Prophet Joel 3. 2*
Joel, I will also gather all Nations, and bring them down into the valley of
Iehosaphat, and will plead with them there for my people; partly on the
expression of the Angels to the Disciples after Christ's ascension, Act. 1. 11.
that in the same manner he should return again. But these are too low,
carnal, and restrictive conceits of Gods glorious judicial proceedings* it
being improbable he would appoint the certain particular place, who in his
wisdom has caused the time to be concealed; yea if one day be as a thousand
years with God, why may not, according to the same proportion, the whole earth
be meant by the Valley of Iehosaphat? Wherefore waving curious inquiries about
the circumstances belonging only to the Judge to assign, let us carefully
provide our selves for those Assizes, the proper work for us to perform*

4. In this Vale of Iehosaphat, on the other side of Kidron stood the village
of Gethsemane, so called in Hebrew for the plenty of Oil, that there was
pressed out: But a far more precious liquor was once afforded in this place,
which in the Garden hard by, fell from our Saviors face in his Agony, Luke 22.
44.
Clods of sweat like blood: Surely the hea^ of the weather had no influence on
this his distemper: being the open air, in so cold a night, that the stout
servants of the high Priest, though housed in a Hall, found need of a fire to
warm themselves thereat. Joh. 18. 18.
It was not then without cause that the paschall Lamb was commanded to be
eaten, neither raw nor sodden with water, but roasted with fire, as Christ, the
tr^th^ of this Type, was at this time bathed in his own sweat. Here Christ
thrice conditionally begged, that his ^up might pass away, preferring three
several short prayers, before one entire continued petition; partly that in a
tripled suit his importunity might be more conspicuous: partly, to get breath,
and gain strength in the intervalls: and partly, in the same time to visit his
Disciples, being never so busy about himself, but he was still at leisure to
look how it fared with them.

5. Hither into this Garden Christ betrayed in this garden.
repaired Judas in the night time Ioh. 18. 3.
with Lanthornes and Torches, (no more light then needed in such a deed of
darkness, otherwise it had been superfluous to seek the Sun it self with a
Lanthorn) to betray our Savior; bringing with him a band of soldiers (too
many to attach Christ as mere man, too few to encounter him as God) from the
high Priest, gown-men, swordmen, young, old, Jew, Gentile, all contriving his
death, as all sorts and conditions of people were afterward to reap benefit
thereby: at the first all Ioh. 18. 6. Luke 22. 52.
fell flat down at the sound of his voice, demanding of them, whom seek ye? If
the report of a bare question gave such a blow, o had his mouth been charged
with a curse against them, what execution would it have done! Here Peter's wild
love almost had done our Savior that harm, which the malice of his enemies
might despair to effect, by making him guilty not only o^ the breach of
peace, but of a plain Riot, by that dangerous wound he gave unto Malchus*
whereby no doubt he had invited many swords about his own ears, had not the
miracle of Christ's Luke 22. 51.
quick cure restrained them* This was that Peter now so forward to draw his
weapon, from whom afterward a word could not be drawn in acknowledgement of his
Master; so unequally bea^s the pulse of blind zeal, either too fast, or not at
all.

6. From this Garden Kidron runs southward, and seems loath to The Rock of
offense.
behold on his western bank the hill before Jerusalem whereon Solomon befooled
in his old age with his wives, built high places for Chemosh and Molech, the
Idols of Moab 1 Kin. 11. 7. 5.
and Ammon; Could not Idolatry be content to whisper in a hole, but she must
hollow on a hill, and with a brazen brow out face the Temple, yea in a manner
challenge, and defy it, to try which of them had the truest worship therein?
Exodus 20.
Thou shall have no other Gods before me, or, in my sight, is the first
commandment. Now, though all places are in the sight of an omniscient Deity,
yet this Idolatry was done in the presence, of the presence of God, who more
immediately and particularly is said to dwell in his Temple: Alas! what an
eye-fore were these high places to all the Godly in Jerusalem? It spoiled the
east and best prospect of all the windows in the City, for none could see the
rising of the Sun, but withal must behold the rising of Idolatry. Adrichomius
tells us that the hill whereupon these Idols stood, was commonly called the
Romans 9. 33*
Rock of offense, which name the Scripture gives to our Savior himself, but in
different consideration: Christ was a Rock of Gods laying; this of man's making:
He a Rock of offense unjustly taken at him by the wicked; this too justly given
by it to the godly.

7. Kidron continues his course southward by the Vale of Saveh, Absaloms
pillar in the Kings dale.
or King Vale: happily so called from two Genesis 14. 17.
Kings meeting of Abraham in this place, namely Melchisedec, and the King of
Sodom; the former with a blessing, the latter with a request in his mouth: yea
let Abraham at this royal enterview pass for the third King, seeing it is more
honorable to make, then to be a King, who so freely here restored the subjects
to the King of Sodom. Many hundred years after in this vale Absalom then
issueless (as being before their birth, or rather after the untimely death of.
his children) erected a 2 Samuel 18. 16.
Pillar to perpetuate his memory. Pilgrims at this very day passing by the
place use every man to cast a stone upon it: and my request to the Reader is,
if he should ever go thither, that when he has first served himself, and
satisfied his own revenge* he would then be pleased to cast one stone more upon
that heap, in my name, to express my detestation of so damnable a Rebellion.

8. Hence the River Kidron turns his channel full east to find out his way
to the dead sea, The stone of Zoheleth.
and leaves at some distance on his northern side the stone 1 King. 1. 9.
Zoheleth, whereon Adonijah, who advanced himself to the kingdom, offered
sacrifices, while the people cried out, God save King Adonijah; but this echo
was quickly checked and countermanded with a louder and greater, show^ed fourth
from Mount Gihon, God save King Solomon. Wonder not that this latter noise was
heard hither, at six miles distance, much befriended in the far and speedy
conveyance thereof with a hollow Vale of Iehosaphat, reverberated with Mount
Olivet, and improved in the sound thereof by the advantage of the waters of
Kidron; besides it was mainly loud in it self, so that (though much of
Hyperbole must be allowed in the expression) the earth 1 King. 1. 40.
rent with the sound of it; worse was Adonijahs heart rent at the hearing
thereof, who now exchangeth his hopes of a Crown, for desire of Life, which he
requested and obtained by his submission to Solomon. So ended the short
government of Adonijah never sleeping in his reign, which began after the
rising, and ended before the setting of the Sun.

9. Thus taking our farewell of Kidron in this Map, Three tops on Mount Olivet.
we pass over the current thereof to Mount Olivet, on the eastern side, so
famous in Scripture, consisting of three eminent Tops. 1 The most Northern,
hereon the Cell of Saint Pelagia was built, leading there a solitary life some
hundred years after Christ: no doubt a devout woman, especially if her heart
was as holy as her house was high. 2 The middlemost, from which Christ made his
ascension to heaven, and after ages erected a fair Chapel in memorial
thereof. 3 The most Southern, whereon the villages of Bethany and Bethphage,
the house of Simon the Leper, the grave of beloved Lazarus, with the barren
figtree which Christ cursed.
All three overspread with Olive trees, (whence it has its name) and plenty
of Palms, of so quick growth, that those who cut down their Mat. 21. 8.
branches, when our Savior on an Asses Colt (which with her Colt was tied hard
by in the meeting of two ways) rode to Jerusalem, did no considerable trespass
to the owners of those trees, so speedily they sprouted again.

10. Over the southern part of Mount Olivet David fled from Absalom, David
flying from Absalom.
for perceiving that his son by State-felony had stolen away his peoples
hearts, he politickly resolved not to be pent in Jerusalem (where the landflood
of a popular mutiny, might presently drown him) but to retire to the uttermost
bounds of his kingdom, mean time giving his subjects leisure and liberty to
review what they had done, dislike what they reviewed, revoke what they
disliked; that so on second debates they might seriously undo, what on first
thoughts they had furiously attempted: knowing full well that Rebellion though
running so at hand is quickly tired, as having rotten lungs, whilst well
breathed Loyalty is best at a long course. As David was flying this way, the
Priests proffered their service to carry the 2 Samuel 15. 24.
Arc along with them; Indeed how could it well stay behind, and what should
the Arc and Absalom, Religion and Rebellion do together? Was it not fit, that
as once it was joifully brought into Jerusalem with David's 2 Samuel 6. 14
dancing: so now it should dolefully depart hence with David's weeping?
Howsoever he accepted their good will, and on better 2 Samuel 15. 25.
reason declined their attendance. Coming 2 Samuel 15 30. and 16. ^^.
a little past the top of the hill, Ziba meets him with a couple of Asses,
laden with bread, Raisons, summer fruits and wine for the refection of David
and his company. But, o the Bran in that Bread, rottenness in those Raisons,
dregs in that wine he brought, joining with them a false accusation of his
Master Mephibosheth to be a Traitor; whilst, alas! all the disloyalty that
good man was guilty of, was only his lame legs, his lying servant; and his
over credulous Sovereign David did rashly believe this information.

11. A little farther eastward was Bahurim, Bahurim where Shimei rayled on
David.
where Shimei (Lord of that place) cursed David, casting stones and dust at
him. What meant the mad man thus to rail being within the reach of David's
Armies, except he intended to vent out his venom, and life together? But
causeless curses rebound on their Authors, and Ziba's gifts did David more harm
then Shimei's curses; for those betrayed him to an 2 Samuel 16. 45,
act of injustice, whilst these improved his patience. Indeed his railing gave
an Alarm to the martial spirit of Abishai, who 2 Samuel 16. 9.
desired a Commission to take off the head of this dead dog (blood so let out
in the neck vein is the soonest and speediest cure of such a traitorous
Frenzy.) But David who desired not that Shimei should be killed for his
words, but rather that his own heart should be mortified by them, by heavenly
Logic a majore ad minus, argued his own soul into 2 Samuel 16. 11.
humility; that seeing his Son had conspired against him, the ill words of an
open Enemy ought patiently to be endured. Well! Let Shimei know though he pass
unpaid for the present, yet either David himself, or his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall one day see this debt duly discharged.

12. To this place of Bahurim Phaltiel the son of Laish followed Michal, Sples
at Bahurim concealed*
his (or rather David's) wife, 2 Samuel 3. 16.
weeping, when David demanded the restitution of her, as unjustly detained from
him. Wherefore all Phaltie^^ tears move no pity of mine; Caveat raptor, let him
beware, who violently takes another man's wife; seeing shame and sorrow are the
issue of such ungodly marriages. Here in a man's 2 Samuel 17. 18.
Court at Bahurim, Jonathan and Ahimaaz David's Intelligencers were concealed in
this manner; an equivocating covering was spread on the ground, pretending
nothing but ground Corn laid upon it, but having under it the reservation of a
dry well, into which the messengers were put, and by it a woman to manage the
fallacy with the less suspicion: she tells the pursuers after them 2 Samuel 17.
20.
that they were gone over the river, which nigh Enrogell falls into Kidron; o
that I could in the same instant commend her Loyalty, and condemn her Lying;
which being impossible, we must be contented, successively first to praise her
charity, and then to protest against her falsehood.

13. Come we now to survey the south parts of the Land of Moriah, Rachel bur^ed
nigh Bethlehem.
where we meet some seven miles from Jerusalem with the famous City of
Bethlehem-Ephrath: The first mention of this Place we find, was when Jacob
near to it buried his beloved wife Genesis 35. 14. and 48. 7.
Rachel, dying in childbed. This was that Rachel who said in her Genesis 30. 1.
fury, Give me children or else I dye (as if she would have had them begotten,
conceived, bred, and born all in an instant) and now she had not only her
fill, but a surfeit of her own wish, had children and dyed. It seems, dying in
childbed her corpse required speedy interment: otherwise (no doubt) Jacob would
have conveyed them to the Cave of Macpelah the solemn sepulcher of his family.
She was buried by the high way, the ancient custom both of Jews, and Heathen,
partly to mind passengers of their mortality, and partly to preserve the
memory of the dead the longer, by so making their monument the more public and
visible. Heathen used in like manner to interre their dead in highways: yea
their sepulchers served to measure the distances of places. Virgil. Eclo. 9.
Hinc adeo media est nobis via: namque sepulchrum
Incipit apparere Bianoris. --
Hence even mid way it is for us: for near
Bianors Tomb begins to appear.
Nor is it amiss to observe that the self same place where Benjamin was born,
and his mother buried, fell afterward to the lot of the 1 Samuel 10. 2.
Benjamites, as if Rachels body all the while had but kept possession for her
posterity.

14. Bethlehem in Hebrew is the house of bread; Ruths gleaning in Bethlehem.
principally so called in reference to Christ, the bread of life, who in
fullness of time was here to be born: otherwise time was, when in this house of
bread, little bread was to be had, namely when God brake the staff thereof in
Israel, by a Ruth 1. 4. 6.
ten years famine. This caused Elimelech with his wife Naomi and her sons to
remove into Moab, whence after ten years stay she returned home to Bethlehem
with Ruth her daughter-in-law, who here became an extraordinary Ruth 2. 8.
Gleaner on the field of Boaz. Here harvest being ended, Ruth by the advice of
Naomi, went afterward to glean a husband for her self, and came in the night
to the Ruth. 3. 6.
threshing floor of Boaz, to challenge in him the right of the next kinsman;
some herein will censure her carriage, to come at so unseasonable a time, to
surprise a man for her husband: so that, se defendendo, to vindicate his
credit, he must be forced to marry her. But let these dainty dames, which
condemn Ruth herein, first follow her faithfulness in attending, then imitate
her industry in maintaining her mother-in-law, and this done, they will have
less wanton thoughts in themselves, and more charitable opinions of Ruth.
Besides, in the innocence and simplicity of those days, some passages might be
harmelesly performed, which in our age (grown ripe in wit, and ri^e in
wickedness) carry with them more then the appearances of evil. She brought
forth here Obed, the father of Iesse, and grandfather of David.

15. David afterward was born, David's birth and life in Bethlehem.
and keept sheep in Bethlehem (therefore called the City of David) here he made
an experimental syllogism, and from most practical propositions (Major a
Lion, Minor a 1 Samuel 17. 54.
Bear) inferred the direct Conclusion, that God would give him victory over
Goliath. Hence he was fetched from following the Ewes big with young, to go
before the people of Israel; and God intending to raise David high in
honorable old age, that the building might be the firmer, laid the foundation
thereof very low in his laborious and religious education. Being then better
employed, when thirsting after Gods honor, then afterward, when not far from
this place, he fondly longed for the 2 Samuel 23. 15.
water of the well of Bethlehem, which is by the gate, the Philistines Army
then encamping about it. But it shall not be said, that David desired, what
David's subjects durst not perform; three of his Worthies boldly marched through
the midst of their enemies, quickly draw, safely bear back, humbly present to
their Sovereign this Aqua vitae, the procuring whereof cost them the hazard of
their lives. But though David's fancy was above his judgment in desiring, his
conscience was above his fancy in refusing to drink of that water, 2 Samuel 23.
16.
but powered it out unto the Lord.

16. But that that gave the greatest luster to Bethlehm, Jesus born in
Bethlehem.
was that Jesus Christ Esaias 9. 6.
the Prince of peace, was born herein of the blessed virgin Mary in a time of
peace, to procure and establish a peace betwixt God and Man, Man and Angels,
Man and Man, Man and his own Conscience, Man and other Creatures. Public the
place of his birth, an Luke 2. 7.
Inn, (every man's house for his money) and poor the manner thereof, so
defeating the Jews towering fancies of a ^emporall King, who long looking to see
their Messiah sitting on a throne, would rather stumble at him, then stoop to
behold him lying in a manger. The first tidings of the Lamb of God, by
intelligence of Angels, is told to poor Luke 2. 8.
shepherds watching their flocks by night, whilst the Priests the pretended
shepherds of Israel, were snorting on their beds of security. The place of
this apparition not being far from the tower of Eder (or, the tower of ^locks)
where Genesis 35. 21, 22
Jacob sometime pitched his tent, and kept cattle, and where Reuben defiled
his Fathers Concubine.

17. And now the wise men of the East make speed to their Savior, The wisemen
directed by a star to Bethlehem.
directed unto him by a star, in its progressive motion probably pointing at
Judea, as if it had been but the bare reflection of a brighter star which was
there to be seen. These wise men, well read in the volume of heaven, perceiving
this to be no hypocrite star, or blazing Comet, (usually portending not the
Cradle but Coffin of some Prince) yea, no light constantly Leiger in the skies,
conclude it an extraordinary Ambassador sent upon some peculiar service, and
advantaged with the Prophecy of Number. 24. 17.
Baalam, current among the children of the East, haste to Jerusalem, and put it
to the question, Mat. 2. 2.
where the King of the Jews was to be born. Here Gentile and Jew confer their
notes, and compare their intelligence together concerning Christ's birth; the
former collecting the time from the star; the latter concluding Bethlehem the
place from the Mica. 5. 2. Ioh. 7. 42.
Scripture. How much knowledge might men attain, if mutually they would lend
their light one to another! To Bethlehem Herod sends the wise men to seek this
new King, promising to come himself, and worship him, but secretly similing at
their diligent devotion, whilst God in heaven laughed at his dissimulation.

18. To Bethlehem they come to make enquiry after Christ, Return to their
Country another way.
whom none never sincerely sought, but they found him. The star by moving
(probably in the low region of the air) shows them their way; by standing
still, the end of their journey: coming into the house they find the royal
Babe, and present him with gifts; Then warned by God in a dream, they return
into their own Country another way. Say not that they were more wise then
honest, in not making good their promise to go back to Herod, seeing 1 No such
promise made by them appears in Scripture, who being certainly foreiners, and
probably free Princes, owed no obedience to Herod's injunction. 2 Had such
promise been made by them, yet being done in consideration of another from
Herod, to come and and worship Christ, they were now remitted to their former
liberty, his fraudulent intent being revealed unto them by divine information.
3 Suppose their promise to return bound with an oath, yet herein the breach
thereof made no forfeiture, because their Recognisance was taken in Gods name,
who freely delivered up the band unto them again.
Homewards they go, whilst Herod wonders at their long delay, yet comforts
himself, that the slowness of their searching, will at last be recompensed with
their sureness of finding what he desired.

19. Weary at last he is with waiting, The babes of Bethlehem massacred.
seeing no King of the Jews was found, and they lost, which were sent to seek
him: But this old Fox had two holes: fraud failing him, he betakes himself to
force, and sends executioners to kill all the children of two years old and
under Mat. 2. 16.
in Bethlehem, and all the coasts thereof; Herod's cruelty, being of greater
compass, then the City of Bethlehem, took in that circuit which the walls there
of left out, so cunning he was to overdoe, rather then leave any thing undone.
Here no pen can express the mothers sorrows for their children, whilst one
stood amazed, as if she had lost her son and senses together: another bleeds
out sorrow in her eyes, to prevent festering in her heart: a third vents her
passions in exclamations, and it gives her some ease, though she could not
recall her dead child, to call him Tyrant that murdered it; All their mourning
going several ways, meet in one common misery, whilst the souls of these
children are charitably conceived by the Primitive Church all marched to
heaven, as the Infantry of the noble Army of Martyrs. Herod, the while, huggs
himself, that he had fitted their new King with a short reign, being confident,
that burning the Hive, he had killed the Master-Bee, though Christ was all the
while safe in Egypt, where his Policy could not find, whence his power could
not fetch him.

20. Bethlehem is on all sides compassed with places of eminent note. On the
North stood Ramah, Ramah nigh Bethlehem.
nigh which was the execution of those infants. In Ramah was a voice heard,
lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning, Mat. 2. 18.
Rachel weeping for her children etc. Some will say Leah had more cause of
sorrow (to make her eyes watery Genesis 29. 17.
by nature, worse with her tears) Bethlehem belonging to the Tribe of Judah*
But let such know, that the cruelty of Herod extended to all the coasts of
Bethlehem, and so also reached to Benjamin, in whose confines Bethlehem was
situated. Besides it is the opinion of some learned men, that the land about
Bethlehem was called Rachel, from her sepulcher so eminent in these parts.
Zelzah is hard by (in Hebrew a place shadowed, and therefore we have presumed
to cover it with trees) where Saul 1 Samuel 10. 2.
according to Samuels prediction first heard tidings, that his Father had found
his Asses, and feared the loss of his Son, who had found a kingdom.

21. Southward we find Asahels sepulcher 2 Samuel 2. 32.
buried in the grave of his Father: How so many Kings in Bezek.
and south-west-ward in the way to Hebron, Geruth-Chimham, the Manor or Mansion
of Chimham, son of Ba^^illa^, no doubt bestowed on him by David according to
his Princely promise, 2 Samuel 19. 38.
to give him whatsoever he should choose or require. Many years after, Iohanan
the Son of Kareah with the remnant of the poor Jews, which had escaped the
Baby^lonish captivity, dwelt at Geruth-Chimham Jer. 41. 17.
until contrary to Gods express command, hence they departed into Egypt.
Almost full west lay Bezek, whose King Adonibezek was punished according to his
own cruelty, who having cut off the Thumbs and Toes of threescore Judge. 1. 7.
and ten Kings, caused them to gather their meat under Genesis 27. 20.
his table. Now if Isaac's question to Jacob concerning his kid, was of
consequence, how he came so quickly by it? The Quere here is more considerable,
how came Adonibezek by so many Kings, to have them all at one time? With what
Royal drag-net did he fish to catch so many together? Where got he these
Kings? and where got they their kingdoms? Canaan being so small a Country. In
answer hereunto, in the acception of the word King, we must grind the honor
thereof the smaller, to make the number thereof the greater, communicating it
to the Sons and Nephews of Toparchicall Princes, as honors in Germany equally
descended to all in the family, and so the number is quickly made up.

22. North of Bethlehem lay the Vale of Ephraim, The vale of Rephaim.
or Vale of Giants, men of vast proportions, which the ancient Ages plentifully
afforded. Yea, our English Antiquary C^md. Brit. in Northumberland.
tells us, that Risingham a village in Northumberland in old Saxon, is nothing
else then the dwelling place of Giants. In this vale of Rephaim, the
Philistines (little less then Giants) were twice subdued; once at 2 Samuel 5. 18.
20.
Baal-perazim, where God by the hand of David brake forth upon them as the
breach of waters: and again, where God not only gave the success, but laid the
design how the battle should be managed, namely as soon as he himself had
sounded a charge out of the 2 Samuel 5. 22, 23, 24.
Mulberry trees, David was to fetch a compass, and fiercely to fall on his
enemies. Well is God styled a man of war, who here ordered the battle himself,
and well did David confess Thou teach my hands to war, and fingers to fight,
who here received from God particular instructions, how to regulate his Army.

23. Mulberry Trees (pardon a digression) were plentiful in Palestine;
Mulberry trees and silk plentiful in Palestine.
A tree which may pass for the emblem of prudence, slow in consultation, swift
in execution; for it puts forth its leaves the last of all trees, but then
(as it is said) all in one night, as if sensible of, and ashamed for its former
neglect, she endeavors to overtake other trees with her double diligence. Men
feed on the fruit, Silkworms on the leaves thereof: Creatures contemptible in
themselves, admirable in their qualities, appearing Proteus-like in sundry
shapes in the same year, eggs, worms, flies, finishing for the most part
yearly their life and work together. But we leave these mysteries to be
discussed by Naturalists, and will only add, that if the original of silk
were well considered, Gallants had small cause to be proud of gay clothes, for
from worms it came, and to worms shall the wearers thereof return.

24. Store of the best silks were made and used in Palestine; Saul first made
bravery frequent in Israel.
amongst other favors bestowed by God on the ungrateful Jews, this was one. I
have girded thee about with fine linen, and covered thee with Ezekiel. 1^. 10.
silk. King Saul was the first, who made bravery frequent, and fashionable in
Israel (little state and gallantry being used under the Judges) when the Court
and costly clothes began together, according to our Saviors Mat. 11. 18.
saying, They that wear soft clothing are in Kings houses: I say in the reign
of King Saul, rich raiment began generally to be worn by the Jews: 2 Samuel 1. 24.
Ye daughters of Israel weep over Saul, who clothed you in Scarlet and other
delights: yea by the confession of the heathen writers, best silks both for
fineness and color were in Palestine. In Esiacis. lib. 1.
Pausani^s writes (...) (...). The silk (says he) of Elis in Greece gives not
place in point of fineness to silk of the Hebrews, but is not like it in
yellowness: whereby it appears, that the Hebrew silk-wormes were as good
spinsters, and better Dyers then those in Greece, setting a better gloss and
luster on their work. So much for the silk in Judea called Shesh in Hebrew,
whence happily, that fine linen or silk is called Shashes worn at this day about
the heads of eastern people.

25. But to return to our description, ^maus where Christ appeared to the two
Disciples.
north-west from the vale of Giants lay the City of Emaus, afterward called
Nicopolis. Hither the two Disciples were a traveling, being about sixty
furlongs from Jerusalem, when Christ after his resurrection unknown joined
himself to their company. They tax him for not knowing the news in Ier^salem,
he reproves them for being ignorant of the sense of the Scriptures, which he
began to declare unto them. O excellent expositor! Christ Commenting on his own
prophecies, all which he first inspired, afterward fulfilled, and now
interpreted. As he put light into their heads; so also heat into their hearts,
which Luke 24. 13.
burned all the while he communed with them: only their eyes were held that
they knew him not. Day, and their journey drew both to an end, when Christ
makes as if he would go Luke 24. 28.
farther; Truth cannot lie, but did simulate, only to try how welcome his
company was to them. They constrain him to stay, (such civil violences
prevail on heaven it self) and in breaking Verse. 30.
of Bread, he brake himself unto them: their eyes being opened, he left them
full of joy and amazement. Nor have I ought else to observe of Emaus but that
many years before, Judas Macca^eus in that place got an eminent conquest, and
defeated the voluminous Army 1 Mac. 4.
of Lysias.

26. Hard by Emaus even at this day are showen the ruins of Zachariah his
house, Zachariah his house.
where John the Baptist was born, being the voice of a Mat. 3.
crier, begot of a dumb Father. This was that Zachariah who would not believe
God without giving him a sign, and was punished that men could not understand
him, without making of signs. To this place (then in a City in the
Hill-country of Judea) the blessed virgin Mary came with have to congratulate
the pregnancy of Elizabeth her Cosen; at the music of whose salutation, the
babe danced for ^oy, and leaped in Luke 1. 41.
the womb of Elizabeth.

27. Hard by is the City Gebah belonging to the Josh. 21. 17.
Priests; Gebah a City of the Levites.
afterward made a 1 Samuel 13. 3.
garrison of the Philistines, who therein were smote by Jonathan. King Asa
afterward built, that is, repaired and enlarged this City, as also Mizpah,
with the remainder of those materials, which King Baasha had provided for the
fortifying of Ramah: Cities so near in situation, that after the captivity,
their inhabitants are counted together in one Nehem. 7. 30.
sum, the men of Ramah and Gebah six hundred twenty and one, which returned
from Babylon.

28. We have hardly recovered into this map, David dancing before the Arc.
the house of Obed-Edom, whence David in a most solemn procession brought the
Ark to Jerusalem, dancing himself before it in a linen Ephod, which was not so
white, but that Michal found spots therein, or rather cast dirt thereon,
censuring David 2 Samuel 6. 20.
a fool for his indiscretion. But, when holy zeal is arraigned at the bar of
profaneness, and condemned either for folly, or Act. 26. 24.
madness, it may appeal from that sentence, and challenge its right to be tried
by its Peers; carnal eyes being incompetent judges of spiritual actions. Yea,
God himself here took the matter in hand, so ordering it, that for the future,
Michal's daughter should never mock her husband on the like occasion, punishing
her with perpetual barrenness.

29. Look on the prospect of this map, Store of Storks in Palestin.
especially the eastern parts thereof, and behold it overspread with trees of
all sorts, Olive, Pine, Mulberry, Fur etc. Of the last says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 104. 17.
and the fir-trees are a refuge for the Storkes, breeding here in the greater
abundance, because forbidden by the Levit. 11. 19.
Leviticall law to be fed upon. A speckled bird (therefore (...) in Greek from
(...) niger, and (...) albus, black and white) and is remarkable for their love
to their parents, feeding them in their old age. Hence called Chesida in
Hebrew, that is, the merciful bird; and in Dutch Oudevaer, that is, the
carrier of the old one, because every Stork is an Aeneas bearing his Anchises
on his back, carrying his Parent, when for age it cannot fly of it self. Some
have confidently reported, that Storks will not live, save in a Republic; who
may with as much truth affirm, that an Eagle, the Sovereign of birds, will not
breed in a Commonwealth. Not to say, that Storks were named in the Monarchy of
Adam, preserved in the Arc in the Monarchy of Noah. Jeremy, who lived in the
kingdom of Judah, upbraided the ignorance of the people therein, Yea the Ier.
8. 7.
Stork in the heaven knows her appointed times. Which birds had they known
their times, and the Jews not known the birds, as frequent, and familiar with
them, both the Prophets illustration had beed obscure, and exprobration
improper for his present purpose.

Finis Libri secundi.
To the Right Honorable JOHN LORD ROSSE, Son to the Right Honorable JOHN EARL
OF RVTLAND.
MY LORD,
IT has been charged by Foreiners on our English Gentry, that many of them
very knowing beyond the seas, have been strangers in their native Country; as
able to give a better account of the Spaw, then our own Bath; the diving of the
Spanish Anas under ground, then of our own Rivers (Diverill in Wiltshire, and
Mole in Surrey) wherein the same wonders of Nature are set forth in a lesser
Edition.

How just this accusation is, for the present I have no leisure to enquire, but
am afraid, that too many of our nation are guilty of a greater Ignorance; That
being quic^ sighted in other kingdoms, and Countries, they are altogether
blind as touching Judea, and the land of Palestine; the Home for their
meditations, who are conversant in all the historical passages of Scripture.

Yet I would not have any wilfully to expose themselves (as Saint Paul was
against his will) to 2 Cor. 11. 26.
perils of waters, perils of Robbers, perils by the Heathen, etc. personally to
pace and trace the land of Canaan: who rather conceive that precept to Abraham*
Genesis 13. 17.
Arise, walk through the land in the breadth thereof, and in the length
thereof, may be performed by us, even whilst we also follow the counsel of
Joash to Amaziah, Abide 2 Chr. 25. 19.
now at home.

This may be done by daily and diligent perusing of the Scriptures; and
comparing the same with it self; (Diamonds only cut Diamonds) as also by
consulting with such as have written the description of that Country. Amongst
whom give me leave (though the unworthiest of thousands) to tender these my
endeavors, to your Honors serious perusal, and patronage, hoping my pains
herein may conduce to the better understanding of the History of the Bible.

I confess the doctrinall part of the Scripture is in it self most instructive
to salvation. But as the rare relation of the woman of Samaria, John 4. 39.
first drew her neighbors to the sight of our Savior, which afterward
believed on him, not for her words, but his own worth; so the delightful
stories in the Bible have allured many (youth especially) to the reading
thereof, the light (the historical part) first inviting their eyes, whose
hearts were afterward inflamed with the heat, the holy fire in the doctrine of
Gods word.

Give me leave therefore my Lord, humbly to commend to your Honor, the
constant reading of that, which eminently is termed The Scripture and the Bible
or Book, all other being but scribbling and Pamphlets in comparison thereof.
They contain what will make you wise unto salvation; and the study thereof will
render your Lordship more truly honorable then your outward extraction.

Great indeed was the privilege of Ruth, for whom purposely some handfuls were
Ruth 2. 16.
let fall, for her to gather up. But greater the honor done to your Ancestors
by our English Kings, above an hundred years since, who scattered some flowers
(and other ornaments) out of their own Arms, therewith to deck and adorn those
of your family.

Yet know my Lord that the Bereans are Acts 17. 11.
pronounced more noble then those of Thessalonica, in that they received the
word with all readiness of mind, searching the Scriptures daily, whether those
things were so: And by the same proportion your exact skill industriously
attained in Gods word, shall make your soul increase with the increase Colos.
2. 19.
of God; far more honorable then that Augmentation in Heraldry, which was
conferred on your Ancestors.

Remember I pray what David writes, I Psalm. 119. 96.
have seen an end of all perfection, but thy commandment is exceeding broad.
Oh imperfect perfection which has an end! And indeed David lived in an Age,
wherein he saw Goliath 1 Samuel ^7. 51.
the strongest overcome, Asahel the 2 Samuel 2. 23.
swiftest overtaken, Achitophel 2 Samuel 17. 23.
the wisest befooled, and Absalom the 2 Samuel 14. 25.
fairest deformed with a violent death. Yet still the immortal word outlived
all casualties, and triumphed in defiance of opposition.

Wherefore as the Jews were to provide a chest by the side of the Ark wherein
the Law Deuteronomy. 31. 26.
was to be placed and kept, so I wish your Honor a large heart to be a
repository for this Broad commandment of God, that therein you may carefully
lay up and treasure the same, which when all earthly perfections prove false
and fading, will furnish your soul with holiness here and happiness hereafter:
which is the daily prayer of

Your Honors most humble servant THO. FULLER.

Here follows the description of Jerusalem.



THE DESCRIPTION OF THE CITY OF JERUSALEM. The third Book.
CHAP. I. Of the several names and general situation of Jerusalem.
1 WHen a woman often alters her surname, it is a sign she has been many
times married; denominating of his wife from him, being parcel of the Isa. 4.
1.
maritall privilege. But when a City in diverse Ages has different names,
this speaks her successive subjection to several Lords, new owners imposing on
her new appellations, as in our present subject plainly appears. For the City
which we are to describe was called 1 Genesis 14. 18.
Salem, in the days of Abraham, when Melchisedec was King, and probably first
founder thereof. Then it was but a small place, (the greatest Giant had once
the cradle of his infancy) when mount Moriah (afterward in the midst of the
City, and a forest of houses) was as yet but a thicket of Genesis 22* 13.
thorns, wherein the Ram, the exchange for Isaac, was caught by the horns. 2
Iebus. A name either of the whole or principal part thereof; so we read of the
Levite Judge. 19. 10.
that he came over against Iebus, which is Jerusalem. 3 Jerusalem It is of the
dual number in Hebrew, because first consisting of two principal parts* Zion
and the Lower City.
; so called, as the Fathers generally affirm, as the product of the union of
Iebus and Salem, B, for sounds sake being changed into R, which notwithstanding
the propriety of the Hebrew tongue will not permit. For though chopping of
letters be her common practice, yet, the Jews (as they always married within
their own Tribe, so they) exchanged letters of the same Lineage, (same
Instrument) Labials for Labials, Gutturals for Gutturals, whereas betwixt Beth,
and Resh in Hebrew no such affinity. Besides the turning of a tender melting B.
into a surly rigid R. is not to levigate or mollify, but to make the name the
harder in pronunciation. This drives others to seek out the Etymology thereof,
as signifying in Hebrew, The vision of peace. But seeing Abraham Genesis 22. 14.
called an eminent place whereon it stood, Iehovah-Iireh, The Lord will be
seen; perchance from the echo of the name Iireh added to Salem,(that is, peace
shall be seen or provided) the City might be called Jerusalem, where having the
essential Consonant^, the most various point-vowels are not so considerable.
Forget we not that even in David's time, when the name of Jerusalem was in
fashion, the City was sometimes still called Salem: For in Psalm. 76. 2.
Salem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling in Sion. Thus it is usual in
England in common discourse to cut off the former part of long-named Cities,
Wes^chester, Southhampton, Kingstone on Hull, whilst the remnant Chester,
Hampton, Hull sufficiently express them to ordinary capacities. 4 Hierosolyma,
which indeed is no new name, but the old name in a new language, translated
into Greek. Some Eusebius. li. 9. pr^par. evange. ^^ge^ippus. l. 5. ca. 9. and
Niceph. calixt. l. 10. cap. 33.
Fathers will have it compounded from the Greek word (...) a Temple and (...)
Solomon, that is, Solomon's Temple, as if the mixing of these Languages did
promise, if not prophecy, in after ages a joint interest of Jew and Gentile in
the mysteries of Religion. But Saint Absurdum esse peregrinae linguae mixtura
demonstrat. Hieronymus Evagr^.
Hierome is zealous against this Fancy, impatient that in the name of the
principal City of the Jews a Greek word should not only be mingled with, but
preferred before the Hebrew. It is safer therefore to say, that Hierosolyma is
nothing else but Jerusalem grecized, or made Greek, and the conceit of the
Temple of Solomon rather a witty allusion thereto, then a solid deduction
thereof. 5 Solyma, being only the half of the former. For whereas Hierosolyma
being a confluence of six short syllables was unmanagable in ordinary verse,
Poets served this name (as the Ammonites the clothes of David's 2 Samuel 10. 4.
Ambassadors) cut it off in the middle. An Statius sylvar. li. 5. in
protr^ptico ad Crispinum.
Solymum cinerem Palmetaque capta subibis?
Will thou go under Salems dust forsaken,
Under the palme-trees lately captive taken?
I conceive the name of Solyma not used by Authors till after our Saviors
suffering, though Josephus (and probably out of him Tacitus) writes that Homer
makes mention thereof, as indeed we find it (...). z^ta, and Odyss. Beta.
twice in his Poems, never for this City in Judea, but for a place and people
in Lycia. I will not say that the curtling of Jerusalem into Solyma after our
Saviors time, was a sad prognostic that this spacious City should suddenly in
the fire of civil war be boiled away to the half, yea afterward shrink to so
unconsiderable a smalness that a monosyllable, yea a bare letter were too long
a name for it. 6 Aelia, so named from Aelius H^drianus the Emperor, who built
some part of it again, and made it a Garrison. 7 Jerusalem, recovering the
ancient name again, whilst for some hundred of years it was in the possession
of the Christians. 8 Sands Trav. li. 3. page 155.
Cuds, so called at this day by the Mahometans, who are the present owners
thereof, which signifies Holy in their language.
Here we omit those many appellations given Jerusalem in Scripture: The Isa. 1.
21.
faithful City, the City of the great Mat. 5. 35.
King, the Mat. 27. 53.
holy City, because these are not proper names, but glorious Epithets thereof.

2. Concerning the general situation of Jerusalem, three things herein are
remarkable: first it was placed, as De bell^ Iud. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Josephus reports, in the very middle of Judea. But herein critical exactness
is not to be observed, (the heart it self is not so unpartially in the midst of
the body, but that if not in position, yet in motion it propends to the left
side) for Jerusalem inclines more to the south of the Country. As Jerusalem
was the navell of Judea, so the Fathers make Judea the midst of the world,
whereunto they bring (not to say, bow) those places of Scripture, Thou have
wrought salvation in the midst of the earth. Indeed seeing the whole world is a
round Table, and the Gospel the food for men's souls, it was fitting that this
great dish should be set in the midst of the Board that all the guests round
about might equally reach unto it; and Jerusalem was the Center whence the
lines of salvation went out into all lands. Yea Ptolemy dividing the
(then-known) world into seven Climats, placed Jerusalem as the Sun, in the
fourth Climat, proportionably to what is said in the Ezekiel. 5. 5.
Prophet, I have set it in the midst of the Nations, and the Countries that are
round about her.

3. Secondly, it had high Eusebius says that Jerusalem was called anciently,
Algariza, that is, The (...) mountain.
mountains under it, and lower about it, which as dutiful servants at distance
seemed to attend it. Jerusalem had a mountain for her footstool, and her floor
was higher then the roof of other Cities: no doubt the Emblem of the strength,
stateliness, and stability of Gods Church in glory. High and hard climbing
thither, but plain and pleasant dwelling there.

4. Lastly, it was distanced from the sea welnigh forty miles, having no
navigable River near unto it. For God intended not Jerusalem for a staple of
trade, but for a ROYAL EXCHANGE OF RELIGION, chiefly holding correspondency
with Heaven it self, daily receiving blessings thence, duly returning praises
thither. Besides, God would not have his virgin people the Jews, wooed with,
much less wedded to outlandish fashions. And if In perap. Evang lib. 12. cap.
27.
Eusebius may be credited, for the self same reason, Plato in imitation of
Jerusalem, would have that City, wherein the model of his imaginary
Commonwealth should be set up, to be seated some miles from the sea, lest
foreign merchandise should by degrees bring in foreign manners into it.

CHAP. II. The particular Situation, Circuit; Populousness, Beauty and strength
thereof.
1 IT will be pain-worthy to enquire into the exact situation of Jerusalem in
what Tribe it was placed, the rather because several testimonies of Scripture
entitle both Judah and Benjamin unto the possession thereof.

For JUDAH. Josh. 15. 63. And for the Iebusites, the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
the children of Judah could not drive them out, but the Iebusites dwell with
the children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this day.

Judge. 1. 8. Now the children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem, and had
taken it, and smitten it with the edge of the sword, and set the City on fire.



For BENJAMIN. Josh. 18. 28. And Zelah, Eleph, and Iebus, (which is Jerusalem)
Gibeah and Kiriath. This is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin
according to their families.

Judge. 1. 12. And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Iebusites that
inhabited Jerusalem, but the Iebusites dwell with the children of Benjamin in
Jerusalem unto this day.



FOR BOTH: Nehem. 11. 4. And at Jerusalem dwelt certain of the children of
Judah, and of the children of Benjamin.

This fifth and last place is a good Comment on the four former, namely, that
this City (though the Iebusites long disturbed their quiet possession) jointly
belonged to both Tribes, neither claiming it totally as his, both truly as
theirs; Nor Nu^* 36. 9.
was this any confused mixture of their inhetances (flatly forbidden in the
law) but methodicall (if not mystical) meeting thereof, so that Judah and
Benjamin (which alone persisted loyal to God and their King) had their
possessions lovingly shaking hands in Jerusalem, the solemn place appointed for
Gods public service.

2. Jerusalem was fifty Josephus contra Appi^n. lib* prim^.
furlongs in circuit, which reduced to our English account amounts to six miles
and a quarter. In which compass multitudes of People did inhabit, and three
different degrees of the populousness of this place are very remarkable. 1
Ordinary, even in vacation-time, when there was no spring-tyde, or usual
confluence of people more then the proper Citizens thereof, and those no fewer
then one hundred and fifty Iosep. ibid.
thousand. 2 Extraordinary, at the three annual Terms, (as I may call them) I
mean the three Feasts general of the Jews, Passover, Pentecost, the feast of
Tabernacles, when all the able males Exodus 34, 23.
of Israel appeared with an offering before God. 3 Superextraordinary, when
this City was sacked by the Romans, and when all sorts, and sexes (some drawn
with devotion, more driven for protection) flocked thither, insomuch that by
fire, famine, sword, civil discord, and foreign force, eleven hundred I^sep.
B^l. Judah. ca. gr. 45. lat. 17.
thousand are said to be slain therein.
Incredible it seems that so many should be pent in this place, except the
people therein (as when they crowded about Christ, (...) Luke 8. 45.
(...) (...)) did throng and press one on another. But we must consider that
flying thither for shelter, they had room enough, if they had but room enough,
not aiming at any convenient, (much less delightful habitations,) but only a
bare lodging in Jerusalem, where for the time being, every single chamber was
made a several family, and every story multiplied into a street whilst the
fiege continued.

3. And therefore it is most justly recounted asone of the ten wonders (whereof
the Rabbis take especial notice amongst the Jews) that ^^ver Aboth. R. Nat^^n
per. 34
any man did say to his fellow, I have not found a bed in Jerusalem to lie in;
nor did ev^r any man say to his fellow, My lodging is too strait for me in
Jerusalem. As if ^he place were of a Cheverell nature, to extend to the
proportion of the People therein. Indeed it was part of Gods goodness when he
brought his Vine out of Egypt, then also to prepare Psalm. 80. 9.
room for it, which he performed here accordingly, even to admiration.

4. Now amongst the nativ^s of Jerusalem, many no doubt were the eminent
Persons born therein, especially, if the Rabbinicall tradition be true, that
wheresoever the particular place of any Prophets birth is not set down, there
it is to be presumed that he was of Jerusalem. By this observation, Nathan,
Gad, Isaiah, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Habakkuk, etc. should be town-born children
of Jerusalem. But we leave it uncertain whether this place gave the cradles to
these, being too sure that it gave the coffins to too many worthy messengers of
God, O Jerusalem, Mat. 23. 37.
Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto
thee.

5. The structure of this City was beautiful and high, of hewed freestone,
very uniform, whether in respect of the houses, or streets, one toanother:
Psalm. 122. 3.
Jerusalem (...) builded as a City which is at unity in it self. Their roofs
were flat and fenced with battlements, by special Deuteronomy. 22. 8.
command from God* to prev^nt casualties of people falling thence. These roofs
were the Jews watch^owers for prospect, galleries for pleasure and (which was
the worst) their ^igh places for Idolatry. Which causes the Prophets complaint
more then Ier. 19. 13. and Ier. 32. 29.
once, That thereon they burnt incense unto all the host of Heaven. Surely the
weight of this wickedness did break the strongest beams, and stiffest rafters
in the Palaces of Jerusalem. For, though Idols be lighter then vanity it self,
in point of power, and efficacy; they are heavier then lead to press the place
down with divine vengeance.

6. As for the strength of Jerusalem, we must in the first place listen to
Iu^ah his song, Isa. 26. 1.
We have a strong City, salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks. The
Spaniards come off poorly with their brag, that they have Madrid a City in
Castile walled with Joan. Mena Poeta Market. page 118. in Atlante.
fire; which at last proves nothing else but that there be many quarries of
flint found round about it. But, most true it is that God promised Jerusalem,
Zech. 2. 5.
he would be unto her a wall of fire round about: which promise he for his
part, would most surely have kept, and performed, had not the sins of the Jews
forced him to break it, in vindication of his own justice.

7. As for the outward fortifications thereof, it was encompassed with a
Joseph. lib. 6. B^ll* I^d. ^a. 6.
treble wall, save where it was begirt with unpassable valleys, and there one
wall did suffice. This wall was fenced with a ditch, cut out of a rock, says
Con. App. lib. 1.
Josephus, and Geogr. li. 16. page 762.
Strabo, sixty foot deep, and two hundred and fifty foot broad; the former not
acquainting us with the author thereof, so prodigious a work may well be
conceived, a performance of many successive Princes therein. It seems, it was
made the deeper because it was dry: Idem ibid^^.
(...), well watered within, and dry without, is the character our author gives
of the City. This I dare say, the breadth of this ditch exceeds the proportion
of al modern regular fortifications, for in Breda it self (the platform
wherein, may be the platform for other places) the ditch is no broader then the
rampire at the bottom thereof. And now, what Psalm. 48. 12.
David principally intended mystically, comes to our place literally to
endeavor, Walk about Sion, and go round about her: tell the towers thereof.
Mark ye well her bulworks, consider her palaces, that ye may tell it to the
generation following. And to follow the motion of the Sun, we will begin at the
East, and so forward.

CHAP. III. Of the Gates thereof.
1. BE it premised, Four sort^ of Gates in Jerusalem.
that many difficulties in this subject have been caused by men's unwary
confounding of the several natures of the gates in Jerusalem, which for the
clearing of the truth, must carefully be distinguished into four sorts, in
sundry places serving for different employments.

Gates 1 In the out-wall, giving ing^ess and egress to passengers, the sole
subject of our present discourse. 2 In the in-walls, (like Temple Bar opening
out of Fleet Street into the Strand) being partitions within Jerusalem. Such
the Irongate through which Act. 12. 10.
Saint Peter went out of prison, to the house of Mary the mother of John Mark.
3 Leading to the Courts of the Temple: (as Saint Austins-gate into Saint Paul's
Churchyard) such the Act. 3. 2.
beautiful gate etc. 4 Of the Kings palace: (like Bulwark- gate, and Iron-gate
leading to London tower) as the gate 2 Chr. 23. 15.
whereby the horses came into the Kings house.
Now such as promiscuously make all these to be out-gates of Jerusalem engage
themselves in difficulties, and deceiv^ others thereby. For prevention whereof
we will only insist on the gates of the first qualification.

2. Begin we with the Sheep-gate on the east of Jerusalem, The Sheepgate.
in Nehem. 3. 1.
Nehemiahs time owing the reparation thereof to Eli^shib the high Priest, and
his brethren. Through this gate the sheep were driven in, and all other cattle
designed for sacrifice, as the nearest way to the Temple.

3. Next follows the Golden-gate (not mentioned in Scripture, The Goldengate.
but mee^ly depending on Br^c. it^. 6. Sal. (...). 9. c. 4. Breid. 14. Iul*
Pasch. d. 184.
humane authority,) so called because gilt all over, vulgar beholders (who
carry no touchstones in their eyes) accounting all massy gold which is richly
gilded. Popish See Adricho. Theatrum Terr. sanct. p^. ^67.
authors add that when our Savior in an humble but solemn equipage rode on
an Ass colt to the Temple, this gate opened unto him of its own accord: a
pretty proportionable fiction. For, if the Act. 11. 9, 10.
Iron-gate opened to Peter a Disciple, no less then a Golden-gate could offer
entrance to Christ his Master. Only here is the difference, we receive the one
as recorded in Scripture, and re^u^e the other as not reported therein,
especially our Savior having ^o fair an occasion to make mention thereof. For
when the Pharisees questioned him for not silencing the Childrens Hosa^a^s, and
when he returned, that if they Luke 19. 00.
should hold their peace, the stones would immediately ^ry out, how easy had
it been for him to add, that the very walls of the City had already opened
their mouths (their gates) to receiv^ him?

4. Thirdly, The Horse-gate.
the Horse-gate by the Kings palace, through which the grooms brought the Kings
hor^^s, to water them in the brook of Kidron, yet some erroneously make this
the same with the Watergate. The Prophet points at the exact position thereof
toward Ier. 31. 40.
the east, and we find the mention, but not the reedifying of this gate in
Nhem. 3. 28.
Nehemiah; a Presump^ion, that it was not so ruinous as the rest, and not
needing much reparation. As for (...), who cried Treason, Treason, (the fox the
finder) when she was the greatest Traitor herself: on the Compare* 2 King. 11.
16. with ^ Chr. 23. 1^.
Comparing of Scripture it will appear that the Horse-gate whereat she was
killed, was not this City gate, but another so named leading from the Temple to
the the Kings Palace*

5. Fourthly, The Watergate.
the Watergate, In a fall, or declivity of ground, Neh. 12. 37.
full east. So called, because thereat* all the ^ewers, channels, and
watercourse of the City, flowed out, and ran into the brook Cedron* No
mention in Nehemiah of the repairing hereof, for the reason aforesaid. Indeed,
if in his time the Jews had de no vo, from the very ground begun the building
of the walls, and gates thereof, it had been impossible, they could have
finished that work Neh. 6. 15.
in two and fifty days. Whereby it appears, they only mended those places,
which were most in dilapidation. This was the Eastgate, emphatically so called
Jer. 19. 2.
by the Prophet, and opened into the valley of the children of Hinnom.

6. Thus far the gates on the east of Jerusalem. On the south thereof* Why no
gates on the south of Jerusalem.
where Sion (or the City of David) lay, we meet with no gates at all, the
precipice of the rock affording no passable ascent on that side, so that men
must go first through Jerusalem, and then into Sion. I dare not say that
herein Jerusalem was a type of the Militant, as Sion (more mounted) of the
Triumphant Church, although there be no access for those which are without into
the happiness of the latter, but by taking the holiness of the former in their
passage thereunto.

7. Come we now to the west, in the southermost part whereof, we light on the
Fountain-gate, The Fountain-gate.
near the pool of Shiloah whence it took its Nehem 3. 15.
name, nigh to which on the inside, were those Neh. 12. 37.
stately stairs, whereby men went up to the City of David. This gate was in
Nehemiahs time repaired by Nehem. 3. 15.
Shallum the Son of Col-hozeh.

8. Next to this the Dung-gate. The Dung-gate.
A gate in greatness, though but a postern for the private use thereof, through
which the offall, and excrements of the City were conveyed. Appliable to this
place, is that which the 1 Cor. 12. 22.
Apostle speaks, of some parts of the body* Nay, much more thos^ members of
the body, which seem to be feeble, are necessary. This gate, though of small
honor, was of great use, and all Jerusalem had been a Dung-City* but for the
Dung-gate. Yea, the noisomer soil carried out hereat, and conveyed hence into
the gardens thereabouts, was by natures Chemistry converted into wholesome
herbs, and fragrant flowers growing there. The Dung-gate in the days of
Nehemiah, was set up, with the doors, locks, and bars thereof, by Nehem. 3. 4.
Malchiah the son of Rechab.

9. Next follows the Valley-gate, The Valley-gate.
commonly but wrongfully placed on the east side of the City; chiefly on this
account, because the valley of Kidron lies on that side thereof. As if this
valley alone was near Ierusa^lem, which by the Psalmist is described P^al. 125.
2.
with the mountains round about it, and so by necessary consequence must be
surrounded with valleys interposed betwixt it and those mountains* This gate
stood in the north-west* opening into the valley of Carcases, lying betwixt it,
and Mount Calvary. Here Nehemiah began, Neh. 2. 13. 15.
and ended his surveying the ruins of the walls* going by night, because loath
to be seen, and loath to see so sad a sight. This valley-gate was in his time
repaired by Neh. 3. 13.
Hanun and the inhabitants of Zanoah.

10. Having thus surveyed the east, The Cornergate.
south and west, come we now to the northern part of the City. Where, first, we
find the Corner-gate, whose angular position speaks it to participate of two
points, being seated in the very flexure of the wall from the east to the
north. It was distanced from the gate of Ephraim just four hundred cubits, all
which space of the wall was broken down by Ioash 2 Chr. 25. 23.
King of Israel when he conquered Amaziah, that his Army might march in
triumphantly with the greater state. Pride we see has not only an high neck,
but also a broad breast (especially when setting her arms by her side) so
large a passage must be cleared for her entrance. Afterward King Uzziah
rebuided this gate, and adorned it with towers, yea fortified all the 2 Chr.
26. 9.
turning of the wall. For, as the elbows of garments ought to be made the
strongest, as most subject to wearing out: so (walls being the clothes of
Cities, without which they are naked) wise Uzziah adjudged it necessary, that
this Corner-gate, and wall bending thereabout, should have most cost and care
expended in the fortification thereof,

11. No mention of the repairing of this gate in Nehemiah, Why not repaired in
Nehemiahs time.
which prompteth us with these conjectures: 1 Either that it was then dammed
up. Jerusalem after the captivity being large in extent, and thin in people,
(many uninhabited places being left therein) probably in policy they contracted
the number of their gates, the multiplying whereof did require more money and
men to guard them. Or For this gate is mentioned Zech. 14. 10.
rather, 2 Being so lately built by Uzziah, it might notneed much mending, as
left standing, and undemolished by the Babylonians.
For, in the sacking of a City it often fares with the gates as with the men
thereof, it is hard if some do not escape, and survive the destruction. Yea,
sometimes conquerours are pleased to spare some parcel of walls, out of pity
(not to the place but) to themselves, finding the structure thereof of so firm
constitution, that it requires more pains then it will return profit in the
levelling thereof.

12. Next comes the gate of Ephraim. The gate of Ephraim.
so called, not because standing in, but opening toward the Tribe of Ephraim.
I deny not, but that some Ephraimites, after their return from captivity, dwelt
in 1 Chr. 9. 3.
Jerusalem, from whose habitations hard by, this gate might, in probability,
borrow his name; but prefer the former notation as most natural. For usual it
is, both for streets and gates, to take their denomination from such places
(though at great distance) to which they lead. Witness Kentish-street in Stows
survey of London. page 448.
South-wark, for that it is the way (says my author) leading into that
County, the street it self otherwise being in Surrey: and witness
Winchester-gate in Sarisbury, so named, because through it travelers pass to
Winchester, a City twenty miles off: and (an instance best known to Scholars)
Trumpington-street in Cambridge, so called from a village some two miles
thence. This gate was probably destroyed, when Ioash King of Israel entering
Jerusalem, brake down four hundred cubits of the wall, from the gate of
Ephraim, to the Co^^er-gate, where I conceive, the particle from is to be taken
inclusively (so that both the gates were cast into that account) the rather,
because Pride, and Cruelty, always, when they make measure, give in the
advantage.

13. Next the Old-gate: The Old-gate.
so called (as Bonsrerius will have it) because extant here, ever since
Melchisedec was the founder thereof. If so, it was an Old-old-gate indeed. But,
as men having out lived all Registers, account themselves; so gates having
outlasted all memories, are accounted by others, more ancient then truly they
are. However, no wonder, if in Nehemiahs time the decays of so old a fabric,
called to the charity of Nehem. 3. 6.
Iehoiada the son of Paseah, and Meshullam the son of Besodajah jointly to
repair them.

14. Next the Fish-gate. The Fish-gate.
By mistake generally placed in the west wall, merely because Ioppa on the
Mediterranean sea, whence they fancy all fish ( as if no more ways to the water,
then one) must come to Jerusalem, lay on the west thereof. Whereas in Scripture
we find no express of fish for man's eating (but one which eat a man, Ionab his
Whale) mentioned from thatplace, whilst whole sholes were caught in the Sea of
Galilee, or lake of Tiberias, lying north of Jerusalem* Indeed Tire, lying
almost full north from this City, was the staple place, which furnished it with
fish (as appears in Nehe. 13. 16.
Nehemiah) which through this gate was brought to Jerusalem. Surely, the
provisions of any populous place in long time will tire, if only going on
feet, or flying on wings, and not also swimming with fins, having fish as well
as flesh and fowl for their repast, as here in Jerusalem. And although no
sacrifices of fish were by God appointed to be offered unto him, yet hence the
less wholesomeness, or cleanness of them cannot justly be inferred; because
they were improper for offerings, living in an element wherein men had no
conversation. This gate was Nehem. 3. 3.
repaired by the sons of Hassenaah.

15. The gate of Benjamin does only remain, The gate of Benjamin.
he the least in his fathers family, this the last amongst the gates of
Jerusalem, standing in the north. east part thereof. Indeed we find two gates
of Benjamin in Jerusalem (two of the same name, in one City, no wonder, the
double Newgate in London, the later new made postern into Moor-fields may be
an instance thereof) one called the high-gate of Benjamin, where Pashur put the
Jer. 20. 2.
Prophet Jeremy in the stocks, which was by the house of the Lord, and
therefore probably a gate of the Temple. The other was an out-gate of the City
leading into the land of Benjamin, whither Jeremy was going to separate
himself, when the Captain of the Jer. 37. 13.
guard in this gate, seized him in his passage, falsely accused him, and
occasioned his imprisonment.

16. Here I cannot but wonder at many Arias Montanus, Adricho^ius, and M. Moor.
learned men, A strange mistake in learned men.
who make this Gate of Benjamin, to be the same with the Corner-gate. I deny
not but that in many Cities it is usual, for one and the same gate to have
several names, as I have learnt from my industrious, and judicious M. william
Summer in his Antiquitles of Canturbury pa. 16. and 17.
friend in his description of Canterbury, how Burgate, and Saint Michaels-gate
are the same* and so Newin-gate, and Saint Georges-gate in that ancient City*
But the fancy of the foresaid authors, is directly oppossite to the words of
the Zech. 14. 10.
Prophet, foretelling that Jerusalem should be inhabited from Benjamin gate,
unto the place of the first gate, unto the corner-gate, etc. where we may
behold these two gates, Benjamin, and the Corner-gate, set at terms at great
distance, and a considerable space interposed. This gate was not repaired in
Nehemiahs time for the reasons formerly alleged.

17. These are all the gates of Jerusalem, The Needleseye.
whereof express mention in Scripture. Some fancy another, called the
Needles-eye, so low, and little only men might enter thereat. These conceive
our Saviors expression, Mat. 19. 24.
It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich
man[ Mark. 10. 24.
trusting in his riches] to enter into the kingdom of God, intended this small
postern; where, the bunch on the Camels back, was the Porter to shut it against
him, for entering in thereat. But, we listen hereunto, as to a fable, and
account the threading of Camden. in Yorkshire page 700.
Saint Wilfrides needle, as a conceit (though much later and of a different
nature) to have as much gravity, and truth therein.

CHAP. IV. Of the Towers on or about Jerusalem.
1. BEsides these gates, The Tower of M^^^.
Jerusalem was beautified* and fortified with many towers proportionably
interplaced, though we find but few of them recorded by name. Amongst these we
meet with the tower of Nehem. 3. 1. and 12. 39.
Meah, that is, the hundred tower, so called either because so many cubits
high, or so many distanced from some other tower, or because a just Century of
towers was at it begun or finished. It was built after the captivity by
Eliashib Nehem. 3. 1.
and his brethren the Priests.

2. The Tower of furnaces, The tower of furnaces.
standing in the West, north of the Valley gate, jointly repaired by Neh. 3. 11*
Malchiah, and Hashub. So called (thinks Adrichomius) from fire kept there as a
signal to seafaring men; But oh woeful those Mariners, who in a dark night
had no better direction then what they received thence, above forty miles from
the sea, and many mountains interposed! rather it might serve for some Beacon,
or landmark, or might take its name from some fire in the corpse du guard
constantly preserved therein.

3. The tower of Hananeel in the east part. The tower of Hananeel.
So called, no doubt, from the first builder thereof. It was in Nehemiahs time
repaired by Eliashib the Nehem. 3. 1.
high Priest, and his brethren.

4. The Tower Nehem. 3. 25.
that lies out from the Kings high house, The tower that lies out.
nigh unto which Palal the son of Uzai, repaired in Nehemiahs time. Not that
the prominency of this extravagant Tower, hindered the uniformity of the walls,
but the fencing of the City, required such situation thereof.

5. The Great Nehem. 3. 27.
tower that lies out, The great tower that lies out.
different from the former, else the builders of the wall in Nehemiahs time,
made no progress in the work; in the east of the City, over against which the
Tekoites did repair.

6. The Tower of Nehem. 3. 19.
David, The tower of David.
furnished with an armory, at the southwest turning of the wall, over against
which Ezer the son of Joshua repaired. Christ compares the neck of his Cant.
4. 4.
spouse to this Tower for the whiteness and proportionable length thereof.

7. But among all these, The tower of Siloe.
most remarkable was the Tower of Siloe (near unto the water of Siloe whence it
fetched its name) on the west side of the City, which killed Luke 13 4.
eighteen men with the fall thereof. Yet, the stones of this tower fell not
more heavy on their bodies, then the censure of uncharitable Jews did on their
memories, condemning them for the greatest sinners in all Jerusalem, as whose
offenses were mounted so high, that nothing less or lower then the fall of a
tower, could depress their Persons, and impieties to the pit of perdition.
False position to maintain, that those have wrought the most sin, who are
brought to most shame, and confuted by our Savior, assuring the Jews, if they
did not repent, they should likewise perish: likewise; certitudine, non
similitudine poenae. Yea, in a mystical meaning, those incredulous Jews who
rejected our Savior, did not only fall on a stone, and so were broken, but
also the stone fell on them, by reason of their infidelity, and Mat. 21. 44.
ground them to powder.

8. We will conclude with the Tower of Ophel, The tower of Ophel where the
Nethinims dwelt.
so named from darkness, as some would have it, because always cloudy and misty
at the high top thereof: But though the Etymology of Ophel be obscure, the
situation and use thereof is clear in Scripture, over against the Nehem. 3. 26.
Watergate, where the Nethinims had their habitation. Understand not all of
them at once, but so many of their society, as for the time being, were in
ordinary attendance about the Temple, whilst the rest lived in other Ezra 2.
70.
Cities assigned unto them.

9. These Nethinims were descended from those Gibeonites, Their service, and
privileges
who for their fallacy put on Joshua, and the people of Israel, were condemned
to the drudgery of Gods service. Josh. 9 27.
Thus the fathers lying tongues, cost their children many aching arms, and
weary backs, with hewing of wood, and drawing of water. Saul was a great 2 Samuel
21. 2.
persecutour, David a grand preserver of them, who first made them a
Corporation: Ezra 8. 20.
He and his Princes appointing them for the service of the Levites, when first
we find them called Nethinims, (to bury the odious name of Gibeonites) that
is, persons given to to pious uses. These for many generations approving their
industry in Gods service, washed out the stains of their Fathers falsehood,
with the sweat of their fidelity: and in process of time, (though Hivites by
extraction) attained to some honor above the natives of Israel. For whereas
the sons of Barzillai were put by their places in the Ezra 2. 62.
Priesthood, because they could not clear their pedigree; the Nethinims
continued in their place whose Ezra 2. 43.
genealogies were exactly, derived* Yea, whereas other Israelites were subject
to heavy taxes, after their captivity, the Nethinims were exempted from all
tribute (pity their purses and persons should both bear burdens) by the bounty
of the Kings of Persia. Whose liberality, though a Pagan, to Gods worship (
like the precious ointment on Psalm* 133. 2.
A^rons head which ran down to his beard, even to the skirts of his garment)
flowed from the Priests and Levites, by the singers, and porters, to the
Net^inims (the very verge, and utmost hem of Temple officers) by his especial
grace taking Ezra 7. 24.
order, that it should not be lawful to impose toll, tribute, or custom upon
them.

10. Many more towers not mentioned in Scripture, The Tower of women.
were about Jerusalem, as the Joseph. Bell. Iud. li. 6. c. 2. 5.
Tower of women, remarkabl^ in Josephus. But, why i^ was so called (what have
women to do with war?) I will give him a satisfactory answer, who first
resolves me, why the Roman Fortification of twelve acres of ground Ca^d. Brit.
in Dorset. shire. And another so called in York^^ire.
near Dorchester, is called Maidens-castle. But, we refer all the towers of
Josephus his reporting (not appearing in Scripture) to our particular Map of
Jerusalem, as by him described. Come we now to make some observations on such
as were the builders of the City walls, in the days of Nehemiah, because it was
built on the same Area or floor with that in Solomon's time, and we meet with
many remarkables in the history thereof.

CHAP. V. Observations on the repairers of the walls of Jerusalem, in the days
of Nehemiah.
1. MInisters ought to lead the Van, The high Priest begins the building.
and be the first, and forwardest in all pious projects. Behold here Eliashib
the high Priest, with the Priests his brethren, begin the work, and built the
Sheep-gate. A gate ministerial unto the Temple, (through which the sheep were
brought intended for sacrifices) and therefore, as it was fit it should have
the pre-eminence to be first repaired: so the Priests were the most proper
persons to be employed therein. Of this gate it is solely, and singularly said,
that they Nehem. 3. 1.
sanctified it, which dedication speaks it set apart to holy service as
introductory of the offerings into the house of God.

2. Great is the influence of the Pastors example, People of all sorts second
them.
on the peoples practice. Many hands make light work, behold a troop of
builders comes, of all Professions, private persons, public officers, whole
families of all jointly, Levites, Merchants, Goldsmiths, Apothecaries etc. of
all Places, from Jericho, Tekoa, Gibeon, Mizpah, Zanoah etc. Sexes, both men
and women. Next repaired Shallion the son of Halloesh, the ruler of the half of
Jerusalem, he, Nehem. 3. 12.
and his daughters.
What, had their tender hands any skill to carve stones, or weak shoulders any
strength to carry mortar? Or, was it suitable with the modesty of their sex, to
clime ladders, clamber scaffolds, seeing there is no acting for any builders,
but upon such stages? Surely they refused no pains proportionable with decency
to their power; and what was wanting in their persons, supplied with their
purse, expending it (perchanc^) out of their own portions. And, if orphans
money put into the Chamber of London, be accounted so sure; God (no doubt) did
repay, what they laid out on the walls of Jerusalem.

3. Now whereas Shallum their Father is styled ruler of the half part of
Jerusalem, Why after the captivity, two governors to one city.
rather subtle then solid is the note of Tremellius Vid^ ejus Annot. in Nehem.
3. 12.
thereupon. For, says he, Jerusalem being in two Tribes ( Judah and Benjamin)
had therefore two rulers thereof. Not considering, how in the same Chapter,
other smaller Cities, and those undoubtedly whole and entire in one Tribe, had
notwithstanding two governors over them, and those benefactours to the
building of Jerusalem; As Malchiah the son of Rechab, the ruler of Ibid. ver.
14.
part of Beth-haccarem.
Shallum the son of Col-hozeh, Ibid. ver. 15.
the ruler of part of Mizpah.
Nehemiah the son of Azbuk, the ruler of the Ibid. ver. 16.
half part of Beth-zur.
Hashabiah, the ruler of the half Ibid. ver. 17.
part of Keilah.
Banai the son of Henadad, the ruler of the Ibid. ver. 18.
half part of Keilah.

Now the dividing of the command of the City betwixt two Governors, so usual
at this very time, and no^ notably extant in Scripture, before, or after the
days of Neh^miah, leads us to this probable opinion, that immediately upon the
Jews return from Babylon, the Persian Emperor (from whom all Commissions were
derived) would not entrust any Jew with the sole rule of a strong City, but for
the better security, parted it betwixt two, who had joint, but distinct
dominion therein: That whilst they with mutual jealousy observed the actions
each of other, both might preserve the interest of their Master.

4. In building the Old gate two co-founders were joined together, The builders
of one gate.
namely, 1 Iehoiada the son of Nehem. 3. 6*
Paseah. 2 Meshullam the son of Besodaiah.
I will not say that as York Minster was built by Percy Camd. B^it. in the
descrip. of Yorkshire.
and Vavasour, the one giving stone, the other timber to that structure: so the
building of this gate was in like manner advanced betwixt them; but hence
observe, that it is no shame for one to admit a partner in that weighty work,
which he caunot weild by himself. Blame worthy their pride, or peevishness, who
will not have that good design done at all, which can not all be done by
themselves.

5. Whereas Malchiah the son of Rechah is recorded builder of the Dung-gate (no
needless port in that City, The founder of the Dung-gate conce^ved by so^e a
R^chabite.
seeing in populous places, Perfumers may be spared with less loss to the
public, then Scavangers) some Villalpandus in locum.
conceive this Malchiah to have been a Rechabite by descent, and a ceremonious
observer of their Ancestors instructions, not to drink Ier. 35. 6.
wine, nor build house, but to live in tents, with other Canonical obediences.
Nor was this building of the wall of Jerusalem any breach of their vow; partly;
because a public, no private edifice; and partly, because those their
ceremonious observances, probably terminated at the Babylonish captivity. This
Malchiah they make heir of the family of the Rech^bites, according to the
Prophetical promise, that one of that house Ibid. ver. 19.
should not fail to stand before God for ever. But, whether herein Interpreters
do not take more then the text tenders unto them, be it reported to others.

6. It is signally observed, Younger before the elder in goodness.
that Hanun the Neh. 3. 30.
sixth son of Zalaph, repaired a piece of the wall. But, where were his five
elder brethren? Were they dead, or absent, or idle, or impotent? The Scripture
gives no account of them, only the sixth son is recorded for his forwardness
herein. In matters of piety, there is no standing on useless (yea on dangerous)
modesty. No breach of good manners, to go before our betters in goodness, or
for the younger brother in nature, to gain the birthright in grace.

7. It is said of Baruch the son of Zabbai verse 20. Baruch repaired earnestly.
(and of him alone it is said) that he earnestly Neh. 3. 20.
repaired the other piece. What, did the others work but in jest, because this
Accent earnestly, is only put over the piece he repaired? Is not this mark of
honor on him, a brand of infamy on the rest? No surely, though probably his
zeal was paramount in the employment; and what if the word earnestly* (set
there almost in the very midst, amongst all the builders) be to be taken (...),
relating to all the rest, before, and behind it?

8. It is observed, Persons repa^ring against their own houses.
that many men repaired only against their own Ibid. ver. 28. 29. etc.
houses. This, though at the first sight it may seem the fruit but of a narrow
soul, and private spirit, yet effectually advanced the work. Yea, it is
particularly recorded of Meshullam the son of Berechiah, who likely was but a
lodger, and no housekeeper, that he repaired over Ibid. ver. 30.
against his Chamber. Oh, if order were observed for every one to mend his own
heart, or house, how would personal amendment by degrees quickly produce
family-city-countrey-kingdome-reformation? How soon are those streets made
clean, where every one sweeps against his own door?

9. Some doubled their files, Doublers with credit in the work.
as Merimoth the son of Urijah the son of Coz, who having formerly been a
repairer (verse 4.) comes again the second time to build (verse 21.) out of
doubt the same person, as having the same name, father, and grandfather. Let
him have double praise, for his double pains; who not being weary of well
doing, dealt with the wall of Jerusalem, as the Philippians with Saint Paul,
Phil. 4. 16.
once and again relieving the necessity thereof.

10. The nobles of Tekoah are taxed for not putting their necks to the work
Nehem. 3. 5.
of their Lord. The degenerous nobles of Tekoah.
Strange that now they should discover such unseasonable pride. Had they not
lately returned from Babylon? Could not seventy years banishment from their
own, and captivity in a foreign land, humble them to purpose? Me thinks, so long
suffering should have broken (though not their hearts) their stomachs. But, oh
the difference betwixt being low, and being lowly! No affictions, except
seasoned, and sanctified, are sufficient to bring down men's natural
corruption. This negligence of the Tekoite nobility in Gods cause was so much
the more conspicuous, because of the double diligence of the Tekoite commoners
therein; for, they had two shares in this adventure, building, Nehem. 3. v. 5.
and again they had verse 27. another bout in the same service. Except any will
say, that by the Tekoites in the second mention of them, their nobility are
intended; who, sensible of their own dishonor, for their former backwardness,
played an after-game, to repair their credit; which is affirmed without any
proof, and with little probability.

11. Some here will demand, Quaere concerning Nehemiah.
What did Nehemiah himself all the while? did he only look on, work with his
eyes, and command others to labor? Or was he like the Scribes Mat. 23. 4.
and Pharisees, who bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and lay them
on men's shoulders, but they themselves will not move them with one of their
fingers?

12. It is answered, Answer, with his privative and po^^tive bounty to this
building.
his zeal was active, and exemplary in Gods work, and therein expressed it
self, 1 Privatively, in forbearing the salary of the Governor, which his
predecessors did, and he might justly receive. In this respect, one may truly
say, that each gate, tower, and piece of wall in Jerusalem, was in part
repaired with Nehemiah's money, because the builders thereof were the better
enabled for that work, by his remitting unto them, the tax due to him as
Governor. 2 Positively, not only forbearing his own right, but also bearing a
large proportion in the work. He kept a daily Ordinary (thanks being the only
shot his guests were to pay) for an hundred and fifty Jews, and Rulers, besides
strangers of the Heathen. How many attendants then dined on the reversion, at
the waiters table? and how many poor feasted on the fragments, at the Porters
lodge? It may be presumed many laborers at the wall had gone supperless to bed,
had they not repaired to Nehemiah's house for their refection.
As for the opinion of Tremellius, that Nehemiah built the Kings palace at his
own charge, grounding the same on his own translation of the text, because I
find no other Authors to follow him therein, it is enough barely to mention
his opinion.

13. At the Sheep-gate they began to repair, The conclusion of the work.
and thereat also they ended. The Goldsmiths and Merchants brought up the Rere
of the work, Nehem. 3. 3^.
betwixt the going up of the corner unto the sheep-gate.

14. Within the circumference of the walls, lay much ground uninhabited,
Jerusalem emptied of inhabitants, when rebuilded by Nehemiah.
people being loath to live therein, except Neh. 11. 1.
by lot compelled thereunto, and all Ibid. ver. 2.
blessed such as willingly offered themselves to dwell therein. Strange, that
the chief City should run so low in general reputation, the Gallants of our
age being otherwise minded, all posting unto the principal place of the
kingdom, as the fountain of fashions, and all delights. I read indeed of
Histria a province under the Venetian Commonwealth, that they are fain to
B^terus.
hire people to inhabit there. But the reason thereof is visible, because of
the unwholsomeness of the air, whereas no such pretense for any to decline the
City of Jerusalem, whose elevated situation, conduced much to the purity, and
wholsomeness thereof.

15. But men's unwillingness to dwell therein, Why men loath to live in Jerusalem.
took the rise from other reasons* as namely, 1 The common enemy beheld it with
most envious eyes, as the proper object of his malice. 2 The vast circuit of
the City, put them to hard duty to guard it. 3 Trading was dead therein, and
little wealth to be gotten at the new erection thereof. 4 All coveted the
country, for the privacy, pleasure, and profit thereof.
However in after ages, Jerusalem grew exceeding populous, and had all the
vacuities thereof filled, yea crowded with inhabitants. Thus, as it is most
easy and thrifty, to make childrens garments too big for their bodies, because
they will quickly grow up to their clothes: so providence advised Nehemiah, to
make the circumference of Infant- Jerusalem the larger, as which, in process of
time, would soon spread it self, to the replenishing thereof.

CHAP. VI. Of the waters in and about the City.
1. PAss we now from the walls, to the water of Jerusalem, Nogrea^ ^vers near
I^rus^lem.
a most necessary commodity for the well being of mankind. True it is,
Jerusalem was so far from boasting of any navigable river, that it had no
stream, near, or about it, to drive any water-mils. If it be demanded, how
without such mils so populous a place could subsist, and not be famished for
want of grinders? (as a chap-fallen man for lack of use of his teeth) Know this
was principally supplied by hand-mils, here ordinarily used, where multitudes
of slaves were in every family. As for other waters, both for necessity, and
pleasure, Ie^^salem had, (though no super^tuity) a self suffi^i^ncy thereof.

2. The waters, Three sorts of waters.
in and about Jerusalem, are reducible unto three several kinds. 1 Partly
artificial, as Pools and Conduits. 2 Partly natural, as the brook Kidron
(whereof In the Land of Moriah.
formerly) and the fountain of Si^^am. 3 Partly supernatural, as the
miracle-working Pool of Bethesda.
Of the former sort were the Kings fishponds, ^ Neh. 2. 14.
on the south-west, not far from the fountain ga^^, and near thereunto the pool
Nehem. 3. 16.
which was made, (no doubt with gre^^ care and cost) betwixt the sepulchers of
David and house of the mighty men. Also the conduit of the 2 Kin. 18. 17.
upper or old pool, in the path ^o the fullers field, and probably another of
the lower pool, all referred by learned m^n Josephus expr^sly called the first
Sole^^^s pool.
to Solomon, as principal Author thereof.

3. For in the Inventory of his vanities he confesses of himself; I made me
pools of water to ^a^^r th^re^ith the wood that brings forth Eccl^^. 2. 6.
trees. Thus he sought for felicity in the air, climbing up with his lofty
buildings; in the earth, di^ing low in his deep minigs; in the water, wading
therein through costly aquaducts; but found at last that happiness was
super-elementall, and not to be found but in heaven.

4. Some may conceive that King Uzziah had a hand in promoting the
water-fabricks near Jerusalem, Vzziah a dealer in water works.
finding him a very active Engineer, and of whom it is expressly recorded that
he dug 2 Chr. 26. 10.
many well^* But what follows? for he had much cattle both in the low
Country, and in the plain. The scene therefore of his watery discoveries, was
laid at greater distance, where his cattle were kept, and where he was more
commendably employed in his husbandry, then afterward in Gods house, any
instrument better befitting his hand, then a 2 Chr. 26. 19.
Censer.

5. Not long after, probably in the reign of King Ahaz, The Jews busy about
drains and trenches.
(as may partly be collected from the time of Isaiah's Prophecy, and pla^ing of
this passage therein) when the siege of Jerusalem was suspected from Rezin King
of Syria Isa. 7. 1.
and Pekah King of Israel, the Jews fell to the fortifying of their City, both
with wall and waterworks. Hereupon the Isa. ^2. 9.
Prophet when the new line about Jerusalem was finished, complains thereof as
follows. Ye have seen also the breaches of the City of David, that they are
many, and ye have gathered together the waters of the lower pool: And ye have
numbered the houses in Jerusalem, and the houses ye have broken down to
fortify the wall. Ye made also a ditch betwixt the two walls for the water of
the old pool, but ye have not looked unto the maker thereof, neither had
respect unto him that fashioned it long ago. And in that day did the Lord God
of hosts call to weeping and mourning etc.

6. Not that the Prophet herein reproved the people, Three faults taxed herein.
for provident preventing of danger, or politic endevou^ing of safety, or
moderate delighting in pleasure, but justly taxed them, for 1 Too much
confidence in the arm of flesh. 2 Unseasonable rejoicing in carnal comforts,
when drains and for ditches down their own cheeks, had been more proper
waterworks for the present sad occasion. 3 Admiring their own handy-works,
(without thankful relating for to God the principal) as if they had created
those pools and springs of their own industry and ingenuity.
Whereas all Grottoe^, conduits, and Aquaducts, though allowed the lawful
issue of art, and offspring of humane invention, are but sti^born babes at the
best, except God quicken and enliven them, mediately or immedately, with
moisture from above. He only is the Father Job 38. 28.
of the rain, and is by consequ^nce the Gra^d-father of all pools and conduits
whatsoever. Justly therefore were the Jews reproved, for having their
steg^atick Souls, dabling too much in water, without once looking up to God,
according to David's div^^^ty, freely confessing, Psalm. 87. 7.
All my fresh springs are even in thee.

7. But how well soever, Hez^kiah stops out the water.
the ponds, pools and conduits were perfected at this time, soon after all
their curiosities were discomposed, when Se^^^^heri^ sent the railing message
and letter, (though words whether spoken, or written, storm no Cities) to King
H^zekiah in Jerusalem. Who fearing a siege, by the assistance of his Princes
and people in a short time stopped all the 2 Chr. 32. 4.
fountains and the brook which ran through the midst of the land, saying, Why
should the Kings of Assyria come and find much water? Hezekiah knew that
S^nnacheribs blasphemous tongue would be sooner silenced, and his roaring
throat easier stopped, with Thirst then with any other answer. And although
Sennacherib, out of the plentiful Magazeen of his malice, shot his arrows,
even bitter Psalm. 64. 3.
^ords, against Hezekiah, yet according to Gods promise he came not into
I^^usalem, nor did Isa. 37. 33.
he sho^t an arrow there, having all his Army soon after confounded from
heaven, and he himself, (reprieved from the Angels) was executed by his own
Sons sword, in his own Country.

8. Here if any demand, Gihon brook meant hereby.
what is meant by stopping the brook which ran through the midst of the Land;
we understand not Cedron thereby, which to save them the pains in summer stops
it self, (as only the cistern to receive the land-flouds from mount Olivet)
but rather, conceive the constant waters of Gihon, or Siloam, therein intended,
running through the midst of the Land of Genesis 22. 2.
Moriah, wherein Jerusalem is seated.

9. After Sennacheribs departure, Reopeneth and improveth it.
Hezekiah fell a fresh on opening those springs he had formerly obstructed,
yea to make them reparation, he improved them to an higher perfection then at
first he found in them: for, 1 He made a pool 2 King. ^0. 20.
and a conduit. 2 He stopped up the upper 2 Chr. 32. 30.
watercourse of Gihon, and brought it straight to the west side of the City of
David. 3 He brought water IN TO THE CITY 2 King. 20. 20.
of Jerusalem.
Hereby no doubt Hezekiah got many a blessing and hearty prayer from the poor
servants in the City, whose weary shoulders had formerly fetched their water so
far off for the use of their masters family.

10. Here some will object, Such altering rivers not unlawful.
that such an altering of the course of this river, from the ancient channel
thereof, and the enticing of it by Art into a new passage, was a violence, and
a trespass offered to Nature. Yea did not man herein pretend to more wisdom
then his maker, as if by such variation, he could direct the veins in the body
of the earth, to a fitter posture, then that wherein God himself had disposed
them* But let such know, that when God gave the earth [with the water therein,
as making up one Globe] to the Sons of men, in the same charter he derived a
right unto them, to mold it as might be most convenient and advantageous for
their habitation. And although it belongs to God alone, to put a sandy girdle
about the loins of the Ocean, (because otherwise a giant too great for men to
manage) Hither shall thou come, and no farther, yet lesser brooks fall under
the jurisdiction of humane industry, to order them for man's most commodity.

11. Others will admire, H^z^ki^^ supplies Solo^ons omission.
that this new river was brought no sooner to Jerusalem, and that a project, so
honorable, profitable, necessary, and feasible lay so long unperformed. How
came this design to escape the searching eyes of Solomon, especially, seeing
(as he confesses himself) he dealt much in that moist Eccles. 2. 6.
Element? See we here, Solomon himself saw not all things, and Hezekiah coming
many years after him, might supply his omissions. And to speak plainly, many of
Solomon's projects, were but voluptuous essays for his own personal (not to say
carnal) contentment, whereas holy Hezekiah in his undertakings might have a
more public spirit for the general good of his kingdom.

12. The well or fountain of the Dragon Nehem. 2. 13.
near the Valley gate might be made at the same time, The Dragon fo^^tain.
probably taking its denomination from some artificial resemblance of a Dragon
about it. A conduit in a Dragon-fashion, (though such Anticks are more commonly
presented spitting of fire then venting of water) is made here by Adrichomius.
Tremellius conceives it called Dragon, or Serpent well, because the waters
thereof (which contrary to other Authors he makes the same with Siloam) glide,
snake-like, soft and gentle, yea crooked and winding with many intricate
flexures thereof. But it is impossible to assign the certain cause of such
names as are merely ad placitum, finding a Well and Gate in the Cose of the
City of Dragon gate in Sarisbury.
Sarisbury of the same name, yet hitherto could never hear any probable reason
thereof.

13. Amongst the waters merely natural, Pool of Siloah a Type of Christ.
the fountain or pool of Neh. 3. 15.
Siloah, with the stream flowing thence into the brook of Kidron, justly
claims the pre-eminence. Fountain which both in the name and nature thereof,
was the lively emblem, if not the reeall type of our Savior. Name which is by
interpretation, Joh. 9. 7.
SENT; and we know, When Gal. 4. 4.
the fullness of time was come, God SENT forth his Son, made of a woman, made
under the law. Nature; for the waters thereof, as the Isa. 8. 6.
Prophet observed, ran softly 1 To the eye* sine impetu, moving slowly, and not
rushing with a rapid stream like an impetuous torrent. 2 To the ear, sine
strepitu, still and quiet, not offensive to the neighbors with the noise threof.
So Christ 1 Was leasurable and treatable in his going (on foot, but if
mounted, only on a slow paced Ass) and doing, not rashly precipitate in his
proceedings. 2 Not querulous or clamorous in his discourse; He shall not strive
nor cry Mat. 12. 19.
neither shall any hear his voice in the streets; but meek and quiet.
Now as God was eminently in the still 1 Kin. 19. 12.
voice, so also was he effectually once in this still water, when our Savior
sent the blind-born man hither John 9. 7.
to wash, and thereby he recovered his sight.

14. This was he, The blind man cured therewith.
who afterward proved so constant a confessor of Christ, avouching him a
Prophet, and his cure by him really effected notwithstanding the Pharisees
menacing to the contray; Hoping in vain, though Christ had opened his eyes,
that they could stop his mouth, from the acknowledging thereof. His constancy
herein cost him an excommunication and a casting Joh. 9. 22. and 34.
out of the Synagogue. The best was, the power of the Keys when abused, does
not shut the door of Heaven, but in such cases only shoot the bolt besides the
lock, not debarring the innocent person entrance thereat.

15. The supernatural pool of Bethesda by the Joh. 5. 2.
Sheep-market remains, The pool of Bethesda.
whose waters, when at a certain season moved by an Angel, were medicinal to
cure the first commer thereinto, whatso^ver disease he had. A learned
Tremellius on Nchem. 3. 1.
man conceives, that when Eliashib the high Priest, (after their return from
Babylon) with his brethren, first began hereabouts to build the sheep-gate, and
sanctify it to divine service, (as leading to the Temple) God then and there
in approbation of his Act, endued the Pool hard by, with this sovereign
sanative quality: but this we leave with the Author.

16. By this Pool an Infirmary was built, God and man's charity well met.
for maimed folk to lodge in, and attend the troubling of the waters. How well
was Gods bounty and man's charity here met together? Commendable it was that
rich men did not engross this Spaw to themselves, but permitted poor people not
able to use Physic and Surgery the benefit thereof. This Hospital for
building consisted of five Joh. 5. 2.
Porches; not that the defective in the five senses, lame, blind, deaf, etc.
were here severally disposed of by themselves, but no doubt all promiscuously
put together. In this College of Cripples, he for his seniority might have
been the Master thereof, who had been longer lame, then most men live, and now
past the fifth climactericall of his disease, where with he had been afflicted
full thirty eight years. Indeed so impossible was the conditions of his
recovery, that being lame, He must run, before he could go, for seeing the
first commer was only served, he must have with speed into the pool after the
moving thereof: whilst he, alas, wanted strength to help himself, wanted money
to hire others, and others wanted mercy freely to give him their assistance.
But because he could not go to health, Health was graciously pleased to come
to him, and he was cured miraculously by our Joh. 5. 9.
Savior.

17. And thus much of the Walls, Two ancient parts of Jerusalem.
Gates, Towers, and Waters about Jerusalem: come we now into the City it self,
which anciently consisted of two principal parts (therefore dual in the
Hebrew) Sion on the southwest, and Jerusalem (properly so called) on the north
thereof, which we proceed in order to describe, with the places of principal
note therein contained.

CHAP. VII. Of David's Palace, the Highpriests houses, the Coenaculum, and
other memorable places in mount Sion.
1. WE begin with mount Sion, making that first which God most favored, Psalm.
87. 2.
who loved the Gates of Sion, more then all the tabernacles of Jacob. Here
first our eyes are entertained with the stately Palace of David, 2 Samuel 5. 11.
and 1 Chr. 1 4. 1.
Hiram King of Tire sending him timber and workmen for the building thereof.
Flat was the roof of this palace, whereon David sat, and from whence he beheld
Bathsheba (hard by is her house) bathing her self. I cannot excuse her action
herein. If policy be jealous, that hedges may have ears, modesty may suspect
lest the motes in the air have eyes. But see here divine justice. As this roof
was the place whereon David's lust did burn first; so thereon Absaloms incest
did blaze farthest, lying here with his Fathers Concubines. This he easily did
at the persuasion of Achitophel; those spurs needing no rowels, which are to
prick forward graceless youth into wantonness. But that hellish Politician did
this to set such a distance betwixt Sire and Son, that the affection of the one
might never meet with the submission of the other, the breach hereafter being
made so deep and wide, that no bridge of reconciliation might be built betwixt
them.

2. Under the Romans this Palace was turned into a Act. 21. 37.
Castle, where a Garrison was kept to overawe the City. Once the honor, now
the terror; once the beauty, now the bridle of Jerusalem. Upon Act. 21. 40.
the fair stairs leading thereto, stood Saint Paul when he made his speech to
the people, hearing him with great silence, because he spoke in Act. 22. 2.
the Hebrew tongue; until he came to that passage of preaching to the Gentiles
(which though spoken in Hebrew was no good Hebrew to his auditors, but false
construction, and breach of Jewish privilege) when they turned their attentive
ears into railing tongues, away with such a fellow from off the earth.

3. And now to show the frailty of humane happiness, pass we from the palace of
these Kings to their burying place, seeing Sion in a double respect may be
called the Westminster of Jerusalem; because the Kings thereof resided there
while living, and rested when dead. The reader shall pay nothing but his pains
in following me, whilst I show him these royal remains. We may observe four
gradations of honor in these interments. 1 Wicked 2 Chr. 33. 24.
Amon was buried in his own house, (not under the roof, but within the verge of
the wall thereof) and so was 2 Chr. 33. 20.
Manasseh, In the Garden of Vzzah.
whose true but late repentance was effectual to save his soul, but not his
kingdom from destruction. 2 Cruel Ioram, who had no compassion whilst
living, and therefore no 2 Chr. 21. 1^.
bowels when dying, was buried by himself in the 2 Chr. 21. 16.
city of David, and neither fire nor water, neither burning nor mourning made
for him. 3 Godly, but leprous Uzziah, being ceremoniously unclean, was interred
in the 2 Chr. 26. 23.
field of the burial which belonged to the Kings; understand it, within the
suburbs, but without the walls of their solemn sepultures. 4 All the rest were
intombed in a stately place set apart for that purpose; namely, David the holy,
the man after Gods own heart;
Solomon the wise, when old, befooled by his wives: Rehoboam the simple, whose
rigor rent ten Tribes from his kingdom: Abiah the wicked, but 2 Chr. 13. 15.
valiant and fortunate in fight; Asa the upright, whose 2 Chr. 15. 17.
heart was perfect all his days: Iehosaphat the just, whose 2 Chr. 17. 6.
heart was lift up in the ways of the Lord: Ahaziah the Idolater, whose only
commendation was that he reigned but 2 Chr. 22. 2.
one year. Ioash the backslider, the lease of whose goodness determined with
his 2 Chr. 24. 2.
uncles life: Amaziah the rash, worsted in a needless war against the King of 2
Chr. 25. 21.
Israel: Iotham the peaceable, who built the 2 Kin. 15. 35.
highest gate to the house of the Lord: Ahaz the profane, 2 Chr. 27. 22.
who in the time of his distress, yet trespassed more against the Lord:
Hezekiah the pious, who destroyed the high places: Josiah the tenderhearted,
who 2 Chr. 34. 27.
melted at Gods threatenings, denounced against the people of the Jews.

4. Amongst these still I miss Iehojakim, and long seeking for his tomb light
at last on the Prophets threatening, Ier. 22. 19.
he shall be buried with the burial of an Ass, drawn and cast forth beyond
the gates of Jerusalem.

5. Now as it were in exchange of Iehojakim excluded, we find Ie^ojada
admitted among the royal interments. Count it not presumption for a Priests
body to intrude amongst Princes bones, seeing not his pride but the peoples
gratitude preferred him to the place, because 2 Chr. 24. 16.
he had done good in Israel toward God and his house. (Oh if monuments were
marshalled according to men's merits, what change would it cause in our
Churches!) See we here the care the Jews had of decent burying their dead. True
it is, bodies flung in a bog, will not stick there at the day of judgment;
cast into a wood, will find out the way; thrown into a dungeon, will have free
egress; left on the highway, are still in the ready road to the resurrection.
Yet seeing they are the Tabernacles of the Soul, yea the Temples of the holy
Ghost, the Jews justly began, and Christians commendably continue the custom
of their solemn interment.

6. Farther off from the palace, we find the house of the mighty; where David's
worthies lived in a College under Ioab their President, next the Kings Zach.
14. 10.
wine press and his Neh. 7. 16.
fish ponds. Think not that the Kings of Judah had only Crowns, Thrones, and
Scepters, the Ensigns of Sovereignty, for besides these to maintain their
state, they had places of profit, so thrifty as to make their own wine at the
best hand.

7. Next we take notice of the houses of Annas and Caiaphas both alive Joh. 8.
13. and 24.
at once, and termed the Highpriests at the same time; one by courtesy,
because lately he had been: the other by right, because at present possessed of
the High Priesthood. Thus that function, which ought to have been during life
by Gods institution, was made alternately annual by man's innovation. Was not
the shining of two Suns together in the Jewish Church sadly ominous? And was it
not high time for God to take away the office, when men began wantonly to play
at in and out, with that holy profession? But besides these two Highpriests,
there was a third that had more right then either to the place, our Savior
himself, at the present brought a prisoner before them. In the house of Annas
an officer wrongfully Joh. 18. 22.
struck him with the palm of his hand, and in the house of Caiaphas he was
thrice denied by Joh. 18. 25.
Peter, adjured by the High Priest, adjudged to death, spit upon, blinded,
buffeted, with other insolences offered unto him. The houses of the
Highpriests were far asunder, all which distance Christ traced on foot; and it
is observable, that being posted backwards, and forwards, from Annas to
Caiaphas, from Caiaphas to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, from Herod to Pilate,
from Gabbatha to Golgotha, he traversed all the length and breadth, and most of
the considerable places in the City: Partly to render his passion more public,
being made a spectacle to men and Angels, partly that his beautiful feet might
bring the Gospel of peace into every principal street in Jerusalem.

8. Next follows the Coenaculum, or Luke 22. 12.
large upper-room where Christ ended the Passover, began the Lords supper, and
probably afterward in the same place appeared to his disciples, where after
his ascension, the holy Spirit Act. 2. 3.
in fiery cloven tongues fell upon them, enabling them to speak all languages,
for which some senslesly slandered them to be Act. 2. 13.
full of new wine. For the excess thereof may give men more tongue, not more
tongues; and is so far from making them speak other, that it hinders the
pronouncing of their own language. As for the house of the Virgin Mary, which
some make very fair in mount Sion; I say a better was beneath her desert, but a
worse was above her estate. Sure it is, that after hersons sufferings, she
privately lived in the house of John the Apostle, and John formerly lay in the
bo^om of Christ, and Christ once lodged in the womb of Mary, and Mary was for
ever hid Col. 3. 3.
with Christ in God. O holy chain, o happy complication!

9. In the last place we come to the prisons (those necessary evils in a
populous City) whereof we find three several degrees, 1 The dungeon of Ier.
38. 6.
Malchiah, a most nasty place, the mud and mire whereof shall not be stirred by
my pen, lest the ill savor offend the Reader. Yet good Jeremiah was forced to
lie, and Ier. 38. 9.
like to die therein, had not Ebed-melech the blackmore procured his writ of
removal. 2 The house of Jonathan the Scribe, made a prison extraordinary of a
private Ier. 38. 15.
dwelling. This little better then the former, so that Jeremy counted it a
favor at his importunate Ier. 37. 20.
request to be preferred thence, into -- 3 -- The court of the prison, the best
of all bads; which was part of the Kings palace, where Jeremy remained many
days, fed with a piece of bread out of the bakers-street Ier. 37. 21.
(a place hard by) till Nebuchadnezzar at last gave him a Ier. 39. 11.
Jail-deliver.


10. So much of Sion, forbearing to enlarge my self in the praises thereof
frequent in holy writ. As for that expression, Psalm. 76. 2.
Gods dwelling is in Sion, it seems particularly to relate to that time, when
the Arc resided there, brought in by 2 Samuel 6. 16.
David, and placed by him in the midst of a Tabernacle which he had 2 Samuel 6.
17.
pitched for it. Indeed he designed to make a better casket for that Jewel,
had not God retrenched his resolution by special 2 Samuel 7. 12.
order, intending Solomon for that purpose, who many years after removed this
Ark into the Temple he erected.

CHAP. VIII. Of Millo.
AS it is a great grace in a Rhetorician, not to have bald and flat but clear
and fair Transitions; so it is no less beautiful in buildings to have spacious
and handsome passages therein. For this cause the Kings of Israel counted no
cost too much to be bestowed upon this Millo, as being the common pass between
Sion and Jerusalem. It was called Millo, that is, a filling, as some would have
it, because being naturally a gulf or concavity, it was by great expense
levelled to be built upon. Greg. Greg. in Lex. sanc. n^mero 603.
Others conceive it so named, because filled with the confluxe and confluence
of people, being indeed the largest street in the whole City. 2 Samuel 5. 9.
David began, 1 King. 9. 24.
Solomon finished the building thereof. But as once Wickam Bishop of Winchester
wrote in a wall of Windsor, This made Wickam; in the same sense it may be said
of Millo, This made Jeroboam. For Solomon taking notice of his activity (merit
commended men, and beauty women to his favor) made him surveyour of the works
when he built 1 Kin. 11. 27.
Millo, which brought him from a private person into public notice (the first
admission is half a degree to honor) and gave the occasion of his future
greatness. In this 2 Kin. 12. 20.
Millo, at the going down to Sillah, or to the Vid. Tremel. annot. in locum.
bulwark, King Ioash was cruelly killed by two of his servants.

CHAP. IX. Of the Princely Palaces in this City.
1. PRoceed we now to the Princely palaces in Jerusalem; The house of the
forest of Lebanon.
and first we light on the 1 King. 7. 2*
house of the forest of Lebanon, built by Solomon: So called, because an
abridgement of that great forest, wherein (I mean in the groves and gardens
about it) wild beasts of all kinds (if humane Authors may be believed) had
their habitation. Here the bellowing Hearts are said to harbor, the throating
Bucks to lodge, the belling Roes to bed, the beating Hares to form, the
tapping Conies to sit, and the barking Foxes to kennell. Strange music to be
heard in the midst of a populous place; and very pleasant, that such a woody
retiredness should be afforded in the heart of a City. Yet Solomon's mind, when
mounted on these seeming felicities, was as far from reaching true contentment,
as the tired traveller, when on the top of the next hill, will be from touching
the skies, which whilst he was in the valley seemed contiguous thereunto.

2. The length of this house was an hundred, The dimensions of this house.
breadth fifty, height thirty cubits, whereby it appears both longer and
broader then the Temple it self. And no wonder, for who will deny that
White Hall stands on more ground then Westminster-Abby-Church? Besides, in
measuring the Temple, only the covered part thereof is reckoned on, without
the Courts (wherein the greatest capacity thereof did consist:) whereas no
doubt, Courts and all are taken in to make up the aforesaid dimensions in
Solomon's house. But grant the Kings Palace outspread the Temple in greatness,
the Temple out-topped it in height; whose towred porches ascended 2 Chronicles. 3. 4.
an hundred and twenty cubits. In this house Solomon's golden shields and
targets were 1 Kin. 10. 17.
kept, till 1 King. 14. 26.
carried away by Shishak King of Egypt.

3. Besides this Solomon Solomon's wives house.
had another house in Jerusalem which was 1 King. 7. 1.
thirteen years in building; and a 1 King. 7. 8.
third which he made for his wife the daughter of Pharaoh. Say not, they needed
two houses, which had two Religions, for we find not that she ever seduced
Solomon to idolatry: nor are the Egyptian Idols reckoned up among those
several 1 Kin. 11. 5. 7.
superstitions, which his second brood of wives brought into Jerusalem. Enough
to persuade some that this match was made by dispensation, if not direction of
God himself, (typifying the calling of the Gentiles) and that Pharaohs daughter
afterward became a convert, following the Psalmists counsel, Forget Psalm. 45.
10.
also thine own people, and thy fathers house. Hereabouts also was the Golden
throne of Solomon, to which those golden Lions gave a stately ascent. It was
the prayer of loyal 1 King. 1. 37.
Benaiah, make the throne of Solomon greater then the throne of my Lord King
David, which accordingly came to pass, whether taken for this his material
throne, or for the largeness and fullness of his royal authority.

4. Pass we by the Castle of Antiochus, 1 Mac. 1.
built by him as a bridle to the City; The stately palace of Herod
as also the Palace of the Maccabees, wherein for many yea^s they made their
residence, first built by 1 Mac. 13. 52.
Simon west of the Temple. In Christ's time Herod the great had in Jerusalem a
most magnificent house, wherein his grandchild Herod Antipas Tetrarch of
Galilee kept his passover, when Pilate sent Christ unto him to be examined by
him. Right glad was Herod of this occasion, because though formerly much
conversing with John the Baptist, yet John did no Joh. 10. 41.
miracle, which he now in vain hoped to behold from our Savior. For he that
would not work a miracle at his mothers Joh. 2. 4.
motion, would not do it for his persecutors pleasure. Let Herod take this for
a sign that Christ was the Son of God, because he would show no sign for the
will of man. However the silent show of our Savior wrought a reconciliation
betwixt him and Pilate, which before were at Luke 23. 12.
enmity betwixt themselves. But alas the innocent Lamb is not long lived,
when thus both Wolf and Fox are agreed against him.

5. Appendant to this Palace was the prison wherein Peter was put, Peter's
prison.
and being to dye the next day, was found in a dead Act. 12. 7.
sleep the night before. I question whether Herod who condemned him, slept half
so soundly. He must be smote before he could be waked, and his shackles fell
off easier then his sleep. The Rhemish note tells us, that the chains wherewith
he was bound are still preserved at Rome in the Church of Petri ad vincula. But
if those there be the true chains, I dare boldly say, that others of richer
metal, and finer making, more worth, and less weight, are daily worn by Peter's
pretended successor.

6. Pilates Palace must not be forgotten, The palace of Pilate.
wherein our Savior was accused by the Jews: near whereunto was the
Judgement-hall, called Joh. 19. 13.
Gabbatha, or the Pavement. But how even, or smooth soever the stones were laid
in the floor thereof; most rough, harsh, and unequal justice was administered
in this place, when our Savior therein was condemned. This was the place, into
which the Highpriests prepared for the Passover would not Joh. 18. 28.
enter for fear of pollution. O my soul enter not into their secrets, whose
fe^^ are swift to shed blood, but legs lame to lift themselves over the
threshold of a judgement-hall, for fear of defilement. Now all these Princely
Palaces were not extant in this City at the same time, but successively: and
therefore as Poets, when they present Persons, who lived in several ages, on
the same stage, lay their scene in the Elysian fields; so to put these Palaces
together, the reader must suppose their dust and ruins did all meet on the
floor of this City, though made in our map in a flourishing estate, the better
to adorn our description of Jerusalem.

CHAP. X. Of the Colleges in Jerusalem.
1. PAss we now from the Court, Jerusalem an Academy for education of youth.
to the Innes-of-Court, namely such places, wherein youth had liberal
education. The Vid. Grotii annot. in Act. Apost. cap. 6. verse. 9.
Jews tell us of four hundred and fourscore Synagogues at Jerusalem for this
purpose. We will insist only on such as we find named in Scripture, and begin
with Huldah's 2 Kin. 22. 14.
college, wherein that Prophetess lived in the days of Josiah. Perchance a
female foundation of women alone, and she the Presidentress thereof; though
surely not bound with any monastical vow of virginity, because there also
styled the wife of Shallum.

2. Next, in the days of the Maccabees, we take notice of the Grecian College
or Gymnasium, The Grecian college.
erected by Jason the high Priest, wherein the Jewish youth were taught to
wrestle, 1 Mac. 1. 15. and 2 Mac. 4. 12.
ride horses, and other Grecian accomplishments. Indeed archery was an ancient
Jewish exercise, ( David taught the children of Israel the use of the 2 Samuel 1.
18.
how, as it is written in the book of Iasher) but these were pure heathenish
employments. Here also they were taught to wear a garment called (...), which
some translate Hats, others buskins, See the Gen^va note on 2 Mac. 4. 12.
(though head and feet are far asunder) which whether it were the general
garb of the Grecians, or only an Academicall habit to distinguish the
Students from common Citizens, let others enquire. But the worst of all was,
here they were taught, not only uncircumcision of omission, (neglecting the
observing thereof on infants) but also the uncircumcision of commission,
practicing to 1 Mac. 1. 15.
make themselves uncircumcised, studiously deleting the character of that
Sacrament out of their bodies.

3. After Christ's ascension we find five Colleges or Synagogues mentioned in
one Act. 6. 9.
verse, Five Synagogues against Saint Steven.
all disputing against Saint Steven, Out of Asia those of Cilicia, and proper
Asia. Out of Africa, those of the Cyrenians and Alexandrians in Egypt. Out of
Europe, those of the Libertines of Rome.
Behold here an admirable Act hept, wherein Saint Steven was the Answerer,
against whom Opponents were fetched from all the parts of the then known world;
and all too few to resist the wisdom and Spirit by which he spoke. What this
Synagogue of Libertines was, is much controverted by learned men. Surely
Libertines here are not taken in the modern notion of the word, for such as
used their liberty for an occasion Gal. 5. 13.
to the flesh, or 1 Pet. 2. 16.
a cloak of maliciousness, though we confess in after ages such grew into a
numerous society, whereof Satan's subtilty, and man's corruption the Founders,
the negligence and conivence of Magistrates the daily Benefactours: A College,
whose gates (like those of hell) stand always open, having no other Statutes
then the Students pleasure: where the diet is so dear, that their Commons cost
the souls of such as feed on them, without their final repentance. Most
probable it is, that by Libertines were intended such Romans as were manumised,
or made free by their Masters; whereof Tacitus counts no fewer then four
thousand in the City of Rome, which professed the Jewish Religion; some whereof
with most likelihood had their Synagogues in Ierusal^m, wherein they were more
perfectly instructed in matters both of doctrine and discipline. The Gazith or
Common Council must not be omitted, coming near to the nature of a College,
wherein the Sanhedrin or seventy Elders had their judicatory, before whom the
Disciples were summoned, and Act. 4. 15.
straightly threatened not to preach, and afterward, for disobeying their Order,
were put into the Act. 5. 18.
common Prison. In the same Act. 6. 15.
place Saint Steven was accused and passed his purgation, in that excellent
speech, that he was no enemy to the Law of Moses, if rightly understood.

CHAP. XI. The remainder of private houses and streets in Jerusalem.
1. AMongst the private, The house of Mary the mother of Iohn-Mark.
dwelling in this City, we take special notice of the house of Mary, the
mother of Iohn-Mark, wherein the Saints were assembled to pray for Peter's
enlargement. Hither he came and knocked at the door, when Rhoda portress
thereof, Act. 12. 14.
opened not the gate for gladness; whether because loath to lose so much time,
as the opening thereof did necessarily require, (conceiving that Peter might
better stand without the door, then the people stay without the news) or
because her soul, surprised with sudden joy, was not at leisure to actuate her
hands to open the door: yet it informed her feet, to run into the house,
because that motion (was not, as the other, against the stream, but) went along
with the tide of her affection, so desirous to tell the news unto others. Sure
I am, Peter got less harm by this maidens keeping him out for a time, out of
this godly house, then he did by another Damsels Ioh. 18. 17.
letting him into the Highpriests Palace.

2. Add to this the house of Ananias the High Priest, The house of Ananias and
Veronica.
which stood not far off. If therein there was any rotten wall Act. 23. 3.
well whit^d over, it may pass for an emblem of him the hypocritical owner
thereof. As this was the house of a false man, so we take Veronica's to be a
false house, yea mere fiction, shown to pilgrims at this day, in the corner of
a street. Here she is said, that meeting our Savior when carrying his Cross,
she t^ndred unto him her vai^^ therewith wiping off his sweat, which vail
thereby presently received the lively impression and portraicture of his face
and complexion: with more probability they might affirm, that the picture of
his see^ remained in the Ioh. 12. 3.
hair of Mary Magdalen.

3. So much for particular houses. The accurate ranging of streets in Jerusalem
at the best but conjecturall.
Now that Jerusalem was digested and methodized into several streets is most
certain, whereof such frequent mention Ier. 5. 1. and 7. 17. and 11. 6. etc.
in Scripture: as sure it is also, that many fair market places were found
therein, where children Mat. 11. 15.
played with their mates, Merchants met with their Chapmen, Laborers Mat. 20.
3.
waited for Masters to hire them, and Pharisees bartered their outside sanctity
for the Mat. 23. 7.
greetings and salutations of the people. But the order and fashion of their
several streets are to us unknown, Scripture affording no certainty therein.
And though Adrichomius seem so accurate in this point, that no London-beadle
can be better acquainted with the lanes, allies, courts, corners, of the
Precinct belonging unto him, yet herein he proceeds on his own fancy, and mere
conjecture. Only we meet with the names of two streets, Water-gate-street, and
Ephraim-gate-street, which may justly be concluded more spacious, and roomthy
then the rest, because preferred before all other places in the City to build
booths therein at that solemn festival, in the days of Neh. 8. 16.
Nehemiah. In the former of these, Ezra assembled the people, and read the law
before the Neh. 8. 1.
Congregation.

4. Give me leave to supply out of Josephus three eminent places, The
Amphitheatre, Castle Antony, and Hippodrome.
though not mentioned in Scripture. First, the Iosep. ant. Iud. li. 15. c. 10.
Amphitheatre, erected by Herod, so capable that it could contain fourscore
thousand people, if the readers belief be so large as to give credit
thereunto. Here Herod, after the fashion of the Romans, exposed condemned
persons to encounter with Lions, Bears, Boars etc. But whether Saint Paul, when
after the manner of men he fought with beasts at 1 Cor. 15. 32.
Ephesus, intended such combats with cattle, or only his contesting with
(...) evil beasts, such as the Cretians are Tit. 1. 12.
described to be, is not decided by Divines. Secondly, Castle Antony, built by
the same Herod in the honor of Antonius, to be the keeper, yea the Jailer of
the Temple, (to which he had an underground passage, which would hold six
hundred men) wherein he observed the motions of the Jews, lest they should
hatch mutinies under the covert of Religion. Time was when God himself watched
over the Temple to protect it, till for the sins of the people, he gave it over
to be guarded by the jealous eyes of their inveterate enemies. Lastly, the
Hippodrome, or place for horse-races, where the Chivalry of the City met on
several occasions. Sick Herod the great perceiving his end to approach, and
knowing the same would bring a great joy to the Jews, (a Tyrants death-day is a
solemn festival in the Calendar of Nature it self) in this Hippodrome
imprisoned a principal person of every City of Judea, enjoining Salome his
sister to kill them at the instant of his expiring, that so there might be a
general grief, though not for, yet at his death, whilst no place could laugh
heartily being pinched with their particular loss. However after his death she
discharged those prisoners, and we may easily believe that these Legatees were
not offended with her (the Executrix of Herod's Will) for not disposing the
Legacies bequeathed to them, according to the mind of the Testator.

CHAP. XII. The mysteries of mount Calvary.
1. SUburbs in Cities are like Suckers in trees, The dolorous way.
which make them bigger, but not better; so that much of the strength of the
City leaks out in such Excresences. Jerusalem therefore had no suburbs at all,
but many pleasant mountains and gardens about it. We will begin with mount
Calvary, and the passage thereunto, commonly called the dolorous way, (though
thence came all our comfort) traced with the blessed feet of our Savior, who
suffered without the gate. This we are now to describe, and o that our patience
and practice might go along with our pen! to observe our Saviors motion,
according to the counsel of the Apostle, Heb. 13. 13.
Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach.

2. This dolorous way began at Gabbatha or the Pavement: The wild justice of
Pilate.
wherein we may take notice of a wild piece of justice in Pilate, first
scourging, then crucifying Christ. If his offense was but criminal to deserve
scourging, why was he crucified? If so capital as to deserve crucifying, why
scourged? Perhaps Pilate hoped by his scourging to satisfy the malice of the
Jews, but in vain. For it was not the back-bloud, but the heart-bloud of Christ
must satisfy their thirst. So that what might be pity in the intent of Pilate,
proved cruelty in the event to Christ; whose bitter cup hereby was twice
filled. Thus we commit double-folded, twisted, and complicated sins, which our
Savior expiated with duplicated suffering, first scourged, then crucified.

3. Hence being condemned he Ioh. 19. 16.
bare his own Cross part of the way, Reasons of Christ's fainting under the
Cross.
toward the place of execution, according to the custom of malefactors (and
we know what Furcifer inports in the natural signification thereof) until, it
seems, at last he fainted under the burden thereof; whereof several reasons
are assigned. 1 Probably the Jews malice provided him a Cross of extraordinary
greatness, proportionable to the reputed offendour Paramount. 2 He was much
debilitated with his long watching and sweating the night before. 3 The edges
of the Cross grating his late whip-furrowed back, might occasion the new
bleeding of his wounds, and his weakening thereby. 4 He bare withal the
invisible weight of the sins of mankind, and Gods anger for the same.
Hereupon a substitute or surrogate was provided for him to bear his Cross, not
out of any mercy, but the deeper malice of his enemies; partly thereby to
reprieve him to a more public death; not willing he should die under, to cover
him from shame, but upon the Cross, to expose him to the greater ignominy:
partly, because they were loath he should go away so easily as in a fainting
fit, and therefore their cruel kindness reserved him for a more painful death.

4. Simon of Cyrene is the person by them compelled to bear his Cross. Simon of
Cyrene bearing Christ's Cross.
Had it been foretold that one Simon should have carried Christ's Cross, and had
one heard Simon Peter so lately, so solemnly promising, Mat. 26. 35.
though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee, he would hence have
certainly concluded him the party for that service. But it fell out far
otherwise; whilst that Simon had forsaken his Master (and now was bewailing
his fault) another of that name is found out, coming out of the field, to carry
the Cross before him. Let Heralds then boast of men's bearing, and their
blazing of arms, (empty husks where the kernel of virtue is wanting) behold
here a rich bearing indeed; A Cross proper carried by Simon for our Savior. We
must buckle our selves in like manner for the same burden, patiently to
undergo afflictions. The best is, our Crosses are made hollow, being greater
in bulk then in burden; seeing the Cross of our Crosses, eternal damnation, is
taken off by the suffering of our Savior.

5. And now Christ comes to the place of execution, Mount Calvary why so called.
called Golgotha or mount Calvary, that is, a place of a skull. Either from the
fashion thereof, because that hill was rounded up in the form of a man's head,
or because men's bones were scattered thereabouts. Tremellius with great
probability conceives this Calvary called the hill Ier. 31. 39.
Gareb in Jeremy, being described to lie near the valley of the dead bodies.
Here our blessed Savior in a public place, with infamous company, (who lived
amongst Publicanes, and dyed betwixt thieves) after a cruel manner was
despightfully crucified. In whose sufferings we may observe

6. The length thereof, The length of Christ's passion.
lasting six tedious hours, exposed all that time both to hunger and cold.
Indeed the thieves were longer in suffering, both being still Joh. 19. 32.
alive when Christ expired: but they endured but personal pain, whilst he
underwent miseries for all mankind; so that what his Passion lacked in the
length, it had in

7. The breadth thereof: The breadth thereof.
extended over all the parts and powers of his soul and body. No part free from
pain, save his tongue, left at liberty to pray for his enemies. His senses all
suffered, namely 1 Seeing, tormented with the scornful gestures, and
reproachful postures of such as passed by Mat. 23. 39.
wagging the head, to expiate the lascivious, envious, covetous glances of our
eyes. 2 Hearing, grieved with the taunts, jeers, and wilful Mat. 27. 49.
mistakes of the Priests and people: so to satisfy for the pleasures our ears
have taken in lustful Sonnets, wanton jests, and other vain and wicked
delights. 3 Smelling, offended with such savours as may well be presumed to be
none of the best, in the place of a skull, to make amends for our luxury in
sents and perfumes. 4 Tasting. For when he cried out, I thirst, (and sorrows
we say are dry) they provided him a potion of Joh. 19. 30.
gall and vinegar; so to repair Gods justice offended with our gluttony and
drunkenness. 5 Touching, his hands and feet being pierced with the nails, to
expiate the rapin and violence of our hands, the swiftness of our feet in the
way of wickedness, with the manifold sins, which that sense in us commits.
What shall I speak of his head pierced with Thorns, so to make satisfaction
for the profane plots and projects, the wicked machinations of our brains? And
it is worth our observing, that though the Scarlet Robe (put on him to act in
that Princely Pageant) was taken from him, (as of some value, no pain, and too
good to be spoiled) yet the Crown of Thorns, painful to him, and profitable
to no other, was, (for ought we find) continued on his head, all the time of
his passion. In a word, it is hard to say, whether his pain was more shameful,
or his shame more painful unto him: the exquisiteness of his bodily temper,
increasing the exquisiteness of his torment, and the ingenuity of his Soul,
adding to his sensibleness of the indignities, and affronts offered unto him.

8. Thirdly, The depth thereof.
depth. His passion was as deep as Hell it self, enduring tortures in his
wounded Conscience to the apprehension of a desertion; witness his Exclamation,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me! not that really he was forsaken, or
totally conceived so, showing his faith in the deepest of his distress. For as
when twins in the womb of Tamar strove which should come first into the world,
the Genesis 38. 28.
mid-wise adjudged the Primogeniture unto him that first put forth his hand, as
a champion chall^nging his birthright: so in this expression of our Saviors,
wherein Faith and Fear did contest for the priority, Faith must be esteemed the
heir and eldest, first putting forth his hand, My God; yea both his hands, My
God, my God, claiming by that gemination a double interest in Gods fatherly
affection.

19. Lastly, The height thereof.
the height: as high as heaven, because the person enduring it was both
innocent and infinite. Innocent; such he must be to effect our redemption, 1
Pet. 1. 19.
without blemish and without spot, otherwise had blurred fingers come to rub
off, or wipe out the blot in man's nature, thereby it had been made the bigger:
Infinite, being no less then the Son of God, which gave infinite worth and
valuation to his sufferings. O then that we might be able to comprehend with
all Saints, what is the Ephesians. 3. 18.
breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and might know the Love of Christ
that passes knowledge, so infinite every way were the dimensions thereof.

10. And now he had left all he had to be severally disposed of to persons most
proper to receive them, The sevenfold division of Christ's goods.
as namely his 1 Purse (and his own price therein) to Judas, who bare the Ioh.
13. 29.
bag. 2 Peace unto his disciples, and the godly their successors: My Ioh. 14.
27.
peace I leave unto you. 3 Prayers to his enemies for their pardon: Father
forgive Luke 23. 34.
them, they know not what they do. 4 Wardrobe to the soldiers, who parted his
raiment amongst them, and on his vesture did cast lots. 5 Mother to John the
beloved disciple: Ioh. 19. 26.
Woman behold thy Son. 6 Body to Joseph of Arimathea, who afterward Luke 23.
52.
begged, and (with Nicodemus) embalmed and buried it. 7 Soul to God: Luke 23.
46.
Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit.
These things thus disposed of, he bowed his head, partly in submission to
Death the messenger, but more in homage to God the sender, and not by violent
compulsion, but voluntary susception of death, gave up the ghost. So ended our
Saviors satis^^ing sufferings, as redeemer of mankind; though his sympathizing
sufferings, as mystical head of the Church, are still behind, Col. 1. 24.
and are daily filled up with the afflictions of his servants. I say his
compassion daily remains and increases, though his passion was then, and there
ended, according to his own expression, Io^. 19 30.
It is finished.

11. Say not that the arrears thereof, Dead corpse may be wronged, but not hurt.
and another reckoning remained, because presently after, one pierced his side,
out of which came water and blood. For this added to their malice, not his
misery: according to that expression, Luke 12. 4.
Be not afraid of those that kill the body, and after that have no more that
they can do; all cruelties to breathless corpse amount to just nothing, and
injuries to the dead though figures on the account of the offerers, yet are but
ciphers on the score of the sufferers.

12. Near mount Calvary was a garden, Christ buried in Joseph's sepulcher.
and in that garden a rock, and in that rock a grave, which Joseph of Arimathea
had provided for himself. This was fashionable in that age to make their
monuments in their gardens, so to retrench their wanton thoughts with
meditations of mortality. Thus pleasure, poison in it self, is made wholesome,
when well corrected with thoughts of our latter end; yea graves and green herbs
make a good medly, seeing 1 Pet. 1. 24.
all flesh is grass, and the glory of man as the flower thereof, which
withers and falls away. Here our Savior was intombed, in a Luke 23. 53.
sepulcher bewen in stone, wherein never man before was laid; it being fit,
that as he was born of a virgin-wombe, he should be buried in a virgin-tombe.
It was also Joseph's Mat. 27. 60.
own tomb, intended for his proper interment. Such our Saviors poverty, that
as he lived in lended houses, so he was buried in a borrowed sepulcher, being
rather a tenant, then owner thereof. To make sure work, the grave was shut with
a great stone, the stone fastened with a solemn seal, the seal guarded with a
watch of soldiers; though all in vain. For all their solicitous care to
suppress his resurrection, did but render it more conspicuous, and free it from
all suspicion of forgery.

13. Sure they did bind, Christ's resurrection.
but loose they did find. For on the third day an Angel came down from
heaven, causing a great earthquake; as if the earth, like a guilty malefactor,
trembled with fear, for its former boldness, that being made Gods footstool,
it presumed to be his prison. This earthquake begat a second in the heart of
the soldiers* who frighted with fear ran all away, our Savior being formerly
risen out of his sepulcher. For the stone was not M^t. 28. 2.
rolled away by the Angel to give his body passage out, but to give the
disciples eyes passage into the grave, to behold the reality of his
resurrection: otherwise he, who came in when the Ioh. 20. 26.
door, could come out when the grave was shut. A^t^rwards he attested his
rising from the dead, by his manifold appari^ions in sundry places to several
persons, as is largely recorded in the Gospel.

14. However the Priests to palliate the matter, Endeavored in vain to be
silenced.
possess the people, and prevent the propagation of the repo^t, endeavored by
their money (their coin being better then their cause) whereby they had
compassed the death, thereby also to hinder the belief of his resurrection.
Though their seal on his grave was broken, they hoped to s^t a firmer on the
lips of the soldiers, bribing them for the silence of the truth, and
dispersing an improbable lie, that the Disciples came by night whilst they
slept, and stole him away. It is admirable that such a falsehood confuting it
self (for if they were asleep, how could they discover them? if awake, why did
they not resist them?) should by Gods permission make it passage so fast, so
far, and so firm in the belief of the Jews. Here taking the devil (the Ioh.
8. 44.
father of all lies) to be father thereof, it is worth our observing in the
very words of the Mat. 28. 15.
Evangelist 1 The mother of the lie, the brains of the Pharisees: they taught.
2 The nurse thereof, the tongues of the soldiers: they did as they were
taught. 3 The wages of the nurse, ready payment: so they took the money. 4 The
well-batling of the babe, it grew very great: For it is commonly reported
amongst the Jews. 5 The long life thereof, lasting longer then sixteen hundred
years, unto this day.
And it is to be feared it will live next day, next month, next year, many
years, if God be not more merciful in convincing their erroneous judgments.
Thus it is just in heavens proceedings to suffer the posterity to be poisoned,
for the wilful default of the parents.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Potters-field, Aceldama, Fullers-field etc.
1. PAss we from the north-west, The Potters-field.
to the south-east part of the City, where, without the walls, we light on the
Potters-field, where men of that trade made brittle plate in abundance. For,
although in Solomon's time, such earthen ware was worthless in this City, when
silver it self was ^ King. 10. 21.
nothing accounted of, and made to be Ibld. ver. 27.
as stones in Jerusalem; yet, poor people in after ages, found such cheap
furniture useful for their estates. Here one might have seen those Potters
absolutely lording it over their clay (purely passive to receive any impression
from them) and, according to their own power and pleasure, making of the same
lump one Romans 9. 21.
vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor. Others conceive, this
Potters-field was only an inconsiderable wast place, where sherds and pieces
of broken pots were cast out in a bycorner.

2. Surely it was neither great in extent or value, Bought for a burying place.
seeing thirty pieces of silver (the restored reward of Judas his treason)
could purchase the fee-simple thereof; except any will say, it came at a
cheaper rate, because intended for a public and pious use, the burial Mat.
27. 7.
of strangers. Here their dead corpse had an Hospital, wherein their lodging
and clothing was freely bestowed upon them: and thus our Savior, though
himself a Stranger in a borrowed Ibid. ver. 60.
grave, by the price of his blood conferred graves on many Strangers. As for
the confident report, that the earth in this field will in forty Sands his Tr^.
page 187. with legions of other Authors.
eight hours, consume the flesh that is laid therein, yea retaining that
quality though transported into foreign Countries, (the grave which every where
has a voracious appetite, having here as quick a digestion) my faith is
neither all wax, nor all iron herein. To speak plainly, after long fighting
against an Army of Authors affirming the same, my belief at last is taken
captive by their gravity, and number, to give credit thereunto.

3. It was afterward called Aceldama, Called Acelda ma.
or the field Act. 1. 19.
of blood, because purchased with the price of Christ's blood, and not (as some
may erroneously conceive) because handselled with the blood of Judas therein,
when his bowels gushed out. The place of whose self-execution is shown to
pilgrims, some distance hence, on the south-west of the City, where he, who
had lived a Joh. 12. 6.
thief to his Master, dyed a felon of himself, hanged, say some, on an Elder;
say others, Adricho. in Theatr. ^^^sanc.
on a Sycomore tree; a matter of no concernment.

4. More are we troubled, The manner of Judas his death.
not for Judas his sake (for whom two deaths were not too many) but in behalf
of the Truth (which can be but one) to reconcile a seeming difference betwixt
two places of Scripture about the manner of his death. MATTHEW. 27. 5. And he
cast down the pieces of silver in the Temple, and departed, and went, and
hanged himself.

ACTS 1. 18. And falling headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his
bowels gushed out.

We understand it thus, not that the rope breaking, Judas falling down thence
some steep place, was paunched on some sharp pile; but, that the very weight of
his body, and violence of his headlong motion (having no hopes upward in
heaven, and therefore hasting downward to the center of despair) brake his
belly in so precipitate a fall. Thus as Traitors, when hanged, are by our law
to have their bowels drawn out by the executioner: so Judas served himself so,
^o spare others the pains to punish him.

5. Fullers-field must not be forgotten, where they stretched, Fullers-field.
and dried their clothes which they they had washed in the brook of Cedron. But
all the soap used here by men of that trade, could not scour the indelible
stain of impiety out of the credit and conscience of King Ahaz, who in the
highway of Isa. 7. 3. 12.
the Fullers-field, peevishly refused a sign, which God graciously proffered
unto him. And men's several behaviors in matters of this nature deserved to be
marked. For, it was 1 Commendable in Judge. 6. ^7.
Gideon and Isa. 38. 22.
Hezekiah, humbly requesting a sign for farther strengthening of their weak
Faith. 2 Pardonable in Luke 1. 18.
Zacharias, craving one out of a mixture of infidelity, therefore granted him
in loving anger; his dumbeness serving as well to correct, as confirm him. 3
Damnable in the Jews, who out of pride and presumption, in a daring way Mat.
16. 1.
demanded; and in Herod, who out of curiosity Luke 23. 8.
expected a sign from Christ, and therefore denied them.
But most of all in Ahaz, in whose nostrills the very perfumes of Heaven sented
ill, because proffered unto him, refusing to accept a sign so freely tendered
unto him.

6. East of Aceldama, Tophet why so called.
in the valley of the Sons of Hinnon, lay Tophet (that is, Breadth) as Saint
Hierome In his comment on Ier. 7.
expounds it, because there the Citizens of Jerusalem, pent within the walls
of their City, used to dilate, expatiate, and recreate their spirits in the
walks thereof. Pity it was that so pleasant a place should afterward be
poisoned with Idolatry, where children were offered to Moloch, searing them to
death with his burning imbracements; of the manner whereof largely herefter.
For the present let it suffice us to observe, that Josiah is said to 2 King.
23. 13.
defile this place: what! was it capable of more pollution then what it had
before? Understand it, by burning of dead bones therein, he made it as
offensive to the nostrils of men, as formerly it had been odious in the eyes of
God. Now as the stinking lake of Avernus in Italy, passes in Pagan Poets for
Hell it self: so this valley of Ben-hinnon (Gehenna in Greek) is used in the
same sense by our Man. 5. 29.
Savior: either because of the abominable impieties here committed by the
parents; or exquisite torments here endured by the children.

7. We conclude with the place wherein Saint Steven was stoned, Place of Saint
Stevens Martyrdom.
being on the east of the City, some distance from what at this day is termed
Saint Stevens-gate: nigh which they show the place where Saul sat, when he
kept the clothes of those that stoned him. Now, seeing by David's law, 1 Samuel
30. 25.
made by the brook Besor, he that tarrieth by the stuff is to be equal sharer
in the spoil with those that go forth to the battle; the equity of this
ordinance arraigneth Saul guilty alike of the blood of Saint Steven, with those
whose wardrobe he kept during the time of the execution. But, whatsoever Saul's
share was in the murder, great was his part in the prayer of Saint Steven,
whose Act. 7. 60.
petition (Lord lay it not to their charge) is justly accounted by Divines, a
promoting means of his speedier conversion.

Her^ the draught of Solomon's Temple is to be inserted.



THE DESCRIPTION OF SOLOMON'S TEMPLE.
CHAP. I. David's threefold preparation for the Temple.
1. IT will not I hope be censured superstition, Preface to the ensuing
discourse.
if at the Threshold of this Temple, we fall flat in veneration of the God
thereof, to guide us in the ensuing discourse. The subject whereon we enter is
holy ground, may both writer and reader put off their shoos, and devesting
themselves, as much as may be, of carnal corruption, come with simplicity, and
sincerity to the matter now undertaken.

2. As some previous dispositions, Prepara^^ons made for the Temple.
and antecedaneous acts are required of a Christian, before he be perfectly
converted, and become the Temple of the holy Ghost; so some preparatory
provisions were necessary to be made before the building of the Temple was
taken in hand. Holy 1 Chr. 26. 28.
Samuel was the first we find, who stored up any wealth to this purpose; and
Saul (probably invited with his example) dedicated things to the same intent.
Yea Ibidem.
Abner and Ioab (though at deadly feud each against other) agreed both in
consecrating spoils won in battles t^ maintain the house of the Lord. But
David exceeded all other, beforehand providing the materials wherewith,
prescribing the pattern whereby, and purchasing the ground whereon the Temple
should be erected.

3. First, David's double oblation.
for materials. Lest he or his son should be recounted amongst those Luke 14.
30.
foolish builders, which began and were not able to finish, vast were his
preparations for this purpose, in those his two large showers of his
liberality, which we may call the former and latter rain of his bounty on the
Temple.

The former 1 Chr. 22. 14. An hundred thousand Talents of gold, and (...)
thousand thousand talents of silver, and of brass and iron without weight.

The latter 1 Chr. 29 4. 7. Three thousand talents of gold of Ophir, and seven
thousand talents of refined silver, given by David of his own proper goods.
Besides given by the Princes of the people, of gold fiv^ thousand talents, and
ten thousand drams, and of silver ten thousand talents, and of brass eighteen
thousand talents, and an hundred thousand talents of iron.

In the first oblation was given what they had suddenly gotten by their
valor, in the latter, what they had leasurely advanced by their diligence. In
the first their own, but taken from their enemies; in the latter their own, but
saved from themselves: in both 1 Chr. 29. 16.
Gods own, as David confesses, who first bestowed it on them, and they now
restored it to his service.

4. Come we now to examine how much a Talent, The value of a Jewish talent.
in Hebrew Chichar, did contain. Whereof in Scripture we find these generals.
1 One man could not conveniently carry two Talents, and therefore 2 King. 5. 23.
Naaman bound two Talents of silver in two bags, and laid them upon two of his
servants. 2 One man might easily bear one Talent, not only on his back, but
on his head, and that not as a burden, but ponderous ornament. Thus the Crown
of the King of Ammon, afterward worn by David, 2 Samuel 12. 30.
weighed a Talent, besides precious stones. Except any will say, that the
heaviness thereof rested more on the subjects hands, then on the Sovereigns
head, who by grandsergeantry man be presumed to support the same. 3 Probably
(...) ^ontained more then ten thousand Adarconim, (or drams, as ^^r
translations render it) because in the 1 Chr. 29. 7.
aforesaid text, after entire talents were reckoned up, these drams follow as a
fraction or broken sum, not amounting to a whole talent. 4 The particular value
thereof may be collected out of Exodus 38. 26. demonstrated by Brerewood d^ number.
Iud. c. 4
Exodus, that every talent contained three thousand shekels, or fifteen hundred
ounces, which in gold according to three pound the ounce, amounts to four
thousand five hundred pound of English money.
According to this standard the hundred thousand talents of gold given by David
in the first oblation, make up four hundred and fifty millions, as an excellent
Idem ca. 5.
Critic has accounted it.

5. Here as that infidel Prince conceived, Talent sometimes taken for a
smaller sum.
if 2 King. 7. 19.
windows were made in heaven, such plenty of food could not follow in Samaria
as the Prophet foretold; so more will be of the mind, that if Pluto should let
open all his trap-doors, melt all his mines into money, so great a sum could
not suddenly be advanced. This has given the ground to their probable
opinion, who conceive that Talent in the first oblation of David is there taken
only for a plain or flat plate of gold of small value,(as anciently in Iliad.
lib. 23.
Homer it passes in the same acception) whilst in the second offe^ing Talent
is used in the exact and strict notion, according to the full value aforesaid,
whose judgment is strengthened by the following arguments. 1 Surely Solomon
was the 1 Kin. 10. 23.
richest of all the Kings of Israel before or after him, bu^ verily I say unto
you, that Solomon in all his wealth and trienniall returns from Tarshish, was
far inferior to David, if the Talents there mentioned were full and entire
according to the first computation. 2 What is said of our Saviors deeds by way
of hyperbole, that if they Joh. 21. 25.
were all written, the world it self could not contain the books that should be
written, may be literally affirmed of David's treasure in the first oblation.
For as the silver there mentioned was tenfold more then the gold; so if it be
allowed (what in moderate propor^ion cannot be denied) that the unweighed Brass
was tenfold to the Silver, and the Iron to the Brass, the whole content of the Sea Ludovicus de Aleaser de mensuris sacris.
Temple was not sufficient to comprehend so mighty a mass. 3 Though the second
offering of David was far short of the first in number of Talents, yet it is
beheld in Scripture as most solemn and of highest importance. At the presenting
whereof greatest gratitude to God, and mutual exultation amongst men was 1
Chr. 29. 9.
expressed. This insinuates that at this rere-account, the Talents were Talents
indeed, and though in number fewer, in worth more considerable then the former.
Wherefore though we conceive not the long life of the Patriarchs a sufficient
cause (as some do) to expound their age of lunary years, yet the strength of
these reasons carry our belief along with them to contract the accep^ion of
talents in the first account, as is above stated.

6. But to close up all concerning Talents: A talent afterward a vast sum.
It was so great a sum, that though now so many thousands of them abounded in
Jerusalem, yet after wards in the reign of Iehojakim, one talent of gold and an
hundred talents of silver, was found and felt an heavy annual taxation for the
whole City of Jerusalem and kingdom of Judah to pay. Insomuch, that he 2 King.
23. 35.
exacted it of every one in the land, to make up that sum for the King of Egypt
So great is the difference betwixt the same place, when flowing with wealth,
and when exhausted with war.

7. After all these preparations made, David's holy complement.
let not David's expression be condemned of complement, Now behold, in my 1 Chr.
22. 14.
poverty I have provided for the house of the Lord etc. as if he were like
those fond ente^tainers, who having forraged the elements of air, earth and
water for provision for their guests, still excuse their cheer for being no
better. His words were indicted from an humble heart, finding his deeds so far
short of his desires, of Gods deserts. Thus those who have given a little to
God, think they have given much, whilst such as have given much, know they
have given but a little.

8. Here it will be demanded, Why no restraint of p^oples bounty in building
the Temple.
that seeing at the building of the Tabernacle, peoples bounty was refrained
with a flat Exodus 36. 6.
prohibition to bring in no more, why no such restraint appears at the building
of the Temple, where far greater masses of metal were presented for the
erection thereof. But it is answered, that moderate or competent state best
became the Tabernacle, resembling the kingdom of grace; whilst the Temple was
not capable of excess in magnificence, representing the kingdom of glory. No
hands could contribute too much to the Type, where no heart can conceive enough
of the truth, the things which God has prepared 1 Cor. 2. 9.
for them that love him, not entering into humane imagination.

9. Besides these materials, Model of the Temple made Iure divino.
David prescribed the model, which he gave to Solomon his son, the pattern of
the porch and of the houses thereof, and of the treasures thereof, and of the
upper chambers thereof, and of the inner parlours thereof, and of the palace of
the Mercy-seat, and the pattern of all that he had by the 1 Chronicles. 28. 11, 12.
19.
Spirit. And it follows not far after, All this (said David) the Lord made
me to understand in writing, by his hand upon me, even all the works of this
pattern. Here David for the more certainty, had a double direction, one by the
Spirit, the other by writing, to stand on record in perpetuam rei memoriam.
These two did not contradict, but confirm each other, because he, who has
learned his lesson most perfectly by heart, may notwithstanding sometimes have
need to have recourse unto, and make use of his notes.

10. However herein the note of the Geneva translation is very considerable,
Obs^rve the notes in the Geneva transl^tion.
thus glossing on the text. For all this was left in writing in the book of the
Law, Exodus 15. 40. which book the King was bound to put in execution. Deuteronomy. 17.
19. Thus making David not by prophetical revelation, but prudentiall
collection, to arrive at the knowledge of the Prototype of the Temple, by a
writing, being (no new or immediate manuscript from heaven, but) the ancient
Scripture, delivering the model, and dimensions of the Tabernacle to Moses.
Yet so, that the dead letter in the word, was quickened and enlivened in David's
heart by Gods Spirit, teaching him to observe a general conformity betwixt the
Tabernacle and Temple, yet with those due and necessary alterations, as were
requisite betwixt the one a small and moveable fabric, and the other a large
and standing structure. An interpretation easier cavilled at, then confuted,
because such the Analogy betwixt these two edifices. -- Facies non una duabus,
Nec diversa tamen, qualis decet esse sororum.
Their faces neither diverse, nor the same,
But such as sisters very well became.
The latter being none other, then the imitation of the former with
proportionable addition: as indeed what is the Tabernacle of Grace, but the
Temple of Glory contracted; or the Temple of Glory, but the Tabernacle of Grace
dilated?

11. This * Solomon was not so pattern-bound as Moses
pattern was imparted to David, (who had the holier, though Solomon the larger
heart) and no doubt his son exactly observed the same. Yet can I not believe
that Solomon was altogether so pattern-bound, as Moses, who was so confined to
his Exodus 25. 40. Act. 7. 44. Heb. 8. 5.
instruction, that his hand might not write a letter, yea not make a flourish,
more then was in his Copy: And a knop or flower in the Candlestick under or
over, was a mortal transgression. More probable it is, that Hirams fancy, (
Solomon's Architect) was not pressed in all particulars, but was left a
volunteire for some descants of Art, whilst for the main, he kept himself to
the groundwork prescribed unto him.

12. Besides materials, The ^loor of the Temple purchased by David.
and model, David purchased the floor whereon the Temple was erected; a floor
paved with mysteries. Here on mount Moriah, an Angel Genesis 22 2. and 12.
stayed the stretched-out hand of Abraham from killing Isaac, and in the same
place, God stayed the 2 Samuel 24. 16.
sword of the destroying Angel, from slaying the Israelites with the
pestilence. No place therefore more precious, more cordial, or sovereign to
build a Temple in, then this, which was twice confirmed with Probatum est,
stamped with a double impression of Gods favor upon it. This floor David
bought of Araunah the Iebusite, from whom he would not take it of gift, that
hereafter it might not be said, that the Temple had no better title to the
ground whereon it was built, then the mere gratuity of such a man, whom most
conceive to be but a Pagan. Indeed a main matter to make a structure stand
firm, is to found it on ground lawfully purchased, and honestly paid for,
otherwise that floor, which for substance is a rock, will in point of right be
found but a sandy foundation.

13. On this place David built an Altar, An Altar here first built by David.
giving it this large character, This 1 Chr. 22. 1.
is the house of the Lord God, and this is the Altar of the burnt-offering for
Israel. Now as the heart is the Primum vivens in a creature; so this Altar was
the first thing erected in the Temple, though for the present made of such mean
matter as that hasty occasion would give leave. Here it stood many years after,
even until the brazen Altar of a firmer Fabric was substituted in the room
thereof. Either to this did Ioab fly, and caught hold in vain of the horns
thereof, (three years before the Temple was built) or else to some other Altar
near the Tabernacle in Sion For seeing those passages betwixt him and Solomon
were transacted in the City of Jerusalem, certain it is, he fled not to the
Altar as yet at 1 Chr. 21. 29.
Gibeon, distanced some miles from this place.

14. If it be demanded why David thus diligent to provide for the Temple, Why
David prohibited to build the Temple.
was forbidden to build it; a double reason is rendered thereof. First, because
he had been a 1 Chr. 28. 3. and 1 Chr. 22. 8.
man of war; and his martial reign encumbered with constant battles, afforded
not a peaceable convenience suitable to such a design. Secondly, because he had
shed much blood upon the earth in Gods sight, which principally related to his
killing of Uriah. Say not that Solomon also was a man of blood, having ordered
the executions of 1 King. 2. 29.
Ioab, Shimei, and Adoniah, doing it in a judicial way, not violent and
murdering manner, as David had done. And although his serious repentance had
cured the wound in his conscience, yet God suffered the scare in his credit so
far to remain, as to render him uncanonicall, or irregular for such an
employment. However, in some sense David may be said to have built the Temple:
Namely, in Gods gracious 2 Cor. 8. 12*
acception of the readiness of his will for the performance thereof.

CHAP. II. An army of workmen employed by Solomon in the building of the Temple.
1. NOw Solomon his son being a peaceable Prince, The Halcyon days of Solomon.
as his name imports, in his quiet reign began the building of the Temple. Thus
as Cryers make an Oyes to silence all noise, that men may the better attend to
the Judge when beginning his Charge; so by a general peace, the rage of all
people was stilled, before God in the Oracle did begin his familiar discourse
with the Israelites, or the foundation of the Temple taken in hand. Then
Solomon enters on the work, employing in mount Lebanon, a vast army of workmen,
in their several distances to advance this Fabric.

2. Namely, The multitude of workmen.
for servile work, an 1 Kin. 5. 15. and 2 Chr. 2. 18.
hundred and fifty thousand bearers of burdens, and hewers of stone and wood.
All these were strangers, Solomon reserving his native subjects for their
purses to pay taxes, not persons to bear burdens. Secondly, for plain work; in
which thirty thousand Israelites were employed, yet with such 1 King. 5. 14.
alternation, that, divided in three parts, they stayed one month in mount
Lebanon, and the other two at home. Thirdly, for carved-works; herein the
Sidonians only were used, whose exact number is not specified: But they must
needs be numerous, if we may guess the men by their mouths, and their mouths
by the 2 Chr 2. 10.
proportion of victuals allowed them. Lastly, above all for direction three
thousand three hundred were appointed (surely so many officers would suffer no
drones to be in the whole hive) to oversee the rest.

3. Such, Two invincible gulfes to swallow men's labors.
who admire how so many could so long be busied in such a building, would happily
have wondered more, how so few in so short a time could have finished the same,
had they beheld the magnificence thereof. Two great gulfes there were, which
insensibly swallowed up the labors of many thousands of men. First, the want
of horses in Judea (plenty whereof were brought out of Egypt toward the latter
end of King Solomon's reign) whereupon massy timber in those mountainous
countries, were managed by the main strength of men. The second was a religious
Criticisme peculiar to this structure, all things being beforehand so framed
and fitted in mount Lebanon, that not so much as the sound of an Axe, or Hammer
was heard in Jerusalem, when it came to be erected. Which exactness must needs
occasion many chargeable essays and samples, before it could be attained. Nor
wanted there a mystery therein, because as the moving Tabernacle typified the
Church Militant; so the Temple resembled the Triumphant, where those who shall
be thought worthy to be admitted into glory, shall have nothing to do, but to
be admitted into glory.

4. Some will say with Ioh. 3. 9.
Nicodemus, Objection about the impossibility thereof.
How could these things be, that no noise should be made at the erecting
thereof? suppose but a bedstead having head, sides, feet, posts, tester, cords,
and curtains fitted before, it cannot be set up without some necessary noise.
Yea grant their hammers or mallets cased with some soft matter, to bribe them
to silence, yet they could not be made so mute, but that the very contusion and
enforcement of the air, would unavoidably advance some sound. Nor were the
beams of the Temple so far in love with their mortises, as to run into them, or
the mortises so fond of the beams, as to embrace them of their own accord.

5. In answer hereto, Several answers thereunto.
some plead miracle, others exquisite Art, and several kinds of cementing,
souldering, rivetting, screwing, glewing, and other devices unknown to our age.
As for the Rabbinicall fancy, that Solomon with the blood of the worm Thamyr
Rather S^hamir. vid. Text^^ Eber. Lyran. Ezech. 3. 9.
effected this matter, most will account it improbable in it self, and
unproportionable to Scripture. Others distinguish on the degrees of the noise;
small in comparison of so great a work, and not obstreperous to a public
disturbance. But the best interpret it, that no laborious sound was heard from
the hewing or squaring of timber, or stone, but only a more cheerful, yea
melodious harmony, from the happy conjunction, and compacting of parts
together, now easily matched, which had been contracted before. This I am sure,
that what tongue-tied tools soever, were used at the erecting of the Temple,
too clamorous instruments were employed at the destruction thereof, when they
brake down the Psalm. 74. 6.
curved work thereof at once with axes and hammers.

6. Besides the two gulfes aforesaid, Solomon consulteth not with thri^t.
(the quicksands of many men's labors) it is also to be considered, that
though so wise a King as Solomon* would not burden himself with superfluous
numbers, yet in this Fabric, wherein he did personate and represent the great
God of heaven, he consulted more with his magnificence, then his frugality, not
minding so much how many the building in bare necessity did require, but how
many the builders with full authority could command.

7. Notwithstanding so many laborers entertained in the work, Seven years
spent in building the Temple.
seven years was this Temple in building. Here some will behold the sanctity
and perfection of the septenary number, 1 King. 6. 38.
so often occuring in Scripture, whilst we conceive this the best reason, why
just seven years were spent in the building thereof, because it could not be
ended in six, nor accomplished within a shorter compass of time. Indeed almost
twice as much time (thirteen years) did Solomon 1 King. 7. 1.
spend in building his own house: whereof this fair and ingenuous reason is
rendered by Ant. Iud. li. 8. cap. 2.
Josephus; because he was not so intent and earnest therein, as in the
structure of the Temple. It is in another case reported to the praise of Boaz,
Ruth. 3. 18.
the man will not be at rest, until he have finished the thing; so Solomon,
during those seven years of the Temples building, did not sleep in a cessation
from, nor slumber in an interruption of that work, which was intended for the
honor of God. Though in erecting his own Palace, as he made it for his
pleasure, so he did it at his leisure; as conveniences would permit.

CHAP. III. Of the general dimensions of the Temple.
1. THe length of this Temple was 1 King. 6. 2.
sixty Cubits (besides ten Cubits for the Porch, The dimensions of the Temple.
which complete the whole length, seventy) the breadth thereof twenty, the
height thirty. Here we may take notice of a manifest difference betwixt the
Scripture and the writer of the Jewish antiquities; both for the time, wherein
the Temple was built, and the dimensions thereof.

Scripture. 1 KING. 6. 1. Four hundred and fourscore years after the children
of Israel came out of the land of Egypt.

1 KING. 6. 2. The height thereof thirty Cubits.

Josephus Ant. Iud. li. 8. c. 2. Five hundred ninety and two years after the
departure of the Israelites out of Egypt.

Ibidem. The whole height of the Temple was six score Cubits.

A difference which will make no impression on his Faith, who has read Saint
Peter's resolution, Act. 5. 29.
We ought to obey God rather then man; Such passages not unusual in Josephus;
witness when he says of King Iehojachin, c (...), being just and merciful,
Ant. Iud. li. 10. cap. 8.
of whom the Scripture 2 King. ^ 4. 9.
once and 2 Chr. 36. 9.
again reports, and he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord.

2. A Cubit, Two sorts of Cubits.
say some, is the length from the elbow to the wrist; say others, to the tip of
the longest finger: some making it the fourth, others the sixth part of a man.
Some allowing it a foot, others a foot and half, with whom we concur. But it
is mainly material, that the Cubits of the Temple were 2 Chr. 3. 3.
after the first measure; that is, according to those whereby the Ark was
framed, before men's first strength and stature was abated. For as it is hard
exactly to define how big men were in former ages: so it plainly appears, both
by Scripture and Pagan Testimonies, how much men's might is impaired, and falls
short of the performances of the ancients. Homer, Iliad. E* in the duel
betwixt Diomedes and Aeneas. -- (...)
(...). --
Virgil, Aeneid. 12. in the fight betwixt, Aeneas and Turnus. Vix saxum lecti
bi^ sex cervice subirent,
Qualia nu^c hominu^ producit corpora tellus.
A stone he snatched and threw, a stone indeed
So huge* so heavy, two men now had need
To heave it up, such dwarfes our days do breed.
However we may safely with the most moderate, make the Cubit of the first
measure double to the former, and equal to our English yard.

3. Say not that this allowing of several Cubits amongst the Jews was double
dealing, This no breach of the law.
and a flat breach of that Commandment, Deuteronomy. 25. 13.
Thou shall* not have in thy bag diverse weights, a great and a small. For that
ordinance only forbad the abuse of one measure, a great to buy, and a small to
sell with, both being conceived of the same standard. But to have several
weights or measures, where the chapman is acquainted with the difference, and
the prices rated accordingly, is neither fault nor fraud at all, no more then
for a Merchant to sell by two several pound weights, the one Troy, the other
Averdupois, where the differences of the ounces is notoriously known.

4. But thus allowing the Temple to be sixty great Cubits, Objection; Temple a
z^ar or little one.
or as many yards, or ninescore feet, long; twenty great Cubits, or yards, or
sixty foot, broad; thirty great Cubits, or yards, or ninety foot, high; (all
clearly within the house, besides the breadth of the wall without) yet some will
say it answered not expectation, and the stately character given thereof in
Scripture. Is this that Fabric which filled the whole world with the fame
thereof, which was so small in it self considered? Nothing can be magnificum,
which is not magnum, and it must first be great, before it can be glorious. He
may be pretty, but not a proper person, who has not bulk proportionable to his
beauty. Yea if Solomon's Temple were compared to some structures and Fanes of
heathen Gods (as humane Authors give in their dimensions) it would appear as
Saint Gregory's to Saint Paul's, (the babe by the mothers side) or rather this
David's model would be like David himself standing by Goliath, so gigantick were
some Pagan Fabrickes in comparison thereof. Indeed this Temple is termed
exceeding magnificall 1 Chronicles. 22. 5. But Diana who is styled her magnificence,
Act. 19. 27. seems better to deserve the title, whose Temple is Plin. Not.
hist. li. 36. ca. 14.
said to be four hundred and twenty feet in the length, two hundred and twenty
in the breadth, Answ. It was a vast edif^ce well considered with the
appurtenances
and sixty in the height thereof.

5. To which we answer. 1t. The state of Solomon's Temple did principally
consist not so much in the greatness, as exquisite symmetry thereof, and costly
furniture therein. 2. It was abundantly big enough for the use for which it was
intended, namely to contain the holy vessels (with sufficient, yea with large
space betwixt them) and to receive such Priests as did officiate therein. For
the Holy of Holies was accessible to the High Priest alone, and that but once a
year, and into the Holy or inward house came not all the many thousands of
Levites, but only such Priests (to light lamps, set shewbread, offer
incense) as by Lot and course were called thereunto, as appears by Zacharies
sole staying therein, whilst the whole Luke 1. 10.
multitude of the people were praying without. Indeed nothing of drudgery was
done in the Temple, or what must require many men to manage it, it being
neither handsome nor healthful to crowd much company into a covered room in
that hot Country. Lastly, the great latitude and capacity of the Temple
consisted in the outward Courts, unseparable parts thereof of such receipt, as
to entertain multitudes of men sub dio, in the open air, as completing a
square of five hundred cubits, and in the amplitude, largeness and magnificence
thereof, equalling, yea exceeding the greatest buildings in the world, if
report be but reduced to the standard of truth, and travelers not permitted to
slip their thumb in their measuring of yards, overlashing in their relations.

6. To return to what properly is termed Temple, Temple bigger then Tabernacle,
and why.
the Tectum, or covered part thereof. It was more then twice as great as the
Tabernacle made by Moses, which (as De templi fabrica. l. 1. c. 7.
Ribera collects from the length of the curtains Exodus 26.) was but thirty
Cubits in length, ten in breadth, and as many in height. Yea, well might the
Temple exceed the Tabernacle in dimensions, if we consider; First, the
Tabernacle was erected by exiles wandering in a barren wilderness; the Temple
by a potent Prince, and his populous subjects in their own peaceable country.
Secondly, the Tabernacle was in a manner fitted for its foundation, to the
backs and shoulders of the Levites, which were to carry it, and therefore might
not exceed a portable proportion. Thirdly, the Temple mystically typified the
Church Triumphant, and therefore in strength, state, grace, and greatness was
to surpass the Tabernacle, the moveable Emblem of the Church Militant.

7. Now how the structure of the Temple stood in relation to the four quarters
of the world, is not plainly expressed in Scripture, The Temple stood East and
West.
but may partly be collected from the phrase used in the original, where the
porch is said to be set (...) before 1 King 6. 3.
the face of the house, where Before is Eastward in the propriety of the Hebrew
tongue. Hence all expositors, Jewish and Christian, confidently place the ends
or length of the Temple East and West, the sides or breadth thereof North and
South, making the porch or entrance on the East end, the inward house in the
middle, and the Holy of Holies in the West end of the Temple, which several
parts we come now orderly to describe.

CHAP. IV. Of the fair Porch at the entrance of the Temple.
1. THe Porch, in Latin porticus, and vestibulum, The dimensions of the porch.
in Hebrew Ulam, (which name the Septuagint retain) gave a stately
entertainment to such as entered into the Temple. In the book of 1 King. 6. 3.
Kings we meet with the length, and breadth thereof, but no height there
mentioned: In 2 Chr. 3. 4.
Chronicles we find the length and height of it, whilst there the breadth is
omitted; by putting both together we may spell the perfect dimensions thereof.
Thus, those who hope for exact intelligence from heaven, must peruse, and
compare all expresses dispatched thence. Yea, in the new Testament, Gods
message is whole, but not wholly by one messenger, so that, what is wanting in
one, is supplied in another Evangelist. This Porch was twenty Cubits in The
flying ^oll. Zach. 5. 2. was just ad^quate to this porch, in length and breadth
twenty Cubits long and ten borad.
length (according to the breadth of the house) ten in breadth, and an hundred
2 Chronicles. 3. 4.
and twenty in height, mounting tower-like above the rest, being four times as
high, as the body of the Temple.

2. Some will say with covetous Judas, Such a tower not useless.
To Man. 26. 8. and Ioh. 12. 4.
what purpose was this wast? seeing the inside thereof was but an useless
vacuity, not having any bells therein (trumpets being the only bells of the
Hebrews to summon their assemblies) and that otherwise it was for no service.
But know, that is not empty, which is full of ornament; nor idle, which stands
both for strength, and state. If an elegant exordium be so useful in an
oration, to gain the ears of the Auditors; no less graceful a fair front in a
building, to win the eyes of the beholders. Nor was Solomon minded like many in
after-ages, who cut down all top-masts from the ship of Christ's Church
(politickly pretending a tempest, and that all is done for her safety) and make
her close notted to the very keel; but, his large heart and hand, cared not what
he expended on the magnificence of Gods House.

3. Here I cannot but admire, The Temple not so high as the Porch.
to see legions Reckoned up by Ribera de Templo. li 1. c. 2. with whom he
seemethto concur.
of learned men, extend and carry on the aforesaid height, of an hundred and
twenty Cubits (appropriated in the text to the porch alone) even to the whole
fabric of the Temple, making the entire body thereof of an uniform height,
equal with the porch. Where, to excuse them from inconveniences, they make the
lower Temple to reach to the first loft, roof, or seeling of Cedar, over which
they fancy an upper house of equal proportion, the roof whereof ranged even
with the porch in height; so making a Duplicate, or all the rooms of the Temple
to be double, one on the floor, the other in the upper story. Indeed we read in
Solomon's song of a sort of sheep Cant. 4. 2.
whereof every one bare twins, but that such gemination was here in the Temple,
is altogether improbable, Scripture being silent of that second, or upper
story, nor mentioning any use, for which it was intended, and confining the
height of the Temple to just thirty 1 King 6. 2.
Cubits. Well therefore may we suspect some flaw, or crack in those spectacles,
which represent the Temple thus double, against the simplicity of the text, to
the unprejudiced readers thereof.

4. To return to the porch; Bid his conceit.
fair (no doubt) was the door or gate leading thereinto, though very bold is
the assertion of venerable Bede, In lib. qu^st. in lib. Regum quaest. 12.
affirming that it was so great, that, standing full east, the equinoctial Sun
without any obstacle, did send his beams through the door of the Temple, and
Oracle, into the very Ark which was within the Holy of Holies. But, grant the
gate very great in the porch, surely the sunshine could not penetrate so far,
being intercepted by the partition. It being improbable, that the door of the
Oracle was ever left open, that mysterious place being unenterable, as well for
the eyes, as feet of any, save the High Priest alone. Otherwise, needless was
the renting of the vail at our Saviors passion, Luke 23. 45.
if the passage into the Holy of Holies was pervious at all times, or if the
gate thereof did usually stand open.

5. The porch how overlaid with gold.
This porch (as the words lay plain in the text) Solomon 2 Chr. 3. 4.
overlaid within with pure gold. However interpreters expound these words
(though next in position to the porch) rather to reach over in their relation,
to other more inward parts of the Temple, conceiving it too vast and needless
an expense, to overlay a tower six score Cubits high within with gold. But, ill
fare covetous Commentatours on a liberal text. Solomon will give them small
thanks for their great thrift; to spare his cost, and at once to spoil both
the letter of the text, and the luster of his Temple. We conclude it overlaid
with pure gold, that is, gilded all over, but being silver within; so
reconciling it to another place, where David is said to have provided 1 Chr.
29. 4.
seven thousand talents of refined silver, to overlay the walls of the houses
withal. Thus it took the denomination of gold, from that metal which was most
precious, and most visible on the surface thereof.

6. Let none here condemn me, for grudging the Temple her glory, thus debasing
the gold thereof into silver-gilt. For mine own part, as Moses wished all Gods
people Number. 11. 29.
Prophets; it would not offend me, if all Gods House were pearls, mine eyes
are not so bleared with envy, as to smart at the shining of Solomon's Temple.
But a due decorum must be observed in this edifice, and one place of Scripture
must not be advanced, to depress another. And, seeing there were degrees in
holiness, why not also gradations in gallantry, between the several rooms of
the Temple? So that all three might be overlaid with pure gold; the porch with
leaf, the inward house with plate, the Holy of Holies with the most refined
gold of Parvaim.

CHAP. V. Of the Holy, or outward Temple.
1. WE advance now from the Porch into the next room, The names and dimensions
thereof.
called (...) Hechal the Temple, (because the largest part thereof) as also
(...) the greater 2 Chr. 3. 5.
house, by Tremellius templum anterius, by others interior domus, the
inward-house, (namely in respect of the porch) which had forty 1 King. 6. 17.
Cubits in the length, while the breadth and height thereof, was adequate to
the general dimensions of the Temple.

2. The foundation of this Temple (as of the whole structure) consisted of
great costly hewed stones, The foundation of the Temple.
brought thither by the Kings 1 King. 5. 17.
command. Here if the vulgar Latin has Lapides pretiosos, we must not
understand gems and jewels thereby; for, the burying of such shining beauties
under ground, what had it been else, but the putting of a candle under a
bushel? Besides, such are by nature too small for that service, and it was the
prerogative royal of the new Jerusalem, which came down from heaven, to have
the foundation of that City Revel. 21. 19.
garnished with all manner of precious stones. Conceive them here stones of
price, on whose polishing much cost was expended to make them no less fair to
^ight, then firm for substance. For, Solomon, who built not for ostentation,
but true magnificence, did not worship God only with eye-service; but was
careful, that the underground work of the Temple should be as well specious,
as strong; knowing, that the same God saw both the secret of his heart, and
bottom of his house. To lesson us in our spiritual edifices, 1 Timothy 6. 19.
to lay up in store for our selves a good foundation against the time to come,
that we may lay hold on eternal life.

3. How thick the walls of the Temple were, The thickness of the walls.
is not expressed in Scripture. Villalpandus out of Ezekiel colle^teth the
breadth of the wall to be six Cubits, In Ezekiel. cap. 41. ver. 5.
but how truly, I will not determine; whilst Peter Comestor, without giving
any reason, makes the wa^^en Cubits thick; more, I believe, then an Architect
will allow proportionable; not to say, how many quarries of stone so much solid
wall would superfluously devou^e. We are well assured (though insisting on no
^et measure) it was built most substantial of it self (had not the sins of the
people infeebled it) with breadth suitable to such an height, to which it was
to be raised, and such a burden, which it was to support.

4. This wall had the outside thereof made of stone, The threefold matter of
the wall.
for strength; the middle of Cedar, for beauty; the inside of gold, for
magnificence. The Cedar was so curiously carved with imagery of flowers, 1
Kings 6. 18. and 29.
Palms, and Cherubims, that the walls of this house seemed at the same time, a
Garden of flowers, a Grove of trees, yea and a Paradise of Angels. Nor was all
this flowretry, and other celature on the Cedar, lost labor, because
concealed, when covered with gold. Indeed, had such graving been either
in-laid, or flat-work, the superinduction of the gold had hid it, from any to
behold it; but those figures being outwardly imbossed with visible
prominencies, the plate of the purest and most flexible metal, applied it self
so close to each lineament in the sculpture, that it set off, and expressed the
carved work with advantage, abating nothing of the cunning, and adding much to
the cost thereof.

5. The several shapes of Cherubims.
But being here to enquire into the forms of these Cherubims, I am utterly
dishea^tened with that passage in Josephus Ant. Iud. lib. 8. cap. 2.
speaking of their shapes, (...), none can conceive or express what kind of
creatures they were. Notwithstanding, many learned men are very peremptory in
assigning their shapes, but no more agreeing in their several opinions, then
Men, Women, Children, Lions, Eagles, Oxen, are one like to another. In all
which forms I find Cherubims represented by several Authors, grounding them
on the vision in Ezekiel. 1. 5.
Ezekiel. Happily they assumed several shapes, not always fixed to one figure,
but preferring that form for the time being, which suited best with their
present service. Appearing, when sent to treat, Men; when to terrify, Lions;
when to show strength, Oxen; when to use swiftness, Eagles. But for certainty
herein, the surest way, to know the fashion of these celestial creatures, is
to live and dye in Gods fear and favor; and then, shall we not only see, but
in some sort be Cherubims our selves, (...) fellow-commoners with Angels (as
our Luke 20. 36.
Savior says) and sharers with them in glorious immortality.

6. The door leading into the Temple.
Of the same curiosity for 1 King. 6. 35.
carving, were the two doors with folding leaves, but made of fir tree, and
overlaid with gold, which lead out of the porch into the Temple. The
workmanship of these doors, and of the wall being in all particulars so like,
that when they were shut, no breach or interruption appeared in the graving,
but a fair continuation thereof. Posts of olive tree Ibid. ver. 33.
apiece were made for those doors to turn upon.

7. The gorgeous floor thereof.
The floor hereof was made of boards 1 King. 6. 16.
of fir (only as stifning in the middle) and they were faced and lined with
gold on both sides. So sounds the text to the plain reader thereof, Ibid.
ver. 30.
and the floor of the house he overlaid with gold within and without. But
Tremellius Vid. ejus annot. in locum.
expounds this within and without, not, above and beneath the boards
(theseeming sense of the words) but, tam in adyto quam in templo, both within
the Oracle, as also without, in this Temple or great house.

8. Some will say, Plain but of pure gold.
this was not so proper, that the pavement of the house should be as rich as
the roof thereof. But this must be imputed to the poverty of nature, not
affording more precious metal, seeing worse the gold was too bad for the floor,
and better could not be had for the roof. Yet the foresaid pavement though of
gold must be presumed plain, without any carving, otherwise the inequality of
the sculpture had rendered it uneasy to be walked upon. Here the Priests feet
were taught to trample on worldly wealth; and surely, one means to move God to
Romans 16. 20.
tread Satan under our feet, is to make a footstool of this temporal Mammon,
being one of his principal baits, and most pernicious temptations.

9. Windows were also made in the Temple, but how many, Windows in the Temple.
is not exactly specified. The fewer would serve the turn, because of the
abundance of artificial lamps constantly burning therein. Indeed, some
competent darkness raises devotion; for, though that 1 Timothy 6. 16.
unapproachable light which no mere man has or can see, does heighten, and
elevate the zeal of glorified Saints admitted thereunto, yet too much outward
light draws out devotion too thin, and scatters it in the eyes, whilst a
solemn darkness remands it to the heart with greater veneration. And a dark
Oratory (being as it were a room hung with black against a funeral) does mind
such as enter therein of mortification.

10. These windows come under a threefold enquiry. The^ fashion, matter, and
position.
1. How fashioned. 2. Whereof made. 3. Where placed. For their fashion, the
original terms them Secuphim athumin, words so variously rendered by
Translatours, that the windows which should lighten the fabric, are themselves
the most dark and difficult to be understood. We stick to our last translation
of narrow lights; a form found advantageous, as most thrifty to collect
(tunnel-like) most light from without, so most liberal to dispense it within
with greatest convenience. For their matter, Rabbi Iehuda an ancient writer
(whose judgment Tremellius prefers Vid. annot. in 1 King 6. 4.
above all others) conceives them of glass, plenty whereof we have observed
nigh Sidon, in purity corrivall with Crystal it self. But On Ezekiel. 41.
Saint Hierome will have them lattised, Lignis interrasilibus, and
vermiculatis, with worming or winding splinters of shaved wood: in which notion
the Septuagint renders them (...) windows of net work. If so, we will be bold
to conceive such wooden lathes were overlaid with gold, otherwise it was
unsuitable, that when no wood appeared on the walls, it should presume to peep
out in the windows. Sure I am, in the second Temple (inferior to this in
magnificence) Josephus De bello Iud. lib. 7. cap. 10.
reports, how a Roman soldier set fire on a golden window. However, if one will
maintain, that these windows, made as much to let in air, as light, and
(perchance) more to let out smoke then either (caused by the constant lamps and
perfumes) were open without any shutting at all, I see no coercive argument, to
enforce his belief to the contrary, can be taken out of Scripture. Now because
the Temple was compassed about with three stories of chambers, each of them,
five, and all three, fifteen Cubits high, these windows in the Temple must be
made above the roof of those chambers, where their high standing afforded a
double benefit, both of clearer light, and greater privacy.

11. The roof of the Temple, The roof and covering thereof.
finding no exception to the contrary, probably was flat, built like other
houses in Judea, where men might walk upon them; Mat. 10. 27.
Preach you (says our Savior) on the house tops. But, if any ask, with what
metal it was covered? I am not ashamed to profess my ignorance. A quere,
which, by his own confession, In Ezekiel. tom. 2. par. 2. cap. 40.
posed Villalpandus, propounded unto him by Isabella Archduchess of Austria,
even after he had studied the subject many years, and accounted himself
question-proof in all particulars. Insomuch, that non-plussed hereat, he was
fain afresh to betake himself to his book, and on second enquiries found out of
Eupolemus, and other Authors (Scripture being silent therein) that it was
covered with tiles of brass (no more contradiction, then 1 King. 22. 11.
horns of Iron mentioned in Scripture) which, squammato opere, in scalework,
lay one over another. A thing not unlikely in it self, David having provided
brass in such abundance, that it was 1 Chr. 22. 14.
without weight. No wonder, when we read that in Meldorpe a small City of
Dithmars in Denmark the ordinary inhabitants therein cover their houses with
Pet. Hcylyn. Micr. pa. 326.
copper. This I dare negatively affirm, it was not covered with lead, being so
drossie and impure a metal, that not one ounce thereof is mentioned to be used
about all the Temple.

CHAP. VI. Of the Holy of Holies.
1. THis is called the Oracle, The dimension of the Holy of Holies.
in Hebrew Debir, Gods Parliament House, or, speaking place, also the Holy of
Holies, or, the inner-house. It was in fashion apiece, the height, length,
and breadth thereof equally extending to 1 King. 6. 20.
twenty Cubits. To show the stability, and firmness of happiness: so that,
place the roof where the floor was, exchange one side-wall for the other,
Cube-like it still continued the same firm proportion. Homil. 14. in. Ezekiel.
Nor is the allusion of Saint Gregory to be contemned, on the like occasion
observing, that so much as the soul ascends in knowledge of God, so much it
extends in love to his neighbor; both which meeting together make a
square-well-grown, and proportionable Christian. Of the same form, but far
less, was the Holy of Holiest in the Tabernacle, namely ten See Ribera de
Templo. li. 1. cap. 6. p. 28.
Cubits square verifying our observation, that the Temple was the Tabernacle
printed in a greater character.

2. Some will demand of me, The vacuity above the Oracle how employed.
that seeing the Temple was thirty Cubits, and this Holy of Holies but twenty
Cubits high, what then became of the remaining ten Cubits, reaching up to the
roof of the Temple? I answer in the words of Elisha in another case, 2. King.
4. 27.
The Lord has hid it from me, and has not told me. For the main we may be
confident, that seeing Christ commanded the fragments of the multiplied loaves
to be basketted up, that John 6. 12.
nothing be lost, surely no rag of room, no snip, or shred of empty space cut
off from the squareness of the Oracle, was cast away as needless, but was used
for some sacred service, though the particular employment thereof appears not
in Scripture.

3. It is stiffly can vassed by learned men, Whither any windows in the O^acle.
whether any windows were in this Oracle; and topicall arguments are produced
on both sides. For the Negative.
1 Windows Villalp. in Ezekiel cap. 41. tom. 2 par. 2. cap. 4.
were useless therein, which was entered into but once a year. 2 The Cherubims
overshadowed the Mercy-seat, showing thereby these mysteries were intended not
for sight, but secrecy. 3 This Oracle was designed for a little heaven, wherein
They need no Revel. 22. 5.
candle nor light of the Sun, for the Lord God gives them light. 4 It was
exposed to the west, or setting Sun, whose declining beams were improper for
that place being the emblem of perfection.
For the A^^irmative.
1 A total darkness had made it rather the Truth of a dung^on, then Type of
heaven. 2 The 1 King 6. 4.
text places these windows not in the Hechal, but Ha-baith or House, which
properly compriseth all the structure of the Temple. 3 Uniformity to the rest
of the fabric required, that the windows in the Oracle should be correspondent
to those in the outward house. 4 S. In Ezekiel. cap. 41.
Hierome is positive, that on three sides. South, North, and West, windows were
made, only denies any in the East, or Porch of the Temple, where the door
supplied the want thereof.
But leaving the Reader to the liberty of his own opinion, I conceive them too
cruel, who serve the Oracle, as the Philistims did Judge. 16. 21.
Samson, putting out the eyes thereof, to which some necessary light in
probability must be allowed, and that the high Priest therein did not annually
officiate with blind obedience.

4. But grant the windows doubtful, certain it is, The doors of the Holy of
Holies.
that a most magnificent door of olive tree was made out of the greater house
into the Oracle, carved with Cherubims, and overlaid with gold, the lintell and
sideposts thereof being five square, of the same matter and metal. As for the
Cherubims of massy gold, with their several dimensions, hereof more
hereafter, in the description of the Utensils of the Temple.

5. The floor was covered with boards of Cedar, Gold of Parvaim.
overlaid with gold. But whether or no, the precious stones, wherewith this
house was 2 Chr. 3. 6.
garnished, were disposed in the pavement, or elsewhere in the walls, or roof,
we are as uncertain, as we are confident those precious stones were exposed to
view, and not covered (as the rest) under the gold of Ibidem.
Parvaim; which some, from the affinity of the word, conceive Peru, or Peruana.
But, we will not be over curious in seeking for the Country, which should we
discover, all the misers of our modern age, would presently flock thither, to
fraught themselves with wealth. Nor is it any absurdity, to conceive, Parvaim
might be a Country now altogether unknown, where God broached a rich vein of
gold for this par^icular purpose; and, the structure of the Temple once ended,
stopped it up again, that no other should taste thereof ever after.

6. The nails of the Holy of Holies.
The weight of the nails used in this room was fifty 2 Chr. 3. 9.
shekels of gold, which Ribera understands not collectively of them all (the
most seeming sense of the text) but, that each of them severally weighed so
much. I dare not say, that Solomon particularly reflected on them, in that his
expression, The words of the wise are as goads, and as ^ccles. 12. 11.
nails fastened by the Masters of the assemblies. But here the quere will be,
how could they be of pure gold, seeing nails of such refined metal will not
drive, but flat, because of the extraordinary softness, and pliableness
thereof? It is answered, either they were rivetted into holes fore-prepared of
purpose, or else they were stifned with some mixture of silver, or copper, not
for cheapness, but the greater usefulness thereof. Be it here once for all
observed, that, where the Utensils of the Temple, are termed of pure gold,
understand it so pure, as the end, for which they were intended, would permit.
Otherwise some necessary allay of baser metal made them not only serviceable
for, but more durable in that purpose, for which they were employed.

7. A stately Veil was used as a traverse, The curious Veil.
cross the Holy of Holies, which Solomon made 2 Chr. 3. 14.
of blew, and purple, and crimson, and fine linen, and wrought Cherubims
thereon. If any demand why Solomon did not rather make use of that veil of
like Exodus 26. 31.
workmanship, which Moses had made by Gods direction, then put himself to the
pain, and expense of a new one? Let them know, that the former veil fitted for
the Sanctum Sanctorum in the Tabernacle, was too short and narrow, yea, half in
half too little for this purpose. Therefore, it not being princely to piece,
patch, or eek the same, another was contrived, as indeed nothing at the second
hand was suitable to so stately a fabric, wherein (as the Apostle in another
case) 2 Cor. 5. 17.
Old things are passed away, behold all things are become new. But more hereof
hereafter in the Utensils of the Temple.

8. One difficulty remains, How the Holy of Holies was in the midst of the
Temple.
where this Holy of Holies was placed, because the text 1 King. 6. 19.
says (...) he prepared it, in medio domus, in the midst of the house, which
seems to import, that the house or Temple did inviron, or encompass it, and
that the Oracle, like the center, was surrounded with the circumference of the
Temple: But on stricter enquiry, it will be found only a pure Hebraism, and
that in the midst signifies the same with within, as it is judiciously
rendered in our translation. Thus says David, Psalm. 101. 7.
He that works deceit shall not live in the midst of my house, that is, shall
not dwell within my family. O Lord, Hab. 3. 2.
says the Prophet, Revive thy work in the midst of the years, in the midst of
the years make known. Not insisting therein on an exact middle, but desiring it
might be done, only within the time, and term appointed, and promised by the
Prophet. So also was the Oracle prepared in the midst of the house, that is,
within the same, as the Chancell is said to be within the Church, through which
the high and usual way leads into it.

CHAP. VII. Of the Chambers about the Temple.
1. ALthough it be repeated thrice in one 1 King. 6 5.
verse, Chambers how round about.
that chambers were built round about, yet because in the same place, mention
only is made of the Temple and Oracle, we conceive with learned Ribera, that
the east end where the Porch stood, was clear, and un-chambered, having no
other buildings about it, to hinder the prospect thereof. Nor, let any be
moved, because that the chambers are said to be built (...) Ibidem.
upon the wall, as if they were founded on the wall of the temple, supra being
there taken for juxta, or contra, upon; or hard by, or over against, as our
translation renders it. Thus it is in the original, Psalm. 137. 1.
Upon the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept, that is, by the waters; as
these chambers were built hard by, or leaning to the wall of the Temple.

2. Three rows there were of these chambers. In the lowest, Their dimen^ions.
each chamber 1 King. 6. 6.
was five; in the middle, six; in the third, and highest story, seven cubits
broad; and each of them equally lbid. ver. 10.
five cubits in height, going up from the first to the middle, thence to the
highest story with winding stairs. The beams of these chambers did not lie in,
but 1 King. 6. 6.
rest on the wall of the Temple, the reduction or abatement whereof, narrowing
in, the higher it went, afforded fit stays for that purpose. It seems, the
beams were not mortised into the walls of the Temple, because the intireness of
that building was not to be wounded with holes, and perforations, which in
process of time might fret in, and indent into the structure it self. Special
care therefore was taken, to preserve the wholeness and prevent all fractions
in this fabric, in some relation to the Temple of Christ's body, whereof a bone
was not to be broken.

3. It is not expressed in Scripture, The vessels of the Tabernacle kept in
these chambers.
for what use these chambers were principally intended. Some conceive them
designed for galleries, or walking-places; which to me seems too much
presumption, for any to take their pleasure so near the holy place. Others will
have them used for Dormitories, for such Priests to lodge in, who were in
ordinary attendance about the Temple. For my own part, I conceive them employed
for Repositories, wherein the holy vestments, and vessels were safely laid up,
together with those of the Tabernacle, which (though not used) were here
carefully preserved. For, first, the vessels of Moses his making were not
aliened, or diverted to any profane service; such sacrilege being unsupposable
in that age. Secondly, they were not altered, or melted by Solomon (of more and
lesser, so to make fewer, and greater Utensils for the Temple) because, the
making, as well as the matter; the shape, as well as the substance of all the
Tabernacle-vessels were of livine institution. Thirdly, they were not employed
in Gods service, because (some few excepted, whereof hereafter) being
calculated for the Meridian of the Tabernacle a less fabric, thus fell out to
be too short, and small in proportion to the Temple, as in the Vail was formerly
observed. Seeing therefore they were neither aliened, altered, nor used, it
remains they were carefully kept in these chambers, intimated in the text, 2
Chr. 5. 5.
where after the finishing of the Temple, the Levites are said to bring up into
it, all the vessels of the Tabernacle. Thus graces acquired or infused into a
Christian in this life, are not lost, forfeited, or cast away after death; but,
preserved* perfected, and swallowed up in glory.

4. As for the mystical meaning of these chambers; Fancy runs riot when
spurred with superstition.
Bid, Lib. 7^.
no doubt, thought he hit the very mark, when finding therein the three
conditions of life all belonging to Gods Church. In the ground-chamber, such as
live in marriage; in the middle-chamber, such as contain; but, in the excelsis
or third-story, such as have attained to the sublimity of perpetual virginity.
Rupertus, in the lowest chamber, lodges those of practical lives with Noah;
in the middle, those of mixed lives with Job; and in the highest, such as spend
their days with Daniel in holy speculations. But is not this rather lusus, then
allusio, sporting with, then expounding of Scriptures? Thus when the gates of
the Oracle are made 1 King. 6. 31
five-square, Ribera therein reads our conquest over the five senses; and when
those of the door of the Temple are said to be apiece, therein says he is
denoted the quaternion of Evangelists. After this rate, Hiram (though, no
doubt, dexterous in his art) could not so soon fit a pillar with a fashion, as
a Friar can fit that fashion with a mystery. If made three-square, then the
Trinity of Persons; apiece, the cardinal virtues; five-square, the
Pentateuch of Moses; six-square, the Petitions in the Lords prayer;
seven-square, their Sacraments; eight-square, the Beatitudes; nine-square, the
orders of Angels; ten-square, the Commandments; eleven-square the moral
virtues; twelve-square, the articles of the Creed are therein contained. In a
word, for matter of numbers, fancy is never at a loss, like a beggar never out
of his way, but has some haunts where to repose it self. But, such as in
expounding of Scripture reap more then God did sow there, never eat what they
reap thence, because such grainless husks, when seriously threshed out, vanish
all into chafe.

5. For the rest, we refer the reader unto our Map, wherein he may observe a
double Alphabet for his direction. One of Roman letters, presenting only such
things in the building of the Temple, as are infallibly founded on the words of
the text. The other of Italian, relating to such additions, which, to complete
this fabric, are taken out of Traditions, Rabbis, Fathers, and learned men's
conjectures. We thought it unfit, to confound these together in the same
character, being so distanced in their own natures. The Apostle Saint Paul
varies his phrase, when delivering his prudentiall advises, from his style,
when enjoining, what he had from divine inspiration. In the former, To the rest
1 Cor. 7. 12.
speak I, not the Lord: In the latter, Ibid. ver. 10.
I command, yet not I, but the Lord. It had therefore been impudent presumption
in us, not to have observed a difference in this our description, betwixt
immediate divine dictates, and humane (probable, but fallible) collections.

Here the Map of Solomon's Courts is to be inserted.



THE COURTS and UTENSILS OF SOLOMON'S TEMPLE.
CHAP. I. Of the Court of the Priests.
1. SO much for the Diamond it self, The difficulty of the present subject,
with the causesthereof.
the covered Temple, come we now to the Ring wherein it was set, the Courts
which encompassed it. Herein we meet with much difficulty, arising partly from
Gods silence, (speaking little in Scripture of the present subject) partly from
mansloquacity, whose fancies without warrant from the word, are as copious as
different in describing the Courts of this Temple. But, that which makes the
matter in hand more intricate is, because learned men confound Temples and
Times, ascribing those Courts to Solomon's, which only belonged to the second
Temple, at, and after the time of our Savior. Thus, as country painters make
the nine Worthies (not according to the garb of those ancient ages wherein they
lived) with bands and cuffs according to our modern fashion; so some Jewish
writers (Josephus himself being not wholly free from this fault) shape the
Courts of Solomon's Temple, not after their true form in the old Testament; but
as the second Temple adorned by Herod, stood modelled in their own days.

2. We read of Jacob, Ill consequences of confounding the two Temples.
that he set his own sheep three days Genesis 30. 36.
journey from the flocks of Laban his father-in-law, so sufficiently to
distinguish their several stocks from making quarrels by meeting together. A
greater distance divides the two Temples, there being no less then seventy
years, betwixt the destruction of the one, and erection of the other. Enough in
probability to prevent all mistakes, which might arise from ^udling them
together. I wonder therefore the more at their mavelous agility, who so
easily can leap over this great-gulfe of time, and who by confounding the two
Temples, and making many things common to both, of two perfect models, compose
one no better then a monster. That we run not on the same rocks, we will
carefully observe their several properties, insisting only on such things for
the present, as were peculiar to Solomon's fabric, confining our selves to
Scripture instructions: as knowing that the judicious palate will prefer a drop
of the sincere milk of the word, before vessels full of Traditionary pottage,
resenting of the wild gourd of humane invention.

3. A Court, The fashion of a Court.
in Latin Atrium, Greek (...), Hebrew (...) Chatzer, according to architecture
consists of two principal parts, 1 An open space in the middle (properly
called cavedium, quasi cavum edium) exposed to wind, and weather. 2 A covert on
the sides thereof (termed porticus and (...)) whither in heat, or rain, men
might retreat, for shade, or shelter, like the cloisters about the
Royal Exchange in London.
This premised of the fashion of a Court in general, Solomon made two of them
on the east of the Temple, one called (...) chatzer happenimith, or, the inner
1 King. 6. 36.
Court (in 2 Chr. 4. 9.
Chronicles, the Court of the Priests) built with three rows of hewn stone,
and a row of 1 King. 6. 36.
Cedar beams. Understand three rows, not collaterally in thickness, all abreast
on the floor, and the Cedar for ceiling within, (as Richardus will have it) but
three subordinately in height, one upon another, with Cedar beams (as lightest,
and therefore uppermost) for a tarras on the top thereof. This is all that
Scripture acquaints us with, concerning the fabric of the inner Court. For,
that each row of stone therein, was of a different color, as Lyra Vid. Lyram
in locum.
affirms, is but a fancy of his own. Such variation of colors I believe in
Joseph's Genesis 37. 3.
coat, and Thamars 2 Samuel 13. 18.
garment, because Scripture has affirmed it: not here, where no warrant out of
the word for such an assertion.

4. Probably certain ascents led hither out of the outward Court, and hence
into the Temple. For, D^grees in this Court.
besides the frequent phrase of going up into Gods house: it was proper that
the Temple, as in holiness, so in height should be distanced above her Courts
(as they one above another, and both above common ground) were it but to mind
such as approached thither, with the mounting of their bodies to elevate their
hearts in devotion. But, how many these stairs or steps were, is uncertain,
though some will have them fifteen, according to the number of the Psalms of
Degrees, sung, as they affirm, by the Priests in their ascent to the Temple.

5. This inner Court, People (...) pressin into the (...) Court.
or Court of the Priests, was proper only for the Priests to enter into. Yet
probably the common people made a tumul^^ous incursion into it, when stoning
Zachariah at the command of King Ioash in the Court of the house of the Lord,
even 2 Chr. 24. 21.
betwixt the Temple Mat. 23. 35.
and the Altar. As if the Antiperistasis of two eminent holy places on both
sides of them, had intended and emboldned their cruelty, and profaneness.
Wherefore, his last words, the Lord look upon it, 2 Chr. 24. 22.
and require it, speak not not so much revenge of his own death, as zeal to
Gods honor, that he would vindicate the profanation of so holy a place. This I
conceive one cause why the Prophet points the Priests to this particular
place, to ^oel 2. 17.
weep betwixt the porch and the Altar, so by their sorrow to avert Gods
judgments from their nation, for this foul murder by their ancestors
committed therein.

CHAP. II. Of the great, or outward Court.
1. WHereas Solomon is said to have made the Inner Court of the House of the
Lord; The several names of this Court.
by the rule of relation, an outward Court is thence next inferred. But to
clear it more, express mention is made thereof 2 Chronicles. 12. 9. where, besides
the Court of Priests, he is said to have made the great Court, and doors for
the Court, and overlaid the doors of them with brass. This Court in Hebrew is
called Azarah 2 Chr. 4. 9.
, rendered by Montanus atrium auxilii, from Azar to help, because God there
answered his peoples prayer by his gracious assistance afforded unto them.

2. Well might this be termed the great Court, Certainly large, how large
uncertain.
seeing large (though uncertain) were the dimensions thereof, an hundred Cubits
square at the least. But what was this to contain all Israel therein? Philip
speaking of five thousand to be fed, Two John 6. 7.
hundred penny worth of bread (says he) is not sufficient for them, that every
one may take a little. But, grant this Court two hundred Cubits square (more
then the place will allow) this would afford but few inches for a man's body to
stand in, except the ground was here (as the loaves) miraculously multiplied.
We therefore conceive, that the people of the land were successively admitted
to this place, otherwise impossible to contain them. Ascents, or stairs did
also lead into this Court, but how many is not known; surely they were low and
little, short and easy, to be climbed up, otherwise the cattle brought
thither to be sacrificed, could not conveniently clamber over them.

3. This Court was by successive Kings (especially Hezekiah, This Court
bettered by succeeding Kings.
who 2 King. 18. 16.
cased the pillars thereof with silver) improved to more beauty, then it had in
the days of Solomon. Some will say, this was a disparagement to the perfection
of Solomon's work, as if he had left any defects, or defaults therein, to be
amended by others. Were not his structures, as his discoveries, complete? for,
Eccles. 2. 12.
Who is he that will come after the King in things? It is answered, the outward
Temple was, in the appendent Courts thereof, capable of more cost and expense,
to make them both bigger, and braver; though the covered Temple was semel and
semper, at once and for ever perfected, afterward admitting of no new
addition, when Solomon had finished it. Surely God granted not such a Monopoly
to Solomon alone to ingross all honor to himself, so that no reserve was left
for posterity, no bottom for their bounty to build on, in after ages, to
testify their gratitude to Gods goodness. Some accessions therefore might be
made (though not to the vital parts, as I may say) to the out-lims of the
Temple. It is the privilege not of the house of God, but of God himself, to be
so perfect, as that nothing can be added unto him.

4. But others will object, Hez^kiah encused from innovation.
that this was a presumptuous innovation in Hezekiah, seeing the Courts of the
Temple, and all things therein were framed according to the divine 1 Chr. 28.
11. 12. 19.
pattern David left to Solomon, for him to overlay those pillars with silver,
which Solomon's wisdom, following Gods platform, was pleased to make plain.
But, let such know, that he swerveth not at all from the proportion of the
Copy, who only gilds, or colors the letters therein. Hezekiah for the main
kept himself to the former fabric, not altering, but adorning the same. The
worst was, that afterward he 2 King. 18. 16.
cut off the silver again to purchase the favor of Sennacherib. Better had
those pillars been left naked, then thus to be clothed, and then to be stripped
of their costly coats. For, though (as some scornfully may scoff) there was no
danger of their catching cold when thus disrobed; yet the beauty of those
pillars were thereby much impaired, looking ruggedly when again uncased,
besides the inexcusable sacrilege therein committed, whereof hereafter.

5. We must not forget the entry, Private passage from the Kings house into the
Temple.
leading from this Court to the Kings Palace, through which the Kings of Judah
had at pleasure a private passage into the Temple. This continuation of the
Kings to Gods house, showed the mutual intercourse which ought to be betwixt
Policy, and Piety; as also that Princes (besides their set, solemn, and public
addresses to God by prayer) must have their secret recourses unto him, in their
occasional devotions. It was first made by King Solomon, and then so stately a
structure, that amongst other things, the Queen of Sheba was ravished with
admiration at the sight thereof, when she beheld 1 King. 10. 5.
the ascent by which he went up into the house of the Lord. And yet afterward
it was made more magnificent, when 2 Chr. 9. 11.
terrased on both sides with 1 King. 10. 1.
Pillasters made of those Almuggin trees which she presented to Solomon; which,
if oderiferous, (as some will have it) made that passage as sweet to the smell,
as specious to the sight. Wicked Ahaz 2. King. 16. 18.
turned this entry from the house of the Lord, for the King of Assyria, that
is, as Vide ejus annot. in locum.
Tremellius will have it, stopped up, or diverted that passage, fearing, lest
through it the King of Assyria should out of the Temple suddenly surprise the
Kings palace. I conceive this done not for fear, but in favor of the Assyrian
King, Ahaz hereby cutting off all connection, and dependence of his Palace to
the Temple, and utterly renouncing all relation to true Religion, so the more
to confirm this friendship with that heathen King, begun on a new account, and
grounded on pure principles of Idolatry. At the same time he turned out also
the 2 Kin. 16. 18.
covert of the Sabbath which they had built in the house, by which our foresaid
Author understands, a place erected for the shelter of such Priests as
officiated on the Sabbath.

6. As for their tradition, A Rabbinicall Tradition.
who report Solomon to have written on the walls of the Temple, sovereign
Receipts against all diseases, which Hezekiah afterward is said to raze out,
because people placed too much confidence therein, to the prejudice of divine
providence, I listen to both as Rabbinicall fables. Surely such medicines (if
any there prescribed) proved uneffectuall to cure Asa's gout, Ioram's
dysentery, Uzziahs leprosy, as indeed no art can crave longer time, when death
calls for the present payment of the debt to nature.

CHAP. III. Of the Gates and Porters of the Court.
1. HEaven has only one, Four principal gates.
and that a Mat. 7. 14.
narrow gate leading thereinto. But several fair gates on all sides, gave
entrance into the Courts of Solomon's Temple. Some of them to us of certain,
others but of conjecturall situation. Of the former were, 1 Eastgate, where 1
Chr. 26. 14.
Shelemiah was Porter. This gate was set in the front, leading directly to the
Temple, and therefore King Iotham 2 Kin. 15. 35. and 2 Chr. 27. 3. Vide Tremel.
in locos.
rebuilt it, mounting Monarch-like above the parity of other ports, that it
became higher then all the rest, yet met with no zelot to humble it, for
aspiring above its fellows. 2 North-gate, where 1 Chr. 26. 14.
Zacharias his son was Porter. 3 South-gate, attended on by the sons of 1 Chr.
26. 15.
Obed-Edom. The house of Asuppim Ibidem.
(rendered by Hierome and Pagnine a counsel-house, by Tremellius Aerarium, the
Treasury) was for convenience united to their charge. A place, probably of
entrance, certainly of consequence, as needing a constant guard about it. 4
West-gate, where Shuppim 1 Chr. 26. 16.
and Hosah were Porters. To them also belonged the gate Shallecheth, by the
causway of the going up, understand thereby that stately ascent made by
Solomon, out of his own Palace into the Temple.
But besides these four, which respected the cardinal winds, we meet with
other intermediate gates, whose accurate position is uncertain. Never did the
blinded Genesis 19. 11.
Sodomites more groap for Lots door in the dark, then learned men are puzzled to
find the gate of 2 King. 11. 6.
Sur, (elsewhere 2 Chr. 23. 5.
called the foundation-gate) where at the coronation of King Ioash, a tierce of
Levites were awarded to wait, by order from Iehojada. Tremellius not
improbably conceives it the same with the Eastgate. As for the Newgate Ier.
26. 10. and 36. 10.
, wherein Baruch publicly read the book of Jeremy, I am confident it was one
of the four principal gates, only repaired, enlarged, or adorned with new
buildings. 1 Chr. 26. 18.
Parbar seated on the west must not be forgotten (whether Porters-lodge,
Priests-vestry, or place wherein sacrificing instruments were laid up) having
something of the nature of a gate therein, because two porters daily attended
it. Say not, it was suspicious, that so small a Court would run out at so many
gates, which surely were no more, then just proportion, and uniformity did
require.

2. The principal office of Porters was to secure the gates, The number and
office of the Porters.
providing for the peace and purity of the Temple and service therein. These in
all were 1 Chr. 23. 5.
four thousand, thus daily disposed of; Eastward, six; Northward, four;
Southward, four; at Asuppim-gate, two; and two, Westward; at the Causway, four;
at Parbar-gate, two; four and twenty in all. An eminent number in
Temple-service (so many the singers 1 Chr. 25. 32.
, and the several 1 Chr. 24. 18.
courses of the Priests) to which the four and twenty Elders in the Revel. 4. 4.
Revelation have some allusion. Their service was, as well nocturnall, as by
day: Psalm. 134. 1.
which by night stand in the house of the Lord.

3. Here let others dispute, A treble quere concerning the Porters places.
whether the Porters places were merely ministerial, (or servile rather) or
also partly judicial, with some admissive, and exclusive power to take
cognizance of the cleanness of such persons as did approach to the Temple.
Otherwise, they were easily qualified for their office, rather bigness then
brains commending men generally to such employments. Secondly, if they were
entrusted with any such authority, let others enquire, by what means they made
discoveries of peoples uncleanness, finding no oath Ex officio they tendered to
any to betray themselves, though otherwise some secret pollution might be
concealed, the parties themselves being only privy thereunto. Lastly, let them
discuss, whether these Porters were afterward advanced to higher places, or
only (as the doors whereon they attended turned round on their hinges) moved
alternately in their own sphere, without possibility of any farther preferment.
If the latter, it is strange that the worthy parts of Zachariah his son Porter
Northward, commended in Scripture to be a 1 Chr. 26. 14.
wise counselor, should be imprisoned in so narrow a profession. And yet his
employment (though the meanest about the Temple) was honorable in it self, if
well executed: witness holy David his choice, I had rather be Psalm. 84. 10.
a doorkeeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tabernacles of
wickedness.

4. Now notwithstanding all the care of the Porters to the contrary; some (not
going through the gates, Intruders into the Temple without the Porters leave.
but over the walls) made bold to lodge and live with their whole families
within the verge of the Temple. Yea, the sparrow Psalm. 84. 3.
has found an house, and the swallow a nest for her self, where she may lay
her young, even thine Altars, O Lord of hosts, my King, and my God. By Altars
understand the Courts and buildings about it, otherwise the Altar it self
(fitter for Salamanders then Sparrows) was too hot a climate for their
habitation. Birds, we see, may prescribe an ancient title to build in our
steeples, having time out of mind taken the same privilege in the Tabernacle,
and Temple. Yea David in exile debarred access to Gods public service, does
pity his own, and prefer the condition of these fowls before him. And, although
no devotion (whereof they were incapable) but the bare delight in fair
fabrics, brought them hither; yet, we may presume (according to their kind)
they served God better then many men in that place, chirping forth Morning and
Even-praises to the honor of their maker. To take our farewell of these
Porters, wicked Ahaz gave them a Supersedeas. from their office, in that long
Vacation wherein he 2 Chr. 28. 24.
shut up the doors of the house of the Lord, so obstructing Gods mercy against
himself.

CHAP. IV. Of the Chambers, and Treasuries about the Court.
1. THe Porches, Chambers and Treasuries over the Porch.
or Cloisters beneath were built with rooms above; if not round about the
Court, certainly over the intervalls of the gates. Such places were employed,
partly for chambers for Priests to lodge in, partly for Treasuries, wherein
consecrated things were deposited.

2. Amongst the former, The Chamber of Gemariah wherein Ieremiahs book was read.
most remarkable was the chamber of Gemariah the son of Shaphan the Secretary,
wherein Ier. 36. 10.
Baruch read the book of Jeremy, which afterward was burnt by Iehojakim King
of Judah. When though some (dissenters and disswaders) amongst all the
Courtiers no mourners appeared at the funerals of this book, it being
expected, they should have been as cruel to their clothes, to Verse. 24.
rend them for sorrow, at the sight of that double martyrdom of that innocent
Volume, first cancelled with a penknife to pieces, then afterward burnt to
ashes. But the flame, which did burn the book, did but burnish the truths
written therein; Yea another Phoenix arose out of the ashes thereof. Baruch
transcribing another roll Verse. 32.
with the same and many like words added beside. Thus wanton children by
breaking their parents old rod, give them only the occasion to make a better,
and bigger in the room thereof.

3. Next we take notice of the chamber of Nathan 2 King. 23. 11
Melech at the entering of the house of the Lord, Chamber of Nathan Melech.
by which stood those statues of horses dedicated to the Sun by some Idolatrous
Kings of Judah, which Josiah destroyed. What! was the Sun, which Psalm. 19. 5.
rejoices as a Giant to run his course, ever so tired, as to need hacknies to
carry him to his journeys end? Oh no, but the Jews plundered this piece of
Idolatry from the Persians, who Xenophon li. 8. (...).
offered horses unto the Sun, and Fastor. 1.
Ovid renders some reason thereof, Placat ^quo Persis radiis Hyperiona cinctum,
Ne detur celeri victima tarda Deo.
Horse to the beamed Sun's the Persians gift,
Slow sacrifice ill fits a God so swift.
Now the Jews counting it too gross Idolatry to sacrifice natural horses to
the Sun, erected artificial ones in honor thereof.

4. Another eminent chamber, The chamber of the Sons of Hanan.
was that of the Sons of Hanan, Ier. 35. 4.
which was by the chamber of the Princes, probably on the one hand, which was
by the chamber of Maaseiah the son of Shallum the keeper of the door, on the
other hand thereof. Here Jeremy in vain solicited the Rechabites to drink wine,
observing the instructions of their ancestors therein; as also in their
constant dwelling Ier. 35. 10.
in tents, so to entertain all turnings of the times, with less trouble to
themselves. Provident birds, only to perch on the boughs, not build their
nests on that tree, which they suspected would suddenly be cut down, foreseeing
perchance the captivity of Babylon. Indeed, in all fickle times (such as we
live in) it is folly to fix on any durable design, as inconsistent with the
uncertainty of our age, and safest to pitch up tent-projects, whose alteration
may with less loss, and a clear conscience comply with the change of the times.

CHAP. V. That Solomon made no more then two Courts on the east of the Temple.
1. ALthough many learned authors make four, No more then two outward Courts
made by Solomon.
and some more Courts about Solomon's Temple, yet the following reasons persuade
me, that these two Courts formerly described by us, were all which were of
Solomon's original foundation. Because, 1 Mention is made of no more in
Scripture, either in the book of Kings, or Chronicles, where his buildings are
particularly described. 2 Manasseh is said to have built Altars for the host of
Heaven in the two 2 King. 21. 5.
Courts of the house of the Lord. Probably, had there been any more, his
profaneness would have found them out, no place being privileged from his
Idolatry. 3 The narrowness of the place, as it was in Solomon's time, admitted
of no more Courts, such was the precipice thereof on all sides.
This last is confessed by Joseph. de Bell. Iud. lib. 6. ca. 6. Edit. lat. sed
graec. cap. 13.
Josephus, whose words deserve our heeding to clear the matter in hand; The
Temple was built upon an (...).
hard mountain, and at the first, the plain on the top thereof was scarce
sufficient to contain the Temple, and the Altar, the (...).
circumference thereof being steep and shelving. But, when King Solomon who
built the Temple, had compassed the east part thereof with a wall, he also
placed a Porch upon the rampire, and so, many ages after it lay (...).
unfenced on the other parts, until the people every day bringing earth
thither, at last made it plain and large enough. Insomuch that the Temple
extant in the days of Josephus* had a threefold wall about it, and other courts
built on that forced ground, which industry had added thereunto. See here the
small compass of the Temples floor at the first founding thereof. So that those
who in Solomon's time make more Courts about it, must build them in the air,
seeing the earth (such then the scantness and steepness thereof) afforded no
bottom for the building of such imaginary fabrics.

2. But shrewd objections Object.
are brought to the contrary, David at least prescribed three Courts.
by such who, in Solomon's time, make more then two Courts by us described. No
doubt (say they) he observed David's instructions, who by the Spirit gave him
the pattern of 1 Chr. 28. 12.
all the Courts of the house of the Lord, which he meant to make. These
therefore at the least must needs be three, seeing All (as Lib. 1. de Caelo.
cap. 1.
Aristotle observes) can not in proper language, be predicated of a lower
number.

3. Answ. I confess the words so read in the vulgar Latin, and omnium quae
cogitaverat atriorum, though no such thing appears in our translation founded
on the original, where David is said to deliver to Solomon the 1 Chr. 28. 12.
pattern of all that he had by the Spirit, of the house of the Lord, of all the
chambers round about etc. This third Court therefore in Solomon's time, was but
a groundless fancy.

4. Object. Another Court must of necessity be allowed on the west of the
Temple, Court on the west.
or else (which is altogether improbable) the Holy of Holies lay open,
unfenced, and common to the City.

5. Answ. The same was sufficiently fenced, and severed from the City with the
precipice of the place, barring all access, and the Temple on that side
surrounded with ambient air in the concavity of the valley. If besides this,
any artificial wall encompassed the Temple on the west, the distance between
it and the Temple may be counted a passage, but amounted not to the
spaciousness of a Court.

6. Object. Good authors, Some make a woman's Court.
Bid, Cassidore, Comestor, and Tostatus confidently add, Atrium Foeminarum,
or, the Women's Court, where their sex severally by themselves attended their
devotions. Nor is it probable they were mingled with men, seeing the Prophet
speaking of a solemn humiliation, They shall wail (says he) the family of the
house of David apart, and their Zec^. 12. 13.
wives apart, the family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart.

7. Answ. This place cited out of Zachary was spoken after Solomon's Temple was
demolished, The woman's Court not grounded on Scripture.
and Zerubbabels erected. Such separation of sexes in several Courts in the
first Temple has no foundation in Scripture, but rather thence the contrary
may be collected, that all sexes and ages promiscuously met together; for,
Iehosaphat is said, to have stood in the 2 Chr. 20. 5. Ibid. ver. 13.
house of the Lord with their little ones, their l wives, and their children.
However it may be that there was anciently a partition of the outward Court per
clathros and cancellos, with bar or lattise-work, into two parts, and so the
women (though in the same Court) might be severally by themselves.

8. Object. There were more Courts, Ezekiels Temple had more Courts.
three at least, in Ezekiels Temple; which as Villalpandus will have it, in all
particulars was the same with Solomon's.

9. Answ. But was not the same with Solomon's.
Confessing some general conformities, we deny, not only the identity, but
exact similitude betwixt them. It is against the nature of a Prophecy to have a
retrograde motion, to bring things backward, and raise the ghosts of buildings
departed, which rather looks forward, presenting things to come. Ezekiels
Temple had not the same body with Solomon's, but greater, and more were the
parts, and members thereof; as in due time, God willing, we shall make it to
appear.

10. Object. Ant. Iud. l. 8. cap. 2.
Josephus a learned Jew living in Jerusalem seems to add another, Some collect
another Court out of Josephus.
Atrium Gentium, the Court of Gentiles, or unclean persons.

11. Answ. The place quoted out of him to this purpose, will scarce bear the
collection of a new Court from it. However Josephus was none of those Ezra 3.
12.
aged men, who remembering the magnificence of Solomon's, wept when the
foundation of the second Temple was laid before their eyes. I mean he was no
eyewitness of the first and old Temple (being born five hundred years and
more, after the dissolution thereof) and only spoke of it, either by
tradition, or conjecture, and therefore his authority of no such strength, as
to command our belief. Besides, he seems to have forgotten what formerly we
cited out of him, for the narrowness of the place, not admitting more Courts in
Solomon's time. However, his eyes were so dazeled with long looking on the
second Temple extant in his age, that he conformeth thereto, and confounds
therewith Solomon's Temple, if making any more Courts then two therein.

12. However, I dare not deny, A third Court might afterward be added
but even this first Temple, after the death of Solomon, might by succeeding
Kings, have another Court added thereunto; namely, when by art, industry, and
great expense they had raised up the valley, and gained more ground to the
mountain of the house, which was so small at the first. Hereof we find a
double insinuation in Scripture: 1 One, when Iehosaphat is said to stand in the
house of the Lord before the new 2 Chr. 20. 5.
Court, which probably about his reign, was added to the ancient fabric. 2
Another, when at the coronation of Ioash Iehoiada gave order that the Priests 2
Chr. 23. 6.
alone should come into the house of the Lord (meaning the inner-court thereby)
whilst the people should be in the Courts Ibid. ver. 5.
of the house of the Lord, the plural number there importing two Courts at the
least, at that time belonging to the Temple, into which the common people had
free access. But herein nothing can be positively concluded.
Wherefore, as the sons of Barzillai, though Priests, yet because they found
not their genealogy reckoned in the Ezra 2. 62.
Register, were therefore removed from the priesthood, till one with Urim and
Thummim, should arise to decide the controversy: so we suspend this third and
new Court, as doubtful, in our descriptions, until some infallible Judge, on
better evidence then we can produce, shall clear the title thereof.

CHAP. VI. Of the Pillars in the Porch of the Temple.
1. GOd at the first creation, The expressive utensils of the Temple.
having finished the elements, and essential parts of the world, did
afterward furnish them with creatures suitable thereunto, no vacuity being
left: so that rather then any thing should be empty, any thing will fill it.
Solomon in like manner, having ended the main rooms of the Temple, in the n^xt
place made the furniture thereof, wherein every vessel was pregnant with
heavenly mysteries; so that what the Apostle says of the languages in the
world 1 Cor. 14. 10.
none of them are without signification, was true of the smallest Uten^ill in
the Temple, speaking much holy matter, had we ears to hear, and hearts to
understand it.

2. We begin with the Porch, The different dimensions of the Pillars reconclled.
where the two great brazen pillars were set up, each of them 1 King. 7. 15.
twelve Cubits in compass, (bearing a little more then four Cubits in Diameter)
four Ier. 52. 21.
fingers thick of solid metal, and the rest hollow within, some difference
appearing in the measure of their height, variously presented unto us; 1 KING.
7. 15. And he cast two Pillars of brass of eighteen Cubits high a piece.

2 CHRONICLES. 3. 15. Also he made before the house two Pillars of thirty and five
Cubits high.

1 To reconcile these, some have recourse to several Cubits, common, or great;
of the first measure conceiving the former mentioned in Kings; the latter
(which were twice as big) intended in Chronicles. 2 Others understand the bare
shaft of the Pillars to be eighteen Cubits high, besides the Chapiters above,
and Basis beneath them: the former being 1 King. 7. 16.
five Cubits, and the latter so many as made the total number thirty and five.
3 A third Ribera de iis qua erant in Temp. l. 2. ca. 11.
sort most probably conjecture, that in Chronicles the height of both Pillars
are counted together.
Where if any object, that eighteen and egihteen Cubits make thirty six, one
more then the number in Chronicles; Ribera conceives that so much only as
appeared of these pillars are summed up, each of them having half a Cub it of
their shaft lost in their height, as running in, and hid in his Chapter
grafted upon it.

3. The chapiters of these pillars were curiously adorned with network, Their
chapiters how adorned.
chain-work, and rows of pomegranats. These were but apples of brass, whilst
words spoken in due season are far more precious, being like those of gold in
pictures Prove. 25. 11.
of silver. Lillies 1 King. 1. 19.
also were made on the top of these Chapiters, wherein though Hiram might
imitate the fashion of those flowers, no art could counterfeit their colors,
seeing he who set him on work, even Luke 12. 27.
Solomon himself in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. These
pillars set in the porch did not like those two in Dagons Judge. 16. 29.
Temple support the main fabric thereof, nor was any burden born by them, but
were only (like brazen Andirons in great men's chimnies) for ornament. Let none
say unto them as the master to the men in the market place, Mat. 20. 6.
Why stand ye here all the day idle? seeing they were useful in their kind,
and contributed much to the beauty of the Temple.

4. Others will say, these pillars were ill placed, because obscured in the
porch, where few did behold them. His kindred said to our Savior John 7. 4.
There is no man that does any thing in secret, and he himself seek^th to be
known openly. Had Solomon for his credit intended to make the Temple appear
glorious, he should not so privately have concealed these pillars in the Porch.
-- Occultae non gratia magna columnae. Better had they been set like the
Colossus at Rhodes, or the two Columns before Saint Marks in Venice, sub dio,
in the open air. But here we must know, first, that Solomon intended his
Temple, not so much to be seen, as to be glorious. Secondly, the door leading
into the Porch, being exceeding broad, and high, these pillars were not wholly
concealed, but a great part, if not all of them, was exposed to public view
through the door of the Porch.

5. The Pillar The meaning of the Pillars names.
standing on the right hand in the 1 Kin. 7. 21.
Porch was called Iachin, that is, he will stablish; and the other on the left
side Boaz, that is, in him is strength. Pity without power will be but lame to
help us; Power without pity will be but deaf to hear us; whilst both together
make a comfortable composition. Both these pillars we find in a manner erected
in the expression of the leper Mat. 8. z.
to our Savior: Iachin, but doubtfully and conditionally, Lord if thou will.
Boaz, positively and absolutely, Thou can make me clean.
Both these pillars there set up, signified Gods protection of the place, and
the gates of hell could not prevail against that Temple, which had these
pillars in the Porch thereof.

6. Besides this, in a secondary sense these two did resemble eminent Saints,
What they myftically repr^sented.
Ministers especially (such as James, Cephas, and John, Gal. 2. 9.
who seemed to be, yea, whom God made Revel. 3. 12.
pillars in his Temple) who by the Word and Sacraments direct, conduct, and
admit men into the true Church. Pillars, bottomed on the basis of a firm faith,
mounting up with a clear shaft of a shining life, having their persevering tops
garlanded about according to Gods Revel. 2. 10.
promise, Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life.

CHAP. VII. Of the furniture of the Sanctuary, or Inner Tample.
1. AMongst the Utensils of the Sanctuary, we first look on the Candlestick,
Ten Candl^sticks in the Temple.
and the light therein enables us, the better to behold all the rest. The
Tabernacle had but Exodus 37. 17.
one, the Temple ten 1 King. 7. 49.
Candlesticks of pure gold, (this exceeding that ten to one in luster) five on
the right side, and five on the left, each of them no doubt fashioned like that
which Moses made, seven fold with a great shaft for the body in the midst, and
three stems on each side branching out thereof. In some resemblance of the
seven Planets, amongst which the Sun, the stock of light, stands in the midst,
and three other on each side, above, and beneath it. Here we cannot but mind
the reader of a foul mistake in Anti. lib. 8. c. 2.
Josephus, who beholding these Candlesticks through a multiplying glass, in
stead of ten reads ten thousand that Solomon made in his Temple. Yet we deny
not, that besides these ten standing Candlesticks of gold, there were many more
^oveable ones, but all those made of 1 Chr. 28. 15.
silver, which the Priests in the night might carry about with them. By these
Candlesticks also, having lights always in them, Gods Ministers in general
were represented. For, to say, that by these seven lamps in the ten
Candlesticks (threescore and ten in all) the Luke 10. 1.
seventy Disciples were designed, would savor of too much curiosity.

2. Next we take notice of the Table of 1 King. 7. 48.
shewbread, The Table of Shewbread.
which Solomon made of that gold, which his Father David had peculiarly
prepared for that 1 Chr. 28. 16.
purpose. The particular dimensions, and fashion thereof, is not mentioned in
Scripture. Probably of the, like form with that which Moses made in the
Tabernacle, though of a far greater proportion. On this loaves were daily
presented to God; Who, not out of any necessity ( If I be hungry, I will not
tell thee, for the Psalm. 50. 12.
world is mine, and the fullness thereof) but free will, was pleased to accept
thereof: otherwise no more needing this bread to feed, then the light of the
lamps to guide him. The bread on this Table was tendered to God, partly as a
Quit-rent, in confession that the Jews held all their food from his providence;
and partly as a Type of Christ, The Ioh. 6. 41.
bread which came down from heaven. And, as servingmen feed on the reversions
which their Masters leave, so the Priests (when new was substituted in the room
of the formet) eat those loaves which were taken away. Not pretending with
Hist. Bell. v. 7.
Bells Priests, that their God eat up, what they secretly devoured themselves;
but by license from him, they openly avouched their lawful repast thereupon.

3. But the most eminent utensill in the Holy, was the Altar of incense, The
Altar of incense.
made by Moses in the Tabernacle, two Exodus 30. 2.
cubits high, and four square: namely, with a cubit in the length, and another
in the breadth thereof. Proportionable enough for that purpose, no sacrifices
of bulk being to be offered thereon, but only sweet odours (much whereof might
lie in little space) and spiritual spices (as I may term them) which took up
but small room therein. David's express care provided 1 Chr. 28. 18.
refined gold for this Altar of incense. And no doubt, Solomon, the Executour
of his Will, performed it accordingly. For, when it is said, that he 1 King. 6.
20.
covered the Altar with Cedar, and that he Ibid. ver. 22.
overlaid the whole Altar (elsewhere 1 King. 7. 48.
made the Altar) which was by the Oracle with gold; it can refer to none other,
but this Altar of incense; seeing, that for burnt sacrifices, was made 2 Chr.
4. 1.
of brass. It seems that, when Solomon made the Holy in the Temple, far larger
then that in the Tabernacle, and when every implement therein (to make the
furniture proportionable to the room) commenced and took an higher degree of
glory and greatness; then he cased the old Altar of incense with Cedar, and
overlaid the same with gold, to be but the Basis and Pedestall of a greater
Altar, which for the same purpose he advanced thereupon.

4. As for the position of this Altar, that it was not set in the Oracle or
most Holy place, Placed in the Holy
but only in the Holy, or inward Temple, may by the ensuing arguments be
demonstrated. 1 The text says expressly, Moses put it in the tent of the Exodus
40. 26.
congregation before the veil. 2 The incense thereon was to be perpetual,
renewed every Exodus 30. 7.
morning, and therefore it could not be in Sancto Sanctorum, which was
penetrable but once a year for the high Priest. 3 Zacharias an inferior Priest
(as of the eight 1 Chr. 24. 10.
order, or course of Abiah) incapable to enter the Holy of Holies, Luke 1. 5.
officiated on this Altar of incense. Luke 1. 9. and 11.

Greater therefore is the difficulty, that, notwithstanding the premises so
plain to the contrary, the Author to the Hebrews, places it in the Holy of
Holies, Heb. 9. 3.
And after the second veil, the Tabernacle, which is called the Holiest of
all, which had the golden censer, and the Ark of the Covenant etc.

5. All that our best endeavors can perform herein, Scripture to the contrary
answered.
is only to present the several solutions, learned men produce to the present
difficulty. 1 Iunius See and endeavor to understand him, Parall. lib. 3. pa 275.
places this Altar within the vail, and without the Sanctuary, in so strange a
posture, that scarcely either Jewish or Christian Tacticks of
Temple-implements, will admit thereof. 2 Others Di^dati in. locam.
by the golden censer [(...)] understand not this Altar of Incense, but that
eminent Number. 16. 18. and 46.
censer of Aaron used by him in his contest with Korah, which they conceive
(though omitted by Moses) preserved with his Budding rod, as a memorial in the
Holy of Holies. 3 Others understand that Levit. 16. 12.
Censer which the high Priest once a year carried thereinto full of incense,
and which for the time being was in the Holy of Holies, namely during the high
Priest his remaining therein. 4 Ribera, De iis quae erant in Templo. lib. 2.
cap. 8.
expounding it properly of the Altar of incense, avoucheth, that the Holy of
Holies had the golden censer, not, quoad situm, but, quoad usum; not within the
compass, but command thereof, as more immediately subservient thereunto.
Indeed this Altar of incense peculiarly belonged to the anniversary solemnity
of the Holy of Holies, upon the horns whereof Exodus 30. 10.
once a year, the high Priest with the blood of the sin offering (sacrificed no
doubt on the brazen Altar without, but) sprinkled here, made an atonement for
the people.

6. So much for the Utensils of the Holy, No staves on the Altar in the Temple.
only we will add, that whereas the Table of shewbread, and Altar of incense
were made by Moses with Exodus 25. 27. and ^0. ver. 5.
staves and rings, to make them more portable on the Priests shoulders;
probably Solomon omitted the same as superfluous, when now settled in a fixed
residence. Except any will say, that as the Israelites (when peaceably
possessed of their country) were still enjoined to eat the Passover with Exodus
12. 11.
staves in their hands, to preserve the memory of their Yet disused^in Christ's
time.
journey at the first institution thereof: so these Utensils, even in the
Temple, continued their staves about them, in memorial of their long
pilgrimage, and late coming home to their constant habitation.

CHAP. VIII. Of the vessels in the Holy of Holies.
1. PAss we now into the Holy of Holies, Why Solomon made no alteration in the
Utensils of the Holy of Holies.
into which the high Priest only entered once a year; finding three gradations
in their religious service, which waited on the Temple; 1 Hourly attendance in
the outward Courts: where many (Porters especially) watched all hours of day,
and night. 2 Daily in the Holy: where lighting lamps, and burning incense were
quotidian duties. 3 Weekly in the same place, where new shewbread was
substituted every Levit. 24. 8.
Sabbath day. 4 Yearly in the Holy of Holies; open only to the anniversary
entering of the high Priest.
This was a little, house well filled with mysterious vessels. And for the
main, we may observe, that, although Solomon altered, and enlarged the Utensils
in the Holy and outward Courts, yet in the Holy of Holies, he made use of those
numericall vessels of Moses his making, without any addition, or alteration: as
at the first formed so exactly, and fitted so suitably to the privacy of the
place, that it had been presumption to new model them, whose perfection was
uncapeable of any higher improvement.

2. Yet Solomon for the more magnificence, Solomon's additionall Cherubims.
added two Cherubims, for the matter, dimensions, position, and use thereof,
distinguished from those of Moses his making. 1 Moses made his of pure gold
Exodus 37. 6, 7.
of beaten work, whilst Solomon, were of 1 Kin. 6. 23. 30
Olive Tree within, but overlaid with gold. 2 Both the former had but two
cubits and an half in length (as only adequate to the Eoxd. 39. 6.
length of the Mercy-seat) whereas each of Solomon's Cherubims was ten 1 King.
6. 25*
cubits in height, the greatest gallantry of the whole Temple. 3 Moses his
Cherubims lay on the Mercy-seat, both whose wings turned inward, met together,
whilst Solomon's were set on the floor, whose four wings stretched outward to
the full length, extended to the whole breadth of the Holy of Holies. 4 Moses
his Cherubims with their wings shadowed the Mercy-seat; Solomon's, like a golden
arch, overshadowed those Cherubims; so that in the Holy of Holies there was a
little Hierarchy, Angels above Angels therein.
Wonder not that whilst Moses his Cherubims were of Massy gold (bearing best
proportion to the purity, and incorporeity of the Angelical Nature) that
Solomon's should be but overlaid with gold, having Olive Tree within them. For
so vast were their dimensions [ ten cubits or thirty foot high] that if of
solid gold, a little land of Ophir might have lain within that compass. And
being to be made hollow, perchance it was necessary that some wood for
stiffenting should be put within them. These Cherubims were the most gorgeous
and costly ornaments in all the Temple, and probably were embezeled by the
covetous Babylonians at the captivity, and never brought back again, because
only essential E^ra 1. 9.
vessels, and not all the ornaments of State, were restored, and placed in the
second Temple. To return to the Mercy-seat, under it: the Ark of the Covenant
was placed, and the Tables written with Gods own finger, were put therein.

3. But here appears some contradiction, Aseeming contradiction started.
betwixt the furniture of the Ark of the Covenant, as described in the Old and
New Testament. 1 King. 8. 9. and 2 Chronicles: 5. 10. There was nothing in the Ark
save the two tables of stone, which Moses put there at Horeb.

Hebrews 9. 4. And the Ark of the Covenant overlaid round about with gold,
wherein was the golden pot that had manna and Aarons rod that budded, and the
tables of the Covenant.

Behold here the Ark filled (not to say crowded) by the Apostle with other
implements; which the Old Testament only a Repositary for the Tables of the
Covenant.

4. Amongst the many answers tendered by learned men, in solution to this
difficulty, none in my opinion so satisfactory, And the same satisfied.
as what De iis quae erant in Templo. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Ribera first brings, and In his parallels on Heb. 9.
Iunius (otherwise in judgment much different from him) approves, and
enlarges. Namely, that those words of Saint Paul, Wherein was the golden pot
etc. (...), relates not to (...) the Ark (though last named) but to (...) the
Tabernacle, called, The holiest of all in the precedent verse: it being
confessed of all hands, that the foresaid pot of Manna, and Aarons rod (though
not within the concavity of the Ark) were within the compass of the Oracle, or,
Most holy place. Now, that the propriety of the tongue will bear it out, that
the Relative sometime refers not to the next immediately, but more remote
Antecedent, many instances are alleged for the proof thereof.

CHAP. IX. Of the vessels in the Priests Court.
1. SO much for the Utensils in the covered Temple. One only Altar.
Proceed we now into the Priests Court, and there first find the brazen Altar,
having twenty 2 Chr. 4. 1.
cubits in length, as much in breadth, and ten in the height thereof. Now,
although Solomon made ten candlesticks, ten lavers, ten etc. yet he confined
himself to one Altar of incense, one Altar of sacrifice, (multiplying of Altars
hearing ill in Scripture, as suspicious of Idolatry) but whether therein
pointing at Christ our only Mediator, or at the unity of the Church, let
others dispute.

2. Now seriously considering this Altar, we meet with many wonders therein.
First, that being set sub dio, in the open air, it is strange that rain
(presumed sometimes to fall in great plenty, with great violence) did not
extinguish the fire thereof. Secondly, seeing continual fire was kept there,
it is wonder, that the whole Court (as the Chimney-generall thereof) was not
turned Tawny-More, if not Black-More with the constant soot, smuttiness, and
smoking thereof. Thirdly, it is strange, that in so short time, so many
sacrifices could be consumed, within the compass of so small a place;
especially at the dedication of the Temple, when, 1 King. 8. 5.
sacrificing Sheep and Oxen that could not be told, nor numbered for multitude.
Lastly, it is admirable, that in a Climate so hot, and place so populous, no
putrefaction did arise from the blood, fat, offall, and ordure of so many
beasts slain there, to the infecting of the Priests, and people thereabouts. We
know how noisome, and offensive slaughter-houses in Summer, are in great
Cities; insomuch that Tertio Richardi secundi a motion was made, St^ws Survey
of London. p. 340.
that no Butcher should kill any flesh within London, but at Knightsbridge, or
some such distant place from the walls of the City.

3. But under favor I conceive, Unwondred if the nature of the fire be
considered.
the true satisfying of these difficulties depends on the right understanding
of the nature, or rather the supernatural qualities of the fire on the Altar.
It was not common, or culinary fire, but such as 2 Chr. 7. 1.
came down from heaven: which (amongst other peculiar properties where with it
was endowed) was so far from being quenched by rain, or water, that it would
quickly lick it up, though 1 King 18. 38.
a trench, containing twelve barrels, were filled therewith: as in the
sacrifice of Elijah (fetching fire from the same original) it came to pass.
Secondly, such celestial flame, being of a more clarified, and refined
substance* left not any suffocating smoke, or sooty feculency behind it.
Thirdly, being sent from heaven not to dally, but dispatch the work (God
employs no slugs on his errands) it made speedy riddance of the matter in hand,
and consumed the sacrifice of a sudden. We know how quickly lightning (though
not the ^ame, much of kin to the fi^^ on the Altar) will turn any thing that
resists it, into ashes. Hereupon, some conceive, that by Ariel, that is, Gods
Lion, in the Isa. 29. 1.
Prophet, the Altar in the Temple is meant. A voracious Lion indeed, which with
Pharaoh's lean kine, devoured many thousands of cattle, and was no whit the
fatter for the same. Lastly, such heavenly fire was a great preservative
against infection, and the purgative nature thereof, swept away much
putrefaction, which otherwise would have proved very noisome.

4. Pass we now from the fire, to the Water: from the Altar, to the Molten sea.
The brazen Sea.
A worthy vessel this was, of solid brass; five cubits high, and ten over from
side to side, being 1 King. 7. 23.
round all about, and thirty cubits in compass, containing two thousand Baths:
1 King. 7. 26.
namely, as they filled it, but two parts of three for ordinary use, leaving a
third part for empty Margin in the top. Otherwise were it filled brimfull, it
would in all receive three 2 Chr. 4. 5.
thousand Baths, where the total capacity thereof is computed. Therefore
called a Sea from the large containt thereof (and not much unlike the Caspian
sea, for the circular form, and entireness thereof) having its brim wrought
about with lily-work, and it stood upon twelve oxen, which by four several
Threes respected the quarters of the world.

5. But now the question will be, How this vast vessel was furnished with
water? How supplied with water.
Solomon, speaking of the Ocean, Eccles. 1. 7.
All the rivers (says he) run into the sea; but, how this artificial sea, was
supplied with any water by peoples industry, is a considerable question; the
Temple of Jerusalem being so highly situated on a mountain. Here the Rabbis
tell us of a Well Maimony in Biat^ Mikdash. per 5. and Talm. I^rus. in Ioura
per. 3. sol. 41.
Etam, some distance hence* whence the water was conveyed in pipes, so that the
Temple had it always in great abundance. We confess, there was a 1 Chr. 4. 32.
city, and Judge. 15. 11. and 19.
rock of Etam in the Tribe of Simeon: near to which a miraculous fountain
issued in the days of Samson, to quench his thirst, out of the jawbone of an
Ass. And it seems, the Ghost of this fountain did walk in the brains of the
Rabbis, when first they invented this tradition. But, this Etam, being full
forty miles from Jerusalem, was likely to afford them little water, for the
replenishing of this Molten sea. Rather we believe, that the Gibeonites, or
Nethinims, whose office it was to be Icsh. 9. 27.
drawers of water for the Congregation, out of the fountain of Siloam, or Pool
of Bethesda hard by, filled this Sea, and furnished all other Lavatories, and
Offices about the Temple, with that necessary element. Yea, probably there were
some wells within the verge of the Temple, seeing Jerusalem is charactred by
Strabo, an Heathen writer, to be (...), well watered within it self, though
without the walls it wanted the convenience thereof. And, which is the main, in
Ezekiels description of the Temple, which one may term A visionarie varnish on
an historical groundwork, being a literal truth mystically much improved, we
find, the waters Ezekiel. 47. 1.
issued out from under the threshold of the house eastward, which swelled to a
miraculous proportion. Now, though the increase, and overflowing of such
streams, was extraordinary, and prophetical; yet surely the fountain thereof
was real, and natural, importing some springs in the Temple, whence the
Nethinims did fill this Molten sea, and all other vessels with water, designed
for the Priests to 2 Chr. 4. 6.
wash themselves therein.

6. Having thus dispatched the Molten sea, the ten Ibidem.
Lavers The ten Lavers.
(being as it were but so many little lakes) will quickly be described. In the
Tabernacle none of these were extant, as appointed for the washing of
sacrifices: (for, that single Laver made by Moses for the Priests service,
answered only to the Molten sea) whereby it appears, that Solomon, not only
made in his Temple, vessels more in number, and bigger in degree, but also other
in kind, then were in the Tabernacle, to fill and furnish the magnificence
thereof. These Lavers of brass contained forty Baths apiece, each set on his
basis with wheels, for their more convenient removal, though generally their
station was five on the one side, and five on the other in the Court of the
Priests, and east of the covered Temple.

7. In the outward Court, Utensils of the outward court.
or Court of Israel many (no doubt) were the Utensils thereof. As that brazen 2
Chr. 6. 13.
scaffold made by Solomon for the King to stand, and pray upon, the same (as
Tremellius conceives) with the Kings 2 Chr. 23. 13.
Pillar: with the Pulpits and deskes, wherein the Priests expounded the law to
the people. But as for the remainder of the vessels of the Temple, with the
manyfold traditions concerning them, the Reader is referred to the learned
pains of my industrious friend Mr. John Lightfoot: who, as I understand,
intends an entire Treatise thereof. Far be it from me, that our pens should
fall out, like the heardsmen Genesis 13. 6.
of Lot, and Abraham, the land being not able to bear them both, that they
might dwell together. No such want of room in this subject, being of such
latitude, and receipt, that both we, and hundreds more, busied together therein,
may severally lose our selves in a subject of such capacity. The rather because
we embrace several courses in this our Description, it being my desire, and
delight, to stick only to the written word of God, whilst my worthy friend
takes in the choicest Rabbinicall, and Talmudicall relations, being so well
seen in those studies, that it is questionable, whether his skill, or my
ignorance, be the greater therein.

CHAP. X. Of things deposited in the Chambers, and outward Courts of the Temple.
1. PRoceed we now to the outward Courts of the Temple, Rooms for the keeping
of Salt.
whose Chambers were severally employed for sundry uses: as for the laying up
of Tithes, First Fruits, Wood, Salt, and other Requisites for the sacrifices.
Of this last a mass was spent in the Temple, seeing no offering was Mark 9. 49.
acceptable without it. The best was, Judea could well afford to spare plenty
thereof for Gods service, who had bestowed such store thereof upon it, that
there was a place called the Josh. 15. 62.
City of Salt in the Tribe of Judah.

2. Other rooms were employed, to contain the many instruments And for several
musical instruments.
used in the Temple. Some of whose names we find mentioned in the titles of
several Psalms, solemnly set to be sung upon them, though so many authors so
many minds in expounding their names and qualities, we will only insist on
what we conceive most probable. 1 Psalm. 22.
Aijeleth Others apply it to Christ.
Shahar: or, The hind of the morning. Probably some early instrument (as the
going about of the Waits in some places) bringing tidings of the morning, and
giving men notice to rise. 2 Psalm. 46.
Alamoth; which literally may be rendered Ainsworth Annot. ibidem.
Virginales, or Maiden-instruments, with high and shrill notes; acuta
symphonia, says Tromellius. 3 Psalm. 8. 81. 84.
Gittith; A personal instrument, appropriated to the posterity of 2 Samuel 6. 10.
Obed-Edom the Gittite, an excellent 1 Chr. 15. 21.
Master of music, thence taking its denomination. 4 Psalm. 56.
Ionath Elem, Rechokim. By some rendered appellatively, The dumb Dove in far
places. By others conceived an instrument of sad, and doleful music; I did
mourn as a Dove* says dying Isa. 38. 14.
Hezekiah. 5 Psalm. 53.
Mahalath; which Ainsworth interprets, sickness, or infirmity, and conceives
it a kind of wind-instrument. 6 Psalm. 98.
Mahalah-leannoth. The same with the former, but with this addition, to
Ainsworth in locum.
sing by turns, which is, when alternately one part answers another in
singing. 7 Psalm. 9.
Mutb-labben. The Chaldee interprets it, for The death of the Son (as if it
were some cheerful instrument made by David to comfort himself after the death
of his 2 Samuel 12. 19.
child) whilst others conceive it a kind of tune, like to that which we call
the Countertenour. 8 Psalm. 61.
Neginah. A manual instrument, 1 Samuel 19 9.
Nagan being properly to play with the hand. 9 Psalm. 4.
Neginoth, a consort of the former. 10 Psalm. 5.
Nehiloth: being wind-instruments, ( Chalil being used for a Isa. 5. 12.
pipe) as Flutes, Cornets, and Trumpets. 11 Psalm. 12.
Sheminitb; an Harp, or instrument of eight strings: conceived (no doubt) very
complete in its kind, until (as there is daily accession and improvement in
artificial inventions) an instrument of ten Isal. 30. 2. 144. 9.
strings got the credit from it, as of more absolute perfection. 12 Psalm. 45.
Shoshannim. Which amongst flowers is the Lily with six leaves, but amongst
instruments, an Harp with so many strings. 13 Psalm. 60.
Shushan-Eduth. The same with the former, with the addition of the Testimony,
as used at the witnessing of some great solemnity.
Expect not here from me a Panegyric in praise of Music (either in it self,
or reference to Gods service) though in Scripture appearing isntrumental to
qualify 1 Samuel 16. 23.
evil, and invite 1 King. 3. 15.
good spirits; heighten devotion both in Men and Angels: seeing Charity, and
Melody, Loving, and Singing is almost all we find expressed of Celestial
happiness. Nor can any truly tax Music, as the children their mates in the
market place, Mat. 11. 17.
We have piped, and ye have not danced; we have mourned, and ye have not
lamented: seeing such the sociableness of Music, it conformes it self to all
companies, both in mirth, and mourning, complying to improve that passion, with
which it finds the Auditors most affected. In a word, it is an invention
which might have beseemed a Son of Seth, to have been the father thereof:
Though better it was, that Genesis 4. 21.
Cains great-grandchild should have the credit first to find it, then the
world the unhappiness longer to have wanted it.

3. In other Chambers the standards of all measures were carefully kept. Thus
we find the inferior Levites, whose office was to wait on the sons of Aaron,
in several services; and amongst other of their employments, they had a
superintendency over 1 Chr. 23. 29.
all manner of measures and sizes. Let none conceive this beneath the calling
of the Levites, to be so meanly busied; seeing in all ages something of
sacredness has been conceived in weights, God himself ( who has ordered all
things in Wisd. 11. 20.
measure, and number, and weight) being justly reputed the supreme Clarke of
the Market; for, All the Prove. 16. 11.
weights of the bag are his work. And, as God is accounted the first founder,
the Levites were esteemed the fitrest keepers of measures, presumed men of much
integrity, which willingly would not falsify, and deprave the same. Besides,
an essential part of the sacrifices consisted in the pars quota, in the exact
quantity of the meal, oil etc. in their offerings, and therefore the Levites
were highly concerned to be skillful in measures, as constantly converstant in
the criticalness thereof.

4. Their measures were of a double nature, either of Application, Measures of
Application
or of Capacity. Of the former these the principal. 1 (...): A fingers Ier.
52. 21.
breadth, which in round reckoning. (though not exactly) passed for an inch. 2
(...), Palmus, A Exodus 28. 16.
span. Whereof the lesser contained three inches; the bigger was the distan^e
betwixt the thumb, and little finger extended* 3 (...) A Cubit; of the
several kinds whereof largely before. 4 (...) Ezekiel. 40. 5.
A Reed; used to measure buildings, containing six Cubits, and an hand-breadth
in the length thereof.
Here of purpose (because ignorant of the exact proportion thereof) we pass by
the (...) Chebel (whence our English Cable) being a Rope, or line to measure
ground therewith: so that by a Metonymie, sometimes it is taken for the
inheritance it self, The Psalm. 16. 6.
lines are fallen to me in pleasant places.

5. Measures of capacity follow, Of Capacity for dry things.
being either to mete things dry, liquid, or both. Dry things were measured by
1 The Kab 2 King. 6. 25.
, answering unto (in default of accurate correspondencies, we must pitch on the
English measure next thereunto) our Quart, the fourth part whereof [our double
Gill] of Doves dung, was at the siege of Samaria sold for five Ibid.
pieces of silver. 2 (...), Omer. It was the daily Exodus 16. 16.
Ordinary of Manna for a man, and contained well-nigh a pottle, or two quarts.
3 Ephah. The just quantity that Ruth Ruth 2. 17.
gleaned in a day Concerning this measure let these following Scriptures be
observed, lest similitude of sound betray us to a great mistake: 1. An Omer is
the tenth part of an Ephah. Exodus 16. 36. 2 The Ephah is the tenth part of an
Homer. Ezekiel. 45. 11.
It was in fashion shallow, and broad, (so that a Zech. 5. 7.
woman might sit in the compass thereof) and contained half a bushel, and a
pottle; wherefore Boaz Ruth 2. 16.
his bounty concurred with Ruth her diligence in making so good a dayswork. 4
(...), Homer; that is, The lading of Ass, being five bushels, and five
gallons. God threatens in his Prophet, that, The seed of an Isa. 5. 10.
Homer should yield but an Ephah, that is, their grain should so decrease, they
should only reap the tithe of what they had sown. The half of an Homer was
called a Hosea 3. 2.
Lethec. Here we wittingly omit the (...) Seah, because unsatisfied in the
content thereof; though surely it must be much more, then what a learned Godwin
in Moses and Aaron. lib. 6. ca. 9.
man makes it, stinting it to a gallon, and an half: for, by that proportion no
incredible plenty, or cheapness was prophesied in Samaria, when 2 King. 7. 1.
a Seah of fine flour should be sold for a shekel (or an English half-crown)
which is according to the rate of a Mark the bushel; dear enough of all
conscience for poor people to purchase.


6. As for Measures for Liquids, For liquids.
we first pitch on an Hin, whereof frequent mention in Scripture (as also of
the Numb. 15. 9.
half, Ibid. ver. 6.
third, Numb. 28. 5.
fourth, and Ezekiel. 9. 11.
sixth part thereof) and contained three English Quarts. Next it we take notice
of the Bath, being just of the same capacity with the Ephah, and the tenth part
of an Homer, as the Prophet Ez^k. 45. 14.
himself has computed it, that is, four gallons and an half. By which account
the Molten sea, which held three 2. Chr. 4. 5.
thousand Baths, contained thirteen thousand five hundred gallons.

7. Amongst mixed measures the Cor deserves especial notice; used both for 1
Liquid. Ez^k. 45. 14.
The Cor of Oil. 2 Arid. (...), Luke 16. 7.
Cors of wheat.
The Cor was (as may be collected from the Ez^k. 45. 14.
Prophet) just the same quantity with the Homer (as in the best English,
Bushel, and Strike are several names for the same measure) save that the Cor
was common to both, the Homer appropriated to liquid commodities.

8. To measures might be added the gage of 1 Kin. 18. 33.
Barrels, Barrels and Coins.
and John 2. 6.
Firkins; as also all Weights and Coins, as Gerahs, Half Shekels, Shekels of
the Exodus 38. 24.
Sanctuary, (so called, as some will have it, because the Standart thereof was
kept in the Sanctuary, whilst others make it double to the common Shekel)
Drams, Pounds, Talents, whereof largely In Descrip. of Solomon's Temple.
heretofore. All which we leave in the Levites safe custody, being confident,
that they will very carefully keep them, from ever coming into the fingers of
such covetous wretches, who would willingly make The Ephah small, and the Amos
8. 5.
Shekel great, and falsify the balances by deceit; especially, if the
Originals of both were but once in their absolute disposal thereof.

9. There were also Books kept in the Temple, Book of the Law where kept.
of which the Autograph of the law was most remarkable, by command from Moses
to be placed in the Deuteronomy. 31. 26.
side of the Ark of the Covenant, that is, Ainsworth in locum.
by the side (as some expound it) in a coffer by it self made for that purpose.
But others conceive the performance hereof neglected after Moses his decease
(before which time it could not conveniently be done, Deuteronomy not being
fully finished till after his death) and this book deposited, not in the Holy
of Holies but in some outward place amongst the treasures of the Temple:
Alleging in confirmation hereof, how Hilkiah the high Priest, sent to seek out
and sum 1 King. 22. 4.
up the silver for repairing of Gods house, found (what in David's and all good
men's valuation is dearer then Psalm. 119. 72
gold and silver) the 1 King. 22. 8.
book of the Law, hid in some treasury within the verge of the Temple. But
probably this book was originally placed in the Holy of Holies, which
afterward, when the Temple-service in the Idolatrous days of A^az, and
Manasseh was turned upside down, might fall out of the proper position thereof,
into another place.

10. Other books (no doubt) were kept by the Priests ( Scribes, whereof many
amongst them, Other books in the Temple.
and books being relatives) though their Libraries could not be so numerous in
volumes, the Art of printing not being then invented. Wherefore, when we read
in Job, a most ancient author, Job. 19. 23.
Oh that they were printed in a book! the mystery of the Press is not meant
thereby, but letters written in deep and large characters. And amongst all
other books most likely it is, that, that book of the Josh. 18. 9.
description of the land into seven parts by lot, as of public concernment,
daily use, and divine institution, was preferred in the Temple; like our
Domes-day book in England, which some Critics will have so called (not because
all lands are arraigned to appear therein as at a General Judgment, but) quasi
domus Dei, or Godshouse book, where the original thereof, was anciently
entrusted.

11. The Refectories must not be forgotten, Refectories for the Priests.
being rooms, wherein the Priests had their repast on hallowed food. Amongst
all whose fare, we most admire at the Shewbread; that, being shifted but
Levit. 24. 8.
once a week by Gods command, it did not contract corruption, grow hard, and
dry, good only for the Gibeonites to cheat the Israelites, with the Josh. 9.
12.
mouldiness thereof. This the Rabbis ascribe to miracle, the same command,
which enjoined it to be set there, preserving it from putrefaction; that
nothing might lose ought of its goodness, which is exactly ordered according to
Gods direction. Thus, as Man lives not by bread alone: so bread lasts not
only by natural causes, but Mat. 4. 4.
by every word which proceeds out of the mouth of God.

12. And now (to conclude all fast and firm) there was also an Armory in the
Temple, An Armory in the Temple.
well provided with weapons, to guard the Treasure therein. For, seeing it is
the privilege of heaven alone, that there Mat. 6. 20.
Thieves cannot break through, and steal; the provident Princes of the Jews
thought not fit to entrust so much wealth without Ammunition to defend it,
seeing no place so sacred as to secure it self from sac^iledge. David provided
Chr. 23. 9.
Spears, and bucklers, and shields for that purpose, as if foreseeing in his
Prophetical spirit, that in after ages, a distressed Prince [ Ioash] extracted
from his loins, should, by Gods blessing, and the assistance of those Ibidem.
weapons, recover his rightful throne from the unjust usurpation of [
Athaliah] an Idolatrous intrudress thereinto.

CHAP. XI. The additionall Utensils of the Temple after the days of Solomon.
1. MAny other instruments were added to the Temple, The Chest which I^hoiada
the Priest^ade.
after Solomon's death, by succeeding Kings, as occasion did require. Amongst
which, we must take especial notice of that Chest, which in the reign of King
Iehoash, was made by Iehoiada the High Priest, to receive the peoples
free-offerings for the repair of the Temple.

2. It may seem strange, How the Temple so much ruined in so short a time.
that the Temple built so substantially at the first, of the most solid
materials, should in so short a time of an hundred and fifty years, run so far
to ruin, as to need so costly reparation. But, we must know, it stood without
shelter, high on a mount, exposed to tempests, and in the last seven years of
wicked Athaliahs reign (gray hairs are multiplied on men, more by afflictions,
then old age) besides neglect of reparation, did 2 Chr. 24. 7.
meet with despightfull defacing thereof. Iehoash therefore resolves to amend
the decays therein, as indeed he stood obliged, both in credit, and conscience;
for, seeing the Temple had formely been the nursing-mother to Iehoash, well
might Iehoash be the nursing-father to the Temple; who now did only (...), pay
for his feeding and breeding, who six years 2 Chr. 22. 12.
had his preservation, and his education therein.

3. The care of the work, Levites why backward in repairing the Temple.
was at first committed to the charge of the Levites in general, though it
thrived not under their managing thereof, so that in the twenty third year of
the reign of King Iehoash, they had not repaired the 2 King. 12. 7.
breaches of the house. We can not be so uncharitable, as to conceive, they
embez'led the moneys appointed for that purpose, but rather impute their slow
proceedings herein, either to 1 The unhappiness usually attending great
undertakings, few effectually advancing that work, wherein all are equally
entrusted. Or else, 2 Being every one to receive money of their own 2 King. 12.
5.
acquaintance, some carnal indulgence might be used therein to retard the
business. 3 Receiving small sums of several persons, they were insensible in
the taking, and inconsiderable in their laying out. 4 Repairing was out of the
Levites element, having no dexterity therein; and we know, that Ministers, and
Churchwardens are two distinct employments.
Hereupon the Levites by King Iehoash are called, checked, commanded to forbear
farther collection of money, and some other particular persons deputed for that
purpose, who had more care, skill, and success to order the matter.

4. To this end a chest was devised, The fashion and placing of C^rban.
with an hole 2 King. 12. 9.
bored in the lid thereof, and appointed to receive the free-gifts of those who
would contribute to so pious a work. It was placed very handy, and convenient
for such as went up to sacrifice, to cast in their b^nevolence, being set
Ibidem.
beside the Altar on the right side in the outward-court as one came into the
House of the Lord. Perchance our Savior reflected on the position of this
chest so fit for dexterous Benefactours, when advising in giving of alms, Let
Mat. 6. 3.
not thy left hand know what thy right does. In this chest were men's charities
cast, and kept till amounting to a great sum, (and then the breaches of the
Temple were perfectly repaired therewith) and in after-ages, it was called
Corban, which name sometimes signifies the Mar. 7. 11.
gift it self, sometimes the vessel receiving it, which was the pattern (not
to say parent) of the poor-mens-boxes in our modern Parish-Churches.

5. Here we must not forget that Dial of Ahaz Ahaz his Dial.
(in those days, no doubt, a masterpiece of art) whereon the Sun miraculously
went back ten 2 King. 20. 9.
degrees, in token that Hezekiahs life should go forward fifteen degrees. Some
conceive this Dial, not drawn on the outside of any wall, or house, but
contrived within a winding staircase, so that every step thereof bare
proportion to the distance of an hour: but whether this fancy may be
reconciled to art, be it referred to the judicious in dialling. However it was
made, we shall scarce meet with a Dial more ancient in any author, which many
years after retained the name of Ahaz the erectour thereof. But for all this
Dial, Ahaz was one of those who could not discern Mat. 16. 3.
the signs of the times, nor perceive the day of his visitation; how his
kingdom, being past the flourishing Meridian thereof, did draw near to the
night of final ruin, and destruction.

6. Adrichomius places this Dial on the House of the Lord, Adrichomius his
conceit concerning this Dial.
and therefore we mention it here amongst the ornaments of the Temple. Though,
to speak my opinion, on perusal of the text, it appears rather set up in some
open place in the Kings Palace, so that sick Hezekiah, for the farther
confirmation of his faith, lying on his bed, might look on the retrograde
motion of the Sun thereon: though I deny not, but he might receive information
thereof from relation of others. But would In quar^a part Templi.
Adrichomius had acquainted us, whence he received his intelligence, for what
he reports, that Ahaz made this Dial of the brazen Fecit ex altari
Holoca^stiaen^o
Altar of whole-burnt sacrifices. Indeed 2 King. 16. 17.
Scripture tells us, that he took down the twelve brazen oxen from under the
great sea, and it was poor reparation for his sacrilege, if in lieu thereof he
set up a Dial, with figures for twelve hours, or perchance the twelve signs
of the Zodiac thereupon. But carnal men conceive, they may safely steal Gods
dove, and stick down a feather in the room thereof.

7. Now besides the original Utensils of the Temple, Two eminent supplies of
holy instruments.
of the same foundation with the Temple it self, there were several recruits
(not of different, but the same fashion with the former) which succeeding Kings
made in stead of those instruments, which constant use and age had empaired.
For, we must not think, that the Ash-pans, Fire-pans, Snuffers, Caldrons, and
Flesh-hooks of the Temple, were like the bush appearing to Exodus 3. 3.
Moses, always burning, yet never consumed: or, that the knives used about the
sacrifices, were like the Deuteronomy. 29. 5.
clothes of the children of Israel in the wilderness, never a whit the worse
for wearing, but they did daily decay, and were duly repaired, especially in
the reign of King 2 Chr. 24. 14.
Iehoash. Thus when the soul of a Christian is by faith made the Temple of the
holy Ghost, and fitted with several graces, the furniture thereof; the same
notwithstanding, because of continual sinning, must be constantly repaired by
renewing repentance.

8. So much of the right and lawful issue of holy vessels in the Temple.
Idolatrous utensils justly omitted.
As for that spurious, and bastard brood of Idolatrous Altars, and other
Utensils principally introduced by King 2 King. 16. 3.
Ahaz and 2 Chr. 33. 7.
Manasseh, contrary to Gods express command, and placed in the house of God, we
will not do them so much honor as once to mention them in this discourse.

CHAP. XII. The Temple often spoiled of her Treasure and Ornaments.
1. THe first Temple of God at Jerusalem, The Temple pillaged by Shishak King
of Egypt, and Io^sh King of Israel.
often had the same hard hap with him that journied thence to Jericho, even to
fall Luke 10. 30.
amongst thieves, or rather for thieves to fall into it. Twice was it pillaged
by foreign foes, and four times by her own friends before the final destruction
thereof. First, when Shishak King of Egypt in the reign of Rehoboam, took 1
Kin. 14. 26.
away the treasures of the house of the Lord, This wound, whence so much
precious wealth did bleed forth, first showed, the Temple with the riches
therein to be mortal. Shishak did then but brush the house of God, whilst he
swept the house of the King, whence he even took away Ibidem.
all. Afterward Ioash King of Israel in the reign of King Amaziah, having
stormed Jerusalem, took 2 Chr. 25. 24.
All the gold and silver, and the vessels that were found in the house of God
with Obed-Edom, and returned to Samaria. That were found, for, such no doubt
was the providence of the Priests to conceal some wealth from his sight. A
thing not impossible for them to do, having formerly hid a young King, and his
nurse six 2 Chr. 22. 12.
years invisible, from the jealous eyes of Athaliah. And now, seeing idolatrous
Ioash carried away this holy treasure to Samaria, let none hereafter conclude
the best cause from the best success, finding the Cherubims of Solomon's setting
up, worsted by the golden Calves of Ieroboams erection.

2. By the way, it is very remarkable, that the Tabernacle, The Tabernacle
never plu^d^red, and why?
which lasted four hundred and thirty years before the Temple was begun, was
never plundered, or robbed, or spoiled of its goods. Yet the Jews in that age
were as sinful, and their enemies as spightfull, Moabites, Midianites,
Ammonites, etc. who in the interim betwixt the Judges, oppressed the people of
Israel, though we find none of them offering any affront, or violence to the
Utensils of the Tabernacle. As for the Philistims, though they took the Ark by
conquest in the field, we know they were forced with a witness to bring it back
again. Whereas the Temple within less space was by foreign Princes often pilled
and polled of the ornaments belonging thereunto. Enquiring into the reason
hereof, we meet with none more probable, then because Divine providence
delights in protecting what is weakest in it self. And seeing the Tabernacle
was altogether undefensible, and able to make no resistance, consisting only
of thin boards, slight skins, and slender curtains, God more immediately walled
it about with an awefull respect, which the very enemies thereof bare unto it.
Whereas the Temple, being a strong structure of stone, in a stronger City, with
walls, gates, and bars, visibly entitled it self to fortification, and
therefore God left it to the arm of flesh to defend it, which frequently
failed therein, as nothing can be safe, which has only ^infull men to secure
it.

3. But the Temple suffered oftener from her friends, The Temple spoiled by her
own Kings.
then her foes, frequently spoiling the wealth thereof, insomuch, that in all
desperate consumptions of the State, no gold was found so cordial to cure it,
as what was taken out of the treasury of the Temple. 1 Asa brought out silver
and 2 Chr. 16. 2.
gold, out of the treasuries of the house of the Lord, and bestowed them on
Benhadad King of Syria, to purchase his assistance against Baasha King of
Israel. 2 Iehoash to appease the anger of Hazael King of Syria, marching
furiously against him, took 2 King. 12. 18.
all the hallowed things, which his Fathers, and himself had dedicated, and
sent them as a gift to Hazael, to stop his coming up against Jerusalem. 3 Ahaz
took the silver and gold 2 King. 16. 8.
which was found in the house of the Lord, and conferred it on Tiglath-Pileser,
to hire his help against the Kings of Syria and Israel. 4 Hezekiah cut off 2
Kin. 18. 16.
the gold wherewith he himself had overlaid the doors, and pillars of the
Temple, and gave it to pacify Sennacherib coming against him.
Not to mention the waste, and havoc, wicked 2 Chr. 24. 7.
Athaliah, and Manasseh made, in their idolatrous reigns, of the vessels of the
Temple.

4. There want not those, Reasons for the law fullness of such sacrilege
who dare to defend the foresaid spoiling of Gods house to be lawful, chiefly
alleging absolute necessity (that bawd^ general of all illegitimate actions)
that, otherwise, in such extremities, the kingdom of Judah could not be
preserved, from foreign invasion. In vain does what may be dispute, when what
must be sits Doctor of the Chair. It is not only lawful, but needful, to
shave the hair, thereby to save the head. The parting with the fruit, kept the
tree alive; otherwise, if not pacified with such a present, the idolatrous
enemies would undoubtedly have demolished the Temple, and totally rooted out
Gods service therein.

5. But what ever politic palliations may be pleaded for the contrary, Such
arguments answered.
such sacrilege was unavouchable in it self, and those pretended extremities
to justify it, were only created; either by men's infidelity, not believing
Gods power; or their impatience, not attending Gods pleasure, to defend his own
glory, in his own due time, by his own means. Yea, Heaven by the final success
protested against such proceedings, and the treasure taken out of the Temple,
and given to Pagans, rather presently declined, then finally diverted the
imminent danger. Thus Ahaz 2 Chr. 28. 21.
took away a portion out of the house of the Lord, and gave it to the King of
Assyria, but he helped him not. Likewise when 2 King. 18. 15, 16.
Hezekiah presented Sennacherib with the wealth of the Temple to buy his
favor, his bribes proved ineffectull, who having received the present, was not
pleased to understand the language thereof, but nevertheless in the next Ibid.
ver. 17.
verse invaded Judah. As for the instance of Asa, God directly by the mouth of
his Prophet reproved him for his fact, in relying rather on the King of Syria,
then divine assistance. In a word, though some were good men that did it, they
were no whit the better for the doing it. For, though it be Christian policy,
and Christ's Luke 16. 9.
precept, that men make to themselves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness;
yet, goods rightly consecrated to the righteous God, come not under that
appellation: and such holy things are unjustly degraded, which having once been
advanced to the dignity of a free-will-offering to God, are afterward set back,
to become a peace offering to man.

6. Indeed some hold, No sacrilege, say some, under the Gospel.
that under the Gospel the sin of sacrilege cannot be committed. If so, it is
either because nothing under the Gospel has been given to Gods service; or,
because God has solemnly disclaimed the acceptance of any such donations;
which, when and where it was done, will be hardly produced. If this their
position be true, we have cause, first, to rejoice in regard that God and his
members are now adays grown so rich, that they need not addition of humane
gratuities to be bestowed upon them. Secondly, we may congratulate the felicity
of ours above former ages, being not in a capacity of committing the sin of
sacrilege, to which those were subject, who lived before the time of our
Savior. Lastly, we may silently smile, to see how Satan is defeated, having
quite lost one of his an^ient baits, and old temptations; men now adays being
secured from this sin, and put past a possibility to be guilty thereof. But,
before we go thus far, let us first be sure, we go on a good ground,
otherwise it is the highest sacrilege, to steal away sacrilege it self, and
to deny that (which formerly was a grievous) in our days to be any
transgression.

7. To come now to the final, and fatal dissolution of this Temple, with the
dissipation, at least wise transportation of all the Utensils thereof. Three
gradations herein may be observed.
Nebuchadnezzar 1 In the 11 year of Iehojakim 2 In the 4 month of Iehojackin 3
In the 11 year of Zedekiah
carried Of the 2 Chr. 36. 7.
vessels of the house of the Lord The goodly Ibid. ver. 10.
vessels of the house of the Lord All the vessels Ibid. ver. 18.
of the house of the Lord great and small.
to Babylon. Here we will not observe the eleventh year of wicked kings,
climactericall to their kingdoms, seeing any year is equally fatal to a
nation, when the measure of their sins is made up. Rather we will take notice,
how God, twice as it were in mercy, clipped the treasures of the Temple with the
cisers, and (neither working repentance) the third time in justice shaved all
away, with the hired Isa. 7. 20.
razor of Babylon. And it is my opinion, that though the outward Courts, and
chambers of the Temple had formerly been frequently plundered, yet the Holy, and
Holy of Holies remained entire, and untouched, till all was destroyed at the
captivity of Babylon.

Here the Map of Zorobabels Temple is to be inserted.

THE TEMPLE as it was in CHRIST time.
John Goddard sculpsit.



ZOROBABELS TEMPLE, REBUILT BY HEROD.
CHAP. I. The mean preparations for building this Temple.
1. THe seventy years of the Babylonish captivity expired, God moved the spirit
of Cyrus Cyrus his proclamation.
(whose name the Prophet Isa. 44. 28.
mentions two hundred years before his birth) not only by his Ezra 1. 1.
proclamation to permit Gods people, to return to their native Country, and
thereby to encourage others to contribute necessaries unto them; but also
restored the vessels of Solomon's making, and furnished them with provisions out
of his own Exchequer, for the erection of a second Temple, which came after the
former, not more years in time, then degrees in magnificence. A thing no whit
strange, if the disparity betwixt the builders be seriously considered.

2. First, Difference in power.
Solomon was an absolute Prince, full of wealth and power, in his peaceable
Country, where no dog durst bark against him (save two 1 King. 11. 14. 23.
or three whapping curs toward the end of his reign) whilst the builders of
this second Temple were but raw captives, newly returned to their native land,
where they met with much disturbance, and constant opposition from their
enemies. Wherefore, no such (almost miraculous) silence observed at the second
Temple, like that in the first, wherein 1 King 6.7.
no tool of iron was heard, it being probable, here was knocking of hammers,
and (certain) here was clashing of malicious foes against the faithful
Israelites.

3. Secondly, In number.
Solomon (though alternately) employed seven score 1 King 5. 15.
and ten thousand hewers and burden-bearers, besides three thousand three
hundred overseers at the building of his Temple; whereas the total sum, and
whole company of this Remnant, or rather, Reversion of the Jews, with their
servants Ezra 2. 64. 65.
and maids, exceeded not fifty thousand, not amounting to a full third of the
former number. As few the men: so were they ill furnished with all kind of
cattle. And whereas Camels had been necessary creatures to be used by them,
for bearing of burdens at this structure, so meanly were they provided
therewith, that Compare Job 1. 3. with Ezra 2. 67.
Job a private man, had six times (and after his restoration twelve times) more
Camels, then all the whole nation of the Jews had in their possession, when
returning from captivity.

4. Thirdly, In wealth.
Solomon had (besides other vast in-comes, and a bank provided by David his
Father) the gold of Ophir swimming unto him in the ships 1 King. 9. 28. and 10.
22.
of Tarshish, making their trienniall returns. Whereas no such golden fleet
arrived to the building of this second Temple. As for silver, in Solomon's time
it was 1 King. 10. 27.
in Jerusalem as stones in abundance; but, in Zorobabels time, silver was as
silver in scarcity, and esteem, and the exchange of all coin ran very high in
valuation. And, whereas the cost expended by Solomon on his Temple amounted to
many thousands of 1 Chr. ^2. 14. and 1 Chr. 29. 4.
Talents, unto which are added ten 1 Chr. 29. 7.
thousand drams of gold (only as a supernumerary fraction, or odd sum above
the entire Talents) the free-will-offering to the second Temple is not at all
computed by Talents, which would have disgraced their poor provisions, but (to
stick to our new translation) is only summed up by Ezra 2. 69.
drams (as the silver not by Talents, but pounds) for the greater grace and
credit of their contribution, so small in it self, but large (no doubt) in
proportion unto their poor estates.

5. Lastly, No eminent ar^izan.
here was not (as in the making of the Tabernacle) any Bezaleel, or Aholiab,
filled with the Exodus 31* 3.
Spirit of God in all manner of workmanship; no Hiram (as at the building of
the Temple) 1 King. 7. 14.
filled with wisdom, and understanding, and cunning to work all works in
brass; no extraordinary artificer specified by name, employed therein. Yet,
probably, they entertained the best workmen that age did afford, their purses
or credit could procure, to polish, and adorn the building. And therefore the
ingenuous Ribera de Temp. sabr. li.^. cap. 27.
Romanists acknowledge a gross error in their vulgar Latin, where they read
Ezra 6. 4.
ordines de lapidibus impolitis tres, three rows of unpolished stone, which
should be polished stone. For, (...) Eben Gelal in the original, is a stone
turned, rolled, and tossed about, to smooth, and levigate every side thereof,
and by Anti. Iul. lib. cap.
Josephus is rendered (...), ^n. some copies (...) as Ribera ci^es it.
of shaved, hewed or carved stone. However, our last translation (following
Tremellius therein) reads it GREAT STONES, as if the state consisted, rather
in their bigness, then beauty; amplitude, then art bestowed upon them.

6. Timber they fetched from Ezra. 3. 7.
mount Libanus (the magazeen of Cedars) brought thence in ships to Ioppa,
Cedars fetched from (...).
and thence conveyed by landcarriages to Jerusalem. But, we may be assured,
that Solomon long ago had flitted the cream of the choicest trees in that
mountain, this second generation being lesser, lower, and fewer, then those
before them. Yea, in process of time, Cedars were so rarefied in Libanus, that
B^ddulphs Travel^. page 40.
modern travelers saw but four and twenty in their passage over this mountain,
and heard but of a few more (and they all in one place) extant there at this day.

7. Some will object, Great promises ill performed.
all these defects were eminently supplied by the favor of Cyrus, who in his
Charta Magna for the building of the Temple, had privided, that the expenses be
Ezra 6. 4.
given out of the Kings house; and water may sooner be wanting at the
wellhead, then they lack accommodations, who commanded the coffers of so
mighty a Monarch. But, such must take notice of the great space of ground,
betwixt Jerusalem and Babylon; and the bounty of Kings (especially at so great
a distance) makes more noise in the mouths of the reporters, then it brings
profit into the hands of the receivers. So that all things considered, whilst
Solomon's Temple, like the eldest son, and heir, went away with the solid
inheritance of a world of wealth; this latter, like the younger brother, was
contented with a poor pension of the peoples bounty allotted unto it,
especially at the inconsiderable beginning thereof.

8. Wherefore at the foundation of this Temple, The old men weep.
the old men Ezra 3. 12.
wept at the laying thereof, who could call to mind the greatness, and
gallantry of the former. How great was the grief of our first parents after
their expulsion ou^ of paradise, when comparing their present with their
primitive condition, and what was lost, with what was left unto them? Enough to
drown them in despair, if not supported with certain expectation of the
promised Seed.

9. But the youngsters, The youngmen shout for joy.
being more in number, and greater in strength, shouted for joy, conceiving the
foundations newly laid a matchless fabric for magnificence, having never seen
better, nor other in that place. Thus, such as have been bred in the dark, when
first brought into the twilight, admire at the incomparable luster thereof.
But, what says our proverb? Better children weep, then old folk: and it had
been happy, if here (by a transposition of their passions) whilst the young
folk sorrowed, the old men had rejoiced: the former thinking themselves to have
just occasion of mirth, the latter knowing they had too much reason for
mourning.

10. But, what says the Prophet, God delights in minims.
in reference to this mean fabric? Who has despised the day of small things?
Zech 4 10.
God, who is all in all, delights to improve such things, as are next to
nothing. He that loved the Jews best, who were D^ut. 7. 7.
the fewest of all people; who made Gedeon a Judge, who was the Judge. 6. 15.
least in his Fathers house; Saul a King, whose family was the 1 Samuel 9. 21.
least of all in his Tribe* Paul a preacher, the 1 Cor. 15. 9.
least of the Apostles; who delighted in Psalm. 68. 27.
little Benjamin their ruler, the little hill of Hermon, the Luke 1. 48.
lowliness of his handmaiden; who multiplyeth mustard seed the Mat. 13. 32.
least of all grains into a tree, did cherish and hatch this weak building
under the wings of his protection, bringing it from feeble beginnings; by faint
proceedings, to full perfection.

CHAP. II. The dimensions of the Temple, and the foundations thereof laid.
1. BE it premised for an undeniable truth, This far less then Solomon's Temple.
that this Temple fell short of Solomon's in the dimensions thereof. Which
plainly appears, first, by the question the Prophet propounds; Hagg. 2. 3.
Who is le^t among you, that saw this house in her first glory? and how do you
see it now? Is it not in your eyes, in comparison of it, as nothing? Secondly,
by the tears the old men Ezra 3. 12.
shed, when the Ibidem.
foundation thereof was laid, whilst they beheld the meanness of the one with
their eyes, and recollected the magnificence of the other in their memories.

2. But here we meet with (almost) an inextricable difficulty. Objection to the
contrary.
For, notwithstanding the premises so plain to the contrary, the dimensions of
Cyrus his Temple appear larger then those of Solomon's, if the ensuing parable
be seriously perused.

1 King. 6. 2. And the house which King Solomon built for the Lord, the length
thereof was threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits, and the
height thereof thirty cubits.

Ezra 6. 3. Let the foundations thereof be strongly laid, the height thereof
threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof threescore cubits.

Behold here, how Cyrus his Temple was thirty Cubits higher (just as high
again) and forty cubits broader (thrice as broad) as Solomon's. And, although
the length of this second Temple is not expressed, yet an ordinary judgment
will infer by the symmetrie of building, that the length thereof must needs be
much greater, to manage such a breadth in any due proportion of Architecture.
This so strong an evidence to the contrary, would almost have persuaded one to
believe, that their old men were either deceived with their dim eyes, or
mistaken in their frail memories, and that this Temple was greater then the
former, did not the infallible testimonies of the ^^gga. 2. 3. Zech* 4. 10.
Prophets so peremptorily avouch the comparative smalness thereof, in respect
of Solomon's.

3. Many are the solutions, A Salv^ rejected.
which the learned produce in satisfaction of this difficulty. But, first, as
for their conjecture, that Zorobabel, at the building of this Temple, purposely
abated of those dimensions assigned by Cyrus (as too great for him to compass)
contenting himself with a less scantling, but more proportionable to the weak
power of his people: I can in no wise concur with them therein. For, in such
de^alcation of measures by Cyrus allotted, he showed little courtship to his
master the Emperor, (in distrusting the performance of his promises) and less
religion to the Lord his God, in not believing, that he, who miraculously had
stirred up the spirit of Cyrus to appoint, would also vigorously enable him (or
his successors) to effect the aforesaid assignment, in building of his Temple.

4. Some suspect a mistake of numbers in Cyrus his Grant, Others^end^^d.
which notwithstanding will very hardly be admitted. For, seeing the laws of
the Medes and Persians could Dan. 6. 8.
never be altered, they were highly concerned to be accurate, and exact, in
their entering, and inrolling all Deeds on Record. Others justly make a
difference in the measures, and whilst Solomon's were sufficiently known to
have been of the 2 Chr. 3. ^.
first measure, Tremellius in locum Ezrae.
they conceive Cyrus his cubits to be common ones, but half as large as the
former. And thus this second Temple, though sixty cubits high, was for the main
body thereof, but just even with Solomon's Temple. Mean time it came far short
of Solomon's in this respect, because Solomon's had amost beautiful Porch, in
nature of a Tower-steeple, 2 Chr. 3. 4.
one hundred and twenty cubits high (that was double the body of the Temple)
whilst no such aspiring building graced the second Temple, being all of one
uniforme height.

5. This difficulty in the height thus satisfied, Breadth how taken in
Scripture.
by the difference of cubits, let none be troubled at the breadth of this
second Temple, tripling that of Solomon's, seeing here breadth is taken (as
elsewhere in Scripture) for the full extent of a thing on every side. Thus in
the Revel. 20. 9.
Revelation, Saint John speaking of the numberless army of Gog and Magog,
describes them to go upon the breadth of the earth, that is, on the whole
space of the surface thereof. Nor is the Hebrew (...) Rekbo (which properly
signifies his breadth, and is used. 1 King. 6. 2.) used in Ezra, but the
Chaldee (...) which (as De Templi ^abrica. lib. 1. cap. 27.
Ribera observes) imports the expansion, or spreading of a thing,
quaquaversum, on every side. On which consideration, it is judiciously rendered
by Tremellius, not latitudine, but amplitudine ejus, not the breadth, but the
largeness thereof. So that Cyrus gave order, that the bigness of this Temple
(length and breadth put together) should not exceed threescore cubits
(perchance forty in length, and twenty in breadth) and so, both when first
founded, and when fully finished, it came far short of the dimensions of
Solomon's.

CHAP. III. After many obstructions, finished at last.
1. NOw went the building hopefully on, Samaritanes the^r false friendship.
probable in some competent time to come to perfection; when the Samaritans
(the envious enemies of Israel) first by fraud, then force, endeavor to
obstruct their proceedings. First, they tender Ezra. 4. 15.
their service to be fellow-builders with the Jews, (claiming a joynt-interest
in their Temple, as serving the same God) which by Zorobabel, and the Elders of
Israel was wisely refused, as knowing, such seeming helpers would prove real
hinderers. Thus, when 2 Chr. 11. 14.
Satan transformes himself into an Angel of light, as pretending to sing Gloria
in excelsis, with the rest of those heavenly Spirits, it is only out of design
to disturb their harmony, and (if possible) to put that celestial Quire out
of ^une.

2. Their first project failing, Their open enmity.
the Samaritanes accuse the City of Jerusalem in the Court of Artaxerxes King
of Persia, to have been formerly a Ezra. 4. 15.
rebellious city, referring themselves to the Court-rolls for the proof
thereof. See what it is to be a Rebel on record, their posterity may fare the
worse for it, many years after. Indeed, it cannot be denied, but that Zedekiah
King in Jerusalem, though sworn by God to the contrary, 2 Chr. 36. 13.
rebelled against King Nebuchadnezzar, so that this suggestion of the
Samaritans, had too much of truth, though more of malice therein. For, hence
they inferred, were the place rebuilt, the people would return to their former
stubbornness, whereby, in process of time, the Persian Monarchy would be
deprived of all command, and Ezra 4. 13. 16.
revenue on this side the river of Jordan.

3. Power, The I^ws forbidden to build the Temple.
and Profit are the two apples of Princes eyes, woundable with the least touch
thereof. No wonder therefore if upon the premises, a Prohibition was presently
from Artaxerxes sent, and served upon the Jews, commanding them to desist from
building till farther order should be Ezra 4. 21.
given them. Thus the work ceased till the second of Darius. Mean time private
palaces in Jerusalem were finished, and garnished with Haggai 1. 4.
ceiled work, whilst Gods Temple lay waste. Did not those priva^e houses blush
at their own bravery, as serving-men may be justly ashamed, to see themselves
finer then their Masters?

4. Then arose Haggai, Fall a building it again encouraged by the Prophets.
and Zachary, and Ezra 5. 1.
encouraged the people to build again. What, must the Pulpit be obeyed before
the Throne? Eccles. 8. 4.
In the word of a King there is power, but is there more in the mouth of a
Prophet? Oh! a greater then Artaxerxes was here, these Prophets being warranted
by divine inspiration. On goes the Temple afresh, whilst the enemies of Israel
seek in vain to hinder it the second time. For, upon search, the original
grant of Cyrus is produced from amongst the Records of the Ezra 6. 2.
Medes, in pursuance whereof, Darius did not only give leave, and liberty to
the Jews to build their Temple, with a penalty on such as refused it, but also
enjoined Tatnai, Ibid. ver. 8.
Shethar-Boznai, and others beyond the river (which sided with the Samaritans)
to contribute all necessaries toward the finishing, and furnishing thereof. No
doubt the Jews (formerly refusing their persons) accepted their purses to build
with, as knowing, though the men were false, their money might be made
faithful toward the farthering of the work.

5. As for the many chronologicall differences, Chronologicall difficulties
justly declined.
wherewith the building of this Temple is encumbred, we utterly decline them as
alien from our subject. He that medleth (says Prove. 26. 17.
Solomon) with strife belonging not to him, is like one that takes a dog by
the ears. Chronology (all know) is a surly, churlish Cur, and has bit many a
man's fingers, who have causelessly meddled therewith. Blame me not therefore, if
willing to keep mine own hands whole. Only I will add, that such are much
troubled, who apply to this Temple those words of the Jews to our Savior, John
2. 20.
Forty and six years was this Temple in building, and will thou rear it up in
three days? So that all their endeavors can not conform those numbers to
Zorobabels Temple, which had not so many years spent in the erection thereof.
Wherefore for the main they plead, that malice has a wide mouth, and loves to
outlash in her relations. So that the Jews stood not exactly on the particulars
of years, whilst the total sum of their intent was to cast a greater odium on
Christ, by widening the disproportion between so many years, and so few days.
Yea, seeing at the same time they wilfully mistook the meaning of our Saviors
words, no wonder if withal they corrupted the computation of the building of
the Temple, adding more years thereunto, then were in the true account thereof.

6. But be the years more or less, Sacrifice at the Dedication.
at last after many stops, stays; demurs, delays; suspensions, relaxations;
desertions, resumptions thereof, the building was completed, and a solemn
sacrifice at the dedication thereof, but far inferior to Solomon's, on the same
occasion.

1 King. 8. 63. And Solomon offered a sacrifice of peace offerings, which he
offered unto the Lord, two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty
thousand sheep.

Ezra 6. 17. And they offered at the dedication of this house of God, an
hundred bullocks, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs; and for a sin-offering
for all Israel twelve hee-goats, according to the number of the Tribes of
Israel.

See here a great fall, but the second sacrifice was suitable to their small
substance: of a little they gave a little to that God, who, where there is 2
Cor. 8. 12.
first a willing mind, accepts it according to that a man has, and not
according to that a man has not. However, we must congratulate the hopeful
mention of the twelve Tribes of Israel. Welcome happy name, and number, well
met in holy writ, seeing so long since last we parted from you, some hundred
years ago, when Elias offered his sacrifice on mount 1 King. 18. 31.
Carmell. A strong presumption, that some of each Tribe were now present, at
the finishing of this Temple, whereof largely before.

7. This Temple was afterward miserably defaced, Repaired by Maccabeus.
and profaned by wicked Antiochus, until some years after, Judas Maccabeus
cleansed the Sanctuary, repaired the breaches of the Temple, renewed the gates
and chambers about it, and decked the 1 Mac. 4. 57.
forefront thereof with crowns of gold. He ordained also in the month Casleu
an Ibid. ver. 59.
annual festival by the space of eight days to be kept with mirth and
gladness. Some will say, this was but a ceremonious supererogation of
Maccabeus, in making such an ordinance; seeing, neither Hezekiah, when purging
the Temple from the profanation of Ahaz; nor Josiah, cleansing it from the
idolatrous pollutions of Manasses and Ammon, instituted any such yearly
solemnity in memorial thereof. But, let such know, that under Antiochus there
was not only a suspension, and interdiction of the Temple from pious uses, but
a total alienation thereof from piety, and diversion to profaneness: and by
Maccabeus the old Altar was not (as by Hezekiah, and Josiah) reconciled to Gods
service, but a Ibid. ver. 47.
new one erected (hence perchance the feast was called Encaenia, or the
Renewing) in the place thereof* And what, if in this particular point Maccabeus
was more pious then either Hezekiah, or Josiah, let not his memory fare the
worse, for endeavoring the better to preserve Gods favors in the memories of
others.

8. Just (no doubt) were the considerations moving Maccabeus to make this
annual festival, Christ at this Feast of Dedication.
seeing our Savior in the Gospel Ioh. 10. 22.
graced this feast of the dedication with his presence. Although it appears not
in Scripture, that Christ went up purposely to Jerusalem for the observation
thereof (as he did to the Passover, which was of divine appointment) but there
might be a casual coincidence of this feast, and his presence at Ierusaem.
However, seeing Christ with his company adorned a Ioh. 2. 2.
marriagefeast at Cana in Galilee, being a meeting of mere civil concernment,
founded on no divine command, but only the commendable custom of the
Country, no wonder if he honored the feast of Dedication with his person,
wherein the Temple was at first in some sort remarried to the proper use
thereof, from which by the profaneness of persecutours it had formerly been
divorced.

9. Here I must not omit the Rhemists note, The Rhemists their wild note.
Page 29^. on John 10. 22.
Christ (say they) vouchsafed to honor, and keep that feast instituted by
Judas Maccabeus, Lib. 1 cap. 4. and now Heretics vouchsafe not to pray, and
sacrifice for the dead, 2 Mac. 12.
used and approved by him. But, Christ his presence at this feast of Maccabeus
his institution, does no more oblige us to an universal observation of all the
actions of Maccabeus, without farther examination of them, how well they agree
with Gods word; then his eating of bread in the house, and at the invitation of
Simon the Luke 7. 36.
Pharisee, engages us to avouch all the opinions, or practice all the
traditions, which the said Simon might erroniously maintain.

CHAP. IV. Of the Utensils in Solomon's, wanting in this Temple.
1. AS for bulk of fabric, Most of the ^^ensils restored.
and beauty of frame: so also for variety, and richness of furniture, this
Temple fell short of Solomon's. Indeed, great was divine providence in
preserving the Utensils of the Temple, during the captivity in Babylon. Though
Belshazzar Dan. 5. 3.
drank in the holy vessels, yet his sacrilegious swallow was not so wide, as to
devour the metal thereof. These remained in the treasury, and were afterward
restored to the Jews at their return, even vessels of gold and silver, to the
full number of Ezra 1. 11.
five thousand and four hundred. And yet notwithstanding the restitution of
them, this widow-Temple, as I may ^erm it, fell in beauty short of the
Virgin-Temple, wanting many eminent ornaments which were found in Solomon's.

2. First, it is probable, But many wanting.
that the stately 2 Chr. 6, 13.
scaffold of brass, with the Kings 2 Chr. 28. 13.
pillar (which some conceive set thereupon) in nature of a royal throne, was
not in the second Temple; so glorious a Sphere being needless, when there was
no Sun to shine therein. Certainly this wanted 1 The two fair pillars of Iachin
and Boaz* 2 King. 25. 13.
broken in pieces by Nebuchadnezzar, to make them the more portable to Babylon,
otherwise such mountains of massy brass, were unmanageable, till par^elled
into many fragments, past possibility of being rejointed together, whilst all
the lesser vessels were preserved whole and entire. Thus, greatness oft-times
exposes eminent persons to their own destruction, whilst poverty carries its
own protection, and inferior people are preserved by their meanness. 2 The
great Ibidem.
Molten Sea, which being guilty of the same crime (its own overgreatness)
suffered the same execution with the brazen pillars. 3 The fire from heaven,
which, as in the Levi^. 9. ^4.
Tabernacle, so in Solomon's Temple 2 Chr. 7. 1.
came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt-offerings, and the sacrifices,
and the glory of the Lord filled the house. No spark of this fire appeared in
the second Temple. 4 The Pot of Exodus 16. 33.
Manna, spilt, broken, or lost by some accident unexpressed in Scripture. 5 The
Number. 17. 10*
Rod of Aaron which budded, but now was withered away (by some casualty
unrecorded) during the cap^ivity of Babylon. 6 The Ar^e of the Covenant. Not,
that we give any heed to Jeremy his Apocryphal 2 Man. 2. 5.
hiding thereof in mount N^^o; but, wheresover it was, it was not in the second
Temple. 7 The t^o tables of the Exodus 34. 1.
Law written by Gods own finger, and put formerly into the Arc of the Covenant.
Here for the main we may observe, that the Holy of ^olies in this second
Temple, was left altogether empty, and unfurnished. Such avoidance of the
Utensils thereof being purposely made to make room for the coming of our
Savior the true High Priest, who with his gracious presence Ephesians. 1. 23.
fills all in all.

3. As for the Oracle, The Oracle speech^ess.
if it were present in this Temple in substance, it was absent in effect,
because dumb, and speechless, as Anti. Iud. li. 3. ca. 10. page 90.
Josephus both ingenuously (...), and conscienciously rendereth a reason
thereof; affirming that the stones therein ceased to send forth their wonted
splendor (by which formerly answers were returned) two hundred years before he
wrote his book, God being angry ^ith his people for their pre^ari^ation from
his law. And thus this second Temple was, ^s in her struc^ure, so in her
ornaments much (...) to that first of Solomon (...).

4. All these defects notwithstanding, Wherein it excelled Solomon's.
in one eminent respect this Temple equalled, yea excelled Solomon's; according
to the Hagg. 2. 9.
Prophets prediction, The glory of this latter house shall be greater then of
the former, says the Lord of hosts: and in this place will I give peace, ^aith
the Lord of hosts; so that in a mystical respect, the pavement of this, was
higher then the roof of the other. For, hereon our Savior, when a child, was
presented to the Priests; when a youth, disputed with the Doctors; when a man,
wrought many miracles, preached many Sermons; teaching within, and tempted
without the Temple, on a pinnacle thereof. In a word, Solomon's Temple, like
Man's original creation in purity, and perfection, was most glorious in it
self: this latter, like our state of regeneration, which, though full of
faults, failings, wants, weaknesses, in comparison of the former, yet outstrips
it in Gods gra^ious acceptance thereof, crowning it with perseverance here, and
happiness hereafter.

5. So much for the Temple it self, The Courts of the Temple.
which also was guarded with Courts attending the same. Witness Nehemiah
reporting, how, at the feast of Tabernacles, the people, to testify their joy,
made themselves booths, or arbours, in the N^hem. 8. 16.
Courts of the house of God. But, whereas Ez^a mentions the Ezra 10. 9.
street of the house of God, (whither all the people repaired, being about to
reform their strange marriages) I take this to be no part, or parcel of the
structure of the Temple, but some fair street in Jerusalem, leading thereunto:
as Temple-gate, and street in Bristol, so termed, because in passage to the
fair Church called the Temple therein.

6. Let not the Reader here expect from me, a draught of Zorobabels Temple. Why
no draught of Zorobabels Temple.
For, besides that already I have dipped my fingers deep enough in holy mortar,
(when describing Solomon's Temple) we have nothing out of Scripture, for the
particular fashion thereof. To frame it therefore according to conjecturall
fancies, would be as much offensive to any conscientious writer, as little
satisfactory to the judicious Reader thereof. Only in lieu of Zorobabels we
present here the Herodian Temple, and all the Courts thereof (the same in all
essentials with Zorobabels) as Herod rebuilt it, although the story thereof be
encumbered with many improbabilities, which we come now to relate.

CHAP. V. Herod (says Josephus) plucked down, and (...) built Zorobabels
Temple.
1. IT is strange, Wicked men sometimes do good.
how the worst of Tyrants sometimes stumble on eminent actions, doing such
works as might beseem be^ter men to be the authors thereof. Either, out of the
love of variety, that being long wearied with a constant course of wickedness,
they adventure on some commendable deeds, merely for recreation. Or else, only
se defendendo, for their own security, to fence themselves against the too just
assault of peoples tongues, hoping in vain, by one good, to make amends for
many evil deeds they have committed. Some such consideration put Herod the
King upon the building of the Temple, who (as Anti. Iud. lib. 15 cap. 14. (...)
of which all our ens^ing history is taken. Some deny Herod's rebuilding of the
Temple.
Josephus reports) plucked down Zorobabels Temple to the ground, and erected a
new one in the room thereof, of greater art, and larger dimensions.

2. But some Ekius first, and after him Villalpandus in ^zech tom. 2 part 2.
lib 5. d^^p. 4. cap. 68. and sequentibus.
Authors of very good account, are very loath to give credence hereunto, utterly
denying Herod to have built, and lanched a new vessel of a Temple, although
allowing him, to have carined, new rigged, and repaired the old, and especially
the south-porch thereof. They conceive this third Temple merely modelled, and
made by the fancy of Josephus, as which never had other then paper-wals,
inke-mortar, and quil-timber in his book-description thereof. Yea are bold to
call it commentum, figmentum; fabulam, and in downright terms mendacium, the
flat lie of Josephus.

3. For mine own part, Josephus to be believed herein.
after very much reluctance, I am at last contented to credit Josephus herein,
though willingly I could have wished, that some other ancient Author of his
own age had avouched the same, that so in the mouth of two witnesses this Deuteronomy.
17. 6.
truth might have been established. For, this is that same Josephus whom the
great In Proleg in librum de Emend. it. Temporum.
Scaliger charactereth Diligentissimum (...) omnium Scriptorum, cujus fides and
eruditio in omnibus elucet. And, although we come not just up to this so high a
commendation of him, yet we will not suspect him of falsehood in such passages,
wherein he dissenteth not from Scripture.

4. For, Could not be deceived, would not deceive.
first herein he himself could not be deceived in a matter notoriously known,
some being alive who could remember Herod's building thereof. And Josephus
himself had often personally officiated in this Temple, in his Priestly
function. Nor, would he deceive others by such a report; for, cui bono, what
could he gain thereby? Nothing could be gotten by flattering the dust, or ghost
of Herod; especially none of his lineage (when Josephus wrote) being in power,
or place to reward him. How can we then in charity conceive, that he did
transgress without a cause? Seeing there were so many of his own countrymen,
living in all lands, ready to confute so loud a lie, if avouched by him.

5. Secondly, Answers b^st to the Disciples* admiration.
the words of the Disciples to our Savior, M^^k 13. 1.
Master, see what stones, and what buildings are here, must in probability
relate to some new, sp^cious, eye-pleasing fabric. And, if any should say,
that the Disciples, being poor fishermen, and untravelled into foreign parts,
might be privileged to wonder at a fabric, not so admirable in it self; let
such know, we collect the magnificence of this Temple, not so much from their
admiration, as from Christ his concession; who (though reproving the Apostles
carnal affections) allows the stateliness thereof in that sharp return,
Ibid. ver. ^.
See thou (...) these great buildings? Now, this could not well agree with
Zorobabels Temple, being little curious when new, and almost contemptible when
old (if standing in Christ's time, weather-beaten after four hundred years
continuance) and therefore undoubtedly relates to the Herodian Temple, as then
in the prime, and perfection thereof.

6. Add hereunto, Believed by many good authors.
that Herod his wholly taking down, and rebuilding this Temple, is embraced,
and believed, by most ancient, and learned writers, Lib. de.
Hegesippus, In cap. 11. (...) fere initio.
Saint Hierome, In cap. 2. Haggai.
Rupertus, and many other Christian Authors. Constantine l. Empe. in
praesatione in Middoth.
And that some Talmudists acknowledge Herod's Temple, a learned Critic has
sufficiently cleared the same. Yea, which is much material (even by the
confession of such Villalpandus ut prius.
as lately have opposed it) mill quingentis annis nemo vocavit in dubium, nemo
non credidit; for fifteen hundred years (since Josephus wrote it) none ever
doubted, or questioned the truth thereof.

CHAP. VI. Objections to the contrary answered.
1. HAving thus brought our belief (not over forward in it self) to answer the
spur, Much may be alleged against Herod's building.
in what Josephus reports, we confess notwithstanding, many shrewd objections
may be alleged to the contrary, which we shall endeavor to satisfy in order,
as follows.

2. Ob. It is utterly improbable, 1. Objection.
that God who refused David's tender to build him a Temple, merely because he
was a man 2 Chr. 28. 3.
of blood, would accept of such a Tyrant as Herod was, for the same purpose.
Who had murdered Hircanus his patron, Joseph his own uncle, Aristobulus his
brother-in-law, Mariamme his wife, Aristobulus the younger, Alexander, and
Antipater his sons. In a word, unlikely it is, his service should be employed
in building the Temple of God, who endeavored to destroy the Mar. 2. 20.
God of that Temple.

3. Ans. Answer.
Gods ways are in the deep, past man's finding, or fathoming out: who, to show
the fullness of his power, and freedom of his pleasure, uses variety in his
own working. That shall be sometimes a bar to one, which otherwhiles shall be
no hinderance to another. Who knows not, but Cyrus was a cruel man, the
manager of mighty wars, who came to a woeful and violent death? Witness, when
Instine lib. 1.
Tomyris the Scythian Queen, having cut off his head, and put it into a vessel
of blood, Satia te (says she) sanguine quem semper sitisti, Cloy thy self with
blood which thou have always thirsted after. And yet God accepted of the
service of Cyrus, not only to be a benefactour unto, but founder of his
Temple, the Ezra 6. 4.
expenses thereof being given out of his own house. Why then might not the same
God make use of Herod, for the rebuilding of his Temple, when in continuance of
time, much run into dilapidations?

4. Ob. ^Objection.
The Temple extant in our Saviors time, was forty six years in building, as
the Ioh. 2. 20.
Jews did avouch; now, this cannot be applied to Herod's Temple, who reigned in
all but thirty seven years; it must therefore belong to Zorobabels, the
building whereof was so long suspended, through the frequent opposition of
their enemies.

5. Ans. Answer.
It cannot well be applied to Zorobabels, but exactly fits Herod's Temple; for
Zorobabels it falls out too large, which makes expositours take refuge at
several shifts, as we have formerly Above cap. 3. 5.
observed. It is adequate unto Herod's Temple, the Greek being (...), the first
Aorist passive, that is, it has been in building. For, from the time that the
first foundation was laid by Herod, until the present instant of the Jews
their speech, the sum of forty six years was exactly completed, all which time
(though the main of the fabric was finished in the first eight years, and an
half) workmen were constantly employed in trimming, polishing, and perfecting
the out-buildings thereof.

6. Ob. 3 Objection.
The Prophet Haggai 29.
Haggai foretold, that the glory of the second Temple should be greater then
the first, which was accordingly accomplished in the coming of our Savior,
gracing it with his Mat. 3. 1.
presence, and preaching therein. Now, if the Temple extant in our Saviors
time, were not the same numericall, individual Temple, which Zorobabel built,
but another new one of Herod his erection, the Prophecy of Haggai took no
effect, and missed of the due performance thereof.

7. Ans. Answer.
Haggai his prophecy found the full accomplishment thereof, in our Saviors
preaching in Herod's Temple, which was no distinct, but in all essentialls the
self same with Zorobabels. The holy riddle in the Revelation is very hard to be
understood, how the beast Revel. 17. 11.
was the eight, and yet one of the seven. But here it is obvious to any
apprehension, that this was the third, and yet the second Temple, set up in the
same place of the former.

8. Ob. Zorobabels, The same objection rein^orced.
or the second Temple may as properly be termed the first, and avouched the
same with Solomon's, as this third of Herod's building may be called the second
Temple, and maintained the same with Zorobabels. For, it was erected on the
same Area, or floor, and had, though less limbs (smaller dimensions) the self
same vitals, all the essential Utensils of the first Temple, restored unto it.

9. Ans. And answered.
Not so, for, not a foot of stone, or inch of timber used in Solomon's, was
found in Zorobabels, which being all utterly destroyed, new materials were
fetched from mount Ezra 3. 7.
Lebanon. Whereas no doubt Herod made use of whatsoever was firm, sound, and
undecayed in Zorobabels Temple. Besides, there was an interstitium, or distance
of seventy years, between the destruction of Solomon's, and erection of
Zorobabels Temple; whereas here no vacancy at all, the service, and sacrifices
to God being continued without any interruption. As therefore that man, who,
out of a desperate consumption, by Gods blessing, physic, and good diet,
recovers new flesh, remains still the same man: so Zorobabels Temple, acquiring
by Herod's bounty more beauty, and bigness, continued the same Temple, Gods
unintermitted service (the life and soul thereof) preserving the individuity,
or oneness of this Temple with the former.

10. Josephus himself elsewhere confesses (as learned Vid. ejus annot. in Mat.
24. 1. and John 2. 20.
Grotius does observe) that the Temple was never but twice demolished, 4
Objection.
first by Nebuchadnezzar, and finally by the Romans.

11. Understand him (to reconcile him to himself) never but twice demolished in
anger from enemies, Answered.
whereas Herod destruebat animo restruendi, destroyed it with intent to rebuild
it. As the Surgeon, who, not out of cruelty, but pity, breaks an ill set
bone, with full intent to set it better. Hence it was, that this third Temple,
in some sense, is always accounted, reputed, and esteemed by the Jewish
Rabbis, the same with the second.

CHAP. VII. General observables in Herod's building.
1. THus satisfied for the main, Full credit not required to Josephus.
that Herod rebuilt Zorobabels Temple, come we to some memorable observables
therein, gathered out of Josephus, whose single band if the Reader shall refuse
to accept, we can tender him no better, yea, no other securirity. It is not
therefore expected, that all which Josephus relates, should be credited in the
full latitude thereof, it is enough if the judicious Reader (with 1 Cor. 11. 18.
Saint Paul in another case concerning the reports of the Corinthians) does
partly believe it.

2. First, to satisfy, and content the Jews (half suspecting his power, or
pleasure to rebuild the Temple) he plucked not down the old Temple, till all
necessaries for the new one were perfectly provided, and brought in place,
ready to be set up, lest otherwise between two Temples, none at all should be
left. Such as take down one Church, before fully furnished for the setting up
of a new, make a dangerous breach for profaneness, and Atheism to enter in
thereat. No such regnum for Satan, as in the interregnum between two religions.

3. As for the dimensions of Herod's Temple in relation to Solomon's, the ensuing
parallel thus presents them unto us, 1 King. 6. 2. And the house which King
Solomon built for the Lord, the length thereof was threescore cubits, and the
breadth thereof twenty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits -- [after
the first 2 Chr. 3. 2.
measure] the porch therein was an Ibid. ver. 4.
hundred and twenty cubits high.

Josephus Anti. Iud. lib. 15. cap. 14. Her^d removed the old foundations, and
laying new ones, built the Temple an hundred cubits long, so many and twenty
more, in height; as for the breadth (omitted by Flavi^^^ Ios^phus) Ben-Gori^n
adds, it was an hundred cubits.

Not that the whole body of Herod's Temple was an hundred and twenty cubits
high, but only the middle thereof, as Josephus confesse^h, the sides round
about being lower. Thus whilst Solomon's Temple was builded long ways, with the
porch, or to were at the east end, Herod's appears more round, with a tower in
the middle thereof.

4. Now, Common cubits meant by Josephus, appearing by the bigness of the
^tones.
though the length, and breadth of Herod's Temple exceeds Solomon's, (as they
make it) yet certainly, no^ cubits of the first measure, but common ones are
meant by Josephus, as may appear by the vast proportion of firm stones
employed in this building, being twenty five cubits long, eight high, and
twelve broad. Oh! with what art, or engines were they brought hither? If the
stones on Sarisbury plain, in a level and flat Country, and not above twenty
miles from the sea, are recounted amongst the wonders of England, for their
conveyance thither (though the biggest of them called Corse stones are far As
but 24 foot high, 7 broad, and 16 in compass, Camdens Brit. in (...).
less) I say, if they be beheld with such admiration, that judicious men
resolve them not real, but factitious stones, of grit cemented with some
unctuous matter, how can we conceive that these solid stones (four of them
being the full length of the Temple) were managed hither, farther off from the
sea, over a mountainous Country? However, that great, and goodly stones were
here, the Mark. 13. 1.
(...) and (...) in the Disciples observation, Luk, 21. 5.
does sufficiently prove.

5. The Holy of Holies had the inside thereof made only by the Priests (others
not presuming to come on the ground) whereof a thousand were found very cunning
in building. Priests builders
Now, although Saint Paul was a Pharisee, and a Act 18. 3.
tent-maker (the principles of that sect annexing some trade to their
profession) it is strange, so many Priests, though skillful in the
Mathematical, should be so dexterous in the manual part thereof. The pinnacles
of the Temple (says Josephus) were made so sharp, that a bird could not sit on
them, to prevent the defiling thereof. Wherefore when the Devil set our
Savior on Mat. 4. 5.
a pinnacle of the Temple, (where no doubt his feet stood fast without any
miracle, which the Devil could not, and Christ would not causlesly work, as
presumption against the will of his Father) we understand thereby, not such a
sharp pinnacle, but some bartlement, wing, or brink, of building, higher then
the rest of the fabric.

6. It was finished (of all the days of the year) on Herod's birthday, Finished
on Herod's birthday.
and therefore (says Josephus) the joy was the greater, two such eminent
causes thereof meeting together. In very good time no doubt. Indeed the
memories of Philip and Jacob; or, of Simon and Jude, have been anciently
celebrated on the same day, being paires of pious persons well agreeing amongst
themselves. But, 2 Cor. 6. 14.
What communion has light with darkness? Heaven, with hell; God with Herod,
that they should be coupled together, in the same solemnity? However, the
finishing of the Temple on Herod's birthday, was a better deed then what his
grandchild Herod (...) did many years after, on his Mat. 14. 6.
birthday, beheading John the B^ptist. The same author reports they had it by
tradition, that it never rained on the daytime, but only by night, during the
building of the Temple, that so the labor of the workmen might not be
interrupted.

7. But a more improbable passage falls from the pen of Josephus, An incredible
report.
when he reports, that the Temple when finished, sunk down twenty cubits in the
foundation, which the skillful in Architecture will hiss at as an untruth. For,
1 Strange that all parts thereof (as if by mutual consent) should at once
equally sink directly down, such an even, and eminent proportion; the same
weight above meeting with just the same weakness beneath, and no more in one
place, then another. And grant, the walls all agreed to sink together, it is
much, the beams were not broken with the sudden subsidency of the building. 2
Such a sinking fabric would have frighted the Priests from officiating
therein, and death hanging over their heads disturbed their devotion. 3 The
same author reports, that the Holy of Holies in Herod's Temple was just twenty
cubits high. If so, then by the sinking of this fabric, it was wholly
swallowed in the earth, turned into a cellar, so that the High Priest, in
Scripture phrase, must not go up, but go down unto it. 4 The Disciples, when
gazing on the Mark 13. 1.
greatness of the stones, might better have bestowed their wonder, that so firm
a fabric should stand on so fleeting a foundation.
Wherefore with the sinking of his Temple, Josephus his cred it sinkes twenty
cubits in my estimation, enough almost to make one un-believe whatsoever he
has formerly reported therein.

8. But admit it done, What ^se may be made thereof, if true.
not suddenly, but leasurely, and by insensible degrees, sinking some cubits
more or less, was not the hand of God more immediately therein? Partly to
punish Herod's pride; showing, he rather permitted, then approved, such a
wretched Tyrant should build his Temple. Partly, to prognosticate the future
ruin of this fabric, not standing full fourscore years, before it was
destroyed. However, in a spiritual sense, the true Zion, and Church of God
has the Psalm. 87.1.
foundations thereof in the holy mountains -- The highest himself shall
establish her, God is in the Psalm. 46. 5.
midst of her, she shall not be moved.

CHAP. VIII. Herod's Temple many degrees short of Solomon's.
1. BUt here we must have an abominable falsehood of Joseph BenGorion, An
impudent lie of Ben-G^rions.
posted, and pillored, impudently affirming, that the Herodian In his book of
the Herodians page 103.
Temple was a more gorgeous structure, then that of Solomon's; flatly against
the Scripture it self, which presents Solomon's as a Nonesuch, or peerless
structure, (admitting no equal, much less a superior) exceeding 1 Chr. 22. 5.
magnificall, of fame, and of glory throughout all countries. But let us put
the builders, and their buildings into the balance, whilst the Reader is
requested to hold the beam with an unpartiall hand. 1 Solomon was a mighty
Monarch, subordinate to God alone, having many tributary Kings homagers 1 King.
4. 24.
unto him. 2 He had wealth at will, God promising there should not 1 King.3.13.
be any amongst the Kings like unto him all his days; and had his ships from
Tarshish, and Ophir, bringing him abundance of treasure. 3 He employed 1 King.
5. 15, 16.
an hundred forty three thousand three hundred for seven years in the building
of the Temple.
1 Herod was a King by the Courtesy of Rome, and accountable unto Augustus the
Emperor. 2 Herod (whilst Solomon was a Merchant royal) was so poor a Peddler,
that he turned the basest of thieves, and (as Josephus reports) robbed the
sepulcher of David f^r treasure hid therein. 3 Herod used eleven thousand men,
and a thousand carts, eight years and an half, in the erection of his building.
Whosoever seriously considers the premises, and remembers the words of Judge.
8. 21.
Zalmunna to Gideon, for as the man is, so is his strength, (actions bear
proportion to the power of their actours) will conclude; Herod, though ^urnamed
the great, was too little to match, and far less to surpass Solomon in such
undertakings.

2. As for Joseph Ben-Gorion extolling the Herodian, Ben-Gorion an incompetent
Judge.
above Solomon's Temple for sumptuousness, his judgment is lighter then vanity
it self. In all controversies Gods law provided, that the Exodus 22. ^.
cause of both parties should come before the Judges. But, Joseph Ben-Gorion
(no news for them who know least to censure most) never saw either Temple, and
yet is bold to pass censure on both. Indeed the aged Fathers that Ezra 3.12.
wept, saw two Temples, Solomon's before the destruction, and Zorobabels at the
foundation thereof. Flavius Josephus the Jew saw one ( Zorobabels rebuilt by
Herod) in his time rased by the Romans; Ben-Gorion beheld no pinnacle of either
being a late author, living some hundreds of years since our Savior. Yea
(what the maid said to Saint Peter) Mark 14.67.
his speech agrees thereunto, discovering himself a more modern writer, by
mentioning the name, and nation of the Lib. 6. cap. 1. sol. 53. Editionis
Cracovi^nsis.
Franks, a word not appearing in the world till some hundreds of years after
our Savior. Besides, the book of Ben-Gorion like Geryon (the famous monster
amongst the Poets) consists of three bodies confounded into one; pieces of
Hegisippus, parcels of Russinus, and patches of his own fancying, so jumbled
together, that little truth, and less certainty can be extracted from it.

3. Here we must know, A dangerous Jewish design.
that such as advance Herod's above Solomon's Temple, for the beauty thereof,
drive on a dangerous Jewish design. Late^ anguis in herba, there is a pad in
the straw, and invisible mischief lurking therein. Hoping hereby literally to
verify the Prophecy of Haggai, of the glory of the second Temple, in that
carnal, material bravery, which Heroa bestowed upon it, so to frustrate, and
defeat the spiritual sense of those predictions, mystically accomplished in
the coming of Christ. Wherefore, all Christians are highly concerned to be
zealous, to detect and detest an opinion, so destructive to the truth of
Scripture, and derogatory to the glory of God.

4. However, The golden Vine in the H^rodian Temple.
we deny not, but that this Herodian Temple in it self considered, without
relation to Solomon's, was a magnificent structure, (as Historiaru^. lib. 5.
Tacitus, an heathen, and no friend to the Jewish nation, does confess;) and I
believe that the Courts on all sides thereof took up a greater compass and
circuit of gronnd, then those of Solomon's, the Mount of the house (narrow in
his days) being afterward much enlarged. Therein we take principal notice of
two eminent braveries. First, the Golden Vine ornamentall thereunto, which had
clusters thereon as big as the stature of a man, as if corrivals in greatness
to those bunches of Numb. 18. 23.
grapes, the spies anciently brought as a sample of the fruitfulness of the
land of Canaan: This Vine Ben-Gorion makes of massy gold, whilst a learned
Villalpandus.
author, out of Flavius Josephus, proves it to have been only woven of gold
thread, which much abateth the price thereof. But, whilst Jews gaze with
admiration on the cost, and curiosity of this Golden Vine, Christian eyes may
better behold another, of more grace, and glory, often to be seen in the same
Temple, even Him that said, John 15.1.
I am the true Vine, and my Father is the husbandman.

5. The other was that Golden Iosep^us Anti. Iud. lib. 17. cap. 8.
Eagle, The golden bloody Eagle.
set over the entrance of the Temple, which afterward proved a Bird of prey to
the poor Jews, occasioning a grievous slaughter amongst them. Who conceiving
their Temple profaned by this Image, brake forth into a mutiny thereupon,
wherein they were slain in great numbers. Threefold was the offense, the Jews
took at the making thereof, because 1 Scandalous, to set up any image in the
Temple, as introductory to Idolatry. 2 Unbeseeming the state of Gods house,
like an Inn to have a sign hung out of it. 3 The Eagle being the Roman Arms
minded them of their subjection.
An ungrateful spectacle to the Jewish nation (so constant a pretender to
freedom) to be daily upbraided with their loss of liberty.

6. To conclude, and give Herod his due, this third-second Temple (as I may
term it) though far short of Solomon's, may be believed more magnificent then
Zorobabels. So that, what Hezekiah ingenuously confessed of the Kings of
Assyria, may as justly be affirmed of Herod, Of a truth he has done great
matters. Though, who had not rather have one line of Iosiahs Epitaph, written
truly on his tomb, 2 Chr. ^5. 26.
The rest of his acts, and his goodness, then all the popular applause Herod
received, for erecting this magnificent structure.

CHAP. IX. The Actions of Christ in the Temple.
1. WE have tendered to the view of the reader, The Map taken out of Capellus.
in our lastmap, the draught of Zorobabels Temple as repaired and enlarged by
Herod, so as the learned, and pious Ludovicus In his Compendiu^ Historia
Iudaic^, lent m^ by that learned and industrious Gentleman M. Edward L^igb Esquire.
Capellus has presented it, who exactly took his instructions therein, from
the pen of Josephus, an eyewitness hereof. Wherefore I justly disingage my
self from all objections against this Map, which are properly chargeable upon
Capellus his account. I confess, herein I proceed not with that (...), and
(...), with that boldness and assurance, which I could desire; because the
divisions and dimensions of the Courts, and chambers, as exhibited in this
Temple, rely not (as Solomon's) on Gods word, but only on humane fallible
testimony. Oh it is excellent, when, with Theophilus, we may know the Luke 1. 4.
certainty of those things wherein we are instructed out of Scripture it self.

2. Come we now to the actions of our Savior in the Temple; The difference
betwixt (...) and (...).
having first premised this useful, yea necessary distinction. What our
English tongue, for want of another proper word, promiscuously calls the
Temple, the original carefully expresses by two names, adequate to two
several parts thereof, (...).This properly was the covered part of the Temple
(from (...) to inhabit, God peculiarly dwelling there) consisting of the
P^rch, Holy, and Holy of Holies, with the chambers about them. Into this Christ
never came, (though Zachariah in his course did, to ^ffer Luke 1. 9.
incense) nor by the law ( under which he was made, as not coming to destroy,
but Mat. 5. 17.
fulfill it) might he enter thereinto; proper only for the Priests to
officiate therein. Yet though not his person whilst living, his power when
dying, penetrated this Temple, namely, when he rent the Mat. 27. 51.
veil, thereby mystically opening an entrance into heaven by the merit of his
passion. (...).Containing all the verge and compass of the Courts about the
Temple, and within the outward Sept thereof. Christ constantly came hither, I
ever taught (says he) in Ioh. 18. 2c.
the Temple: understand him, that he never wilfully affected Conventicles, as
ashamed of his doctrine, or willingly declined the Temple, when afforded
convenient entrance thereinto. Otherwise, he taught also on the Mat. 5. 1.
Mount, in the Mat. 13. 2.
Ship, in Synag^gues, in private houses; but never so properly in his center,
as when in the Temple. This distinction of (...) and (...) holds current, clean
through the new Testament; save that once (...) is taken for the whole
circumference of the Temple, when Judas cast down the pieces of silver Mat. 27.
25.
therein: though he stayed not long there, as out of his own element, but
desperately made haste, that he might Act. 1. 25.
go unto his own place.

3. This distinction premised, Beautiful gate full of begge^^.
we will wait on the Reader into the Temple. First requesting him to carry
competent money, and a charitable mind along with him. For as we shall enter
in at the eastern gate, (commonly called Beautiful) we shall be sure there to
meet with many creeples, and beggars of all sorts, as proper objects of his
liberality. Here daily lay that Act. 3. 2.
lame man, on whom Saint Peter, though moneyless, bestowed the bestalmes he
could give, or the other receive, even the use of his limbs.

4. But now we come to the memorable passages concerning our Savior in the
Temple. These were either done on him, Christ presented in the Temple.
when an infant; or by him, when arrived to man's estate. Of the former was his
presentation by his parents to the Priest, and when an Luke 2. 24.
oblation for his mother was made, a pair of Turtle-doves, and two young
Pigeons.

5. Hereat in-springs old Si^^eon into the Temple. Sim^o^s testimony of Christ
God always performs his promises with advantage. He had a revelation that he
should not die before he saw Christ, who here both saw and felt him. Oh how he
hugges him (though faster by his Faith, then) with his weak arms, which seem
the stronger for the Burden, as his dim eyes the clearer for this sight! Yea,
he petitions heaven for a Gaole-delivery, Luke 2. 29.
Lord let thy servant depart in peace. Longer life would be but longer loss,
and therefore fain would he fly from Christ in his arms, to the arms of
Christ, before his refined joy were allayed with any worldly woe. Then he
addresseth himself, with bitter-sweets, to Christ's parents, neither frighting
nor flattering, but plainly foretelling them, their child should be for the
fall and rise of many in Israel. Particularly, he tells Mary, that a Luke 2. 35.
sword should pierce through her, and Christ (though borne) should not die
without the pain of his mother. As if the throws, suffered by other women at
the birth, were reserved for her to endure at the death of her Son.

6. Simeon is seconded by Anna, And is seconded by Anna.
a prophetess of an hundred years old, (temperance is the best prolonger of the
candle of life) and herein she exceeded Simeon. He came but Luke 2. 27.
into the Temple, she Luke 2. 37.
departed not from the Temple, but served God therein with fasting and prayer.
She also spoke of Christ to all that looked for redemption. And thus Christ was
proclaimed in the Temple by two Heralds of different sexes, whilst his Parents
carefully kept the copies of their several Proclamations, as trusting them in
no other Cabinet then their own hearts.

7. Now seeing it is said of Anna (pardon a short digression) that she departed
not from the Temple, How Anna departed not out of the Temple.
it will be enquired whether any women were constantly Leigers to live therein.
Were any of the weaker sex (being prohibited to speak in the Church) permitted
to live in the Temple? For, as for the nurse of King Ioash, hid with him in the
2 King. 11. 3.
house of God, the case was extraordinary, and her clandestine condition
nothing pertinent to the present question. In answer whereunto: By never
departing thence, we understand her daily repairing thither. It was David's
wish, that he might Psalm. 27. 4.
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of his life, i. e. that he might
have free access thither upon any occasion. Thus the sacrifice, though only
morning, and ing, is called a ^continuall Burnt-offe^ing. And thus Anna daily
frequenting the Temple, was continually there, as formerly those persons, who
every day might be found in saint. Paul's Church at walking-houres* might in
some sort be said never to depart thence.

8. To return to our Sa^iour, Christ's first act in the Temple.
who hitherto appeared only passive in the Temple, but afterward acted
miraculously therein First, when found sitting in the midst of the Doctors,
both Luke 2. 46.
bearing them, and asking them questions. He, who himself was the John 1. 1.
Word, would notwithstanding hear, before he did speak^ and attentively listened
to the positions of those Doctors, before he began his opposition against them.

9. Arrived at man's estate, He pu^geth it.
we first fix our eyes on his John 2. 14.
purging of the Temple, from Dove-mongers, Mony-changers, and such as ^old
sheep and oxen therein* Had such Merchants, kept themselves in the (...) or*
John 5. 2.
sheep-market, Christ had never distu^bed them, who now, with a scourge of
small cords, drove them out of the Temple. Say not it was as lawful to sell as
sacrifice cattle therein: the one being the main use thereof, according to
Gods command, the other a notorious abu^^ of the Temple, turning it by
fraudulent bargains into a den of the (...)

10. Saint Hierome reports, Sa^nt Hieromes conceit.
that certain fiery Igneum enim quidd^m and s^dc^eum ^adiabat
rays, or beams, darting from Christ^ eyes, drove out these Merchants from
this place. A c^ncei^, which we dare not presently avouch for fear those (...)
of Christ's scourge fly also in our faces thereupon. For if he whipped out
those Merchants, for setting up their warehouses in the Temple, surely he will
lend a lash to such as add traditions to the Text. This sure we are (because
recorded in Scripture) that Christ so earnestly pursued this reformation, that
the Ioh. 2. 17.
zeal of his Fathers house did eat him up. Understand it, that our Savior
being truly Carneus though not Carnalis, of a fleshy, though no fleshly
constitution, had his body wearied out with faintness, not able in its
performances, to keep pace with the desires of his mind.

11. After this time, Christ's Sermon in Solomon's porch.
many were those hea^enly Sermons; Christ made in the Temple: which here we
forbear to relate Only we take notice of that he preached in Solomon's Porch
Ioh. 10. 23.
(which afterward deserved rather the name of Christs-porch, seeing a greater
then Solomon (...) here) when the people (mysteries are blasphemies to (...))
took up Ioh. 10. 31.
stones to stone him. Some will a^ke, whence had they those stones? It being
unlikely that any were let to lie loose in so holy a place. But we may be
confident, if there were any to be had above ground* their malice would find
them out* And probably they pl^cked them off from the pavement: their furious
zeal counting it a meritorious act, rathe^ to ^end the^ out of the ground, then
suffer a supposed blasphemer to escape* Surely such stones would rather have
Luke 19. 40.
spoken in his praise, then done any thing to his prejudice, especially before
his ^oure was come.

12. And as he spoke woll, Lame and b'ind cured in the Temple.
so he did as well therein. Mat. 21. 14.
The blind and the lame came to him in the Temple, and he healed them. See
here, those with (...) might come to him in the Temple, not those with
Insections: the lame, but not the leprous might enter therein. Thus whilst
sufferings and afflictions do not hinder us, sinful pollutions do debar our
access to Gods gracious presence.

13. We must not forget, Christ's second purging of the Temple.
that a little before his passion, Christ the second time purged the Temple
Three Ioh. 2. 15.
years since he cast all Merchants and their appurtenances out of Gods house,
which now notwithstanding that ejection, had again gotten unlawful possession
therein. Devils he cast out of men so finally, that they entered no more into
them; but wicked men, once thrown out of the Temple, recovered their stations
therein again. Abuses in the Church depart not till they are driven, and then
go away unwillingly, animo revertendi, with full intent to embrace the next
opportunity to return. What need has Reformation it self to be frequently
reformed, seeing corruptions will so quickly creep thereinto? Christ, the
second time, cast those vermin out of the Temple.

14. Now, His farewell to the Temple.
just before he took his farewell of his Fathers house, he beheld the Pharisees
casting their money into the treasury. So that the Mark 12. 42. and Luke 21. 2.
Widows mites, was the last object (no small credit unto her) which in the
Temple entertained our Saviors eyes on earth, and no doubt long since has
been rewarded by him in heaven. For presently he departed to mount Olivet, and
there foretold, yea thence denounced the destruction of the Temple, which
followed not many years after.

CHAP. X. The acts of the Apostles in the Temple.
1. CHrist, Saint Peter's remarkable Sermon.
after his ascension, resigned the Temple to his Apostles, to supply his
absence by their preaching to the people. Here on the day of Pentecost Saint
Peter made that memorable Sermon, wherein he vindicated both himself and
company from the aspersion of drunkenness, avouched the truth of Christ's
resurrection, and charged the Jews so home, for shedding his innocent blood,
that by the sharpness of his reproof ( Eccles. 12. 11.
the words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the masters of the
assemblies) such as heard him were pricked in their Act. 2. 37.
heart; crying out to Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles; Men and brethren,
what shall we do?

2. Here, The Apostles joint-commissioners.
by the peoples equal applications, and addresses to the rest of the Apostles,
it appears, that they were all fellow helpers, and joint Commissioners with
Saint Peter, (all in the Jury besides the Foreman are not ciphers) though he
for order sake, and regularity, to avoid confusion, was made the mouth for the
rest. Yea, such their sobriety and discretion, though at that instant enabled
with the gift of tongues, that they only made use of seasonable silence (such
as best know how to speak, know best when to hold their peace) with their
tacit suffrages concurring to the truth of what Saint Peter delivered: who
further gave his Auditory counsel Act. 2. 38.
TO REPENT.

3. But was this well done of him to add grief to grief? Evangelicall
r^pentance prescribed to the people.
What, more repentance still? Why further pain, to such as were pricked to
their hearts? Was this any valor, to beat them with more blows, who already
cried out for fair quarter, WHAT SHALL WE DO? But know, Peter herein advised
them to join to their former legal sorrow, an evangelicall repentance; such as
is attended with desire, hope, and some assurance of Pardon. He prescribes them
the same receipt, he lately took himself; having found the good fruit thereof,
when, on his hearty Mat. 26. 75.
sorrow, he obtained pardon for denying his Master. No Sermons so sovereign, as
those which proceed from the Ministers 2 Cor. 1. 4.
comfortable experience. Nor did he barely advise them to repent, but also to
Act. 2. 38.
be baptized every one of the^, in the name of Jesus Christ etc.

4. See the success of his counsel, Act. 2. 41.
about three thousand were added to the Church that same day. O high holy day
in heaven! This Many-Saintsday was a festival of great solemnity therein,
where there is Luke 15. 7.
joy over one sinner that repents, singing on their golden viols, Peter and
the Apostles have saved their three thousand. His Sermon (as set down)
contained not so many words, as it converted souls. Though surely, what we read
in Saint Luke was only the breviate, sum, and abridgement of his Sermon,
seeing, with many Act. 2. 40.
other words did he tes^ifie and exhort.

5. Many advantages concurred to render his Sermon the more effectual. First,
Four advantages of Peter's Sermon.
the suffering of our Savior was so near in place, and late in time, that his
wounds were (as I may say) still fresh bleeding in the guilty memories of the
people assembled. Secondly, the present miracle of tongues bestowed on Peter
and his ^^mpanions, did wonderfully make way for the Word he delivered.
Thirdly, such to whom he spoke, were Act. 2. 5.
devout men, blindly pious (like Saint Paul before his conversion) but desirous
of information; zeal not being to be wrought, but regulated, not to be new
gotten, but right guided in them. Lastly, and chiefly, the Spirit of God
invisibly wrought on their souls. Thus when the 1 Cor. 16. 9. and Colos. 4. 3.
door of utterance, or the 2 Cor. 6. 11.
opened mouth of the Minister meets with the Act. 14. 27.
door of Faith or entrance, in the Act. 16. 14.
opened hearts of the people, the Word makes miraculous improvement.

6. And now our Savior had plentifully performed his promise: He that
believes on me, Christ's promise plentifully performed.
the works that I do, shall he do also, and greater Ioh. 14. 12.
works then these shall be do, for I go to my Father; as then put into a
capacity more effectually to assist them, (as formerly but with his prayers)
then authoritatively with his power. The Disciple, (by his Masters permission,
yea procurement) proved above his Master in success. Christ, all his life long,
was angling for a few fishes, but a Act. 1. 15.
hundred and twenty, whilst Peter comes with his Drag-net, and catches about
three thousand in one day. Amongst the reasons whereof, consider 1 Christ was
properly, not to be the builder, but the Foundation it self: and therefore
others were more happy in edification. 2 He was to be humbled (as with hunger,
thirst, weariness, shame, and pain, so) with the heavy afflictions of long
unprofitable preaching, because of peoples Mat. 23. 58.
unbelief. 3 During his life, the kingdom of heaven was but Mat. 4. 17.
at hand, which after his death, and Ascension was in hand. The broad gates of
grace being then opened for multitudes to enter, where few by especial favor
got in before by the Wicket.
We have insisted the longer on Saint Peter's Sermon, because it is the
beginning of Ecclesiastical History after Christ's ascension, which, in Gods
due time, we are in some hope to finish by his assistance. And that the
foresaid Sermon was made in the Temple, appears by the passage of their Act. 2.
46.
continuing daily with one accord in the Temple. Intimating that they were
formerly assembled in the same place.

7. Pass we by the other acts of the Apostles in the Temple, What properly was
Solomon's porch.
only we must not omit Act. 3. 11. and 5. 12.
Solomon's porch where they made their abode. And it is worth our inquiry where
the same was placed.

8. First, Not Solomon's porch properly so called.
negatively, it was not that porch of Solomon's (nor any other afterward built
of the same dimensions on the same floor) mentioned in the 1 King. 6. 3. and 2
Chr. 3. 4.
Old Testament; because 1 That was a part (being the entrance) of the (...), or
Covered Temple: Into which, the disciples (being no Priests) might not enter. 2
That porch had but Ibidem.
twenty cubits in length, and ten in breadth, being so small, that it could not
contain the disciples, and their company, being above three thousand persons. 3
That by the Septuagint, is called UIam (retaining always the Hebrew word) not
(...), as this Porch is called in the Greek tongue.
Rather therefore, by this Porch, we understand, one side, square, or cloister
of the great Court about the Temple.

9. Now seeing the same was surrounded with Courts on all sides, the question
is, Seated on the east side.
on which side thereof Solomon's Porch was placed. Here we had been utterly at a
loss, but for the seasonable help of Lib. Anti. 20. cap. 8.
Josephus; The people (says he) persuaded the King [Agrippa the younger] to
repair the east Porch or Cloister: Now this Cloister was of the outward Temple,
standing over an exceeding deep valley, raised upon a wall of four hundred
cubits, which was made of square white stones of twenty cubits long, and six
cubits high a piece, the work of King Solomon, who first built the Temple.
Whereby it appears, that this Porch respected the east, and was on each side of
the entrance into the Temple.

10. But the greatest difficulty remains. Quest. Why called Solomon's porch?
How came it to be called Solomon's Porch? did not he equally build all the
first Temple? Why therefore did this Porch (as his darling) bear his name
above all the rest? And (which increases the difficulty) seeing all that
Temple was razed by the Babylonians (following no doubt the cruel counsel of
the Edomites, Psalm. 137. 7.
Down with it, down with it, even to the ground) how came this cloister, of the
second Temple in Christ's time, to retain the name of Solomon's?

11. Some conceive this part stood undemolished by the Babylonians: seeing that
curse, Answer thereunto.
there shall not be left (...)
here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down, was denounced
against the second Temple, not against Solomon's, some parcel whereof might be
left standing. But under favor, I conceive, it was particularly called
Solomons-Porch,. because the very bottom, or floor thereof (being forced
ground) was by much expense made by Solomon, and gained with great art and
industry, from the Compare ^osephus as aforecited, with himself, de Bell. Iud.
li. 5. c. 14.
valley beneath; so that (even when the superstructure thereon was by the
Babylonians levelled to the earth) the admirable foundation, that masterpiece
of art, still remained, preserved the memory, and imparted the name of Solomon,
the founder thereof, to that Cloister, which in the second Temple, was erected
upon the same.

12. If any demand why the disciples made choice of this Porch, Why Solomon's
porch chosen by the disciples.
above any other, to make their residence therein; several considerations
might move them thereunto: 1 Because formerly handselled with our Saviors
heavenly Sermon therein. 2 Because of great capacity, conveniently to receive
them, without prejudice to other peoples passage into the Temple. 3 Because it
was the first place that offered it self unto them, at their entrance into the
Temple.
Herein they observed some Analogy of Christ's counsel, In Mar. 6. 10.
what place soever ye enter into a house, there abide until ye depart from
that place. Thus Solomons-porch, being (as I may say) the first house in the
house of God, into which the disciples entered; there they fixed themselves, as
no starters and fugitives, but such as would stand to the doctrine they
delivered.

13. So much of Solomons-porch; Wherein we decline Capellus his judgment.
only let me add; that Capellus (herein contrary to other Constantine
learned men) places Solomons-porch on the south side of the Temple; l.
Empereur in Middoth. p. 53. and Ludovic. de Dicu in Act. Apost p. 39. (...)
mistaking it, as we believe, with (...) or the Cloister Royal: which out of
Josephus (...)
indeed appears, to have been largely built and beautified on the south side of
the Temple. However we would not innovate or alter any thing in our map from
the mind of Capellus, though here, in our description, we presume to ^nter our
dissenting from his opinion.

14. Pass we by many other intermediate acts of the Apostles and Disciples in
the Temple. The last passage of Saint Paul in the Temple.
Amongst all which none might lawfully avouch his entrance so far therein, as
^arnabas, being a Levite by his extraction, and Act. 4. 36.
therefore legally privileged in his approaches to the Altar it self. Come we
now to the last passage of Saint Paul in the Temple. Last indeed it was likely
to prove unto him, and he lose his life therein, on this occasion.

15. At the instance of some godly people, Who almost lost his life therein.
he was persuaded to purify himself: thereby, partly to gain on the affections
of the believing Jews, as yet zealous for the Law; partly to confute their
falsehood, who traduced him for an Antinomian, against all ceremonious
observances. Hereupon he came into Act, 21. 26.
the Temple to signify the accomplishment of the days of purification, until
that an offering should be offered for him and his companions. If any grudge
that after the coming of the Gospel, so much cost should be bestowed on the
Law, and sullenly say, with Judas Iscariot, To what purpose is this Mat. 26. 8.
wast? Might not the Law truly answer with our Savior, in the same case, Mat.
26. 12.
He did it for my burial, and for the more solemn interment thereof.

16. But Saint Paul's devotion in performing these Obsequies was interrupted by
the people, A popular mutiny.
who accused him for defiling the Temple, having Act. 21. 29.
seen Trophimus, and Ephesian, with him in the City, whom they supposed he had
brought into the Temple. Malicious jealousy never makes good Logician, so
strange are the inferences thereof. In vain might Saint Paul deny the
consequence of their syllogism, whilst they were ready to prove it by an
inartificiall argument, from the Authority, or prevalency rather of a popular
uproare, Act. 21. 34.
Some cried one thing, some another, and those, no doubt, that knew least
railed loudest, and no certainty could be known for the tumult, the many-headed
multitude speaking a Language, whereof none can be an interpreter, to
understand them, which understand not themselves.

17. Suppositive was the offense of Saint Paul, Saint Paul rescued.
(only on their bare surmise) but positive must be his punishment, drawing him
out of the Temple, whom certainly they had killed, had not the seasonable
interposing of the Captain, rescued him from them. Who hence conveyed him safe
into the Act. 21. 37.
Castle, no doubt, of Antonia hard by, and not the Castle on Mount Sion, built
out of the ruins of the Palace of David, though formerly (following the
authority of others) we made that place the Theater of Saint Paul's future
actions on this occasion.

CHAP. XI. Of the vast wealth of the second Temple.
1. WE have cause to conceive, that the Corban or Treasury of the second Temple
was about our Saviors time, The wealth of the Corbar ar^sing from pure Pagans.
welnigh as well lined with wealth, as in the reign of Solomon, flowing from
three principal springs, 1 Mere Gentiles. 2 Proselytes. 3 Native Jews.
The first of these were very bountiful to the Temple, and constantly (...)

4. Native Jews were the last, Native Jews their liberality.
and best benefactours to the Temple, especially if all contributed thereunto
in proportion to the poor widow who cast in two Mark 12. 44.
mites being all her substance. Now, had one been present when the Scribes and
Pharisees cast in their offerings into the treasury, it had been pleasant to
behold the conflict, betwixt their covetousness, and vainglory, and how the
latter prevailed in them. For, though they were Luke 16. 14.
covetous, yet when people beheld them, they were content to part with their
money, or rather to let it out for the interest of popular applause* But,
besides free-will-offerings at any time, that Gods service might not be lest
arbitrary, the Jews were enjoined thrice a year Exodus 14. 23.
at the solemn festivalls with their men children (when able, says the Rabbih,
led in their Fathers hands, to climb up the mountain whereon the Temple was
built) to appear before God; where none, who hoped to return with their hearts
full of joy, came with their hands empty of money For seeing the Jews held their
estates of no mean Lord, but all by tenure in capi^e from the God of Heaven,
these were the three solemn payments of their head rent to their high Land
lord. Besides these in the days of our Savior, vast were the sums which were
advanced to the treasury, by that gainful Divinity current amongst the people,
though stamped only with Pharisaicall traditions, of which, this one that
follows, was the most remarkable.

5. It plainly appears, The gainful doctrine of Corban.
that all children, if of ability, should maintain their parents, if by age or
accident grown weak and impotent to subsist 1 Timothy 5. 16.
of themselves, according to Gods command, Honor Exodus 20. 12.
thy father and mother Qamp;c. Notwithstanding which obligation, the Scribes
and Pharisees did preach, and teach, that in case any children were pleased to
compound with Mar. 15. 5. and Muk 7. 11.
Corban, etc to pay a round sum proportionable to their estates, unto pious
uses, thereby they were disingaged in conscie^de, from making any farther
provision for their poor parents* Going on this ground, that one debt was to be
but once satisfied, and if they paid it in to the service of God the
grandfather to all mankind, thereby they were discharged from duty to their
immediate, and subordinate parents.

6. This commutation-money (as I may term it) amounted to a Nem^scit of
revenue, The ill in^luence of this doctrine.
but withal made a dearth of dutiful children in the land, who counted it the
more frugall way, once for all to fine to the Temple, then to pay the constant
rent of daily relief to their parents. But can an Acquittance of humane,
^^adition, be valid, against a debt of Specialty* by Gods command? Oh! had the
hole in the cover of Corban been a mouth to speak, as well as to take in, how
zealously would it have protested against such proceedings? And we may conceive
this one cause of hastening the woeful ruin of the Temples wealth, such ill
gotten money poisoning the Corban, making it suddenly swell, and then break in
pieces, when swept away by the Romans, which we come now to relate.

CHAP. XII. The final abolition of the Utensils of the second Temple.
1. GReat houses commonly crack before they fall, Pompey his moderation in
sparing the treasure of the Temple.
to give the dwellers therein notice to depart. Thus before the Temple was
finally ruined, and her vessels taken away, two grand warnings were given the
Jews, seasonably to amend, and prevent farther mischief. The first in that
famous year wherein Tully and Mark Antony were Consuls, some sixty years before
our Saviors birth, when Josephus Ant. Iud. ^^. 14. 6. 8.
Pompey the great, having taken the City and Temple, entered the Holy of Holies
with some of his soldiers, the floor whereof had formerly felt no other feet,
but those of the high Priests, and those but once a year. Here he saw
mysterious ornaments, understanding (not the meaning but) the matter thereof to
be pure gold; a shroud bait to tempt his hungry soldiers to sacrilege,
besides two thousand talents of silver in the treasury of the Temple. On all
which he only feasted his, and his officers eyes, whilst their hands did
fast, not diminishing the least mite thereof, in veneration of that deity to
whom they did belong; Only he took on him to restore Hircanus to be high
Priest, a presage that the Jewish Priesthood would shortly fall down, which
already did so shake, that the high Priest needed to take a Presentation, ad
corroborandum, from the hands of Pompey a Pagan Patron.

2. Secondly, Crassus his sacrilege.
when Crassus that rich churl, and Roman General marching with his Army into
Syria, and through Jerusalem, flayed, what Pompey did not fleece, spoiling the
Temple to the value of eight thousand talents. Indeed, Ios^phus Ant. Iud. li.
4. c. 12.
Eleazar keeper of the holy treasures, gave, or rather paid to Crassus a wedge
of gold weighing three hundred pounds, to ransom the rest from his rapine. But
the golden wedge did but widen the covet ousness of Crassus, and like a
breakfast did enable him to encounter a dinner with a greater appetite; so
that, notwithstanding his oath to the contrary, he added sacrilege to his
perjury. But seeing thieves give whatever they take not away, we have rather
cause to comend his bounty, that the golden table, candlesticks, and other
ornaments escaped his fingers; except, they were either hid from him by the
careful providence of others, or left by him out of his own politic
covetousnes, like nest-egs to encourage others again to lay up more wealth in
the same place. And no doubt he hoped, though now he had mowed down the Temples
treasure to the bare roots, shortly, when grown up again, to return to the
after-share thereof; but all in vain, for, marching with his Army into Parthia,
there his money perished with him, losing the principle of his stolen wealth,
and paying his own life for interest. Thus, those who on a sudden grow rather
foggy, then fat, by feeding on sacrilegious morsels, do pin^ away by degrees,
and die at last of incurable consumptions.

3. Here we cannot but take notice, The fond Criticisme of the Scribes.
how profoundly shallow the Scribes and Pharisees were, in that their
superstitious Criticisme, and leaden distinction, how he that swore by the
Temple, was left at liberty, whilst he that swore by the Mat. 23. 16.
gold of the Temple, was bound up and concluded in conscience to the
performance of his oath. Whereas our Savior demonstrateth, that the Temple was
greater then the gold, as the sanctifier thereof. Besides, in common sense, he
should seem faster tied, whose faith by oath was staked down to the Temple, as
to a fixed, firm, stable structure, then he whose truth was tied only to the
gold thereof, a more fading, flitting, moveable matter, as appears by Crassus
and others carrying so much of it away with him into foreign countries. But
indeed (as our Savior teaches) the main obliging power of those oaths,
consisted in the presence of God, before whom they were made, who alone is
immovable and immutable, whereas in process of time, the Temple it self, as
well as the gold thereof, came to destruction.

4. For, The final abolit^on of the utensils of the Temple.
Vespasian and Titus his son, Roman Emperors, Anno Dom. 72. razed the Temple,
and utterly confounded all the Utensils thereof. Indeed they were first carried
in triumph to Rome, but what afterward became of them is altogether unknown. It
is no sin to conceive that their property was altered; and they either
converted to coin, or turned to plate for the use of the Emperor, or his
favorites. Sure none are known to remain in specie at this day: and one may
wonder, that no impudent Relickmonger has produced a golden feather of a
Cherubims wing, or a knop, flower, bowl, or almond of the seven-branched
candle-stick, having pretended since Christ's time, to improbabilities of as
high a nature. Strange that no Pope has gotten a piece of Aarons Mitre, or
breast plate, to grace his wardrobe, or a parcel of the
manuscript-commandements written by Gods finger, to adorn his Vatican. But
divine providence has utterly razed all foundation for superstition to build
upon, in the total abolition of these holy ornaments. And if those reasonable
Witnesses of Gods truth, were by his permission overcome, and killed by the
Beast, when they had finished their Revel. 11. 7.
testimony, no wonder if these senseless and inanimate types, having served
their generation, the truth being come, were finally extinguished* Nor have I
ought else to observe of those holy Utensils, save that all were made of pure
gold, and yet the Apostle is bold to term them, and all other legal
ceremonies Gal. 4. 9.
beggarly elements, so debasing them in comparison of Christ, the author of
grace, and giver of eternal life.

Finis Libri Tertii.
To the Right Honorable FRANCIS LORD RVSSELL, Son to the Right Honorable
WILLIAM EARL OF BEDFORD.
MY LORD,
PErusing this passage in the beginning of Saint Lukes Gospel, -- To Luke 1.
3. 4.
write unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus, that thou might know
the certainty of those things, (...), wherein thou have been catechized, or,
instructed: it furnished me with some observables, very conducible to my
present purpose; 1 Though God Luke 18. 19.
alone be good, yet man in some sense may be most excellent. 2 Even in that
age, wherein they had Act. 4. 32.
all things common, Nobility remained several, as appropriated to some
principal persons. 3 No diminution to the dignity of a Noble man, to be
cat^chised, (...), in the Principles of Religion. 4 Dedicating of Books of
Noble persons is an ancient practice, (...) Scripture precedents. 5 (...) not
patronage for his book (the Word of God being the Ephesians. 6. ^7.
sword of the (...) to defend it) but intended the instruction of Theophilus
therein.
The (...) the tex^, encourg^d me, ^^ing to put forth a Treatise to public
view, to make choice of an honorable Patron, and hope I have found a
Theophilus in your Lordship, whom I see to be young, know to be Noble, and
believe to ^e relig^ous. The composure therefore of this ensuing bo^^ (the
issue by Gods ^blessing of (...) own industry) this alone I humbly (...) to
(...) Honor to protect the same. As for the matter thereof, being wholly
Scripture, I heartily dedicate your Honor thereto, to be instructed therewith.

And now, my Lord, may I request you to t^ke a serious survey of your own
extraction, to be unto you a forcible motive unto virtue. To instance only in
your deceased Ancestors (as cut of the reach of flattery) John your Atavus by
his wisdom, and valor (the fortunate General against the Rebels in the
West) founded under God the Nobility of your family. Francis your Abavus (whose
Hall seemed a Court, Closet, a Chapel, and Gate House, an Hospital) shined
as a light with his piety in those darker days. William your Proavus, to whom
agreed the character of Sergius Paulus, Act. 13. 7.
A prudent man, and Deputy of the Country, and that an Island too (though not
Cyprus, yet) Ireland; of whose abilities Queen Elizabeth was well assured, when
choosing him Pilot of that leaking Land; then toffed with the violent tempest
of Rebellion. Francis your (...), whose death I would epithete Untimely (not
only for the behoof of his own family, but benefit of the whole nation) did
not the same authority, which reproved Saint Peter for calling that common Act.
10.15.
, which he had cleansed, forbid me to term any thing untimely which his
Providence has appointed.

Now, my Lord, upon a review of this your pedigree, I will not be so Pedantick
to mind you of a Grammar-instance, to make it true construction in your
Honors practice, Magnorum haudquaquam indignus avorum; but in Scripture Phrase
I request you to Isa. 51. 1.
Look to the rock whence you are hewn, and the hole of the pit whence you are
dug; and do nothing unworthy of that honorable parentage, whence you are
derived.

Far be it from your Honor to be listed among those noble men, of whom it may
be said in a sad sense, that they are very highly descended, as being come down
many degrees from the worth, and virtues of their noble Progenitors.

To conclude then with Theophilus, with whom I began. It is observable of him,
that though styled most excellent by Saint Luke in his Gospel, yet in the Book
of the Acts (which was written many years after) he calls him only Acts 1. 1.
Theophilus, without any honorable addition. What? Had Saint Luke in process
of time less civility, or Theophilus (with more age) less Nobility? Surely
neither, but Saint Luke may be presumed, purposely to wave his titles, out of
compliance to the temper of Theophilus, who in his reduced age grew weary of
worldly pomp, more pleased to have the truth of honor fixed within him, then
hear the titles thereof fastened upon him: according to the Analogy of the
Apostles pre^ept, Let him that has honor, be as if he had it not. Thus, the
longer your Lordship shall live, the less you will delight in outward state,
and daily discover the vanity thereof; especially in your old age, your soul
will grow sensible, that nothing can satisfy it, which is less then Grace, or
Glory, or God himself. To whose protection you are committed, by the daily
prayer of him, who is

Your Honors most humble servant THO. FULLER.
Waltham Abbey, July 16. 1650.
Here follows the Map of Mount Libanus.



THE DESCRIPTION OF MOUNT LIBANVS and the adjacent Countries. The fourth Book.
CHAP. I.
1. SO much for the Jewel, Palestine it self. Now for the Case thereof, namely
the neighboring Countries which surrounded it. Only herein the Simile holds
not, because Cases serve, as to compass, so to preserve and defend the Jewel;
whereas these bordering nations were sworn enemies to oppose and destroy the
land and people of Palestine. The most quiet neighbor Judea had, was the
Midland sea on the west side thereof, which though sometimes (as the Psalmist
observes) it would rage horribly, yet generally it was more peaceable and
serviceable then the Pagans, which bounded them on all other quarters: as
namely, 1 In Syria, on the north, Giblites, Arvadites, Aramites, etc. 2 In
Arabia, on the east, and south-east Ammonites, Moabites, Ismaelites,
Midianites. 3 In Egypt, and the wilderness of the south, Edomites, Amalekites,
Egyptians, etc.


So that the Jews, to find faithful friends must not look about them, but
above them, even to heaven whence all their safety was derived.

2. For the present we are to describe mount Libanus or Lebanon with the parts
of Syria confining thereunto. A mountain which some will have so named from
Frankincense, ((...) in Greek) whereof great plenty grows there. Yet seeing
it is usual for Parents to give names to their children, not children to their
Parents, more probable it is that Frankincense is called (...) from this
mountain, breeding store thereof, then that the mountain should be named
Libanus from Frankincense growing therein.

3. But whilst humane writers are best pleased with this Greek extraction of
Libanus, more conformable to Scripture is the Hebrew Etymology thereof from
Whiteness: In Hebrew White.
because the faithful snow forsakes not the top of this mountain (no not when
persecuted by the Sun in the dog days) but remains there all the year long. A
pleasant sight, at the same time to have Winter on the top, and Summer at the
bottom of one and the same mountain. Excellent the use of this snow in these
hot climats the Prophet Ier. 18. 14.
mentioning it, as most welcome and precious, Will a man leave the snow in
Lebanon, wherewith the Tyrians and neighboring nations used to allay and mix
their wines: so making the Torrid and Frozen Zone to meet in the Temperate,
more healthful for their Constitutions.

4. Lebanon was a place so pleasant, that an Epicure therein might feed all his
senses to a surfeit.

1 Sight. The ^pouse says of Cant. 5. 15.
Christ, His countenance is as Lebanon, where most delightful is the prospect,
with high hills, humble dales, sweet rivers, shady groves. No wonder then if
Ptolemy places Paradise a City hereabouts, where what Poets can fancy, Nature
has performed. 2 Smell. Such the fragrancy of flowers, Gummes, and Spices
thereon, perfuming the air round about. Cant. 4. 11. Hos. 14. 9.
His smell is as the smell of Lebanon. 3 Hearing. For besides the melody
wrabled forth by the sweet Choristers of the wood, pleasant it was to listen to
the complaints which the Rivers murmuring made against the Rocks, for wronging
them in obstructing their channels: whose complaints therein, were so far from
finding pity in men's hearts, that they only lulled their heads the sooner and
faster as^eep. 4 Taste, and Touch. Such the most delicious fruits and liquors
this mountain affords. Vinum C.O.S. The sent thereof shall be as the Hose. 14.
7.
wine of Lebanon. Galen also reports that yearly in mount Libanus husbandmen
used to sing, God raineth honey, at which time they spread hides on the ground,
De alimentis facult. lib. 3. cap. 38.
and from the boughs of trees shook into them the honey dropped from heaven
(called therefore mel roscidum and aereum) filling pots and pitchers with the
same.
No wonder then that Moses made it his earnest request to take this place in
his way, to heaven: I Deuteronomy. 3. 25.
pray thee let me go over and see the good land, which is beyond Jordan, that
goodly mountain and Lebanon. As if his soul more conveniently might take his
rise from the top thereof to eternal bliss, and be the better provided to
entertain endless happiness, when first he had sipt some drops of the same in
delightful Lebanon, the temporal type thereof.

5. It will perchance be objected against the fertility of this place, that the
Prophet Isa. 29. 17.
foretells, Is it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall be turned
into a fruitful field? Where its future conversion into fruitfulness seemingly
implies the present barrenness thereof. But here we must distinguish betwixt
field and forest fruitfulness. The former is composed of the concurrence of art
and industry with nature; the latter only takes what nature tenders, without
any toil to improve the same, wherein Libanus already did exceed. But now the
Prophet foretells (besides this wild and native) an elaborate and artificial
fertility likely to befall this mountain, namely in the speedy and universal
alteration of things in Israel, when champian fields for fear should be
forsaken, and husbandmen for their security retire with their tillage to mount
Lebanon. Thus much for this fair and fruitful place full of goodly trees, wild
and tame beasts in abundance; and yet when measured by an infinite majesty,
Isa. 40. 16.
Lebanon is not sufficient for him to burn, nor all the beasts thereof of
sufficient for a burnt offering.

6. Having largely praised this place (enough to set all the neighboring
Princes at variance about the propriety thereof) it is now high time to inquire
to whom the right thereof did belong. Here we find an undoubted evidence, that
the same by a double title perteined to the land and people of Israel.

1 As a fence to the vineyard. 2 As a Common to a City. As a fence to a
vineyard. So the Prophet in his Parable Is^. 5. ^.
And be fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof. Now although this
fencing principally refers to Gods protection over the Jews, yet is it not
unappliable to the natural posture of their country, hemmed in with mount
Libanus on the north. Secondly, if we conceive all Judea under the notion of a
great city, Lebanon was a Common Josh. 13. 5.
assigned thereunto, and ALL LEBANON toward the Sunrising. And though probably
the neighboring Tribes Asher, Naphtali, and Dan did reap the most benefit
thereby, yet all the rest are presumed to have a right both in the herbage for
their profit, and wild beasts for their pleasure. However, either with or
without the leave of Israel, the Judge. 3.3.
Hivites (and Genesis 10.17.
Archites, whose city Archa is by Ptolemy placed hereabouts) made bold to share
with them in the commodities of this mountain. Here grew the goodly Cedars, of
whose several kinds, (some bearing fruit without flowers, others bringing
flowers without fruit) manner of growing, having straight and clean bodies to
the top, and there a tuft of boughs and leaves, (where should the hair be but
on the head?) natural qualities or supernatural rather, (because said to be
free from corruption, and therefore used to make the statues of the Gods) the
Philosopher ^lin. not. history.
will give the best account, to whose reports we remit the Reader.

7. Forget we not that humane writers make a division of the mountain, calling
the northern ledge thereof Libanus, the southern AntiLibanus whereas the
Scriptures taking no notice of this distinction, express both under the
general name of Libanus.

8. And now to climb this mountain, behold it every where scattered with
Solomon's workmen, some bearing of burdens, (Better to carry the meanest
material to the Temple of God, then carve the most curious pieces for the
tower of Babel) some hewing of stones, all busied, either with their hands as
laborers, or eyes as overseers. No hole left for idleness to peep in at, but
presently she was perceived and punished. I hope without offense, one may wish
them God speed, the rather because Psalm. 74. 6, 7.
he that hewed timber before out of the thick trees, was known to bring it to an
excellent work, but now they break down all the work thereof with axes and
hammers.

9. It is now high time that leaving the general description of Libanus we
come to survay the several places on, or near thereunto. In the southwest side
thereof near Zidon, and the sea, lay the land of Cabul, which Solomon gave to
Hiram King of Tire for the cost and charge he was at in building the Temple.
Hereby it appears that this territory (though lying in 1 King. 9. 11.
Galilee was no part of the Land of Canaan, it being above the power of the
Kings of Israel, to alienate any parcel thereof. But though it was unlawful
to take the childrens bread, and cast it unto dogs, yet the crust and parings
thereof might be given them: to which this Land of Cabul may well be compared,
being so course and base a Country, that it little contented King Hiram, who
therefore called it 1 King. 9. 13.
Cabul, that is dirty, or displeasing. It may seem strange that Solomon, who in
other things consulted with his honor and magnificence and to whom God gave a
large heart, should herein have so narrow a hand, as not to give Hiram a friend
and foreign Prince full consideration, who so freely had furnished him with all
necessaries for his building. But 1 Happily Solomon beheld Hiram as a Homager
unto him, holding the kingdom of Tire from the Crown of Israel. And if so,
then all he did was but his duty, and fully rewarded in Solomon's favorable
acceptance thereof. 2 Solomon might conceive Hirams expenses sufficiently
satisfied in allowing his men such a vast 1 King. 5. 11. 2 Chronicles. 2. 10.
proportion of yearly provision: so these cities were given him not in
compensation of the charge, but as an overplus and mere gratuity. For which
Hiram ought to be thankful because so good, not displeased because no better.
3 Most probable it is, that absolute need, and no other reason, made Solomon
fall short, in satisfying Hirams expectation. His treasure being much exhausted
(excess will beggar wealth it self) by his sumptuous structures. The same
necessitous principles, which caused his intolerable taxes on his own people,
might also make him (against his own will, and generous disposition) fail in
rewarding the full deserts of Hiram.


It is some contentment unto us, that though we know not the several names,
yet the 1 King. 9. 11.
Scripture acquaints us with the exact number of the cities in Cabul-land:
being twenty in all, as in our Map, we have reckoned them accordingly.

10. But here some will be very much startled, that this land of Cabul should
so lately receive this denomination from Hirams displeasure, whereas we find
it so called four hundred years before in the book of Joshua, where the borders
of the Tribe of Asher, are thus assigned: they go out to Josh. 19. 27.
Cabul on the left hand. To satisfy which seeming difficulty, we must know,
that though the book of Joshua contains matter of far more ancient date, Josh.
10. 13.
yet it was written by holy-men of God after the days of David, and probably in
the reign of Solomon. This appears because in Joshua mention is made of the
book of Iasher, wherein the standing still of the Sun and Moon was recorded,
and that book of Iasher was penned after David's reign, because therein David's 2 Samuel 1. 18.
acts were also Chronicled.

11. Mount Libanus is overspread with the 1 King. 9. 19. and 2 Chr. 8. 6.
buildings of Solomon, whereof some may be conceived the fragments made out of
the Remnants and Reversions of the stone and timber left of what was provided
for the Temple. Yea probably some were platformes and modells to heighten and
improve the skill and knowledge of his builders. True it is, in the making of
the Tabernacle, every Tenon, board, hook and socket were Iure Divino, both by
precept and precedent, according to the Heb. 8. 5.
pattern in the Mount: but it was not so in the building of the Temple.
Therein, God gave Solomon a large heart, and furnished him with Hiram a
skillful workman: but as for all particular proportions, they were left at
large for their wisdoms to contrive. It may therefore with much likelihood be
conceived, that to better their knowledge in Architecture for the Temple some
slight buildings in Libanon were erected, which afterward might serve Solomon
for privacy, and pleasure, retirement, and recreation. And seeing Solomon took
his natural history from the Cedar that grows in Lebanon, to the Moss on the
wall, happily he might study in some of these buildings, where Cedars, and other
simples were presented unto him, being best able to comment on Natures works
when he saw the text before his eyes. Of these buildings in Libanus that tower
which Cant. 7. 4.
looks toward Damascus was the principal, to which the Nose of the Spouse in
the Canticles is compared, for the whiteness, uniformity, and proportionable
largeness thereof, whereby the generousness and animosity of the Church is
intimated. The Arist. in libro physiognomico.
Philosopher tells us that a tower-fashioned Nose (round and blunt at the
top) is a sign of magnanimity.

12. From this tower we may take the Prospect of all the adjacent country:
wherein we take no notice of the division of Syria according to humane writers,
but confine our selves to Scripture expressions.

1 Rehob. 2 Aram or Maachah. 3 Syria of Damascus. 4 Zobah. 5 The land of Hamah.
6 Syrophoenicia. 7 Coelosyria. 8 Phoenicia.
Aram 2 Samuel 10. 6.
Rehob, or Beth-Rehoh, so called from a principal City therein, lay south east
of mount Libanus. Herein was Genesis 14. 14.
Dan the place where Abraham overtook the four Kings, who after many victories
had took Lot and his wife captives. By Dan we understand not the city of Dan
(formerly Laish) which some hundreds of years after was so named (though Heb.
7. 9.
Levi is said [vertually] to pay tithes in the loins of Abraham, Dan cannot be
conceived [formally] to name cities, being as yet in the body of his great
Grandfather) but the eastermost fountain of Jordan, anciently called Dan. And
surely springs the issue of nature, are seniours to all cities the result of
Art. Here Abraham overtook them, and with three hnndred and odd men
conqueredand pursued them (being numerous and flushed with former victorys) to
Genesis 14. 16.
Hobah which is on the left side of Damascus. Thus that army which is but a
handful of men, managed by Gods hand, will work wonders. Hereby Lot recovered
his liberty, the King of Sodom his subjects, they their goods; the Auxiliaries
of Genesis 14. 24.
Aner, Genesis 14. 20.
Eshcol and Mamre, received their pay out of the spoil, Melchisedec had the
tithes, Abraham the honor, and God the glory of the victory.

13. Aram-Maachah, lay southeast of Aram-beth-Rehoh, the 1 Chr. 18. 6, 7.
King thereof appeared very active (though bringing into the field but a
thousand 2 Samuel 10. 6.
men) in the battle against King David. It seems Ioab the politic General
reputed these Syrians valiant, who took the 2 Samuel 10. 9.
choicest men of Israel under his own conduct to oppose them, consigning the
refuse under Abishai against the 2 Samuel 10. 9.
Ammnoites, presuming they would fly of course, if the other were worsted: as
indeed it came to pass. Appendants to this Aram-Maachah were 1 Geshur: 2 Samuel*
3. 3. 1 Chr* 3. 2.
hereof Talmai the King; and Maachah his daughter was married to David, and
mother to Absalom. No wonder then if the child proved a cross to his Father,
begotten on a heathen woman contrary to Gods command. And here Absalom
(changing his climate, not conditions) staid 2 Samuel ^3. 38.
three years, clouded with his Fathers displeasure for murdering his brother
Amnon. 2 Ishtoh, which contributed twelve 2 Samuel 10. 6.
thousand men in the general engagement of the Syrians against King David. 3
The land of Tob: that is, the good-land (or So Minister expounds the name
thereof.
Goth-land if you please) so called from the goodness thereof. Though all the
good we know of it is this, that it afforded a safe refuge to Judge. 11. 3.
Iephthah, when persecuted by his brethren, who hence was solemnly fetched to
be Judge of Israel.


Adrichomius, and other Authors here make the Land of Job. 1. 1.
Uz where Job dwelt. I cannot blame any place to be desirous of so pious a man
to be an inhabitant therein. But both Jobs friends and foes forbid the
situation of the land of Uz here abouts. His foes the Sabeans, his friends
Eliphaz the Temanite etc. who are known to live far south of this place, of
whom properly in the description of Edom.

14. Aram of Damascus succeeds lying northeast of Aram-Maachah, 2 Samuel 8. 5.
watered with the rivers of Abanah and Pharphar. This Abanah in humane writers
is called Chrysoroas or golden-streame from the yellowness of his banks and
water. Otherwise, as little gold is to be found in his channel, as at the
golden grove in Caermarthen-shire, or at the golden-vale in Herefordshire.
However Abanah and Pharphar were highly beholden to 2 King. 5. 12.
Naaman, who preferred them before all the waters of Israel; as possibly they
might equal, yea exceed them in some outward respects. But what if the water
in the Cistern chance to be clearer then that in the Font? Know it is divine
institution, which puts the difference betwixt them, leaving the one a plain
Element, and making the other a sovereign Sacrament. This river Chrysoroas
running northward is afterward swallowed up in the sandy ground, and there is
the visible end thereof. So that Solomon's rule, All rivers run into the Eccles.
1. 5.
Sea, must admit of an exception or exposition, namely either openly or
secretly, as no doubt this river has an underground recourse to the Ocean.

15. Coming near to Damascus we find the place where Saint Paul was cast down
to the ground, as he went with a Commission from the high Priest to persecute
the Saints of Damascus. Now seeing Damascus was not in Judea, if any demand why
Paul should straggle so far from his own Country, hear his own answer, Being
exceedingly Act. 26. 11.
mad against them, I persecuted them even unto strange cities: and it is reason
enough for the actions of blind zeal, that they are the actions of blind
zeal. Besides, it seems the high Priests at Jerusalem had a kind of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the Jews in all places. Some seeming
contradiction, but on serious thoughts easily reconciled, appears in the
history of Saint Paul's travells. Acts 9.7. The men also which journeyed with
him stood amazed, hearing a voice, but seeing no man.

Acts 22.9. Moreover they that were with me saw indeed a light, and were
afraid, but heard not the voice of him that spak^ unto me.



For, two things considerable in this vi^ion.

1 The generals thereof communicated to his fellow-travellers, that they might
attest the truth of this miraculous accident. No seeming fancy but really
acted. Hereupon they heard confusedly that there was a sound, but heard not
distinctly what that sound was, and were admitted to see a light, but did not
discover the person of Jesus appearing. 2 The particulars thereof imparted to
Paul alone (as calculated only for his conversion) whose ears and eyes
plainly heard and saw the voice and apparition.
Hence Saint Paul was conducted to the city of Damascus, whither we follow
after him.

16. Damascus is by some conceived to have been founded by Eliezer Abraham's
Steward, only because he is styled Genesis 15. 2.
Eliezer of Damascus: But if so, then signal was the piety of Eliezer who
preferred rather to live a servant in Abraham's good family, then to rule as a
Lord in a great city of his own building. Various was the success and fortune
of Damascus under several Lords, and we will only instance in such as are
mentioned in Scripture.

1 It was inhabited by the Syrians, and accounted the Metropolis of the
Country. 2 It was probably conquered by David, when he put 2 Samuel 8. 5, 6. and
1 Chr. 18. 6.
garrisons into Aram of Damascus. 3 In the days of Solomon it was possessed by
Rezin a fugitive Syrian, who being made a King thereof, a 1 Kin. 1. 23, 24.
was a professed enemy to Israel. 4 It was won by Jeroboam the second, King of
Israel, who is said to have restored 2 King. 14. 28.
Damascus. 5 It was recovered again by the Syrians, and Rezin in the days of
Ahaz was 2 King. 16. 6.
King thereof. 6 It was taken by Tiglath-Peleser King of Assyria, 2 King. 16. 9.
who carried all the inhabitants thereof away captive.
In the new Testament we find it in subjection to the Roman Emperor, under
whom 2 Cor. 11. 32.
Aretas was King, a persecuter of Saint Paul.

17. Wonder not that the Roman Emperors ruling over the world, should suffer
some Kings to reign under them: which was their constant practice, and whereby
they received no small benefit. For first, hereby they kept their people in
more willing obedience, when they saw their former government not wholly
altered, but some shadow thereof still remaining in their Kings continued
amongst them. Secondly, when any distasteful project was set on foot, the
Emperors used these Kings to promote it: so casting the odium upon them, which
themselves declined, while such Vetus ac jam pridem recept a populi Romani
consuetudo, ut habcret instru^enta servit^tis and reges. Tacit. in vita
Agricolae.
Kings (usually by their immediate dependence) durst not displease, but do
whatsoever the Emperors enjoined them. Thirdly, it conduced to the state of
their Empire to have Kings homagers thereunto. It is but a Farm (though of
never so great revenues) and not reputed a Manor, which has not some
freeholders holding of it, and owing suit and service unto it. Semblably it
was part of the Imperial glory amongst the Romans to have even Kings to hold
their Scepters and Crowns, by deputation under it, as Herod in Judea, Deiotarus
in Galatia, our Lucius in Britain, and this Aretas King of Damascus.

18. Under him Saint Paul had a miraculous deliverance, though both Prince and
people plotted his destruction, and Act. 9. 24. and 2 Cor. 11. 32.
watched the gates day and night that they might kill him. But what says the
Psalmist? Except Psalm. 127. 1.
the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain, either to keep out
those whom he will have in, or to keep in those whom he will have out. All the
wall shall be one open gate to those, whom divine providence will have to
escape, as here to Saint Paul, being let down over the wall by a rope in a
basket.

19. Amongst the public buildings of Damascus, the house of Rimmon was most
remarkable; It troubled the tender Conscience of converted Naaman, 2 King. 5.
18.
when his Master went up to worship there, that he had so often bowed to that
Idol: so an excellent Nic. Fuller Miscel. Sacra. page
Critic proves the words to be read, relating not to his future but former
actions. Wherefore the Prophets answer, Go in peace, is not a toleration of
his Idolatry for the time to come, but an absolution from his former faults,
upon Naamans free confession and serious sorrow for the same. They show also in
this city the house or rather hole wherein Act. 9. 12.
Ananias (Saint Paul's ghostly- father) dwelt or lurked, being a Cellar under
ground, to which pilgrims descend by many stairs, who have so filled the
walls thereof by Biddulph in his travels. pa.
writing their names therein, that Reader there is no room left to register thy
name if going thither.

20. Modern Damascus is a beautiful city. The first, Damask-rose had its root
here, and name hence. So all Damask silk, Linen, poulder and plumbes called
Damascens. Nullae ibi sunt ob fortunae bona lites, and nulli proinde advocati,
procuratores, au^causarum sollicitor^s, quia debitores non sunt ulli, aut
credi^^res. Omnia piompta and paeata transiguntur pccunia. Medicis omnino nibil
ni^i restituta prius aegro sanitate ofsertur. G^org. Bra^ in civit: orbis
terrarum. in des. Damasc.
Two things at this day are most remarkable amongst the inhabitants: There are
no Lawyers amongst them, no Advocates or Sollicitors of causes, no compacts
being made for future performance, but Weigh and Pay, all bargains being driven
with ready money. Secondly, Physicians here are paid no fee, except the patient
recover his health. And now I perceive that Mahomet was a politic man, who
entered but once into Damascus, and perceiving the pleasures thereof, would
never return again, for fear (forsooth) lest he should be bewitched with the
delightfulness thereof, and hindered from the great work he had in hand. I
indeed perceive that so pleasant a subject has too long retarded my pen,
almost forgetful to go forward in our description, we therefore leave it and
proceed.

21. Aram-Zobah lay north-east of Aram-Damascus. Hadadezar or Hadarezar was
King thereof, so glorious a Prince, that his servants wore shields of gold in
war, as if they intended to dazzle their enemies eyes with the splendour of their
arms; but all in vain. For the best swords of steel will command the bravest
shield of gold: and David at Elam, got an absolute conquest of him, killing 2 Samuel 10. 16.
Shobach his Captain, as formerly he had 2 Samuel 8. 4.
defeated him and stripped him of much rich spoil. As for those golden shields,
they fell not to the shares of any private persons, but were treasured up by
David for the building of the Temple, where this glorious Plate shined in its
proper sphere; and where Riot, and Luxury abused by man, was converted into
well grounded bounty, as bestowed on Gods service. Here David houghed the
horses of Hadadezar, and only reserved an hundred 2 Samuel 8. 4.
chariots of them as a Trophee of triumph to be used for state at public
solemnities.

22. Some will censure this as an improvident and unpolitick act, and character
David as more happy to get, then able to use a victory; not casually letting
slip, but wilfully casting such a power of horse out of his hand, which managed
with a proportionable infantry, might have given Law to all the east Country.
Surely it was not done out of a cowardly suspicion, lest the Syrians should
recover those horses again; much less out of consciousness of want of
horsemanship in the (...) to set riders upon them: Rather it was, that David
being privy to the deceitfulness of man's heart (how hard it was to have much
humane strength, and not to have confidence in it) did it to wean his subjects
from the arm of flesh, that they might more rely on divine protection. And he
did it, to encourage in them, what properly is called Manhood: that they might
not expect victories of equivocall generation begotten betwixt men and horses,
but such achieved only by man's prowess, isntrumental to get, and Gods
providence, the principal to give them. Yea David might seem to have houghed
all the horses in the world, with that his short, but sharp sentence, A Psalm.
33. 17.
horse is but a vain thing to save a man.

23. It will further be objected, that grant these horses not to be used in the
wars of Israel, yet what needs this wast to spoil Gods good creatures? Might
they not have been sold for many talents and given to the poor? It is answered,
that David did it in an holy Brave, to show that the Pagans pride, was Isreal's
scorn, and that he as much disdained to gain wealth by the sale, as to get
strength by the service of those horses. Besides, David herein did follow the
precept given to, and pressed and practiced by Josh. 11. 6.
Joshua in the like case. And indeed multiplying of horses was Deuteronomy. 17. 19.
forbidden the Kings of Israel. But after David's days the Militia was much
altered and managed by horse; by the way, Absalom was the first Israelite, whom
we find riding in a chariot, and how he was blessed is not unknown: Afterward
Solomon brought many horses out of Egypt, and an Egyptian wife on the back of
them, who certainly hindered more, then the other helped him; and generally the
Israelites were more prosperous before their use of horses, then ever after;
Their success was mounted when they fought on foot, but scarce went on foot
when their armies were mounted on horseback.

24. But to return to Aram-Zobath: Two prime cities thereof with four names are
mentioned in Scripture, 2 Samuel 8. 8.
Beta, and Berothat, 1 Chr. 18. 8.
elsewhere called Tibhah and Chun. Here (not to say that Beta and Tibhah by
Metathesis are the same) it is no news for cities standing in the confines of
several kingdoms, and the juncture of several languages to have double
names. What the Englishman calls Gloucester and Worcester, the Welsh-men term
Hum^rey Lhuyd in descrip. Walliae.
Caer Loyw and Caer-Frangon. And probably one of the names of these cities was
Hebrew and the other Aramite. Both of them afforded much brass 2 Samuel 8. 8.
to King David (Gods receiver general for that purpose) for the building of
the Temple. But Zobah which gave the name to this Country is generally
conceived at this day to be called Aleppo, (though some Jews inhabiting therein
count it anciently the city of Sepharvaim) from Alep which signifies Biddulphs
travels pa. 45.
milk in the Turkish language; whereof such plenty here, that if via lactea be
to be found on earth, it is in this place. It is so seated on a navigable
stream which runs into Euphrates, that here the commodities of the East and
West do meet. The former from Babylon by water, the latter by Land-caravans
from Scanderoon, and this city is the golden clasp to couple both sides of the
world together, and we remit the Reader to modern Merchants for further
information thereof.

25. And here standing on the utmost verge of our map we could wish it of such
extent as might represent to the Reader Aram-Naharam or Mesopotamia (otherwise
Padan-Aram) where Bethuel and Laban dwelt; Charran, whither Abraham first
removed; Caldea and Ur, a city where he formerly dwelt; Babylon and Nineveh,
the two Emperesses of the world, with the rivers which watered and bounded
Paradise it self. But alas, as Prodigalls who have spent their possessions
take little delight to see a survey of the lands they have sold, (the sad
remembrancer of their former riot and present wretchedness) so small comfort
can accrue unto us by the curious enquiry into the ancient place of Paradise,
having long since in our first Parents forfeited all our right and title
thereunto. But the main matter forbidding our Pens progress any further, is
because, as Shimei confined by Solomon to Jerusalem suffered justly as an
offender for gadding to 1 King. 2. 44.
Gath: so Palestine with the neighboring countries being the proper subject of
our discourse, we shall be taken trespassers, if found wandering beyond the
bounds thereof. However I hope without offense my hand may point further then
my feet may follow, and tell the Reader that the forenamed places lie
northeast of the city of Aleppo.

26. The land of Hamah lay west of Aram-Zobah, anciently inhabited by the
Hamathites, descended from the eleventh and youngest Son of Canaan Genesis 10. 18.
the Son of Cham, of whom largely before. In the days of David Toi was King of
this Country, who being at war with Hadadezar, and hearing how the Israelites
had defeated him, sent 2 S^m. 8. 10.
Ioram his Son to King David with presents in his hand and complements in his
mouth, to congratulate his victory. Long after Salmaneser subdued this country
and extinguished the royal race; witness that brag: Where is the King of
Hamath Esa. 37. 13.
and of Arpad? Though that proud question admits of an answer; namely, they
were even there, where their sins set them: seeing it was not so much the
Assyrian valor, as the Syrian wickedness which cast these Kings out of their
country. Riblah was a prime city in this land, where Nebuchadnezzar caused the
eyes of 2 Kin. 25. 6, 7.
Zedekiah to be bored out. Some conceive this done in the land of Nephtali,
others with more likelihood in this place, and we (see Reader our carefulness
to please all if possible in this captious age) mention it in both. Yet because
this Riblah was many miles nearer to Babylon, and further from Jerusalem, it is
more probable to be the place, as more for Nebuchadnezzars ease and Zedekiahs
anguish: it adding to the conquerours state to fetch the captive furthest from
his own country.

27. Hamah the city which gave the name to this country, was afterward called
Antiochia. Seven and twenty cities are said to be of the same name. For
several Antiochuses being successively Kings of Syria, stocked their dominions
with many cities after their names, as being either built, beautified,
strengthened or enlarged by them, or their Favorites. But it matters not how
many younger brethren there be of the same family, as long as our Antioch is
the heir, and though not in age, in honor to be preferred before all the
rest. Here the professor of the Gospel formerly termed Believers for their
faith, sometimes Brethren for their love, Saints for their holiness, Disciples
for their knowledge, were for all these first called Act. 11. 26.
Christians. Probably when many of all nations believed, the name Christian was
given them, to bury the difference betwixt Jews and Gentiles (thus England and
Scotland happily joined in great Britain) which two names though remaining
afterward, were used as terms of civil difference, not odious distinction.
Had this happened at Rome, how would the Tide of Tiber have swollen above all his
bounds and banks at the conceit that in her city Religion it self was
christened? But this Antioch has still more to brag of: The Chair of Saint
Peter, wherein he sat Patriarch many years before his removeall to Rome: and
therefore no wonder if Antioch grudge to give Rome the superiority. Why should
not that place be the prime, which was the first? Besides, Saint Peter was
honored at Antioch, murdered at Rome. And why should that City receive most
credit by him, which used most cruelty unto him? But let Ecclesiastical
Heralds deduce the pedigree, and martial the precedence of these Churches, we
will only add, that this Pharisaicall taking of the upper-hand, has in all
ages hindered the giving of the right hand of Christian fellowship.

28. Now surely no malignant quality in this place, but a principle of
perverseness in men's hearts was the cause, that so many famous contentions
happened in this city of Antioch. Here it was, that some coming down from
Judea, maintained the necessity of Act. 15. 1.
circumcision, and the legal ceremonies, endeavoring to set up a religion
(like those monsters in Africa, begotten betwixt several kinds, partaking of
both, perfect in neither, but defective in their very redundancy) a ^edley
mongrel betwixt Judaisme and Christianity. This occasioned the calling of the
first great Council in Jerusalem, which in fine concluded that this legal
Yoke was not to be laid on the neck of Christians. Here Peter being guilty (it
is the expression of In his Epistle to the Cardinal of Loraine prefixed before
his translation of Chrysostom on the Galatians.
Erasmus) of superstitious dissimulation, with his example (oh the impulsive
power of great men's Precedents!) brought Gal. 2. 18.
Barnabas into the same fault: for which Saint Paul presently and publicly
reproved him. But we will not widen the wounds in good men's memories, rather
commending to posterity, the holy zeal of Saint Paul in seasonable giving, the
humble piety of Saint Peter in patient taking so sharp a reproof.

29. But the greatest contention happening here, was that Paroxysme betwixt
Paul and Barnabas, the one as earnestly refusing, as the other desiring the
company of John Mark to go along with them. In which contest, Paul is
generally conceived to have most reason, Ba^nabas most passion on his side,
because 1 He saw clearly without carnal relation, whilst Barnabas beheld Mark
his Colos. 4. 10.
sisters son through the spectacles of natural affection. 2 A reason is
rendered by Paul why Marks company should be declined, namely, because he Act.
15. 58.
departed from them at Pamphilia and deserted the work, none alleged by
Barnabas why the same should be accepted. 3 Paul immediately departing after
this contention is said to Act. 15. 46.
be recommended by the brethren to the grace of God, which seems to amount to a
general approbation of his carriage herein. No such passage appears of
Barnabas. 4 After this time Saint Paul and his acts are celebrated in every
Chapter, whereas Barnabas sinks here in silence, and his name mentioned no more
in the history of the Scripture.


But we must admire Gods wisdom in man's weakness, sanctifying this discord to
his glory. For whilst Paul and Barnabas were newly converted, and their
company needful for mutual assistance each to other, their persons and
affections were united together: but now grown strong in grace, and able singly
to subsist, God suffered this unhappy difference to sever them. Whereby the
Gospel increased, the one sailing to Cyprus, the other staying in Syria. So
whereas formerly one place at the same time did jointly enjoy them; now there
became two Flocks, two shepherds, two vines, two vinedressers, and the
division of Preachers proved the multiplication of preaching.

30. We must not forget how one Nicolas a Proselyte of this city of Act. 6. 5.
Antioch, was the last of the seven Deacons, and the first founder of an
heresy (which God professes himself to Rev. 2. 6.
hate) from him called the Nicolaitans. For this Bar^nius An. Eccles. Anno. 68.
Number. 10.
Nicolas is reported to have had a beautiful woman to his wife, and being
taxed for being causlesly jealous of her, to vindicate his innocence, he
prostituted her to the embraces of any that would lie with her; with some other
strange opinions he maintained. Those therefore who so undiscreetly express
their detestation of one sin, that they fall foul on the committing of the
contrary, may by a spiritual proportion be accounted mystical Nicolaitans.

31. There was also belonging to Antioch (pardon a little digression) a
delicious suburb called Daphne, where Apollo Daphneus was adored. Now (some
three hundred sixty years after Christ) Julian the Apostate, the professed
enemy to piety, sacrificed hereto this Devill-God, who used to be very
talkative in giving of Oracles, but lately was grown very mute. And being
demanded the reason of his sudden silence answered (forsooth) it was because
the body of Babylas (martyred under Decius the Emperor) was buried near his
Temple, the virtue whereof stopped his windpipe. Hereupon a conceit was taken
that other Martyrs bones might be found upon trial as terrible to the devil,
which gave the Sea M. Meade in his Apostasieof the latter times. page 122.
first occasion to the enshrining, worshipping, and circumgestation of the
Relics of Saints. See how Satan (much delighted in his apish Parallels of
divine service) was ambitious, that a dominative point of Antichristianisme
should have its original in the same place where the name of Christianity
first began. But long since Antioch has smarted for this superstition and her
other sins; reduced at this day to a petty village, (standing in the rode
betwixt Scanderoon and Aleppo) and Orontes the river thereof once navigable,
(Saint Paul is said to have Act. 14. 26.
sailed to Antioch) much obstructed with sand, and more profitable for good
Eeles there taken, then any other commodity, and the few buildings remaining
miserably ruinous. But seeing silks, though ragged, may be worn with the less
discredit; the torn and tattered edifices in Antioch seem no disgrace, because
most of them are made of rich stuff, even costly marble curiously polished.

32. Leaving Antioch we come to Seleucia seated on the sea side, a Port once
graced with Saint Act. 13 4.
Paul's presence: whence they sailed into Cyprus lying over against it. This
Island is so called from Cypress trees growing there in abundance, which a
great Nic. Fuller, Miscell. lib. 4. ca 5. pa. 493.
Critic conceives to be that Gopher Genesis 6. 14.
wood, whereof the Arc of Noah was made, and boldly affirms that setting
aside the adventitious termination, CUPAR and GOPHER are effectually the same
in Hebrew. Frequent the use of Cypress-boughs in Funerals, whereof the
Cupr^ssus incisa non renascitur, sicut ex mort^^ nihil jam est sperandum. Scal.
casti. infestum.
reason is rendered, because that tree cut down sprouts no more, as no natural
hope of a dead corpse reviving. (...) (...) page 5.
Coffins also were generally made of Cypress even amongst the heathen, in
memorial, as Nic: Fuller ut prius.
one will have it, of the deluge, and mankind buried quick many months in the
Cypress ark. The distance of Cyprus from the continent cannot be great, if it
be true what Not. hist. li. 8. cap. 32.
Pliny reports, that whole herds of Deer used to swim over thither (senting,
though not seeing land) the foremost like an adventurous Captain valiantly
conducting them; and then in order one so lying on another, that the leaders
hanch was the followers pillow to rest his head upon. Most fruitful was this
Island, affording all things both for pleasure and luxury, and therefore Venus
worshipped for chief Deity therein. The women of this country anciently were
very wanton, or as they counted it, very religious, for having a whore for
their Goddess, no wonder if adultery was their devotion.

33. Amongst the eminent persons bred in Cyprus, whilst Statesmen take
special notice of Solon the lawgiver, Philosophers of Zeno the Stoic, Poets
of As^tepiades first author of those verses from him so called, it will be
fittest for us to observe Act. 21. 16.
Mnason an old Disciple; host to Saint Paul, Sergius Act. 13. 7.
Paulus deputy of this Island, a prudent man, Saint Paul's Convert; and Barnabas
here born a Iew-Levit-Cypriot (the first by nation, the next by family, the
last by place of his nativity) and had therein possessions of considerable
value. If any say it was covetousness, and distrust of divine providence in
Barnabas to be a landed Act. 4. 36.
Levite, because that Tribe had no inheritance given them; The Lord of Israel
was their Josh. 13. 33.
inheritance: Let such know, that constitution was only temporary and local,
to last no longer, then whilst the Jews continued at home in a settled
Commonwealth, after whose banishment abroad, happy that Le^ite, who (when
charity of others waxed cold) could warm himself with his own well gotten
goods. But afterward Barnabas that Son of consolation (comforting the bowels
of the Saints as well by his works as words, deeds as doctrine) sold Act 4. 37.
his possessions; and tendered the price thereof at the feet of the Apostles.
Such practices were sincerely performed in the primitivetimes, superstitiously
imitated with opinion of merit in after ages, and scornfully derided by too
many in our days, so far from parting with the propriety, that they will not
appropriate a part of their goods to good uses. We find Saint Paul, preaching
in two cities in Cyprus; Act. 13. 5, 6.
Salamis, where there was a Synagogue of the Jews, and Paphos (where Venus was
worshipped, thence surnamed Paphia, and) where Elymas, the sorcerer was struck
blind, for opposing Saint Paul. verse 11.
We cannot recover Paphos proportionably into this Map, behold it therefore
peeping in, but excommuned the lines thereof.

34. But to return to the Continent, where we fall on Syrophoenicia, whose mixed
name speaks its middle situation betwixt Syria and Phenice, so that if those
two countries should fall out, no fitter umpire to arbitrate their difference
then Syrophoeni^ia, participating of, and therefore presumed impartial to
both. Of this Mark 7. 26.
Country was that bold beggar, who would have no saying nay, but importunate
in the behalf of her daughter, no whit discouraged with the disadvantage of her
person, disaffection of the disciples, (miserable mediators interceding for
her repulse) deep silence and afterward disdainful denial of Christ himself,
would not desist (as if her zeal was heated with the Antiperistasis of the cold
comfort she received) till the violence of her faith had wrested a grant from
our Savior. The bounds of Syrophoenicia are variously assigned, the principal
cities whereof are Laodicea, different from that, to which Saint John wrote,
and whose Rev. 3. 16.
lukewarm temper made health it self sick thereof.

35. Next we find on the sea the city of Gebal^ (in Ptolemy and Strabo Gabala)
and the Inhabitants therein and thereabouts, termed Giblites in Josh. 13. 5.
Scripture. These led the Van in the grand conspiracy against Israel, Psalm. 8
3. 7.
Gebal and Ammon and Amalek, the Philistims with the inhabitants of Tire, Asher
also etc. But Solomon taught their hands another lesson, not to fight against
Gods people, but to help to finish his 1 Kin. 5. 15. 18 See the margin in our
Bibles.
Temple. At the Coronation of Tire the Queen-Mart of the world, (so largely
described by Ezekiel, where all neighboring Cities as in Grand-Sergeantry,
held their places, by some special attendance about her) the Ancients of
Gebal, and the wisemen thereof were her Ezekiel. 27. 9.
calkers, to stop the leakes and chinks in her ships, so cunning were the
Giblites in that employment. Yet all their curiosity in this kind, could not
keep out the deluge of divine anger, from entering their own City, which at this
day has drowned Gebal in utter destruction.

36. More south the river Eleutherus arising out of Libanus, shaped his course
to the sea, so being the northern boundary of Phoenicia. In this river, says
reverend Vide Bczae Annot at. inl^cum. Act. 8. 36.
Beza, was the Eunuch baptized by Philip, therein making an unexcusable
mistake. For except the Eunuch in his travel went (like the Sun on 2 King. 20.
11.
Abaz his dial) backwards, it was impossible for him going to Gaza, and so into
Aethiopia his own country, once to come near this river, lying far north quite
the contrary way. Had Beza (in stead of the Eunuch baptized) placed the
Emperor Barbarossa drowned here, it had born better proportion to truth.
However from this learned man's mistake, I collect comfortable confidence of
pardon for my faults committed in this our description. For seeing so strong
legs are prone to stumble, surely the falls of my feeble feet will be freely
forgiven me by the charitable Reader.

37. Near the running of Eleutherus into the midland sea stood Antaradus, so
called because opposite to Aradus (Arvad in Scripture) a city of remarkable
antiquity, situation, and subsistence. Well does Strabo call this an ancient
place, seeing it retained its name, more then two thousand years, from Genesis 10.
18. 1 Chr. 1. 16.
Arvad the ninth son of Canaan, even till after the time of our Savior. The
city is seated in an Island seven furlongs in compass, and twenty distant from
the Continent, being all a main Strabo li. 16. page 753.
rock (industry and ingenuity will make wealth grow on a bare stone) watered in
peace from the main land, in war with an engine (consult with our Strabo ut
prius
Author for the form thereof) which limbeck-like extracted sweet water out of
the brackish Ocean. The citizens of this place served Tire in a double office;
by land as soldiers, The men of Ezekiel. 27. 11. and Ezekiel. ^^. 8.
Arvad with thine army were upon the walls round about; by water, as failers*
The inhabitants of Arvad were thy mariners: which sufficiently speaks their
dexterity in either Element.

38. Next the men of Arvad the Prophet mentions the Ezekiel. 27. 11.
Gammadims (the joint naming them probably insinuates the vicinity of their
habitation) which were in the Tower of Tire as a garrison to defend them. By
Gammadims some understand Pygmies of a Cubit-high (equal to the standard of
Ehuds Judge. 8. 16.
dagger) because, Gamad signifies a cubit in the Hebrew tongue. But how ill
does this measure agree with martial men? except any will say, that as the
Iebusites, in a proud confidence of the natural strength of mount Sion, placed
the 2 Samuel 5 8.
lame and blind to man the same: so the Tyrians presumed that dwarfes were tall
enough to make good their giant fortifications. More likely is the conjecture
of Vide Tr^m^l. annot. in locum.
Tremellius, that the Gammadims were a people in Phoenicia inhabiting a part
thereof, which ran out bowed and bended into the sea. And we know that Ancona
in Italy, and See S^ows survey of London.
Elbow-lane in London receive names from the same fashion. And seeing
Cornish-men are so called from the form of their Country, dwelling in a land
which by degrees is contracted or narrowed into the likeness of an horn; why
not Gammadims Cubit-men from the similitude of their country in the situation
thereof? Here to fortify his conjecture Tremellius produces a place in Not
bist. li. 2. cap. 91.
Pliny of Gamala a city in Phoenicia, since swallowed up, where he conceives
the L. to be changed into the D. that the Gammadims were inhabitants thereof.
However for quietness sake, may the Reader be contented, to suffer them to
remain there in our Map, if not as dwellers, only as sojourners, until such
time as learned men shall provide a more proper place for them.

39. And now on a sudden we are fallen unawares against our propounded order,
on Phoenicia, of the name and nature of which country formerly in the Tribe of
Asher. The chief havens therein were Tripolis; so called, say P. Hylyn
Microsme. pa. 556.
some, because it has been thrice build; by others, because Strabo Geog^. lib.
16. p. 754.
three Cities ( Tire, Sidon, and Aradus) concurred to the building thereof.
Next is the promontory called (...) or Gods face, which no whit afrighted the
Pirates, and sea-robbers (who had a Castle hard by, called Idem. p. 755.
Castellum praedonum) from their mischievous cruelty. Botrus succeeds, whose
name signifies a bunch of grapes, either from plenty of wine growing there, or
because the houses in this compacted city were built in a cluster, though now
become so thin scarce any two of them stand together. Byblus the birthplace of
Philo commonly surnamed Byblius, Barutis, anciently a good haven, now decayed.
Adonius, so called from the minion of Venus worshipped hereabouts, and Licus
are the chief rivers in this country: (having many other smaller brooks) and
Climax the mountain of most note, whose figure like that figure in Rhetoric
ascends like a staire-case by degrees.

40. Coelosyria is only behind, or hollow Syria, so called because lying in a
concavity betwixt the mountains of Libanus and Antilibanus. Though Ptolemy and
others stretch the name thereof in a large acception, even as far as Arabia.
Full it was of fair cities, but none we meet with named in Scripture, and
therefore forbear the further prosecution thereof. Only to cover the nakedness
of our map, we mention four modern villages under the command of the Turks,
where, and where Biddulphs travels. p. 1.
alone the Syriack tongue is spoken at this day, namely, Hatcheeth, Sharri,
Blouza, and Eden. The last the seat of a Bishop of the Maronites (who have a
poor Patriarch residing at Tripoli) and the people here against all sense
conceive this Eden to be the place of Paradise. Worse errors they maintain in
point of doctrine, concurring with the Greek Church; but in discipline late
reconciled to Rome, where the Pope on his own cost gives some of their children
education. Honest harmeless people these Maronites are, happy in the ignorance
of luxury, and so hospitable that in stead of receiving, they return thanks to
any western Christians which will accept of their entertainment.

41* There remains nothing more in the Map for me to acquaint the Reader with,
save only that we have set the modern stages or Innes (we must have all wares
in our pack, not knowing what kind of chapmen we shall light on) betwixt Aleppo
and Damascus, and so forwards to Jerusalem. Amongst these Canes or Turkish
Innes, Marra and Cotefey are most beautiful; the latter, little inferior to
the old Exchange in London; built by a Bashaw (o let not Christians confound,
whilst Turks found places, for public use) for the benefit of travelers,
being both a Castle for their protection, and a College for their provision:
Where on the founders cost sufficient food is afforded both them and their
cattle. As for some Christian travelers who Biddulphs travels. page
scorned to feed thereon, it seems that either they were not soundly hungry, or
were not of the solid judgment of Eliah, who surely would have taken meat from
the hands of Turks, who refused not flesh from the beakes of 1 King. 17. 6.
Ravens.

Here the Map of Midian, Moab, Ammon, Edom, is to be inserted.



THE DESCRIPTION OF MIDIAN, MOAB, AMMON, EDOM. CHAP. 2.
1. BEfore we come to the particular description of the Countries, something
for satisfaction; why Midian first, and why Midian and Moab together. In giving
Midian the Precedence, we observe seniority, he being extracted from Abraham
the uncle, by Keturah his wife, whilst Moab came from Lot the nephew, by his
own daughter. As for putting them together, we are loath to confess our
poverty, that lack of larger instructions to furnish forth several Maps, was
any cause of our conjoining them together. The main motive is not only the
vicinity of their habitation, but also correspondency of several achievements
betwixt them, which makes them often coupled together in Scripture. Thus Genesis
35. 36.
Hadad King of Edom smote Midian in the field of Moab. The Elders of Moab and
Numb. 22. 7.
the Elders of Midian were jointly employed to fetch Balaam. The Compare Numb.
25. 2. with Number. 25. 18.
daughters of Moab and the daughters of Midian enticed the Israelites to
whoredom and Idolatry.

2. Midian consisted of two families: one seated southward near the Red Sea,
serving the true God, (not so purely but with the mixture of superstitions)
where Iethro Moses his father-in^law lived, of whom (God willing) hereafter.
The other Idolaters, planted more eastward; the subject of our present
discourse. This distance of place and difference of Religions gave probability
to their opinions, who fancy them two distinct nations, which is seemingly
confirmed, because the former is called Madian in the Act. 7. 29.
new Testament. But though in some cases we confess that the difference of a
letter, may make more then a literal difference, yet here it is not enough to
make a real distinction: seeing Hebrew words made Greek often suffer
greatermutations then of a vowell, Midian into Madian. Others are startled,
because the Midianites are Genesis 37. 25. 27, 28. 39. Judge. 8. 22. 24. 26.
sometimes termed Ishmaelites, whereas the latter come from Hagar, the former
from Keturah. But it is probable (surely such as reject our conjecture will
substitute a better in the room thereof) that because Ishmael was the eldest
son of Abraham, chief of the house, all those eastern people descended from
Abraham were denominated by the genericall name of Ishmaelites.

3. It is as difficult precisely to define the bounds, as impossible completely
to describe the Country of Midian. For besides the mixture and conjunction
(not to say confusion) of these eastern people, interfering amongst themselves
in their habitations, the Midianites especially led erraticall lives, and
therefore had uncertain limits. They dwelt most in tents, which we may call
moving towns, and extempore cities, set up in a few hours, and in fewer taken
down and dissolved. Next morning often times found them many miles off, from the
place where last night left them. And if we wonder at the wildness of their
wandering, and rudeness of their roving abroad, they will admire as much at the
stilness of our station, and dullness of our constant dwelling in one place. And
no doubt they observed a method in their removalls, as there is a regularity as
well in the motion of the Planets, as of the fixed Stars.

4. For the general we dare avouch they had Reuben and Gad on the west, Moab
on the south, Ammon on the north, the Ishmaelites or Hagarens on the east.
Adrichom. de Te^. Sanct. in tab. Reub.
Some place them more south, hard by the Dead-sea, but therein surely mistake.
For when Iug. 7.
Gideon had the Midianites in chase out of the land of Canaan, they betook not
themselves southward (and surely such Foxes when hunted would have home to
their own kennels) but ran through the Tribe of Gad full east, to their proper
habitations. But now what a slender account shall we make of the towns and
places in Midian? But I conceive it better to present the Reader with a map
without cities, or those cities without names, then those names without truth,
or at least wise that truth without certainty, and a fair blank is to be
preferred before a full paper blurred over with falsehoods.

5. But first we do behold those castles; and cities of Midian all on a bright
fire, Number. 31. 10.
burnt by Eleazer and the twelve thousand Israelites (whereof no Number. 31. 49.
one man slain in the action) wherein they killed all the males of that
country and females which had known man. What time also they did execution on
five Kings of Midian, and Balaam the false Prophet their chaplain, who fell by
the sword of Number. 31. 8.
man, though he had escaped that of the Number. 22. 31.
Angel. Some may think strange, that the Israelites having conquered this
country possessed not themselves and their heirs thereof. Let such know,
first, that this sandy land was barren it self, whose best fruitfulness
consisted only in the largeness thereof: Secondly, God intended an entire
territory to his own people, whereas this straggling Country was hardly kept,
though easily conquered: Thirdly, the Midianites were of the half blood with
the Israelites, descended from Abraham, and therefore God would not have them
disinherit their kinsmen of their possessions.

6. If we go out of their cities to take free air in their country, see how
thick their tents are spread over the face of the earth. Whereof, though their
coverings might seem course, their courtains (mentioned by the Prophet Habak.
3. 7.
) being both the side walls, and roof of their inward rooms, were most costly
and curious. As the Midianites were called the children of the east, so none
more orient in their apparel, and gorgeous accoutrements. For if their Camels
wore Judge. 8. 26.
Collers of gold about their necks, how rich may their riders be presumed to be
in pearls, and precious stone?

7. Another great part of their wealth consisted in their cattle, amongst
which we must take special notice of their Esa. 60. 6.
Dromedaries, seeing the most or best of this kind were bredhereabouts. A
Dromedary is a dwarfcamell, nature recompensing his smalness in his swiftness,
so that he will travellan hundred miles a day, and continue at that rate with
sparing diet a week together. He has but one bunch on his back (the Camel
having more) the natural saddle for his Rider to mount upon, generally more
used for travel then bearing of burdens, and of as much more refined service
above Camells, as Hacknies are above Packhorses. In a word, as in one respect
this beast is the commendable character of perseverance, not fleet by fits, at
the first; but holding out a constant and equal tenor in traveling: so in
another regard, it may pass for the emblem of hypocrisy, pretending to both
symptoms of a clean beast, really chewing the cud, and seemingly cleaving the
hoof, but only on the out side, whereas Gesne^. de quadrup. in Dromedar.
within it is wholly fleshly, and entirely round like a platter.

8. Yet all their speed could not save their Masters from the pursuit of
Gideon, when such a fatal blow was given to the Midianites, that the Text Judge
8. 28.
says, They lift up their heads no more. Yea, which is memorable scarce, any
part of their body appears afterward in Scripture, or any mention of Midian
mentioned 1 King. 18. relates not to these, but to the southern Midianites,
whereof hereafter.
Midianites (save with relation to the former defeat) which leads us to this
conjecture, that the remains of that nation, which escaped that dismal
overthrow, shrouded themselves under the names of some neighboring people,
probably of the Ishmaelites, of whom but a word or two, and so to Moab.

9. Nor need the Reader be afraid to adventure amongst them, suspecting the
Ishmaelites, like Ishmael their Father, to be Genesis 16. 12.
wild men, Whose hands were against every man, and every man's hand against
them; seeing their fierceness and fury had been well tamed by the Reubenites,
Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh in that memorable victory, wherein no fewer
then an 1 Chr. 5. 2^.
hundred thousand of them were taken captives, and those Tribes dwelt in their
tents even unto the river 1 Chr. 5. 9.
Euphrates. Conceive it in a cursory condition, only grazing their cattle
during the season, which amounted not to a constant and settled habitation.

10. The Ishmaelites were descended from Ishmael, otherwhiles called Hagarens,
wherein the difference not great; their former name being fetched from their
Father, the latter (but one degree further) from Hagar, their grandmother. Of
this Ishmael it was foretold, first that he should dwell Genesis 16. 12.
(as also he did Genesis 25. 18.
die) in the presence of all his brethren, that is, he should not hide his head
in holes, or creep into corners, as afraid of the force of his neighbors, but
should justify and avouch his Right in open habitations, daring and defying
all pretenders to his possessions. Secondly, it is said he should be Genesis 21.
12.
Onager homo or a wild-ass-man; in which similitude (the holy Spirit not using
casual but choice comparisons) surely very much is folded up of the
Physiognomy both of him and his posterity. Wild asses are said to carry a bow
in their heels, and to find arrows in the sandy ground where they go, wherein
if hunted they do bestirre themselves with flinging the gravel behind them,
that therewith they pierce the breasts, yea sometimes Ammian. Marcellinus.
split the heads of such as pursue them: as the Ishmaelites excellent archers
laid about them with their arrows to kill and slay such as opposed them.

11. Large were the bounds allotted to Ishmael, and divine providence which
staked them down within certain limits, allowed them a very long teddar, They
Gen.25.18.
dwelt from Havilah unto Shur, that is from before Egypt till as thou go
toward Assyria: a spong of ground somewhat nigh a thousand miles, (perchance
not so entire but interrupted with other nations) and not bearing a
proportionable breadth, consisting generally of the Sandy and stony Arabia, so
that a span of Isaacs was worth a stride of Ishmaels possession. However, in
relation to Ishmaels posterity that Prophecy, he shall dwell in the presence of
his brethren, admits also of this interpretation, that the land allotted him
ranged out so far, that the bounds and borders thereof abutted on all his
kindred, Edomites and Israelites his nephews or brothers sons, Moabites and
Ammonites his cousins once removed, Midianites descended of his half brother by
Keturah, and Egyptians his near kinsmen both by his wife and mother.

12. In this large country did dwell the twelve Genesis 25. 13, 14, 15, 16. 1 Chronicles. 1. 29, 30, 31.
sons of Ishmael, which I may call the twelve tribes of the Ishmaelites.

1 Nebaioth. 2 Kedar. 3 Adbeel. 4 Mibsam. 5 Mishma. 6 Duma. 7 Massa. 8 Hadar. 9
Temah. 10 Ietur. 11 Naphish. 12 Kedemah.
A learned Vid. Tremel. in locum.
man from the allusion of letters and similtude of sounds has found out in
stony, desert, and happy Arabia some places symbolizing with these names; and I
commend his industry, not daring altogether to concur with his judgment;
conceiving the subject in hand to want a bottom for any to build with
certainty thereupon. Sooner shall Chemists fix quicksilver, then Geographers
place these people in a settled habitation. Indeed mention is made of some Genesis
25. 16.
Towns and Castles (no cities) they had, (perchance some strength to retire
to) but generally Comment in Isaiam li. 5. cap. 21.
Saint Hierome tells us, they had neither doors nor bolts, but lived in tents
in desert places. Wherefore, as foreiners, for matter of clothes, paint an
Englishman with a pair of sheares in his hand, taxing therein his levity in
following fashions, continuing constant to no kind of apparel; so we may
present the Ishmaelites (besides a bow at their backs) with a staff in their
hands, to intimate their ambulatory and ever-moving condition. Here we may
remember how Hagar being with child with Ishmael, was Genesis 16. 7.
found by the Angel wandering in the wilderness, and as if the pregnant
mothers condition had made an impression on her child and his posterity, we
find their home to be in a constant roving and wandering in a desert Country.
Leave we these Ishmaelites, and come to men of a milder temper, and more fixed
habitations, I mean the Moabites.

13. MOab Son and Gran-child of Lot, was incestuously begotten on his edest
daughter, in his Genesis 19. 37.
drunkenness; after which act, no more mention of Lot or what befell him in the
history of the Bible: (drunkenness makes men to forget and to be forgotten,
drowning their memories in neglect and obscurity): only after this, the new
Testament epithets him 2 Pet. 2. 7.
Righteous Lot. That Spirit of meekness naming good men, not from the obliquity
of some acts, but habitual integrity of their hearts. Yea, for love to Lot God
granted many great favors to the Moabites, assisting them to conquer the
Giants Deuteronomy. 2. 10.
Emims, and peaceably possessing them of their Country, with special Deuteronomy. 2.
9. Jud. 11. 15. 17, 18.
command to the Israelites not to disturb or molest them in this enjoiment
thereof.

14. Yet the Moabites ill requited Isreal's kindness unto them. That falling out
which was first begun betwixt the servants, and Genesis 13. 7.
heardsmen, was afterward continued and increased betwixt the Sons and
posterity of Lot and Abraham. Yea upon all occasions the Moabites were
backfriends to Israel; witness Balak, who barked at, and Eglon who bit them,
whom Israel served Judge. 3. 14.
eighteen years. Note by the way, that under the Judges all the heathen which
bordered on Israel (Edom almost only excepted, the cause whereof hereafter)
Judge. 3. 8.
Aramites, Judge. 10. 7.
Ammonites, Judge. 6. 1.
Midianites, Iud. 13. 1. etc.
Philistines etc. did all successively ^yrannize over Israel. No shrub growing
about on the banks of Canaan was so little, but it was big enough for God
thence to gather a Rod to whip his wanton children. Now if it be any ease to
the sick^man, to have his bed, not disease often altered, Israel had the favor
of exchange of tyrants and variety of oppressors; amongst whom I dare say the
Moabites were none of the mildest. More might be said of their malice to the
Jews, but I spare them for good Ruth, their Countreywomans sake; who, when all
her sister Orpha's complementall Religion came off with a kiss, Ruth. 1. 14.
persevered to wait on Marah her mother-in-law (for Ruth. 1. 20.
so she desired to be called) into the land of Canaan.

15. But because the Moabites could not be persuaded to love, David was the
first who forced them to fear the Kings of Israel; Psalm. ^^. 8.
Moab is my washpot, that is, one condemned to servile employments: yea such
was David's absolute command over this country, that he 2 Samuel 8. 2. 1 Chronicles.
18. 2.
measured the Moabites with a line, casting them down to the ground, even with
two lines measured he to put to death, and with one full line to keep alive. At
the first sight he may seem to have killed two, and saved one: A merciless
proportion. But on better consideration it may possibly be, that the
preservative might equal both the destructivelines, though not in number, in
measure; as one overflowing cup may contain as much as two sparingly filled.
What caused this severity in David against the Moabites the Scripture is
silent, and I had rather be so too then affirm with the presumptuous Rabbis
without warrant, that it was because the King of Moab had slain David's Father
and Mother, 1 Samuel 22. 3.
whom he had left there for protection whilst Saul persecuted him.

16. If any object, this Act of David was a breach of Gods Deuteronomy. 2. 9.
command, Distress not the Moabites, neither contend with them in battle, it
is answered, 1 This prohibition was temporary to Moses conducting the
Israelites, that they should not molest Moab in their passage by his country
out of Egypt. 2 Israel might not begin with offensive war to provoke them; but
being stricken might strike again, and follow their blow as David did. 3 Moab
might be distressed to subjection, not to ejection; might be brought into
obedience, not dispossessed of their country.


After the defection of the ten Tribes from the house of David, Moab remained
tributary to the Kings of Israel till the death of wicked but valiant Ahab.
After which time, Moab 2 King. 1. 17.
rebelled, and though 2 King. 3. 6.
attempted was never reduced into obedience by the Kings of Israel.

17. Moab had the river Arnon on the north, the Dead-sea on the west, Edom on
the south, and Arabia on the east. It contained about a square of an hundred
miles, fit for grazing; and the peoples industry following Natures guidance to
their own profit, principally employed it to that use. Yea Mesha their King is
termed a 2 King. 3. 4.
sheep-master. Husbandry does no more eclipse the resplendent beams of Majesty,
then the oil in the Lamp hinders the bright shining thereof. Guess the
greatness of the Grist by the Toll, the multitude of Moabs flocks from the
Tribute he rendered to the Kings of Israel, a 2 King. 3. 4.
hundred thousand Lambs, and a hundred thousand Rams with the wool.

18. To come now to the particulardescription of Moab, let it not be censured
for a needless Tautology in this Map, that therein all the cities of Reuben are
again represented, being done deliberately on a double consideration.

1 Formerly that land belonged to Moab before Sihon King of the Amorites had
forcibly wrested it away from them. 2 After the Reubenites were carried away
captive by Tiglath-Pileser, the Moabites reassumed their ancient possessions,
as appears by the Esaias 15. ler. 48.
Prophets.
As for the particular description of those cities, we remit the Reader to what
formerly has been written in the Tribe of Reuben.

19. In the north-east bound of Moab toward Midian in the border of Arnon,
Number. 22. 36.
which is in the utmost coasts, stood a nameless city, where Balak met Balaam,
standing as it were on his tiptoes on the very last labell of his land, to
reach forth welcome to that false Prophet, who hither rode in state with his
Number. 22. 22.
two men to attend him, whilst many Ministers of the Truth are forced to be
slaves to others, and servants to themselves. But that these two men of Balaam
were Iannes and Iambres the ^gyptian enchanters, the Chaldee Paraphrase shall
never persuade me, whilst the distance of time and place; protest against the
possibility thereof. Not to say that it is likely that the sorcerers, so
frequent in the presence of Pharaoh, had long before waited on their Master
through the red sea to another world. Hence Balak conducted Balaam to Number. 22.
39.
Kiriath-huzoth or the city of streets, which at that time seems to be the
Metropolis of Moab.

20. Mizpah of Moab follows, where the Father and Mother of David reposed
themselves whilst their Son was persecuted by Saul. Ar of Moab, and Rabbah of
Moab were also places of great note in this land, and besides these, many other
cities of inferior note. But as many mean men living obscurely, so that the
world takes no notice of them, if surprised by some unusual and strange
mortality, become remarkable for their deaths, who were never memorable for
their lives: so some cities of Moab, whereof no mention in Scripture for any
action done in, or by them, are only famous in holy writ, for their strange
ruin and destruction, by the Prophet sadly foretold, and therefore certainly
accomplished. Such are Read Isa. 16. and Ier. 48.
Misgab, Horonaim, Luhith, Both, Eglaim, Ber-elim, Holon, Kirioth, Kirherez
and Ier. 48. 2.
Madmen. The last as I conceive is note-worthy, not for its own merit, but
others mistake. For in the Bibles, and those numerous, printed Anno Dom. 1625.
the verse in Jeremy is thus rendered, O Maiden the sword shall pursue thee;
where the Corrector of the Press conceiving it incongruous to join Thee a
singular pronoune, with Madmen (which he mistook for an appellative, no proper
name) ran himself upon that dangerous error.

21. But Kirharasheth seems the Metropolis of Moab. Near to this three Kings,
Iehoram of Judah, Iehosaphat of Israel, and the nameless Kingdeputy of Edom,
marched on a design to chastise Mesha the rebellious King of Moab into
subjection. But wandering in the wilderness of Edom they encountered a worse
enemy, Thirst it self, wherewith all of them were ready to saint. But happily
it happened that Elisha, 2 King. 3. 11.
who powered water on the hands of Eliah, by the same Element seasonably
refreshed the hearts of the distressed armies, respecting Iehosaphat for his
own goodness, the other two Kings for his company. How many general benefits
do the very Tares enjoy, because inseparably mingled with the Wheat in the
field of this world? Yea, Elisha was an instrument to give them, not only
water, but victory (heavens favors go commonly by couples) after this
miraculous manner.

22. The Moabites beholding water miraculously brought in that place, where
never any was seen or known before, and the same at distance appearing 2 King.
3. 22.
red unto them, (gilded with the beams of the Sun) concluded it to be blood,
and that that Paroyall of Armies had smitten one another. Wonder not that their
conjecture was so wide and wild, for well might the Comment be out of the way
of Truth, when the Text was out of the Rode of nature, and the Moabites on the
sudden not capable to suspect a miracle. Hereupon the word is given, 2 King.
3. 23.
Moab to the spo^le, which in some sense was true, that is, not to take but
become the spoil of others. For the tents they assaulted, being lined with
armed men, quickly overcame them. And it is worth our observing, that this
victory was bestowed on Iehosaphat (my eyes are only on him, on whom alone the
2 King. 3. 14.
looks of Elisha reflected) just in the morning when the 2 King. 3. 20.
Meatoffering was offered, as procured by the Propitiatory virtue thereof; all
favors being conferred in and for the merits of Christ the truth of all
sacrifices.

23. God gave, man used this conquest. Improving their success, they 2 King. 3.
25.
beat down the cities, and on every good piece of land, cast every man his
stone, and filled it, and stopped all the wells of water, and felled all the
good trees. This was contrary to Gods express Deuteronomy. 22. 19.
command; but none could better dispense with the Law, then the lawgiver, who
in detestation of the rebellion of Moab against Israel 2 King. 3. 19.
enjoined this severity. Only the City of Kirharasheth was left, and that they
besieged, until the King of Moab therein took and sacrificed his eldest Son,
Some conceive him (being ambiguous in the text) son to the King of ^d^m,
grounding it on Amos 2. 1.
who was to succeed him: either out of a bad imitation of Iephthah; (and their
Idols we know were adored with sacrifices of men) or to give assurance to the
besiegers, that they were men resolved to endure all extremities, so that they
might presume he that would sacrifice his Son would not spare to spend his
soldiers on any desperate adventure. Hereupon the foresaid three Kings
surceased their siege: either out of policy, perceiving the same desperate, and
unlikely to prevail; or out of a royal sympathy, that it was revenge enough
to distress, though not destroy a King or (which is most probable) out of a
religious horror (the trembling whereat made their swords fall out of their
hands) as unwilling to provoke the besieged any further to such impious, and
unhumane performances; lest heaven should arraign them as accessory thereunto,
by giving the occasion thereof: whatsoever was the cause, home they returned,
content with the spoiling, without the final conquering of the Country.

24. Many are the invectives of the Prophets against Moab for their sins. The
people thereof are charged to have been at ease from their youth, and settled on
their Ier. 48. 11.
less, because not emptied from vessel to vessel, neither carried into
captivity (whilst poor Israel was posted from Canaan to Egypt, from Egypt to
Canaan, from Canaan to Babylon, from Babylon to Canaan, backward, and forward)
God therefore threatens, because they had not been emptied from their vessel,
to Ier. 48. 38.
break them in their vessel, and foretells that Moab should be made Ier. 48.
26.
drunk (happily alluding to his geniture seeing he was begotten in a fit of
drunkenness) and wallow in his vomit; and come to utter destruction. Thus never
to be acquainted with any affliction in youth, is a certain prognostic of
final confusion in old age. So much for Moab, leaving it to learned men to
dispute, what is intended by the Ier, 48. 47.
restoration of Moab foretold in the latter days; as also let them enquire
whether that passage in Dan. 11. 41.
Daniel, that after a general overthrow, Edom, Moab etc. should escape, must
not mystically be meant of the enemies of the Church, in which sense we may be
sure, the devil will have a Moab, as long as God has any Israel in the world.

25. AMmon another base Son of Lot, had Midian on the east, Moab on the south,
Gad on the west, and Syria on the north: a circular country extending about
sixty miles every way. The ancient inhabitants hereof were the Giants Deuteronomy. 2.
20.
Zamz^mmims. These were conquered and cast out by the Ammonites, who afterward
dwelt in their country, being a fruitful land, and too good for these
Ammonites that bare an inveterate malice to the people of Israel, manifested in
many particulars.

1 In their oppressing them Judge. 10. 8.
eighteen years till Iephthah gave them deliverance. 2 In their cruel
conditions (such Ravens and birds of prey first peck out the eyes) tendered to
the men of 1 Samuel 11. 8.
Iabesh-Gilead. 3 In their barbarous abusing David's 2 Samuel 10. 4.
ambassadors. 4 In ripping Amo. 1. 3.
up the bellies of the women with child in Gilead. 5 In their Clapping Ez^k.
25. 6.
their hands, stamping with their feet, and rejoicing in their heart at the
sacking of Jerusalem by the King of Babylon. 6 In their contriving the
destruction of Ier. 40. 14.
Gedaliah, and the poor remnant of the Jews left behind in the land by the
Babylonians. 7 In N^he. 4. 7, 8.
retarding the building of the Temple after the Jews return from captivity.
And although David and some other Kings, amongst whom Uzziah most remarkable,
forced the Ammonites to give them 2 Chr. 16. 8.
gifts; yet we may justly believe the same were presented rather with their
hands then their hearts, bearing a cordial grudge against Israel.

26. Rabbah was the Metropolis of Ammon, called in Scripture the tity of
waters, 2 Samuel 12. 27.
because low and plashy in its situation, conducing much to the strength
thereof, rendering all undermining of it uneffectuall. But perchance it is so
termed from the extraordinary populousness thereof, Waters being often used for
People in Scripture phrase, both being at all times unstable and unconstant,
and when they get a head implacable, neither speaking nor hearing reason; both
useful servants, but intolerable Masters. Here the Iron-bed of Og was
preserved for a Relick, being Deuteronomy. 3. 11.
nine cubits high and four broad. Now though Alexanders soldiers are said to
have left shields in India, far greater then those which they did or could
wear in war, only to possess posterity with a false opinion that his men were
mightier then they were, yet we may presume this bed of Og was not
unproportionably greater then he necessarily used for his ordinary repose. No
doubt Og confident of his own strength certainly concluded, that as he did
often lie in health upon that bed, so he should quietly die on the same,
whereas contrary to his expectation he was slain in the field, and now his bed
served him for a Cenotaph or empty monument.

27. This Rabbah was besieged by Ioab, to revenge Hanun King of the Ammonites
his despitefull usage of David's Ambassadors. Here Uriah engaged in battle was
killed, though not conquered, by the treacherous retreat of 2 Samuel 11. 15.
his own countrymen. What a deal of do was here to bring one innocent man to
his grave? David's wicked design, Ioabs unworthy compliance, Ammons open force,
Isreal's secret fraud, and yet all too little, had not Uriah's own credulous
simplicity, unspotted loyalty, undaunted courage rather to die then to fly,
concurred to hasten his own destruction. Afterward Ioab having brought the
city to terms of yielding, politickly sends for David solemnly to take his
place, to decline all envy from himself, and invest all honor on his
Sovereign. Here the glorious Crown of this kingdom was taken, and set on
David's 2 Samuel 12. 1.
head: and I dare boldly say it became David better, then him from whom^ it was
taken. But (oh!) what a Bridewell or house of correction was provided for the
people of this place! They were 2 Samuel 12. 31.
put under saws, and under harrows of Iron, and under axes of Iron, and made to
pass through the brick kilne. See here David's patience provoked into fury. And
was it not just that they who would not civilly, like men, use David's 2 Samuel
10. 4.
Ambassadors, should by David's men be barbarously used, like beasts, in
slavish employments?

28. The most populous part of the Kingdom of Ammon lay betwixt Aroer and
Minnith, containing no fewer then twenty Cities, (so many represented in our
Map) and had I found their names in Scripture, I had imparted them to the
Reader. All these Judge. 11. 33.
cities were smote by Iephthah that most valiant Judge of Israel. For he passed
over to the enemy to fight with them, other Judges only expelling them out of
Israel, and pursuing them to their own country. An action of very much prowess
in Iephthah to rowze those wild beasts in their own den, and no less policy,
preventing the spoiling of his native soil, and translating the Seat of the war
into the land of a foreign so. Here if any demand how the wheat of Minnith comes
to be reckoned by the Ez^k. 27. 17.
Prophet, amongst the staple commodities of the land of Judah, wherewith she
bartered with Tire, when Minnith was Judge. 11. 33.
undoubtedly a city of the Ammonites; it is answered. 1 This fine wheat might
first be denominated from Minnith as originally growing there, though
afterward as good and more of that kind grew generally in Judea. Thus some
flowers, and fruits, Province-Roses, Burgamo pears etc. are as full and fair
in other countries as in that place whence they take their name. 2 By
Minnith-wheat may be meant, wheat winnowed, cleansed, and dressed after the
fine and curious fashion of Minnith. Thus they are called Hungar-dollars, which
are refined to the standard of Hungarian gold, in what place or by what Prince
soever in Germany they be coined.

29. We must not forget that after the Tribe of Gad was carried away captive by
Tiglath-pileser, the Ammonites seized on and dwelt in the cities of that Tribe.
For which reason so many of them are set down in this our Map. This caused the
complaint of the I^r. 49. 1.
Prophet; Has Israel no sons? Has he no heir? Why then does their King
inherit Gad, and his people dwell in his cities? Sure I am that Ammon double
barred with bastardy and incest, though somewhat allied, could never legally
succeed to the possessions of Israel. But in such cases, the keenest sword is
next to the kin. Not to say that Ammon had a title to that kingdom, before
that Sihon King of the Amorites took that land away from them, whereof largely
before in the description of Gad. If any ask me what became of the Ammonites
in after ages; I answer with David, he Psalm. 37. ^6.
passed away, and lo he was not, yea I No mention of Edom, Moa^ or Ammon, in
the new Testament
sought him, but he could not be found. Yea the less there appears of Ammon,
the more there appears of Gods justice, and divine truth, foretold by the mouth
of Ez^k 25. 7.
Ezekiel, I will cut thee off from the people, and will cause thee to perish
out of the countries.

30. Esau eldest Son of Isaac was red and hairy at his birth; the one showing
his irefull nature, the other his hardy constitution. He was highly beloved of
his Father (whilst Jacob was Gods and his Mothers darling) chiefly for
providing him Genesis 25. 28.
Venison: a consideration beneath so good a man, and for which Isaac smarted
afterward, sawcing each morsel of his Sons venison in his own tears, caused
by Esaus unhappy Genesis 26. 5.
matches, and undutifull demeanor. This Esau is as generally known in
Scripture, by the name of Edom given him on this occasion. Coming one day
hungry from hunting he sold his birthright to his brother Jacob for Genesis 25. 30.
red pottage, red being Edom in Hebrew. I confess many flaws may be found in
this bargain and sale, as namely, 1 It was no fair but fraudulent dealing for
Jacob to surprise his brother, taking advantage of his hunger. 2 The contract
was not made on a valuable compensation; not to say it was Simoniacall to sell
or buy such heavenly privileges. 3 The heirs of Esau, (as yet in his loins)
concerned therein, but not consenting thereto, might justly question their
Fathers grant in passing away what by nature was intailed upon them.


Wherefore it is safest to turn all our excusing of Jacob into our admiring of
Gods wisdom, who makes men's crooked actions to tend in a straight line to his
own glory. And yet we must not forget, that even after Esau had satisfied
himself with food, the text says, Thus Genesis 25. 34.
Esau despised his birthright. It seems thereby, that what his have and hunger
had conveyed his profaneness did deliberately confirm, and by that his neglect
and contempt, he acknowledged a Fine, cutting off his heirs from any recovery
thereof. Indeed afterward Esau made it a main matter of Genesis 27. 36.
quarrel with his brother, but never a matter of conscience in himself. But
enough hereof: only I will add the crossing of the common rule, Caveat
venditor, let here the seller beware, for God took Esau at his word, and
accordingly deprived him of his birthright.

31. But Esau set a greater valuation on his Blessing, wherein being prevented
by Jacob, he sought it with tears, though they were not a kindly shower of
repentance, but only some heat drops of anger and indignation, not so much
grieved that he had lost, as vexed that Jacob had gotten the Blessing. At last
his importunity got from his Father a Blessing though not the blessing, the
several clauses whereof we are seriously to consider, because thereon
depends the right understanding of the conditions of the people and country
of Edom, which we are now to describe.

Behold Genesis 27. 39.
thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from
above. Earth is by Isaac first mentioned because by Esau most minded. But oh
the difference betwixt the dew of heaven in Genesis 27. 28.
Jacobs and Esau's blessing! In the former it signified Gods favor with an
undoubted right unto, and sanctified use of divine promises, service and
Sacraments: whereas in this blessing of Esau, heavenly dew, was in effect, but
earthly dew, temporal terrestrial fertility allowed to this mountainous land
of Edom, whose lean hills were larded with many fruitful valleys interposed.
Heathen Authors confess no less;

Dulce nemus florentis Statius sylv. lib. 3no.
Idumes.
The fair grove of flourishing Idumea.
Quicquid nobile Ponticis nucetis
Foecundis cadit aut jugis Idem lib. 1. in Satu^^ Kal. December. celebrante.
Idumes.
What ever noble worth destils
On Pontus nut-trees, or what fills
The fruitful Idumean Hills.
However, divine providence seems to have suited the Countries to the
conditions of Isaacs children, giving plain-dealing Jacob a more low and level
Land, and fitting the haughty mind of aspiring Esau with high-swelling and
ambitious mountains, though he who was nearest to heaven, was farthest from God.

And by thy sword shall thou live, and shall be thy Brothers Servant. It is
observable, that though God in the time of the Judges, made use of almost all
other heathen nations, bordering on the Jews, successively to oppress that his
own people ( Midianites, Ammonites, Moabites, Philistines etc.) Yet he never
permitted the Edomites at any time to Lord it over Israel, because (according
to Isaacs Blessing) subjection to Jacob, not sovereignty over him belonged to
Esau, and his posterity. This prophecy of Esau's serving Jacob was fully
accomplished in the days of David, 1 King. 11. 14. 18.
when he put a 2 Sa^^ 8. 14.
Garrison in Edom, throughout all Edom put he soldiers, and all they of Edom
became David's servants; and so remained tributaries to the Kings of Judah and
governed by their deputies for one hundred and fifty years and upwards.

But it shall come to pass, when thou shall get the mastery, that thou shall
break his yoke from thy neck. This was fulfilled when the Edomites rebelling
against King 2 King. 8. 22. 2 Chr. 21. 8.
Iehoram, finally recovered their liberty, whilst he (more cruel to kill his
brethren at home, then valiant to conquer his enemies abroad) could never after
reduce them into subjection, nor his successors after him.

32. The Horims first inhabited this Country of Mount Seir; whose Dukes are
reckoned up by Genesis 30. 28.
Moses, of whom Duke Anah is most remarkable for his first finding out of
Mules, Genesis 36. 24.
as he fed his Father Zibions Asses: A creature (or rather a living beast)
which may be called a real fallacy in nature, whose extraction is a conclusion
unduely inferred from the premises of an Hee-asse and a Mare joined together.
Yet this is commendable in Mules; they imitate rather the virtues then vices of
their Sire, and Dam, having in them, the dullness of the Ass, quickened with
the metal of the Mare, and the Mares stubbornness corrected with the Asses
patience. Barren they are (as to whom God never granted the Charter of
increase) and yet Not. hist. li. 8. cap. 44.
Pliny reports (but it is Pliny who reports it) that in Rome Mules are often
recorded to bear young ones, but then always accounted ominous. Let others
dispute whether Anah was the Inventour, or only the Repertour of Mules, the
industrious Founder, or the casual Finder of them: Let them also discuss
whether such copulations be lawful, for men of set purpose to join together
several kinds, which God has parted asunder; yea they may seem to amount to a
tacit upbraiding of Gods want of wisdom or goodness, in not providing
sufficient Creatures for man's service, without such monstrous additionals in
nature. If they be concluded unlawful, let them argue whether the constant use
of Mules, 1 King. 1. 33. Ezra 2. 66.
be not continuing in a known sin; and yet some good men in Scripture, rather
then they would go on foot, used to ride on them, though our Savior Ma^th.
21. 5.
himself accepted of a plain Ass for his own Saddle.

33. These Deuteronomy. 2. 2^.
Horims were at last conquered and ex^irpated by the Edomites, who succeeded
them, and dwelt in their stead. The civil government of the land of Edom was
sometimes Ducall, sometimes Regal. Moses reckoning up Genesis 36. 40.
eleven Edomite Dukes, leaves it doubtful, whether they were successively one
after another, or went all a breast, as living at the same time, (which is most
probable) and so the land divided into Eleven Dukedomes. This is most certain
that eight several Kings reigned in Edom one after another, and all Genesis 36.
31.
before there reigned any King over the children of Israel. Thus the wicked as
they have their portion in this world; so they quickly come to full age to
possess the same, whilst Gods children are long children, long kept in nonage,
and brought up in the School of affliction. Now it is recorded in Genesis 36. 31.
1 Chr. 1. 43.
Scripture that every Edomite King had successively a several city of his
royal residence, namely Kings Parentage Royall-city. Bela The son of ^eor
Dimhabah. Iobab The son of Zerah Bozrah. Husham of the land of Temani Teman.
Hadad The son of Bedad Avith. Samla^ Masr^kah. Shaut R^hoboth by the river.
Baal-banan The son of Achbor Hada^ Pan.

It is plain those Kings were not by succession, and probably they were not by
election, but only by strength and power as they could make their parties,
according to Isaacs prediction, Genesis 26. 40.
By thy sword shall thou live. Now this their frequent removal of their royal
City was politickly done.

1 To declare the fulness and freedom of their power and pleasure, that they
were not confined to follow the footsteps of their predecessors. 2 To disperse
and communicate civility and courtship into all the parts of their kingdom. 3
To honor and adorn the place of their birth, for probably their native, was
their royal city. 4 To cut off from one place the occasion of suspicious
greatness; Politicians having found in their theory, and Princes perchance felt
in their practice the danger thereof.
34. And now we come to the particular description of the Land of Edom called
also Mount-Seir, Dumah, and Idumea in the Scripture. Mount Seir is as much as
Mons hispidus, or hirsutus, a rough and rugged mountain. So called some
conceive from Esau, who Satyr-like had a quickset of hair on his body, though
it seems the place was so Genesis 14. 6. and 36. 20, 21.
named long before he came to possess it as brisling with bushes and overgrown
with wood, in the famous wilderness thereof, namely of 1 Teman. The inhabitants
hereof were, or were accounted (of themselves or others) very wise. Is Ier. 49.
7.
wisdom no more in Teman? Yet all their carnal policy could not preserve them
from utter destruction there threatened unto them. Eliphaz one of Job 2. 11.
Jobs friends was of this Country. 2 Dedan. Such as dwelt therein were
merchants, Ier. 49. 8. and Ez^k. 25. 13.
and did drive a land trade with Tyrus, bringing thither precious clothes, for
chariots; or, in chariots. 3 Edom, 2 King. 3. 8.
(...). Herein the three Kings wandered and were distressed for want of water,
till Elisha relieved them.


As for the other two names of this Country Dumah and Id^mea, formerly largely
thereof.

35. Edom had the Dead-sea and Moab on the north-east, Arabia deserta on the
east, the wilderness of Paran on the north-west, and the Red Sea on the
south-west. A sea not so called from the redness of the water thereof, (yet I
know not how it may appear, when beheld with bloudshot eyes) nor from a King
Eruthraeus, (for what makes a Greek name so long since in these eastern parts?)
but from Nic. Full^^^ Mis^el.
Edom, or Rufus the red son of Jacob, commanding in this country, so that Red
sea is all one with the Edomite or Idumean Sea. In Hebrew it is termed Iam Suph
or the flaggy sea, because of the plenty of flags, reeds and weeds found
therein, though of the last never so many, as when the wicked Egyptians were
drowned therein. Ezion-gaber is a fair haven of great commerce on this sea.
Here Solomon 1 King 9. 26. 2 Chr. 8. 17.
had his navy royal, which jointly with the ships of Hiram, brought four
hundred and twenty talents of gold from Ophir. This it seems was the sum paid
de claro into the Kings Exchequer, otherwise thirty talents more are mentioned,
2 Chr. 8 18.
probably expended in defraying the cost of the voyage. Long after Iehosaphat
joining with Ahaziah, hence set forth ships for the same purpose, to the same
place, but they 1 King. 22. 48.
went not, for they were broken. Why the seas which smiled on Solomon, should
frown on godly Iehosaphat, I durst not conjecture (lest my adventuring in
guessing, prove as unsuccessefull as his in sailing) had not 2 Chr. 20. 37.
Scripture plainly told me, that the winds and the waves forbad the Banes of
matching Gods children with Idolaters in the same design. Yea the breath of
Eliezer the Prophet, may be said to have sunk those ships, threatening their
destruction. Thus those shall never reap good harvest, who plow with an Ox and
an Ass, contrary to Gods flat Deuteronomy. 22. 10.
command. Afterward, wicked King Ahaziah requested again of Iehosaphat, 1
King. 22. 49.
Let my servants go with thy servants in the ships, but the other refused,
having foundas bad success with the son at sea, as lately he had had on land
with Ahab his Father. Besides, Iehosaphat being sensible how his infant-designe
was strangled in the womb, and his ships broken at Ezion gaber in the very
haven, would not renew his voyage, it being a bold defying of divine power, to
water that project from earth, which one plainly sees blasted from heaven.

36. Other remarkable places in Edom were, first Mount Hor (happily so called
from the Horims ancient inhabitants thereof) where Aaron put off his clothes
the covering of his body, and his Number. 20. 28.
body the clothes of his soul, and Eleazar his son both buried and succeeded
him. Thus though for his disobedience forbidden the entrance of the land of
Canaan, yet he came to the selvedge or out-skirt thereof, for hard by, the
Tribe of Judah with a narrow spong confined on the kingdom of Edom. 2ly The
valley of salt, at the south end of the Dead Sea, where God twice seasoned the
Edomites, with two sharp and smart overthrows, when Abishai 1 Chr. 18. 12.
killed eighteen thousand, and afterward when 2 King. 14. 7.
Amaziah killed ten thousand of them in the same place. 3ly 2 King. 8. 21, 22.
2 Chr. 21. 8
Zair is not far off; where King Ioram of Judah gave the Edomites a great blow,
though he could not bring them again into a full subjection. 4ly More south,
Bozrah the metropolis of Edom. The name thereof signifies a muniment or
fortification, (hence so many of them in these parts) and it was a place of
great strength and renown. The Prophet speaking of Christ returning in triumph
from overcoming his enemies: Who is this (says Isa. 63. 1.
he) that comes from Edom, with red garments from Bozrah? But oh the
difference (though the color be the same) betwixt the manner of the die, when
Christ came red a sufferer, and red a conqueror, the latter from Bozrah, but
the former from Jerusalem!

37. Yet Bozrah carries it not so clear to be chief in this Country, but
that Sclah is a stiff corrivall with it for the same honor. This Hebrew name
signifies a Rock, in which sense it is called Petra in Greek and Latin, (I say
not that Arabia is thence denominated Petraea) standing on a steep hill, from
the precipice whereof, Amaziah threw ten thousand Edomites, and they 2 Chr. 25.
12.
all burst to pieces; whereof before; a cruel act, yet admitting of a better
excuse, then another he committed in this kingdom in adoring the captive Idols
2 Chr. 25. 15.
of Edom, and setting them up to be worshipped in Judah: Did he think that as
some trees gain more strength by being transplanted; so these Gods would get
new vigor by being removed into another country? 2 King. 14. 7.
Petra was by Amaziah named Ioktheel, and is called Crach at this day, having
lately been used for a place, therein to secure the treasure of the Sultan.

38. So much of Edom: whose ancient antipathy against Israel continued and
increased to the last. Witness, their standing in the cross ways to Obad. 14.
cut off them of Judah which should escape, and shut up the remnant in the day
of affliction. God in conclusion was even with them: for as they had cast Obad
11.
lots upon Jerusalem, so at last they drew such a blank for themselves, that
notwithstanding their Obad. 4.
Eagles-nests and starry-dwellings (wherein they placed their confidence) they
were brought to destruction, their high habitations being so far from saving
them, that they only contributed to make their fall more visible to others,
and dangerous to themselves.

39. East of Edom lay the Land of Uz, where Job dwelt, so renowned for his
patience, when the devil heaped afflictions upon him, allowing him no lucid
intervalls. Only the more deliberately to torment him, measured unto him, so
much space betwixt his several stripes, that Job might be distinctly sensible
of the smart thereof. Yea this father of confusion observed a methodicall
gradation in doing mischief, that still the hindmost was the heaviest
affliction.

1 The Job 1. 15.
Sabeans, a people of Arabia the happy, took away his Oxen when plowing, and
Asses when feeding besides them. 2 Fire of hell falling from heaven (of Satan's
sending, and Gods suffering) Job 1. 16.
consumed his sheep and servants. 3 The Chaldeans coming in three bands fell on
his Camels, and carried Job 1. 17.
them away. If any object that Chaldea was many miles hence; it is answered
that roving crafty thieves have long strides, and commonly fox-like, prey
farthest from their den. Besides, probably the Chaldeans driving a land-trade
from Arabia to Babylon with Spices, being Merchant-pirates, did light on this
prize in their passage. 4 A wind smote the four Job 1. 19.
corners of the house wherein his seven sons were feasting with their three
sisters: Nor will any wonder at this wild Hericano blowing at once from all
points of the Compass, when he remembers that Satan is styled the 1 pho. 2. 2.
Prince of the power of the air. 5 His body became an Hospital of diseases,
equally painful, shameful, loathsome. How quickly is Dives turned into
Lazarus? as if his herds of cattle were turned into Job 2. 7.
boiles, and flocks of sheep into so many Scabs on his body. 6 His wife
persecuted him with her bad Job 2. 9.
counsel. When the physic which should help, traitorously sides with the
disease; Oh the doleful condition of the Patient! 7 Lastly, his friends proved
his greatest enemies. Others only despoiled him of his goods, they sought to
deprive him of his goodness. And whereas Job was only passive in his other
losses, (plundered of all his wealth against his will) they endeavored to
persuade him voluntarily to resign and surrender his innocence and integrity,
and to confess himself an hypocrite; For to this purpose tended their large
discourses containing true Doctrines, but false Uses, as applied in relation to
Job.
All these crosses Job bare with invincible patience. Insomuch that some
Moderns accounting such patience impossible, have turned it all into a Parable,
denying the historical, and only making an Allegorical truth of all his
sufferings; dealing worse with Job, then the devilidid, whose commission
extended not to take away his Job 2. 6.
life; whereas these men utterly destroy his being, denying such an one ever
to have been in Rerum natura. See the baseness of our degenerate days, being so
far from following the worthy example of former Heroes, that men's laziness
takes a more compendious way, in stead of imitating their virtues, practice to
abolish their persons. And yet what clearer demonstration can there be of the
historical truth of Job, then that his own name, the name of the place of his
dwelling are set down, with the names of his foes, friends, and daughters; and
the whole History as largely recorded in the old, as briefly repeated in the
new Iam. 5. 11.
Testament? On the other side we listen as little to those who lessen Jobs
sufferings, because he lost nothing with in doors, his Coin, Jewels, Plate, and
household stuff (presumed in a considerable equipage to the rest of his
substance) remained entire for any thing we find to the contrary. But the
wealth of that age chiefly consisted in their stock, so that one may call their
cattle their coin, (Grammarians derive Pecunia a pecudibus) bargains in those
days not being driven with money in specie, but by bartering of commodities.

40. But Comicall was the end of Job, and all things restored double to him:
Job 42. 10.
so that it had been better for him to have lost more; for then he should have
had twice as much restored: only the same number of children were given him,
seven sons and three daughters, because his former children, non amissi, sed
praemissi, were not foregone, but gone before. Parents may account on their
pious children departed, and reckon, not that once they had, but still have
them; though not here, in heaven. Yea in some sort Jobs children were doubled
also, because he lived to see his sons sons to the fourth Job 42. 16.
generation. As for the friends of Job: Eliphaz the Temanite (of whom formerly)
lived in Edom: Bildad the Shubite dwelt hereabouts, as descended from Genesis 25.
2.
Shuah one of Abraham's sons by Keturah: Zophar the Naamathite from Naamah a
City after allotted to Judah, on the south of Judea bordering in Edom Josh, 15.
41.
.

41. Here I omit the Country of Temah with some other petty territories, all
parcels of Arabia deserta. Yea the Reader may stand on the edge of this Map,
and there smell the fragrancies of Arabia the happy, so called on good reason.
Misers measure Paradise by their profit, Epicures by their pleasure: both met
here. And it is hard to say whether the spices or the gold of the country are
more renowned. But if heaven should commence an action against Arabia the happy
for usurping his privilege, Arabia would non-sute it self, and confess her
unhappiness in the midst of all her felicity. For in default of other fuel
they are fain to burn and dress their meat with Aromaticall wood, which so
stupefieth the senses of the people, that they are forced with Plim. lib. 12.
cap. 17.
Bitumen and the sent of Goats (where perfumes are too frequent, a stink is a
perfume) to qualify their suffocating sweetness. Thus no heaven out of heaven,
and no earthly felicity will fall out even measure to content us, but either
too much or too little.

42. It remains now that we observe the several stations of the children of
Israel coming out of Egypt, which cross this map in fashion of a Belt. We begin
at mount Hor their thirty fourth stage in the edge of the land of Edom. Hence
Moses sent messengers to request a peaceable passage through the kingdom of
Edom, but could not obtain it. No doubt they were jealous of Isreal's greatness,
and being carnally suspicious of them (because Power generally performs
promises, no further then it complies with its profit) conceived it easier to
keep, then cast them out of their country. If Genesis 32. 6.
Jacob was frighted with Esau's coming to meet him with four hundred men, Esau
was now no less afraid of Jacob accosting him with six hundred thousand men.

43. However, God commanded his people not to force this, but find another
passage. It was well more ways then one led to Canaan, else Israel had been at
a loss. But wicked men may for a time retard, not finally obstruct our access
to happiness. It is but fetching a compass, making two steps for one; a little
more pains and patience will do the deed. Israel surrounds the land of Edom,
and next sets down at Zalmona.

44. Here they want water, and fall a muttering, and God sends them more fire
in lieu thereof, Numb. 21. 6.
Fiery Serpents to destroy them. Humble praying is the only means to remove;
peevish muttering, the ready way to double our distress. Yet afterward by the
setting up of the brazen Serpent, their malady was remedied. Sudden wound, to
be hurt with a touch; and as quick a cure, to be healed with a look! Oh lively
type of our Saviors death! Here is both Christ and his Cross; both his Person,
and the manner of his Passion, he must be lifted up. Zalmona in Hebrew
signifies the shadowing of a portraicture; probably so named from the Effigies
of the Serpent set up in this place. As for the five following, Number. 33. 42.
Phunon, Oboth, Iie-abarim, Dibon-gad, and Almon-diblathaim, we find no
memorable accident happening at them.

45. These solemn Gests were, as I may say, the full points, which
distinguished the several sentences of the Jewish Peregrination. But besides
these there were certain Comma's or Colons, I mean intermediate subordinate
Stages, where they did bait, not lodge; or perchance lodge for a night, not
live any time. Thus after Iie-abarim, their 88th. Stage, they pitched
successively in 1 The valley of Number. 21. 13.
Zared. 2 By the stream of Arnon. 3 At Beer. 4 Mattanah. 5 Nahaleel. 6 Bamoth.


Betwixt Kadesh-barnea and the valley of Zared the space of time was Deuteronomy. 2.
13, 14.
thirty and eight years, and at Beer was that famous well, which the Princes
dug with their staves (Ensigns of authority are not degraded, Number. 21. 18.
if sometimes used as instruments of industry) except any will say, that with
their staves they only pointed out the place, and gave direction to others. As
for the reasons why the Israelites were a long time in going so little way,
insomuch that that beast in Brasile, which in fourteen Pet. Heyl. Microcos.
days goes no further then a man may throw a stone (therefore called by the
Spaniards Pigritia) might overtake them; the reasons hereof in the following
Map shall be presented us.

Here the Map of the wilderness of Paran is to be inserted.



THE WILDERNESS OF PARAN. CHAP. 3.
1. THe wilderness of Genesis 21. 21.
Paran (wherein a principal place called Phara in the days of Geog. l. 5. c. 17.
Ptolemy) is part of Gal. 4. 25.
Arabia the stony, The bounds and barrenness of this wildern^sse.
has Judea and the Mediterranean-sea, on the north; Egypt, on the west; the
Red Sea, on the south-west and full south; Arabia the desert, and therein the
kingdom of Edom, on the east. An ocean as (I may say) of sand, whereof it has
inconstant tides, removed in drifts, by the violence of the winds, to the great
danger of travelers; without water, or wood, save a few Anchoritepalme-trees
scattered here and there, whereof a whole convent seventy in number, was found
at Elim, therefore signally noted in Ezod. 15. 27.
Scripture, as a remarkable rarity; other wood has it none, says the Strabo.
lib. 16.
Geographer, save Thorn and Tamerisk, and of the former sort (I conceive) that
Exodus 3. 2.
bush was, nigh Horeb, which burnt, and never consumed.

2. Here was (...) Strabo lib. 17.
(...), Flying Serpents.
plenty of Serpents hidden in the sands, whereof the Israelites had sad
experience, when Numb. 21. 6.
stung of them in their passage. Solinus calls them pennatos Serpents, winged
Serpents, affirming their poison so active, ut morsum ante mors quam dolor
insequatur, that death ensues their biting, before any pain felt thereby. Say
not, that a flying-serpent is a contradiction, scarce reconcilable with Gods
curse on that creature, Genesis 3. 14.
upon the belly shall thou go, seeing in the Leviticall law we find the Jews
forbidden to eat Levit. 11. 23.
all flying-creeping things. And though such Serpents might for a spurt, in a
frisk or frolic, make use of their wings, yet creeping was their certain and
constant traveling, which they trusted unto.

3. One may admire, to what purpose, Natures intent in this desert.
nature making nothing in vain, intended this wild desert, the ground whereof
for the generality, is like salt when it has lost its savor, Matthew. 5. 13.
which thenceforth is good for nothing. Except any will say, it was merely made
to be a foil to the transcendent fruitfulness of Judea, and Egypt on both
sides thereof. But, we must know, that though barren for the main, and
distempered with sterility, yet it had some fertile intervalls, especially in
the skirts, and purlews thereof, as about Mount Horeb, where some tolerable
herbage, whereon Exodus 3. 1.
Moses pastured his flock. Yea, some nations, Amalekites, Midianites,
Gessurites (whose hardy bodies, and fierce souls were fitted for so hungry and
course a country) had their habitation in the confines of this wilderness.
But, the main end for which this desert may seem ordained, was, that therein
God and the Israelites might for forty years mutually prove one another. And
upon trial, they appeared a peevish, froward, stubborn people; He, for a long
time, patient, long-suffering, slow to wrath; but at last, sure, and severe in
punishing such, as had provoked his patience, into unquenchable anger.

4. Here some will demand, Object. How could they wander forty years in Paran.
How was it possible, that the Israelites should busy themselves forty years
in passing this wilderness? Had the Patriarchs, when twice sent to fetch food
out of Egypt into Canaan, staid a quarter so long, in crossing this desert,
certainly (without other help) their Father Jacob, and his family had been
famished. An English Gentleman, some forty years since, departed from Cairo in
the heart of Egypt S^nds Trav. page 136.
March the fourth, mounted on a Camel in the company of the Carvan, refreshed
himself with Page 138.
two days rest in his journey, and came safely to Gaza on the entrance of the
land of Canaan, by Page 140.
seven a clock on the seventeenth day of the same month.

5. It is answered; Answ. Several reasons thereof.
first, the Israelites went not the Exodus 13. 17.
nearest way through the land of the Philistines, over the narrow neck of the
desert, but more southward, over the belly or gulf thereof, where it was of
greatest extent. Secondly, their removealls and stations were not arbitrary, at
their own disposal, when, how far, and whither they pleased; but were ordered
by Gods appointment, and the pillar ushering them; probably, staying many
months (not to say years) in the same place. Thirdly, they removed not
foreright, but with many flexures and indentings, that their tedious travel,
in the indirect motions thereof, might mind them of their sins, which caused
their sufferings.

6. They were a crooked Deuteronomy. 32. 5.
generation, lost in the laborious labyrinths of their own fancies, who made
not their paths straight in Gods service, but bent to Hos. 11. 7.
backsliding they did Psalm. ^ 5. 10.
err in their hearts, contrary to God, all 1 These. 2. 15.
men, and themselves. They would, and would not, and would again; now sick to
stay, now wild to go on, now mad to return. God therefore fitted their
perverse wills with winding ways, so that no Hare, when hardly put to it by the
hounds, and running foil, makes more doublings and redoublings, then they
fetched compass, circuits, turns, and returns in this their intricate
peregrination.

7. The Turks (who themselves use to sit still on the ground) wondered at our
English men, Chiefly to spend out that generation.
to see them walk up and down, some few turns in a Cloister. If your way (said
they) Biddulphs Trav. page 98.
lies to the upper end, why come ye downwards? if at the nether end, why go
ye back again? But with how, much admiration would they have beheld the
Israelites, passing from Egypt to Canaan? now going full forward, then moving
retrograde; now advancing in a straight line, then retraiting in the same. Yea
surely, any man would have concluded them not well in their wits, until
satisfied in the true cause thereof; namely, that God in this their forty
years wandering, meant to wear out the whole stock of that faithless
generation, Caleb and Joshua only excepted.

8. See what forty years can do, No old men came into Canaan.
lay six hundred Exodus 12. 37.
thousand men in their graves, and substitute a new generation in their room.
It is observed of Lightning, that sometimes it melts the sword, and yet
bruiseth not the scabbard: and the reason commonly rendered, is, because the
steel makes opposition against it. Thus God miraculously preserved their
clothes, and consumed their flesh; their shoes Deuteronomy. 29. 5.
waxed not old, but their feet did; their cases were spared, and persons
spilled, because God therein met with so much resistance against his commands.
Thus the stock of that generation being wholly wasted, no decrepit, or decayed;
no impotent, or infirm person entered the promised land, but all able and
active, in the prime of their strength, fit to fight, to the greater terror of
their enemies. And in a mystical sense this was to show, that not the old man
born in the house of bondage, but only the new regenerate creature shall enter
the heavenly Canaan.

9. Come we now to describe the Israelites through this wilderness; The
Israelites extremity at the Red-s^a.
and first of their passage over the Red Sea, when pursued by the Egyptians.
Then were they reduced to great extremity. Fight they durst not, being a
multitude of undisciplined people, of all ages and sexes, against a regulated
army of their enemies; fly they could not, having the sea before, the Egyptians
behind, steep (...).
and unpassable hills on either side of them. It was well there was nothing
above, betwixt them and heaven, to hinder the access of Moses his prayers to
God in their behalf. However, for the present, God so ordered it, that the
Egyptians overtook not the camp of Israel, being parted with the pillar of the
cloud, the first and perfect pattern of a dark-lantern; dark Exodus 14. 20.
indeed to the Egyptians, but a lantern to the Israelites. Then Moses, by order
from heaven, gave the signal with his rod, a strong Exodus 14. 21.
east-winde blew, and the sea miraculously retraited, standing on heaps on each
side of the Israelites, whilst they passed through it. Thus, out of danger
came safety, the sea flanking the Israelites on both sides, whose rere was
secured by the pillar, and front advanced far off out of danger.

10. Here the importunate cavil of Borphyrius presses for admission,
Porphyrius his cavil.
alleging, that Moses taking advantage of a low water, unknown to the
Egyptians, passed the people over thereat. Utterly unlikely, that he, being a
stranger, should be better acquainted with the secret ebbings of the Red Sea,
then the Egyptian-natives, whose country bordered on the shores thereof,
beside many other See Sir Walter Raleigh part 1. lib. 2. c. 3. sect. 9.
improbabilities. But, malice must carp at the clearest truth, and had rather
lose her small credit in saying nonsense, then great revenge in bringing
nothing against it.

11. True it is, Passed over at the nartowest place.
they went over at the wrist of the sleeve of the sea, and crossed it in the
shortest place, God making use, not out of any need, but his own mere pleasure,
of the narrowest cut of the sea, for their more compendious passage. Thus
Christ went into heaven from Acts 1. 12.
Mount Olivet, taking the advantage of the rising ground for his ascent, not
out of necessity, but state, the Lord of nature therein graciously accepting of
that service, which she dutifully tendered unto him. And though small and short
the Red Sea in this place, it was big and broad enough to do the deed, and
drown the Egyptians. Oh! if the least joint of the little finger of the sea, be
so heavy, how weighty are the loins of the Ocean if let loose! Able in an
instant to press all mankind to the pit of destruction.

12. The Egyptians follow the chase of the Israelites. Strange, The Egyptians
drowned.
that they left not off their pursuit, at so miraculous an accident! Such a
road in the sea, out of the road of nature, seemed not to be gone in, but gazed
at with amazement. But they thought; good for one, good for another; and all
objections to the contrary, are answered in three words, Exodus 14. 4. 8. 17.
God hardened them. Yea, such, whom he designeth for destruction, shall mistake
their funerals for their nuptials, and dance as merrily to their graves as if
they went to their wedding. God first sent distraction amongst them, their
cripple chariots turned into carts (when their forewheels were taken away) halt
on very heavily. In vain did the wiser Egyptians persuade a retrait, whilst
the returning waters swallow all up in a moment. Mean time the Israelites march
fair on, and recover the other side, and then in a double Quire of men Exodus
15. 1.
and women, sing praises unto God for their miraculous deliverance.

13. But this music was too good to hold long. Their murmu^ing at Marah.
We meet with a new ditty, and worse notes soon after. Three days they wander
without water; probably sustained for food, with that unleavened bread, and
other provision they brought with them out of Egypt. See here sudden
vicissitudes: 1 Water they want. Oh great grief! 2 Water appears plenty at
Marah. Oh great joy! 3 This water proves no water, so bitter it could not be
drunk. Grief again, and murmuring. 3 The water is cured. Great joy again.


This cure Moses effected, casting, by Gods direction, a Exodus 15. 25.
tree into it. Thus the infusion of the least piece of Christ's cross (I mean a
true interest in his passion) will turn our bitterest afflictions in this
world, to become sweet, and pleasant unto us. From this Marah, they remove to
their next station at Elim, famous for Exodus 15. 27.
twelve wells of water, and seventy Palme-trees: as if nature had purposely
produced, a Well for every Tribe to drink of, a Palm Tree for every eminent
Elder in Israel to lodge under.

14. From Elim they removed, Their return to the Red Sea.
and encamped by the Number. 4. 10.
Red Sea. What meant their going back again? Was it because in their Act. 7. 39.
hearts they turned back again into Egypt. And therefore God in his justice,
would vex their wearied bodies, to fetch a flexure thitherwards? Or rather, was
it because God would have them take a second view of that sea, that so their
deliverance thereat, might take the firmer, and deeper impression in their
memories? Thus scholars who have once con'd their lesson by heart, are set
again at the weeks end to get it for their part. Whatsoever was the cause, sure
I am, they were now no nearer to the end of their race, then at the first
starting, and these their last three removealls were but ciphers toward the
account of their journey. Wonder I no longer at Saint Paul, and his companions
in their sea-voyage, when they had sailed Act. 27. 7.
slowly many days, the wind not suffering them, finding these Israelites in
their land-travell after so long time, moved, not promoted, yea, going
backward; and the slowest snaile makes more speed forth-right, then the
swiftest retrograde Cancer.

15. From the Red Sea they advanced to the wilderness Exodus 16. 1.
of Sin. For although the wilderness of Paran passes for the genericall name
of this whole desert, They come into the wilderness of Sin.
yet it was subdivided into many petite wildernesses, namely those of Shur,
Eham, Sin, Kadesh, etc.

16. In the wilderness of Sin, Quails, and Manna.
the Israelites fell a murmuring for food. Here over night God gave them Exodus
16. 13.
Quails, (light supper-meat, and easy of digestion) being only exceedings,
or a feast for a meal; and next morning, their ordinary, or constant fare was
delivered out unto them, Manna rained from heaven. Some conceive it so called
from (...) in Chaldee What? (or rather, Vide M. Mede Diatri. 3. part page 557.
who?) from the question made by them at the first sight thereof. But, how came
the Israelites, newly come out of Egypt, to speak the Chaldee language? Egypt
and Babylon (the one the house of bondage, the other the land of captivity)
though meeting in mischief against the children of God, being in time and place
far asunder? Rather in Hebrew it signifies a portion, being their daily
allowance, or else Id^m ibidem.
food made ready, prepared for them without their labor or industry. It was no
fragments of frankincense, called Manna by Dioscorides and Galen, no (...), or
honey-dew, nor any such mimicall drug (being not food, but physic) called
Manna at this day by the Apothecaries; but a substance so solid, that it would
endure grinding, and pounding, in Mill and Mortar; yet so friable, that it
melted at the rising of the Sun. It fell six days, and not on the Exodus 16. 23.
seventh; observed, and enforced by some, for the antiquity, and morality of
the Sabbath, this happening before the giving of the fourth Commandment on
mount Sinai.

17. Dim are their eyes who see not Christ typified therein. Christ typified in
Manna.
Given freely of Gods goodness, without any work or merit of man; in a
miraculous manner, at first unknown what it was, or Exodus 16. 15.
whence it came, for, who Isa. 53. 8.
shall declare his generation? Equally belonging to all, rich and poor,
sufficient for all: Exodus 18. 31.
white in color, so clear his innocence: pleasant like honey, so sweet are his
benefits, Psalm. 34. 8.
O taste and see that the Lord is good: beaten, and broken, before eaten;
[Christ on the Cross:] given only in the wilderness, ceasing as soon as they
came into the land of promise; as Sacraments shall expire when we enjoy the
substance in heaven.

18. Hence they removed to As for Dophkah and Al^sh two Intermediate stations,
(mentioned Numb. 33. 13.) they are omitted in Exodus because nothing memorable
was performed in them.
Rephidim, and there fall a murmuring for water. Moses at Gods commandment
smites the rock, and water Exodus 17. 6.
gushed forth. Saint Paul adds, and the 1 Cor. 10. 4.
Rock followed them; that is, by a Metonymie, the water issuing thence trailed
after them, in all their removealls. In what state did the Israelites march,
having a pillar of fire before to usher, and a stream of water their
train-bearer, behind them? Both bad masters, but then their good servants. This
latter (though little observed) was one cause of the long lingering of the
Israelites in the wilderness: the pillar conducting them such by-ways, in
levels or declivity of vales in that mountainous country, where the water had
a convenience to be derived after them. How many miles does the artificial new
river make, betwixt Ware and London, finding out flats to expedite the passage
thereof? Indeed, God could as easily have made this rockwater climb, and
clamber mountains, as lacquey at the heels of the Israelites; (though the one
was but beside, the other quite against nature) but he would not causelessly
multiply miracle on miracle. How the water of this rock was afterward
suspended, and another at Cadesh made successor in the room thereof, shall in
due time, God willing, be observed. Rephidim by this ill accident of the
peoples murmuring, got (no good, but) two new names, Massah and Meribah,
temptation and chiding.

19. Here the children of Israel were in war incountred by the Amalekites,
Amali^k opposes Israel.
whose country lay hereabouts. A base barren land, yet too good for the owners
thereof, living not so much on their own, as on incursions into their
neighboring countries. Descended from Genesis 36. 12.
Timnah, concubine to Eliphaz, Esau's eldest son: the dregs of whose malice
against Jacob, and his posterity, were settled in this nation. Whilst Joshua in
the valley undertook them in a pitched field, Moses in the mount of Horeb
assaulted, and battered the gates of heaven with his importunate prayers. With
the rising or falling of whose hands, rose or fell the courage, and success of
the Exodus 17. 11.
Israelites; till at last supported by Aaron and Hur they procure a final
conquest. This Amalek Number. 24. 20.
was the first of the nations that opposed Israel, and therefore just it was,
that on him (first opening the matrix of malice) as on the eldest son of Satan,
a curse should be entailed, and his heirs for ever; God enjoining his people a
truceless war, to the utter Exodus 17. 14. and 16.
extirpation of the Amalekites.

20. Hence forward we never meet an Amalekite in Scripture, Amal^kites
mischievous in conjunction with others.
but ever doing mischief. Either stealing; (as when they plundered 1 Samuel 30. 1.
Ziglag, carrying away the women and children thereof captive) or lying, as the
2 Samuel 1. 8. 10.
messenger that told the tidings of the manner of Readiness death; or craftily
plotting murder, as Esther 3. 1.
Haman designing the destruction of the Jewish nation; or cruelly performing
it, as 1 Samuel 15. 33.
Agag, the barbarous, and bloody King of the Amalekites. Now these Amalekites,
after this their first defeat by Joshua, were never after able alone to wage
war with Israel, but listed themselves as Auxiliaries, with others. Thus under
King Judge. 3. 13.
Eglon, they joined with Moab, and Ammon; united themselves to Judge. 5. 14.
Sisera against Barak; confederated with Judge. 6. 3.
Midian, against Gideon; and after the death of Tola, combined with the
Sidonians against Israel: These Adjectives only appearing in conjunction, and
composition with the enemies of Gods people. Yea, it is observable, that the
Israelites never engaged against Amalek in set-fight, but constantly came off
conquerours, as if the vigor and virtue of Moses his upheld hands, and the rod
therein, had continued to all posterity. Thus, besides the victories gotten by
Ehud, Barak, and Gideon; Saul smote Amalek, (when contrary to Gods command, he
1 Samuel 15. 9.
spared the King, and choicest spoil thereof;) David 1 Samuel 30. 18.
surprised them and regained his captives; and the Tribe of Simeon 1 Chr. 4. 13.
made a succesfull expedition against them, to mount Seir, in the days of
Hezekiah.

21. We must not forget that mount Horeb, Mount Horeb Go^^mountain
whereon Moses did pray, was the place, nigh which formerly, he fed the flocks
of Iethro his father-in-law. It is called in Scripture, the Exodus 3. 1. and 1
King. 19. 8.
mountain of God, either because exceeding high, and by an Hebraisme, all
things eminent in their kind, are given to God, (as the Cedars of God, that is,
very tall and lofty Cedars) or, because God there miraculously manifested
himself in the Exodus 3. 2.
bush that burned, and consumed not. Some hundred years after, Elijah living in
a cave of this mountain, heard the Lord passing by, neither in fire,
earthquake, or wind, but in a 1 King. 19. 12.
still small voice.

22. Whilst the Israelites abode about Rephidim, Iethro Moses his
father-in-law, Iethro gives Moses a visit.
Prince of Midian, a country lying southward from hence toward the Red Sea,
repaired hither to give his son a visit, and congratulate his good success.
During his abode there, he observed how Moses wearied himself with working, and
the people with waiting, whilst all causes arising betwixt Exodus 12. 37.
six hundred thousand men, besides women, (too frequently fruitful in
contentions) were brought before him to be decided. He that measures these
peoples litigiousness amongst themselves, by their frowardness to God, will
less admire, that Samsons back was, then that Moses his brains were not broken,
with so great a burden. Surely his prudence was not so much tried with the
difficulty, as his patience with the easiness of many trivial matters brought
before him. Iethro fairly chideth him for over-burdening himself. Send us such
cordial woundings of a faithful friend, and keep us from the wounding
cordials of flattering foes.

23. His chiding is seconded with counselling him. Chides and counsels him.
Thunder does more harm then good, if not bringing some soft rain along with
it. He advises Moses to substitute under-governers (reserving an appeal in
grand causes to himself) charactered with these cardinal virtues, Exodus 18. 21.
Men of courage, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness. Moses
followed his advice, new modelling the people, appointing officers over
thousands, and hundreds, and fifties, and tens. Parallel to the last was the
original institution of our English See Lambert of Constables.
Tything-men (a word still in use in the west-countrey) being a superior
appointed to oversee ten men, with their families belonging unto them.

24. From Rephidim (alias Massah, Terrible apparitions at the giving of the Law
on Mount Sinai.
or Meribah) Israel advanced to mount Sinai; where, after much preparatory
state (on purpose to make terrible impressions on the people) of thunder,
smoke, and lightning, the law at last was delivered. Small hope, that this Law
would give life, which at the giving thereof, almost proved mortal to the
beholders. If the Judge be thus terrible, when he but begins his charge,
what will he be, when proceeding to pronounce the sentence of condemnation on
malefactors? The mountain was railed about with a Noli me tangere, the people
being commanded to observe a reverentiall distance.

25. Hard it is to understand, who of the people, when, and how far, were
permitted, or prohibited their approach to this mountain. I conceive the
following model clearest in it self, The equipage of the people on Mount Sinai
and most consonant to the text; 1 Moses, by divine command, Exodus 19. 12.
set bounds round about the borders of Mount Sinai; either drawing a line, or
casting up a bank of sand, or cancelling, and railing it with posts: though the
last least probable, trees being so scarce, nothing but hunger and horror
growing hereabouts. 2 When God came down on mount Sinai, it was death for man
or beast to approach those bounds (as made on the skirt of the Mount, which
they might not touch) until solemn leave was given unto them. 3 When the Ibid.
v. 13.
Trumpet sounded long (as a signal, or watchword for that purpose) the people
might come up to the mount (namely up the skirts, and lowest verge thereof, so
far as the foresaid bounds gave them leave) and Ibid. v. 17.
hither they advanced under the conduct of Moses. 4 Here the people kept their
station, during the promulgation of the law: attentive ears being permitted,
but prying eyes forbidden them. Yea, on pain of death they were to proceed
Ibid. v. 21.
no farther. 5 Aaron by a Call of grace (as high Priest in reversion) came up
higher happily to the midst of the mountain. 6 Whilst thus the people stood at
the bottom of the mount, in the Chamber of presence; Aaron in the midst
thereof, as in the Privy Chamber; Moses on the mount-top (as in the Bed
Chamber, wherein Gods glory rested) conversed with the Divine Majesty.


Forget we not, how Joshua was disposed, in some unknown distance in this
Mount, where he remained with Moses Exodus 32. 17.
forty days. As formerly Barons eldest sons were admitted into the House of
Lords, not to vote, but view the passages therein: so Joshua Moses his heir
apparent, and successor designed in Divine intention, had a peculiar favor,
more nearly to behold the transactions on Mount Sinai.

26. No doubt the Israelites, The Jews Idolatty.
at the giving of the Law, made large promises to observe it, but very ill
performed by them. For, during Moses his absence forty days in the Mount, they
solicited Aaron to make them Gods. He to decline the employment, requires the
Exodus 32. 2.
earrings (not out of the cabinets, but) from the ears of their wives, sons,
and daughters. Hoping, this his motion would make such a general mutiny in all
their families, it would finally dash the design. Especially, seeing golden
ornaments were accounted essential in those Eastern parts, and their heads,
and hands being without earrings, and bracelets, were esteemed more naked,
then ours without hats, and gloves. But Aaron herein missed his mark, finding
the Jews superstition above their pride, or covetousness, who violently brake
Ibid. v. 3.
off their earrings, even such as were riveted in their skin with long
wearing, so that rather they would fetch away some flesh, then leave any gold
behind them. Of these Jewels delivered unto him, Aaron made a molten Ibid. v.
4.
calfe for them to worship.

27. And why a Calfe? Why a Calf.
could they find no fitter resemblance of God, amongst all the creatures? Why
not rather the Lordly Lion, to show the sovereignty; vast Elephant; the
immensity; subtle Serpent, the wisdom; long-lived Heart, the eternity; swift
Eagle, the ubiquity of God, rather then the silly senseless calfe, that eats
Hay? But, the shape mattered not much, for if God be made like any thing he may
be made like any thing. It being as unlawful to fashion him an Angel, as a
worm, seeing the Commandment Exodus 20. 4.
forbids as well the likeness of things in heaven above, as in earth beneath.
But, probably a Calfe was preferred before other forms, because they had
learned it from the Egyptians worshipping their ox Apis. Thus the Israelites
Exodus 12. 35.
borrowed, not all gold, and silver, but some dross from the Egyptians, whence
they fetched the idolatrous forms of their worship.

28. Moses descends in haste from the mount, The abolishing thereof.
and beholding their impiety, in holy zeal brake the two Tables, wherein the
Commandments were written. Then, boldly he seiseth on their Idol, being but
one against many thousands. Oh! what an army, innocence and authority carries,
in a sole person! None durst rescue their calfe, and it could not rescue it
self; yea, could not so much as low, being now led to be slaughtered. He stamps
it to powder, and being now pulverized, and strawed on the water, he Exodus 32.
20.
made the Israelites to drink thereof. Say not, this was uncivil, to force men
to drink against their will, and the Persians in their feasts had more
goodness, where Esther 1. 8.
none did compel. For, as a Physician, he made the people his Patients, take
this potion for their own good. Aurum potabile (they say) is cordial, and this
draught would be sovereign for the Israelites, to teach them, how hereafter
they worshipped that, which went into the draught. For, now, their Gods made to
go before, are gone behind them; and, if so minded, they might meet them next
morning in their excrements.

29. The Idol thus abolished, ^xecution made by the Levites.
the idolatry was not thereby instantly expiated. The Levites, at Gods summons,
and command, with drawn Exodus 31. 27.
swords, went in and out from gate to gate, through the camp, and unpartially
slay every one they meet. Wherein observe, they had no commission to kill 1
Children, whose judgment was not out of nonage to discern Idolatry. Besides,
God was very tender in preserving the next generation. 2 Nor women: seeing men
alone are mentioned to be slain. And although Levi is commended for saying to
his mother, Deuteronomy. 33. 9.
I have not seen her; this relates not to their killing of women, but that they
were inexorable, to spare any at their entreaties. 3 Nor men in their tents;
How good is it (especially in sad times) to keep home, and not to be gadding
abroad, without great occasion! 4 But only such, as they met straggling, and
strutting in the streets, whilst the rest within doors, may charitably be
conceived, sorrowing for the sin they had committed.


Say not with David, 2 Samuel 11. 25.
the sword-devoureth one as well as another. For, surely Divine providence
brought herein the most active offenders to execution. And God was so well
pleased with this sacrifice of Levi's offering, that hereafter none other Tribe
should offer sacrifice unto him.

30. The number of the slain were about Exods. 32. 28.
three thousand men. Mercy in Gods justice.
A great sum in it self, yet divided amongst six hundred Exodus 12. 37.
thousand, it amounts but just to the twentieth part of decimation, taking
but one out of two hundred, and five out of a thousand. And this was the first
mortal judgment inflicted on the Israelites, since their coming out of Egypt;
for, although formerly they had many times muttered, yet God only chid, not
killed any of them. But, ever after this time, they never murmured, but it cost
some their lives for the same. Thus Divine Justice is long plucking his arm
out of his bosom; but, having once found the use thereof, never strikes in
vain. Yea, ever after God improved himself to greater numbers, observing
generally a gradation in his judgments, and the price of the Market rose higher
to the latter end thereof. But three thousand slain at this time; afterward
fourteen Number. 16. 19.
thousand and seven hundred upon the rebellion of Korah; and Number. 25. 9.
twenty four thousand destroyed by the plague, about the business of Baal-Peor.

31. The modern Jews are of opinion, The error of the modern Jews.
that all the afflictions which ever since have, do, or shall befall their
nation, are still the just punishments on them, for this their first act of
Idolatry. And the Rabbis have Moses Ger^^densis.
a saying, that God never inflicts any judgment upon them, but therein is an
ounce of his anger on them for their ancestors making the golden Vide P. Fagium
in Caldaic. Exodus Paraphras.
Calfe. A reverend friend of mine, conversing at Amsterdam with a Jewish youth
(very capable and ingenious for one of that nation) endeavored to make him
sensible of Gods anger upon them, for rejecting and crucifying of Christ; for
which foul fact, he showed, how the Jews have lived many hundred years in
miserable banishment. But, the youth would in no wise acknowledge their
sufferings, any effect, or punishment of their murdering of Christ, but taking
his Bible, turned to Gods threatening immediately after their making of the
Calfe, Exodus 32. 34. Nevertheless in the day when I visit, I will visit their
sin upon them; so interpreting, and applying all the numerous calamities, which
since have befallen them, to relate to no other cause, then that their first
idolatry. Whereas indeed, the arrears of their idolatry long ago were
satisfied, and this is a new debt of later date, contracted on themselves by
their infidelity.

32. Many more matters of moment happened during the Israelites abode at mount
Sinai; Many remarkable at Mount Sinai.
as instructions delivered to Moses, for the building of the Ark, by him
performed accordingly, (whereof in the next chapter) the first numbering of the
people since their coming out of Egypt, with the giving of the Ceremonial, and
Judicial law. From mount Sinai they marched by Number. 11. 3.
Taberah, that is, a burning, (because there, the fire of God, till quenched by
Moses his prayer, consumed the hindmost in the camp, for their murmuring) on to
Kibroth-Hattaavah.

33. Here the people fell a longingfor meat, Mama loathed by the Israelites.
and loathing Number. 11. 4.
of Manna, though man could eat no cheaper, Angels no better food. But, oh!
thought they, no Manna to variety. Always the same in substance, though
disguised in dressing, proved offensive unto them. This makes me suspect the
truth, of what Saint Augustine out of the Rabbis reports, that Manna relished
in every man's mouth, as their fancy affected, so that all flesh, fish, and
foul were virtually epitomized therein. If so, the Jews had no Vide
Augustinum. tom. 2. page 558. and Retract. lib. 2. cap. 20.
pretense to distaste, what tasted as themselves did desire. Except any will
say, they desired to feast their eye, as well as their palate, and several
meats, not diversified in sight, were nauseous unto them. Had not the fever of
their lust put their mouths quite out of taste, to prefer an Egyptian Number. ^1.
5.
Cucumber before such heavenly repast?

34. Here God gave them flesh with a vengeance, Quails sent them the second
time.
sending Quails now the second time unto them, after a different manner, then
what formerly he had given them at the wilderness of Sin.

Then, 1 They Exodus 16. 3.
murmured out of hunger and necessity, having nothing to eat. 2 Those Quales
lasted but one Exodus 16. 13.
meal. 3. They were safely eaten, and well digested.
Now, 1 They murmured out of humor, and curiosity, because they had nothing but
Manna. 2 These Quails continued a whole Number. 11. 20.
month. 3 Many Israelites were slain, whilst the meat was in their mouths.
The Psalmist adds, that God slew the Psalm. 78. 31.
wealthiest, or fattest of them: the judgment fell heaviest on men of the
primest quality. Which minds me (though barring all uncharitable application)
of a strange mortality in England Anno 1558. at the death of Queen Mary, when a
dainty mouthed disease did rage, which (passing by poor people) fed generally
on Communis quaedam lues exardore febrium per universes Angliae ordines
permeabat, and in ill is maxim divites and honoratas personas depopulabatur.
Haddon cont. Os^rium. fo. 25.
principal persons, of greatest wealth, and estate. The place where this
execution was done, was called Kibroth-Hat-taavah, or, the grave of lusters.

35. Miriam and Aaron brawle with Moses.
Hence they removed to Number. 11. 35.
Hazeroth, where happned the contest of Number. 12. 1.
Miriam and Aaron against Moses, because of the Ethiopian [or Cushite woman]
whom he had married. Understand we Zipporah hereby ( Moses having wife enough
of her alone, as appears by her shrewish Exodus 4. 25.
returns) being an Ethiopian at large, Midian being part of the Asi^tick Cush,
as learned men have cleared beyond opposition. Wherefore we look on the Lady
Tarbith, as no Bride of Moses, but Brat of Josephus, begotten of his luxurious
fancy. True it is, many years since Moses was married to Zipporah, and yet no
wonder, that now they made it new matter for fresh falling out. For, Anger can
keep an accusation long dormant in the deck, and awaken it at last, when
conceiving it most for its advantage.

36. That Miriam was most active in this brawle, Miriam most active.
is not only probable from the female subject thereof, but may certainly be
collected from the first naming of her, [ Number. 12. 1.
And Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses] and the punishment lighting heaviest
upon her. For, God making himself umpire, ended the brawle, cleared Moses,
checked Aaron, and punished Miriam with seven days leprosy. During which time
the Congregation of Israel Number. 12. 15.
not removing out of regard to her (leprous Miriam is Miriam still, a good
woman for the main; and such, when smarting for their faults, are not to be
cast away, but comforted) respectfully attended her recovery.

37. Hence they removed to the Wilderness of Paran, Murmurings occasioned by
the false report of Spies.
whence spies were sent to search the land, and whither after forty days they
returned, with medly tidings in their mouths, feeding such as sent them with a
bit and a knock; great Number. 13. 23.
grapes, figs, and pomegranates, but withal telling them, that the rest
(whereof these were a sample) must cost bloody blows, before they could quietly
be gathered. Here we will not defend their falsehoods by a figure pleading a
Miosis, when they in respect of the Anakims, Number 13. 33.
were in their own sight as Grasshoppers, whilst the Cities of the Cana^nites
(liers relations like the sea, what they lose in one place, gain in another)
were (by an Hyperbole bringing both stone and mortar) Deuteronomy. 1 2^.
walled up to heaven; seeing, in down right terms, they with their carnal
fear, flatly belyed both the place, and people therein. Yea, what if their walls
had reached up to heaven? Did not Isreal's help come down from thence? so that
the bottom of their comfort, was higher then the battlements of their enemies
buildings. Hereat the people fall a muttering and whilst Caleb and Joshua, the
only two Tell-troths, endeavored to undeceive, and encourage the people,
instead of stilling them, they had been stoned themselves, if the glorious
appearance of God out of the Tabernacle had not seasonably Number. 1. 10.
interposed betwixt their innocence, and the fury of the multitude.

38. God (as justly he might) took this their affront in high indignity, This
the tenth temp^a^ion.
especially seeing since their coming out of Egypt, they had tempted him now
these Number. 14 22.
ten times, and this decumana tentatio as yet the last and greatest. Ten
Commandments he gave them to observe, and ten temptations they already
returned him in lieu thereof. Surely God is a just Accountant, not charging more
faults on their score, then they were guilty of, but let us reckon up as many
murmurings of them as appear in Scripture. Not to speak of the personal
faults of Nadab and Abihu offering with Levit. 10 1.
strange fire, (conceived drunk at the same time, because immediately after,
wine and strong drink are forbidden the Priests when they officiate) one that
Levit. 34. 11.
blasphemed, another gathering Number. 15. 32.
sticks on the Sabbath; we insist on more general and solemn Rebellions, out
of the stock of the public infidelity. 1 Before their coming over the Red Sea.
Exodus 14. 11. 2 At Marah for want of water. Exodus 15. 24. 3 In Sin Wilderness
for lack of food. Exodus 16. 2. 4 At the same place, some keeping Manna till it
st^nk. ver. 20. contrary to Gods command. 5 Others going out to gather it on the
Sabbath. ver. 27. contrary to Gods command. 6 At Rephidim, for want of water.
Exodus 17. 2. 7 For the absence of Moses, when they made the calfe Exodus 32. 1.
8 At Taberah, when fire consumed them. Numb. 11. 1. 9 At Kibroth-Hattaavah
longing for food. Numb. 11. 4. 10 At this time after the return of the Spies.
Yet not to stand strictly on ten, perchance, a certain is put for an uncertain
number ( Thou have changed my wages Genesis 31. 41.
ten times, that is, very often.) Not that the Jews tempted God under, but
rather over that number, their several impieties not being all expressed, as
appears by the charge of the Prophet Amos, In the Amos 5. 26.
wilderness forty years, o house of Israel, you have born the Tabernacle of
Moloch, and Chiun your images etc. being guilty of more Idolatry, then is
particularly mentioned by Moses.

39. The place whence the Spies were sent, Three names to one place.
and whither they returned is called in Scripture by three several names; 1
Number. 33. 18.
Rithmah, as may be collected from the order of their several stations. This
we conceive the center of the camp, and punctual place (otherwise but obscure
in it self) where the Tabernacle was pitched. 2 Deuteronomy. 1. 19.
Kadesh-barnea, whither the out skirts of that numerous Camp, distant some
space, might extend. 3 The Wilderness of Number. 12. 16. and 13. 3.
Paran, which though the genericall name to the whole Desert, is here
appropriated to a particular part thereof.
Thus in Asia a fourth part of the world, there is the lesser Asia (now
Natolia) a large Country, and therein 1 Pet. 1. 1.
proper Asia a little Province (which I may call the Asia of ASIA in ASIA) as
here, this proper Paran in the midst of the great Wilderness of the same name.

40. God on their disobedience condemned this whole generation ( Caleb and
Joshua excepted) to death in the Wilderness, forbidding them farther approach
to the land of Canaan, and enjoining their tedious return toward the Red Sea.
Notwithstanding whose prohibition, some outlawed of his protection, armed only
with their own stubborness (as if with their gold and silver, they had borrowed
also part of Pharaohs hardened heart) without Pillar to guide, or Arc to
accompany them, advanced forward, and became a Number. 14. 45.
prey to the Canaanites, and Amalekites. And no wonder, if such who in their
march set their faces against Gods command, be found in their retrait (or
flight rather) turning their backs toward their enemies. The rest were
remanded by Gods order toward the south, who from Rithmah their fifteenth, to
Kadesh their thirty third station, spent well-nigh thirty eight years, and were
spent by the same, wherein all that generation was consumed.

41. Which term of time we may fitly call the Gulf of silence, The gulf of
silence.
nothing remarkable being stored thereof in Scripture, save only the rebellion
of Number. 16. 1.
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and that also without any notation of the
particular place whereon it was acted. Yet Ainsworth on Numb. 33.
learned men with some probability conceive, that Number. 33. 25.
Makheloth the two and twentieth stage of the Israelites, was the Theater of so
sad a Tragedy, because interpreted Assemblies in the Hebrew tongue, the same
word which in the Original is used, when those mutineers are said to Number. 16.
3.
gather themselves together against Moses.

42. Come we now to Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin their thirty third resting
place, They come to Kad^sh.
where one may rationally hope to find much reformation amongst the people, if
all things be seriously considered. For, such as survived of the old
generation, seeing their equals in age extinguished before their eyes, and
this the last year (in their lease of forty) begun, should probably prove older
and wiser, learning wit from others woe not to provoke God. And the succeeding
generation were concerned to carry themselves accordingly, being Probationers
upon their good behavior, to be admitted into Canaan, coming now to the
confines thereof. (...)

^

^

^

45. It is observable, Moses punished for the people.
that since the Israelites making of the Calfe, all their mutterings were
mortal, and cost many their lives: yet only here at Kadesh none were slain
for their disobedience, save Moses and Aaron (eminently worth thousands of
others) who here had the sentence of death pronounced against them (though
reprieved for a time) and rendered incapable of their entering into Canaan, as
if the rest had fared the better for their punishment, God not willing that the
chief Magistrate, chief Minister and all the people should smart at the same
time, for the same offense.

46. Here we take our farewell of the Israelites, A farewell to the Israelites.
much admiring at their constant disobedience, notwithstanding their manifold
deliverances, so that miracles grown customary with them, were (like Manna)
contemned for their commonness, and the Pillar of Number. 14. 14.
fire going before them ( What is ever seen, is never seen) made no more
impression on theirs, then the rising and setting of the glorious Sun, does on
our thankfulness. Yea, still they persisted to rebel against God, and (which
is remarkable) lust was their last tempting of him, committing carnal and
spiritual Number. 25. ^^
whoredom with the daughters of Moa^, whereof formerly in the Des^^iption Page
63.. 19.
of Reuben. Now the old generation began to run drogs, (very few of them being
left alive, and therefore strange it is, that any of them should be wanton in
their old age (How ill does green thoughts sui^ with gray heads?) though
probably some of them having one foot in the grave, had an Arm in those
amorous embraces.

47. But whilst we condemn the Jews, Admonition to the English.
we see not the stubbornness in our own hearts. A brainsick opinion has
possessed many English now adays, that they are descended from Jewish
extraction, and some pretend to derive their pedigree (but out of what Heral^s
office I know not) from Jewish parentage. Here a mystical truth may be wrapped
up in a literal lie: ( Old-Iury is a street of large extent) and too much of
Jewish blood, spirits, marrow; fill, move, fraught; our veins, nerves, bones;
Amos 2. 13.
pressing God under the weight of our sins, who daily Psalm. 68. 19.
loadeth us with his benefits; who, besides other favors, in the daytime of
posperity is a pillar of a cloud to cool, check, and counsel; in the night of
adversity a pillar of fire to cheer, comfort, and conduct us, and yet neither
effectually works our serious amendment. Thus leaving the tedious travels of
the Jews, we come to the ready road betwixt Egypt and Can^an, which may be gone
over in far fewer days, then they spent years in their passage.

48. Some will say, Joseph defended for want of affection.
if so short a cut betwixt Egypt and Canaan, how can Joseph be excused for lack
of filial affection, in not sending so long time to his Father, to rectify
his mistake, and to untorture him from the apprehension of his sons supposed
death? Especially, seeing his Fathers numerous family on small enquiry might
easily be found out, even by the sign of his different religion from the rest
of the Country. All that can be answered is, Joseph had some immediate
security, and assurance from God, that his dreams in due time should take full
effect, and therefore attended whilst providence seasonably ripened the same by
his own means: his obedience to God (whose ways he waited on) stopping his
expression of his love to his parent, which flowed forth at last the more
plentifully, for being so long dammed up before.

49. This compendious passage betwixt Egypt and Canaan, Sy^^on lake and Casian
Mountain.
leaves the Mediterranean sea on the left hand, as also the Syrbon-lake,
formerly much larger, now daily decreasing, since the inlet thereof into the
sea, has been choked up with the sand. More eastward it passes by the Mount
Casius, famous for the burial of the unfortunate Pompey the great therein, by
a poor soldier, until Adrian the Emperor afterward bestowed a fair Monument
upon him. But neither this Mountain, nor any other place on this road is
mentioned in Scripture, save two Innes thereon of eminent note.

50. Of these that the ancientest wherein the ten sons of their Father Jacob
lodged in their going down to Egypt. The most anc^ent Inn.
I say the ten sons of one Father. And therefore the same is pertinently
alleged by them in their purgation that they were no spies, Genesis 42. 11.
because all one man's children, (which some resemblance in their countenances
[probably] might partly evidence) it being utterly unlikely, that persons sent
on so dangerous discoveries should all be taken out of one family, (to the
final extirpation thereof, if miscarrying in the design) whereas generally
Spies, (like a Party commanded out of several troops, when sent on desperate
service) are chosen out of diverse households, (with those which Moses sent to
search the land, one out of Number. 13. 2.
every Tribe) that if cut off in the Action, the loss may be the lighter when
divided amongst many families. Here those brethren were, in their return,
troubled with too much money, ( wealth has her distractions as well as want)
the silver in their Genesis 52. 28.
Sacks, which they beheld as a bait laid there to ens^are them, though all came
off joyfully at the last.

51. The other Inn (on or near this road) was that wherein Moses (coming out
of Midian and compassing the Red Sea) lodged with his wife and children. Moses
his Inn.
An Inn which was likely to have proved his Eccles. 12. 5.
long-home, and Moses his Embassy to Pharaoh, was almost turned there into an
errand unto his own grave, yea the messenger welnigh dispatched before the
message, God seeking to Exodus 4. 24.
kill him, for neglecting the circumcising of his sons. Whether because his
forty years living in Midian, had made him more remiss in his Religion, or out
of a peaceable compliance to purchase the quiet of his wise, whose aversness
herein appears by her words and gesture, at the same time here casting her sons
foreskin at his feet, yet hitting him in the teeth Exodus 4. 25.
there with, Surely a bloody husband art thou to me.

52. Now to take our farewell of this Wilderness, People living in this
Wilderness.
as barren as it was, some people, (besides the Amalekites formerly spoken of)
made a shift to live therein. (No place so dry with sand, or hard with rocks,
but, if well cooked with industry, it will make mans-meat, especially for
hungry-stomachs.) As the Madianites, where Iethro was Prince in the South-west,
on the Red Sea, the 1 Samuel 24. 8.
Geshurites, and Gezrites in the North-east, betwixt Egypt and Shur, and above
all, the Kenites, who at first lived mixed with the Amalekites.

53. By Kenites we understand not that antiquated nation, The Kenites.
whose lands God promised to Genesis 15. 19. See our first book page 19.
Abraham, but a people descended from Hobab Judge 4 11.
or Iethro the father-in-law to Moses, some whereof removed out of this
Wilderness, and planted themselves near the Tribe Ibidem.
of Napthali, others continued here, and both Colonies of them always kept
good corresponcie with the Israelites. Saul, when sent against the Amalekites,
was very civil to these southern Kenites, both warning and wishing them
seasonably to 1 Samuel 15. 6.
depart at which time I conceive they hitched their Habitations; a little more
Northward, and nearer to Iuduh. These Kenites, (though Gentiles and strangers)
were kinder to David, then the Keilites, (Jews, of his own Tribe) who though
engaged to David for delivering them from their enemies, yet ungratefully 1 Samuel 2^. 12.
intended to betray him to Saul. Whereas the Kenites, though bound to Saul for
a late favor received from him, yet protected David's innocence from Saul's
persecution, their Cities being one of David's Topics, 1 Samuel 30. 29.
or place where he haunted, and whither he sent part of the spoil he had taken
from the Amalekites.

54. Here let Balaams prophecy be well heeded, Balaam his proph^cy of the
Kenites.
when looking on the Kenites, Strong (says he) is thy dwelling place, Number. 24.
21.
and thou put thy nest in A ROCK, nevertheless the Kenites shall be wasted,
until [or rather See Ainsworth in locum.
whilst] Ashur shall carry thee away captive. By Rock, (besides the local
position of their dwelling) we understand, their confederacy and association
with the Jews in the true Religion, (being accounted Proselytes) and sharing
with them in the same success, as carried away by the Assyrian to Babylon, and
returning again when the rest of the Jews were restored, seeing we find some
Kenites 1 Chr. 12. 55.
mentioned after the captivity, and are (as the text intimates) conceived to be
the same with abstemious Family of the Rechabites.

Here the draught of the Tabernacle is to be inserted.

Icon TABERNACVLI ex Aria Montano desumpta


GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE TABERNACLE. CHAP. IV.
1. IN all peaceable times, Always some public places for Gods service.
even from the infancy of mankind, certain places were set apart for Gods
public service. Thus the ancient Genesis 12. 7, 8. and Genesis 13. 3. etc.
Patriarchs, no sooner pitched down their tents, but they reared up an Altar
for divine worship. Indeed this laudable custom had been intermitted,
discontinued and suspended during the Israelites affliction in Egypt, making
hard shift to serve God with safety, and secrecy in their own houses, when
public places of adoration were prohibited: as always in time of persecution,
any place which has the properties of Capacity and Privacy, (to hold and hide
the people assembled therein) may serve for that purpose. But no sooner were
the Israelites restored to their liberty (though as yet but in a barren
wilderness) but that God issued out order for the erection of his Tabernacle to
place his Name, and fix his peoples devotion therein.

2. The materials of this Tabernacle were taken from the Egyptians, Egyptians
justly spoiled.
when the Israelites, at their departure, Exodus 12. 35.
borrowed of them jewels of silver, and jewels of gold. The text says
(according to the old Translation) that they Exodus 12. 36.
robbed the Egyptians: as indeed to borrow, with an intent never to pay, is no
better then flat felony. But, although this act of the Israelites was robbery,
quoad effectum, leaving the Egyptians spoiled and naked; yet it was none, quoad
reatum, having not only a Commission, but Exodus 12. 12.
Command from God for the same. And albeit the Egyptians are in some sense,
then said, to Exodus 12. 36.
lend to the Israelites, yet in very deed they did but pay back their due unto
them.

3. See what it is to detain the wages of the hireling. Wages long detained
paid with a witness.
Many a year had these Israelites, and their Fathers toiled, and moiled in
Egypt, and had nothing for their pains but their labor. But now, both the
Principal, and Consideration for their forbearance thereof, was laid them down
in a lump all together* Indeed they are said to have builded Treasure Exodus 1.
11.
Cities for Pharaoh; whereas in fine Pharaoh proved but the Treasurer and
Storer for them, carefully keeping their money for them, till it amounted to a
mass, for their greater benefit; which, if formerly paid them by
inconsiderable parcels, might possibly have been spent, as fast as received.

4. Amongst the materials offered for the building of the Tahernacle, All
persons promote Gods Tabernacle.
all Persons presented things proportionable to their own professions and
conditions. The Princes brought Exodus 35. 27.
Precious stones, rich people Gold and Silver, the middle sort fine Linneu and
Brass (not an ounce of iron being used in all the Fabric) and the meanest
Goats hair and Badgers skins. And as men sent their purses, so the women lent
their pains, the wise hearted amongst them, Exodus 35. 25.
spinning with their hands, blue, soarlet, and fine linen for the Tabernacle.

5. Behold here, But still keep their callings.
how all advanced Gods work, yet every one continued in his own vocation. Blame
worthy their Pride, who will be nothing, if they may not all be Bezaleels at
the building of the Tabernacle. Romans 10. 15.
How shall they preach except they be sent? De jure: How can they preach
lawfully and comfortably? though de facto, they presume to do it although but
to the small profit of others, and great danger of themselves.

6. But that which most commended the offering of the Isr^elites in the sight
of God, was their readiness and willingness therein. None were rated, or taxed
to this work, but all flowed freely from them. This purified poor peoples Brass
into refined gold, and changed their Goats-hair into silk, in Gods acceptance
thereof. Otherwise, many may be the Item's in men's Account, and yet all of them
amount to just nothing in divine acceptance, only for the want of a good
Imprimis. For if there be FIRST a 2 Cor. 8. 12.
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not that he
has not.

7. One main motive which made them more bountiful, A main motive of their
bounty.
was to expiate the late guilt that they had contracted by making the Calfe;
when off went the Exodus 32. 3.
earrings of the women and their children, to that Idolatrous use. They were
therefore engaged to drown that stain with a more plentiful stream of gifts to
Gods service. Thus, the consideration how prodigal we have formerly been to
sin and Satan, ought to make us hereafter more liberal in the performance of
divine duties: Romans 6. 19.
For as ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity,
unto iniquity: even so now yield your members servants to righteousness, unto
holiness.

8. Yea, Their bounty restrained by Proclama^ion.
such was the spring-tyde of the Israelites bounty herein, that to prevent the
danger of a deluge, bounds were set thereunto, Hither shall thou come and no
further: They brought Exodus 36. 5.
much more then enough, for the s^rvice of the work which the Lord had
commanded to make. Insomuch that Moses issued out a Ibid. ver. 6.
Proclamation of restraint, that no more should be brought to that purpose. Oh
the shame! that peoples liberality under the Law should need a bridle, which
needs a spur under the Gospel!

9. Here we may take notice of the (...), Moses his contented mind.
and contented mind of Moses. Had he been posses^ed with the humor of the
Prove. 30. 15.
Horse-leach, Give, give; yea, had he been but pleased to have been the Cistern
whilst the children of Israel were glad to be the fountain, what a mass of
money might he have advanced for himself, and yet have unsuspectedly charged
all on the account of the Tabernacle? How might he have feasted his family and
friends with the full baskets of the fragments left of their liberality? But
Moses was of the same mind, with his great-great-grandfather Abraham, who
would not take even from a Genesis 14. 23.
thread to a shoe-latchet, of what was not his own, that none but God might make
him rich. And thus honest hearts will rather cut off their hands, then lick
their own fingers, for their private profit, when entrusted only as Stewards
for the public good.

10. It may seem strange, Why so bountiful to this building, and afterward
backward in goodness.
that these Jews, who now were so forward to serve God, should soon after prove
so backward in his worship, and provoke him so often by their manifold
infidelities and rebellions against God. Many of these bountiful contributors
to the Tabernacle, being devoid of true grace, and some of this people slain
afterward for their disobedience. But herein we may consider: 1 That this
building was but a worldly Sanctuary, as the Heb. 9. 1.
Apostle calls it. And therefore no wonder, if men, otherwise given to Ti^us
2. 12.
worldly lusts, were liberal thereunto. 2 Carnal men may take a natural
delight in outward visible works, whilst a confluence of vainglory and
hypocrisy may make the torrent of their bounty the greater. 3 Such outward
performances are easy in comparison of that difficult and spiritual
masterpiece, the mortifying of men's inward corruptions.
Hence came it to pass, that many that brought gold to the Tabernacle, proved
themselves but dross afterward, and fell in the conspiracy of Number. 16.
Korah and his company, and other their mutinies made against Moses.

11. The Platform of this Tabernacle was by God delivered to Moses in the
Mount; Moses receives the pattern.
With a strict charge, to make all things conformable thereunto. And he herein
so exactly observed his instructions, without the least deviation from them,
that in the two last chapters of Exodus, where the erecting of the Tabernacle,
with the Utensils thereof, is described, these words are twelve several times
solemnly repeated, As the Lord commanded Moses. So dangerous it is to introduce
any thing as essential to Gods worship, which is not of divine institution.

12. Bazaleel is appointed Master-workman, B^zaleel and Aholiab, Artizans.
one of a prosperous name, whose parents may be presumed pious, comfortably
calling their child (though born in Egypt under the parching heat of
persecution) in the shadow of the Lord, as his name seems to import. This
Bazaleel was one of all crafts, skillful to Exodus 31. 4, 5.
work in gold, silver, brass, precious stones, and timber (whereas amongst us,
Gravers in gold are utterly at a loss to work in wood) Goldsmiths, Lapidary,
Carver, Carpenter, never Apprentice to any, yet Master in all Handy-crafts to
work, and Head-crafts to contrive by divine inspiration. And there was Exodus
31. 6.
given with him Aholiab of the Tribe of Dan (as a Secondary, inferior to the
former in skill, not to clash with, but submit to his judgment) so that, as
all the fine linen used in the Tabernacle, was for the more strength thereof
Fine twined linen mentioned about sixteen times in making the Tabernacle.
twined by divine command: so God also twisted two curious Artizans together
(besides many other wise hearted men) that the building might be the more
substantially effected.

13. The Tabernacle taken in general consisted of two principal parts: Two
principal parts of the Tabernacle.
1 The Court of the Tabernacle, being an Exodus 27. 9.
hundred Cubits long, and Ibid. ver. 13.
fifty broad, made with hangings and pillars for side-walls, and without roof,
open at top, parallel to the outward Courts of Solomon's Temple. 2 The covered
Tabernacle (consisting of the Holy, and Holy of Holies) answering to the (...),
or roofed Temple, whose length may be collected to be thirty yards (accounting
a Cubit a yard) because composed of twenty Exodus 26. 18.
boards, standing Ibid. ver. 15.
upwards, each a Ibid. ver. 16.
Cubit and an half in breadth (so that the breadth of the boards joined
together made the length of the Tabernacle) the height thereof being the length
of the boards, that is ten Cubits, and the breadth thereof of the same
proportion.
This latter alone is presented in our Map, as the proper subject of our
description. It was without windows, admitting no natural light, (save what
entered in on the east at the door when opened) the defect whereof was supplied
with the constant light from the sevenfold Golden Candlestick.

14. To resume the boards of the Tabernacle; The breadth, gilding, sockets and
bars of the boards.
we have (as formerly) their length, and breadth, but not thickness expressed
in Scripture. Arias Montanus conceives them almost a Cubit thick, but if so,
they had rather been trabes quam asseres, beams then boards; whilst Josephus
more probably conjectures them four fingers thick, and we may conclude them so
substantial, as was consistent with their portableness. They were Exodus 26. 29.
overlaid with gold, understand it, they were gilt over, both because, if
covered with gold-plate, the same was more subject to discomposure at the
disjointing and removing thereof, and because it is impossible such a mass of
the purest metal should be found with exiles in the wilderness. Each board had
two Exodus 26. 29.
tenons fastened in their silver sockets, which sockets some conceive made
fitchy, or picked, to be put into the earth; which we rather believe flat and
firm, standing fast on the surface of the ground, otherwise no need of silver
sockets if their bravery was all buried in the earth. These boards had bars
also (overlaid with gold) in the midst of them, Ibid. ver. 29.
(understand it not perforating their thickness, but) running along their
breadth in an even proportion through golden rings (as in our draught is
described) to make them the more portable.

15. The inside of the Tabernacle was covered with curious courtains
embroidered with Cherubims, The inside and roof thereof.
and a threefold roof (showing the Exodus 26. 14.
plentifulness of divine protection over the Church against all dangers)
covered the same. One of Goats-hair, (spun into cloth) another of Rams skins
died red, and a third of Badgers-skins; the latter no doubt had the fur upon
them, the lubricity of the hair thereof being excellent gutters and spouts to
shoot down the rain thereby.

16. But amongst all the materials in the Tabernacle none more frequently
mentioned then Shittim-wood, Three properties of Shittim-wood.
though learned men agree not, what it was, or where it grew. But, leaving them
to abound in their own sense, we will content our selves with three principal
properties of this wood. First, it was very durable, therefore usually
translated in the Greek (...), wood which never rotteth. Secondly, it was
portable, very light for carriage, else the Israelites coming out of Egypt,
would never have cumbered themselves, to have brought heavy lumber along,
seeing such shittim wood was not felled by them in the way, but Exodus 35. 24.
found with them, as the text does observe. Lastly, it was precious, used in
the midst of the most Utensils of the Tabernacle: Arc, and both the Altars,
typifying there in the humanity of Christ; in the brazen Altar of burnt
offering, resembling his satisfaction when Redeemer; and in the golden Altar of
Incense, representing his intercession as Mediator; retaining still his
[glorified] body about him in Act. 3. 21.
heaven.

17. Many will wonder, Shittim-wood within the Altar, why never fi^ed.
that this Exodus 27. 1.
Shittim-wood in the midst of the Altar for sacrifices (though plated over
with brass on each side) was never fired with the continual flames thereupon.
Some know to their sorrow how soon such rafters or joices are set on fire,
which by the ill contrivance of the Carpenter run under those hearths where
constant fires are kept. But we must know, that on the Altar the fire came down
from heaven, and only minded the dispatch of that message on which it was
sent; and as gunpowder (though ill comparing fire of heaven, and Ignis
tartareus.
fire of hell together) burns only upwards: so this celestial fire, as in
motion, so in operation, had its activity upwards toward heaven, whence it
derived the descent thereof.

18. Expect not here an enumeration (much less an exposition) of all the
Utensils of the Tabernacle, The Laver made of women's Lookingglasses.
most of them being formerly touched in Solomon's Temple. Only here a word of
the Laver, and Aarons solemn Pontificalls, because of their rare composition.
The former was made of the Exodus 38. 8.
looking-glasses of the women, many being much troubled herein, how so brickle
matter when broken could be made useful, and solidated for this service.
Indeed we have a tradition of one at Venice, who made glass malleable, but was
for his invention rewarded with death by the State (who knew full well that
they must break, if glasses were not broken) though this is listened unto as a
fable. But, to the difficulty in hand, it is merely grounded on a mistake, that
all Specula must needs be vitrea, that what renders the reflection of a face
cannot be but of glass. Whereas many other resplendent, though not transparent
bodies, do the same, as polished touch, jet, steel, and brass, the purest of
the last most probably being here intended. Surely such looking-glasses, which
severally were so clear, lost not their luster by being many of them melted
into the Laver, but (when polished again) retained their returning of
resemblances. But, whether the Priests (as some will have it) made use thereof
to discover all soiliness in them before they washed, as also after washing,
whether the same were sufficiently cleansed, we dare not define.

19. However, Female devotion.
commendable was the devotion of these women in bringing their glasses (dear
ornaments in their account) to Gods service. Oh that men would but part with
their superfluous, yea noxious glasses (such as might be spared, not only
without any hurt, but with much health to their souls, bodies, and estates) to
bestow them on pious uses! What monuments to Gods glory, and the good of
others, might therewith be erected?

20. We must not forget the Largely reckoned up Exodus 28. and methodically
ranked Levir. 8. 7, 8, 9.
eight ornaments of Aaron thus reckoned up. Aavons ^ight ornaments.
1. Linen breeches next his flesh. 2. A Coat of fine linen over them. 3.
Girded with an embroidered girdle. 4. Over which coat and girdle a robe all of
blew, with bells and Pomegranates. 5. Upon it the Ephod, on the shoulders
whereof two goodly Berill stones graven with the names of the Tribes of Israel.
6. In the Ephod the Breast Plate, and therein the Urim and Thummim. 7. On his
head a Mitre. 8. In the forefront whereof a plate of pure gold two fingers
broad, wherein was graven Holiness to the Lord. Say not, that the High Priest
was sweltred, being built so many stories high in his garments; seeing, if
pride be never a cold, when pleasing its own fancy; piety can never be too hot,
with what it wears in obedience to Gods commandment. The Priests hands and
feet, when entering into the Holy of Holies, were washed and bare, to show the
purity, simplicity, and sincerity of his actions, and conversation, especially
in the service of God.

21. In the making of these vestments we frequently meet with four essential
ingredients, Four principal ingredients of Sacerdotall ^^vestments.
Exodus 28. 5. 8. 15.
blew, purple, scarlet, and fine twined linen. Here Divest. Sac^r. lib. 3. ^.
5.
Ribera finds the four elements (though hardly put to it to make them all out)
fire in the color of scarlet; air of blew; earth in fine linen, because it
coming thence; water in the color of purple, because died with the liquour of
a fish from the sea: as if the High Priest was thus presented as ^upreme
Chaplain to the Lord of the Universe. Thus though taking in the whole world, in
my mind he leaves out the most material mystery intended therein; for, we may
behold the High Priest, when entering the Holy of Holies, representing Christ
himself under such colored clothes in a double capacity; First, as he stood
charged with the guilt of mankind, when The Lord Isa. 53. 6.
laid on him the iniquity of us all, having our Isa. 1. 18.
scarlet and crimson sins imputed unto him. Secondly, as he made satisfaction
for the same with his blood, scarlet, blew, and purple being several sanguine
colors, differing only in degrees, and the several setlings thereof.

22. What Urim and Thummim Vrim and Thummim.
were ((...) in the Septuagint, (...) in Aquila, doctrina and veritas in the
Vulgar, light and perfection, according to the interpretation of the Hebrew)
neither Jew nor Christian can tell; though the former (the blinder the bolder)
are as various, as confident in their conjectures. Some conceive it those very
two words, others the name Jehovah graven in the breast plate, others nothing
else but the twelve stones, resplendent with light and completed to perfection
with the Tribes names therein, and other some mysterious matter, not of man's
making but Gods giving to Moses. In a word, we shall never certainly know what
Urim, and Thummim were, until (as in the case of Ezra 2. 63.
Braz^lla^'s children) there stand up a Priest with Urim and Thummim to inform
us thereof.

23. Nor less is the variance amongst authors, how answers thereby were
returned to the Priests that consulted it, in behalf of others, whether such
designs should be undertaken, or not. Some conceive, that at such times, the
fair, fresh, and orient luster of the stones therein amoun^ed to the
a^^irmative, whilst their dim, dull, and dead color was interpreted negative.
Others conceive, that seeing the Tribes names therein contained all the Hebrew
letters and vowels, such characters discovered themselves by their sparkling,
which concurred to the spelling of a grant or denial, as here (imitating the
Hebrew in our English tongue) is described. Conceive such letters as we here
make Capita^^ appearing extraordinarily radiant on the Priests enquiry. And
also to avoid confusion, that sparkling first in time, which was to be read
first in place. Sardius. Reuben. Dun. ReUben. DaN. Lig^re. Topaz. Sin^con.
N^phtali. Sin On. NaPh T^li. Agate. Carbuncle. Levi. Gad. LEvi. G^d.
Amethyst. On a On a Emraud. Judah. Ash Er. I^udah. Asher. Beryl. Saphir.
Issachar. IsePh. Issachar. ^Oseph. O^yx. Diamond. ZebulOn. Benjamin. Zebulon.
Benjamin. Jasper.

GO UP, GO NOT UP.

But leaving these difficult trifles (beneath the state of the high priest,
good only for Acrostick-mongers, and Anagrammatists to pore upon) I conceive
rather, that (because sometimes the answer returned was prolix and encumbered
with numerous and important 1 Chr. 14. 14, 15.
circumstances, troublesome to be represented in such literal curiosities) it
was neither audible to the ear, nor legible to the eye, but by Rivet in Exodus
ca. 28. v. 13.
illuminating the understanding of the High Priest, inabling him to give a
satisfactory answer in all particulars, to the question propounded, whilst
consulting the Urim and Thummim as of divine institution, to invite the Spirit
of God upon him.

24. There needs no other argument to be alleged for the freeness, The speedy
finishing of the Tabernacle.
and forwardness of the Israelites in building the Tabernacle, then that the
same was fully finished in few months. For they came to the desert of Sinai in
the third Exodus 19. 1.
month after their coming out of Egypt, and all was ended before the Number. 10.
11.
twentieth day of the second month of the second year, when they removed from
Sinai to the Wilderness of Paran. So that not above eleven months were
expended on the whole fabric, whereas Solomon in building the Temple (though
confessed a far more stable, and stately structure) spend full 1 King. 6. 38.
seven years therein.

25. The Tabernacle thus finished, most methodicall was the marching and
pitching of the Tribes about it; and surely, that God who in his service
enjoined order under the Law, will not allow confusion under the Gospel.

See we here the Levites of Kohath, and the Reubenites, near neighbors on the
south of the Tabernacle. See Psa. 80. 2.
Hereupon it came to pass, that Korah the grandchild of Kohath the Levite,
conspired against Moses with Dathan and Abiram the sons of Number. 16. 1.
Reuben, the vicinity of their habitation affording them the convenience of
intercourse, and privacy together. And thus was the Tabernacle first put in its
posture, surrounded with the people on every side. Happy method, when in
matters of religion the Church guides the State by her counsel, whilst the
State guards the Church with her company.

26. This Tabernacle when first brought into the land of Canaan, The Tabernacle
Templizing.
was set up at Gilgat, (the Ark being often parted from it on several
occasions) thence removed to Shiloh where it staid a long time, thence to 1 Samuel 22.
Nob, thence to ^ib^on, and thence brought into Jerusalem, and laid up with the
vessels thereof in the 2 Chr. 5. 5.
Temple. The Rabbis conceive that during the abode thereof at Shiloh, the
Tabernacle began to Templize, getting walls (though without a roof) round about
it, chiefly because about that time it is Namely, 1 Samuel 1. 9. and 2 Samuel 22.
7. and Psalm. 19. 3.
thrice termed a Temple. But I rather conceive, that Temple in those places is
taken in a large acception, in which notion Anti. Iud, lib. 3. cap. 4.
Josephus terms it (...), an ambulatory, or portable Temple. Or else it is so
styled by way of Prolepsis, and well might David (twice in the forementioned
places) call the Tabernacle a Temple, who endeavored to make it so, both in his
intention, and vast preparation for the same. But enough of this subject, for
as Moses by his Exodus 36. 6.
prohibition stopped the bounty of the people bringing too much to the making
of the Tabernacle: so must we here stint our discourse as swelling too large in
the description thereof. Only I add, that though at the first free
will-offerings alone were used, at the making of the Tabernacle, (none being
necessitated to contribute thereunto) yet afterward for the maintenance
thereof, and the service therein, men were bound to a certain sum to be paid
Deuteronomy. 16. 16.
thrice a year. God foreseeing that their first forwardness would not always
continue, but cool by degrees, and need to be quickened by commands, as men now
adays must be legally rated to repair those Churches which at first so franckly
were erected, and endowed by the liberality and devotion of our Ancestors.

Here the Map of Egypt is to be inserted.



THE DESCRIPTION OF EGYPT. CHAP. V.
1.EGYPT was by the Hebrews called Mizraim (and by the Arabians, The names and
bounds of Egypt.
Mesre, at this day) from Genesis 10. 6.
Mizraim the second son of Cham, first inhabitant thereof. It was anciently
called (...), by the most skillful of the Egyptian Priests, as Plutarch Lib. de
I^ide and Osyride.
observes, no doubt from Cham the second son of Noah: as also it was termed
Hammois (a name also general to Libya, yea to all Africa) being in the same
sound and sense styled the Land Psalm. 105. 23.
of Ham by the Psalmist. It had the Mediterranean sea on the north, Cyrene on
the west, Ethiopia (the country of Queen Act. 8. 27.
Candace) on the south, the Red Sea on the east, with a small Isthmus of land
(not past seventy miles over) betwixt it and the Mediterranean. Many Princes
with as great expense as small success, have often attempted with their Pioneers
to pierce through this slender neck of ground, so to join the two seas
together, for the greater convenience of traffic. It seems heaven blasted
their designs, as an incroachment on the divine Prerogative, it being only
placed in Gods power to give the Word of Command to the Ocean, Hither shall
thou Job 38. 11.
come, but no farther. And if it be dishonesty to Pro. 22. 28.
remove Land-markes of men's fixing, how high presumption is it to alter so
ancient and solemn water-bounds of Gods own appointing?

2. The Egyptians are low in stature, The complexions and conditions of the
Egyptians.
of firm and well compacted bodies, swarthy and tawny complexions. Hereupon
Abraham coming into Egypt said to Sarah his wife, Behold NOW, I know that thou
art Genesis 12. 11.
a fair woman to look upon. Not that being so many years married, he had
hitherto lived in ignorance of her beauty, and now took first notice thereof,
but (as Stars shine brightest in the night) so her fairness was now more
conspicuous amongst the black faces of the Egyptians. Their wits anciently were
very subtle and searching, esteemed the first inventers of Arithmetic,
Music, and by reason of the perpetual serenity of the air, they found out
the course of the Sun and Stars, first dividing Time into Months, and Years.
The wisdom of the 1 King. 4. 20. and Act. 7. 22.
Egyptians, is eminent in Scripture, much given to Magic, and Divination, yea
2 Timothy 3. 8.
Iannes and Iambres the Inchanters have even to this day some in Egypt, heirs
to their mysterious impieties. As for the wandering Gypsies, which now a days
pretend to the telling of Fortunes, their best cunning generally is the
credulity of others, oft-times not seeing how near their own feet are to the
stocks, and backs to the whipping-post. Yea commonly they are counterfeites,
coming no more from Egypt, then the dissembling Gibeonites did from a far Josh.
9. 6.
Country, and perchance are next neighbors unto us.

3. A most pleasant Country Egypt was, The pleasure and profit of Egypt.
and is. For when the holy Spirit intended to commend the sweet situation of
the plain of Jordan (before it was turned for the sins of the people into a
stinking lake) he describes it to be well watered every where, even as the
Garden of the Lord, like the Genesis 13. 10.
land of Egypt. Nor was the profit less then the pleasure thereof, affording
plenty of the best Wheat, Barley, Rice, and all other grain; insomuch that this
Land was generally horreum Romani imperii, the Barn or Granary of the Roman
Empire. Indeed I find the same title given also to the Island of Sicily. And
no wonder; for the Roman Empire being so vast and expensive an housekeeper,
might well make use of two Barnes for her provision. However I dare boldly say,
that though Sicily was the nearer, Egypt was the bigger and better Barn, and
yielded greatest store of corn in time of scarcity.

4. Flax also was a stable commodity of Egypt, Egyptian Flax.
much whereof at this day is imported and used in England. Of this the finest
linen in the world was woven. The Harlot could tell the silly young man, she
sought to inveigle, I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with
carved works, and fine Prove. 7. 10.
linen of Egypt, as commonly the worst of women, get the best of wares, to
please their luxury. As for the making of this linen cloth, it will hardly be
believed, what Pomponius Mela has reported, that the ancient Egyptians used to
have their men keep home and spin, while their women managed their greater
businesses abroad. But surely where the man puts his hand to the spindle, and
the woman to the plough, there the whole family will be ill clad, and worse fed.

5. Horses of the best kind were very plentiful in Egypt. Egyptian horses
excellent.
Those were a prohibited commodity, forbidden by Gods law to be brought by
great numbers into Israel, whose King was charged, Deuteronomy. 17. 16.
Not to multiply horses to himself, nor to cause the people to return into
Egypt; partly, lest whilst they went thither to course horses, they should
change religions, and fall into love with Egyptian Idolatry; partly, lest they
should place too much confidence in the legs of horses; or arm of flesh, whom
God would have immediately to depend on his own protection.

6. Paper most useful for intercourse, anciently grew in Egypt alone, Paper
first grew in Egypt.
being a sedgy weed on the rivers side, which they divided into thin flakes,
whereinto it naturally parts, then laying them on a table and moistening them
with the glutinous water of the River, they pressed them together, and so dried
them in the Sun. God foretelling his punishments on Isa. 197.
Egypt, threatens that The paper reeds of the brooks, by the mouth of the
brooks, and every thing sown by the brooks, shall wither, be driven away, and
be no more.

7. Mummy must not be forgotten, Mummy how made.
being man's flesh, at the first embalmed for Genesis 50. 3.
forty days together, and afterward for many years buried, in that hot and
sandy Country. Yet all art cannot finally avoid the curse pronounced on
mankind, Genesis 3. 19.
Dust thou art, and to dust thou must return, so that if left alone, these
corpses of themselves moulder to ashes. O^herwise such cost and curiosity used
for their longer preservation, accidentally occasioneth their speedier
destruction; such bodies being taken up out of their graves, bought and brought
into foreign Countries for medicinal uses. What, is there such a dearth of
drugs? such a famine of Physic in nature, that (as in the 2 King* 6. 28.
siege of Samaria) one man must feed on another? However, whilst some
squeamish stomachs make faces to feed on the dead, perhaps their hard hearts at
the same time, Psalm. 14. 4.
Eat up the living as if they were dead, either by fraudulent contracts or
forcible oppressions.

8. But these grand commodities of Egypt, The inconveniences of Egypt.
were also allaied with some great inconveniences, many noxious and venomous
creatures swarming therein. The Prophet Isa. ^0. 6.
called it, the land from whence come the young and old Lion, the Viper and the
Viper and the fiery-flying Serpent. This, though mystically meant of the Kings
of Egypt, their Lion-like antipathy and cruelty to Israel (styled also Serpents
for their craft; flying, for the swift marching of their Armies, winged on
horse-backs; fiery, for the fierceness and heat of their fury) yet was it also
literally true, of plenty of such beasts in Egypt, where that moist and hot
Country was both the pregnant mother to breed, and tender nurse to feed them
in great abundance. Especially in the western deserts, toward Cyrene, an
hideous, and dismal place: and therefore the Tobit. 8. 3.
Author of the book of Tobit, fitted it with a meet inhabitant, banishing
thither, and binding there, Asmodeus the evil spirit, in the utmost parts of
Egypt.

9. Rain is very rare in this land Rain rare in Egypt.
(and that only in winter) the windows of heaven here having no casements, and
the Egyptians supplying the want of rain, by making gutters out of the river of
Nilus into all their grounds and gardens. God therefore in this respect
prefers the land of Canaan before this Country, Deuteronomy. 11. 10.
For the land (says he) whither thou go to possess it, is not as the land
of Egypt, from whence ye came, where thou sowedst thy seed, and watered it with
thy feet; as a garden of Herbs. But the land whither thou go to possess it,
is a land of mountains and valleys, and drinks water of the rain of heaven.
Surely as it is more honor to receive a boon immediately from the hand of a
Prince, then in an indirect line, from him, by his servants; so more peculiar
was the favor of God to the Jews, and the familiarity of the Jews with God,
having their land watered from heaven, whilst the Egyptians looked not upward
as men, but downwards as beasts, on that moisture which constantly procured the
fruitfulness of their Country. But this pleased them best: as carnal souls
had rather be at a certainty of plenty from Nature, then at an uncertainty
thereof, even from the God of Nature himself. However they are much mistaken,
who have confidently reported that it never raineth in Egypt; seeing I have
been informed the contrary, by a right worshipful Sir william Paston of Oxbint
in N^rfolk.
Person, and well accomplished traveller, a great Patron and bountiful
promoter of my present studies; an eyewitness of much and violent rain at
Grand-Cairo in Egypt, but such as presaged a great mortality, which ensued not
long after.

10. The River of Nile is the happy Genius of the Egyptian soil, called in
Scripture Nachal Mitzraim, or the river of Egypt, as a most learned Author
has V^ssius de Idololatria. lib 2. cap. 74.
observed. Yea from this Nachal he clearly derived the name of Nilus with
excellent proportion. For as from Bahal Baal Beel Bell (...) is deduced. so
Nachal Naal Neel Neil (...) And to make the matter more plain, Pomponius Lib.
5. c. 10.
Mela reports, that the fountain of Nilus is called Nachul by the Ethiopians.
A river wherein nature has observed an even tenor of admirableness, so that
the birth, the life, and the death thereof, I mean the fountain, flowing, and
fall of the river, are equally composed of a concatenation of wonders. 1
Fountain. The particular place thereof being never as yet known certainly. So
that (as the Mat. 13. 26.
Tares in the Gospel, were beheld, not when sown, but when grown) Nilus
appears even at the first in a full stream and fair channel. 2 Flowing: which
constantly begins with the rising Sun on the seventeenth of June, swelling
by degrees until it mount sometimes twenty four Cubits, and that the uttermost
(for anciently sixteen was the highest it attained unto:) and answerable to the
increase of this river is the plenty of scarcity of the following year. Nor
does this overflowing of Nile, give only wealth, but also health to Egypt. For
if five hundred chance to dye in a day in Cairo of the plague (a G. Sandys
Trav. p. 97.
mortality not rare in so populous a place, where the sound keep company with
the sick, holding death fatal, and to avoid it irreligion) not one does die
the day following. 3 Fall. For at the influx thereof into the sea, the fresh
water keeps together, and contrary to other rivers, changes the color of the
salt* far Idem. p. 94.
farther into the sea then the shore from thence can be discerned.
Nor less wonderful are the creatures in and about this river, the bird
Trochilus, the Ichneumon, or Rat of Nilus; the Crocodiles and River-horses,
(though as big as a cow, and proportioned as a Idem. pa. 99.
swine) for all which we send the Reader for his better information to that
modern learned Philosopher, Windeline de ad^ira. Nili.
who has made a just tract thereof. Only we will add, that not more cures are
prescribed for the toothache, then causes by several Authors assigned for the
flowing of Nilus, nor are the one farther from giving the body ease, then the
other the mind satisfaction.

11. With the flowing of the River, The Egyptians proud of Nilus
rose also the Pride of the Egyptians, exceeding all bounds and banks of
modesty and moderation, defying Nature it self, because (as Isocrates says)
they had both drought and moisture in their own dispositions. And such their
land is described by the Lu^an. l. 8.
Poet: Terra suis contenta bonis; non indiga mercis,
Aut Iovis, in solo tanta est fiducia Nilo.
A land content with homebred ware,
For foreign wealth she does not care,
Or whether heavens do frown or smile,
Her confidence is all in Nile.
Yea so impudent is the Egyptian arrogance herein, that whereas Nilus makes
Egypt and God made both, they falsely boast Ezekiel. 29. 3.
once and Ezekiel. 29. 9.
again in the Prophet, My river is mine own, and I have made it for my self;
whereupon God to clear his own property and right to the creature, threatens
to show his judgments on that river, Ezekiel. 29. 10.
from the tower of Syen even unto the border of Ethiopia.

12. Nilus venteth it self into the Mediterranean sea, with seven mouths,
nothing being more famous in humane poetry and prose then this septemfluous
river. The holy spirit takes notice of the same number, threatening utterly to
destroy the tongue of the Ethiopian Sea, when with his mighty wind he shall
shake his hands over the river, and shall smite it in the seven streams, and
make men go over dry-shod: Isa. 11. ^5.
which words admit of several interpretations. 1 The strength of Egypt is
hereby mystically meant, whose kingdom was afterward destroyed, and the
Country thereof conquered and subdued to the Persian Monarchy. 2 It probably
was literally performed, when Nilus by ominous accident failed to overflow (as
in the tenth and eleventh year of Cleopatra) and his streams became low, and
shallow thereupon. 3. The ancient and original channels thereof are now in time
obstructed, new conveyances succeeding in their place.
An alteration elsewhere obvious. In the Isle of Elie (Englands Egypt for the
flatness, moistness, and fruitfulness thereof) how are the old, and once
plentiful streams of Vide Camdens Brit. in Cambr. sh^re.
Nine and Welland impoverished, by artificial derivations thereof, into the
Leam, the old and new Podick, and other byditches; made, to drive mills, to
drain meadows; fence fields, bear boats, and other private conveniences? Rivers
having as little certainty to possess their proper channels, as men their
houses, ancient families being daily outed by other of later extraction.

13. However, Various numbering of the streams of Nilus.
though the seven streams of Nilus pass current in most mouths, yet they are
reckoned up, both over and under that number, by authors of excellent credit.
Ortelius and Maginus, in their Maps of Egypt, make them eleven. Hondius in his
Map of Europe (where Nilus is brought in by the by) ten. Ptolemy this
Countreyman, in his description thereof, nine. The foresaid Hondius, in his Map
of Africa, eight. Herodotus In Euterpe.
(with whom the Isa. 1^. 15.
Scripture agrees) seven. Gulielmus Tyrius, and Bellonius, four. Mr. Trav. pa.
94.
Sandys, but two navigable branches extant in our age.
This various reckoning, exceeding seven, arises, because anciently, some
only counted the grand and solemn ostiaries of Nilus (and these, which they be
at this day, let such enquire which are of the Commission of Sewers amongst the
Egyptians) whiles others cast all his chanelets (rather cuts then courses) into
the number. Since, they fall short, either choked up, or commixed, yet still
maintain in men's talk the reputation of seven. For, when a natural, or noted
number is once up in the market, small occasional variations thereof, more or
less, can never beat it down in common discourse. Thus, Thomas is termed one of
the John 20. 24*
twelve, when there were but eleven, after the self-execution of Judas, and
before the election of Matthias. In a word, the channels of Nilus, daily
decreased in number, because (as pinked or slashed clothes have the fewer holes
the longer they are worn) so his streams fret one into another; especially, the
ground being so soft and tender which lies betwixt them.

14. To come now to the particular description of Egypt; The Isle of Dogs.
Nilus flowing out of Ethiopia, compassed an Island called the Isle of See
Ortelius and Mercators old Maps.
Dogs; but, why so named, I know as little, as why those rich meadows lying
betwixt London and Black-wall, are called after the same name, though better
deserving to be termed the Isle of Oxen, from the fat cattle feeding therein.
But, seeing no mention of this, or the next Island (which Nilus makes) in
Scripture, we pass them by, confining our ensuing discourse to Gods Word alone;
save only, that we will take leave to survey the Pyramides, because Anti. Iud.
li. 2 K^^. ^.
Josephus (though erroneously) conceives them built by the Israelites, when
here living in bondage.

15. They stand not far from the western bank of the river, Vanity in building
the Pyramids.
and are the younger brethren of the Tower of Babel, built (but with better
success, because finished) on the same consideration, by the Egyptian Kings, to
Genesis 11. 4.
make them a name. Yet, who erected them, Greeks agree ill with themselves, and
worse with the Arabian authors, so that Pliny Not. hist. li. 36. cap. 12.
gravely observes it a just punishment on the vanity of these ^ounders, that
they are forgotten. Indeed, in the Criticisme of credit, the Artisans cunning
might cry halfes in honor, with the Kings cost in this structure; but, both
the one and the other, are equally buried in silence, so that the most skillful
Egyptian Antiquary cannot out of these Hieroglyphics of pomp and pride, read
the name of either. Whilst the poor midwives, who contrary to Pharaohs command
preserved the Hebrews children, are to this day remembered by their names,
Shiphrah Exodus 1. 15.
and Puah. Thus memories founded on the rock of virtue, stand firm, and fast;
when they quickly fall, built on the foundered bottom of affected
magnificence. Indeed, these Pyramides are of stupendous vastness, and may be
termed Arts mountains, though mole-hills, yea, but warts, if compared to those
which Nature has produced. So ridiculous is the unequal contest in point of
bulk, betwixt their several workmanships, that Natures pismires may be said to
exceed Arts elephants.

16. Some to excuse the pride of these builders, Intended for Sepulchers.
resolve their design on a point of policy, only to busy their people, to
prevent in them laziness and luxury, (the mother of mutinies) knowing, so rich
a soil would invite them to riot, if out of employment. But (whatever was
their principal project) their secundary end intended such structures for
sepulchers, where the builders bodies lay, not interred, but immured, with all
imaginable cost bestowed upon them. For, the Egyptians fondly conceived
(Reader, pity them, and praise God that thou are better informed) that the soul
even after death, like a grateful guest, dwelt in the body so long, as the
same was kept swept and garnished, but finally forsook it, and sought out a new
body, if once the corpse were either carelessly neglected, or dispightfully
abused; and therefore to woo the soul to constant residence in their bodies
(at least wise to give it no wilful distaste, or cause of alienation) they
were so prodigiously expensive, both in imbalming their dead, and erecting
stately places for their monuments.

17. The long lasting of these Pyramids, Their long lasting.
is not the least of admiration belonging unto them. They were born the first,
and do live the last, of all the seven wonders in the world. Strange, that in
three thousand years and upwards, no avaritious Prince was found to destroy
them, to make profit of their Marble, and rich materials; no humorous, or
spightfull Prince offered to overthrow them, merely to get a greater name for
his peevishness in confounding, then their pride in first founding them; No
Zelote-reformer (whilst Egypt was Christian) demolished them under the notion
of Pagan monuments. But, surviving such casualties, strange, that after so long
continuance, they have not fallen like Copy-holds, into the hand of the Grand
Signeur (as Lord of the Manor) for want of repairing. Yea, at the present, they
are rather ancient, then ruinous; and, though weather-beaten in their tops,
have lively looks under a gray head, likely to abide these many years in the
same condition, as being too great for any throat to swallow whole, and too
hard for any teeth to bite asunder.

18. We have been the longer hereon, because Josephus, Not built by the
Israelites.
as is aforesaid, makes the Israelites, when enslaved in Egypt, against their
wills, the builders of their Pyramids; others conceive them Pharaohs magazines;
so called, not, (...) from fire, ascending in a narrowing shape, but (...) from
wheat, as used for granaries, or storehouses, where corn was deposited: both
alike improbable, for 1 They afford no concavity of considerable receipt for
such purpose. 2 Their form (of all least capable) is useless for such intents,
all the spire being to loss. 3 The Israelites built with Exodus 5. 8.
b^icks, whereas these are made of Marble.
But for farther satisfaction of the Reader herein, I refer him to that learned
M. John Greaves in his Pyramidographia.
Traveller, who has made an excellent tract of his own observations herein.

19. However, The miserable slavery of the Hebrews in Egypt.
here we may take occasion, to mention the miserable condition of the
Israelites in Egypt, during which time, woeful their slavery, if we consider,
the 1 Long continuance thereof, two Four hundred and thirty years if accounted
from Isaac's birth Exodus 12. 41.
hundred and odd years in the latitude, and fourscore (from the birth of
Moses) in the Paroxysme of their bondage. 2 Deep misery, insomuch that their
lives Exodus 1. 14.
were made bitter unto them. 3 Broad extent, none exempted, no, not Moses and
Aaron; Get you unto your Exodus 5. 4.
burdens. Say not, that the officers of Israel, who only oversaw the rest,
had an easy place of it; for, they Exodus 5. 14.
were beaten, because others under them did not their impossible task: as if
what was wanting in the tale of the peoples bricks, must be made up in blows on
their backs, who were set to oversee them.
Only, to give the Egyptians their due, they gave the Israelites their belly
full, (as of work, so) of Exodus 16. 3.
food: which proceeded, not so much from their pity, as their policy; (Cariers
are so merciful to their horses, meat them well, to prevent their trying) and
the plenty of the land, affording at cheap prices abundance of provisions.

20. Somewhat north of the aforesaid Pyramids, Memphis the ancient Metropolis
of Egypt.
on the same side of Nilus, stood the great City of Memphis, anciently the
Metropolis of Egypt, where their Kings kept their Courts, and therefore it is
probable here Joseph was bought, and beloved by Potiphar, here afterward
accused and imprisoned unjustly, favored by the jailer, advanced by Pharaoh,
whose dreams he expounded: in a word, likely it is, that all those eminent
passages, betwixt him, and his brethren, were transacted in this City. Some
hundred years after, the frequent addresses of Moses and Aaron to another
Pharaoh, in the behalf of the Israelites, were performed in the same place; and
here, or hereabouts the ten Egyptian plagues were first inflicted, in manner
and order ensuing. 1 All the water (formerly the merciless executioner of the
Jewish infants) was for seven days turned into blood, The ten plagues of Egypt.
whereby the fish dyed, and the river stank, so that the Exodus 7. 21.
Egyptians could not drink of the water thereof. Water, which otherwise in it
self, was most sweet and delicious, witness the answer of Pescentius Niger unto
his murmuring soldiers, What? crave you wine, and have Nilus to drink of? The
transubstantiation of this element into blood, extended over all the streams,
rivers, ponds, and pooles in Egypt, and the sea only was excepted, from whence
(or from pits newly Exodus 7. 2^*
dug in the ground) the Magicians might fetch their water, which in
imitatition of Moses, quoad similitudinem, if not veritatem, they also turned
into blood. 2 Frogs, so plentiful that they covered the land, and so
presumptuous they came into Pharaohs Exodus 8. 3.
Bedchamber, (though never sworn his Grooms in ordinary attendance) yea, they
crept into the very ovens (as if Salamanders rather then frogs) and no private
place was privileged from their unwelcome company. But the Magicians made the
like in show, if not in substance, the Devil much delighting in their
monstrous shape, for we find in Revel. 16. 13.
Scripture, Three unclean spirits like frogs coming out of the mouth of the
Dragon. 3 Lice, Insects, with so many lineaments in a little compass, that the
eyes of the Magicians could not see, much less imitate them, so that they were
forced to confess it Exodus 8. 19.
the finger of God. But, whether thus beaten out of distance, they here left
off their race of emulation with Moses, or still continued it, it is hard to
determine. 4 Flies, Exodus 8. 21.
properly waspes, or hornets, armed with stings, wherewith they tormented the
people. Surely, they were more then ordinary flies, because they brought
Pharaoh to proffer to Moses, a partial and conditional departure of the
people. 5 A general Murrain, insomuch that Exodus 9. 6.
all the cattle of Egypt dyed. Some will object, If this was a total
destruction of all the beasts in the land, how came it to pass, that some
afterward were killed by Exodus 9. 25.
the hail, and after that, in the tenth plague, the firstborn Exodus 13. 15.
of beasts were destroyed by the Angel? But it is answered, All, here is taken
communiter, non universaliter, for the greater, and most considerable number.
Or else, the Egyptians in the interim (some distance of time being betwixt the
several plagues, and a year from the first to the last) furnished themselves
afresh with new supply of cattle from foreign Countries, which second stock was
also afterward destroyed. So vain is it, for men to outvie Gods routings, with
their recruitings; his desolations, with their replantations; and no new store,
without a new heart, can hold out against his punishments. 6 Boils, and Blains,
so general that they were on the Exodus 9. 11.
Magicians themselves (Hell has no guard against Heavens blows) who therefore
could not stand before Moses. Let them now not try to make, but unmake such
boils, if they can. But here it is remarkable, that as the wife Genesis 39. 14.
of Potiphar, when she had tempted Joseph to uncleanness, cunningly changed her
note, and complained on him for offering violence unto her: so in after-ages,
the Egyptian Authors slanderously retorted these loathsome diseases on the
Israelites. From whose false reports, humane writers both Greek and Latin (as
See the books of Josephus against him.
Appion, Diodorus Siculus, Trogus Instin. Hist. lib.
Pompeius and Tacitus) have fetched their relations, how the Jews being
shamefully afflicted with scabs and ulcers, were therefore driven out of Egypt
(for fear of infecting others) by the inhabitants thereof. 7 Thunder, fire and
hail, consuming all men and beasts abiding in the field, together with the flax
which was bolled, and barley then in Exodus 9. 32.
^are, whilst the wheat was yet under ground: a thing preposterous in our
English, but methodicall in the Egyptian harvest. 8 Grasshoppers, or locusts,
which devoured the reversion of grass and green herbs, till the verdant earth
was sabled, and the surface of the land was Exodus 10. 15.
darkened with their multitudes. 9 Positive and palpable darkness for three
days, not so much from the suspension of the sunbeams, or detention of the
Egyptians eyes, as condensation of the air with thick clouds, probably also
extinguishing all fire, and artificial lights, as candles go out in a damp.
The Author of the book Wisd. 17. 4.
of Wisdom adds, that the Egyptians during that time, were frighted with
terrible sounds, with sad shapes and apparitions, which is more then the
Scripture affirms, though we deny not, but that darkness is the pliable wax,
whereof a guilty fancy may mould to it self any frightfull impressions. Thus
all the land of Egypt was beforehand hung with mourning, against the death of
her people, and all the Egyptians were for three days imprisoned in their
places, not moving thence, so great was the darkness. Whilst the Israelites,
though in the same Climate with them, were in effect their Antipodes, it being
day and summer with the one, when night and winter with the other. 10 The
firstborn Exodus 12. 29.
of man and beast were slain by the destroying Angel all over Egypt. Here if
any object, that the plague could not be general, because probably in so large
a Country some childless family could not afford a firstborn: Saint Augustine
answers, that God in his providence so ordered, that every house yielded a fit
object for his justice. And seeing Pharaoh their Sovereign was raised on set
purpose for God to ruin, no absurdity to conceive, that his subjects were made
fruitful on design, that they might be deprived of their firstborn. However,
grant it only in most families, never were more heirs killed and made in one
night. Yet the younger brethren could not brag of the lands they got by this
accident, fearing for the present, lest their own turn was next, and many of
them (no doubt) found their deaths few days after in the Red Sea.
Observe in all these the variety of Gods judgments, no one twice used, always
inflicting fresh punishments. God is said to be clothed Psalm. 93 ^.
with strength, and here like a Prince of such power, he appeared ten several
times in new suits, so plentiful is his wardrobe, and such the diversity of
his judgments. Indeed, he could have made any one of these miracles, effectual
for his peoples deliverance, but was pleased to make use of them all, so to
prove his peoples patience, manifest his own power, render Pharaoh the more
inexcusable.

21. A gradation also appears in his proceedings, The gradation in Go^s
judgments.
so that his heaviest judgments were reserved to the last, showing first
harmeless miracles (only to raise wonder and seal his servants Commission)
when Moses his rod was turned into a Serpent, and vice versa; and afterward
sending Punishments, Noisome, Frogs about Lice upon
men. Painful, Flies Bo^ls
within their skins flesh.
Deadly, Murrain, Hail, Grasshoppers etc. to Plants, destroying man's Meat, in
grain. Drink, in Psalm. 78. 47.
Vines. Clothing, in flax and ^emp.
Beasts, for Burden, Camels, Asses. Food, Oxen, Sheep.
Men Some Exodus 9. 19. and 25.
refractary folk in the field. All the (...)-born.


In the eight first plagues, God by the mouth of Moses, gave solemn notice to
Pharaoh, how, and when he would send them, but in the last two surprised him on
a sudden. After warning often given, and neglected, expect no farther caution,
but present confusion.

22. To return to the City of Memphis, Memphis, or Noph threatened in Scripture*
by which name it is but once called in Scripture, namely Hosea 9. 6. being
otherwise usually termed Noph in Holy writ. Diverse Prophets have reproofs of,
and comminations against this proud and profane City. Isaiah 19. 13. The
Princes of Noph are deceived. Jeremy 46. 19. Noph shall be wast, and desolate
without an inhabitant. Ezekiel 30. 13. Noph shall have distresses daily.
Can the walls of that City stand long safe, against which so great bullets are
discharged? These threatenings took slow but sure effect, and at this day it is
justly become a desolation. For, seeing all Egypt bare an implacable antipathy
to the people of Israel, it may well be presumed, that Memphis the metropolis
of the kingdom, as in wealth, so in wickedness exceeded other Cities.

23. Somewhat north of Memphis Nilus divides it self into two main streams
(besides some smaller betwixt them) thereby shaping a triangular Country, No,
or Alexandria.
not unlike a D Delta in the form thereof. Of these the more western falls
into the Mediterranean, at the ancient city of No, afterward called
Alexandria. A place, which principally prided it self in its populousness ( the
Ier. 46. 29. and Ezekiel. 30. 15.
multitude of No, often mentioned in Scripture) and in the advantageous
situation thereof, both to get, and keep wealth, being environed with water.
But the greatness of this City only made it the fairer mark for divine
justice, which (notwithstanding the watery station thereof) needed neither
bridge, ford, nor ^erry, at pleasure to waft it self over into it. How
afterward this City was humbled, take it from the pen of the Prophet Nahum 3.
8.
, who speaking to Niniveh (though an exceeding great City Jonah 3. 3.
of three days journey) seems to equalize, if not prefer No for bigness above
it; Art thou better then populous No, that was situate among the rivers, that
had the waters round about it, whose rampart was the sea, and her wall was from
the sea, Ethiopia and Egypt was her strength, and it was Infinite, Put and
Lubim were thy helpers. Yet was she carried away, she went into captivity, her
young men also were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets: and they
cast lots for honorable men, and all her great men were bound in chains. It
will hardly appear elsewhere in Scripture, that Infiniteness is attributed to
any created greatness, and here we see what became of it, so that the ruins of
No may have this Epitaph written upon them, Hic jacet finis infiniti.

24. Beth-shem^sh where Christ is said to have lived.
The estern stream of Nilus from the east receives the river Trajanus, on the
south side whereof stood the City On (Onii in Ptolemaeus) whereof Potipherah
was Prince or Priest, whose daughter Asenath Genesis 41. 50.
Joseph took to wife. Aven is hard by, a City, against which Ezekiel. 30. 17.
Ezekiel prophesied, and by some is made the same with Heliopolis. This
Heliopolis, or Bethshemesh, is generally conceived the place (though not named
in Scripture) where our Savior (before he could go, forced to fly Mat. 2. 13.
from the fury of Herod) being a babe abode with his parents. What he did here
(besides sucking of his mothers breast) is not recorded in the Gospel; though
Athanasius lib. de Incarn. Verbi.
one presumes to tell us, how the Egyptian Idols, at his entering into the land,
felt a shaking ague, and fell down in homage to him, as once Dagon to the Ark.
Sozom. Historia. lib. 5. ca. 21.
Another relates, how this infant sat under a great tree, which out of
dutifulness bowed down to him, because his short arms could not reach the
branches thereof. Burchar. in descrip. Ter. s^nc. par. 2. cap. 4.
A third reports of a fountain betwixt Heliopolis and Babylon, purified to a
medicinal virtue, from the foulness of the Babes clothes washed by his mother
therein. All which Non credimus, quia non legimus. Thus Authors conceiving it
not to stand with the state of Christ to live obscurely in Egypt, furnish him
with feigned miracles to make him more illustrious, and therein mark not the
main intent of Divine Providence. For, in this clandestine flight of his Son,
God intended not to present him in a glorious appearance, but to lessen,
humble, and empty him, so that his poverty in it self considered was a rich
miracle, especially seeing we are stayed by his flight, and brought home by his
banishment. Besides, the Ioh. 2. 11.
Scripture expressly terms his turning of water into wine at Cana in Galilee,
the beginning of his miracles.

25. The precise time of Christ's residence in Egypt is not set down, The time
of Christ's abode in Egypt.
but surely his stay here was not so long, as to tanne the Virgin Mary, and dye
her complexion into a Black-more, as she is presented in her Chapel of
Lauretta. I deny not, but the purest beauties are soonest subject to
sunburning, but such a face better became Christ's Spouse, then his mother,
C^nt. 1. 5.
I am black, but comely, o ye daughters of Jerusalem. Nor should I much wonder
at the color in her face, if only the fancy of a libertine Painter, had not
so many learned men made her picture the object of their adoration. Yet the
darkness of her face here, is as avouchable, as the brightness of her clothes
elsewhere, glistering with gold, and rich stuff (some pretended relics
whereof at Paris, the finer they are, the falser they are) better beseeming her
ancient royal extraction, then her husbands present poor and painful
condition. Yet such gorgeous apparel was not so much above her means, as such
garish attire (wherewith some Painters do dress her) was against the modesty
of that ever blessed Virgin. But, pardon our digression, and we return to o^r
matter.

26. Just at the confluence of Trajanus and Nilus, Babylon a City in Egypt.
stood the once famous City of Babylon, though in antiquity, greatness, and
strength, far inferior to a City of the same name in Chaldea. It is not yet
decided, which of these two Saint Peter intended; when writing, The 1 Pet. 5.
13.
Church which is at Babylon elected together with you saluteth you, and so does
Marcus my Son. Protestant Divines generally interpret this of the great
Chaldean Babylon, where more Jews dwelt, then in any one place which was without
the land of Palestine, and therefore probable that Saint Peter, being the
Apostle Gal. 2. 7.
of the Circumcision, might sometimes reside there, yet seeing Marcus is
mentioned in the same verse, who is notoriously known to have lived in this
land (and once to have been Patriarch of Alexandria) why might not this our
Egyptian Babylon, be here meant by the Apostle? But Popish writers are so fond
to have Saint Peter at Rome, that here they will have Rome mystically to be
termed Babylon. Good luck have she with her honor; always provided, that if
Rome will be Babylon in this Epistle, to gain Peter's presence; she shall be
Babylon in the Revelation, on whom those plagues and punishments are denounced.
But, such as plead her heir-apparent to the former, endeavor to cut off the
entail, that the latter may not descend upon her.

27. To return to the eastern stream of Nilus, Jeremy forced into Egypt.
which runs through the land of Pathros. Into which the remnant of the
Isra^lites, left by the King of Babylon, returned under the conduct of Iohanan
the son of Kareah, contrary to Gods flat Jer. 42. 14.
command by the mouth of Jeremiah. They took also him, and Jer. 43. 6.
Baruch the scribe (pity to part them, but that the mouth and ^and should go
together) no doubt against their consents, and brought them down hither into
the land of Egypt, partly out of policy (though they would cast away their
counsel) to wear their [forced] company to countenance their design; and part
out of despite, that if (according to their prediction) any evil betided
them, they also might be joint-sufferers therein. Both of them, (nothing
appearing to the contrary) dyed here, not finding their corpse, like Exodus 13.
19.
Joseph's, carried back in a Coffin into their own country. It matters not
though our bodies be bestowed in the earthly Egypt, so our souls be translated
to the heavenly Canaan.

28. Many were the prophecies of Jeremy during his abode in this land.
Prophecyeth Pharaohs d^struction.
Amongst others, that, when he solemnly denounced the ruin of Egypt. For he
was commanded Jer. 43. 9.
to take stones, and hide them in the clay in the brick-kill, which is at the
entry of Pharaohs ^ouse in Tahpanhes, (understand it some competent distance
thence, otherwise such a shop of smoke was but a bad Preface to a Kings Palace)
and did foretell that Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, should in process of
time, set his throne, and spread his royal pavillion on those very stones when
he should conquer Egypt, which no doubt came to pass accordingly. A little more
northernly this western stream of Nile parts it self into two channels. One
falling into the Mediterranean at Zoan, a City built Number. 13. 32.
seven years after Hebron in the land of Canaan. Anciently a chief City in
Egypt, the whole land, by Synecdoche, being termed Psalm. 78. 12.
The field of Zoan, where many of Moses his miracles were wrought. The Princes
of Zoan, though pretending to much wisdom, are Isa. 19. 11. and 13
twice pronounced fools by the Prophet. The other stream of Nile falls into
the sea at Ezekiel. 30. 15, 16.
Sin, (where hard-by anciently lived the Genesis 10. 17. Bochart. in Geogr. Sac.
Sinites, one of the eleven nations of the Canaanites) called also Raamses,
being one of the Exodus 1. 11.
cities which the Israelites built for Pharaoh, (as Pithom was another)
afterward called Pelusium from the muddy situation thereof, and Damiata at
this day.

29. But we hasten to the land of Goshen, The land of Goshen.
as the best ground in all Egypt, lying in the east part thereof. The bounty of
an ancient Pharaoh gave this Country to the Israelites for the goodness
thereof, and the policy of succeeding Pharaohs continued it unto them for the
situation thereof being surrounded with Egypt on all sides save the sea on the
east, so that the Israelites were wedged in fast, not to depart without leave.
Herein they multiplied miraculously, though the Egyptians endeavored their
destruction.

30. Shiphrah and Puah are tampered with, The midwives honesty.
of Midwives to become Murderers, that all the male children of Israel might be
still-born. The privacy of their place might have performed this with the less
suspicion, by but lending a Pinch to such tender plants, and then putting it on
the account of casualty, or some sinister accident. But they the Ministers of
life, refused to be the Messengers, yea the Procurers of death: and God, in
reward of their kindness to his people, Exodus 1. 21.
made them houses. Not material houses (as little comfortable in a land where
they, and theirs were not long to live) but understand it, God made their
posterity (the Midwives) themselves being presumed ancient before entering on
that profession) to multiply and increase. Some will say, such houses could not
stand firm, being built on the foundered foundation of their Exodus 1. 19.
lying. For this act of these Midwives was with child with twins, St. August.
Fides mentis, and Fallacia mentientis, the faith of their love, and falseness
of their lying, and the former only was rewarded by God, without any
approbation of the other.

31. This taking no effect, Moses born.
came out that cruel edict, that all the males should be drowned, whilst the
females were kept alive to be drudges. In which time Act. 7. 20.
Moses was born; one of the best of men, in the worst of ages. He was a
beautiful child, Exodus 2. 2.
not only in the eyes of his partial parents (every bird counting its own
young-ones the fairest) but really the marks of extraordinary comeliness
appeared in his face. Yea, such was his persevering beauty, (fair in the Cradle
and Saddle too) that it lasted unto his old age; His vigorous and sparkling
eyes not being Deuteronomy. 34. 7.
dimmed after an hundred any twenty years. His parents hid him three months,
and then not daring longer to keep him, for fear of the Kings searchers for
forbidden goods [male-children] expose him in a Exodus 2. 3.
bulrush Ark unto the water.

32. Taken up by Pharaohs daughter.
Pharao^s daughter with her feminine train-guard comes down to wash her self,
spies the Ark, and commands one of her maidens to fetch it. At the opening
thereof, to see with what wares it was fraught, they find a child therein, and
Exodus 2. 6.
behold the babe wept. It is common for children to cry (few born without it)
whilst this infant did not cry out of curstness, nor sob out of sullenness,
but wept out of sorrow, as silently sensible of more sadness then he durst
express, lest he should give his enemies warning thereby to destroy him. How
early did Moses begin his meekness, and learned the lesson of patience betime?
The Lady beholding him, had compassion on him, accounted it pity to drown him,
who had almost drowned himself with his tears. She saves him alive, sends him
to his mother-nurse, pays her wages for suckling him, takes him home when
weaned, counts him her Exodus 2. 10.
son, and gives him breeding accordingly, they being but half-parents that
bestow Nutrition, not education, on their children.

33. Moses well becomes his breeding, Refuses royal relation.
and is Act. 7. 22.
learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. Yet we find not that the Court
made that impression on him as on Joseph, never swearing by the Gen 42. 16.
life of Pharaoh. However, when he was come to years, he Heb. 11. 24.
refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter. Probably in his minority he
owned that royal relation. 1 Cor. 13. 11
When he was a child he did as a child. Now come to the full use of his reason,
he renounced all such false extraction. He was so far from writing or styling
himself so, that he would not be called the son of Pharaohs daughter. It is not
enough for us not to tell lies, but we must not suffer them to be told, if it
lie in our power to forbid it. Moses is not ashamed of Exodus 6. 20.
Amram and Iochebed his poor but pious parents, and will not exchange them, to
be supposed the son to Pharaohs daughter: Though that was not a bare title, but
had both the Heb. 11. 25.
pleasures and Heb. 11. 26.
treasures of Egypt attending it. An Israelite in the kilne is better then an
Egyptian in the Court.

34. He chose rather the afflictions of his brethren, Kills an Egyptian.
and goes out to see how it fared with them. Finding an Egyptian wronging an
Israelite he kills him: showing therein some signs of that Saviour-ship, which
God intended him for, and he hoped his Countrymen would have Act. 7. 25.
understood. But alas, they were capable only of burning brick, whose eyes
had pored so long on the earth, at last they had almost lost looking up to
heaven with any hope of deliverance. The Egyptians body Exodus 2. 12.
is hid in the sand, but his killing was public in the mouths and discourse of
all the Israelites.

35. This his first essay succeeding so well, Is upbraided with k.
Moses would adventure on a second design, to at one two Israelites at
variance. But he found it more facile to subdue a foe, then reconcile friends
fallen out, and easier to be a Conqueror, then Peacemaker. He that did the
wrong demands of him, who made him a Judge, and whether he Exodus 2. 14.
intended to kill him, as he did the Egyptian. I see it is no sufficient proof,
because the party is Plaintiff that his cause is the best, seeing sometimes
they that are most injurious, are the most querulous. Herein God gave Moses an
handsell, or taste, of the froward nature of the Jews, (offended with such, as
advised them for the best) that he might know the better, how hereafter to
demean himself toward such waiward dispositions. Hereupon Moses, by seasonable
flight, provides for his own safety.

36. Shall such a man as Moses fly? Flies into the land of Madian.
Had he not better have stood to it, and avouched his act? Sure the Princess
royal, his Lady-mother could bear him out for innocent; at the worst, by her
Court-interest could procure his pardon. But he knew it was ill trusting of
doubtful friends in dangerous cases; especially that Ladies affection no doubt
abating unto him, since his refusal of her sonship. Into the land of Madian
he flies, continues there forty years; that term expired, returns into Egypt,
and wrought those great wonders in the Court of Pharaoh, whereof largely before.

37. But of all the Physic he gave Pharaoh, Returns and brings out the
Israelites.
none wrought so effectually upon him for the mollifying of his heart, as that
last Purge, when the eldest son was slain in all families; whereupon the
Israelites are urged to depart: first borrowing all the Exodus 12. 35.
wealth from their neighbors, who would make their flying enemies a bridge of
gold. Nothing bounded the Egyptians giving, but the Israelites asking: had more
been demanded, more had been delivered unto them. Skin for skin, yea all that a
man has, Job 2* 4.
will he give for his life. Yet I cannot properly call these, Gifts; but rather
Legacies of the Egyptians, because bequeathed by them, when all conceived
themselves in a dying condition.

38. Out marched six hundred thousand Israelites, The march forward and
backward in Egypt.
besides a mixed multitude; full of wealth, wanting nothing, but Exodus 12. 39.
leaven in their bread, for lack of time; from Rameses in the land of Goshen
where they dwelled, to Exodus 12. 27.
Succoth: thence forward to Exodus 13. 20.
Ethaim in the edge of the wilderness; and then faces-about, by Gods command
they were to turn and encamp before Pihahiroth between Migdoll and the sea,
over against Exodus 14. 2.
Baalzephon, where we leave them in a sad condition, Pharaoh behind them, the
sea before them, having their choice to be drowned or slain; till God sent them
a miraculous deliverance.

Here follows the Map of Jewish habits.



OF THE CLOTHES and ORNAMENTS OF THE JEWS. CHAP. VI.
SECT. 1. Of Jewish Garments in general, their matter, colors, and fashions.
1. I Conceived my task finished in describing the land of Palestine, The
occasion of this discourse.
when casually casting mine eye on Speeds Maps of England, and other Countries,
I found their borders, or margins, garnished with the pictures of their
inhabitants, garmented, and habited respectively according to their several
fashions. Wherefore, not to be defective in any necessary ornament, we have
added this discourse of Jewish Vestments, confining our selves herein only to
Scripture instructions, and the last Translation, to avoid endless
difficulties, arising from the various rendering of the names of Jewish
apparel.

2. Jewish garments were made of several matters. First, Several matter of
Jewish garments.
of pelts, or raw hides, all the wardrobe of those pious persecuted people (
Exiles are living Martyrs) who Heb. 11. 37.
wandered about in sheepskins, and goat skins. Secondly, Leather, as the girdle
2 King. 1. 8.
of Elijah. Thirdly, Hair-cloth, as the raiment of John Mat. 3. 4.
Baptist. Fourthly, course hemp, whereof sackcloth, the general weeds of
extraordinary 2 King. 6. 30.
mourners. Fifthly, Fine linen very fashionable in those parts, silk, cloth,
scarlet, Psalm. 45. 13.
wrought gold, whereof severally in due place. In a word, according to the
condition of the wearer, their clothes might be made of any thing, but not of
two things together [ woollen and linen] as flatly forbidden by the Leviticall
Deuteronomy. 22. 11.
Law. Because God would have his people sincere, without any mixture of
hypocrisy; 1 These. 5. 23. and James 1. 4.
(...), all of one sort, linsie-woolsie being to the touch, what Revel. 3. 16.
lukewarmn^ss to the taste, offensive to him, who being simple and single in
himself, loves integrity in others.

3. Of all colors they most delighted in white. White their principal color.
Let thy garments be always Eccles. 9. 8.
white; signifying the jollity and mirth of the wearer. A color highly valued
in Scripture, He that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in Revel. 3. 5.
white raiment, as the Emblem of victory, purity, cheerfulness, knowledge, and
(in a mystical sense) grace, and glory. Which whiteness of their apparel, the
Jews daily preserved, with constant washing thereof.

4. Black is conceived by Arias Montanus to be the general wearing of
mourners, Black used by mourners.
chiefly grounding it on David's words, Psalm. 35. 14.
I bowed down heavily as one that mourns for his mother; the Hebrew is (...)
Incurvabam atratus, I bowed down in black. However, I conceive this blackness
no superinduction of a dark die on David's clothes, but rather a dirty hue, or
soil contracted on his white garments, from neglect of washing them ( Vestes
potius sordidae quam; nigrae, as we say mourning shirts) it being customary for
men in sadness, to spare the pains of their laundresses, with Mephibosheth,
who, when David was driven from Jerusalem, during his absence, washed not his 2 Samuel 19. 24.
clothes from the day the King departed, until he came again in peace.

5. Other mention of black among the Jews, Chemarims clad in black.
I find none at all, save only, that there was a company called Chemarims,
or, Black men, from (...) to black or burn, (and black we generally complain is
a burnt die) accounted by some conjurers, as trading in the black Art, and
clothed accordingly whose name God Zeph. 1 4.
threatens to cut off from Ierus^lem. They were the idolatrous Priests of
Baal, prophesied against by Hosea 10. 5.
Ho^ea; or some appendants to his service, who were 2 King. 23. 5.
destroyed by King Josiah, and got their name of Chemarim from black clothes, a
peculiar habit (no doubt) to themselves, and which in opposition to them (I
conceive) few other would wear.

6. Blew succeeds, ^lew more valued then worn by the Jews.
a celestial, or sky color; Color caeruleus quasi coeluleus, highly priced
by the Jews, who anciently had (as their Rabbis report) the exact skill of
dying it to the height, which since they have lost. Yet I find no Jewish
apparel wholly made of this color; whereof I conceive this reason, that they
abstained from it, as a color sacred and mysterious, then which none more used
about the Tabernacle, and Temple, in the curtains, vailes, and vestments
thereof. Only we read, that ordinary Jews, by Gods command, were to make that
lace, or ribband Number. 15. 38.
of blew, wherewith their fringes were bound to their clothes. Intimating, that
heavenly meditations were the best ligament, to continue, and fasten Gods
commandments unto their souls. The Babylonians much delighted in, yea, doted
on this magisteriall Ezekiel. 23. 12.
color: and so also did the Persians, as may appear by Mordecai, who when
advanced, was clothed in Esther 13. ^5.
blew, amongst many other royal accoutrements.

7. A gradation in honor of three colors remain, Scarlet, Crimson and Purple.
usual amongst the Jews in robes of State for persons of highest qualities, on
great solemnities. First, Scarlet wherein 2 Samuel 1. 24.
Saul first clothed the daughters of Israel, not dyed (as our modern) with
Madder, or with Cochenil, or with the powder in grain [otherwise Alchermis] all
inventions of later date; but with (...), a shrub, whose red berries, or
grains, gave an orient tincture to cloth. Second, Crimson (to which Scarlet is
brought by a mixture of Alume) which was used in Solomon's 2 Chr. 2. 7. 14. and
3. and 14.
Temple, and in the garments of the principal Jer. 4. 30.
Jews. Third, Purple, the richest of all earthly colors, having the gaudiness
of red (whereof it retains a cast) abated with the gravity of blew, chiefly
dyed at Tire, and taking the tincture thereof from the liquor of a shel-fish,
formerly found plentifully in the sea thereabouts, but utterly lost and unknown
at this day. And, although I no whit envy the good huswife described by
Bathsheba, clothed with so Prove. 31. 22.
rich a die, because earned with her industry (and good reason, Win purple and
wear purple) yet, I confess, I grudge at the rich glutton in the Gospel, that
he should be clothed with Luke 16. 19.
purple and fine linen, and fare sumptuously every day.

8. And now I have dipped my fingers so far in the die-fat, Scarlet and Purple
how the same.
a word more to reconcile a seeming difference in the Gospel. For, when our
Savior had rich robes in derision put on him by the soldiers, what Saint
Matthew calls a Scarlet Mat. 27. 28.
robe, is termed by Mark 15. 17.
Saint Mark, and John 19. 5.
Saint John a purple robe, and that without the least prejudice to the truth;
for 1 Possibly two several garments were put on him, as our English Judges
have distinct suits of robes, one of Scarlet, the other of Purple. 2 The
ancient Roman robes of Magistracy whatsoever, were called by the genericall
name of If I rightly understand Lazarus Bay^^us de Re Vestiaria. page 173.
Purple. 3 The ground work was Scarlet, which with a mixture of blew makes the
richest purple (as the most skillful in that mystery have informed me) so,
being Scarlet purpurized, it might be termed by either, and both appellations.
So much for the colors of the Jews clothes mentioned in the Bible; other
colors, yellow, Yet found in the Rabbis.
green etc. not appearing therein; though I dare not say, that* because these
colors not being dyed in grain, lose much of their luster, and gloss in
washing (so frequently bestowed on their apparel) they therefore abstained
from the use thereof.

9. As for the shape and making of the Jewish garments, Jews no fashion mongers.
they were no affecters ( Englishmen-like) of various fashions; but, according
to the commendable gravity of the ancient Germans, kept the same form for many
ages. Indeed their clothes, being for the most part loose vestments, not
exactly fitted to their bodies, but only cast over, wrapped about, or girded
unto them, the less curiosity was required in their making. Hence it is, that
we find the Philistines their Judge. 14. 19.
clothes fitting Samsons friends, and Ionathans Sam. 18. 4.
robe given to David, serving him without any considerable difference. And,
because we meet not with the trade of a Tailor, clean through the Scripture
(though frequent mention of Weavers, and Full^rs therein) it seems anciently no
distinct occupation among the Jews, being probable, the men, or their wives
made their own clothes; with Dorcas, who Act. 9. 39.
made coats and garments for the widows, whilst she was with them. Thus the
state, and gallantry of the Jews, consisted not in their changeable fashions,
but in their various changes, orient colors, costly matter, curious
embroderies of their garments. However so much of the fashionablenesse of their
clothes as is colligible from Scripture, we come now to describe.

SECT. II. The particular fashion of their apparel.
1. NExt to their skins they ware linen cloth (as most cleanly, Linen next
their b^re bodies.
soft, and wholesome for that use) and at night lay in the same: Thus the young
man, late at night allarum'd out of his bed, with the noise made by Judas, and
his rout, when Christ was apprehended, is said, to have Mark 15. 5^.
a linen cloth cast about his naked body (as his bed-livery left on him) which
he was fain to forsake, and so to make his escape.

2. Next this they put on their coat, Next a coat coming down to their feet.
which came down to their very feet, accounted modest, grave, yea, honorable
amongst them. Great therefore the indignity, offered by the King of Ammon, to
David's Ambassadors, 2 Samuel 10. 4.
cutting off their garments in the middle, even to their buttocks; it being a
disgrace to the Jews, which was all the fashion in the cloaks of the ancient
Gauls. Dimidiasque nates Gallica Ma^^ialis.
palla tegit. And to prevent the dangling down, and dagling of so long
garments, the Jews used, when sent on 2 King. 4. 29.
an errand, when taking a journey, when doing any Luke 17. 8.
office in the house, and when Exodus 12. 9.
eating the Passover, to gird up their clothes about them. Hence a girdle is
taken in Scripture for strength, readiness, and activity, whilst the want
thereof denotes weakness, looseness, and laziness. Those girdles used
generally to be but about their loins, Stand therefore having your loins Ephe.
6. 14.
girt. And therefore extraordinary was that golden girdle of Christ in the
vision, and singularly placed about Revel. 3. 13.
his paps, showing it rather of ornament then use, not to get strength, but
show the state of the wearer thereof.

3. Now, Slaves tucked up their clothes above the thighs.
although freeborn people, when about their business, girt up their coats not
above their mid-leg; slaves, for their greater shame, when carried captive,
were forced to tuck their clothes up above their thighs. Thus the Prophet,
foretelling the captivity of Babylon, calls to the virgin of Sion, make bare
the leg, Isa. 47. 2.
uncover the thigh, pass over the rivers, as being to wade the nearest way over
waters in their passage, whilst their conquerors would not be at the cost to
ferry them over.

4. To return to the Jewish coats; Jewish coats girdled, collar'd and fringed.
As they were tied up with girdles in the midst: ( girdles serving the Jews for
purses wherein they carried their moneys -- (...), Mat. 10. 9.
nor brass in your girdles) so they were collared about the neck; witness Job
his expression, that his disease Job 30. 18.
bound him about as the collar of his coat. Either, that his malady inseparably
clinged unto him, (in which sense we say, ^n ague sticks to ones back as close
as his clothes) or rather, because he was visited with a noisome disease and
aggulatinatus sanie, was grown stiff and hard with the purulent matter of his
ulcers. As the Jews coats were collared above; so they were skirted, and
fringed below, by Gods especial command. Number. 15. 38. 39.
Speak unto the sons of Israel, and say unto them, that they make unto them a
fringe on the skirts of their clothes throughout their generations, and that
they put upon the fringe of the skirt a ribband of blew. And it shall be unto
you for a fringe, that ye may see it, and remember all the commandments of
Jehovah, and do them. And Deu^. 22. 12.
elsewhere they are enjoined to make fringes upon the four skirts of their
garment.

5. A fringe in Hebrew Zizith, The manner and mystery of their ^ringes.
or Tsitsith, sometimes also Gedilim, in Greek Mat. 23. 5. and Mark 9. 20.
(...), represented the complication, or conjunction of Gods commandments
among themselves, with their inseparable connection, as the threads in those
thrummed fringes were woven together. The blew lace tying them to the four
skirts, typified how closely Gods law ought to be applied, and fastened to our
hearts. By the rules of the Rabbis, every freeborn male-child amongst the
Jews, when knowing to cloth himself, was bound to wear these fringes. But
women, servants, and infants were not bound (say Maimoni. Tom. 1. in Zizith
cap. 3. Sect. 9.
they) to wear them, though they might without committing any sin, provided
that they used no ceremonious blessing (like men) at their putting them on. The
same say, that blind Idem ibidem.
men were also bound to wear fringes, for, though they saw them not themselves,
others did behold them. Gedilim (they say) was the thrums woven in the cloth,
and Zizith was an addition of threads tied with knots thereunto, but the
particular and numerous Criticismes thereof we refer to such as delight in
Rabbinicall disquisitions. Only adding, that the modern Jews have wholly left
off the formal wearing of fringes, alleging this reason thereof, because they
have utterly lost the mystery of making the blew ribband (even by their own See
Ainsworth on Number 15. 39.
confession) an essential implement of the fringes, which should be dyed of a
firmament, and unfading color, in lieu whereof, some make shift with a white
only, whilst others (it seems) unable to complete their fringes according to
Gods command, prefer the total omission, before the imperfect observance
thereof.

6. Hitherto of the lower coat of the Jews, Their cloak, or mantle.
which they ware next their linen shirts. Over this they had another called a
mantle, or cloak cast over them, when they went abroad, separable from their
garment beneath it. This cloak Genesis 38. 25.
Judah left with Thamar, and Genesis 39. 12.
Joseph with his mistress, when the one lost and the other preserved his
chastity thereby. Such an upper garment was laid John 13. 4.
aside by Christ, when about to wash his Disciples feet: and put Act. 7. 58.
off by the Jews, when intending to stone Saint Steven; and was 2 Timothy 4. 13.
left by Saint Paul at Troas. Yea, generally they ware it not when busy at
their work in the field, and were counseled by Christ at the invasion of Judea
by the Romans, forthwith to make their escape, and not to return back to take
such clothes with them, as left at home behind them.

7. Of these coats beneath, What meant by double clothing.
and cloaks above, we understand that expression in the description of a good
Prove. 31. 21.
wife, She is not afraid of the snow for her household, for all her household
are clothed with scarlet, or rather (seeing no good huswifery to array servants
in so rich suits) as the Hebrew word imports (...) with double garments, that
is, with coats and cloaks to make them winter-proof, and perchance with
duplicates, or two of both kinds, though successively worn at several times.
So much of both their garments, not forgetting the counsel Christ gave the
Jews concerning them (but when and how far to be followed, let others dispute)
Mat. 5. 40.
If any will sue thee at law, and take away thy coat, let him take thy cloak
also.

8. At night they used to strip themselves of both Put off both at night.
when going to bed: ^ant. 5. 3.
I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? Except in some case of
extremity, requiring their readiness every instant: Nor the men of the guard
which followed me, none of them put off their Nehem. 4. 23.
clothes, saving that every one put them off for washing.

9. The poorer sort were fain in the night, Cloaks poor men's coverlets.
to make use of their cloak, or upper garment, for their blanket, or coverlet.
And therefore God by special order provided, that though men might pawn their
upper clothes (as not absolute necessary for their wearing) all the day time,
yet at night such a pledge was not longer to be detained, but should be
restored to him, Exodus 22. 26.
At the Suns going down, for that is his covering only, it is the raiment for
his skin, wherein shall he Ibid. ver. 27.
sleep? Say not, he was as much subject to catch cold in the day, as at night
for want thereof; for then being warmed with his work, and in constant motion
during his day-labour, no danger of taking cold, though the same might surprise
him lying still at night, when, how sharp the season happened sometimes, the
high Priests servants will testify, needing in the spring time John 18. 18.
a fire of coals to be made for them.

SECT. III. Vestments how varied, according to the age of the wearers.
1. HOwever, Infants swaddling clothes.
all Jewish garments admitted of variations, according to the ages,
professions, conditions, occasions, and sexes of the wearers. First for the
ages, briefly to habit a Jew, from the Cradle to the Coffin, we begin with the
infant, who with Job, coming Job. 1. 21.
naked out of his mothers womb, finds some clouts provided by the care of his
parents, or providence of his friends, to cover him. Amongst these, most
remarkable are his Lam. 2. 22. and Ez^k. 16. 4.
swaddling clothes, wherewith the Jewish mothers Luke 2. 7.
swathed their children. No doubt doing it with more discretion then many
English mothers, and nurses, who (as Spigelius In his Anatom lib. ^ c. 9.
Anglia regio perve^sam ^anc fasciandi rationem ut plurim ^ sequitur, quo ^it ut
maxima pars hominum ^abe and distillationibus ibi con^iciatur. Afterward
yearly coated.
observes) generally hurt their babes by binding them too hard about their
breast, thereby causing consumptions, of which disease, he affirms, more die
in England, then in any other Country. And so we leave this Jewish infant
sucking, or sleeping on the lap of his mother.

2. Afterward in due time he is coated, with little Samuel, for whom his mother
made a little 1 Samuel 2. 19.
coat year by year. Nor know I which more to commend, Hanna's huswifery in
annual providing, or Samuel's thrift in making his coat to serve him a whole
year. We conceive childrens clothes differed from men's, not in fashion, but in
degrees, which increased with the stature of the wearer. Leave we this child
in his calling, namely playing with his mates in the Market Mat. ^1. 16.
place, loath to spoil his sport (it being as pleasant to see children play, as
men to work:) Provided, they be seasonably set to school, for, Prove. 22. 6.
Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it.

3. From a child he starts up a youth, Then grown a Stripling.
and becomes a stripling, then beginning to delight in brave clothes. If his
fathers darling, then perchance he is clothed with a coat, rainbow like,
striped, and streaked, as Joseph's garment, with diverse Genesis 37. 3.
colors; the sight whereof bred worse colors in the face of his brethren (
pale envy, red wrath, blew malice, black hatred) finding him so far out strip
them in their fathers affection. Leave we this stripling, hunting, shooting,
and offering at manlike exercises.

4. Few more years shoot him up to be marriageable, Becomes a gay Bridegroom.
and his parents provide a wife for him, as Abraham for Isaac, (Abraham, who
followed Gods Genesis 24. 7.
Angel sent before him, whilst too many covetous fathers are only g^ided by
other Angels in their choice) and soon after he is prepared for marriage. On
his wedding day, how glorious does he appear coming out of his chamber as the
(...). 19. 5.
rising Sun, when as a Isa. 61. 10.
Bridegrom he decketh himself with ornaments? We wait on him to his
Bride-chamber, wish him joy, and depart.

5. Within a year after his marriage After a year is a Soldier.
(for till that time he was privileged by the law, Deuteronomy. 24. 5.
not to go out to war, but to be free at home, and to cheer up his wife) he
goes forth to fight, soldiery not being so distinct a profession amongst the
Jews, but that every able man, upon just summons, was bound to bear arms.
Behold we him now in complete armor, according to his quality, made either of
steel, King. 14. 27.
brass, or 1 King. 10. 10.
gold (I m^an for shields and targets; for, otherwise all the art of man
cannotmake an edged tool of gold, or silver) Defensive; as habergeon,
brigandine, coats of male, (which we wish better put on, then Ahabs was, that
no chinkes may be left betwixt the 1 Kin. 22. 34.
joints thereof) Offensive, and those either to use cominus, at handpush; or
stroke, as sword, dagger, spear; or eminus, at distance, as bow, sling, dart,
and other artificial engines, (whereof King 2 Chr. 26. 15.
Uzziah was the ingenious inventour) or of a mixed nature, as a Iavelin, which
was a spear-dart, sometimes cast out of their hands, as Saul at 1 Samuel 18. 11.
David; sometimes kept in, and thrust through their enemies, in which manner
Number. 25. 6.
Phinehas did execution on Zimri and Cozbi. It is enough barely to name these
weapons, as having no peculiar Iudaisme in them, but common with other
Countries. For, though God enjoined the Jews some ceremonious observances in
their wearing-apparell, distinguishing them from other nations; yet in the
fashion of their arms, he suffered them to conform with the heathen, as might
be most for their own safety, and advantage.

6. But amongst all martial accoutrements, The Soldiers b^lt or girdle.
we must not forget the soldiers girdle, the inseparable companion of military
men. Thus when Jonathan stripped himself, he gave David his garments even to his
sword, and to his bow, and to his 1 S^m. 18 4.
girdle: understand his gift exclusively, these three things not comprehended
therein, as being unsouldier-like to part with them. Ioab promised to give him
that could kill Absalom ten shekels of silver, and a 2 Samuel 18. 11.
girdle, as a proper military Donative. And perchance, such a Girdle, Balteus
militaris, bestowed by a General in a field after the fight, amounted to the
honor of our modern Knighthood, not to say, Banneretship. Conquerors used to
besmear their girdle with the blood of those they overcame (a Bend or Fess
gules, we know, is an honorable Bearing) in avowance, and justification of what
they had done. And therefore David taxes Ioab, that having killed Abner, and
Amasa, not valiantly in the field, but treacherously by fraud, he shed the
blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war upon his 1 King. 2. 5.
girdle, that was about his loins, and in his shoes that were upon his feet.
Not that it casually spirted upon them, but that of set purpose he put it
there, misapplying an hostile ceremony of lawful conquest, to his act of
perfidious, and cowardly murder. Leave we now our soldier thus completely
armed in all respects, going forth to fight, wishing him to be valiant for his
people, and for the Cities of his God, and [for success] the Lord do what
seems 2 Samuel 10. 12.
good in his eyes.

7. But if in stead of victory, Turns mourner at ill success
he meets with overthrow, and destruction, so that, with Jobs Job 1. 15.
messenger, he himself hardly escapes to bring the doleful tidings of their
defeat; behold him in the following sorrowful equipage of a Mourner. With Isa.
1^. 2.
baldness on his head (not natural, but) occasioned by the shaving thereof, to
make room for a sad Peruke of 1 Kin. 20. 38.
Ashes, or 1 S m. 4 12.
earth thereupon; beard lsa 15. 2.
shaved, or else, his upper lip Mi^ah 3. 7.
covered, clothes rent, yea, flesh it self cut (not wounded by the enemies
sword, but) as a penance imposed upon ler. 41. 5.
himself, feet 2 S^m. 15. 30.
bare, and whole body next the skin clothed 1 King 21. 27.
in sackcloth, wherein he used to lie, and according to the occasion, more or
less was his humiliation. May he meet with seasonable comfort, and good
counsel, whilst we proceed.

8. Some few years after, it is strange to see, how insensibly age has
surprised him, so that he begins now to become an Elder. Quickly beco^es an
^^der
If you find him not at home in his house, you shall certainly meet him
amongst those of his own rank in the gate of the City (where a Consistory Court
was daily kept, and he a Judge therein) wrapped with Samuel warm in his 1 Samuel
28. 14.
mantle, and having in his hand a staff; 1 Not of any infectious infirmity,
being an heavy curse: Let there not fail from the house of Ioab, one that
leans on a 2 Samuel 3. 29.
staff. 2 Much less of Idolatry, an heinous sin: My people ask counsel at
their stocks, and their Hos^a 4. 12.
staff declares unto them. 3. But a staff of Antiquity, accounted a great
blessing: Every man with a Zech. 8. 4.
staff in his hand for very age.
To which we wish him another staff for his better support, even dutyfull
children, and so leave him.

9. At next return we find him beddred, Beddred without heat.
reduced to aged David's condition, though they cover him with clothes he
gets no 1 King. 1. 1.
heat. We wish him (in stead of a young Abishag) good kitchin-Physick, careful
attendance, and serious meditation on his latter end.

SECT. IV. Their habits how differenced, by their several professions, and
conditions.
1. PRobable it is, Fishermens coats.
that all vocations of people (besides the Priests and Levites) as Husbandmen,
Tradesmen, Citizens, Merchants, Doctors, Judges etc. were distinguished by
their several apparel, though we can only insist upon some few we find in
Scripture. First, Fishermen had their coats made with the best advantage, not
to hinder the wearers swimming therein. Thus, Peter hearing that the Lord stood
on the land, John 21. 7.
girt his fishers-coate about him (for he was naked) and did cast himself into
the sea. Oh that men would but use the wealth of this world, as Saint Peter his
coat, only for civility, as a covering in their passage through the waves of
this life, without danger of being drowned in the Deep, with the weight thereof!

2. Shepherds succeed, Shepherds garments.
sufficiently known by their bag, 1 Samuel 17. 4^.
and staff, or Psalm. 23. 4.
hook; except any will add thereunto the Job 30. 1.
dog of their flock, as so necessary an attendant, they seem naked without him.
Their clothes were made large and loose, easy to be put on, without any ado,
so that they might run, and ray themselves. Hereupon it is prophesied of
Nebuchadnezzar, that he should array himself with the land of Egypt, as a
shepherd Jer. 43. 12.
puts on his garment, that is, quietly, quickly, in an instant, the conquest
thereof should cost him no trouble, as meeting with no considerable opposition.

3. But my pen is soon weary of the worthless wardrobe of such poor, and
painful people, longing to come to Court, Court the Element of Gallants.
the center of bravery, where those Men of clothes, to whom gallantry is
essential, have their continual residence. Such (says our Savior) as wear
Mat. 11. 8.
soft clothing, are in Kings houses. Insomuch that there was a law in the Court
of Persia, that, None might enter into the Kings gate clothed with Esther 4. 2.
sackcloth, as a disparagement to the place. Though the Porters which shut out
sackcloth, could not stop out sorrow from entering into the Palace of the
mightiest Monarch.

4. Courtiers were apparelled often in fine Genesis 41. 42.
linen, Courtiers clothed in white linen.
which the chiefest of them need not blush to wear, finding Angels themselves
(waiters on an higher King) clothed in pure and Revel. 15. 6.
white linen. Now, although Judea had store of home-growing Josh. 2. 6.
flax, yet she fetched far finer from Egypt, whence in Solomon's time the Kings
Merchants received linen 1 King. 10. 28.
yarn at a price. Kings Merchants, being a Guild or company of men with a badge
Royal upon them, probably privileged with a preemption of all wares, and sole
trade in some commodities, so that Solomon (like the great Duke of Tuscany)
counted traffic no abatement to his Majesty. They brought it in linen-yarn,
not linen-cloth, Solomon so setting up Napery, and the manufacture of weaving,
to the much enriching of the land, and employing of the poor people thereof.
Thus, after his time the finest linen cloth, formerly a purely foreign, became
partly a native commodity of Judea; as linen, Egyptian; as cloth, Jewish; spun
abroad by the wheels of strangers, woven at home on the looms of his own
subjects. I say not, that Solomon took the first hint of this good husbandry,
from the mouth of his mother Bathsheba, charactering a good wife, Prove. 31. 24.
She makes fine linen, and sells it: though a family being a little kingdom
(as a kingdom a great family) what is found beneficial for the one, may by
proportion be extended advantageous for the other.

5. Pass we by fine cloth to come the sooner to silk, And in silk.
the appa^ell also of our Courtier. By silk we understand not Sericum, coming
from the East Indies, where it grows on trees: nor Byssus, a soft silk grass;
but Bomby^ina, made of silk-wormes, (whereof largely In the land of Moriah.
before) and of it plenty in Palestine. Indeed we find, that Lampridius in
e^us vita.
Heliogabalus first wore such silk clothes in Rome; and that in Justinians time
(some five hundred years after Christ) silke-wormes by some Procopius.
Monks were first brought into Europe; as also that Matthew. Parker in his life.
Cardinal Woolsie was the first Clergyman that wore silk in England: but,
when silk began first to be worn by the Jews, we cannot exactly define. Only
we find amongst the many favors God bestowed on their Country, this
especially recounted, Ezck. 16. 10.
I covered thee with silk. And thus we leave our Courtier so gaily apparelled,
that his clothes (according to the Apostles James 2. 3.
complaint) are not only his Usher to make room; but also his Herald, to
appoint a principal place for him to sit down, when coming into any assembly;
whilst others, of less gallantry, (but perchance more goodness) must either
stand, or sit at his footstool.

6. Come we from the Stars to the Sun; Robes royal of Kings.
from the Courti^rs to the King himself. Such were conspicuous, and
distinguished from their subjects, by their Crown, Scepter, Throne, and royal
Robes, which Iehosaphat wore in war to his 1 King. 22. 30.
cost, had not Gods goodness ordered, that he was more scared then hurt
thereby. White garments were worn even by the Kings themselves. Hereupon when
our Savior as a Mock-king was made a derision both to Gentile and Jew* as the
Soldiers arraied him in John 19. 2.
Purple, Robes of Magistracy amongst the Romans; so Herod, a Jew (conforming
his scoffs to custom of his own Country) Luke 23. 11.
(...), clothed him with a white garment. Sometimes, Kings did, out of special
grace, communicate their robes to be worn by their Favorites, as is Esther 6. 8.
eminent in the case of Mordecai. Many and rich (no doubt) were the
habilliments of the Jewish Kings, but when all was done, Solomon, in all his
glory, was not arrayed as a Mat. 6. 29.
Lily in the field, more fine to the touch, fair to the eye, and, which is the
main, the Lilies beauty is his own, and in him; Solomon's bravery but borrowed,
and upon him.

7. We had almost forgotten the Pharisee, Pharisees their habit.
who will be offended (as loving the Mat. 23. 6.
uppermost rooms at feasts, and chief seats in the Synagogues) if not having an
high, and honorable mention in our discourse. These, generally, delighted in
Mat. 23. 5.
Phylacteries (and fringes of the broadest size) being schedules, or scrouls of
parchment, tied to their foreheads, or left hands (by popular error accounted
nearest the heart) wherein the Decalogue, and, some add, four other sections
of the Law were written; so carrying a Library of Gods word on their clothes,
scarce a letter in their hearts. They wore course clothing, pretending much
mortification, and (...), when they exercised, (that is, when these Mountebanks
theatrically acted their humiliation) (...) ^piy^anius adversus Hareses li. 1.
p. 20.
(...), they had thorns for their bed to lay upon, and some of them wore a
Mortar on their heads, so ponderous, that they could look neither upward, nor
on either side, but only downward, and forthright. But, because the Pharisees
affected such clothes merely to be seen of men; out of set purpose, to cross
their vainglorious humor, we will look no longer on their strange apparel,
lest we increase their pride, by our studious gazing on their fantastical
habits.

SECT. V. A Jewish man ornamented cap-a-pe.
1. ALthough it be probable, Hats on their heads.
that the ancient Jews generally went bare-headed (making use with Elijah of
their Mantles, or upper garments, in tempestuous weather, wrapping their heads,
as he his 1 King. 19. 13.
face therein) yet we find them in after ages wearing Hats on their heads,
with which the three children Dan. 3. 21.
were cast into the fiery furnace. Not, that they were like those we wear now
adays, (a mere modern invention since round flat caps were disused) but, are
termed Hats by analogy, though not of the same form, for the same service, the
coverture of the head.

2. But, Antiochus his hats of a different fashion.
some will say, if Hats were formerly fashionable among the Jews, how came that
Order of Antiochus (many years after) to be beheld as an Innovation, of so
dangerous consequence in it self, and so distasteful to the Jews, when he
enjoined them to wear an 2 Mac. 4. 12.
Hat? It is answered; such Hats were offensive to the Jews, not so much for
themselves, but because, 1 A foreign Power imposed them. 2 An odious instrument
( Jason the Pseudo-Priest) pressed the wearing of them. 3 They came in company
with other heathenish Ibid. ver. 13.
customs, for whose sake they fared the worse in the Jews acceptance. 4 Such
Hats (in Greek (...)) were (as I may say) of another block from those, which
the Jews, most tenacious of their native habits, formerly had used.
But, how the ancient Hats of the Jews were made, is impossible to define,
though probably they were of the same matter with their upper garment. Sure I
am, the Babylonians were more top-gallant then the Jews, and quite put them
down with bravery in that part, as, exceeding in died Ez^k. 23. 13.
attire upon their heads. All that we will add of Jewish head-attire, is this,
that mourners amongst them used (in expression of their shame, and sorrow) to
be bound about close, The plowmen were ashamed, they Jer. 14. 4.
covered their heads. Wherefore, when the Prophet foretold, Ezekiel. 24. 23.
And your tires shall be upon your heads, and your shoes upon your feet: ye
shall not mourn nor weep, but ye shall pine away for your iniquities, and
mourn one toward another; he pronou^ceth their sorrow so transcendent, as
incapable to be ordered by the usual method of mourning, and only to be
managed with amazement.

3. Earrings were generally worn by Jewish women, Earrings doubtful whether
worn by Jewish men.
as also by their male children whilst as yet young, and under their mothers
command; Exodus 32. 2.
Break off the golden earrings which are in the ears of your wives, your sons,
and your daughters. Where, by sons, we understand little boys (therefore hemmed
in the text with women on both sides) having their sex as yet scarcely
discriminated by their habits. But, whether men amongst them ware earrings, is
doubtful, and the negative most probable; seeing the Scripture, speaking of
the eastern Army conquered by Gideon, For they had golden Judge. 8. 24.
earrings, because they were Ishmaelites; intimates thereby, that such were no
masculine ornaments usual amongst the people of the Jews. Except any make [
for] there to relate, not to the earrings themselves, but to the extraordinary
multitude, and massiness thereof. Wherefore, if any be earnest on the contrary,
I oppose not; being contented the Jews should have rings in their ears, so be
it they had not Idols in those rings, a Genesis 35. 4.
superstition of their ancestors, when first coming out of Padan-Aram.

4. Nothing save Cant. 1. 10.
chains was worn about their necks; Only chains about their necks.
no linen in lieu of our modern bands, which otherwise would have intercepted,
and hindered the beautiful prospect of the Spouse her neck, when compared to a
tower of Ivory. As for Genesis 24. 22.
bracelets about their wrists, Luke 15. 22.
rings on their fingers, (for gloves we find none) Jer. 22. 24.
signets in those rings, herein the Jews nothing differed from other nations.

5. Their legs were generally bare: Their legs bare.
wherefore, when we find the Three children cast into the fiery furnace, in
their coats, their Dan. 3. 21.
hosen and their Hats; by [ hosen] we understand not stockins, but breeches;
which (as the Ie^ish Priests Exodus 28. 42.
must wear of linen for modesty) other persons might for their own convenience,
or warmth; as probably these children did, as then living in Babylon, being
somewhat a more northern climate, and colder country then Judea.

6. On their feet, when at home, Sandales and shoes.
and in summer time, they used to wear Mark. 6. 9. and Act. 12. 8.
Sandales; which had soles, but no upper-leathers, save the ligaments wherewith
they were fastened over the instep and cross of the foot. Hence came the
frequent washing of their feet in the eastern parts; not only to cool them,
but chiefly to clear them from the gravel, and cleanse them from the dirt,
which those casements of their Sandales had let in. In the winter time, and
when they traveled abroad, they wore shoes (which they used to put off when
coming on Exodus 3. 5.
holy ground.) And it seems that in fair weather, whilst the Master, for more
ease, might walk in his Sandales, the servant used to carry his shoes after
him (as our Serving-men their Masters hoods on the same occasion) in case that
rain, or foul weather should happen in their journey. Hence that humble
expression, Mat. 3. 11.
Whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, that is, unworthy to perform the meanest
servile office unto him. Their shoes were tied with a small, and slender
latchet, yet big and strong enough, to fasten two eminent Proverbes on
posterity. 1 From a thread to a Genesis 14. 23.
shooe-latchet, that is, nothing at all. 2 The Mark 1. 7.
latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose, that is (as
aforesaid) unworthy to have the meanest employment about him.
Nothing else occurs of the Jewish shoes, save that they were often made of
Ex^k. 16. 10.
Badgers skins, which (otherwise seeming fitter for gloves then shoes) served
for the upper-leathers, which skins (no doubt) were of finer grain and dressing
in those parts (perchance worn with their fur) then in our land where the
leather thereof is of no considerable value. It is suspicious, that afterward
some extraordinary cost was luxuriously bestowed on their shoes, when the poor
was sold for a Amos 2. 6. and Amos 8. 6.
pair of them. Or else their Exchange ran at a strange rate, when a piece of a
dead beasts skin was accounted a valuable compensation for the flesh, whole
body, and life of a man.

SECT. VI. The habits of Girls, Virgins, Brides, Wives, and Widows amongst the
Jews.
1. SO much of the Jewish male-apparell, Sexes distinguished by their clothes.
come we now to their Feminine-attire; sexes amongst them being solemnly
distinguished by their clothes, according to Gods express command therein,
Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
The woman shall not wear that which pertains to the man, neither shall the
man put on a woman's garment, for all that do so are abomination unto the Lord
thy God: as in all ages, Epicoene Apparel has been the Baud to much baseness.
Only herein we are sorry we cannot satisfy our selves, much less the Reader;
so little appears of their apparel in Scripture, though we will diligently
take whatsoever it tenders unto us.

2. We begin with the Girls; Girls soon starting Virgins.
when, first we find Zech. 8. 5.
the City full of boys and girls playing in the streets thereof. Let none
condemn them for Rigs, because thus hoiting with boys, seeing the simplicity of
their age was a Patent to privilege any innocent pastime, and few more years
will make them blush themselves into better manners.

3. For, Maidens kept secret; their attire.
being grown virgins of pretty stature, they were closely kept under
covert-parent. Whereupon a virgin in Hebrew has her name from (...) to hide,
or keep secret, maidens not being permitted to gad abroad alone, but only in
companies on great solemnities, then exercising themselves with their own sex,
in Judge. 21. 21.
dancing, singing, and playing on Judge. 11. 34.
Timbrels, accounted maiden melody. Hereupon it was, that Amnon lusting after
his sister Thamar, thought it 2 Samuel 13. 2.
hard for him to do any thing to her. Not, that he made it any difficulty, or
scruple in conscience to commit folly with her; but all the hardness was in
compassing her company, that was kept so close; and therefore, he was fain,
with a fetch, to betray her into his Chamber. We find nothing particularly of
the attire of ordinary virgins in Scripture, but only that the Virgin-royall,
or Kings daughters, were apparelled with garments of diverse Ibid. ver. 18.
colors upon them: of the several kinds and makings whereof, we shall treat
Parag. 7.
by and by.

4. Now, Jews marry young.
before the Virgin we speak of, prove (...) 1 Cor. 7. 36.
past the prime of her youth, her parents have provided an husband for her.
Indeed generally the Jews married very young, as studiously advancing speedy
propagation of posterity, especially before Christ's time, accounting virginity
(after ripe years) a petty purgatory, and barrenness after marriage a little
hell, so ambitious all were of children.

5. On her wedding day, The bravery of Brides.
how gallantly does she come forth as a Bride Revel. 21. 2.
adorned for her husband? She needs not any Art of memory to mind her to put
on her ornaments, for, can a Bride Jer. 2. 32.
forget her attire? Hers, to use, if not to own: it being a fashion amongst the
Jews (even at this very day observed by them) that, at a marriage, a Bride
(though never so mean a person, or silly servant) is decked and dressed in all
gayitry lent unto her by her neighbors, so that, that day she appears a moving
mine of gold, and precious stones. Nor matters it, though the Brides bravery be
borrowed on her wedding day, if so be that the comfort, and contentment in her
match, remain her own all her life after* And no wonder, if Bride and Bridgroom
were both very gallant, when all their invited guests are highly concerned to
be comely; otherwise, if wanting a Mat. 22. 12.
wedding garment, they are accounted to ^ff^ont all the company, and the
welcome occasion of their meeting together.

6. Next day we behold our Bride a formal wife, Wives wore vailes.
and amongst all her clothes we take especial notice of the Genesis 24. 65.
veil on her head, in token of the subjection she gave to, and protection she
took from her husband. Veil in Hebrew called (...) radid, derived from radad,
to bear rule and authority, showing now she had power 2 Cor. 11. 10.
on her head, being under the command of an husband. Her veil was partable
from the rest of her clothes* witness the complaint of the Spouse, that, The
Cant. 5. 7.
watchmen (shame on them for their pains) and the keepers of the walls took
away her veil from her. This veil (as all the other garments of the wife)
were provided her all her life time, on her husbands charge, God taking
peculiar order, that in case her husband should take another wife, yet (amongst
other provisions) his first wives Exodus 21. 10.
raiment should not be diminished, though formerly she had been but a servant
unto him. But woeful the condition of those seven women, who (as the Prophet
foretells) in a dearth of men, desiring nothing with an husband but an husband,
would be contented, yea willing, and desirous to weaie their own Isa. 4. 1.
apparel, (that is, to clothe themselves at their own charges) so be it they
might have but one man for their husband, to perform conjugall duties unto them.

7. Now, Ladies wore broidered clothes of two sorts.
as the ordinary Jewish wives wore clothes proportionable to their husbands
estates: so the honorable women amongst them, Queens especially, wore
broidered garments, which were of two sorts, 1 Wrought with Psalm. 45. 14.
needle work, brought from Babylon, of which kind (for the Art, though not the
sex thereof) I ^on^eive was that Josh. 7. 21.
Babylonish garment which tempted ^he hands of Achan to sacrilege. 2 Woven
exactly in imitation of the former, and this properly called (...), Plurimis
liciis texta, composed of various colored threads, like branched work; first
found out at Alexandria in Egypt, whereof the Martialis.
Poet,
Haec tibi Memphitis tellus dat munera: victa est Pectine Niliaco, jam
Babylonis acus. Affirming that in his age the Egyptian shuttle had got the
victory of the Babylonish needle. Understand him, for the quickness,
speciousness, cheapness, and novelty of the work; not the state, riches, and
curiosity thereof, seeing the wrought garments from Babylon were like costly
Manuscripts, the woven stuffes from Egypt like Printed books, done with less
charge, and greater expedition.

8. But besides embroidered clothes, And Queens beaten or wrought gold.
we find the Queen of Judea once arraied in Psalm. 45. 9.
gold of Ophir (as if her garment were cut out of the same piece with her
Scepter and Crown) and made of massy plate. If so, such bravery was rather to
be pitied, then envied, (as all outward greatness is a penance rather then an
ornament) except the hands of her Trainbearers did lighten the burden thereof.
However, it rather appears (as afterward it follows) of Ibid. (...). 13.
wrought gold; either only studded or bossed therewith, or consisting of
golden threads wrought thereinto. Thus such gallantry was fashionable amongst
the Jews, long before any thereof was used in the western parts, or Rome it
self. Where Tarquinius Priscus is by Pliny affirmed the first who triumphed
aurea tunica, In a golden coat. And many hundred years after, the same Author
reports for a matter of greater rarity, that he with his own eyes beheld
Agrippina the wife of Claudius wearing Paludamentum auro textili (or Chlamydem
auratam, as Tacitus phraseth it) a Mantle of cloth of gold, as the first which
began that fashion in Rome, though customary with the Jewish Queens a thousand
years before.

9. But, The sad garments of Widows.
if our foresaid wife, though a Queen, chances to bury her husband, and so
become a widow, presently on she puts her Genesis 38. 14.
widows-garments, and 2 Samuel 14. 2.
anoints not her self with oil, but wears mourning apparel (or else, it
would be accounted a great breach of modesty in her) some competent time,
though the exact limitation thereof be not specified in Scripture. These
Widows-garments, of what mean and homely matter soever they were made, had this
peculiar privilege, that they might not be taken to pawn, or Deuteronomy. 24. 17.
pledge; God the Father of the fatherless, and the Judge of the Psalm. 68. 5.
widows, being so careful, that no injury should be offered unto them.

SECT. VII. Of the riot and luxury of the Jewish women before the Captivity.
1. SO much for the attire of sober, Riot the forerunner of ruin
and civil Maidens; the garments of grave and modest Matrons. Another
generation succeeds, whose husbands might be the Sons of Abraham by their
extraction, but these their wives were none of the daughters of Sarah by their
conditions. Indeed a little before the captivity of Babylon (luxury is the
forerunner of misery) the Jewish women were arrived at the greatest height of
pride; like those of whom Moses foretold, D^ut. 28. 26.
The tender and delicate woman among you, who would not adventure to set the
sole of her foot upon the ground, for delicateness and tenderness. Oh pride!
the earth, which is Mat. 5. 35.
Gods footstool, is not good enough to be hers. Though the same one day will be
bold to tread on her face, who thought her foot too good to tread on it.

2. The Prophet sa. 3. 18. etc.
Isaiah takes especial notice of a world of trinkets, Mundus, or a world of
women's trinkets.
which in his days concurred to dress them: 1 Tinkling ornaments. 2 Caules. 3
Round tires like the moon. 4 Chains. 5 Bracelets. 6 Mufflers. 7 Bonnets. 8
Ornaments about the leg. 9 Head-bands. 10 Tablets. 11 Earrings. 12 Rings. 13
Nose-jewels. 14 Changeable suites. 15 Mantles. 16 Wimples. 17 Crisping-pins. 18
Glasses. 19 Fine-linen. 20 Hoods. 21 Vailes.
But now, as once the Eunuch said concerning a more mysterious passage in this
Prophet, Act. 8. 31.
How can I understand without an interpreter? So here without the same help,
who can attain to the meaning thereof?

3. In the first place we may conceive many of these ornaments were only
temporary, Many of these ornaments temporary for that age.
as used by the Fashionists of that age, which afterward disused, both name
and thing came to be abolished. Which frequently comes to pass in all kind of
apparel, whose very names by degrees grow old, wax threadbare, turn to
rents, to rags, to nothing. For instance, it would pose a good Antiquary, to
describe the exact fashion of Camd. Remains page 196.
Herlots, Paltocks, Gits, Haketons, Tabards, Court-pies, Chevesailes, and
Gipsers: barbarous names, which may seem to carry a Spell or Conjuration in the
mention of them. Yet all these were kinds of garments, commonly used in
England some four hundred years ago. Yea, pride playing in all ages upon
conceited opinions of decency, has infinitely varied the fashion of all
apparel, customs of our Ancestors appearing as antic to us, as our fashions
(perchance) will seem incredible to posterity. Who would believe, that ever our
English, some four hundred years since, wore shoes s^outed and piked more then
a finger long, crooking upwards (called Mentloned in the History called
Eulogium.
Crackowes) resembling the Devils claws, which were fastened to the knees with
chains of gold, and silver? Or, that about the reign of King Henry the fifth,
men grew so excessive in that kind, that it was fain to be ordered by
Proclamation, that none should Camd. Remains. pa. 197. Pride the greatest
offense in these ornaments.
wear their shoes broader at the toes then six inches?

4. Secondly, of these ornaments, some were necessary, as fine-linen; others
modest, as Vailes; more (though costly) comely, as earrings, and bracelets;
(which Genesis 24. 30.
Rebekah her self, and the best of women did wear) most of them (some few
excepted) though magnificent, lawful, if not exceeding the wearers estate.
Some therefore will demand why the Prophet reproved them, and why God was
offended therewith? But, we must know, the things were not so faulty in their
own nature, as for the superfluous variety, fantastical fashion, and over
costly matter thereof. But, which is the main, the minds of the wearers did
the mischief, whose fingers (as I may say) infected their Rings; and mouths
marred their Mufflers, being used with pride, and abused to wantonnefs. The
text says, The daughters of Sion were haughty and walked with Isa. 3. 16.
stretched out necks (and (...) to boast is by Vide Stephanum.
Critics deduced from (...) the neck; pride being most visible in the erected
posture thereof) and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a
tinkling with their feet, carrying (it seems) bells at their heels, whose
music did jar with modesty, and gave the watchword to wantons, at what Sign
mercenary embraces were to be sold unto them.

5. Thirdly, Nose-jewels how fastened.
of such as were mere superfluities, none appear more ridiculous and strange
then the nose-jewels in Hebrew (...) leaving us at a loss how they were
fastened. Surely, the Jewish women were not ringed swine-like, nor had they,
like the Salvages in America, their noses bored through to hang jewels therein.
For, although some may plead, Pride never feels pain; as also, that the
absurdest fashions, when made common, seem comely; yet such holes in their
noses (more nostrils then ever nature made) must of necessity hinder, both their
speech, and plainer pronunciation: except, (as some conceive) they were fastened
with gold, or silver-hoops about their noses. For mine own part, I suppose
these nose-jewels the same with frontlets, frequent among the Jews, or else
some pendants fastened thereunto: 1 First, because frontlets (otherwise
ordinary ornaments) are omitted in this catalogue. 2 Secondly, because
frontlets were worn betwixt their Exodus 13. 16. and Deuteronomy. 9. 8.
eyes (between which and the nose no great distance) hanging down on a peak
from their foreheads.
However, it is probable these nose-jewels were frontlets of a larger size, more
prominent then ordinary, as pride in process of time improveth it self to a
greater proportion. And most certain it is, God was highly displeased with this
their luxury; witness his heavy Isa. 3. 24.
commination, And it shall come to pass, that in stead of sweet smell there
shall be stink; and in stead of a girdle, a rent; and in stead of well-set
hair, baldness; and in stead of a stomacher, a girding of sackcloth; and
burning, in stead of beauty. Which last curse is omitted by the Septuagint.

6. Now, Women why subject to baldness.
whereas baldness is threatened to the Jewish women, i^ prompts unto me a
passage in Hippocrates, who (as Foeminis nec capillos des^uere dixit, nec
laborare. Epist. 95.
Seneca cites him) affirms, that women in his time were neither bald, nor
subject to the gout: and yet Ibidem.
Seneca confesses, that the weaker sex in his days, were subject to both these
infirmities; Non qu^a mutata foeminarum natura, sed vita: nam cum virorum
licentiam aequaverint, corporum quoque virilium vitia aequa^ verunt. Though a
supernatural cause must be allowed, immediately to inflict the same on the
Jewish women, about the time of the Prophets prediction.

7. Whereas it is said, What meant by burning.
in stead of beauty burning, I question whether it relates to the Babylonians
sacking of the City, when 2 Chr. 36. 19.
they burnt the house of God, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem, and burnt
all the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed all the goodly vessels
thereof. Rather I believe it referred to some personal, and corporal malady,
which afterward God inflicted on the bodies of these lascivious women: As
Fevers, or the disease Erysipelas, A swelling full of heat, and redness with
pain about it, (called by us Saint Anthonies fire) or some other pestilent
inflammation. Except any will understand burning in the 1 Cor. 7. 9.
Apostles sense, for inward lust; that these women, when ugly and deformed,
should still ardently affect their lovers, by whom they were entertained with
neglect, and contempt.

8. The mention of turning a sweet smell into a stink, Jews generally ill
sented.
minds me of a common tradition, that an offensive savor attends the bodies
of modern Jews, who (notwithstanding their frequent washing) may be sented in
their company, from those which are Christians. Indeed the flout of a fleering
Pagan Martialis. li. 4. Epigr. 4.
Poet herein, works nothing on my belief, Quod jejunia Sabbatariorum,
Malles, quam quod oles, olere, Bassa.
More am I moved with the testimony of many credible Merchants in our age,
adding hereunto, that the Jewish mothers use to buy the blood of Christians,
from Barber-surgeons, (who preserve it on purpose) therein to bath the bodies
of their new born babes, so to mitigate the rank smell of their children.
However, we leave this as It is learnedly confuted by D. Brown in Vulgar Errors.
doubtful, having formerly found their report false, who (literally
interpreting that commination, Psalm. 69. 24.and Romans 11. 10.
And ever bow down their backs) affirm all Jews to be crooked, or
bunch-backed; experience presenting many of that nation (for their stature) as
proper persons, and as straight as any other people.

9. I shall deceive their expectations, Harlots their bashful impudency.
who conceive I will soil my book with presenting the exact habits of common
Harlots therein. Only in general we learn from Scripture, that with Thamar
the daughter-in-law of Judah, they used to sit Genesis 38. 14.
covered and wrapped in a veil, in an open place, by the way. Impudent modesty!
shameless shamefacedness^ What a contradiction was there betwixt her gesture,
and posture? Why Ibid. (...). 15.
face covered, if intending to be dishonest? Why in the highway, if disposed
to be otherwise? Hereby she professed a private-publickness (the Prove. 7. 9.
twilight is the Harlots season) As free to commit sin: so careful not to be
openly known her self, and (by consequence) not to reveal him who committed it
with her.

10. Harlots painted themselves.
Add hereunto that painting was practiced by 2 King. 9. 22. and 30.
Harlots, adulterated complexions well agreeing with adulterous conditions.
Especially, they used to Ezekiel. 23. 40.
to paint their eyes, understand their eyebrows and eyelids with Stibium, to
make them look black, conceited by them an extraordinary comeliness. Hereupon
was Solomon's caution, Neither let her take thee with her Prove. 6. 25.
eyelids, as one of her principal nets to catch wantons therewith. When aged,
they used in vain to make themselves fair by Jer. 4. 30.
renting their faces with painting, though more cause to rent them with their
nails out of penitent indignation. Thus painting, used to reconcile, in time
widens the breaches in their faces; and their flesh, tainted at last with the
poison thereof, like rotten vessels, spring the more leakes, the more they are
repaired.

11. As for the other garments of whores, it is probable, Harlots had habits to
themselves.
that the public, and mercenary, were distinguished from honest women, by some
habit peculiar to themselves; Solomon observing, that one came forth Prove. 7.
10.
with the attire of an Harlot. Sure I am, the same custom long since was
observed in England, finding that Adam Francis Mercer, and Lord Mayor of London
Anno 1352. procured an Act of Parliament, that no known whore should wear any
hood, or attire on her head, except raied, Stows Survey page 553.
or striped cloth of diverse colors. But, enough, if not too much, of so bad a
subject; Eccles. 7. 26.
Who so pleases God, shall escape from her, but the ^inner shall be taken by
her.

SECT. VIII. Of Jewish Grave-clothes, and burying Ornaments.
1. AFter some few years, The dead how ordered among the Jews.
all the persons formerly described, high and low, rich and poor, one with
another, meet at the house of death, whither we will afford them our
attendance, to behold their funeral wardrobe. Indeed, by Jobs confession, Job
1. 28.
Naked shall I return thither again, all are resolved naked into the
wombe-generall of their Mother Earth; and Psalm. 49. 17.
When he dies he shall carry nothing away with him, (that is, actively, which
he himself can put on, or is sensible of) though passively the dead may be Luke
7. 12.
carried out with such clothing upon them, as decency, and modesty requires.

2. First therefore, Eyes closed, washed and embalmed.
his eyes being closed by one nearest, or dearest unto him, Genesis 46. 4.
Joseph shall put his hands upon thine eyes; the body was Act. 9. 37.
washed, and then prepared for embalming. This embalming was twofold; either by
incorporation, substituting spices in the rooms of their brains and bowels
taken out, so to preserve their corpses from corruption; an Egyptian custom,
and so probably Genesis 50. 2. and 26.
Jacob and Joseph were embalmed: or else only by apposition, or putting of
sweet odours to the dead body, (called by the Jews John 19. 40.
(...)) after which sort our Savior was embalmed. Of whom as a bone was not
broken: so no part of his body was taken away, to hinder the entireness of his
resurrection.

3. The next work was, Winded in linen.
Act. 5. 6.
(...) Act. 8. 2.
(...), that is, to contrive the body, and wind it into a modest method. For,
though the pale cheeks of the dead will take no other dye, yet the corpse may
blush by proxy in the surviving kindred, if not put into a decent posture.
Afterward, they were wrapped up in a Sindon, John 11. 44.
bound hand and foot with grave-clothes (generally called John 20 7.
(...), and more particularly (...)) having (...) a napkin about their heads,
single by it self, and not fastened to the rest of the grave-clothes, as appears
by that napkin in about our Saviors head, not lying with the clothes after his
resurrection, but Ibid.
wrapped together in a place by it self. This done, the body was put into a Gen
50. 26.
Coffin; laid, and carried out on [(...)] a Luke 7. 14.
biere, and then either, 1 Buried, the most Genesis 23. 19.
ancient and general custom of the Hebrews; or, 2 Burnt Jer. 34 5.
with fragrant spices, to qualify all noisome smells; or, 3 Both, as the bodies
of 1 Samuel 31. 12, 13.
Saul and his sons, whose flesh was burnt, and bones buried.
As for Asa his burial, it was peculiar for the solemnity thereof, they 2 Chr.
16. 14.
laid him in a bed which was filled with sweet odours, and diverse kinds of
spices prepared by the Apothecaries art; and they made a very great burning for
him. And the reason, that more state was used at his burial, then others, was
because he was a pious King, and so well deserved it; as also (which was the
main) because he had a godly son and successor Iehoshaphat, not grudging what
cost he bestowed on his Fathers funeral. A feast called the bread Ezekiel. 24. 17.
of men, and elsewhere a Jer. 16. 7.
cup of consolation, was made at these burials, probably at the cost of the
friends of the party deceased, to comfort them at their grief, with moderate
refection.

4. We presume, Mercenary weepers.
the children and friends, of this person deceased, bemoaned him veirs and
spirantibus lachrymis, with true and lively sorrow; otherwise it was common
amongst the Jews, as amongst our modern Irish, to send for Mourning women, so
Jer. 9. 17, 18.
cunning in wailing, that they could make their eyes run down with tears, and
their eyelids gush out with waters, so to furnish forth the Funeral. Such
mock-tears were in all ages: Credidimus Ovid. E^pist.
lacrymis: an and hae simulare docentur?
Hae quoque habent arts, quaque jubentur eunt.
Thy tears were trusted: do they falsehood know?
Yea, they have tricks, at will they come and go.
But, as parents, when their children cry for nothing, use to beat them, that
they may cry for something: so God threatened that he miseries of Jerusalem
should Jer. 9. 19*
afterward turn their feigned, and strained wailings, into sound and sincere
sorrow; when those tears (formerly but the adopted children) should become the
natural issue of their heavy hearts.

5. Nothing more remains of the Jewish burying clothes; Sepulchers
Metaphorical clothes.
except any will add, as part of their Metaphorical garments, the graves
wherein they were interred. These were proportioned to the deserts of the party
deceased, and love which the living bare unto him. In which respect Hezekiah
was buried in the chiefest (or 2 Chr. 32. 33.
highest) of the sepulchers of the sons of David; but whether highest in
posture as nearest to David, or in structure, as built most eminent above
ground, let others dispute. They used to white over their sepulchers to appear
beautiful without, to which the hypocritical Pharisees are resembled by our
Mat. 23. 27.
Savior. Yea, the friends of the dead used to raise, repair, and rebuild such
sepulchers many years after the party was deceased (probably renewing the
Epitaphs upon them:) Mat. 23. 29.
witness the contradiction in the Jews actions, with one hand out of pretended
courtesy, building and garnishing the tombs of the dead, whilst at the same
time with the other hand, out of real cruelty, they killed the living Prophets
among them.

Here the Map of Jewish Gods is to be inserted.



THE IDOLS OF THE JEWS. CHAP. VII.
1. IT is hard, Idolatry very ancient.
exactly to define, when Idolatry first began. It is generally thought about
the days of Enos, Adams grandchild; grounded upon Genesis 4. 26. though little
certainty can be collected from those words, so variously translated. We may
safely conceive, it began very early, in the infancy of mankind: it being true
of the great World, what is said of Man the Microcosme, Psalm. 58. 3.
The wicked are estranged from the womb, they go astray speaking lies, as
soon as they be born.

2. If we enquire into the causes of the variety of Idols, First reason of many
Gods, multiformity of Error.
and far spreading of superstition, these principally present themselves.
First, the multiformity of error in its own nature. If truth be once casually
lost, but especially if wilfully left, numberless are the bypath of falsehood.
Nothing under an Infinite, can expleat, and satiate the immortal mind of man.
Who having once forsaken God, infinite in power, thought to fill it self with
Idols, infinite in number; leaving still a blank, and reserving their souls for
Act. 17. 23.
unknown Gods, when they should be added thereunto.

3. Secondly, Second misunderstanding of Gods Prov^dence.
the mistaking the attribute, of divine Providence. Men did conceive the whole
world, and all therein, too large a compass for one God to actuate and inform.
And therefore as Pliny Not. hist.
observes, that the old Eagles determinant spatia, assign several and certain
circuits to their young ones to fly and feed in, without interfering each on
others dominions; so the heathen confined topicall Gods to particular places.
Their Gods (say 1 King. ^0. 23.
the Syrians of the Israelites) are Gods of the hills; (perchance collecting
the same from the Jews usual sacrificing in high places) we will fight against
them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger then they. This minds me of
the speech of a I do not say his name was Coya Shawsware of whom in Stows
Survey. page 780.
Persian in England, attendant on the Ambassador Anno 1626. who perceiving
wealthy people in London in the time of the Plague tumultuously posting to
their Country houses; What (says he) have the Englishmen two Gods, the one
for the City, and the other for the Country? A mistake in the heathen, which
gave the occasion of multiplying of Deities: some shadow of whose superstition,
still remains in Popish Saint-worship. For whereas Christ gave his Disciples
power to Mat. 10. 1.
heal all manner of sicknesses, and all manner of diseases (not consigning the
Ague to Peter, Palsy to Andrew etc.) they appoint the several maladies to the
cure of several Saints, Toothache to Apollonia, Sore-eyes to Saint Blaze etc.

4. Thirdly, Third, impreving Heroical into Divine worship.
the improving of Heroical into Divine worship. Anciently every nation had men
of renown, famous in their generations, meriting much of their Country. Whose
memories after their death was honored with monuments, statues, Anniversaries
of mourning, some foo^steps whereof are seen in the daughters of Israel yearly
lamenting the daughter Judge. 11. 40.
of Iephthah. In process of time, popular indiscretion, hightened this civil,
into divine honor, translating such famous Heroes from the front of the
mightiest men, into the rear of the meanest Gods: as appears by the propensity
of the people of Israel to adore Moses when dead, had not God Deuteronomy. 34. 6.
prevented it.

5. Fourthly, Fourth, assigning several sexes to their Gods.
the assigning several sexes to their Gods, as 1 King. 11. 5. and 33.
Ashtaroth the Goddess of the Zidonians. Hereupon the fancy of the Poets were
the spokesmen to make love betwixt them, the Priests to marry, or rather the
Pandars to couple; and upon the present impregnation of the female Deities, the
same luxurious fancies were the midwives to deliver them, the nurses to suckle
their children. These, when brought up to maturity, were also disposed in
matches, thus filling the world with families of full grown, and nurseries of
infant Deities.

6. Lastly, Last, suggestion of Satan.
the suggestion of Satan, who was the Master of the ceremonies in all these
superstitions: who as he is a general gainer by all sins of men, so he did
drive a secret trade, and particularly received unknown profit by Idolatry;
seeing, as the 1 Cor. 10. 20.
Apostle observes, what they saerificed, they sacrifittced to Devils.

7. In the progress of Idolatry we may observe, F^ur steps of Idolat^y.
first, they began to worship glorious creatures, The Sun, with all the host of
heaven, mentioned by holy Job. 31. 26.
Job, an ancient writer. But all the stars in heaven were too few for them to
adore. Hence they proceed to worship useful creatures, sheep, oxen etc.
stepping thence to the adoration of things hurtful, Dragons, Serpents,
Crocodiles; probably in fear, for a Ne noceant, that they should do them no
harm. Lastly, they gave divine honor to all creatures in general, Romans 1. 23.
Changing the glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image made like to
corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things:
their children not making more babies, then their parents did Idols. But of
all, the Egyptian superstition, rather then it would sit out, played at the
smallest game; they worshipping besides Oxen, and Sheep, Onions and Leeks, in
their gardens: So that one may justly admire that their superstition did not
starve them. For this being granted, that they would not eat what they did
adore, (which is laid to the charge of the Papists, how truly I have now no
leisure to examine) it is hard to conceive where they found food to satisfy
their hunger, besides the objects of their Idolatry.

8. If now in the next place we descend to enquire, what should make men so
much to dote on the visible representations of their Deities, contrary to the
nature of a spirit; we shall find it proceed from their infidelity, Infidelity
the main cause of worshipp^ng God in a visible shape.
not able to apprehend God under the notion of an incorporeal Being. And
therefore to contract the species of their devotion, they fixed it in a
material object, lest otherwise with them their God should be out of sight,
out of mind. Saint Jews of France loved much to hear Sermons, whilst our
King Henry the third his contemporary, was more for being at Mass, saying he
had rather see his God then hear another speak eloquently of him. This humor
of seeing a Deity (though venting it self otherways) possessed the hearts of
people in all ages, who being unable to raise up their minds to conceive God
every where, loved to look on him bodily represented in some material Image.

9. Infidelity thus premised as the main cause, two other occasions, Two
occasions thereof.
no ways given by God, but ignorantly taken by men, much advanced such visible
representations: First, Gods frequent appearing to the Patriarchs in a bodily
shape. Which being but then assumed, voluntary, occasional, and for the
present purpose, was misinterpreted by men for natural, necessary, constant,
and an essential part of his Being: and thence they concluded him a corporeal
substance.

10. Secondly, Second occasion of making images.
Image-making was much advantaged by some expressions in Scripture, that God
used after the manner of men, allaying the purity of his nature, with humane
Phrases, so to work himself the better down to our capacities. Should God
speak of himself as he is, his expressions would be as incomprehensible as his
Essence. Hereupon, men, in stead of thinking higher of Gods Goodness, thought
lower of his Greatness, and not able to conceive his Providence by his Eye,
clear demonstration of his Power by his Arm, clearer by his Hand, clearest by
his Finger, attention by his Ears, gracious presence by his Face etc. fell
first in their brains to fancy, and then with their hands to form him a bodily
Image, or Idol. Idols, which though (as the Psalmist Psalm. 105. 5.
observes) they have mouths and speak not, yet are termed by the Prophet,
Habak. 2. 18.
teachers of lies, misinforming men with most false apprehensions.

11. But their impieties stopped not here, but proceeded from a corporal, to a
vicious assimilation, A second assim^lation in badness.
and soon after inferred their Gods conformity to man, as well in lewdness, as
in limbs, badness, as bodily proportion. This they falsely collected from the
impunity of many profane persons, interpreting Gods silence, consent; as
approving, because not presently punishing their wicked practices. These things
^ast thou done, and I kept Psalm. 50. 21.
silence, and thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self.
Thus because many Thieves have thrived by their felonious courses, Drunkards in
their distempers have strangely escaped dangers, and Harlots have grown wealthy
by their mercenary embraces; the heathens have fancied Mercury the God and
Patron of theft, Bacchus of drunkenness, Venus and (as some will have it) Flora
of whoredom, conceiving such Gods guilty themselves of the same sins, and
friends, favorers, yea protectors thereof in others.

12. But to return to their worshipping of Idols. True it is, Difference
betwixt the learned and simple heathens Idolatry.
the most knowing and rational amongst the heathens, adored not the very
material Image, but in, under, through, and beyond the same worshipped the
true God of heaven and earth. And in all ages some were found who flouted at
such superstitions: amongst these the Poet brings in an Idol thus speaking.
Olim truncus eram ficulnus, inutile lignum,
Cum faber incertus scamnum faceretne, Deumve;
Maluit esse Deum.
Time out of mind a fig tree stock I grew,
An useless block, before the workman knew,
Benches, or Gods to make me, (small the ods)
Resolved at last of me to make his Gods.
Semblable whereunto is the story of a Countryman in Spain, who coming to an
Image enshrined, the extraction and first making whereof he could well
remember, and not finding from the same that respectfull usage which he
expected, (happily because he had not feed the Friars to their contentment, who
accordingly do sell such frowns and smiles) You need not (quoth he) be so
proud, for I have known you from a Plumtree. But although the wiser sort both
of Pagans and Papists worshipped God under the Image, so only faulty in
symbolicall Idolatry, and breach of the second Commandment, serving the true
Deity in a false and forbidden manner, yet the ignorant people amongst them
both, were directly guilty of dull downright Idolatry, breaking both first and
second Commandment, adoring a false God with a false service. And as Jacob,
though bound by his own vow to go on to Genesis 28. 22.
Bethel, yet either out of faintness or forgetfulness, set up his staff short
thereof at the City of Genesis 33. 19.
Shechem, where he bought a dwelling; so the devotion of ignorant people,
though projecting perchance a longer journey to themselves to worship God in
the Image, tired in their travel, and taking up a nearer lodging, terminated
their worship in that visible object presented unto them. Thus Gods Spirit,
though allowing liberty to the Potter of the same clay to make one vessel to
honor and another to dishonor, sharply reproves the Isa. 44. 16, 16.
Carpenter, who makes a fire for his warming, and a God for his worshipping of
the self same wood.

13. But grant Idols originally frequent amongst the Heathen, How heathen Idols
were first brought in amongst the Jews.
a Colony of them began to be planted amongst the Israelites, much by their
mixture with the men, more by their matches with the women of those nations of
Canaan; notwithstanding God flat prohibition to the contrary: His Deuteronomy. 7. 3, 4.
daughter shall thou not take unto thy son, for they will turn away thy son
from following me, that they may serve other Gods. Some will say, it was more
probable the Jewish husband should turn his heathen wife to true Religion. For
suppose her no fool (such unconvertible in a Prove. 27. 22.
Mortar) but one of a tolerable capacity, bearing unfeigned affection to her
husband (obliged thereunto in gratitude for his marrying her, he might destroy)
he having the double advantage of Authority and Verity on his side, it seems
more likely that he should make impression on he belief, then receive
infection from her. But here we must know, that he husband by breaking Gods
command in his unlawful match, forfeited the vigor and virtue of his
arguments, entreaties, persuasions, and threatenings to work upon her. And as
his sword justly wanted the edge of power, so his shield deservedly lost all
strength of protection, being left liable and exposed to his wives
solicitation, without any fence against her infection. Yea, grant at first his
constancy in the truth as hard as stone, yet in continuance of time it might be
hollowed with that, which Solomon calls a continual Pro. 19. 13.
dropping; and restless importunity advantaged with bosome-opportunity, may
atchieve a seeming impossibility.

14. So much for the occasion of Polytheisme, How it is lawful to describe
heathen Idols.
the original of heathen Idols, and naturalizing such strange Gods amongst the
Israelites. Come we now to the particular description of their Idols. Conceive
we this no breach of Gods Exodus 2^. 13.
command, Make no mention of the name of other Gods, neither let them be heard
out of thy mouth, understanding it, by way of praying to them, praising of
them, pleading for them, swearing by them, but otherwise it is lawful to
mention them occasionally by way of discourse; yea commendable to name them as
detesting their impiety, deploring men's ignorance, desiring men's information,
the right knowledge of many Scripture-passages, depending on some insight into
such superstitions. Where, before we begin, be it observed, that though very
many the Idols mentioned in Scripture, yet our mistake may make them more then
they were; if erroneously conceiving Quot nomina, tot numina, that every
several Idols name we meet with, was a different and distinct Deity by them
adored. O no! As our one and only God is known to us by several names, Iah,
Jehovah, El, Elohim, Adonai etc. so in apish imitation thereof, some one
heathen God took a principal pride, to have several names imposd upon him,
and pleased himself much in (...), in multitude of titles.

15. In setting forth these heathen Gods, Alphabeticall method in ranking them.
it matters not what method we use, and perchance none at all is most natural
for our subject. Molten Images are Isa. 41. 29.
confusion, says the Prophet; and therefore, a rude heap fitter, ^hen an
orderly pile, for their description. However, not for their honor but one
ease, we will rank such Idols as we find in Scripture worshipped by Jews, or
Judaizing people, Alphabetically; as follows.

Adramelech.
16. That is, a Magnificent King. Surely, seeing such men as made, named also
these Idols, they had been highly to balm, if not fitting them with
illustrious titles. This was not adored by the Jews, but such Samaritans as
from Sephervaim, came to people the Country whence the ten Tribes were carried
captive. His image may probably be conceived, a Crowned King sitting on a
Throne, and the manner of his worship is expressed in Holy 2 Kin. 17. 31.
writ, that they burnt their children in fire unto him. Not that they burnt
them to ashes, as they did to Moloch, (whose service was Hell, whilst this of
Adramelech was Purgatory) but, by way of lustration, expiation, consecration,
and Mock-baptisme by fire, their Chemerim, or Priests led the unwilling
children, and passed them through the fire on both sides, where their painful
scorching was rewarded, with the peoples acclamation, and their parents opinion
of merit therein.

Anamalech.
17. As some Ger Voss. de Orig. Idolat. lib. 2. cap. 5.
deduce it from the Arabian word (...) Any, Rich, in effect a rich King, or (if
you will) Prince Mammon. If so, he has many adorers this day, by Col. 3. 5.
covetousness which is Idolatry. Others deriving it from an Hebrew root (...)
an answering God, which shows him more civil, friendly, and familiar then
others of his rank, taking more state upon them in their sullen silene No
doubt, the Devils answers here were no plainer, then his riddling Oracles
elsewhere, which like changeable Taffata (wherein the woofe and warpe are of
different colors) seems of several hues, as the looker on takes his station:
so his doubling answers appeared such to every ones apprehension, as they stood
affected in their desires. Anamalech had the same superstitious worship 2 King.
17. 31.
with the former, and was worshipped by the Sephervaite Samaritans.

Apis, or Serapis.
18. Was a true living black bull, with a white list, or streak along the back,
a white mark in fashion of an half Moon on his right shoulder; only two hairs
growing on his tail (why just so many, and no more, the Devil knows with a fair
square blaze in his forehead, and a great bunch called Cantharus under his
tongue. What art their Priests did use, to keep up the breed, and preserve
succession of cattle with such (...), or privy marks, I list not to enquire.
It was adored by the Egyptians, (though not mentioned by name in Scripture) and
hence it was, that they fed by themselves, counting it an Genesis 43. 32.
abomination to eat with the Hebrews. For, oh! how would their hunger have
been turned into fury, if tasting of an Israelitish dish, they should chance to
meet therein with parcel of that God whom they worshipped? This also was the
cause, why Moses requested three days journey into the wilderness to sacrifice,
refusing to do it in the land of Egypt, alleging fear to be stoned, if before
their eyes they should offer the abomination Exodus 8. 26.
of the Egyptians, namely, if he should offer a bull or cow, how mad would the
other have been, at such an indignity, and affront to their Deity.

19. Be^ides this natural and living Bull, kept in one place, they also
worshipped (...) a golden, or gilded ox, the Image or portraiture of the
former. Some conceive this Apis to have been the symbol, and emblem of Joseph
the Patriarch, so called from (...) Ab, a father, seeing he is said to be made
by God Genesis 45. 8.
a Father to Pharaoh, that is, preserver of him and his Country. And therefore
the Egyptians in after ages, gratified his memory with statues of an Ox, a
creature so useful in plowing, sowing, bringing home, and treading out of
corn, to perpetuate that gift of grain he had conferred upon them. They
strengthen their conjecture, because Serapis (which G. Voss. de Idol. li^. 1.
c. 29.
one will have to be nothing else but Apis with addition of (...) Sar, that is,
a Prince, whence perchance our English Sir) was pictured with Ruffinus Hist.
Eccles. lib. 2. ca. 22 and Suidas in (...).
a bushel over his head, and Joseph (we know) was corn-meater general in
Egypt. Though others on good ground conceive, Oxe-worship in Egypt of far
greater antiquity.

20. However, hence Exodus 32. 4.
Aaron, and hence afterward Jeroboam (who flying from Solomon, lived some
years with Shishak King of 1 Kin. 11. 40.
Egypt) had the pattern of their Calves, which they made for the children of
Israel to worship. If any object, the Egyptians Idols were Bulls, or Oxen, the
Israelites but Calves; the difference is not considerable. For (besides the
objectour never looked into the mouths of the latter to know their age) gradus
non variat speciem, a less character is not another letter. Yea Herodotus calls
Apis himself (...) a Calfe, and Vitulus is of as large acception among the
Latins. Such an old calfe the Virg^l.^log. 3.
Poet describes, -- Ego hanc vitulam (ne forte recuses,
Bis venit ad mulctram, binos alit ubere foetus)
Depno --
My Calfe I lay (left you mislike't, both tides
She comes to th'pale, and suckles twain besides.)
But to put all out of doubt, what in Exodus is termed a Calfe, the Psalm. 106.
20.
Psalmist calls an Ox. Some will have Aaron to have branded on his Calfe the
privy tokens of Apis, because it is said, after he had made it a molten calfe
that he Exodus 32. 4.
fashioned it with a graving tool, this is, say some, imprinted it with the
foresaid characters in the face, back, and shoulder thereof; but this we leave
as uncertain.

Ashima.
21. All that we know of him, is, that he was the God of the men of Hamath 2
King. 17. 30.
, which were brought into Samaria. The Rabbis say, he was presented as an
Hee-goate. Like enough, Satan much delighted in that shape, where his staring,
frizeled, shaggy hair was fit to affright folk. Indeed, both Devils and Goats
are said to go out in a stink, and so fare they well.

Ashtoreth, in the Septuagint Astarte.
22. Her Hebrew name signifies flocks, either because worshipped in the form
of a Sheep, as the Jews will have it, or because (as Scaliger) whole flocks
were sacrificed to her. What if because supposed protector and preserver of
flocks in those eastern Countries, as in the west, -- Pan curat oves, oviumque
magistros.
Pan he does keep, both Shepherd and Sheep.
Ashtaroth, says the Scripture, was the Goddess of the Sidonians 1 Kin. 11. 13.
. Tully says the same, De na^. Deo. ^ lib. 3.
Venus Syria Tyroque concepta quae Astarte vocatur. But, though the Sidonians
did originally invent, they did not totally ingross her to themselves, the
Philistines having a share in her service, who hung up Saul's Armor in the 1 Samuel 31. 10.
House of Ashtaroth, as acknowledging their victory achieved by her
assistance. In the vacancy Judge. 2. 13. and 10. 6.
of the Judges, the worshipping of Ashtaroth was first brought into Israel;
which afterward, by the advice of 1 Samuel 7. 3, 4.
Samuel, was solemnly banished out of the land, untilll Solomon in his old age,
befooled by his wives, 1 King. 11. 5. 33.
introduced it again. Her image was the statute of a woman, having on her own
head the Head M. Seldom de Diis Syris ex Philone Byblio.
of a Bull, where the horns erected resembled the Crescent Moon, and his
curled hair (falling down on her forehead) betokened (forsooth) the fiery beams
thereof. This Goddess was very tender of her self, and careful not to catch
cold; for, besides the Grove over her image, she had also Curtains over her
Grove, 2 King. 23. 7.
which the women weaved for that purpose, till Josiah took order to destroy
them.

Baal.
23. That is, a Lord, being the name general for most Idols. Hereat happily the
Apostle 1 Cor. 8. 5.
reflected, when acknowledging (according to common language) there be Gods
many, and Lords many. But, we take this whereof we treat, to be Chief of the
Baals, the most ancient, and eminent of his name. A great Lord no doubt, who
could qualify four 1 King. 18. 19.
hundred and fifty Prophets for his Chaplains. He was served with 1 Kin. 19. 18.
bowing of the knee, and his Priests, in a religious frenzy, 1 Kin. 18. 28.
used to cut themselves with knives and lancers, till the blood gushed out upon
them. Oh^ how do some go down hill with difficulty, and take pains to the
place of eternal Pain? In the interim betwixt the Judge. 2. 13.
Judges, Baalisme was first brought into Israel, which in the days of Samuel
was 1 Samuel 7 4.
publicly abandoned by the people. Afterward the worship of Baal ebbed and
flowed variously, as follows: In Israel.
1 1 Kin. 16. 31.
Iezebel daughter to Eth-baal King of the Zidonians wife to Ahab, brought in
Baal (as part of her portion) into Samaria. 2 Eliah gave his worship a mortal
wound, when killing four hundred and fifty of his Prophets at mount Carmel. 3.
Iezebel before Ahabs death, recruited the number of Baals Prophets, to about 1
King. 22. 6.
four hundred, and set up his service again. 4 Ichoram her son (best of all the
bad Kings) put away the image 2 King. 3. 2.
of Baal, which Ahab had made. 5 Iehu so totally and finally routed Baal, and
his Priests, that they never after rallied up their forces in Israeal.
In Judah.
1 Athaliath Iezebels daughter, publicly planted the service of Baal in
Jerusalem, and bestowed 2 Chi. 24. 7.
on him, all the dedicate things of the House of the Lord. 2 Iehoiada rooted it
out, when he slew Mattan 2 Kin. 11. 18.
Baals Priest, before the Alter. 3 Ahaz set up bank-rupt Baal, with a new
stock, and made molten 2 Chr. 28. 2.
images for his service. 4 Hezekiah is presumed to have destroyed Baal, amongst
the rest of the images, which he brake in pieces. 5 Manasseh reared up 2 King.
21. 3.
Altars for Baal, and made a grove for him in imitation of Ahab. 6 Josiah made
an 2 King. 23. 5.
utter abolition of Baal out of the land.
Then was fully acomplished, what God by his Hosea 2. 17.
Prophet had foretold, I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth,
and they shall no more be remembered by their name.

24. Some will ask, that seeing Baal is made a Man by Eliah, He is a God 1
King. 18. 27.
pursuing his enemies (which is no woman's work) how comes Saint Paul to make
him female Romans 11. 4. (...), where the feminine article speaks him, or her
rather, of the weaker sex? It is answered, (...) the Image, or something
equivalent, is understood. If this satisfy not, even, Let, Baal plead for
himself, and make his own vindication for the monstrosity of an Hermaphrodite.

Baal-Berith, and Baal-meon.
25. I take these to be the same with Baal, only distinguished by the place
wherein they were worshipped. Thus the Lady of Lauretta Hall, and Walsingham,
are not several persons, but the same adored in sundry Shrines. Baal-Berith
(perchance because first worshipped in Berithus a City in Phoenicia) had a
Temple in, or near Shechem, whence Abimelech took seventy pieces of silver to
raise his Judge. 9. 4.
Army. Baal-meon was placed in the Tribe of Reuben.

Baal-peor.
26. Taking his name from (...) to lay open, Deus apertionis, an Idol which
showed all that Adam covered with fig leaves. The Hieron. lib. 2. in Hose. ca.
9 and lib. 1. contra Iovinianum Isidorus de Origin. lib. 8. c. 11.
Fathers make him to be the beastly God Priapus. No wonder then if grave Cato
went off from the stage, at the Plays presented to the honor of the God
Bacchus, accounting such scurrility inconsistent with his severity, seeing none
could contentedly behold the image of Baal-peor (the Idol of Moab and Midian)
but first must sacrifice all his modesty unto it. And we may be well assured,
where the Idol was naked, the Idolaters were not covered, so that both sexes
assumed much licentiousness in their feasts, and merry meetings, as appears by
the impudency Numb. 25. 6.
of Cozbi and Zimri.

27. One thing I much admire at, in the worship of Baal-peor, that such as
adored him (as the Psalmist observes) did eat the sacrifices Psalm. 106. 28.
of the dead. Me thinks, each morsel they put into their mouths, should mar
their mirth, and the very mention of the Dead, make them all amort. Their warm
and wanton embraces of living bodies, ill agreed with their offerings Diis
manibius, to gashly Ghosts. This inclines me to that learned Vollu^ de Idolat.
man's opinion that by sacrifices to the dead are intended no Inferiae, or
obsequies to the departed, but only mere offerings to the Idol, a liveless,
dull, dead, and inanimate thing; in opposition whereunto, God so Above thirty
times. See the Concordance.
often in Scripture is styled the living Lord.

Bell.
28. The same (say some) with Baal, only he was a Phenician, this a Isa. 46. 1.
Babylonish Deity. This Bell was the grand confounder of so many barnes, flocks,
and vineyards, spending daily twelve Hist. Bell. v. 3.
measures of fine flower, forty sheep, and six great pots of wine. Surely he
deserved to forfeit his large fare, by the Apostles 2 These. 3. 10.
rule, He that will not work, let him not eat, finding no activity in this
Idol, proportionable to his voracious appetite. Indeed his Priests, and their
famiy are said to make riddance of all those victuals; and although the whole
story may be challenged to be Apocrypha, yet so much thereof as relates to
Bells devouring belly (so believed by a vulgar error) seems framed in some
analogy to Canonical truth; witness the threatening of God in the Ier. 51. 44.
Prophet. And I will punish Bell in Bablyon, and I will bring forth out of his
mouth, that which he has swallowed up.

Baal-Zebub.
29. That is, the Lord of flies; but, whether so called, from bringing or
banishing of flies; from causing, or chasing them away, is not decided. Indeed
the Jews account it one of their constant miracles in their Temple, Mat. 24. 28.
that whereas naturally (as where the carcass is, thither will the Eagles
resort: so) flies swarm where sacrifices are slain, yet not any of such
troublesome insects infected their Altar, whilst plenty thereof about the
sacrifices of Baal-zebub. Of this Idol formerly in 29.
Dan, here I only enter my dissent from their opinion, who conceive Baal-zebub
a nickname given in derision to the God of Ekron. Surely sick men speak
seriously, and Ahaziah his fall had not so far crazed his intellectuals
(calling him Baal-zebub in his Commission to his messengers) as to send a mock
by their mouth to that God from whom he begged a boon, 2 King. 1. 2.
and hoped to have a favorable answer. At which time those messengers were
remanded by Elijah, and soon after the two Captains with their fifties sent to
attach him burnt with fire from heaven, whilst the third saved himself with 2
King. 1. 13.
submissive language; a Petition working more then a Mandamus on the spirit of
the Prophet. Bel-zebub, or God of flies, passes in the Testament for the Mat.
12. 24.
Prince of Devils. Indeed, as flies have their felicity in inflaming of raw
sores: so the Devil delights in heightning each pimple into a scab; scab, into
a boil, boil, into an ulcer; ulcer, into a fistula; endeavoring to improve
our smallest sins by his temptations into unpardonableness, if Gods mercy
prevent not his malice.

Chemosh.
30. Notoriously known to be the abomination of 1 King. 11. 33 and 2 Kin. 23.
13. and I^r. 48. 13.
Moab; yet so that this Idol was held in Coparcenary betwixt them, and the
Ammonites; witness Iephthah his question to the King of Ammon, demanding
restitution of the land of Gilead from the Israelites, Judge. 11. 24.
Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy God gives thee to possess? Thus
as Moab and Ammon once parted the incestuous extraction from the same Genesis 19.
37, 38
Grandfather: so now they met again at the Idolatrous adoration of the same
God. We find nothing in Scripture of the fashion, or worship of Chemosh, only
we read in In (...).
Benjamin an ancient learned Jew, that at Gebal in a Temple was found the Idol
of the children of Ammon (certainly either Chemosh, or Moloch) being an image
of stone gilded over, sitting on a throne, betwixt two female images also
sitting, having an Altar before him whereon incense was offered, as we in our
draught have designed it accordingly.

Dagon.
31. Neither good flesh nor fish, but a mixture of both, bearing fish in his
name, and flesh in his head, and 1 Samuel 5. 4.
hands. Indeed the heathens observe the Syrians generally to have adored fish:
Piscen Syri venerantu^, De Natura D^orum. 3.
says Tully. Yet dare I not impute Gods not apointing any fish to be
sacrificed unto him, to his detestation thereof on the foresaid account; but
rather, either because being ferae naturae they could not be constantly gotten
for the continual sacrifice; or because it was hard to bring fish alive to
Jerusalem many miles by land, it being essential to the sacrifice to be
presented quick at the Altar when offered thereupon. But of Dagon formerly in
32.
Dan.

The Ephod*
32. This by the primitive institution thereof, is sufficiently known for a
Priests Exo. 28. 6. etc.
vestment. Indeed, once we find David, when dancing before the Arc, wearing 2 Samuel 6. 14.
an Ephod, but in what capacity let others dispute: surely not with any
^^crilegious invading of the Priest-like office. Perchance, (as formerly our
English Kings at their Coronation wore a Dalmatica with sleeves, a Sacerdotall
garment: so) David, as custos utriusque tabulae, and being by his place to
provide that the Priests should perform their office, habited himself
(especially on that occasion) in some general conformity to their function.
But leaving this to others, as God by A^rons chief 1 Samuel 13. 7.
Ephod informed such as inquired of him, so Satan (Gods Ape in his Temples,
Priests, Prophets, Altars, Sacrifices, Oracles, and Ephods) counterfeited in
his mock- Ephods, to resolve such as asked counsel thereat. Thus the Danites
before their expedition against Laish, consulted the Judge. 18. 5. 14
Ephod which Micah had in his house, concerning their success. Gideon also made
an Ephod of the spoils of the Midianites, which we charitably believe might be
(when first made) a Virgin (as innocently intended by him, only for a civil
memorial) but in fine proved an Harlot, when all Israel went a Judge. 8. 27.
whoring after it. So that such an Ephold may pass under the notion of a Jewish
Idol.

Milcom.
33. That is, their King. If any object, that the points therein answer not
exactly to that sense; know their Gods were too great to be ranked under
Grammar Rules: ( Jupiter we know irregularly declined both in Latin and Greek)
and some grammatical Anomaly is conceived to conduce the more to their
magnificence. It was the God of the 1 King. 11. 33. and 2 Kin. 23. 13.
Ammonites, and was the same with Moloch, as may appear, because what Amos 5.
26.
Amos calls (...), Saint Luke Act. 7. 43.
rendereth Moloch* according to the judicious observation of the most learned S
Hiero^e li. 2. in Amos.
Father, concerning Apostles, and Apostolical me^, citing places out of the
old Testament, Illos non verba considerare, sed sensum, nec eadem sermonum
calca^e vestigia, dummodo a sentent^is non recedant.

Moloch.
34. A monstrous Idol. Nothing came amiss to him, having Stowage enough to
receive whatever was offered unto him. It was an hollow image of brass, having
seven repositories therein; one for Meal, a second for Turtles, a third for a
Sheep, a fourth for a Ram, the fifth for a Calfe, (like to which was the head
thereof) the sixth for an Ox, the Paulus F^gius in Chaldaeam paraphrasi^
Levi^ici.
seventh for a Child, which it first embraced in its arms, and then ( Hags
hugs kill with kindness) seared to death, having fire made under the concavity
thereof. This murder of children was acted near Jerusalem, in a place
remarkable for its double name,

1 The valley of the sons of 2 Chr. 28. 3.
Hinnom. So called from the skreeking of children ((...) Nahem is to roar out)
when sacrificed there.

2 2 King. 23. 10.
Tophet. From (...) Toph a See supra, in the Description of Jerusalem page 349.
6.
drum, loud music being used to intercept the childrens crying from their
parents hearing it. But, had not such parents ears as well is their hearts, as
on their heads, to sympathize with the suffering of their own flesh and blood?
And seeing these Tragedies were acted in their presence, why had not such
parents, (as music to keep the sound from their ears, so) maskes to hide the
same from their sight? But, what shall we say? They may be ranked amongst those
of whom the Apostle speaks, Whom 2 Cor.44.
the God of this world has blinded. Superstition depriving men both of Grace
and Nature together.

Nergal.
35. He was adored by the 2 Kin. 17. 30.
Cuthites, by whom we understand such who (before their transplanting into
Samaria) dwelled at or nigh Cuth, a river in Persia. His name may be deduced
from (...) Properly a Candle in Hebrew.
Ner, light or fire, and (...) gal, rolled or wreathed: the rays of the one,
and flakes of the other appearing waved or curled to the beholder. Hence we
conceive this Nergal of the Cuthites to be a constant fire which they adored as
the symbol of the Sun, notoriously known to be the grand Deity of the
Persians. As indeed fire is the the terrestrial Sun, Whence the Stars of our
torches and tapers borrow their light. Yea, such the purity, clarity, and
activity thereof, that though it be not to be called a God, God is pleased to
call himself a Heb. 12. 29.
consuming fire.

Nisroch.
36. A God of the Assyrians, in whose Temple Sennacherib was a worshipping,
when 2 King. 19. 37.
slain therein by Adramelech, and Sharezer his sons. This was he who so lately
boasted, Where is the King of Hamath, of Arphad, of Sepharvaim, Ibid. ver. 13.
of Henah and Ivah? Let now one more be added to that Catalogue, And where is
Sennacherib the proud King of Assyria? Many were gainers by his death; God got
the honor of the action, Isaiah the performance of his prophecy, Hezekiah
riddance from his worst enemy, Esarhaddon his son and successor got the
kingdom of Assyria, and his two sons who slew him, Ibid. ver. 37.
got exile into the land of Armenia, too fair a reward for so foul a Patricide.
Now though we find not this Nisroch by name to be worshipped by the Jews, yet
because the Ez^k. 23. 5.
Prophets complaint is general, that they doted on the Assyrians their
neighbors, we may conclude them guilty of spiritual whoredom with Nisroch as
a principal Idol of that Country.

Nibhaz.
37. This and Tarkah were the Idols of the 2 Kin. 17. 21.
Avites, of whom nothing save their names extant in Scripture, (though the
Rabbis fancy the one like a Dog, the other an Ass) and it is a good hearing
that we hear no more of them. Some heathen accounted those men happiest that
were never born, and those next that died the soonest: so we esteem those Idols
least bad which never appeared, and next them such as are most obscure, the
manner of whose mischievous worship have left the least impressions to
posterity.

Queen of Heaven.
38. God himself most justly is styled The King of heaven by Dan. 4. 37.
Nebucchadnezza^; but by Queen of heaven in the Jer. 7. 18. and 44 ^^.
Prophet, (superstitiously worshipped by the Jews) we understand the Moon made
to rule the night. Let her be deposed from her Regency, if willingly accepting
of this usurped title, and their unlawful offerings: but seeing man's
importunity forced them upon her against consent, the Moon is as free from
idolatry, as the Virgin Mary from superstition, on whom Regina Coeli is
obtruded by the Roman Missals. The Cakes offered unto her must needs be most
complete, seeing each one in the family had a finger in the making thereof.
The Ibid^m.
Children gather the wood, and the Fathers kindle the fire, and the women
^knead the dough to make cakes for the Queen of heaven. Their servants being
conceived too mean to be used in so high an employment.

Remphan, or Rephan.
39. Only mentioned by Saint Steven in his purgation of himself, and that with
such difference from the text in the old Testament, that learned men have much
ado to reconcile it. AMO^ 5. 26. But ye have born the Tabernacle of your
Moloch, and Chiun, your Images, the Stars of your God which ye made to your
selves.

ACTS 7. 43. Yea, ye took up the Tabernacle of Moloch, and the Star of your
God Remphan, figures which ye made, to worship them.

The main difficulty is this: how comes Chiun in the Hebrew to be rendered
Remphan in the Greek? not the same letter (save the last) being found in the
one as in the other. The best solution we meet with is as follows: 1 By Chium
(as Aben-ezra will have it) the Planet Saturn is meant. Plautus in his Penulus
calls the same C^un, as a learned Sam. P^tit. Miscel. ^i. 2. c. 2.
Critic has observed, and the Egyptian Anubis called Cyon in Greek, Plutar.
in ^ ^ide
Plutarch conceives to be the same with Saturn. 2 Rephan in the Coptick
language, a tongue extant at this day (partly consisting of Greek, and partly
of old Egyptian) is used for Saturn, as an Kircher. Prod. page 147. c. 5.
Author well skilled in that tongue has informed us. 3. The Septuagint we know
was written in the land of Egypt, at the instance of P^olemaeus Philadelphus,
where the Translatours using Rephan the noted name for Saturn in stead of
Chiun, altered the word and retained the sense, a liberty lawfully assumed by
the most faithful interpreters. 4. Probably Saint Steven spoke to the Jews in
their own language, but Saint L^ke writing in Greek, alleges his words
according to the Septuagint translation.
This I conceive to be most satisfactory amongst multiplicity of answers by
several Authors applied to the place.

Rimmon.
40. An Idol of Syria whose principal Temple was in 2 King. 5. 18.
Damascus. The name signifies a Pomegranate, Ni. (...).
as one will have it; who thereupon concludes it to be Venus, because Apples
were dedicated unto her, and her image commonly made with such fruit, as a
frolic, in her hand. More probable it is, that this God got his name from
(...) Rum, that is, high, or exalted, used so frequently in Scripture of the
true God, and of them abused to their Idol.

S^ccoth-Benoth.
41. This was made by the 2 Kin. 17. 30.
men of Babylon. The Rabbines (according to their assumed liberty, to fancy any
thing without reason rendered thereof) conceive this Idol, A Hen and her
Chickens. We stick to the original notation of the word, The tents of the
daughters, conceiving thereby meant some Temple-like Tents, by them made and
erected in the honor of Mylitta or Venus Urania Herod. li. 1. and Strabe. li.
16.
, known for an eminent Deity in Babylon: unto which tents their daughters were
sent, there to do their devotions. How honest they went in we know not, it is
suspicious they came out none of the chastest, the bargain of their uncleanness
being driven, though not performed in that place. That Suidas (...).
(...) Binos, Venos Venus, is deduced from Benoth in Succoth-Benoth, is
learnedly observed for probable by Syntag. 2. 6. 7. page 313.
Mr. Seldom in his excellent book de Diis Syris. From whom I have, with the a
King. 6. 5.
children of the Prophets, not only borrowed an Axe, but most of the tools and
timber, wherewith the structure of this our Jewish Pantheon is erected.

Teraphim.
42. A word plural in the sound and termination (like Penates in the Latin)
yet single in the sense thereof. Three sorts of Teraphims appear in Scripture,
in the original; 1 Common, only an ordinary carved image, such as 1 Samuel, 19.
13.
Mic^ol is said to have laid in her bed, making a mock-David, or counterfeiting
her sick husband therewith. 2 Religious, in which sense the Prophet threatens,
that Israel should Hose. 3. 4.
remain many days without King, Prince, Sacrifice, Image, Ephod and Teraph^^,
that is, a Prophet to instruct them in future occurrence. 3 Superstitious; such
as Judge. 17. 5. and 18. 17.
Micah made, which foretold the Dan^tes of their future good success.
This we conceive some Image acted and informed by the Devil, according to his
serpentine knowledge shrewdly guessing at all contingences.

Thamuz.
43. That is, Adonis, as Saint Hierom^ conceives, whom most Latins do follow.
Adonis is known by all for a Phenicia^ Deity, so called from (...), Adone, A
Lord in Hebrew. And the Poets are almost hoarse with singin the sad El^gies,
how Venus bemoaned Adonis killed by a Boar. In mythologie this is true, when
wan^on women bemoan their beautiful youth, slaughtered with old age, leaving
the print and mark of his teeth and tuskes in the wrinkles furrowed in their
faces. But seeing Adonis is generally conceived to be the Sun, Venus her
mourning at his death, rather represents the general grief of northern men,
when the Sun in June (called Tham^z by the Jews and their neighbors) takes his
leave of them in the tropic of Cancer, and retreateth southward, making
shorter days by d^gre^s. This Phenician superstition infected the Jews; ^zek.
8. 14.
Then he brought me to the doo^ of the gate of the Lords house, which was
toward the north, and behold there sat women weeping for Tammuz: And why the
gate toward the north? Because the body of the Sun never appearing in that
quarter of the heaven, it was the fittest place to bemoan the absence thereof.
Had not those women's tears been better expended on the death of Josiah,
according to that 2 Chr. 35. 25.
ordinance in Israel? But we may be well assured, such eyes as wept for Tammuz,
were dry for Josiah.

Conclusion.
44. Many other obscure Deities were adored by the Jews, which we purposely
omit. For never was Rebecca more Genesis 27. 46.
weary of conversing with the daughters of Heth, then we of describing these
heathen Gods. Enough therefore of ^ Cor. 8. 4.
nothing, for so all Idols are termed by the Apostle. The rather because that
as the Psalmist observes, Psalm. 104. 20.
In the night all the beasts of the forest creep forth, the Sun arises, they
gather themselves together, and lay themselves down in their dens: so when the
Sun of the Gospel displayed his light, all these herds of heathen Gods hasted
to their homes, their lurking in eternal obscurity. Then was the Isa. 2. 20.
Prophets prediction accomplished, that all Idols should be cast to the Moles
and to the Bats. Excellent company, it is pity to part them: let the blind
converse with the blind, it being true of these that they have eyes and see not.

45. Yet to give the Jews their due, in the days of our Savior they were so
free from Idolatry, that the very name thereof, or the word Idol, is not to be
found in the four Evangelists. For having smarted seventy years in Babylon, and
sensible that their Idolatry principally caused their captivity, after their
return that sin was de^ested by them, and shunning open profaneness, they
reeled into spiritual pride, hypocrisy, superstitious observing the Sabbath,
equalling Traditions with Scripture etc. sins chiefly reproved in the Sermons
of our Savior.

46. As for Christians, their principles pres^rv^ them from formal worshipping
of Idols, though too often guilty of what may be termed, tralatitious Idolatry,
when any thing (good and lawful in its own nature) is loved, or honored
above, or even with God himself. Thus money may and must be loved and used, as
the Centurion did his Mat. 8. 9.
servant, Do this, and he does it, fetch me meat from the shambles, and money
fetches it, bring me clothes from the shop, and money brings them: But, when
the man shall turn master, and money command him, Commit such a sin for my
sake, and he obeys, such ba^e Colos. 3. 5
Covetousness is by the Apostle termed Idolatry.

47. Indeed Idolatry is a subtle sin; and seeing by nature we retain in our
hearts the principles of all old Errors, it is to be feared that this sin
finding its usual way obstructed, will watch its own advantage, to vent it
self by some other conveyances: Yea as Pride may grow out of humility; so
Idolatry may sprout out of the detestation thereof; when men (like Iehu rooting
out Baal* and erecting his own opinion of Kin. 10. 16.
merit therein) shall detest, damn, and destroy all images, and worship their
own imaginations.

Finish Libri quarti.
To the Right Honorable JOHN LORD BVRGHLEY Son to the Right Honorable JOHN
EARL OF EXETER.
MY LORD,
IT is confidently reported of the Stork, (plenty of which build in the
Low Countries, being Inmates in most chimneys) that she usually thro^eth down
one of her young ones out of the nest, as a Rent to the Landlord of the house,
for permitting th^re her quiet and unmolested habitation.

Now as our Savior sends us to such Masters, [ Behold the fowls of the Mat.
6. 2^.
air etc.] of them all to learn the general lesson of a contented dependence
on divine providence, (and particularly Innocence from the Mat. 10. 16.
Doves) so may this practice of the Stork instruct us to be grateful to such
as have bestowed courtesies upon us.

Now the first light which I saw in this world was in a Benefice Oldwin^le (old
shop Saxon) Saint Peter's in Northhampton-shire
conferred on my Father by your most honorable great Grandfather, and
therefore I stand obliged in all thankfulness to your family. Yea this my right
hand which grasped the first free air in a Manor to which your Lordship is
Heir apparent, has since often been catching at a Pen, to write something in
expression of my thankfulness, and now at last dedicates this Book to your
Infant honor. Thus as my Obligation bears date from my Birth, my thankfulness
makes speed to tender it self to your Cradle.

I know it will be objected, that your Lordship is infraannuated to be the
Patron of a Book in the strist acception thereof: For a Patron properly is
appealed to as Judge of the Merits of a Treatise. Yea Authors anciently-craved
their Patrons consent (as dutiful children their Parents leave) whether that
he thought it fit their work should be matched to the Public view, or rather
remain in the single estate of privacy. This censure some will cavil at me
that your tender Age is unable to pass, and therefore incapable of being a
Patron.

In answer hereunto, first I am assured, none of those who please to call
themselves Roman Catholics, will lay this to my charge. If they do, I return
them with the story confessed by their Champian, of a child not fully five
years old consecrated Archbishop of B^^onius An. Er. ann. 925.
Rhemes, by Pope John the tenth, sinc^ which time some children of small age,
(but great birth) have been made Cardinals, though long since their Church of
Rome had been off the hooks, had it had no stronger Hinges.

But generally I plead in my own defense, that Custom Custom has much
mitigated the rigor of the word Patron, which is not current in common
discourse, at so high a rate whereat first it was coined, insomuch that a
Negative vo^ce is denied to many Patrons now adays, and they generally used not
for Censurers, but Countenancers of books dedicated unto them, in which notion
I humbly request your Lordships patronage of our present endeavor.

Our London Gardiners do not sow or set all their seeds (though of the same
kind) at the same time, but so that they may ripen successively, to last the
longer in season. Such is my design, planting a Nursery of Patrons, all Noble,
but of different years, a Babe, a Child, two youths of several date, and a
Man, (having as a Scale of miles in my Maps, a Scale of Ages in my Honorable
Patrons) hoping so always to have one or more in full power to protect my
endeavors.

Thus in process of time your Lordship (as yet but a Patron in reversion) will
be possessed with power effectually to discharge that place. As for the
present, let not your tender age be slighted by any, seeing such an one ( Man.
18. 2.
(...) a little child) was chosen by our Savior to be Doctor of the Chair to
determine the controversy between the Disciples; which he truly decided, not
by his speech, but humble silence. Till such time as your Honor shall be able
to learn by my writing, may I learn from your Honors living the necessary
virtues of Meekness, Humility, Quietness, Contentedness. For the continuance of
which in your Honor, with the daily addition and increase of other Graces
proportionable to your growth, the hearty prayers shall never be wanting of

Your Honors most bounden servant THO. FULLER.

OBJECTIONS ANSWERED Concerning this DESCRIPTION. The fifth Book.
CHAP. 1. The intention of the Author in this Treatise.
PLATO being sick said to the Physician being about to prescribe Physic unto
him, Cure me not (...) as a Countrey-oxe-driver, but (...), as one well versed
in Philosophy; and demanded of him the reason of his receipts, how the medicine
was proper for his malady, why this, why thus, why now, why thus much, why no
more was prescribed unto him. In like manner it seems unreasonable for
Map-makers, here to plant a wood, there mount a hill, here to sink a valley,
there to run a river in their draughts; and then magisterially obtrude all
these on the belief of an ingenuous Reader, without giving a particular
account how the same are conformable to Nature and true Geography: especially
seeing it is vehemently suspected, that many maps are full of affected
extravagancies. And must their fancies draw up the forms for other men's
judgments to subscribe?

But on the other side it seems not only an ungentile harshness, but an
unconscionable injustice, strictly to exact a reason for every Puntillo in a
Map. Gally-slaves would be in a more freer condition then Geographers, if thus
dealt with. As the Poets feign Atlas was wearied by bearing the weight of
heaven, Mercator would be more tired by bearing the burden of his own Atlas, if
questioned for the crookedness or straightness of every line in so vast a
volume. A lawful latitude herein has been ever allowed. For instance, it is
generally agreed that Meander, a River in Phrygia, runs wonderfully winding;
but it breaks not the head of Truth in a Map, if a curle of that River be made
more or less, or be put out of its proper place. Let the Stewards of Lords
Courts, or rather Bailifes of Gentlemen's Manors know each nook of a wood,
corner of a field, reach of a River within so small a compass; such as describe
a Country in general, if truly presenting the most material things therein
without visible disproportion, do what their diligence can exactly perform,
and what the Readers discretion can rationally expect.

Desiring therefore to acquit my self in the best manner to all ingenious
capacities, I have here exposed my self to the strongest objection^ which
without favor or flattery, I could make against the former description. And
left scattering of them before in the respective Tribes should have interrupted
the entireness of our discourse (what thread can run smooth if full of so many
knots? we have reserved them all for a small Treatise by themselves in the
conclusion of the work. Solemnly promising that if any shall enfavour me so far
as to convince me of any error therein, I shall in the second Edition (God
lending me life to set it out) return him both my thanks and amendment, or else
let him conclude my face of the same metal with the Plates of these Maps.

Whatsoever can be objected against the General description of Judea returns
in the particular Tribes, and therefore to avoid repetition we shall there more
properly meet with it. This premised, without further delay (by Gods blessing)
we fall on the matter in hand. And can we begin higher then at Adam it self?

CHAP. II. Objections concerning Reuben answered.
Philogus. Alethaeus. Philol. I First take exceptions at your placing the City
Adam so near unto Jordan. For where it is said, That the waters which came down
from above, stood and rose up upon an heap, very Josh. 3. 16.
far from the City Adam, which is besides Zartan, you make Adam not above three
miles from that stoppage of waters, which is not very far.


Aleth. Very far, is a relative term, and accordingly admits of much
alteration. Three miles is little in respect of so many leagues, but very far
in respect of so many furlongs. Attend I pray you the main scope of the holy
Spirit, which was to notify the place where these upper waters failed in view
of the Israelites. Which must be acknowledged within the discovery of their
sight; otherwise the landmark more obscure, then the staying of the waters
that were dated from it. Where therefore the distance is measured in a plain
Country by the eye, three miles may well pass for very far.


Philol. Why make you so great a flexure in Jordan just at his influx into the
Dead-sea, contrary to the nature and custom of great Rivers? Indeed small
brooks like little children go wadling on one side, their streams are winding
and crooked, because they must run where they may run, and find soft ground to
receive them. But great Rivers which do not find but make their way, flow
generally in a straight channel, and so it seems should Jordan, sliding
through a flat, low, and level Country, and not meeting with any effectual
opposition.


Aleth. I have sufficient warrant for this my description. Pliny says of
Jordan, Invitus Asphaltit^n lacum, natur^d dirum petit; unwillingly he goes
into that slimy Lake, terrible by nature. You perchance will say, Jordan needs
not to follow the motion of Plinies pen, as if because he makes a flourish with
his phrase, the River must fetch a compass with his channel. But consider, I
pray, how in the mixture of all liquours of contrary kinds, the best liquour
(which may be said to lose by the bargain) incorporates always with a
reluctance, and the same Antipathy causes here this crookedness of Jordan.
This is precisely taken notice of by learned In Plinianis exercit. in Ca^^
Iul^^ Solini Polyhist. p. 577.
S^lmasius, and is agreeable to the observations of modern Travelers.


Philol. You place three several stations of Balak and Balaam with seven
altars a piece upon them in this Tribe of Reuben, whereas more probably all
those passages were transacted south of Arnon in the Kingdom of Moab. It is
utterly unlikely that King Balak would adventure his person out of his own
dominions, into a strangers (not to say an enemies) Country.


Aleth. In so short a journey the pains was little, the danger none at all. For
(although on Balaks side there might be private* heart-burnings) there was no
open hostility betwixt Israel and Moab. Yea we know that then the Israelites
had familiarity, much with the men, too Numb. 25. 1.
much with the women of that Country. I confess the places as described in
Scripture stand (as I may say) equivocally betwixt Israel and Moab. But herein
I have followed the example of In Theat. Ter. sanc. in R^uben.
Adrichomius, and other good authors, not to say, that if Balak had taken his
view in the kingdom of Moab of the people encamping then at Abelshittim, he
could not at that distance have taken a discovery of them.


Philol. Mr. More in his Maps brings down the waters of Nim^im (with a stream
in breadth corrivall, if not bigger then Arnon it self) running through the
very midst of this Tribe into the Dead-sea, whereof no appearance at all in
your description. It was a very envious part of the Philistines to Genesis 26. 18.
stop up the wells of Isaac, (so needful a commodity in that Country) but how
great a fault in you to deprive Reuben of this river, except it was not your
envy that stopped, but ignorance that omitted it?


Aleth. I am sensible full well of such waters, but cannot be convinced that
they took their course through this Tribe into the Dead-sea, but rather
conceive they ran only through the Tribe of Gad, and emptied themselves in
Aroer, whereof in due time we shall give our best account.


Philol. I wonder you make Nophah so near to Medeba contrary to See M. Mores
Map.
others descriptions, which set it thence twenty miles at least.


Aleth. I wonder they place it so far from Medeba contrary to the words of the
N^m. 21. 30.
Scripture, and we have laid them wast unto N O P H A H which reaches unto M E
DE B A: where the verb, though supplied by the Translatours, is employed in the
Text.


Philol. Why make you three fishponds in Heshbon, to which the eyes of the
Cant. 7. 4.
Spouse are compared, which is in effect to make her a monster if the
resemblance be applied?


Aleth. I set a certain for an uncertain number: in the original it is (...)
plural, and therefore indefinite. In all these comparisons, the strength of
the similitude lies in the nature, not the number of the things. They deserve
not the name of a flock of sheep which are under an hundred, to which the teeth
of the Spouse are Cant. 3. 2.
compared, and nature commoly allows not above thirty two.


Philol. The City of Misor belonging to the Levites, and recorded by
Adrichomius in this Tribe, is omitted by your oversight.


Aleth. Commendable is his charity to the Levites. For whereas Moses allotted
them but four Cities in Reuben, namely Josh. 21. 36.
Kedemoth, Iahazah, Mephaah, and Bezar: his bounty bestows a fifth, this
Misor, upon them. But the poor Priests might well be full lean, had they
nothing to feed them, but this imaginary City, groundless in the Hebrew, and
only founded on the erroneous Vulgar. Yea generally the descriptions of
Adrichomius are guilty herein, that (more made ad splendorem, then ad
veritatem) to render them specious to the beholder (because a lean bald Map is
not so amiable as one filled full) he poulders them thick with places, rather
scraped then gathered, thereby offending the judgments of the learned to please
the eyes of the ignorant. But it is my business to excuse my self, not accuse
him, and consciousness to my own many faults, commands me to be tender to the
errors of others.


CHAP. III. Objections concerning Gad answered.
Philol. Why make you the City of Iazer so inland into this tribe, which
Adrichomius places on the River of Arnon?


Aleth. I can demonstrate, it could not stand on that River, and by consequence
must be more within the Tribe of Gad. For, Arnon, is notoriously known to be
the eastern bound of Canaan* Now attend what Moses says, And the suburbs of
the Cities, which ye shall give unto the Levites, shall reach from the wall of
the City, and outward a thousand Cubits round about: And ye shall measure
from without the City on the east side, two thousand Cubits, and on the south
side two thousand Cubits, and on the west side two thousand Cubits, and on the
north side two thousand Cubits, and the City shall be in the midst, this
shall be to them the suburbs of their Cities. Iazer therefore being a City of
the Josh. 21. 39.
Levites, could not stand upon Arnon, because they could not measure three
thousand Cubits eastward, for then they should take so much out of an enemies
Country, which belonged not to Israel. Where we may also observe, that no
sea-town was allotted the Levites, because, for the reason aforesaid, it would
have proved less unto them, hindering the circular dimensions of their
possessions.


Philol. You are much mistaken in the placing of the City of Aroer. The Josh.
13. 25.
Scripture says, that it is before Rabba, or as Tremellious renders it, ante
conspectum Rabbae, within the view, or sight of Rabba. Whereas your Map
presents it six and twenty miles off from that place. Lynceus his eyes need a
prospective-glass to discover Rabba from Aroer, at the distance in your
description.


Aleth. Judicious Sir History of the World ^. part 2. book 10. chap. ^ 5.
Walter Raleigh answers in my behalf; that Rabba, near to which Aroer was
seated, was not (as you erroneously conceive) Rabba of Ammon, to which it was
neither near, nor in sight, (as he worthily observes) but Rabba a chief City of
Moab. Which Rabba bordered on Aroer, as in our Map of Moab does appear; though,
here straightened fro room, no mention is made thereof.


Philol. You ill observe Scripture-instructions, in fixing the first tent of
Ioab, when sent to number the people. For the 2 Samuel 24. 5.
text says that the he pitched in Aroer (that is, in the Country not City of
Aroer, wherein I concur with you) on the right side of the City that lies in
the midst of the River of Gad, and toward Iazer. Be your own judge, whether or
no, the tent be set on the right side of the City.


Aleth. The chief directory in placing this tent is the word right hand, and
that relative term is varied, according as the face is settled. If Ioabs face in
his journey respected the north, then the east is the right hand of the City,
and then the posture of the tent is rightly placed. However the best is, a tent
is but a tent, no solid or substantial structure, it will be no great work, or
weight, on better grounds, to take it down and remove it.


Philol. IN Ia^obs travells you place Soccoth fifteen miles from Peniel, yet
was it the very next Genesis 33. 17.
station, to which he removed. Now I appeal to Nurses and Drovers (the most
competent judges in this controversy) whether it be not too long a journey, for
little Children and E^s big with young; except you conceive, miles are as
easily gone on the grounds, as measured in a Map with the Compass.


Aleth. Though in Jacobs Gests, Succoth succeeds the next place to Peniel, yet
it follows not, that Jacob with his train went so far in one day. Probably, he
might bait, yea lodge several days betwixt them; the Scripture not mentioning
every stage of his staying, but only marking signal places, whereat some
memorable accidents did happen, or wherein for some considerable time he made
his abode.


Philol. Sir Walter Raleigh (whose judgment you deservedly honor) makes the
River of Iabbok the northern bound on the matter of the Tribe of Gad, therein
following the example of Adrichomius. Whereas you extend this Tribe many miles
beyond that river, even to the sea of Cinneroth or Galilee; a great tract of
ground, which you injuriously take from Manasseh, and bestow on this Tribe.


Aleth. I exactly follow Scripture directions, in dividing this land betwixt
them. Josh. 13. 27.
The text says expressly, that the border of the inheritance of the Gadites
reached even to the edge of the sea of Cinneroth, and therefore the land
betwixt Iabbok, and the edge of the sea, undoubtedly belongs to this Tribe,
which justly may have an action of trespass against the foresaid Author, for
depriving it of so considerable a part of its true possession. And yet (under
favor) I conceive, Mr. More in his Maps does much overdoe, stretching the
inheritance of this Tribe to the utmost, and most northern part of the sea of
Galilee.


Philol. I admire much at your inconstancy. In your Map of Palestine, some
seven years since prefixed to your Holy War, you set Iabesh-Gilead north of the
river Iabbok in the Tribe of Manasseh, which now you have translated many miles
southward into this Tribe. It seems, you need no other to confute you but your
self.


Aleth. I have seen mine I request this mine answer may be applied to those
many differences betwixt my former Map, and this present description.
error, and you see my retractation thereof. One day teaches another. To live,
and not to learn, is to loiter, and not to live. Confessions of our former
mistakes, are the honorable Trophies of our conquest over our own ignorance.
The main reason, why Iabesh-Gilead could not be so far north, is this, because
Saul marched from Bezek in the Tribe of Ephraim, with an army of foot, in an
afternoon and a night, over Jordan, unto this City, and came hither in the 1 Samuel 1^. 11.
morning-watch. Now though we allow, that zeal to their brethren in danger,
spurred on the soldiers, and did horse those foot in point of speed, yet they
almost needed wings, in so short a time to go so long a journey (fifty miles
at least besides the crossing of two great rivers, Jordan, and Iabbok) and to
come thither so early. Wherefore with master More we have placed Iabesh-Gilead
south of Iabbok, some thirty miles from Bezek, having the concurrence of other
Authors for the position thereof.


^hilol. You have found a nest of Cities in the 1 Mac. 5. 26.
Apocrypha, and place them all in this Tribe. Whereas two of them, namely,
Bozra and Betzer, are by learned Vid. T^^m i^ locum praed.
Tremellius found to be, the one in Edom, the other in Reuben, many miles from
the Tribe of Gad.


Aleth. I deny not, but two Cities of the foresaid names are presented in those
Countries, but could not be the same, with these Cities which Maccabeus
relieved. It is expressly recorded (once 1 Mac. 5. 25. 27.
and again for the more certainty thereof) that these places were in the land
of Gilead. And that any part of Edom, or Reuben, was ever reputed to belong to
the land of Gilead, is as I conceive an opinion unpresidented in any good
author, and unavouchable by any strong argm^nts.


CHAP. IV. Objections concerning Manasseh beyond Jordan answered.
Philol. YOu have made the country of Manasseh beyond Jordan, too large in the
dimensions thereof. for, it being the portion but of half a Tribe, is,
according to your scale of miles, little less in proportion, then the Country
which other entire Tribes did possess.


Aleth. I confess the truth of what you allege, which is no whit strange in it
self. What more common then to call a Twin, half a man? Yet I doubt not, but
you have seen such half-men, as proper persons, as any single-born. And the
moiety of this Tribe, possessed as much ground, as most other whole Tribes in
Israel. This may appear by the number of Cities, no fewer then Josh. 13. ^0.
threescore contained therein. Yet under favor, I conceive, that the land east
of Jordan was not altogether so civilized, but more wild, and warlike, then
the country west thereof. Especially this of Manasseh, subject to hostile
incursions from the north and east; and therefore their portion was cut out in
the largest size, that what they wanted in the quietness, they might have in
the quan^ity of their possessions.


Philol. You make Chorazin within two miles of Capernaum, whereas Mr. More in
his Maps, places it on the west side of the sea of Galilee, hard by Bethsaida;
in my mind with more probability of truth. For, our Savior says, Mat. 11. 21.
Woe be to thee Chorazin, woe be unto thee Bethsaida, coupling them together in
his commination, who probably would have joined Capernaum and Chorazin
together, for the vicinity both of their profaneness, and place, had they been
seated so near together, as they are presented in your description.


Aleth. Your argument concludes nothing at all. Have you not often seen
malefactors manacled together, whose places of birth and breeding were
farthest asunder? So might it be with Chorazin, and Bethsaida; whilst
Capernaum is singled out, and set solely by it self, in our Saviors
threatening, as a signal offender, most eminent for its ingratitude. As for our
placing of Chorazin, we have therein observed the instructions of Saint Hie^on,
in locis Hebr. lit. C. and Br^chardus itin^re 3. and. 5.
Hierome, and other good Authors.


Philol. You make the brook Cherith in this Tribe, without rendering any
reason, why you place it here; which Adrichomius (no doubt on good ground)
appoints to be on the west side of Jordan, in the Tribe of Ephraim.


Aleth. The brook is but once mentioned in Scripture, and therefore we want
exact instructions for the position thereof. Yea generally the Maps of
Palestine take no notice of this brook. As if it had been so dried up, with the
long drought in the days of Eliah, that the channel thereof did not afterward
appear. But to the point; Two things are observable in Scripture, concerning
the post^re of this Cherith; First, that Eliah after his message done to Ahab
in Samaria, was commanded to turn himself 1 King. 17. 8.
Eastward: Secondly, that the brook Cherith, whither he was sent, is said to be
before Jordan; the Hebrew has it (...) and Tremellius rendereth it e regione
Iordanis; All which put together, clearly speaks it, to have been ^ast of
Samaria, and on the other side of Jordan, where judicious Mr. More in his Map
has placed it, whom I conceive my self to follow on good reason.


CHAP. V. Objections concerning Naphtali answered.
Philol. YOu make all the Tribe of Naphtali west, and on this side the River of
Jordan; whereas that passage foretold by the Isa. 9. 1.
Prophet, and applied by the Mat. 4. 15.
Evangelist, describes it on the other side; The land of Zebulun, and the land
of Naphtali by the way of the sea beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles. The
particle beyond is (...) in the Greek, which makes it plain, that Naphtali lay
on the east side of Jordan.


Aleth. The strength of your objection consists in the words beyond Jordan,
which are variously rendered by learned men. By Tremellius in Isaiah secundum
Iordanem, by the same Author in Matthew, transitus Jordan; by Beza, secus
Iordanem. The dicision of the difficulty depends on the proper sense of the
preposition (...) ^nebher, in Hebrew; which barely imports no more, then over;
but which way, whether Cis, or Trans; whether on this side, or beyond, is to be
expounded by the context. This flexible nature, and promiscuous sense of (...)
Gnebher, is observed by On mat. 4. 15. instancing on J^r. 22. 20.
Tremellius, and others; so that the text alleged by you, renders no more,
then the land of Naphtali over Jordan, without specifying any side of the
river. Secondly, we answer, that those words beyond Jordan, are so
indifferently placed in the Prophet, that they may equally be referred, to what
follows, Galilee of the Gentiles; part of which Galilee, we have Lib. 1. ca.
11. parag 6.
formerly described, to lie east of Jordan, and therein the City Chorazin,
wherein our Savior so frequently conversed.


Philol. You make two fountains, the one Ior, the other Dan, as the father and
mother of the River Jordan: a fancy (I fear) rather pretty, them solid; bearing
too much affinity with the derivation of the River Dourdan in France, from the
confluence of the two streams, Dour, and Dan; whilst such a composition has
more of Latin, then Hebrew therein. Not to say, that Josephus is wholly silent
hereof, I suspect it for a modern conceit, unavouchable by ancient Authors; and
prefer his opinion Greg. Gr^g. Lex. Sa^c^num. 209.
as most probable, who deduceth Jordan from the Hebrew (...) Iarad, to descend,
because it comes down with a powder, and at set times Josh. 3. 15.
overflowes, all his banks.


Aleth. The negative argument from Josephus, is of small validity; but to
attest the antiquity of Iordans descent, according to our description, grudge
not to read the following testimony of Philostorgius, both because he is an
ancient Author (living in the fifth Century after Christ) and his book at this
day not extant, save that some parcells of his are recited by Ioannes
Antiochenus, out of whose In part set down by Sal^^sius in his notes on Solinus
cap. 35.
Manuscript, not yet printed, the following words are transcribed, (...). In
this Country of Paneas one of the fountains of Jordan is begotten, there being
two of them; Dan so called even to this day from the ancient name thereof. As
for the other, which is named for, a certain hill of the same Meaning Libanus.
mountain sends it forth, distant from the former about an hundred and sixty
furlongs; from either of which flows a rivolet, the one termed Io^ates, the
other, Danites, which flowing by the mountains to the foot of the plain, thence
forthwith complete one great River Jordan, in the same mingling both their
names and streams. See here an excellent evidence of the extraction of Jordan,
which cannot be condemned for a modern invention. However if any will deduce
Iordans name from a third fountain, (that Hebrew word aforesaid) let him herein
contentedly embrace his own opinion.


Philol. If you stick so steadfastly to the authority of Philosto^gius, why
dissent you from him in the distance between those two fountains, which ^e
makes an hundred and sixty furlongs, that is, twenty miles, (if eight furlongs
make a mile) and the interstitium in your Map amounts not fully to half so much?


Aleth. Some mistake may justly be suspected in Philostorgius his number,
because for exceeding the proportion in other Authors. I Book. 1. ca.^.
formerly acquainted you with that arbitrating power I have assumed (I hope not
unjustly) to reconcile such differences in Authors by pitching on a middle
number betwixt their extremities, and here have made use of the same power
accordingly.


Philol. What mean you by these eight nameless buildings surrounding the City
of Cesarea Philippi?


Aleth. They are set there to signify the towns of Cesarea Philippi mentioned
by the Mark. 8. 27.
Evangelist, whereabouts Saint Peter gave that eminent testimony of the Deity
of our Savior.


Philol. At Dan in this Tribe ( alias Leshem, and Cesarea Philippi) you erect
one of Jeroboam his Calves; whereas In descrip. Ter. sanc. page 237.
Brocard, who exactly surveyed Palestine, in his Iournall gives us to
understand, that half a league from Bethel, where one of the Calves were set
up, stood a mountain called Dan opposite thereunto, where the other Calfe was
erected.


Aleth. His authority cannot countervaile Saint Hieromes, Benjamin in
Itinerario, and others, yea Truth it self, which are on our side, and against
his opinion. For, Jeroboam was too good an husband to lavish both his Calves in
one place, which he rather would scatter in distant Cities, the better to
spread Idolatry in his kingdom. Besides, consider the end pretended at their
erection, namely to spare the peoples pains, It is too 1 Kin. 12. 28.
much for you to go up to Jerusalem, that these Calves should be (as it were)
Chapels of ease, to save his subjects a tedious journey. Now, if both his
Calves were penned up in a stall near Bethel (as Brocard would have it) little
ease thereby was given to the northern Tribes, and their journey not
considerably shortened. Therefore the other Calfe was set up at Dan in Naphtali,
as we have described it.


Philol. All that you have said, does not satisfy me, that this Dan was the
place where the Calfe was worshipped. For, soon after Ieroboams death, in the
reign of Baasha, this Dan you speak of was 1 Kin. 15. 20.
smitten by Benhadad King of Syria. This, probably, would have extinguished
Calfeworship, if set up in that place, which notwithstanding 1 Kin. 10. 29.
continued many hundred years after in the kingdom of Israel.


Aleth. You might argue on the same grounds, that the other Calfe was not
erected in Bethel, seeing even in the life of Jeroboam, Abijah King of Judah
took from him 2 Chr. 13. 19.
Bethel with the towns thereof. Observable herein is divine Justice, punishing
both those idolatrous places by the sword of their enemies, so soon after the
Calves were set up in them. But, we may be confident, the Kings of Israel
recovered both Dan and Bethel again, and restored them to their former impious
uses.


Philol. In the Worthies of Naphtali you account on Hiram Solomon's Architect in
building the Temple, Description of Naph.. 1.
as a Naphtalite by the mothers side: And yet in the Descrip. of Dan.. 9.
description of Dan you make him a Danite by his female extraction. Now, what
says Nicodemus? Jo^. 3. 4.
Can a man enter the second time into his mothers womb? Yea, can he be born
(as you would have it) twice, though not of the same, of several women?


Aleth. This your objection is not brought against my description, but against
the very letter of the Scripture that affirms the same.

1 KING. 7. 14. He was a widows son of the Tribe of Naphtali, and his Father
was a man of Tire.

2 CHRONICLES. 2. 14. The son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and his father was
a man of Tire.

Now although I am not engaged to meddle with the solution of this difficulty;
yet, under favor, I conceive the same properly to depend on an observation in
Chorography. May you be pleased to remember, that Dan had a parcel of his
portion acquired by conquest, near the fountains of Jordan, where Leshem,
Laish, or Dan was placed, which small territory lay above an hundred miles from
the main body of that Tribe, surrounded about with the Tribe of Naphtali, as
appears in our See our Map of Dan, and description.. 9.
description thereof. Now I suppose Hiram (whose paternall extraction from Tire
is confessed on all hands) was descended a Danite by his mother, and called a
Naphtalite also by his mothers side, because of her habitation (though in Dans
small Country aforesaid) lying in the land allotted to Naphtali.


Philol. You term it In descrip. Naph.. 5.
a most erroneous opinion in such, who conceive the Galileans more drossie Jews
then the rest, herein contradicting your self, having formerly Book. 1. cap.
11.. 7.
affirmed, that they were courser, and less refined Jews.


Aleth. Give me leave to distinguish, between Jews courser in Religion, and
courser in Extraction. The former we confess, that the Galileans were less pure
in Gods service, as probably descended from the remnant of the ten Tribes: Yet
were they most truly the lost sheep of Israel, not debased by mixture of
Gentilisme in their blood, like the Samaritans, whom Christ declined, whilst
he constantly conversed with these Galileans.


Philol. You say, that the City Naasson depends merely upon the credit of the
vulgar translation Tobit 1. Whereas looking on the Hebrew Map, graven at
Amsterdam by Abraham Goos, but designed, and made by another Abraham a great
Rabbin, skilled in the land, and language of his own nation, this Naasson
appears there in Hebrew characters, the Author (no doubt) having good assurance
for the same. Whose Map (I can tell you) is much valued by many Antiquaries, as
appears by their difficult procuring, dear purchasing, and careful preserving
thereof. And you may find it solemnly set up, at the upper end of Sion
College Library.


Aleth. It ill becomes me to detract from the pains of any, being also my self,
a man under authority of the pens, and tongues of others, and Candidate for the
Readers good will in this my description. Yet, give me leave, plainly to
profess, that the Map by you alleged, answers not the great price, and
general praise thereof, being nothing else but Adrichomius his Map translated
into Hebrew. What once Sir John Old Castle, Lord Cobham, spoke jeastingly, that
the Priests made Christ to be boots, and spurs, and all in the Sacrament, may I
serously say that Adrichomius, with his faults, and failings, dross, dirt, and
all together, without any correction, is cast into this Abraham's overvalued
description, so that the Map you allege is not gold, but mean metal gilded
over, containing surreptitious names out of the Vulgar Latin therein
Hebraized, and presenting many spurious places utterly disclaimed in the
Original.


CHAP. VI. Objections against Asher answered.
Philol. I Admire you have altogether omitted the River Eleutherus in this
Tribe (much mentioned in Mac. 11. 7. and 12. 30.
Maccabees, and which Adrichomius makes to fall into the Mediterranean in the
midway betwixt Zidon and Tire. Yea, Lib. 3. p. 213.
M. George Sandys in his travels, going from Sarepta to Tire, crossed a little
valley divided by the River Eleutherus, called Casmire at this day by the
inhabitants thereabouts.


Aleth. By what name, or title soever, the water, he there went over, is known
at this day, sure I am, it cannot be the ancient Eleutherus, which by Ptolemy,
Strabo, and general consent of all Authors, falls above sixty miles more
northward, into the Mediterranean. And therefore the error of Adrichomius and
others herein, is briefly taxed by judicious Sir Hist. lib. 2. part. 1. page 289
Walter Ralegh.


Philol. You make Asher to border on Zidon, contrary to the description of See
Masius on the 19. of Joshua.
Wolsegangus Wiseburgius, and learned In his Comment on Genesis ^9.
Tostatus, who set Zebulun in the same place, as the most north-west of all the
Tribes, and allege Genesis 49. 13.
Jacobs words to avouch the same, prophesying, that Zebuluns borders shall be
unto Zidon.


Aleth. Gods Josh. 19. 2^.
Word, the coast of the Country, and all good authors justify our
description, those two only excepted which you allege, being both deceived,
by taking Zidon restrictively in Jacobs prophecy, for the City so called,
whereas the whole Country thereby is intended (as Sarepta is called a City
Luke. 4. 26.
of Zidon) and the name of Zidonians adequate to Phenicians, in which sense
Zebulun confined on the Country, though Asher only on the City of Zidon.


Philol. You peremptorily place the defeat of Ben^adad, and fall of Apheks wall
on his flying Army, in this Tribe, not remembering the while, that there is
another Men^ioned 1 Samuel 29. 1.
Aphek in Issachar, (nearer to Samaria) which puts in with more probability to
be the theater, whereon that tragical accident was acted.


Aleth. I confess Aphek a place in Issachar, but find it not charactered to be
a City, such an one as our Josh. 19. 30.
Aphek in Asher is described, and whose walls are therefore more probable to
do the foresaid execution. However, be it known unto you, whenever two
places are with equal likelihood corrivals for actions therein achieved, we
adjudge it to that place, that falls first under our description. Thus, the
start of half an hour, bestows on the elder twin, the whole inheritance. To
avoid confusion, and prevent repetition, first come, first served; the place
first occurring, carries away all history in our describing thereof.


CHAP. VII. Objections, against Zebulun, answered.
Philol. YOu, very confidently, make Jordan continue his un^ixit stream, clean
through the Galilean-sea (a course somewhat irregular in nature) without
alleging any authority for the proof of so improbable a passage.


Aleth. Excellent Authors avouch the same. Hist. lib. 5. page 618.
Tacitus, amongst others, tells us of this River, Unum, atque alterum lacum
integer perfluit, tertio ^etinetur; One, and another lake (viz. the waters of
Merom, and Galilean-sea) it runs through entire, but is stopped in the
third; namely, in Asphaltite-lake, or Dead-sea. More full is the testimony of
Philostorgius, and deserves our serious perusal thereof. Who speaking of this
River, (...), Which (says he) passes through the lake of Tiberias, cutting it
in the middle, and flowing clean through it in its own proper channel. Which
cutting of the lake, implies the entire continuance of Iordans water;
otherwise, that knife does not cut the loaf, but is cut by the loaf, which is
broken in the dividing thereof.


Philol. I wonder you pass over Shimron-Meron in such silence, which appears a
place of great note, yea, a Royal City in the days of Joshua, as the Coronet
thereupon does inform us.


Aleth. I confess it signed with a Coronet, and with something more, a flag of
uncertainty, having nothing sure of the location thereof, the chiefest cause
that I willingly declined the mention of it. However, we will scrue our selves
into as much certainty of this place, as may be extracted out of Scripture: and
observe, the four first wreaths of my scrue are undoubtedly, the fifth and last
more then probably true, as follows. 1 Shimron-Meron was one of the Josh. 12.
20.
Royal Cities, whose King Joshua destroyed. 2 The same City is elsewhere
called plainly Josh. 11. 1.
Shimron, without any addition. 3 It lay on the northern part of the land,
because the King thereof associated in the northern, and second See book. 1.
cap. 8.. 3.
combination of the Canaanites against Joshua. 4 A City named Shimron, was
alloted to the Tribe of Josh. 19. 15.
Zebulun. 5 Most probably this is the same Shimron, whose King was destroyed by
Joshua.
This is all, which my best industry could collect out of Scripture, or good
Authors, concerning the situation of this place.


Philol. What mean you by that third smooty circle, which (as the Meteor Halo
about the Sun) surroundeth the Levites City of Iockneam?


Aleth. It signifies nothing, being a mere aberration of the Graver, which
(now but obscure) will in process of Printing, wholly disappear. And I could
heartily wish, no other faults in our Maps, would be of longer continuance.


Philol. You make the Galilean-sea all along the east boundary of this Tribe.
Whereas I am altogether of the mind of Masius, that no part of Zebulun touched
on that sea; with him principally grounding my opinion on the Scriptures
silence, which mentions not any conterminating of this Tribe thereupon. Which
might soon have been spoken, yea surely would not have been omitted, had
Zebulun been so situated.


Aleth. That Zebulun bordered on this sea, may clearly be demonstrated; first
from Jacobs prophecy, that he should dwell (...) Gen 49. 13.
At the haven of the Seas. Seas in the plural, pointing at his position
betwixt the Mediterranean, and Galilean seas, the west and east bounds of his
possession. Now lest any should seek to wave these words by an Enallage in
Number (a figure, we confess, frequent in Hebrew) Zebuluns bounding on the
Galilean-sea, is unfallibly collected out of the Mat. 4. 13.
Gospel, where Christ is said to dwell in Capernaum which is upon the sea
coast, in the borders of Z^bulun, and Naphtali.


Philol. Christ his feeding of five thousand, with five loaves, and two fishes,
is misplaced in your Map, as which ought to be set on the east side of the Sea
of Galilce.


Aleth. Learned men are much perplexed about the position of this miracle. A
miracle, so remarkable in it self, that of all the passages betwixt Christ's
conception, and the introduction to his passion, this only, and the descent of
the Dove at his baptism are recorded in all four Evangelists. Yet some
difficulty appears in the particular place thereof. L^k. 9. 10.
Luke terms it the desert of Beth^aida; but Saint John John 6. 23.
who wrote the last, (therefore supplying the omissions, and explaining the
doubts in other Gospells) assigns the particular place to be near Tiberias,
both being Cities on the west side of the sea, so that north of Tiberias,
betwixt it The Reader is entreated with his eye to ^emove the p^cture of the
peoples feeding, a little north of Tiberia^.
and Bethsaida, (in a desert named from the latter, because leading to it) this
miracle is properly placed.


Philol. But immediately at the ending thereof, the Disciples are said to sail
(...), M^ k. 6. 46.
unto the other side unto Bethsaida, or as Saint John says, toward Joh. 6. 17.
Capernaum (both these being Cities not far asunder.) Wherefore, if they
crossed over the Sea to go to Bethsaida, they were not already on the same side
thereof when the miracle was wrought, and by consequence were then on the other
[ the eastern] side of the Sea.


Aleth. By (...), is meant the opposite shore, on the same side of the Sea, but
so that it was over a reach, or bay which they crossed therein, sailing (not
athwart the breadth of the Sea from west to east, but) almost foreright the
length of the lake, from a place near Tiberias to the land of Mat. 14. 34.
Gennesaret, on the north end of the lake, betwixt Bethsaida and Capernium.
Thus, such who on the Severn Sea sail from Bristoll to Barstable, may be said
in some sense to cross the water, as well as those that sail from Barstable to
Cardif^e. And thus, in placing this miracle we have not only followed the
judgment of In his Harmony on the Text.
worthy Calvin, but also the eyes of See our Zebulun 26.
Biddulph a modern traveller, who beheld the place.


CHAP. VIII. Objections against Issachar answered.
Philol. WHat vast mountains have you made those of Gilboa to be? the highest
of them four miles perpendicular: Surely the battle betwixt Saul, and the
Philistines could scarce be fought on such ascents. Yea, David might well have
spared his wish, 2 Samuel 1. 21.
Let there be no dew, neither let there be rain upon you, whose tops, (as you
have exalted them) may be presumed higher then the clouds themselves.


Aleth. I confess them to be of the largest size, store of room and want of
other matter to fill it, gave the occasion to their greater growth. Which fault
is amended in the following Map of Manasseh, where behold them reduced to a
more moderate proportion, less then many of the mountains in Wales.


Philol. How comes a parcel of mount Ephraim to straggle into the Map of
Issachar? It being proper for those mountains to be confined to their own Tribe
of Ephraim, whence they fetched their denomination.


Aleth. I may say the Tribe of Ephraim had the Preemption, but not the Monopoly
of them. I mean his turn was first served, and he had the best and most of
those mountains in his possession, whence they deservedly took their name. Yet
so, that some part of mount Ephraim ranged south ward into the Tribe of
Benjamin, (as mount Compare Josh. 18. 22. with 2 Chr. 13. 4
Zemaraim) and some branched northward into Issachar, as Shamir in mount Jud.
10. 1.
Ephraim; certainly in this Tribe, Judge. 10. 1. 2
because Tola a man of Issachar was buried therein.


Philol. It follows not, because he was extracted from this Tribe, that
therefore the place of his burial was in the same, finding many men's
interments in Scripture, casual, out of the Tribes of their nativity. Thus
Saul and Jonathan being Benjamites, were notwithstanding buried in the Tribe of
Gad, at 1 Samuel 3. ^. 12.
Iabesh Gilead: as also Ishbosheth and Abner their Countrymen got graves at 2 Samuel 4. 12.
Hebron in the Tribe of Judah: so infirm is your inference, that Shamir in
mount Ephraim was in Issachar, because Tola an Issacharite was intombed therein.


Aleth. You instance only in persons, some forcibly, others treacherously
slain, which occasioned their hasty, tumultuary, and extravagant interment.
Remember also that Saul and Jonathan, (though intermediately at Iabesh Gilead)
were finally intombed in the 2 S^m. 21. 14.
sepulchers of their Father, in the land of Benjamin, as we may presume that
Tola his corpse a peaceable Judge (no violent detention, or disturbance
appearing to the contrary) did rest in the possessions of that Tribe; the Jews
generally being as ceremonious to be buried in their own land, as to be married
in their own lineage.


CHAP. IX. Objections against Manasseh on this ^ide Jordan answered.
Philol. ANd why so much of the Map of Issachar presented again in Manasseh?
What need this waste, and repetition of the same again?


Aleth. The squaring of the Map necessarily commanded the repetition thereof;
nor is it lost labor, because two scattered pieces in Issachar belonged to
Manasseh.


Philol. But o what a medley motley pieced Map have you made of this half Tribe
of Manasseth! Surely Joseph's coat consisted not of more Genesis 37. 3.
colors then Manasseh (Joseph's sons) portion is made up of shreds and parcels
as you have presented it, marring the in^ireness of this half Tribe with your
manifold divisions.


Aleth. And yet no more then what are warranted by Gods word. Let none part
what he has put together, nor put together what he has parted. I delight not
out of wantonness, to make smp^ of Manasseh's portion, but the Tex^ puts the
Shears into my hand, commanding me to cut it so: because Manasseh had Josh.
17.11.
three Countries in Issachar and Asher: That is, surrounded with them, which
necessitates the cantoning of this half Tribe into such dis-jointed parcels.


Philol. You make a piece of Asher, parted from the main body thereof, to
confine on Manasseh, whilst Bonfrerius finds a fitter expedient by cutting off
the west ends of Zebulun and Issachar from the Mediterranean, and continuing
Asher along the sea side to Manasseh, so preserving Asher entire thereby.


Aleth. His Expedient raises more difficulties then it allaieth; as directly
opposite to Scripture, Reason, and the general consent of Writers, as formerly
has been largely proved in our Objections against Zebulun. Better it is
therefore to admit a parcel of Asher separated from the main of the Tribe
(Instances in English Counties being frequent in this case) then by Bonfrerius
his shift, to allow Truth parted from Jacobs Genesis 49. 23.
prophecy, which inevitably follows, if Zebulun be made Land^locked, and cut
off from bounding on the sea.


Philol. Indeed you put Manasseh's separate Countries within Issachar, but not
within Asher, not environed there with, but only joining thereto, whereas the
Text says equally, Josh. 17. 11.
And Manasseh had in Issachar and Asher etc.


Aleth. The main body of Issachar confining on Manasseh afforded us convenience
to insert such Countries therein. But Asher his part being in it self but a
small dis-jointed portion, is not so capable of surrounding a Country within
it, seeing such a parcel within a parcel would appear so diminutive a
subdivision as almost inconsiderable. Besides, the preposition (...) rendered In
in the Text, may sometimes be satisfied with signifying ad, or juxta, nigh, or
by, that is, a bare proximity, apposition, and contiguousnes of a thing. In
which sense Manasseh had land bordering on this dis-jointed piece of Asher.


Philol. In Parag. 32.
Ephraim you say that Iezreel was more then twenty miles from Samaria, which
measured by the scale in your Map are not above twelve miles asunder.


Aleth. Let not the Typographicall mistake of the Printer be accounted the
Topographicall error of the Author; That twelve should be twenty, and in the
Errata is mended accordingly.


Philol. You might almost as well inscribe this Map the Tribe of Levi, as the
Half Tribe of Manasseh. It was the complaint in time of Popery, that the Church
did eat up the Commonwealth; every third foot in the kingdom being
Church-land, before the dissolution of Abbeys. You endeavor to reduce Palestine
to the same proportion. It was a pious wish of Moses, Number. 11. 29.
Would God, that all the Lords people were Prophets: But a covetous desire in
you to convert so much of the land into the Levites portion, by extending the
circular suburbs of their Cities to six miles Diameter; whereas Authors
contract them, within less then half that compass, yet observing the true
dimension of the Cubit therein.


Aleth. For number such Cities are no more then the Scripture assigns, though
here happily falling thicker then in other Maps. As for the three thousand Cubits
of their extent on all sides, we have in the manner of the measuring thereof
followed the direction of judicious Vid. on Number. 35. 4, 5.
Mr. Ainsworth, (as he the learned Rabbi Maimony) preferring it amongst various
expositions, as most natural to the Text. Now let none wonder that we make a
thousand Cubits adequate to a thousand paces, or on English mile. For, although
lesser Cubits were used by the Jews, about their vessels, and buildings; yet
their Geometrical Cubit (generally employed for their better expedition,
because largest, in their surveying of land) contained six M. Godwin his Moses
and Aaron lib. 6. page 248.
common Cubits; and Rabbi In Ez^kielis ca. 48. 2. cited by Arias Montanus de
Mensuris sacris.
Kimhi expressly says that a thousand Emoth, or Cubits make a mile. Besides,
consider I pray, these three thousand Cubits were to be measured from the wall
of the City, the flexures and bendings whereof, produced the parallel bendings
in the bounds of the Levites suburbs. But because we cannot be instructed in
what from the line of their walls ranged about, we begin our measure from the
midst of the City, and therefore (...) bound to make their lands amends with
the largeness of the C^ibts, because beginning our mensuration to their
disadvantage, from the ^^n^er of the City, in s^ead of the [unknown]
circumf^^^^ce thereof.


Philol. I am not satisfied in the situation of (...), that it was seated in
this half Tribe of Manass^h.


Aleth. It is seated according to Adrichomi^s, and the judgment of most other
Merca^or, G^il. Tyrius and generally in most Maps.
Authors. But if I might interpose mine own opinion, I conceive it many miles
nearer unto Jerusalem in the Tribe of Ephraim, rather nigh then on the sea, in
the road betwixt Jerusalem, and Cesarea, some thirty miles from the former;
whither I shall remove the same, when my opinion herein shall be countenanced
with the approbation of others. My reason that Antipatris could not be so far
northward, (full sixty miles as they make it from Jerusalem) is, because the
Act. 23. 31, 32.
^ootmen sent to attend Saint Paul marched thither from Jerusalem in one night.
Now, although their suspicion of the Jews pursuing them to rescue Saint Paul,
might quicken their pace, yet Ibid. v. 23. 32.
foot-souldiers could not be foot-posts, it being impossible for spearmen to go
so far, in so short a time, betwixt the third hour [nine a clock at night] and
the next morning.


CHAP. X. Objections against Ephraim answered.
Philol. YOu make a strange desultory Description of the bounds of this Tribe,
va^lting over from length to breadth in such a fashion as is hard to be
understood, and worse to be applied to the letter of the Josh. 17.
Text.


Al^th. Wise Agur confessed he knew not the Prev. 30. 19
way of an Eagle in the air, whose flight therein (...) not to be traced,
leaving no visible perforation behind it, partly through the swiftness of his
motion, partly through the subtileness of the air presently closing up the
passage. So short and concise is the Holy Spirit in bounding the children of
Joseph, and so long since has time taken all impression of many limitary
obscure places there mentioned, that exactness herein, by the confession of the
Masins in Josh. 17.
best Authors, is not to be attained. But herein we have followed the direction
of the learned Bonfrerius, save that we have not contracted the east of Ephrain
to wards Jordan into so narrow a point, but bounded it broader, to make it a
degree the better with the descriptions of other Authors.


Philol. You make Sechem in this Tribe, full seventy miles from Hebron in the
Tribe of Judah. Me thinks they should be much nearer seeing Jacob sent Joseph
from Genesis 37.14.
Hebr^n to Sechem to give a visit to his brethren. Now how could his tender
love adventure his darling child alone so tedious and dangerous a journey?
Surely the distance was far less then you make it.


(...). ^


Philol. Rama in this Tribe, doubtlesly was a City of the Levites as does
appear by Elkanah and Samuel their constant habitation there, both of then
Levites. Why therefore is it not surrounded in your Map with a double circle,
like other Cities of the saine qualification?


Aleth. I acknowledge Ra^a for the reasons by you alleged, probably pertaining
to the Levites, but have omitted the double incircling thereof, because I find
it not amongst the four Cities given the Levites in Ep^raim, nor the forty See
Josh. 21.
eight assigned to them in the whole kingdom.


Philol. Was it not then usurpation in the Levites to inhabit a City which by
God was never granted unto them?


Aleth. Under favor I conceive, though the Levites must have four, they might
have more Cities in Ephrain, or elsewhere, if the charity of well disposed
people was pleased to bestow them. Thus, beside the three Cities for Refuge
west of Jordan the Israelites were bound, if God did enlarge their D^ut. 19. 8,
9.
coasts, to add three more for the same service. By which analogy it may be
collected, that the Ephraimites in gratitude to God, who gave them more entire
possession of their portion then any other Tribe in Joshua's division (nothing
out ^ezer, a Levites City being detained from them by the Can^anites) might
give this Ra^a as a gratuity to the Levites. Besides, the suburbs and lands of
the Levites reached from the walls of the Cities three thousand Cubits round
about, with in which space they might erect what buildings they please, being
therein (without incroaching on any other Tribe) resident on their proper
inheritance. Rama therefore might be built within that circumference, and by
the proportion of miles we collect it to stand within the circuit of Gezer, so
that though they could not get Gezer it self, they might gain and build Rama
within the compass thereof for their habita^ion. However, we define nothing
positively, much less impose it on the belief of others. Clipped money is worth
as much as it weighs, though it will not pass for what it was coined; and
conjectures, though they will not go for certain truths, deserve to find as
much acceptance, as they bring probability with them.


Philol. Have you nothing more to observe concerning the blessings, and (...)
pronounced on mount Ebal and Gerizim


Aleth. I conceive on second thoughts, that the Prie^ts with the A^ke stood in
the valley betwixt the two hills (whilst the whole body of the ordinary Deuteronomy.
30. 2.
Levites were on the mount of Gerizi^) whose station in the half way betwixt
both, when they pronounced the blessings and the cursings, facilitated the
conveyance of the sound on both sides, as appears on the serious Compare
Deuteronomy. 11. and cap. 27. with Josh. cap. 8.
comparing of the Scripture.


Philol. Tiphsah is made by you a City in this Tribe. But, if it were situate
herein, very short were the dominions of Solomon even in the very height of his
greatness, who then reigned on this side of the river from 1 King. 4. 24.
T^phsah even to Azza, or Gaza, in the Tribe of Simeon, not fully an hundred
miles, as appears by your Scale in the general Description of the land.


Aleth. Tiphsah there mentioned being the eastern boundary of Solomon's Empire
(from our 2 Kin. 15. 16.
Tiphsah where cruel Menahem began his reign) was near a thousand miles
north-east on the river Euphrates, probably the same with the City Tharsacus,
whereof Ptole^y, Strabo, and Stephanus take special notice.


Philol. Have you any miraculous faith, who so easily have removed the mountain
of Phinehas (wherein Eleazar was buried) from the north of this Map, within the
suburbs of Bethhoron a Levites City, to the south thereof near Shiloh, where in
your Map general the same is presented?


Aleth. On better consideration I see no necessity, that his mountain should be
brought within the bounds of any Leviticall City. Phinehas was an extraordinary
person, and therefore his land might be extraordinary in the location thereof.
This his portion was no part of the Levites patrimony in their forty eight
Cities given them by God, but seems rather the s^perpondium of the peoples
Josh. 24. 33.
bounty cast into the balance, as an honorable augmentation in reward of his
Number. 25. ^.
eminent desert. I conceive therefore it lay in Mount Ephraim, near Shilob,
where the Tabernacle was set up, bestowed upon him thereabouts, for his more
convenient attending of Gods service therein.


CHAP. XI. Objections against Dan answered.
Philol. YOu positively affirm that the land of Dan belonged primitively to
Judah, yet produce no Scripture for the proof thereof. We believe the same of
Simeon, the Josh. 19. 1.
Text affirming that their inheritance was within the inheritance of Judah, but
no evidence appears of such derivation of Dans possession originally from Judah.


Aleth. The same is infallibly collected from Scripture, because the Cities of
Eshtaol, Josh. 15. 33.
Zoreah, Josh. 19. 57.
Timnah, Josh. 19. 45.
Ekron were first bestowed on Judah, and Josh. 19. 41. 43.
afterward we find the same places, (with the Country thereabouts by
necessary consequence) conferred upon Dan's posterity for their portion.


Philol. Such an alteration seems utterly inconsistent with divine
immutab^lity, with whom is no (...), nor shadow of James 1. 17.
changing. To give a thing and take a thing is unproportionable with his
proceedings, whose Gifts are pronounced by the Apostle to be (...), Romans 11. 29.
without Repentance.


Aleth. Indeed such gifts as amount to the notion of (...) are incapable of
alteration, to which his other grants are subject. Besides, God never so passed
away that land but he still reserved it as his own Demesnes. For the land
(says he) is mine; not was, but is, even after the Israelite, had long
possessed the same. Is it not lawful for him to do as he will with his own,
Mat. 20. 15.
and to change at pleasure what tenants to rent, or rather what Bailifes to
occupy his own ground?


Philol. The faces of the Men which bear the great bunch of grapes, are set the
wrong way. For being to go south-east to Kadesh-^arnea, they look full west to
the Mediterranean sea.


Aleth. You put me in mind of a man, who being sent for to pass his verdict on
a Picture, (how like it was to the person whom it was to resemble) fell a
finding fault with the frame thereof (not the Limners but the Ioiners work)
that the same was not handsomely fashioned. In stead of giving your judgment on
the Map, (how truly it is drawn to represent the Tribe) you cavil at the
History^properties therein, the act of the ^raver, not Geographer. Yet know Sir
when I checked the To. Vaughan.
Graver for the same, he answered me that it was proper for Spies, (like
Watermen and Rope-makers) for surety sake to look one way and work another.


CHAP. XII. Objections against Simeon answered.
Philol. Why both an Asteriske and flag of uncertainty over Sheba? For, though
unassured of the exact position thereof, the Text ascertaineth us, that it was
a real City in Simeon, Josh. 19. 2.
Beer-sheba, and Sheba, and Moladah etc.


Aleth. I am not satisfied that Sheba was a distinct City by it self, but
rather conceive it the same with Beer-sheba. Because, 1 They are both accounted
the same Genesis 26. 33.
when originally denominated. 2 Sheba is omitted in 1 Chr. 4. 28.
Chronicles where other Simeonite Cities are summed up) as the same with Beer
sheba. 3 Simeon had but Josh. 19. 6.
thirteen Cities, which make fourteen if Sheba be accounted a distinct City by
it self.
The premises considered, Sheba appears the same with Beer-sheba (as Psalm. 76.
2.
Salem with Jerusalem) commonly so called for brevity sake.


Philol. But then how do you answer the Text, which expressly makes Sheba a
distinct City, Beer-sheba, and Sheba, and Moladah etc?


Aleth. Proteus appeared not in more shapes, then the Particle^ (here rendered
and) has several significations, for though chiefly it is copulative, other
whiles it is causall, collective, adversative, exegeticall, redditive, and
disjunctive, as In locum Josh.
Bonfrerius reads it here, Beer-sheba, or Sheba, and Moladah etc.


Philol. You say that Simeon was In the des^r. of Judah.1.
surrounded on all sides with Judah, whereas in your Map, the northern side
thereof, is all along fairly flanked with the Tribe of Don.


Aleth. You may remember (what we so lately proved) that Dan's portion
primitively pertained to Judah, and was a canton cut out thereof. In which
sense according to Scripture, Simeons inheritance was Josh 19. 1.
within the children of Judah's, and originally encompassed therewith.


Philol. Why call you this Tribe In descript. of Simeon 1.
a jagged remnant, being as whole a cloth as the rest, and (though not so
great) as entire as the other Tribes? I am not sensible by this your Map of any
notorious dispersedness of the Simeonites habitations.


Aleth. Undoubtedly Judah his portion made many incisures, and larcinations
into the Tribe of Simeon hindering the entireness thereof. Particularly Askelon
and Josh. 15. 47.
Gaza first given to, once Judge. 1. 18.
possessed by Judah, (though regained by the Philistines) were continued and
tied by some narrow labell of land to the main of Judah, at leastwise had a
Church-path (as I may term it) a passage to the Temple, without going through
any part of Simeon. But, wanting certain instructions, how to contrive, and
carry on such indented conveyances, and not willing to confine the Reader to
our conjecturall fancies, we have left him to his liberty, presenting Simeon
Adrichomius has done the same.
entire, wherein he may frame such incursions of Judah as comply best with his
own opinion.


Philol. You make this Tribe to range some miles south of Beer-sheba, whereas
that place passes current for the utmost border of the Country. What more
common in Scripture, then Judge. 20. 1. and 1 Samuel 3. 20 and 2 Samuel 3. 10. etc.
from. Dan to Beer-sheba, that is, from the north to the south of the land of
Canaan?


Aleth. It was the utmost eminent City, but not absolutely the farthest place
in Palestine, as neither mentioned amongst the southern boundaries of the land
in general, Numb. 34. nor with the utmost limits of the Tribe of Judah, Josh.
15. In ordinary discourse we measure England east and west from Dover to the
Mount, as the farthest western place of note, though Cornwall stretches seven
Consult camdens and Speeds Maps.
miles beyond it unto the lands end. So Beer-sheba was the remotest remarkable
City of Canaan, where the cloth, as I may say, ended, though the list thereof
reached beyond it to the River of Egypt.


CHAP. XIII. Objections against Benjamin answered.
Philol. Why make you Nob a Levite City in Benjamin, within the suburbs of
Anathoth? Seeing Nob is neither named amongst the four Cities bestowed on the
Levites in this Tribe, Josh. 21. 17. nor is it any of the eight and forty
belonging unto them throughout the whole Country of Canaan.


Aleth. That Nob was in this Tribe, appears by that ca^alogue of Cities
presented us in Neh. 11. 31.
Nehemiah, which the Benjamites repossessed after their return from Babylon.
That it was a Levites, yea a Priests City, appears (too plainly) by the 1 Samuel
22. 19.
Massacre therein on them committed. We confess it none of the eight and forty
originally assigned to the Levites. Yet how they in after-ages, were capable of
supernumerary Cities more then in their first Charter, and how the Mort^main of
the Levites (as I may term it) was enlarged with new foundations, we have
lately answered in the objections of Ephraim Concerning (...).
, whither we refer you for further satisfaction.


Philol. You make the sons of Saul executed on an hill nigh Gibeah of Saul,
which your judicious M. ^ight soot in the T^mpl* page 264.
friend will have hung up before the Tabernacle in Gibeon, observing therein an
exemplary piece of divine justice, that, whereas Saul had ruined the Tabernacle
at Nob, his sons were hung up before the same in Gibeon.


Aleth. Not to be a Plaintise against him, but a Defendant of my self* I
conceive him mistaken in confounding Gibeah of Saul with Gibeon, distinct
Cities, as may appear by their several owners, and actions therein performed.
GIBEON. GIBEAH. An ancient City of the Hivites, whose Josh. 9. 3. etc.
inhabitants deceived the Israelites, Josh. 21. 17.
given to the Levites, in the Tribe of Benjamin, where the Tabernacle was set
up in the time of Solomon. A City in Benjamin, hard by I^rusalem, distinct from
the Compare Josh. 18. v. 25. with (...). 28.
former, whose inhabitants were mere Benjamites, and by their lust abused the
Judge 29. 16.
Levites Concubine to death, for which their Tribe was almost extirpated: it
was afterward called Gibeah of Saul from his birth and frequent residence
therein. Now the text expressly says, that the Gibeonites did hang them up unto
the Lord in Gibeah 2 Samuel 21. 6.
of Saul, that is, in Saul's native place, and Court, where he had issued out
his cruel edicts for the slaughter of the Gibeonites.


Philol. But that expression they hanged them in the hill Ibid. (...). 9.
before the Lord, imports the same performed in some religious place, probably
in the prospect or view of the Tabernacle.


Aleth. Before the Lord implies no more, then what in the foregoing verse was
termed Ibid. v^^. 6.
unto the Lord, that is, in a sacred manner, not out of private revenge, but in
an holy zeal, tendering the parties executed an oblation to divine justice, and
so is interpreted by the Expositors thereon.


Philol. In your particular Map of Benjamin, Jordan runs almost directly south,
the whole course of whose channel visibly bends eastward in your Map
general of Palestine.


Aleth. That general Map, (though first placed) was last perfected, wherein we
have amended three mistakes, as escaped in our particular descriptions. One
that wherein you instance, another (...) Re^^en (formerly forgott^n to be
confessed) making that Tribe a little longer from north to south, then it is
represented in our particular description thereof. My care shall be, God
willing, in the second edition, to conform those particular Maps, according to
these rectisi^ations in the general description.


CHAP. XIV. Objections against Judah answered.
Philol. WOuld not it affright one to see a dead man walk? And will not he in
like manner be amazed to see the Dead-sea moving? Why have you made the surface
of the waters thereof waving, as if like other seas it were acted with any
ty^e, which all Authors avouch, and your self confesses In description of
Judah. 5.
to be a standing stinking lake? Think^ not to plead, that such waving is the
impression of the wind thereupon, seeing Tacitus affirms of this sea, Neque
^is^. li. 5. p. 618
vento impellitur, it is such a drone, it will neither go of it self, nor yet
be driven of the wind.


Aleth. I will not score it on the account of the Graver, that it is only
lascivia, or ludicrum coeli, the over-activity of his hand: And in such cases
the flourishings of the Scrivener are no essential part of the Bond: but
behold Mercators, and other Authors Maps, and you shall find more motion
therein, then is here by us expressed. The most melancholy body of moisture,
(especially of so great extent) is necessarily subject to such simpering in
windy weather, as inseparable from the liquidity thereof.


Philol. Why set you Zeboim most northernly of all the five Cities in the
Dead-sea, in the place where Sodom is situated in all other descriptions?


Aleth. The placing of them is not much material, whether longwise all in a
File as Mr. More sets them, or in two Ranks, (two and two) as they are ordered
by So set in our Map of old Canaan.
Mercator. Skuls in a charnel-house never justle for the upper place; and as
senseless is the contention betwixt these dead Cities, which shall stand first,
whose foundations long since were doubly destroyed with fire and water. But the
sole motive of my placing Zeboim most northern of these four Cities, is because
I find 1 Samuel 13. 18.
the valley of Zeboim in the Tribe Ne^. 11. 34.
of Benjamin, which probably lay near the influx of Jordan into the Dead-sea,
denominated from the vicinity of Zeboim thereabouts.


Philol. The Hebrew Orthography confutes your conceit. For Zeboim by you last
alleged is spelled with different letters from the City which was burnt with
fire from heaven.


Aleth. I confess a threefold variation in the writing of this name, though all
the same in effect, 1 Genesis 14. 2. and so also Deuteronomy. 29. 23. (...) 2 1 Samuel So
also Nehem. 11. 34.
13. 18 (...) 3 Hoseah 11. 8. (...). I shall set thee at Zeboim etc.
Here to mollify the word, the Gutturall is either altered, or wholly omitted;
neither amounting to make it a new word: How variously are the names of the
same English towns spoken and spelled; as Lester, Leicester, Legeocester,
Legecester, yet the same word dressed in several spellings and pronunciations?


Philol. Why make you Heb^on being a noted City of the Priests, and City of
Refuge, different from all the rest, only with a single circle about it?


Aleth. Because the fields and villages thereof were none of the Priests, Josh.
21. 12.
but were given to Caleb the son of Iephunneh for his possession.


Philol. If so, then Hebron ought not to have had any circle at all about it,
being a bare City of the Priests without any suburbs belonging thereunto.


Aleth. The Priests in Hebron had, and had not, suburbs pertaining thereunto,
according to the several acception of suburbs. If by them you only understand
aedificia suburbana, buildings (though without the City walls) contiguous
thereunto, these (no doubt) belonged to the Priests, who had Ibid. v. 13.
Hebron with her suburbs: otherwise if you extend them to ager suburbanus, the
fields surrounding the City, these related to Caleb as the proper owner thereof.


Philol. You might well have afforded conjecturall flags to most of the Cities
in Judah, going generally by guess in your placing of them, and differing from
all other authors therein.


Aleth. The Learned in Anatomy have informed me, that veins are alike in their
trunks, but not in their branches; so that although the great Channels of blood
run alike in all bodies, yet the smaller veins (as is most visible in their
diva^ication on the back of the hand) disperse themselves diversely, in diverse
persons: The like is confessed in all Maps of Judah, wherein the grand Cities,
Hebron, Debir, Bethlehem etc. have their certain position agreed on by most
Authors, whilst their inferior places (and no Tribe afforded more obscure
Cities but once named in Scripture) are subject to much variety, according to
the fancies of Authors. Wherein we hope we have observed, as much as might be,
these short, and small directions we find in Scripture.


Philol. But you are not constant to your self in the location of those lesser
places, as appears by some diversity of their distances (both amongst
themselves and from Jerusalem) in the particular description of Judah, and in
the general Map of Palestine.


Aleth. I confess the same; who having discovered some errors in the particular
Map, reformed the same in the Map-generall. Which may be beheld in this point,
as a new Edition of the former, corrected and amended. Request I therefore the
Reader in such small differences, to rely rather on the credit of the
Map-generall.


Philol. You Lib. 1. p. 22. 2.
once placed Hepher a royal City in Manasseh on this side Jordan, which since
you have removed into Judah, without giving any account of the alteration.


Aleth. Some probability persuaded us to our former opinion. Chiefly because
Hepher is mentioned in Joshua's Josh. 12. 17
list, next to Tapuah; which is known to be in Manasseh. But since finding also
a Tapuah Josh. 15. 34.
in Judah, and a land of 1 King. 4. 10.
Hepher near Sochoh, a place also in Josh. 15. 35.
Judah, it has staggered our judgment, and caused us to remove Hepher into
Judah with a flag of uncertaintie thereon; all Authors finding an Ignoramus for
the exact position thereof.


Philol. The land of Goshen is sufficiently known to be in Genesis 46. 28.
Egypt: And how stragleth of Josh. 10. 41. and 15. 15.
Country of Goshen into this Tribe?


Aleth. You know that besides this England wherein we live, there is an Anglia
in Denmark, whence our Ancestors are said to have come; and there is England
beyond Wales, whither some of our nation removed. Some such occasion (to us
unknown) might give the name of Goshen to a petty tract of ground in Judah: Or
else it might be so called from some assimilation in the fruitfulness thereof.
Wonder not at a Goshen in Egypt, and another in Judah; when we find two Josh.
15. 24. and 55.
Ziphs, two Josh. 15. 34. and 56.
Zenoahs, two Josh. 35. and 48.
Socohs etc. (As two Kirbies market-townes in Westmorland) within the compass
of this Tribe.


Philol. Conceive you that any wildernesses wherewith Judah abounded, were
places of any pleasant habitation?


Aleth. I am confident thereof. For instance, Engedi though a 1 Samuel 24. 1.
Wilderness, was so delicious a place, Cant. 9. 14
that the Spouse is compared to a cluster of Camphire in the Vineyards of
Engedi. Besides, it had the convenience of Palmtrees, therefore 2 Chr. 20. 2.
in Scripture called Hazazon-Tamar, which is Engedi Tamar, being in Hebrew a
Palm. Nor can I omit the testimony of In^ra ^os Engadda oppidum est, s^cundum
ab Hierso^ymis s^^ilitate, Palmetorumque nemoribus, nunc alterum bus^um.
Pliny as the best comment herein in Gods word; who speaking of people living
on the west of the Dead-sea; amongst these (says he) is the town ENGADDA;
Second to Jerusalem in fruitfulness, and WOODS OF PALME-TREES; but now become
another heap of Ashes.


Philol. I find indeed a City, and wilderness of Maon in this Tribe, but were
the dwellers therein, those same Maonites, which are said Judge. 10. 12. with
the Zidonians and Amalekites to have oppressed Israel?


Aleth. O no. I take these tyrant Maonites to have been a fierce and foreign
Nation. Saint Hierom, de locis Hebraicis, conceives Maon to be the Country of
Moab. The vulgar Latin translates it Canaanites, because Maonites signifies
inhabitants, and the Canaanites we know were the ancient and original dwellers
in the land) whose Relics left in the land contrary to Gods command, were
constant thorns in the sides of the Israelites. But I conceive rather with
learned Cajetan on this place, these Maonites were a distinct neighboring
nation, whose certain habitation is to us unknown.


Philol. Saul, when marching against the Amalekites, is said to have numbered
the people (being two hundred and ten thousand, in 1 Samuel 15. 4.
Telaim: which by the coast of the Country seems south in or near Judah. Yet
no such place appears in your Map thereof.


Aleth. The Hebrew word (...) is variously interpreted, the Rabbis render it
appellatively in Lambs; affirming the Saul did not count them in specie, but
for more safety or expedition, computed the people by their Paschall Lambs,
proportioning such a number of men to a Lamb. Others read it, He numbered them
as Lambs, that is, now grown meek and quiet, (whereas at the first there were
some 1 Samuel 10. 27. and 1 Samuel 11. 12
animosities of the people against him: Shall Saul reign over us?) contentedly
submitting themselves to his command. But I take Telaim for a true City, and
the same with Telem Josh. 15. 24. which you may find in our description.


CHAP. XV. Objections against the Land of Moriah answered.
Philol. I Perceive the imperfection of your description by the omitting of a
memorable valley therein, namely the vale of Baca, mentioned by the Psalmist
pronouncing him blessed who passing through the vale of Baca Psalm. 84. 6.
makes it a Well. You in stead of passing through, pass by this vale
unmentioned.


Aleth. I reserved my observations on this vale for this place. Some render it
appellatively, The vale of weeping: meaning thereby the militant condition of a
Christian in this life, encumbered with constant afflictions. If so, this vale
of Baca is too big to come under my description; all the mountains in the world
being but part of this valley, the extent whereof is adequate to the whole
earth. But if you be pleased to take this vale for a proper place, I embrace
the opinion of learned Ainsworth on the text, that this vale of Baca, or
Mulberry trees, (for so also it signifies) was near to Jerusalem; out of the
tops of which 2 Samuel 5. 23.
trees, God sounded the Alarm to David when he conquered the Philistines.


CHAP. XVI. Objections against the City of Jerusalem answered.
Philol. What is charged unjustly on Saint Paul and his companions, that they
had Act. 17. 6.
turned the world upside down, may truly be laid to your charge, you have in
your description of Jerusalem tumbled all things topsie turvy, in the position
of the gates thereof; yea the foundations of the City, as presented by you, are
out of course, and contrary to the rules of other writers.


Aleth. Let God be true, and every man a liar. In this particular I profess my
self a pure Leveller, desiring that all humane conceits (though built on most
specious bottomes) may be laid flat and prostrated, if opposing the written
Word. In conformity whereunto, we are bound to dissent from such Authors
(otherwise honoring them for their several deserts) to accommodate the
Description of the Gates and Towers of Jerusalem, according to a threefold
eminent Directory, which we find in Nehemiah.


Philol. Give us I pray you an account of them in order.


Aleth. The first main Scripture direction we are to observe is, the night
survey which Nehemiah took of the walls, (or rather ruins) of Jerusalem,
described in this manner: NEHEM. 2. 13, 14, 15. And I went out by night by the
gate of the valley, even before the Dragon Well, to the Dung port, and viewed
the walls of Jerusalem, which were broken down, and the gates thereof were
consumed with fire. Then went I out to the gate of the fountain and to the
Kings pool, but there was no place for the beast that was under me to pass.
Then went I up in the night by the brook, and viewed the wall, and turned back
and entered by the gate of the valley, and so returned.



The second is the several reparations (where the same were required) done on
the Gates and walls of the City by several persons, in a circular form, from
the Sheep-gate Ne^. 3. 1. and 32.
surrounding the whole City till they returned to the same place where they
began* Whose names we have carefully inscribed on those portions of buildings,
upon which their cost and pains were expended.

The third, but most material, (because most declaratory of the method of the
Gates) is the solemn Processions, which the people divided into two Quires,
made round about the walls: each of them measuring a Semicircle; both of them
incompassing the whole circumference of Jerusalem, and at last joining together
in the (best meeting place) the Temple of God. First Quire, Nehem. 12. 31. One
great company went on the right hand, upon the wall toward the Dung-gate,
consisting of half the Princes of Judah: and Ezra the Scribe before them. And
at the fountain-gate which is over against them, they went up by the stairs of
the City of David, at the going up of the wall above the house of David, even
unto the watergate eastward.

Second Quire, Nehem. 12. 38, 39. And the other company of them that gave
thanks went over against them, Not behind them in place, but somewhat later in
time.
and I after them, and the half of the people upon the wall, from beyond the
Tower of the furnaces even unto the broad wall. And from above the gate of
Ephraim, and above the old-gate and above the fish-gate, and the tower of
Hananeel, and the tower of Meah, even unto the sheep-gate; and they stood still
in the Porta custodiae or the Watch-gate being ( as Vill^lp^^d^s excellently
proves) the Eastgate of the Temple.
prison-gate. So stood the two companies of them that gave thanks in the house
of God.

Now I request the Reader with his eye to examine, whether the walls of
Jerusalem, as designed in our draught, agree not with these directions of
Scripture. To purchase the favor whereof, I pass not for the frowns of any
Authors. Omne excelsum cadet, down with whatever dare oppose our embracing of
the Text. This we hope for the main* will satisfy any indifferent Reader;
otherwise if being as impossible for me in this short discourse, to meet with
the several exceptions of private fancies; as for a Geographer in the
Map-generall of a Country, to set down the house of every particular person.


Philol. You set Sion south of Jerusalem, clean contrary to the description of
the Psalmist Psalm. 43. 2.
, Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth is mount Sion, on the
Sides of the North the City of the great King.


Aleth. The place by you alleged is difficult, much canvassed by Comments,
who fasten upon it two principal interpretations.

1 Sense. Some make this verse a description of Sion alone, the latter clause
by Apposition so referring unto it, that Sion it self is solely charactered to
be the City on the side of the North.

2 Sense. Others make this verse the full description of all Jerusalem,
consisting of two principal parts, by the figure of Asyndeton coupled
together. 1. Sion. Beautiful for situation the ^oy of the whole earth is Mount
Sion. 2. Properly Jerusalem. On the sides of the North the City of the great
King.
That the latter is the truer interpretation we send the Reader to the
voluminous labors of Apparat. Vrbis part 1. lib. 1. cap. 11. pa. 40. col. 2.
and lib. 2. cap. 18.
Villalpandus proving the same out of Scripture, Josephus, and other Authors.
Besides (though time and casualty has made many alterations on Jerusalem, yet)
what Peter in his time said of David's sepulcher, even in our age true of mount
Sion, Act. 2. 29.
it is with us unto this day, standing still full south of Jerusalem, as
Travelers do affirm, no doubt in the ancient place and posture thereof. For,
although Joseph could remove the Egyptians from Genesis 47. 21.
one end of the borders of the land, unto the other end thereof; yet mountains
are too firmly fastened to be transplanted from their natural location.


Philol. You do commit what you condemn in Adrichomius, taxing Lib. 3. pa 342.
par. 3.
him for fashioning the streets of Jerusalem after his own fancy; assuming the
same liberty to your self in conjecturall ranging them without warrant from
Gods word.


Aleth. Reason dictates what we have done herein. For Gates being made for
entrance, probably the streets from them stretched forth-right, as we have
de^igned them. Those Insulae, or Quadrants of buildings, are nothing else but
the necessary product of the decussation and thwarting of such direct streets
where they cross one another. It is impossible that in describing Jerusalem we
should do what Saul in another case desired of the Ziphites, 1 Samuel 23. 23.
See therefore and take notice of all the lurking places, and come ye again
with the certainty; only such generals in likelihood may be presumed, and the
rest is left to every man's free conception.


Philol. You have forgotten the Porta fictilis or Potters-gate, which Apparat.
Vrbis pa^l. 1. lib. 3. c^p. 25.
Villalpandus solemnly sets up on the east of the City, building on a place
alleged out of the Prophet Jeremy.


Aleth. His Porta fictilis, is rather fictitia and so brittle a gate that it is
broken with perusing the text by him cited, for the proof thereof. Ier. 19. 1,
2.
Thus says the Lord, go and get a potters earthen bottle, and take of the
ancients of the people and of the ancients of the Priests, and go forth unto
the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is by the entry of the east gate, and
proclaim there the words that I shall tell thee. See here (whatever may be in
the vulgar Latin) no sherd of a Potters-gate, though we confess a Potters Mat.
27. 7.
field nigh the City; but, thence it cannot be collected that there was also a
gate of that name, no more then if follows, because of Smithfield, there must
be Smith-gate in London.


Philol. You affirm Lib. 3. pa. 320. par. 6.
that we meet with no gate at all in Sion, flatly contrary to the words of
David, Psalm. 87. 2.
The Lord loves the gates of Sion more then all the dwellings of Icoab.


Aleth. I say again, that because of the precipice of the place, Sion had no
out-gates, but had those which led into Jerusalem which might be meant by the
Psalmist. But to speak plainly, Gates of Sion are not there to be taken
literally, being put for the assemblies of the people at Gods public worship;
especially, whilst the Ark was in David's time fixed in Zion.


CHAP. XVIII. Objections against the Courts of Solomon's Temple answered.
Objections against Solomon's Temple are whollyomitted, because the draught
thereof is entirely taken out of Arias Montanus, and chargeable on his account.
Philol. IN your description of the Courts of Solomon's Temple, I find only
four gates to the cardinal winds, but neither Parbar nor Asuppim Gate, though
both of them eminently mentioned 1 Chr. 26. 17.
in the Bible.


Aleth. I must confess my self utterly unsatisfied in the position of these
places, whether or no they were in the first two Courts, as built by Solomon,
or added in after ages, when the new 2 Chr. 20. 5.
or third Court was added to Solomon's foundation: which latter I am most
inclined to believe. For perusing the date of the first book of Chronicles, I
find it written long after the Jews return from the captivity of Babylon, as
appears by reckoning up the grandchildren of 1 Chr. 4. 21.
Zorobabel, and therefore I suspend the describing of them till further
information.


Philol. At the entrance of the House of the Lord, you Page 385.. 3.
make horses, but omit the Chariots of the Sun, both equally mentioned in 2
King. 23. 11.
Scripture, and destroyed by Josiah. Besides, you make them artificial
statues, which (no doubt) were natural horses, sent out with riders every
morning in a superstitious frolic, to give a welcome, or visit to the
dawning-day, and to salute the Sun in the first arising thereof.


Aleth. Chariots must be supposed there, though not expressed for lack of room.
Sure they were no real horses, which the [idolatrous] Kings of Israel had
given to the Ibidem.
Sun. For (except thereby be meant a successive breed, or race) such horses
must be extremely old at this reformation, after the Compare the foresaid place
with 2 King. 22. 3.
eighteenth year of Iosia^, probably set up by Ahaz sixty years since. Besides,
it is improbable, that living horses were kept so close to the Temple, and that
noisome stables should be so near Gods house, generally set at some distance
from men's dwellings. However, I had rather subscribe, then engage in a
controversy not worth the contending for.


Philol. You Page 391.. 2.
mention only one Table of shewbread, whereas David made preparation for the
1 Chr. 28. 16.
Tables thereof. And lest so plain a place of Scripture should be avoided, by
the frequent figure of Enallage, Solomon is expressly said to have made 2 Chr.
5. 8.
ten Tables and placed them in the Temple, and it is added not long after,
whereon the Ibid. ver. 19.
shewbread was set.


Aleth. I am confident, there was but one principal Table for the presentation
of shewbread, whereon, by Gods appointment, the twelve Levit. 24. 5, 6.
Cakes were set in two rows, according to the number of the twelve Tribes of
Israel. Now, if there were ten Tables provided for that purpose, the twelve
Cakes could not be equally set upon them without a fraction. I conceive
therefore the other nine, only as side-cupboards, or Livery tables
ministerial to that principal one, as whereupon the shewbread elect was set
before the consecration thereof, and whereon the old shewbread removed for
some time, might be placed, when new was substituted in the room thereof.


Philol. To proceed to the Altar. I approve your Page 394.. 3.
answer taken from the Celestial fire thereupon, as satisfactory in relation
to the Tabernacle, and Solomon's Temple, that so many sacrifices were so
suddenly consumed without any noisomeness. But, the difficulty still remains as
touching the second Temple: where, by general confession (in default of
heavenly) the Priests were fain to make use of common, and ordinary fire.


Aleth. Although I believe not in full latitude, what the Jewish Rabbis do
affirm; That the Pillar of smoke which ascended from the sacrifice, curled
only upwards in direct wreaths to heaven, without any scattering, or shedding
if self abroad; yet for the main, we may be confident, it was no whit offensive
to the Priests, or people thereabouts. This we impute to the providence of God,
passing an Act of indemnity, that none should be impaired, either in health or
wealth, by the performance of any service according to his appointment. And, as
the land of the Jews was secured from foreign invasion Exodus 34. 24.
during the appearing of all the males thrice a year at Jerusalem: so the same
goodness of God ordered, that his people should sustain no damage or detriment,
either in their purses, or persons, whilst busied in his worship: the main
reason that no infection did arise, no smoke, nor ill savor sented from the
fat, offall, and excrements of so many sacrifices offered in so short a time,
and small a compass.


Philol. You say something for the avoiding of noisomeness, but nothing in
answer, that that common fire should so quickly devour so many sacrifices,
though, I confess the offerings in the second Temple, nothing so numerous as
those in Solomon's.


Aleth. We must totally ascribe this to the work of the Lord, who though not
granting this second Temple the honor and use of Celestial fire (allowed to
the former) yet, in approbation of his own ordinance, endued common fire with
more then common activity. As, often in extremities, when miracles are denied,
ordinary means are blessed with extraordinary efficacy in their operation.


CHAP. XIX. Objections against Zorobabels Temple rebuilt by Herod.
Philol. I Forbear from objecting any thing against this Map of the Temple,
seeing, by your confession, it is none of your own designing, but borrowed from
Ludovicus Capellus. Only let me tell you, that I have seen a draught of the
same Temple, as in fashion much unlike it, so in exactness far above it. I mean
the same which Constantine L' Empereur has set forth out of Middoth, or the
Rabbinicall book of Solomon's building.


Aleth. I confess my self to give little credit to Rabbinicall relations
therein, and think the worse of the writings of all Rabbis, for their own
thinking so well thereof, comparing them with, yea preferring them before
Scripture it self. Such As translated by Buxtorse in his R^censio opcris
Talmudici.
passages (which for me shall go unenglished) being found frequent therein. In
Codice juris Bava M^tria sol. 33. 1.
In illis qui operam dant lectioni Biblicae, virtus aliqua est, aut potius
nulla; at qui traditioni, virtus est, propter quam accipitur praemium.
Egredienti In Codice juris Chagiga. so. 10. 1.
e studio Talmudico ad studium Biblicum, non erit pax. Jacob in Libro Caphtor.
^o. 121.
Scito verba Scribarum amabiliora esse verbis Prophetarum. Justly therefore did
Christ complain of the^, Mark 7. 13.
Making the word of God of none effect through your traditions which ye have
delivered. And, although I am not of the mind of Tom. 2. par. 2. page 576.
Villalpandus, who advises such as would read the Rabbis without danger,
first to fense themselves with the sign of the Cross, and then whilst reading
their books, often to repeat our Saviors word, You are of your father the John
8. 44.
Devil; yet I conceive Epicharmus his counsel very useful herein, (...),
Remember thou not to believe, their books (I mean in many passages therein)
being the Leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, whereof Christ forewarneth us to
beware.


Philol. Grant them unsound in points of faith, they may be true in matters of
fact. And though we must zealously reject their doctrinall positions, we may
safely embrace their historical relations; especially concerning the
contrivance of the second Temple extant in their age.


Aleth. As touching this second Temple, the works of the Rabbis now extant can
give us no true intelligence thereof. The Jews once said to our Savior John 8.
57.
, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and have thou seen Abraham? taxing him for
pretending to more antiquity, then his age could extend unto. Though this was
but a cavil at Christ, the same may justly be charged on the Rabbis, that the
oldest of them extant at this day, (all of them writing since Ann. Dom. 100. in
Trajans time) are too late and modern to give us any infallible information of
the second Temple, as which their eyes did never behold. Whilst Josephus (out
of whose instructions Capellus his description was lately taken) was an
eyewitness thereof.


Philol. Allow their personal experience too short to reach the Temple, their
reports proceed on ancient records, declaring, as what was done in their days,
so in the old time before them.


Aleth. So many and prodigious are the Sea Sixtus Senensis on this subject.
monstrosities by them delivered, that it is hard to discern their Lampreys
from their Snakes; and the very truths among them are rendered suspicious,
because mixed with so many falsehoods: Who, because they received not the truth
[Christ himself] for this cause God has sent them strong 2 These. 2. 11.
delusions that they should believe a lie.


Philol. Grant the Rabbis generally guilty hereof, yet Rabbi Judah may be
credited, living about Trajans time, not much above thirty years after the
destruction of the Temple. One commonly styled the Prince, and the Holy,
conceived by his Countrymen next to Moses in knowledge and piety. Wherefore
that new description of the Temple I so lately commended, deserves belief,
coming from the pen of this Rabbi Judah, as far exceeding other Rabbis, as the
Patriarch Judah excelled other Tribes.


Aleth. Your so much admired Rabbi Judah was swollen with Pharisaicall
hypocrisy, as high as any other. Witness his dying words, breathing out his
soul with an expression to this effect, Constantine L' Emper^ur in M^ddo^b.
cap. ^. Sect. ^.
Lord of the world, it is manifest and known unto thee, that I have labored in
thy law with my ten fingers, and have not received any gain, no not with so
much as the least finger. Justly therefore may we be jealous of this water
coming from such a fountain.


Philol. Well, to wave the description of this Rabbin, and to give you only an
occasion to enlarge your self, I desire farther information both in this
draught of Capellus, and also in your own written description of
Zorobabel-Herods Temple. For the first, I wonder you have omitted the Bridge
from mount Olivet to the Temple, mentioned in Middoth.


Aleth. We find indeed such a Bridge (others call it a Caus-way) in Middoth
built on purpose from mount Olivet to the mountain of the house, A bridge from
mount Olivet to the Temple.
whereon the Temple was built. But oh! how long must that Bridge be? Above a
mile in the direct extent thereof. How many, but especially how high must the
arches therein be, to stride over so vast a concavity? What need of so
expensive a structure, seeing an ordinary plank would serve for a bridge over
Kedron? which in summer time was all bridge it self. How came Josephus (one
neither blind to see, nor dumb to tell of beautiful buildings for the honor
of his nation) to take no notice hereof? Indeed the high Priests amongst the
Romans, anciently had an inspection over the making and mending of bridges,
thence called Pontifices: but he deserved to be Pontifex Maximus amongst the
Jews, who erected this sumptuous bridge, on which may belief dare not walk
with confidence, for fear of falling, and therefore I conclude it well omitted
by Capellus.


Philol. I am not satisfied in the reasons you give why Solomon's Porch was so
called.


Aleth. Concerning the name whereof, Solomon's porch.
let me add this (to what formerly we have In description of Zorobabels Temple.
written on this subject) that some conceive it so called, not because Solomon
ever built it, but because in after ages erected by Herod, it did approximate,
or come the nearest in state and magnificence to that of Solomon's first
founding. Thus Manna is termed Psalm. 78. 25.
Angels food, not because they ever eat thereof, but had they any intention to
feed thereon, better dainties could not be desired by them, or afforded to
them: as this Solomon's porch (at leastwise in the apprehension of the builders
thereof, well conceited of their own workmanship) was so called, because as
brave, and beautiful, as if Solomon himself with all his wealth, and glory,
had been the erectour thereof?


Philol. I conceive some carnal reason for the buyers and sellers of Sheep and
Oxen in the Temple, (driven out by our Savior) because men, to save the
tedious driving of them up in kind, brought flocks and herds up in their
purses to Jerusalem, (money wherewith there they bought them) but what use was
there of money changers in the Temple?


Aleth. Money Changers their employment.
Besides their changing of strangers gold into silver, for less payments at
their coming hither; silver into gold for the lighter portage, at their
departure hence; under favor I conceive, they fitted people coming hither with
Shekels, for their religious service. True it is, the Roman coins were only
current in common and civil paiments (as appears by Christ's question and the
Jews answer, Whose image and superscription is this? and they said, Cesars) but
probably Shekels were used in sacred paiments, the Romans permitting the Jews
the free enjoyment of their Religion, in things not destructive to their civil
government. Now, seeing the Jews were enjoined by Gods Law, to tender unto him
Shekels of the Sanctuary, not only in valuation, but in Specie (especially in
the case of Levit. ^7. 3.
vows, paying more or few according to the age, or sex of the person) it is
likely that the money changers here furnished the aforesaid Votaries with
Shekels, and other pieces thereof, in exchange for their Roman moneys. But
herein such Brokers so improved themselves on the present necessities of some,
and ignorance of others, that they much defrauded people with their contracts,
therefore termed by our Savior a Mat. 21. 13.
Den of thieves.


Philol. Why was the outward Court in the Temple called the Court of women?


Aleth. Why called Court of women.
Not, that they alone were permitted to be there; but because they were not
suffered, unless on special occasions, to go any farther. Thus De Bello Iud.
lib. 5. cap. 14.
Josephus calls it (...), the proper place for women to worship in; but
elsewhere expounds himself, Anti. ^^. 15. c. 14
(...), farther then this the Temple was unaccessible to women; so that this
Court was proper for, but not peculiar unto the weaker sex for their staying
therein.


Philol. Seeing that Court was signally so called from Women, do you conceive
as many women as men repaired to Gods public service in Jerusalem?


Aleth. O no! All males were enjoined to appear Deuteronomy. 16. 16.
thrice a year (and that not empty handed) before the Lord in the Temple;
whilst the same was not required of women. Whose exemption proceeded partly
from the infirmity of their sex, not able to endure so long a journey; partly
to protect their chastity in such a concourse of people; and partly that they
might attend their young Children, and family-affaires. For though God gave
them Exodus 34. 24.
assurance, that during their husbands absence, no enemy should invade the
land; yet their tender 1 Samuel 1. 22.
children were not exempted from inconveniences which might arise if their
mothers were away from them.


Philol. Me thinks the place in the Temple, where the Sacrifices were slain
and fleaed, seems too small for such a purpose, if all the Paschall Lambs
(computed by Josephus to be thousands) were as the Rabbis will have it) all
killed by the Priests in the Temple, and that betwixt the two Evenings, (i. e.
between three and six a clock in the afternoon) no longer time being allotted
thereunto? I say, if so, a far greater square then what is presented in your
Map was requisite for that service.


Aleth. I am not bound to find room for all their Lambs. Suffices it that I
have exactly followed my pattern in the dimensions of the place. But to the
point, may I be so bold as to whisper my opinion in your ear; I conceive that,
after the (...) (or Priests appointed to view the blemishes of Lambs) For they
were not confined to so few hours ^n their scrutiny.
had at more leisure approved those Lambs legally perfect, a private person
might sacrifice them in his own house; and then the less room was required in
the Temple for such performances. And here I allege the authority of Philo,
Libro tertio de vita Mosis, and again in his book de decaloge.
affirming that (as undoubtedly at the first institution of the Passover and
before the erection of the Tabernacle) every one was a Priest in his own
family, even in his days, and sufficiently qualified for the offering of such
sacrifices.


Philol. You make stairs ascending to the Altar, flatly against Gods command;
Exodus 20. 26.
Neither shall thou go up with steps unto my Altar; and the reason is
rendered, that thy nakedness be not discovered thereon.


Aleth. To salve the matter, (and to reconcile our, with the Rabbis,
description) I conceive under the favor of Capellus, that the going up to the
Altar was not divided into steps (as he presents it) but that it heightened
it self by insensible degrees, being (though a Rise of many Cubits) an even
ascent (as I may term it) equally elevated, so that the Priests, not striding,
but pacing up thereon, were not necessitated to any See Constantine L' Empereur
in Middoth. p. 111.
divarication of their feet, which might occasion the discovery of any
uncomeliness.


Philol. You make the Holy immediately continued to the Holy of Holies, whereas
there was a Cubit distance betwixt them, and that covered with two vailes,
which interstitium was called (...), by the Rabbis.


Aleth. I have read as much in their writings, and that they were unresolved
whether to refer this space to the Holy or Holy of Holies; (like the condition
of dying men in transitu, dubious whether to be accounted in this or another
world) and thence they say it was called (...), i. e. See M Light^oo^ in his
Temple.
Perturbation or disturbance, because the Priests were much disquieted thereat
to which part of the Temple to relate it. But what ^aith the Psalmist? man
Psalm. 39. 7.
disquieteth himself in vain, as here the Rabbis do, causelessly troubling
themselves about that which appears not in Scripture. This we know, the Temple
(besides the Porch) had two fair rooms, the Holy and Holiest; but as for this
partition-Closet betwixt them, no foundation thereof in Gods word.


Philol. You confidently deny that the Ark was in the second Temple, whereas,
upon inspection of the Triumphant Marble of the Vespasians in Rome, the same
appears pourtraicted thereupon.


Aleth. Their eyes are much mistaken which find the Ark on that Mon^ment,
though something Ark-like, (but in very deed nothing else but the Table of
shewbread) be presented therein: as for further satisfaction we have caused
See the last draught or fragm^nt^ Sacra.
here to be exemplified.


Philol. You avouch an utter abolition of all Temple-Utensils, and no surviving
Relics thereof at this day. I conceive the contrary may be made good out of
History and daily experience.


Aleth. I confess the fingers of superstition have itched to be tampering with
them. But finding the same not to fadge, at last she was fain Hands-off to
desist from such improbable designs. One Vill^lpand^s.
tells us of a cheater in France which many hundred years ago pretended to
Moses his wonder-working Rod (though that of Aaron, not Moses, was preserved in
the Tabernacle) and essayed to work miracles therewith, till at last he was
beaten with his own Rod, detected and punished for an impostor. I confess also
that In lib. hist. Exodus 1. ca. 6.
Comestor, and out of him De iis quaee fu^runt in cap. 1.
Ribera in altari Lateranensi infra quod dicitur esse Arca, In the Lateran
Altar, say they [in Rome] beneath [within] which IT IS SAID the Ark is; but
both of them speak so uncertainly, and put it on public fame, that they teach
us to deny the Truth thereof.


Philol. You are very brief in the destruction of the City and Temple by the
Romans, whereas so memorable a subject deserved a fuller description.


Aleth. It is largely related by Josephus to whom the Reader is referred; only
I will add a word of the remarkable time thereof. God graciously promised his
people, Neither shall Exodus 34. 24.
any man desire thy land, when thou shall go up to appear before the Lord thy
God thrice a year. Obedience is better then an Army to secure ones estate. As
the Meniall-servants of great Persons are protected in some cases, from
Arrests, whilst they wait on their Masters in public employment; so Gods
people were privileged from damage during their attendance on him thrice a
year in his Temple; no invasion being found to befall them on that occasion
clean through the Scripture. But at last, in token that they, by their
wickedness, had outlawed themselves of his protection, and he withdrawn his
defending of them, the Romans besieged them in Jerusalem, coming up thither on
the solemn feast of the Iosep. Bell. Iud. li. 6. c. 4.
Passover; and soon after both Temple and City was destroyed, by Vespasian and
Titus his son, seventy two years after our Saviors birth. Not one stone of the
Temple left upon another; though three towers of the City ( Ma^iamne, Phaselus,
and Hippicus) were left standing; not out of pity, but pride; their devouring
sword leaving this mannerly bit on purpose, that posterity might taste how
strong the place was, to the greater credit of the conquerours.


Philol. To add to the solemnity of the State, Titus with his Father Vespasian
made a solemn Triumph in Rome, wherein the golden Table and Candlestick, with
other Iosep. de Bell. Iud. li. 7. cap. 21.
sacred Utensils of the Temple, formerly reverenced, now derided, made once for
Gods service, now served to adorn the Trophies of Pagans. We read what befell
Dan. 5. 5.
Belshazzar when he quaffed in the vessels of the Temple. Some perchance might
here expect that God, to punish the profana^ion of these holy instrument^,
should then have showed some signal judgment on the profaners. But the case
was altered, because the date of Ceremonies was then expired, the use of Types
ended, Christ the Truth being come: and the Moon may set obscurely without any
man's taking notice of her, when the Sun is risen.


Aleth. The Law carried captive.
The last and greatest Trophee then carried in triumph was the Iosep. ut prius.
LAW OF THE JEWS: probably that very numericall book, the Authenti^k or
Original of the Law, which by Gods command was constantly to be kept in the
Deuteronomy. 17. 18. and 2 Chr. 24. 14.
Temple. And this perchance was permitted by divine providence, not without a
peculiar mystery therein, to show, that the Law, which formerly bound men over
to damnation, was now bound it self in captivity, outed of its former dominion,
deposed from its condemning power, having now the Gospel of Grace succeeding
in the place thereof. Lastly, orders were issued out to the Governor of Syria
to set the whole land of Judea to sale; which was done accordingly. Time was,
when by the Leviticall Law, Jewish land though ^old, yet at the year of Iubile
was to revert to the ancient Levit. 25. 28.
owners; but now the King of heaven granted such a license of Alienation, that
it was fully and finally passed away from its ancient possessors.


Philol. Coins made in memorial of the Rom^n conquest.
To perpetuate the memory of this Roman conquest, besides many other monuments,
Coins were stamped both in gold and Baronius Annal. Eccles. anno. 73. ex numis
L^lii Pasqualini Romani.
silver, with the Image of Vespasian and Titus, on the one side, and on the
reverse a woman placed in a pensive posture under a Palm Tree, which tree was
the Hieroglyphick of Judea, only differing herein, that the Palm Tree the
more depressed, the more it flourishes, whereas Judea sunk under the weight
of her woes, and never again outgrew her miseries. And lest men should miss the
fancy of the Impress, they are guided thereunto by the Motto subscribed, Iudaea
capta, Judea taken.


Aleth. Conclusion of the description.
What ^an on sight hereof would not call to mind the complaint of the Prophet,
Lamen. 1. 1.
How does the City sit solitary that was full of people? how is she become as a
widow? she that was great among the nations, and Princess among the Provinces,
how is she become tributary? Great, no doubt, was the grief of the Jews hereat.
But few drops seasonably showred, would preserve the green blade from
withering, when much rain cannot revive the roots once withered. Eyes dry for
their sins, are vainly wet after their sufferings: and a drought in the Spring
is not to be repaired by a deluge in the Autumn.


CHAP. XX. Objections, concerning the Description of Mount Libanus, answered.
Philol. YOu make Libanus to be the north-ridge of these hills, and
Anti-Libanus to be the south part thereof, clean contrary unto learned Cosmog.
lib. 5. page 1001.
Munster in his description of it.


Aleth. Munster is singular therein, unseconded by any other Authors. However,
the controversy is not important as touching Scripture, wherein this
distinction appears not at all, both the north and south chains of those
mountains being promiscuously called Libanus in Holy Writ. Some humane Authors
lay this distinction in point of east and west, so great is the difference
among them. If I may freely profess my opinion herein, I conceive that the
inhabitants of this mountain, termed the place of their own habitation,
wheresoever they dwelt, Libanus, and named the mountains of their overthwart
neigh^bours Anti-Libanus: as commonly men account their own Religion only to
be Christianity, and all such opinions as are opposite to their own,
Antichristian


Phil^l. In your Map general of old Canaan, the Island of Arvad (or Aradus) is
not above forty miles from Zidon, which in this Map of mount Libanus are
fourscore miles asunder. Indeed I have read of a floating Isle in Scotland,
moving from place to place with the wind and waves. But is this Isle of Aradus
fixed to no firmer foundations, so that it has swom forty miles more northward
in this, then in your former draught thereof?


Aleth. May you be pleased to remember, that in our instructions Lib. ^. cap.
14. 8.
premised to the Reader, we gave notice that places standing on the Um-stroke*
or utmost line of any Map, denote not their accurate position, but situation
thereabouts, to clear the continuation of the Country. Such the location of
Arvad in our former Map, which in this of mount Libanus is placed according to
the true distance thereof.


Philol. You make the River Aban^ (in heathen Authors Chrysorrho^s) to sink
into the ground, without communicating it self to the sea. This is out of the
common road of nature, that this River should be free from paying tribute to
the Ocean, to which all smaller waters are indebted. Yea and In his desc^iption
of Manas. beyond Jordan. Lit. A.
Adrichomius (no doubt on good authority) makes it, when passing from
Dam^scus, to run through a plain called Arch abod, and so into the Syrian, or
Medite^ranean-sea.


Aleth. His error therein is confuted, both by ancient, and modern writers.
Strabo speaking thereof, (...). Which Chrysorrho^s beginning from the City, and
Country of Damascus, in a manner is wholly spent in drains thence derived; for
it waters much ground, and that very deep. Some thing more may be collected
from Ptolemies expression, not terming the fall of Chrysorrhoas (...) (his
ordinary word) the Out-lets, or Ejections thereof into the sea, but only
(...), the End, or determination thereof. Where, by the degrees by him
assigned, Be^tius in his Maps presents this River swallowed up wholly in the
sands: and the same is confessed by Bellonius an eyewitness thereof, and other
modern V^d^ Ferrarii L^x con Geographicum.
Geographers, that it never comes unto any sea.


Philol. You have omitted the Vale of Salt in your Map (near Aram^ Zoba^)
neither mentioning in your description that most memorable defeat, which David
gave the Syrians therein. Your modern Merchants of Aleppo will inform you
thereof, who have been on the very place where the battle was fought, as
tradition reports.


Aleth. I have heard so much from the mouths of my judicious M. Roger Vivion
and M. Hump. Brown.
friends, which have lived in those parts: and have formerly read the same in
effect; How, within half a days-journey Riddul^hs Travels pa. 45.
of Aleppo, there is a very great plain, without grass growing on it, the sand
whereof is naturally good salt, and after rain being dried again with the Sun,
the people gather it. However, I cannot be persuaded, that this Salt Vale was
the place, whereon David gave his enemies that notable overthrow, as on the
perusal of the following Scriptures will appear.

2 Samuel 8. 13 And David gat him a name when he returned from smiting the
Syrians in the valley of Salt being eighteen thousand men. And he put garrisons
in Edom, throughout all Edom put he garrisons.

1 Chr. 18. 12. Moreover Abishai the son of Zerviah slew of the Edomites in
the valley of Salt, eighteen thousand.

Inscription of Psalm. 60. To the chief Musician upon Sushan-Eduth; Michtam of
David, to teach. When he strove with Aram Maharaim, and with Aram Zobah, when
Ioab returned and smote of Edom in the valley of Salt, twelve thousand.

Here under favor, I conceive, these several Scriptures intend one, and the
same victory, because fought in the same place, the Valley of Salt, whilst the
seeming contradictions, in the names of the Conquerors, different numbers, and
nations of the persons conquered, are easiely reconciled: 1. Ioab (as General)
might give the Command, and Abishai (Lieutenant General) do the execution,
whilst David (as Sovereign) received the honor of the Action. 2. Twelve
thousand might be slain on the place, and six more killed in the pursuit, so
making up eighteen thousand in the total number. 3. This slaughter fell on the
Edomites, who are called Syrians, not by their Country (though Syria taken in
a large sense is comprehensive of many nations) but cause, and confederacy, as
engaging themselves (to their cost) auxiliaries in the same quarrel of the
Syrians against King David.
This battle thus stated (with most probability in my opinion) it seems fought
rather in the land of Edom, where there is another Valley of Salt eminent in 2
King. 14. 7. and 2 Chr. 25. 11
Scripture, and not near Aleppo, or Aram Zobah. However, because Tradition is a
Tyrant on the contrary, I dare resolve nothing positively, but suspend my own,
and attend the judgments of others herein.


Philol. You make Marra the next modern stage south of Aleppo: whereas there be
many more miles, and intermediate lodging-places (namely Cane-Toman, and See
Biddulph^ Travels pa. 88.
Saracoop) betwixt them.


Aleth. I confess no less, but am sorry your memory is so short, that I must so
often incultate the same rule unto you: That places situate on the Um-stroke
(such the location of Aleppo in our Map) are not in their exact position,
whilst we only make a long arm to reach them confusedly into our
description, though otherwise they be at greater distance, then the scale of
miles will admit.


Philol. I wonder you make the Mediterranean from Tripoli to Antioch, to run
with such a crooked flexure, in form of an Hook, which certainly will not catch
the belief of any judicious beholder thereof. The rather because no
Geographers take cognizance of it, and such a bending is disavowed by all
modern Maps.


Aleth. Consult Ptolemies Maps (as drawn by learned Bertius) and they present
the fashion thereof accordingly: though such an Elbow appears not in the late
Cards of this Country. No news now adays for Sea to gain, Land to lose, or
(reciprocally) both to alter their ancient, and accept new forms: seeing our
Cornish-men will tell us, that a good piece of their horn is blunted, and
broken off by the sea: whose land formerly stretched out more westward, and was
Camdens Brit. in Cornwall.
called (as they say) Lioness, before the waters devoured both the paws, and
whole body thereof.


CHAP. XXI. Objections answered against the eastern confines of Palestine.
Philol. YOu have left the eastern part of this Map altogether empty, which you
ought to have furnished with more towns, and Cities therein.


Aleth. Whose image and superscription does this Map bear? Is it not of Arabia
the desert, a wild barren Country? To make a desert full, is as absurd, as to
paint a Black-more fair. Besides, whence should the Geographer fetch the names
of these Cities, except from his own groundless fancy? And then, as King Edgar
is said to have founded in England as many Monasteries as there be weeks in the
year, a Map-maker might build more Cities then there be hours therein, whilst
the Reader must have as much simplicity, as the Author dishonesty, that gives
credit thereunto.


Philol. You have false pointed (to use your own Page ^7.. 45.
expression) the Jewish peregrinations, seeing those four intermediate stages (
Comma's, as you term them) be Ar, Mattanah, Nahaliel, and Bamoth, being named
after the stream of Arnon, seem on the other side of the River, and therefore
rather to be placed in the Tribe of Reuben.


Aleth. I have consulted the text, and best Comments upon it, and cannot yet be
convinced, but that the same is rightly situate. Arnon I conceive divided into
many streams, therefore plurally termed the brooks of Number. 21. 14.
Arnon, probably tributary brooks running into that main River: and though the
places aforesaid lay north of these rivolets, they were south of the main
Arnon, and in the land of Moab. However, because of their so ambiguous posture,
being more willing to learn then to teach, I am ready to alter them on any
better information.


Philol. You make Jobs sons tent in your Map blown down on his children
therein, whereas Job. 1. 13.
Scripture calls it expressly an house, and otherwise it is unlikely they
should be slain, with such slight curtains falling upon them.


Aleth. I will not plead that a tent is also termed an house in Scripture
Compare Genesis 26. 25. with Genesis 27. 25.
phrase, that tent-dwelling was most fashionable in the eastern Countries,
especially in that ancient age, that statory, or long standing tents were
quilted with timber, for their stronger support; that Iob^ children might be
(though not killed with weight) stifled with the closeness of the very linen
in the tent, when Satan with such violence in a vengeance, drove it in upon
them; but fairly charge it on the account of the Graver following his own fancy
therein.


Philol. You have made the Red Sea too near to the Dead-sea, presenting not
above sixty miles distance betwixt them, when there is much more in all
authentic descriptions of them. See now what covetousness does, it makes men
guilty of much falsehood, as here your over-greediness to recover Ezion Gaber
within this Map, has tempted you to trespass on due proportion.


Aleth. I confess the main channel of the Red Sea runs many miles more
south-west; but this Bay called Sinus Elaniticu^; from (...) (E^ath in
Scripture, a fair City built by 2 King. 14. 22.
Uzziah, and restored to I^^^ah, Deuteronomy. 2. 8.
hard by Ezion Gaber) buncheth out more to the north, and in Mr. Mores Maps,
and others of good credit, is advanced as near to the Dead-sea, as in this our
description. Besides, I have good reason to conceive, that this Reach of the
Red Sea, anciently stretched more northward, then now adays; even to the City
of Elana, or Elath, whence it takes its name; because in Ptolemies Map, Elana
is set in the land, some miles distance from the Sea; whither, no doubt, it
reached formerly, and made an haven for Ezion Gaber thereabouts.


Philol. But, how can Ezion Gaber stand on the Red Sea, when we read of Huram
King of Tire (an haven sufficiently known to be seated on the Mediterranean)
that he sent 2 Chr. 8. 17, 18.
ships to Solomon to Ezion Gaber? Surely, they sailed not round about Africa,
much less can you conceive them to go over land, (ships having fins, and not
feet) and a shole of fish may with as much probability be driven over the
Continent.


Aleth. Here Sir, I will not tell you of the Prince of Orange his constantly
carrying boats to make bridges of (though of no great burden) in his wagons:
much less will I instance in those seventy lesser ships, and Galliots, brought
by Zoganes Bassa Anno 1453. up a Knowls T^^k. Hist. page 343.
great hill, and so by dry land with all their sails abroad* out of the
Bosphorus, the space of eight miles, into the haven of Constantinople, by an
ingenious device, and a great strength of men to manage it, whereby the said
City was soon after unexpectedly taken by the Turk. An invention formerly
found out, and practiced by the Venetians at the lake of Bennacus. But, waving
these things, take notice, I pray, of two memorable passages concerning the
matter in hand.

1 King. 9. 26. And King Solomon made a navy of Ships in Ezion Gaber.

2 Chronicles. 8. 18. And Huram sent him [to Ezion Gaber] by the (...) of his
servants, Ships, and servants that had knowledge of the sea.

The result of both is this, Solomon's ships were built in the place at Ezion
Gaber, where all their lumber, and ma^sie timber was provided, at the Dock
wherein they were made: whilst their tackling, and other essential implements
thereof (easily portable when taken in pieces) might be sent from Tire by
land-carriages. Such far carting being part of the burdens Solomon imposed on
the people, whereof they afterward so grievously 1 King. 12. 4.
complained: or else by Hurams sending ships, by a Metonymie of the cause
understand ship-rights, such as found materials there, and brought art and
industry (virtually with the former a whole navy) thither with them.


Philol. Seeing Edom bounded northward on the Dead, southward on the Redsea
(whereon stood Ezion Gaber in the land of King. 9. 26.
Edom) how can the children of Israel be conceived (when denied passage through
it) to Number. 21. 4.
compass the land of Edom without coming into any part thereof, except they
went into the water?


Aleth. Understand it, they went not the nearest way to Canaan through the
heart, and fruitful middle of Edom, but surrounded the same, going through the
borders thereof (leaving the Red Sea on the right hand) where their passage was
no whit prejudicial to the Edomites, as being through a base Country secured
against the long stay of any passengers therein, by its own barrenness.
Besides, (...).
some conceive the land of Edom extended not anciently so far as the Red sea,
so that in Moses his time Ezion Gaber belonged not thereunto, though in the
days of Solomon accounted parcel thereof.


CHAP. XXII. Objections against the Wilderness of Paran answered.
Philol. IN your Map of Simeon and Judah, you make that the River of Egypt,
which runs nigh Rinocolura into the Mediterranean sea. And here you call both
that brook that runs into the Syrbon Lake, as also the easternmost stream of
Nilus by the name of the River of Egypt. How comes this triplication? Where the
Scripture presents but one, you multiply three Rivers of Egypt.


Aleth. You put me in mind of a passage Bishop Latimer confesses of himself,
whilst as yet a young Priest, and zealous Papist. He, being enjoined by the
Rubric to mingle water with the wine in the Ch^lice at Mass, was so See the
preface of M. Mason de Ministeri^ A^glic.
scrupulous to do it effectually, that he powered in water so much, and so
often, that he almost diluted all into water. Such is the (...) of my caution
herein, who have Egypt-rivered this Map to purpose, willing to please all
without displeasing of the truth. You know who says, Romans 12. 18.
If it be possible, as much as in you lies have peace with all men, as herein
I have endeavored. For, 1 The Rivolet south of Simeon, by general consent 2
That running into the Syrbon-lake, by Mr. More 3 The easternmost stream of
Nile, by Bochartus is made the River of Egypt.
Thus each opinion having learned men to patronize it, we equally tender them
all to the Readers discretion, to reject, or accept which of them he shall
conclude most probable.


Philol. You make Sinai (where the Law was given) a different, and distinct
mountain from mount Horeb. Whereas in Scripture it plainly appears, that Horeb
was the same with Sinai, two names for one and the same mount. For, that the
Law was given in Sinai, all agree, and the same is attributed to Horeb also.
The Lord our God made a covenant with us in Deuteronomy. 5. 2. and 4.
Horeb. -- The Lord talked with you face to face in the mount, out of the midst
the fire.


Aleth. Some Sir Walter Raleigh
conceive this mountain (as Moses is erroneously fancied with horns) to rise
up Parnassus-like, with a double top; whereof the one is called Horeb, the
other Sinai. Or else the former, like the Alps, is a genericall name to many,
whilst Sinai, like mount Senis amongst the Alps, is more eminent and
conspicuous then the rest, for the height thereof.


Philol. Seeing the Spies were sent from Number. 32. 8. and Deuteronomy. 1. 19.
Kadesh-Barnea to discover the Land, a City afterward assigned to Josh. 15. 6.
Judah, how come you to make the Israelites to incamp so many miles south of
the same place?


Aleth. None can be so wild as to conceive that the Israelites during their
journeying in the wilderness, ever came within the walls of any City, but
always pitched in the open desert. This premised, when they are said to be
Josh. 14. 6.
in Kadesh-Barnea, we understand thereby a Country, not City, so named, which
began southwardly about Rithmah (the fifteenth station of the Israelities,
whence they sent their spies) and extended northwardly to Kadesh-Barnea
properly so called, (probably a City) certainly a limitary place belonging
afterward to the Tribe of Judah.


Philol. You term their provocation of God in this place Description of Paran
38.
as yet the last and greatest temptation, which seems to me not of so heinous a
nature.


Aleth. So many and great were their Rebellions, it is hard to define which was
their highest offense. Their carriage for forty years is styled by God a Psalm.
95. 8.
day of temptation, whose transgressions were so frequent and came so fast,
that they all completed but one entire, constant, and continued temptation.
But to the point, that this their despising of the Psalm. 106. 24.
pleasant land was a paramount impiety, appears not only by the exclusion of
that whole generation from entering the same, but by the confession of modern
Jews: Manasseh Ben Israel (the Hebrew Divine at this day in Amsterdam) observes
the ninth day of the month Ab, whereon says he In his book called Spes
Isra^lis, Sect. 28. pa. 86.
Exploratores flebant sinecau^a, The spies sent to discover the land [and all
the congregation occasioned by their false reports] Number. 14. 1.
wept without cause, has ever since been unfortunate to their nation, their
first, and second Temple being burnt on the same day, and many dysasters have
since befallen them thereon. Thus the Jews travel far off in their inquiries,
fetching the cause of their misfortunes from their forefathers in the
wilderness more then three thousand years ago, which with more ease might take
up their lodging nearer hand, and find the same in their crucifying of Christ,
as their highest sin, and the cause of their deepest suffering.


Philol. Think you that Rithmah (the fifteenth stage of the Israelites) was the
particular place, whither the spies returned bringing the report of Canaan?


Aleth. Though many conceive so, under favor I take it more probable, that the
next mansion, Rimmon-parez by name, was the proper scene of that action. For,
it signifies in Hebrew the Division of Pomegranates, so called (as I conceive)
not from any growing there (too barren a place for such beautiful fruit) but
brought thither by the Spies ( Number. 13. 23.
Pomegranates being specified amongst the fruits of the land) which here were
divided, and shared among the people of Israel, to show them a sample of the
fruitfullness of Canaan.


Philol. What a blank and vacuity have you left betwixt Ezion-Gaber the thirty
second, and Kadesh-Zin the thirty third station of the Israelites (sixty miles
at least) without any stage interposed? It is not probable that they traveled
so far, without resting themselves betwixt them.


Aleth. Surely they had intermediate Mansions where they took their nightly
repose, though not named by Moses, because not making any considerable abode
therein. I conceive, that after their departure from Ezion-Gaber, God quickened
the Israelites (who truanted before in their slow, and snail-like proceedings)
making them mend their pace, probably traveling every day will they came to
Kadesh, which their young men might the better endure, the old generation being
almost worn out.


Philol. How comes Aaron to be buried in mount Number. 20. 27, 28.
Hor, whom elsewhere the Scripture affirms to be interred in Deuteronomy. 10. 6.
Mosera?


Aleth. It is no news to have several names for the same place. The forest of
Black-more, and the forest of C^md. Brit. in. Dorset-shire.
White-Hart (though black and white be contrary colors) signify the self same
tract of ground in Dorset-shire. Hor was Sir Walter Ra^eigh book 2. part 1. pa.
254.
the east part, and Mosera the west part of this mountain. This Mosera had
formerly been the Number. 33. 31.
twenty seventh Mansion of the Israelites in their passage to Ezion-Gaber, near
which afterward they made their thirty fourth station (when Aaron was buried
there) which sufficiently argues the crookedness of their journying, crossing
those parts again where they had been before.


Philol. I commend your cunning that has slipped over in silence, four of the
hardest names contained all in one verse Deuteronomy. 1. 1. These be the words which
Moses spoke unto all Israel, on this side Jordan in the wilderness, in the
plain over against the Red Sea, between Paran, and Tophel, and Luban, and
Hazer^th, and Dizahab, Direct us to the position of these places.


Aleth. Some Vide Tremel. in locum.
conceive the Sea our description of Reuben.23.
plains of Moab (wherein Moses wrote the book of Deuteronomy) described thereby
with the eminent bounds (though at some distance) round about it, in manner
following.

Others refuse this interpretation, as an obscure, and far fetched bounding of
those plains, preferring our English translation (reading it Red Sea, in stead
of Zuph, or Sedgie-land) and so making these several places the signal stages
of the children of Israel in their passage out of Egypt. Whereof the Red Sea,
and Paran are sufficiently known, Laban the same with Libna^ their Number. 33. 20.
See Ainsworth thereon.
seventeenth station; Number. 11. 35. and 12. 1.
Hazeroth the place where Miriam was punished with leprosy; Dizahab, which the
Greek renders golden mines, and the Chaldee refers to the place where the
golden Exodus 32. 20.
Calfe was made, and stamped to powder, whilst Tophel (not mentioned again in
Scripture) is conceived some station in Paran. Thus Deuteronomy is a repetition
of the law, and of the memorable actions which occurred at these several
places.


Philol. I object nothing against the draught of the Tabernacle, because the
authority of Arias Montanus (whence you confess it taken) will pass it without
exception. But I question the exactness of several places in your Map of Egypt.


Aleth. You mind me of a Gentleman's finding a Picture in the shop of a
Country-Painter, whom he mistook for the maker thereof, and thereupon fell a
finding many faults therein. But being informed that the same was drawn by one
of the rarest Masters in Italy, he instantly turned his cavilling at, into
commending thereof. Such a convent your judgment will quickly be when I shall
tell you that the Map of Egypt is of Ortelius his making, save only that the
southern part thereof (useless for our history) is cut off, and such places
only inserted herein as appears in Scripture. The same I plead for the Habits,
and Idols of the Jews; the former taken all out of Scripture, the latter out of
such Authors as are severally cited in our description. Only I could wish,
that in the Picture of Moloch out of Benjamins Itinerarie the three statues had
been presented ^itting according to our See our description of Chemosh.
directions. And by the Altar to the unknown God we mean not that erected in
Athens (to a Grecian, no Jewish Deity) but only we intend the same for a
reserve for those many Jewish Idols, whose names, and several worships are
unknown unto us. But, it is time to break off, lest one grand objection be made
against all our Objections and Answers, that they swell the volume into
tediousness.


EZEKIEL his VISIONARY LAND OF CANAAN.
CHAP. I. Ezekiels visionary Land, City, and Temple incapable of a literal
meaning.
1. PErusing the nine last Chapters of Ezekiels prophecy (invited thereunto
with the mention of many places in Palestine) whilst I hoped to find, No
literal sense in Ez^kiels land
and feel a Solid body, I only grasped the flitting air, or rather a mere
spirit; I mean in stead of a literal sense I found the Canaan by him described
no Geography, but Ouranography, no earthly truth, but mystical prediction.
Now, his Description will appear irreconcilable with a literal interpretation
(no Topicall, but a bare Typical relation) if the particular location of the
Tribes therein be seriously considered.

2. For, so transposed, and inverted is the method of their several portions,
as neither reducible to an agreement with the order of their birth, nor
blessing by Jacob, Reader this draught I borrowed from the reverend and learned
John Richardson D. D^ of Ardaugh, to whose exellent notes on Ez^kiel (shortly
to come forth) I refer thee for farther satisfaction.
nor division of the land by lot in Joshua's, nor parting it into Purveyorships
in the days of Solomon. Behold here in this rud^ draught how the seven northern
Tribes, as it were, march before in the Van; whilst the five southern Tribes
bring up the Rere. See the Temple in the midst, supported with the Priests
portion on both sides, and that of the Levites coming behind, and holding up
the train thereof (parting the Temple from the City) whilst the Princes
portion flanketh it on both sides. Quav^s dictio, contradictio; Each word
flatly opposes the literal position of those Tribes and places, and therefore
the interpretation thereof Is risen it is, not here, not buried beneath in the
words, but is mounted above in the mystery.

3. Add hereunto the miraculous fruit ( unfading and new every month) which
this land produced, Miraculous fruit.
one leaf whereof was more worth then all the great Number. 13. 23.
Grapes, Pomegranates, and Figs, the Spies brought from Canaan, as being
unfading and Ez^k. 47. 15.
sovereign for medicines. Now surely such as understand this literally have
need of some of those Leaves to cure their distempers therein.

4. It will be objected, Objection.
that this Prophetical Palestine makes frequent mention of Seas, Ezekiel. 47. 15.
Great Sea, and Ibid. (...). 18.
East Sea; River, Io^dan, Mountain, Gilead; besides the land is bounded, North,
South, and East with several places of name, and note, as Ezekiel. ibid.
Hethlon, Zedad, H^math etc. Now, what says our Savior? Luke 24. 39.
A spirit has not flesh and bones, mere visions are of a more rarefied, and
attenuated nature, not consisting of such gross, and drossie parts, and
therefore the Prophet seems rather to be taken at his word, and his literal
relation to be embraced, without farther search for a mystical meaning therein.

5. It is answered, Answer.
Omnis visio fundatur in historia; the most refined vision has some mixture
of, and analogy with an historical truth. As in a Web, the stamen, or Warp,
it fast fixed, through which the Woofe is cast, or woven; ^o there re certain
standards in all visions, being the material and corporal groundwork, for a
spiritual flourish, or descant to improve it self thereupon. More
particularly, because so many places of Palestine are named in this vision;
yea, seeing the body thereof is confo^med to an unlike likeliness (as I may
term it) of the earthly Canaan, it intima^es, that the Jewish nation shall
have more then a single share in the accomplishment of this Prophecy, and have
their happiness highly concerned in the performance thereof.

6. As the Land, The City not literally meant.
so the City described by the Prophet, is not appliable to the earthly
Jerusalem. It is said of Christ, Thou art Psalm. 45. 2.
fairer then the children of men; sure I am, this City as presented by the
Prophet, was fairer, finer, slicker smoother, more exact, more uniforme then
any fabric the earth afforded. This Triumphant Jerusalem (as I may term it)
was a complete square of four Ezekiel. 48. 16.
thousand five hundred reeds, with a just Jury of Ibid. ver. 31.
gates, three of each side, according to the names of the twelve Tribes) with
most regular suburbs, reaching two hundred and fifty reeds every way, so terse,
so trim, that not an house started out of its due proportion. Whereas the
literal Jerusalem, built by parcels at several times, on abrupt precipices,
ranged about with the walls rather for strength, then beauty, being on the East
and South suburbless, and without such correspondency, either in the number, or
position of the gates thereof. In a word, that so exact structure in the
Prophet, never sprang by art out of earth, but was let down by a miracle from
heaven* to which Saint John alludes in his celestial Revel. 21. 10.
Jerusalem.

7. Lastly, the Temple, as framed by the Prophet, is not suitable with
Solomon's, and the very waters rising from under the threshold thereof,
increasing by degrees unto an unpassable Ezekiel. 47. 5.
river, do drown all possibility of a literal sense therein. Expect not here,
I should intermeddle with a particular description of the foresaid Land, City,
and Temple; both because they being merely mystical are alien from our
subject, and because I am deterred from so difficult an undertaking by the
ensuing computation. 1 Moses says, the days of our Psalm. 90. 10.
years are threescore years, and ten. 2 The Jews made an ordinance, that none
should read this vision, till thirty years old. 3 Villalpandus confesses, he
studied this Prophecy twenty three years, yet understood not the difficulties
thereof.
If life be so short, and we must begin so late, and study so long on this
Prophecy alone (without attaining the full understanding thereof) high time at
the end of those studying years, to leave the measuring of this vision, and
survey the dimensions of our own Graves.

8. To conclude, The mystical meaning.
as once our Savior told Pilate, John 18. 36.
My kingdom is not of this world: so the sense of Ezekiels Land, City, and
Temple, is not carnal, and corporal, but mystical, and spiritual. Yea, God
may seem of set purpose to have troubled, and perplexed the text, imbittering
the Nibbles thereof with inextricable difficulties, merely to wean us from the
milk of the letter, and make us with more appetite seek for stronger meat
therein. For the main therefore, it is generally conceived, this vision imports
the great enlargement, and dilatation of the Church under the Gospel, when the
Gentiles shall be called to the knowledge of Christ, and the Jews also (as
mainly concerned, though not solely intended in this vision) brought home to
their true Messiah, not excluding even those of the ten Tribes, from having
each one his Childs-portion in the performance of this Prophecy. A word or two
of whose condition, since their captivity.

CHAP. II. What became of the ten Tribes since their captivity, and where
probably extant at this day.
1. Politic was the practice of the Kings of Assyria, Policy in transplanting
conquered people.
when conquering a Country, neither to kill the natives thereof, nor to
continue them any longer in their own land, but to transport them into a far
distant Country, and in exchange planting other colonies in their room. For,
first to kill them (besides the cruelty thereof in cold blood) had been an
improvident act, men amongst them being precious to people their vast
dominions, which otherwise, if empty, had been more exposed to the invasion of
enemies. To continue them in their own land had not been safe; who, best
knowing the advantages thereof, would on all occasions practice the recovery of
their lost liberty; and therefore to prevent farther disputes, the subject of
the question was taken away, and they advisedly disposed of in far distant
places. Lastly, the removing them into other parts, and substituting others in
their land, taught both these plantations an immediate dependence on their
Prince, (having no other plea but his bare pleasure for their present
possessions) which made them, (like the Turkish Timario^s) more dutiful at
home, and daring abroad in their undertakings.

2. These reasons moved the Kings of Assyria to transport the Israelites from
their native soil. Indeed they, if any people, might term the land their own,
having a threefold ti^^e thereunto; by Donation from God, the supreme
Proprietary; by conquest of the Canaanites, the ancient owners; by prescription
of more then seven hundred years peaceable possession thereof. But this
threefold cable was broken with the weight of their sins, and so was Israel
carried away from their 2 Kin. 17. 23.
own land to Assyria unto this day. Even Lands as well as Goods are movables,
though not from their Center, from their Owners, at leastwise the owners are
moveable from their lands.

3. Yet God did not all at once begin, Their threefold captivity.
and end the captivity of the ten Tribes, but (...), at sundry times, and in
diverse manners. For, 1 1 Chr. 5. 16.
P^l King of Assyria in the reign of 2 King. 15. 19.
Menahem carried the Reubenites, Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh away to
the Cities of the Medes. 2 Tiglath-Pi^^eser in the days of Pekah, transported
(besides Gilead, and the remains of the aforesaid Tribes) 2 King. 15. 29
Galilee; namely, so much thereof as was in the land of Naphtali, unto Assyria.
3 Shalmaneser cleared all the rest in the ninth year of Hoshea, carrying them
away to 2 King. 27. 6.
Halath, and Habor, by the River Gozan in the Cities of the Medes.
Probably the second, or middle captivity of the Naphtalites, afterward
removed themselves into Tartary, where Ortelius finds their very name, and a
City called Tabor ( Josh. 19. 34.
Asnoth-Tabor we know was a place in the border of Naphtali) imposed (no doubt)
to perpetuate the memory of their native Country.

4. Scripture gives us no account what afterward became of these ten Tribes.
Since seemingly utterly lost.
Only in 2 E^d^. 13. 40.
Esdras (^ book accounted by some as the Ap^^rypha of the Apocrypha, because
never owned for Canonical, either by the Jews, Romish See B^ll^rmin^s
Argurme^ts against it.
Church in general, or Protestant writers) we find them traveling over
Euphrates (miraculously dried up in their passage) toward Arsareth [or
Tartary] a great way; namely, a journey of a 2 Esdr. 13. 45.
year and an half. A long stride indeed, and yet might be but little, if
mending their pace no more then their ancestors did in their passage between
Egypt, and Canaan. But waving Esdras his single testimony, these ten Tribes
appear not since in any authentical relation; strange! that the posterity of
the two Tribes ( Judah and Benjamin) should be found [almost] every where,
whilst the offspring of the ten Tribes are found no where! Thu^ God has on
them (...) that curse which he formerly threatened, To scatter them into
corners, and make the Deuteronomy. 32. 26.
remembrance of them to cease. Not, that he has utterly extinguished the being
(an opinion as unreasonable, as uncharitable) but has hitherto concealed the
known b^ing of so numerous a nation, whom we may call the lost-lo^t sheep of
Israel; both in respect of their spiritual condition, and corporal habitation.

5. Supposed by some in America.
Some See the book of my worthy f^iend M* Tho. Th^^owgood on Jews in America.
conceive the modern Am^ricans of the Jewish race, collecting the same from
some resemblances in rites, community of customs, conformity of clothes,
fragments of letters, footsteps of knowledge, ruins of language, (though by a
casual coincidence some straggling words of the Athenians may meet in the
mouths of the veriest Barbarians) and many other Iudaismes amongst the Indians.
And lately, a Manasseh Ben Israel in his book called Spes Israelis.
Jewish Rabbin of Amsterdam tells us, that beyond the Cordiller hills, and river
Maragnon, a fair people are found with long beards, and rich in clothes, living
by themselves, different in religion from the rest of the Indians, whom he will
have to be the ten Tribes there remaining in a body together. His arguments so
prevail on some, formerly contrarily minded, as to turn the tide of their
judgment to concur with his, with others they make it dead water, not to oppose
his opinion, whilst a third sort listen to his relation, as only privileged
from confutation by the remoteness thereof.

6. For mine own part, Our private opinion.
I behold his report as the Twilight, but whether it will prove the morning
twilight, which will improve it self into full light; or that of the evening,
darkening by degrees into silence, and utter obscurity, time will discover.
When the eleven Tribes (so virtually may I term them) brought news that one
lost Tribe [ Ioseph] was found, Jacobs heart Genesis 45. 26.
fainted, for he believed them not, till afterward he was convinced on clearer
evidence. How much more then may I be permitted to suspend my judgment, when
one man brings tidings of ten lost Tribes, all found in an instant, until
farther proof be made thereof? Surely we, who now secretly smile at some
probable insinuations in his report, shall on better assurance have our mouths
filled with Psalm. 126. 2.
laughter (not Genesis 18. 12.
Sarahs laughter of distrust, but Genesis 17. 17.
Abraham's, of desire, delight, and belief) when his relation shall be
confirmed to us from other hands. And indeed, the messenger deserves to be well
paid for his pains, who brings clear proof thereof, the discovery of the
posterity of these ten Tribes being an happy Forerunner, and Furtherer of their
future conversion.

CHAP. III. Of the Jews their repossessing their native Country.
1. IT is a conceit of the modern Jews, that one day they shall return under
the conduct of their Messiah to the Country of Canaan, The Jews fancy of a
temporal kingdom.
and City of Jerusalem, and be re-estated in the full possession thereof. If
any object, that their land, now base, and barren, is not worth the regaining:
They answer, when they shall recover their Country, the Country shall recover
its former fruitfulness; as if God would effect miracles, as fast as man can
fancy them. With them concur some Protestant Divines, maintaining, that the
Jews shall be restored to a flourishing Commonwealth, with the affluence of all
outward pomp, and pleasure, so that they shall fight and conquer Gog and Magog
[the Turke] with many other miraculous achievements. One M. Finc^ in his Book
of the calling of the Jews (published by Will. Gouge D. D. Anno 1621.) for
which he was imprisoned. Scripture produced for the opinion.
Author so enlarges the future amplitude of the Jewish State, that thereby he
occasioned a confining to himself. His expressions (indiscreetly uttered, or
uncharitably construed) importing, that all Christian Princes should surrender
their power as homagers to the temporal supreme Empire of the Jewish nation.

2. For the proof of this their position, never did the servants of Benhadad
more diligently observe, or more hastily catch any 1 King. 20 33.
thing [of comfort] coming from the mouth of Ahab, then the Jews search out,
and snatch at every gracious promise made to them in the old Testament. Such
principally as Deuteronomy. 30. 3. Then [on their repentance] the Lord thy God will
turn thy captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and will return, and gather
thee from all nations, whiter the Lord thy God has scattered thee. Isaiah 11.
12. And he shall set up an Ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the
outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four
corners of the earth. Levit. 26. 44. And yet for all that, when they be in the
land of their enemies, I will not cast them away, neither will I abhor them, to
destroy them utterly, and to break my covenant with them, for I am the Lord
their God.

3. This last place the Jews highly price, The Jews their Golden Ap^.
and such of them as live in Germany, call it See (...) his common places, de
Extr^mo Iudicio. page 258.
Simiam auream, or the Golden Ape. And why so? Because (forsooth) in the Hebrew
it begineth with (...), ve Ape, And yet. A frivolous conceit on the similitude
of sound of two words, of different sense, in the Hebrew, and Dutch tongues.
Indeed, all the loud threatenings in Scripture, may more fitly be termed Lions,
all the meek promises therein, Lambs; amongst which, this cited out of
Leviticus is of especial note, whilst it is to be feared, such Jews (as found
hence their temporal kingdom) will prove themselves Apish in their ridiculous
comment thereupon.

4. But, Arguments to the contrary.
most learned Divines are of a contrary opinion, because total and final
desolation is in Scripture, so frequently denounced against their Country, and
Cities therein. The Virgin of Israel is fallen, she shall Amos ^. 2.
NO MORE rise; I will Z^ch. 11. 6.
NO MORE pity the inhabitants of the land, and out of their enemies hand I will
NOT deliver them: I will love them Hosea. 9. 15.
NO MORE: The land shall fall, and (...) 4. 20.
NOT rise again: I will break this people and this City as a Potters vessel,
which can Jer. 19. 1^.
NOT be made whole again.

5. As for the Scriptures alleged by the Jews for their temporal
restoration to an illustrious condition in their own country, they have found
their full accomplishment, Jewish reasons confuted.
in the return of that nation, to their own land, from the Captivity in
Babylon; and therefore farther performance of such promises, is not to be
expected: and accordingly it is resolved in their own Seder Olam and Talmud.
best Authors, Possessionem primam, and secundam habituri erant, possessio
autem tertia non erit illis. And if any more fulfilling of those promises
remains behind, it must be made up, in the sprirituall conversion of the
Jews, in Gods due time, to the knowledge of Christ, and embracing of the
Gospel. Some of their own In K^li Iachan cited by Ge^ard de Extremo Iudicio
page 259.
writers affirming, that all things which relate to the office of their Messiah
(whom they expect) are heavenly, and not corporal.

6. The farther prosecution hereof, An eminent instance.
we leave to those Authors, who have written large discourses of this subject.
Only we will observe a remarkable difference betwixt a place of Scriputre,
written in the Old, alleged, and applied in the New Testament.

Amos 9. 11, and 12. In that day will I raise up the Tabernacle of David that
is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up his ruins,
and I will build it as in the days of old: That they may possess the remnant of
Edom, and of all the heathen, which are called by my name, says the Lord that
does this.

Act. 15. 16, and 17. After this I will return, and I will build again the
Tabernacle of David, which is fallen down: and I will build again the ruins
thereof, and I will set it up: That the residue of men might seek after the
Lord, and all the Gentiles upon whom my name is called, says the Lord who does
all these things.

Here the Apostle James, more following the sense, then the words of the
Prophet, as an Expositor, rather then Translatour, renders the possessing of
the remnant of Edom, to be, by seeking after the Lord; by which Analogy we
collect, that those Topicall promises to the Jews, of their conquering and
possessing such, and such places, in, and near their own Country, import only
a spiritual propriety, and shall mystically, not carnally be accomplished, in
their sincere conversion to Christ.

7. More probable therefore it is, The Jews their land will come to them.
that the Jews shall not come back to their land, but their land shall come
back to them; I mean, those several places, in Europe, Asia, and Africa,
wherein they reside, shall on their conversion, become as comfortable unto
them, as ever the Land of Canaan was to their Ancestors. Forti quaevis terra
patria; and a contented mind in them, shall make any mountain, their Olivet;
river, their Jordan; field, their Carmel; forest, their Libanus; fort, their
Zion; and city, their Jerusalem. But, as for their temporal regaining of their
old Country, in all outward pomp, and magnificence, even such as are no foes
to the Jews welfare, but so fa^ friends to their own judgments, as not to
believe, even what they desire, till convinced with Scripture, or reason,
account this fancy of the Jews, one of the dreams proceeding from the Romans 11.
8.
Spirit of slumber, wherewith the Apostle affirms them to be possessed.

CHAP. IIII. Of the general calling of the Jews.
1. BY Jews, The question stated.
we understand, some left of every Tribe (as Lib. 1.
formerly has been proved) being banished their own Country, since the death
of our Savior; not extending it also (as some do with small probability) to
the ten Tribes, carried captive by Shalmane^er, and never since certainly
known, where existent. By calling, we intend, their real converting by the
word, to the knowledge and love of God in Christ. By general, we mean not
every individual Jew, whereof some refractary Recusants will ever remain (were
it but to be foiles to Gods favor in saving the rest) but a considerable, yea
conspicuous number of them. And it is a charitable opinion, ancient, and
conformable to Scriptures, that in this sense, the Jews in Gods due time, shall
be generally called.

2. Several Scriptures to prove it.
Come we now to the places of Scripture alleged for the proof of this
opinion. Now as Mesha King of Moab, when his Country was invaded, stood not
the choosing of select soldiers for fight, but 2 King. 3. 21.
gathered all that were able to put on armor, and upwards: so authors muster
up all places of Scripture, which put on any probability to this purpose, and
can carry any countenance thereunto, amongst many others, these ensuing* Number.
24. 17. Isa. 33. 17. Ezekiel. 16. 61. Mat. 23. 38. Deuteronomy. 32. 43. Isa 41. 15. Ezekiel.
20. 34. Mat. 24. 23. Psalm. 68. 22. Isa. 43. 1. etc. Joel 2. 28. Luke 21. 24.
Psalm. 69. 32. 33. Isa. 49. 16, 17. Amos 9. 8. Romans 11. 25. Psalm. 110. 2, 3.
Isa. 51. 1, 2. Obad. ver. 15. 2 Cor. 3. 16. Cant. 8. 10. Ier. 3. 12. Micah 7.
7. 2 These. 2. 8. Isa. 14. 2. Ier. 30. 3. Zeph. 3. 8. Revel. 16. 12. Isa. 30.
21, 22. Ier. 33. 6. Zech. 2. 9. etc. Revel. 19. 5. Should these quotations be
severally examined, many would be found rather to persuade, then prove; rather
to intimate, then persuade the matter in hand: and that, only to such free,
and forward apprehensions, as are prepossessed with the truth thereof. But,
amongst these, and many more numerous Scriptures cited, that one place Romans 11.
25. principally deserves our serious perusal thereof.

3. The words of the Apostle run thus, The staple place for the calling of the
Jews.
For I would not brethren that ye should be ignorant of this mystery (le^t ye
should be wise in your own conceits) that blindness in part is happened to
Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall
be saved etc. This is conceived the strongest, and clearest Charter for the
Jews general conversion*

4. Objection to the contrary.
It will be objected, that by all Israel the believing Gentiles are meant (for
Gods Church, being a collective body, of some Jews, and more Gentiles) which in
Scripture are styled G^l. 3. 7.
the children of Abraham, G^l. 6. 16.
the Israel of God; Romans 2. 29.
Jews inwardly, with circumcision of the heart, in the spirit, not the letter.
Yea, in the same verse, Saint Paul [a Iew] called the Romans being Gentiles,
brethren, the kindred coming in by their regeneration: and in the same sense,
all converted Gentiles may be called Israel, whose praise is of God, and not of
man.

5. Answered.
It is answered, allowing elsewhere in Scripture believing Gentiles to pass
under the name of Israelites, here literally the natural Jews by extraction
must be intended, 1 Because clean through the Chapter, the Apostle opposes the
Gentiles and Israel, as contradistinct terms. 2 He acquainteth the Romans with
a mystery, which was none in effect (but stale news, and generally known) if
only the saving of the Gentiles were therein intended. 3 It was his design, to
comfort the Jews, and curb the Gentiles, from over-insulting on their sad
condition.
And lest any should say slightingly to this opinion, as David once civilly to
Ittai, 2 Samuel 15. 20.
Thou came but yesterday; know, it descends unto us recommended from the
Primitive times.

6. Origin was the first that mentioned it, The opinion ^avoured by Fathers,
School men, and modern Divines.
and h^ (otherwise the Allegorizer General) interprets the Apostle literally,
in his exposition thereof. Say not that being the first of the Fathers who
wrote a Comment, no wonder if he wandered in his Glosses (he who first went from
place to place, never found out the nearest way) seeing better judgments
afterward built on the same bottom, Hierom, Ambrose, In their several
Comments on Romans 11. 25.
Chrysostom, and Lib. 2. Quaest. Evangel. Quaest 13.
Saint Augustine. In the Schoolmen the opinion of the Jews their conversion,
is not dead, but sleeps: Parables, and Prophesies, are no dishes for their
diet. Their heavy studies delighted not to tread the water (at best the
marshes) of future contingencies, but on the terra firma of certainties, where
arguments might be grounded. Yet the most peaceable amongst them, (more meddling
with Comments, then Controversies) such is Dionysius Carthusianus, concur in
their judgments therein. But, the silence of the Schools is recompensed with
the loudness of the Pulpits in our later age of See Gerardi Loc. Com. p. 262.
Romanists, Lutherans, and Calvinists, generally maintaining the certain
expectation of the Jews conversion.

7. Add hereunto, that the Jews ever since their exile from their own land,
Counten^nced by their long continuing an unmixt ^^^tlon.
when the Romans sold their Country, (and a learned M. Mede.
man observes, they set no land to sale save Judea alone) have continued many
hundred years a distinct nation. As if had learned from their River of Jordan,
running through the Galilean Sea, and not mingling therewith, daily to pass
through an Ocean of other nations, and remain an unmixt, and un-confounded
people by themselves. A comfortable presumption (when in company with other
arguments) that they, once Gods D^ut. 14. 2.
peculiar, are still preserved a peculiar people, for some token for good, in
due time to be showed upon them; and that these materials are thus carefully
kept entire by themselves, because intended by Divine Providence, for some
beautiful building to be made of them hereafter.

8. Let it also be seriously considered, And some Jews converted in all ages.
that in all ages God has dropped some considerable convert- Jews into the
treasury of the Christian Church, as good-handsell, and earnest of a greater
payment to ensue. Amongst whom we meet with a Mess of most eminent men.
Nicolaus Lyra, that grand Commentator on the Bible; Hieronymus de Sancta Fide
turned Chistian about Anno 1412. (Physician (as I take it) to Benedick the
thirteenth Pope) who wrote a book unto his Contrymen the Jews, wherewith In
the preface of his book in Biblioth. (...).
five thousand of them were converted; Ludovicus Carettus living His Epistle is
at the end of B^^tor^s Syn. Iud.
in Paris Anno 1553. and the never sufficiently to be praised Emmanuel
Tremellius. And besides the visible converts, falling uner the notice of man,
we may charitably presume many concealed ones, especially on their deathbeds
known to God alone. Yea, I conceive that learned Rabbi S^m. Marochianus de
ad^entu Messi^. cap. 6.
Rabbin, more then Agrippa Act. 2^* 28.
, almost a Christian, who has this amongst other pious expressions, I dread,
and fear, O Lord, that that Jesus whom the Christians worship, may be that
righteous sold for silver, according to the Prophet Amos 2 6.
Amos.

9. Time of their conversion.
As for the time of the Jews conversion, let us content our selves for the
general, it shall be after the fullness of Romans 11. 25.
the Gentiles shall come in. But, for the particular year, by some so
peremptorily, and positively assigned, I cannot but admire at the confidence of
men therein. Especially, seeing some, which pretend such familiarity to future
events, are not the best acquainted with passages in former ages; and those,
which seem to know all which is to come, know but little of what is past; as if
they were the better Prophets, for being the worse Historians.

10. Cruelty conjoined with confidence.
But well it were, if their confidence were confined to themselves alone, being
only content to abound in their own sense, without imposing it on others. But,
besides their confidence, such is their cruelty, to exact, yea, extort the
uttermost farthing of our belief, to be paid in (even at the first sight) to
their conceits, or else we must into the Prison, yea, deepest dungeon, and be
condemned for being weak, or wilful; ignorant, or obstinate. Whereas, in such
peremptory particularizing of the very year, such as pretend to plough with the
heifers of Gods Spirit, may be suspected to be drawn away with the wild bulls of
their own imaginations.

11. Different Dates thereof.
The rather, because so great the difference betwixt the several Dates
assigned by them. Some making it 1652; others, 1660* Some sooner, and before;
some later, and after the destruction of the Romish Antichrist. It is therefore
the most safe, and sober way, in so much variety to leave a blanke in our
judgments, for God to write the true time therein, when we, or after-ages shall
behold the same brought to pass. One day teaches Psalm. 19. 2.
another; and, today (yesterdays schoolmaster) is scholar to tomorrow, at
whose feet (as Paul at Gamaliels) it will at night ^it dutifully down for
farther informaton. Yea, by an inverted method, the daughter does instruct the
mother; and, the day which in time comes after, goes before in knowledge.

CHAP. V. Of the present obstructions of the calling of the Jews.
1. Civil distance in society.
MAny are the obstacles both external, and internal, which for the present
obstruct the conversion of the Jews. First, our want of civil society with
their nation. There must be first conversing with them, before there can be
converting of them. The Gospel does not work (as the weapon-salve) at
distance, but requires some competent familiarity with the persons of
Probationer-converts. Whereas the Jews, being banished out of England, France,
and Spain, are out of the call of the Gospel, and ken of the Sacraments in
those Countries.

2. Cruel usage in point of ^state.
Secondly, the cruel ussage of them in the Papal, and Imperial dominions,
where they swarm most, and where public authority does not endeavor to drop,
and distill piety into them; but to squeese, and press profit out of them.
Especially, whilst that merciless law stands in force, that on their
conversion, they must D. Heylin in Micro. in Palest. page 570. I think out of
St. Edwin Sandys.
renounce all their goods as ill gotten. If the resolutions of the
promise-forward Disciple quickly recoyled, at our Saviors tentative command,
to sell all, and give to the poor; I say, if he Mat. 19. 22.
went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions; no wonder if the rich and
covetous Jews distaste our Religion, when before they can embrace it, they must
take a final farewell of their large estates. Rather should those Princes
imitate the pious example of our Henry the third, who, between the new, and old
Temple, erected an Comd. Brit. in Middlesex page 428.
house of Converts (afterward appointed by Edward the third for Records to be
kept therein, now called the Rowles) endowing it for the maintenance of poor
Jews converted to Christianity, and baptized, allowing two pence Stowes Survay.
page 435.
a day unto each of them during their lives.

3. Offense at Image Worship
Thirdly, the constant offense given them by the Papists their worshipping of
images, the present Jews hating Idolatry with a perfect hatred, whose knees may
sooner be broken, then bended to such superstitious postures. And, to speak out
the plain truth, the Romanists are but backfriends to the Jews conversion,
chiefly on this account, because the Rabbis generally interpret Especially, on
the Burden of Dum^^^ Isa. 21. 11.
Dumah, or Edom, to be Rome, and Edomites, Romans, in their expositions on the
old Testament. And therefore, all those passages have (by order no doubt from
Superiors) been lately purged our, and expunged the Veneti^n Set forth by
Daniel Bomb^^gius.
edition of the Rabbis. Yea, there is a constant tradition, current time out
of mind, amongst the modern Jews, that after the destruction of the City of
Rome, their nation shall be put into a glorious condition. No wonder then, if
cold, and dull the endeavors of the Romanists, for the conversion of the Jews,
who leave that task of be performed by Moses, and Elias, whom the Papists
fondly fancy, shall toward the end of the world personally appear, and by
their powerful preaching, persuade the Jewish nation unto the Christian
Religion.

4. Discords amongst Christians.
Lastly, the difference in judgments, distance in affections, dissoluteness in
lives among the Christians themselves. In vain do we hollow to the Jews to come
over to us, whilst our voices are hoarse with railing one at another; and
becken with our hands to them, to be on our side, whilst our hands are imbrued
in the blood of those of our own religion.

5. Internal obstacle, blindness.
But far greater then all these, is that internal obstacle, that (...), that
blindness which is happened unto them, inflicted on their ancestors,
continued, and increasing on their posterity. How Bedlam-like was their
behavior at Saint Paul's but mentioning of preaching to the Gentiles, Act. 22.
23.
They cried out, and cast off their clothes, and threw dust into the air, as
endeavoring to thicken, and condensate the same, that no audible sound might
penetrate unto them. And, as then they threw the dust into the air: God has
since thrown their land after it; so that no Jew can take up one crum of dust,
from any entire Country, upon the face of the earth, that he can call his own.
Great is Gods providence in ordering it, that a fog, and a tempest never can be
together at sea, the fog vanishing so soon as the tempest arises, otherwise
smaller vessels would be cast away, which want the direction of the Compass to
guide them: but woeful is the present condition of the Jews, having a fog of
ignorance, and a tempest of violence, both together in them in the highest
degree, most bold, when most blind; stumbling at what should stay them;
slighting the Surgeon, when sorest; scorning the Physician, when sickest;
miserable, if they knew their condition; and more miserable, because ignorant
thereof.

6. Obstacles easily banished by an Infinite power.
But though these obstacles, and obstructions were more, and mightier then they
are, should God but give the word, they are instantly removed. Long was the
service of the true God disused in Judah (during the idolatrous reign of Ahaz)
so that great was the difficulty, to bring the whole nation to the solemn
observation thereof. Yet, Hezekiah quickly effected it, because (as the text
observes) 2 Chr. 29. 36.
God had prepared the people, and the thing was done suddenly. So, when He
shall be pleased to set his hand to the Jews conversion, all impediments
notwithstanding, in the twinkling of an eye, their eyes shall be opened; and
their hearts turned, in the turning of an hand.

Chap. VI. How Christians ought to behave themselves, in order to the Jews
conversion.
1. Motives for our prayer for the Jews conversion.
MEan time it is the bounden duty of Christians, to their utmost to endeavor,
both by their pious examples, and faithful prayers, the conversion of the
Jews, having many motives to invite them thereunto. First, because the more
knowing, and pious in the Iew^sh Church, did anciently desire the vocation of
the Gentiles, witness the solicitous care she took, and the great cost she
would expend for the wel^a^e thereof. Cant. 8. 8, 9.
We have a little sister, and she has no breasts, what shall we do for our
sister, in the day when she shall be spoken for? If she be a wall, we will
build upon her a palace of silver etc. For, although the common I^^s accounted
the calling of the Gentiles, blasphemy against their own nation, (having some
carnal reason thereof, as not without cause suspicious, that the Gentiles
admission would prove their expulsion, as indeed it came to pass) yet the
intelligent Prophets (no doubt) were earnest petitioners for the same.

2. Motive from the Jews joy for us.
Secondly, because such was the transcendent joy of the godly Jews, managed
with silence (their hearts thereat being too big for their mouths) at the
conversion of Cornelius, and his family; Act. 11. 18.
When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God,
saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life.

3. Clearing of the Sc^iptures.
Lastly, because so great glory shall, by the conversion of the Jews, redound
to God, and clearing to the Scriptures. Many places in the old Testamen^ (the
meaning whereof, the Jews hitherto were too envious to teach us, or we too
proud to learn of them) will then most plainly be expounded. Oh! what a feast
of knowledge will it make, when both Jew and Gentile shall jointly bring in
their dis^^es thereunto! The former furnishing forth the first course with many
Hebrew Criticismes, and Rabbinicall Traditions (some of them gold amongst more
dross) on the old Testament: the latter supplying the second course on the
whole Scripture, with solid* interpretations, out of Fathers, School^men, and
Modern Divines. Oh happy day for such as shall behold it, and we all ought to
pray for the speedy dawning thereof!

4. Objection against praying for the ^ Jews conversion.
It will be objected, many men cannot heartily pray for the future conversion
of the Jews; being unsatisfied in their judgments, of the certainty thereof*
Romans 14 23.
For whatsoever is not of faith is sin; and because they cannot ask according
to the Apostles precept James 1. 6.
(...) prayers are better omitted, as which may prove prejudicial to
themselves, and nothing effectual for others.

5. Answer.
It is safest for such to insert conditional clauses in their prayers, If it
may stand with Gods good will and pleasure, used by the best men (not to say
the best Mat. 26. 39.
in bests) in their petitions: Mar. 8. 2.
Lord if thou will* thou can make me clean. Such wary reservations will not
be interpreted in the Court of Heaven, want of faith, but store of humility, in
such particulars where such persons have no plenary assurance of Gods pleasure.
Yea, grant the worst, that God never intended the future conversion of the
Jews, yet whilst he has not revealed the contrary (as in the case of Samuels 1 Samuel 16. 1.
mourning for Saul) all men's charitable desires herein, cannot but be
acceptable to the God of heaven.

O Lord who art Psalm. 145. 17.
righteous in all thy ways, A Prayer.
and holy in all thy works, we acknowledge, and admire the justice of thy
proceedings, in blinding, and hardening the Jews; as for their manifold
impieties; so especially for stoning thy Prophets, despising thy Word, and
crucifying the Lord of life. For which thou have caused them, according to the
prediction of thy Hosea 3. 4.
Prophet, to abide many days without a King, and without a Prince, and without
a Sacrifice, and without an Image, and without an Ephod, and without Teraphim.
But thou o Lord how Psalm. 6. 6. 3.
long? How Revel. 6. 10.
o Lord holy and true? How Psalm. 79. 5.
long Lord, with thou be angry for ever? Thine anger is said to endure but a
Psalm. 30. 5.
Moment, but Lord how many Millions of Millions of Moments, are contained in
sixteen hundred years, since thou have first cast off thy first and ancient
people the Jews? Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, not for any merit in their
persons, which was none, but for the mercy in thy promises, which is infinite,
so frequently made, and so solemnly confirmed unto them. But oh! remember the
Orator on thy right hand, Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 1. 3.
which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, and the Orator in
thine own bosom, thine essential and innate Clemency, and let these prevail,
if it may stand with thy good will, and pleasure, that thy people the Jews may
be received into the arms of thy mercy. As once by a wilful, and woeful
imprecation they drew the guilt of his blood on Mat. 27. 25.
them and on their children: so by thy free imputation drop the merit of his
blood on them, and on their children. For the speedying of whose conversion, be
pleased to compose the many different judgments of Christians into one truth,
to unite their disagreeing affections in one love, that our examples may no
longer discourage, but invite them to the embracing of the true Religion. Oh
mollify the hearts, rectify the wills, unvaile the eyes, unstop the ears of
those thy people whom hitherto thou have justly hardened. Reveal to their
understanding those Romans 3. 2.
Oracles which thou have committed to their keeping. That so our Savior, who
long since has been a light to lighten the Gentiles, Luke 2. 32.
may in thy time be the glory of thy people Israel, that so there may be one
John 10. 16.
shepherd and one sheepfold. Grant this o Lord for Christ Jesus his sake, to
whom, with Thee, and the Holy Spirit, be all honor and glory, now, and
forever, Amen.

FINIS.
Here follows the draught of Fragmenta Sacra.



Necessary directions for the use of the INDEX.
AN Index is the bag and baggage of a book, of more use then honor, even such
who seemingly slight it, secretly using it, if not for need, or speed of what
they desire to find. Our Table, for the better expedition, is contrived into
several Columns; The first presenting the names of Scripture places within
the land of Palestine. If any literal difference appear (not only such as
betwixt Zidon, Kidron, in the Old; Siden, and Cedron, in the New Testament,
but) concerning the same place diversely written, the discretion of the Reader
will easily reconcile it. Immediately after the name the addition of C. donoteth
City, F. Field, L. Land, M. Mountain, Pl. Plain, Ri. River, To. Rock, S. Stone,
St. Station of the Jews in the Wilderness, T. Town, V. Veil, We. Well, Wi.
Wilderness.

The second Column interprets the Hebrew names into English, though great the
variety of Authors in rendering their signification. This party proceeds from
the laxity of Hebrew words admitting sundry senses, partly from the vicinity of
Primitives, so that the same derivative may seem to spring from two roots, and
be son (as directly to his Father, so) collaterally to his Uncle, I mean to
words akin, and alluding, whence the same in probability may be deduced; and
this subjecteth it to much variety of interpretation. In this diversity we have
wholly followed Gregorius Gregorii in his Lexicon Sacrum (as a work merely
expository of proper nams) though some perchance will say, that what is the
credit of the good wife Prove. 31. 14.
she brings her food from far, is sometimes his discredit in his over
strained, and far fet derivations.

Expect not here from me, after the meaning of the name, a reason of the
meaning, how conformable to the nature of the place. Many Towns were called
so, because they were called so, ad placitum of the first imposer. Other
places, when first denominated, had just reason of the same, but this kernel
long since has been eaten up by all-devouring time, leaving nothing thereof
but the husk of the empty name to posterity. Now to fix the Hebrew names the
better in our memory, we have here, and there (as the propriety of our
language, and commodities of our Country will admit) inserted some English
Towns, as Synonyma's, and parallel to the Hebrew in signification.

The fourth Column is reserved for those texts of Scripture, wherein is made,
either the first, or most important mention of those plces. As the fifth
exhibits the Map wherein the same are to be found.

The sixth tenders to the Reader the Longitudes of most places, and the rest
may be supplied by proportion. But oh, the difference of best Authors herein!
As in populous Cities an hour is lost in measuring of time, the lag clock
about noon striking the most, when the forwardest strikes the fewest: so a
whole degree of Longitude is swallowed up betwixt the difference of
Geographers. Yea, so great is the uncertainty therein, that in most Maps lines
of Longitudes (as only for general direction, ne toto coelo errent) serve to
lace their Maps that they grow not without form, or fashion; but are not
reducible to an exact agreement.

More is the certainty of Latitudes the work of the next Column, as greater
their concernment in our Description, because effectual in the length of the
days, and heat of the climate in Palestine. It is situated for the main betwixt
thirty one and thirty four, the longest day being fourteen hours, and a
quarter; though the Jews (as if it were always Equinoctial with them) divided
both day and night evenly into twelve hours, so that the two overplus hours
and the quarter, fell under the nocturnall computation.

As for the climate of Palestine, in summer time it must needs be hot, lying
not above seven degrees from the Tropic, especially when the Luke 12. 55.
south wind blew* But sometimes God cooled them, by drawing betwixt the Sun
and them a Canopy, or Isa. 18. 4.
Cloud of Dew in the heat of harvest. Their winter, though short, was sharp;
Psalm. 147. 1^.
Who is able to abide his frosts?

Now although such their vicinity to the Sun (lying at the same distance with
some parts of Barbary, where the people are tawny) yet the 1 Samuel 17. 42. and 2 Samuel 13. 1. and 2 Samuel 14. 27. and 1 King. 1. 4.
(their women especially) were of fair complexion. Indeed, though the setting
of the Fa^ be the same, all stuffes take not die alike. Besides, that the ^able
faces of Black-mores come not from the Sun, but some other secret cause,
plainly appears, because Ebony and Ivory, I mean, black and fair faces are
found in parallel Climates.

The last Column contains the Book, Page, and Paragraph (save that the fifth
book is divided only into Chapters) where any memorable mention is made of
such places in our Description. Places out of the Apocrypha, and humane writers
we have omitted, which by their own See our first Book. chap. 15.
marks will soon insinuate themselves into the Readers acquaintance, without
any farther indication.

AN INDEX. English resemblances*

A
Name. Meaning. Mentioned. Map. Longit. Lat. Lib Page Par ABana. Ri. Stony.
Stony Stratford Buckingham Sh^re.
2 King. 5. 12 Libanu^ 70. 20 34. 10 4 7 14 Abarim. M Passengers. Number. 27. 12
Reuben 70. 10 32. 10 2 63 20 Abdon. C. Servitude. Josh. 21. 30 Asher 69. 10 33.
50 Abel S. Grief, or a Pla^. 1 Samuel 6. 18 Dan 2 213 15 Abel-maim. C. Plain of
the waters. 2 Chr. 16. 14 Naphtali. Abel-Meh^lah C. Plain of the Quire. Judge.
7. 22 Manas^^^s Jo. 69. 34 32. 30 2 175 16 Abel-Mizraim. Grief of Egyptians.
Genesis 50. 11 Benjamin 69. 50 31.^0 2 247 15 Pl. Abel-Shittim. T. Plain of
Thorns. Thorny-A^by Camb^^dg sh.
Number. 33. 49 Reuben Abel of the Vines. Pl. Plain of the Vines. (...)
Judge. 11. 33 Ammon Abez. C. Muddy or dirty. Josh. 19. 20 Issachar Abilene. L.
from Abilene the chief City. Luke 3. 1 Libanus. wholly out of Palest. 1 38 3
Ac^ho. C. Judge. 1. 31 Asher 69. 00 33. 30 2 133 27 Aceldama. F. Field of blood.
Acts 1. 19 By Jerusale^. 3 348 2, 3 Achor. V. Trou le. Troublefield or (...) in
No^mandy.
Josh. 7. 24 Benjamin 2 254 35 Achshaph. C. Witchcraft or Enchantment. Josh.
11. 1 Asher 69. 00 33. 40 2 1^4 7 Achzib C. Josh. 15. 44 Asher 69. 00 33. 40 2
134 27 Adadah C. Josh. 15. 22 Judah Adam C. Red. From such color Rutland, Red
born in (...) in Surry, etc.
Josh. 3. 16 Reuben 2 62 16 Adami T. Josh. 19. 33 Naphtali 69. 50 34. 10 Admah
C. Genesis 10. 19 Judah ^0. 10 30. 50 Adar T. Josh. 15. 3 Judah 69. 10 30. 50
Adithaim C. Josh. 15. 36 Judah Adullam C. Testimony to them Josh. 12. 15 Judah
69. 10 31. 30 2 278 32 Adummim T. Red Redman Ha^sh^^.
men, or Earthly Josh. 15. 7 Benjamin 69. 30 31. 50 Aenon T. A little fountain.
Ioh. 3. 23 Manas. cis Jo. 69. 40 32. 30 2 176 17 Ahlab C. Milky. (...).
Judge. 1. 31 Asher 69. 20 33. 50 Ai C. A confused heap. Josh. 7. 1 Benjamin
69. 20 32. 00 2* 254 35 A^ath C. I conjecture it the self same with Ai. Isa 10.
2^ Benjamin Aija. C. N^h. 11. 31. Benjamin Aijalon. C. An Oake's Okcham in
Rutland Okeley Northamp.
Judge. 12. 12. Zebul^^ ^8. 50. 33.^0 2 150 29 Aijalon. C. Josh. 19. 42 Dan 69.
10 31. 50 2 211 10 Ain. C. An Eye or a Fountain. Number. 34. 11 Nephtali 69. 50
33. 50 Ain. C. Josh. 15. 32. Simeon 69. 0 31 20 2 229 8 Akrabhim. M. See
Maaleh-akrahim. Number. 34. 4 Judah 69. 40 30. 50 Alamelech. T. Josh. 19. 26.
Asher compare Ios. 21. 18. with Alemeth. C. The same with Almo^. 1 Chr. 6. 60.
Benjamin 1 Chro. 6. 60. Alexandria. C. Acts 6. 9 Egypt 60. 31. 4 87 23 Allon.
C. An Oak. Josh. 19. 33 Naphtali 69. 40 34. 10 2 105 6 Allon-Bachuth. Oak of
weeping. Genesis 35. 8 Benjamin 2 248 19 Almon. C. Hiding. (...)
Josh. 21. 18 Benjamin 69. 30 32. 00 Almon-Diblathaim. St. Hiding of clusters
of Figs. Number. 33. 46 Moab Alush. St. Meal mingling with water. Number. 33. 13.
Paran Amad. T. A people of witness. Josh. 19. 26. Asher 2 124 7 Amam. C. Mother
of them. Josh. 15. 26. Judah 69. 20 30. 50 Amana. M. Cant. 4. 8. Manas. tr.
(...) 2 ^93 5 Ammah. M. A Cubit. 2 Samuel 2. 24 Benjamin 2 ^56 39 Anab. C. A
Grape. Josh. 11. 21. Judah 69. 10 31. 10 Anaharath. C. Grumbling, or murmuring.
Josh. 19. 19 Judah 69. 20 33. 00 Anathoth. C. An answer. Josh. 21. 18 Benjamin
69. 30 31 40 2 260 51 Anem C. The same with Engannim; compare Ios. 21. 29. with
1 Chr. 6. 73. 1 Chr. 6. 73 ^ssachar Anim C. Josh. 15. 50 Judah 69. 30 31. 10
Antioch C. Acts 6. 5 Libanus 3 21 27 Antipatris C. Acts 23. 31 Mana. cis Jor.
68. 50 32. 30 2 172 3 Aphek C. Strength, or Vigor. Josh. 12. 18 Asher 69. 10
33 40 Aphek C. 1 Samuel 29. 1 Issachar 5 c. 6. p. 154. Apheka C. Josh. 15. 53
Judah 69. 00 32. 50 Ar C. Watchful. Number: 21. 15 Maob Arab C. Lying in wait.
Josh. 15. 52 Judah 69. 30 31. 10 Arabah T. See Beth-arabah. Josh. 18. 18 Judah
Arad C. A wild Ass. Josh. 12. 14 Judah 69. 40 30. 50 Arba C. The same with
Hebron Josh. 14. 15 Archi T. Josh. 16. 2 Ephraim Argob L. and C. A clod of
clay. Deuteronomy. 3. 4 Mana. tr. Jor. 70. 10 33 40 Arimathea C. High Highworth, Will.
sh. Higham Northamptonshire.
Mat. 27. 57 Ephraim 69. 00 31. 50 2 185 12 Arki L. and People My sinews Genesis
10. 17 Libanus 1 20 13 Arnon Ri. and C. Number. 21. 13 Gad 70. 20 32. 30 2 75 5
Aroer C. and L. Number. 32. 34 Reuben 70. 20 32. 40 2 56 4 Arvad C. Commanding or
domineering. Ezekiel. 27. 8 Libanus 4 16 37 Aruboth L. Lying in wait or
Treacheries. 1 King. 4. 10 Judah 2 286 58 Arumah C. Lofty or exalted. Vppingham
Rutland sh.
Judge. 9. 41 Ephraim 69. 00 32. 00 Ashan C. See Corashan. Josh. 15. 42 Simeon
Ashdod C. Josh. 11. 22 Dan 68. 40 31. 30 2 219 32 Ashdoth-Pisgah T. The
sheddings out of Pisgah. Deuteronomy. 3. 17 Reuben Ashnath C. Josh. 15. 33 Judah
Ashtaroth C. Flocks Deuteronomy. 1. 4 Manas. tr. Jor. 70. 00 33. 30 Ashtemoth C. See
Eshtemoa. Josh. 15. 50 Judah 69. 20 31. 00 Askelon Judge. 1. 18 Simeon 68. 40
31. 20 Ataroth Crowns. Number. 32. 3 Gad 69. 40 32. 40 Ataroth-Adder Crowns of the
mighty Josh. 16. 5 Ephraim 69. 40 32. 20 Ataroth T. Josh. 18. 13 69. 10 32. 00
Athach T. 1 Samuel 30. 30 Judah Aven C. Iniquity, or Vanity Ezekiel. 30. 17 Egypt
63. 30. Avim C. Unjust, or pervers men Josh. 18. 23 Benjamin Avith C. Froward
or perverse. Genesis 36. 35 Edom Azekah T. A fenced City. Josh. 10. 10 Benjamin
Azem Josh. 19. 3 Simeon 68. 50 31. 20 Azmon T. Strength, or Bone. Number. 34. 4
Judah 69. 0 30. 50 Aznoth-Tabor Josh. 19. 34 Naphtali 62. 20 33. 30

B
BAalah Josh. 15. 9 68. 50 31. 40 Baalath 1 King. 9. 18 Baalath-Beer Josh. 19.
8 Baal-gad Josh. 11. 17 70. 20 33. 50 Baal-hamon Cant. 8. 11 Baal-hazor 2 Samuel
13. 23 69. 30 32. 10 Baal-hermon Judge. 3. 3 70. 20 33. 50 Baal-meon Number. 32. 38
Baal-perazim Pl. The plai^ of breaches 2 Samuel 5. 20 Moriah 2 302 22
Baal-shalisha. C. Lord of Shalisha. 2 King. 4. 42 Ephraim Baal-tamar. T. Lord
of a Palm. Judge. 20. 33 Benjamin Baal-zephon. St. The Idol of Zephon. Exodus 14.
2 Egypt 63. 29. 4 92 38 Baca. V. Mulberries or weeping Psalm. 84. 6 Moriah 5
Bachuth. Tree. Weeping. Genesis 35. 8 Benjamin 2 248 19 Bahurim. C. Choice or
young men. 2 Samuel 3. 16 Benjamin 69. 30 31. 40 2 297 11 Baiith. T. Is. 15. 2
Moab Balah. C. Josh 19. 3 Simeon 69. 00 31. 20 Bamoth. St. High places or
Altars. Number. 21. 19 Moab Bamoth-Baal. C. Josh. 13. 17 Reuben 70. 10 32. 10
Bealoth. C. Josh. 15. 24 Judah Beer-elim. C. Fountain of Rams. Rams^y,
Huntington shire.
Isa. 15. 8 Moab Beer-la-hai-roi. W The well of the living and seeing. Genesis 16.
14 Simeon 2 233 17 Beeroth. C. Wells. Wells in Sommerset shire.
Josh. 9. 17 Benjamin Beersheba. C. Well of an Oath. Genesis 21. 14 Simeon 68. 50
31. 10 2 232 14 Beeshterah. C. Josh. 21. 27 Manas. tr. Jor. Bene-berak. C.
Josh. 19. 45 Dan 69. 00 31. 50 Beon. T. In affliction. Number. 32. 3 Reuben
Berachah. V. Blessing. 2 Chr. 20. 26 Judah 2 Berothath. C. Ezekiel. 47. 16 Libanus
4 11 24 Besor. Ri. Merry message. 1 Samuel 30. 9 Simeon Betah. C. Confidence or
security 2 Samuel 8. 8 Libanus 4 11 24 Beten. T. A Pelly. Josh. 19. 25 Asher 69.
00 33. 40 Bethabara. T. House of passage. Aust-pasage Glost. shire.
Ioh. 1. 28 Reuben Bethanah. Josh. 19. 38 Naphtali 69. 40 33. 40 Bethanoth. C.
House of affliction. Josh. 15. 59 Judah. Bethany. T. House of the afflicted.
Mat. 21. 17 Moriah Betharabah. T. A Crows nest. Pic-nest Waltham Abbey Essex
Josh. 15. 6 Judah 69. 5 31. 40 Betharam. C. Josh. 13. 27 Gad Bethaven. C.
House of vanity or iniquity, Josh. 7. 2 Benjamin 69. 20 32. 00 2 254 36
Bethazmaveth. Nehem. 7. 28 Bethbirei C. 1 Chr. 4. 31 Simeon Bethcar. T. House
of the Lamb. Lambeth Surr^y.
1 Samuel 7. 11 Benjamin Beth-Dagon. C. House of Fish. Fish house in the Isle of
Weight.
Josh. 15. 41 Judah Beth-Dagon. C. Josh. 19. 27 Asher 69. 10 33. 40
Bethdiblathaim. C House of Figs. Fig^^ce Court in the Temple
Ier. 48. 22 Moab Bethel. C. House of God. Godstow in Oxfordshire.
Genesis 12. 8 Benjamin 69. 20 32. 00 2 248 18 Bethemek. C. House of deepness.
Deeping, Linc. sh.
Josh. 19. 27 Zebulun 69. 10 33. 40 Bether. M. Division Cant. 2. 17 Manas. tr.
Jor. Beth-gamul. C. House of retribution. Ier. 48. 23 Moab Beth-haran. T. Number.
32. 36 Gad 70. 10 32. 40 Beth-hoglah. T. House of a circle. Josh. 15. 6
Benjamin 69. 50 31. 40 2 247 14 Beth-Iesimoth. C. House of desolations. Number.
33. 49 Reuben Beth-lebaoth. C. House of Lionesses. Josh. 19. 6 Simeon 68. 50
31. 20 Bethlehem. C. House of bread. Breadstreet. Land.
Genesis 35. 19 Judah 69. 20 31. 30 2 298 13 Bethlehem. C. Josh. 19. 15 Zebulun
69. 00 33. 30 Beth-maachah. C. House of contrition. 1 Samuel 20. 14 Naphtali 69.
40 33. 50 2 113 26 Beth-marcaboth. C House of Chariots. Josh. 19. 5 Simeon 69.
00 31. 30 Beth-meon. C. House of habitation. Ier. 48. 23 Moab Bethnimrah. C.
See Nimrim. Number. 32. 36 Gad 70. 00 32. 40 Bethoron. C. House of liberty. Josh.
10. 10 Ephraim 69. 20 32. 30 Beth-palet. C. House of freeing. Josh. 15. 27
Judah Bethpazzez. C. House of breaking. Josh. 19. 21 Issachar 69. 00 33. 00
Beth-Peor. C. House of opening. Deuteronomy. 3. 29 Reuben Bethphage. T. House in the
mouth of the Valley. Mat. 21. 1 Moriah Bethphelet. T. Neh. 11. 26 Judah
Bethrehob. C. A large or spacious house. Judge. 18. 28 Libanus 4 6 12 Bethsaida.
C. House of fishing or hunting. (...) Wilt. sh.
Mat. 11. 21 Naphtali 69. 30 33. 30 Bethsh^n. C. House of enemy. 1 Samuel 31. 10
Manas. cis Jor. 69. 30 32. 40 2 177 21 Beths^^mesh. C. House of the sun.
Sunning in Ba ksh. and Sunbury Middlesex.
^osh. 15. 10 Judah 69. 00 31.^0 2 213 15 Judge. 1. 33 Naphtali 69. 20 33. 40 2
115 31 Ier. 43. 13 Egypt 62. 30. 4 88 24 Bethshittah. T. House of wandering.
^udg. 7. 22 Manas. cis Jor. 69. 20 32. 30 Beth-Tappuah. C. House of an Apple.
Applc shaw Hamp. sh.
Josh. 15. 53 Judah Bethul. C Marriageable Maid. Maidwe^ Northamp.
Josh. 19. 4 Simeon 69. 10 31. 10 Bethzur. C. House of a Rock. To. kley in
Yo^ksh.
Josh. 15. 58 Judah Betonim. C. Bellyes. Josh. 13. 26 Gad Bezek. C. Lightning
or shining. Shine in Surrey.
Judge. 1. 4 Judah 2 301 21 Bezer. C. A fortification or muniment. Castleton in
Yorksh.
Deuteronomy. 4. 43 Reuben 2 58 8 Bileam. 1. Chr. 6. 20 Bithron. L. Partition. 2 Samuel
2. 29 Gad Bizjothjah. C. In the olive of the Lord Joshua 15. 28 Judah Bochim.
T. Weeping Wepham Sussex.
Judge. 2. 1 Benjamin Bozer. To. 1 Samuel 14. 4 Benjamin. Bozkath. C. Josh. 15. 39
Judah Bozrah. C. A muniment or fortification. Genesis 36. 33 Edom 4 34 36 Bozrah.
C. The same with Beshterah. Josh. 21. 27 Manas. tr. Jor.

C
CAbbon. C. Quenching. Josh. 15. 40 Judah Cabul. L. Durty or barren. Josh. 19.
27 Libanus 69. 20 33. 40 4 4 9 Cain. C. A possession. Josh. 15. 57 Judah Caleb.
L. All-heart. 1 Samuel 30. 14 Judah Caleb-Ephrata. C. 1 Chr. 2. 24 Judah Common.
C. Judge. 10. 5 Manas. tr. Jor. 70. 10 33. 30 Cana. C. Ioh. 2. 1 Zebulun 69. 10
34. 00 Capernaum. C. Village of consolation Mat. 4. 13 Naphtali 69. 50 33. 30 2
109 14 Carmel. Val. A full, green, tender ear. Josh. 12. 22 Zebulun Josh. 15.
55 Judah. 69. 40 31. 10 Casiphia. Ezra 8. 17 Cesarea. C. Philippi. Mat. 16. 13
Naphtali 69. 40 34. 0 2 107 11 Stratonis. Acts 8. 40 Mana. cis Jor. 68. 50 32.
40 2 172 3 Charasim. V. Craftsmen. 1 Chr. 4. 14 Judah Chephar-Haammonai. C.
Josh. 18. 24 Benjamin 69. 20 31. 50 Chephirah. C. Josh. 9. 17 Benjamin Cherith.
Ri. 1 King. 17. 3 Manas. tr. Jor. 2 97 17 Chesalon. M. Josh. 15. 10 Dan Chesil.
C. Josh. 15. 30 Judah Chinnereth. Sea. An Harp. Harpham and Harpley. Norfolk.
Number. 34. 11 Zebulun 2 141 4 Chisloth-Tabor. T. Rashnesses of choice. Josh. 19.
12 Zebulun 69. 20 33. 10 Chorazin. C. Mat. 11. 21 Manas. tr. Jor. 69. 50 33. 30
2 97 16 Chozeba. T. 1 Chr. 4. 22 Judah. Chun. C. 1 Chr. 18. 8 Libanus 4 11 24
Cinnereth. C. See Chinnereth. Josh. 19. 35 Naphtali 69. 40 33. 30 Chorashan. C.
A furnace of smoke. 1 Samuel 30. 30 Simeon Cyprus. Isle. Acts 4. 36 Libanus 4 14
32

D
DAbareh. C. Word or work. Josh. 21. 28 Issachar 69. 30 33. 10 2 162 21
Dabbasheth C. Flowing with honey. Honiton Devonsh.
Josh. 19. 11 Zebulun 68. 50 33. 00 Dalmanutha. L. The poors inheritance. Mark
8. 10 Zebulun 2 147 20 Damascus, or Damasek. C. A sack of blood. Genesis 14. 15
Libanus 4 8 16 Dan, Fountain. Genesis 14. 14 Libanus 69. 40 34. 10 4 6 12
Dan-Iaan. 2 Samuel 24. 6 Dannab. C. Judgment. Josh. 15. 49 Jud^h 69. 10 31. 20
Debir. An Oratory. Josh. 10. 48 Judah 69. 40 32. 40 2 277 27 Decapolis. L. Ten
Cities. Mat. 4. 25 Naphtali 1 39 6 Diblath. T. A cluster of Figs. Fighildo^
Wiltsh.
Ezekiel. 6. 14 Moab Dibon. C. An abounding Son. Number. 21. 30 Gad 70. 10 32. 40 2
76 8 Neh. 11. 20. Judah Dibon-Gad. St. The abundance of an happy Son. Number. 33.
45 Moab Dibzahab. St. Sufficiency of gold. Deuteronomy. 1. 1 Paran 4 Dileam. C. Poor
man's answer. Josh. 15. 38 Judah Dimnah. C. A Dunghill. Josh. 21. 35. Judah
Dimon. Ri. Bloody. Isa. 15. 9 Moab Dinhabah. C. Genesis 36. 32 E^om 4 32 33
Dizahab. St. By the gold mines. Goldengrove in carmar sh
Deuteronomy. 1. 1 Paran 5 c.22 Dophkah. St. Compulsion. Number. 33. 12 Paran Dor. C. A
generation. Josh. 11. 2 Manas. cis Jor. 68. 40 32. 50 2 165 26 Dothan. C.
Statute or Decree Genesis 37. 17 Ephraim 69. 20 32. 20 2 199 51 Dumah. C. Likeness
of silence. Josh. 15. 52 Judah 69. 30 31. 10 L. Isa. 21. 11 Edom 4 99 30

E
EBal. Mount. Heap of A^tiquity. Deuteronomy. 27. 4 Ephraim 69. 20 32. 10 2 191 33
Eben-ezer. S. The stone of help. Helpston Northamp. shire.
1. Sam. 4. 1 Benjamin 2 260 49 Ebronah. St. Passing by. Number. 33. 34 Paran Ed.
Altar. A witness. Josh. 22. 34 Reuben 2 60 13 Edar. C. Hocks. Genesis 35. 21
Moriah 244 8 Eder. Josh. 15. 21 Judah Edrei. C. Heap of strength. Number. 21. 33
Manas. tr. Jor. 69. 50 33. 40 2 97 15 Eglaim. T. Calves, or Heifers. Kineton
Warwic. sh.
Isa. 15. 8 Moab Eglon. C. A Calf. The Calf in the Isle of Man.
Josh. 10. 34 Judah Ekron. C. Rooting up, or barrenness. Josh. 13. 3 Dan. 68.
50 31. 40 2 218 29 El^h. V. 1 Samuel 17. 2 Judah Elath. St. An Oak. Oakehampton
Devon. Oakchingham, Barkshire.
Deuteronomy. 2. 8 Paran 5 184 Elealah. C. The ascent of God. Number. 32. 3 Reuben Eleph.
C. Josh. 18. 28 Benjamin 69. 40 31. 50 Elim. St. Rams or Hearts. Ramton Camb. sh.
Exodus 15. 27 Paran 4 47 13 Elon. C. Josh. 19. 43 Dan 68. 50 31. 40
Elon-Bethanan. T. 1 King. 4. 9 Dan Elteketh. C. Josh. 19. 44 Dan 69. 00 31. 30
Eltolad. C. The generation of God. Josh. 15. 30 Simeon 69. 00 31. 20 Emmaus. T.
Mother of strength. Luke. 24. 13 Moriah 69. 10 31. 40 2 303 25 Enam. C. Josh.
15. 34 Judah Endor. C. Fountain of the generation. Josh. 17. 11 Manas. cis Jor.
69. 00 32. 50 2 165 26 Eneglaim. T. Fountain of Heifers. Ezekiel. 47. 10 Engannim.
C. Fountain of Gardens. Josh. 19. 21 Issachar 69. 30 32. 50 Engannim. C. Josh.
15. 34 Judah Engedi. Fountain of felicity. Josh. 15. 62 Judah 69. 50 31. 30
En-hakkore. Fountain of him that cried. Judge. 15. 19 Simeon Enhaddah. Fountain
of eye of Mirth. Josh. 19. 21 Issachar 69. 20 32. 40 Enhazor. C. Fountain of
the Court Josh. 19. 37 Naphtali 6^.30 33. 50 En-rimnon. T. Fountain of the
Pomegranates. Neh. 11. 29 En-rogel. Fountain of a Spy. Josh. 15. 7 Moriah
En-shemesh. Josh. 15. 7 69. 40 31. 40 Entappuah. Fountain of the Sun. Josh. 17.
7 Manas. cis Jor. 69. 10 32. 40 Ephes-Damim. T. 1 Samuel 17. 1 Judah Esek. We.
Contention Genesis 26. 20 Simeon 2 231 11 Ephraim. 2 Samuel 13. 23 69. 30 32. 10
Ephratah. Genesis 35. 16 Eshcol. V. and Ri. A cluster of Grapes. Number. 13. 24 Dan 2
215 20 Eshean. Josh. 15. 52 ^udah Eshtao^. C. Asking or requesting. Josh. 19.
41 Dan 2 214 17 Eshtemoa. C. Woman's womb. Josh. 21. 14 Judah 69. 20 31. 0
Etam. To. Judge. 15. 8 Simeon 2 229 6 Etam. C. 1 Chr. 4. 32 Simeon Etham. St.
Strength or vehemence. Ex^d. 13. 20 Egypt 63. 30. Ezel. S. 1 Samuel 20. 19
Benjamin. Ezem. T. 1 Chr. 4. 29 Simeon. Ezion-Gaber Number. 33. 35 Edom 4 33 35

G
GAash. M. A tempest or commotion. Josh. 24. 30 Ephraim 69. 32. Gaash. R. 2 Samuel 23. 30 Ephraim Gaba. C. An Hill. Hilton Castle. B. of Durham.
Josh. 18. 24 Benjamin Gad. R. A Troop or good fortune 2 Samuel 24. 5 Gad 1
Galilee. L. Josh. 20. 7 1 35 6 Gadarens. Compassed with a sense. Mark 5. 1 Gad
69. 50 33. 10 2 79 17 Gallim. 1 Samuel 25. 44 69. 20 31. 40 Gath. C. A Press.
Dan 68. 50 31. 40 Gathrimmon C. A Press of Pomegranates. Josh. 19. 45 Dan
Gathrimmon C. Josh. 21. 25 Man. cis Jor. Gaza. C. Sec Azza. Genesis 10. 19 Simeon
68. 50 31. 10 2 235 22 Geba. See Gaba. Josh. 21. 17 Benjamin 69. 20 31. 40
Gebal. A bound, or limit. Merch County in Scotland.
Psalm. 83. 7 Libanus 4 16 35 Gebim. Isa. 10. 31 Geder. C. A wall. Walden Essex.
Josh. 12. 13 Simeon Gederah. C. A wall Josh. 15. 36 Judah Gederoth. C. Walls.
Josh. 15. 41 Judah Gederothaim. C. Two walls. Josh. 15. 36 Judah Gedor. C.
Josh. 15. 58 Judah Geliloth. T. Revolutions. Josh. 18. 17 Benjamin 69. 40 31.
50 Gennesaret. L. Mat. 14. 34 Zebulun Gerar. C. Genesis 10. 19 Simeon 69. 00 31.
10 2 230 10 Gergesens. Mat. 8. 28 Gad Gerizim. M. Sythes or Mowers. Deuteronomy. 11.
29 Ephraim 69. 20 32. 10 Geshuri. L. and C. The vale of an ox. Oxney Kent
Deuteronomy. 3. 14 Libanus 2 6 13 Gethsemane. T. A Press of oil. Mat. 26. 26 Moriah
G^zer. C. Cutting off, ordivision Josh. 10. 33 Ephraim 69. 00 31. 50 2 184 8
Giah. C. 2 Samuel 2. 24 Benjamin 69. 30 31. 50 Gibbethon. C. High-backed or
ridged Totterridge Middle sex.
Josh. 19. 44 Dan 69. 10 31. 40 2 213 16 Gibbeah. C. Josh. 15. 57 Judah
Gibbeath. C. An Hill, or Hilly. Josh. 18. 28 Benjamin 69. 20 31. 40 2 257 42
Gibbeon. C. Josh. 9. 3 Benjamin 69. 20 31. 50 2 255 37 Gidom. T. Judge. 20. 45
Benjamin Gihon. M. and Ri. A Belly. 1 King. 1. 33 Moriah 3 331 8 Gilboa. M. Joy
of searching out. 1 Samuel 28. 4 Issachar 69. 20 32. 50 2 163 22 Gilead. L. The
heap of witness. Genesis 31. 21 Gad 2 82 25 Gilgal. C. Rolling. Rollewright
Oxford. sh.
Deuteronomy. 11. 30 Benjamin 69. 40 31. 50 2 245 10 Giloh. C. Joshua 15. 51 Judah 69.
40 31. 10 2 279 36 Gimzo. C. 2 Chr. 28. 18 Judah Gittah-hepher. C. A digging
Winepress. Josh. 19. 13 Zebulun 69. 20 33. 30 2 147 20 Gittaim. C.
Wine-Presses. 2 Samuel 4. 3 Benjamin 2 260 ^0 Goath. Ier. 31. 39 Gob. A Locust or
a ditch. 2 Samuel 21. 18 Golan. C. Change or revolution Deuteronomy. 4. 43 Manas. tr.
Jor. 70. 20 33. 40 2 97 16 Golgotha. M. A place of a scull. Mat. 27. 33 Moriah
Goshen. L. Genesis 45. 10 Egypt 4 90 29 Goshen. L. Josh. 15. 51 Judah 69. 30 31.
10 Gudgodah. St. The same with Horhagidgad. Deuteronomy. 10. 7 Paran Gur. T. A whelp.
Dogdik^se^^y Li^colshire.
2 King. 9. 27 Issachar Gur-Baal. A whelp of the Lord. Whelpston Yorkshire.
2 Chr. 26. 7 Arabia

H
Name. Meaning. Mentioned. Map. Longit. Latit. Lib Page Par HAch^^ (...). M.
Hope or hook in her. 1 Samuel 23. 19 Judah 69. 40 31. 20 Hadadrimmon. Zech. 12.
11 Issachar 69. 00 32. 40 Hadashah. C. New, or a month. Josh. 15. 37 Judah
Hadattah. C. Rejoicingor delighted. Josh. 15. 25 Judah Hadid. C. Neh. 11. 33
Benjamin 69. 40 32. 00 Halac. M. Josh. 11. 17 Edom Halhul. C. The beginning of
grief Josh. 15. 58 Judah Hali. C. Josh. 19. 25 Asher. 69. 00 33. 40 Hamath. C.
Burning Anger. 2 Chr. 8. 3 Libanus 4 11 26 Hammath. C. Josh. 19. 35 Naphtali
69. 30 34. 10 2 112 23 Hammon. C. Josh. 19. 28 Asher 69. 20 34. 10 Hamoth-dor
Heat of the generation Josh. 21. 32 Naphtali 69. 30 33. 50 Hanes. C. Isa. 30. 4
Egypt 63. 30. Hannathon. T. Graces or Mercies. Grace-Dieu Lecest. shire.
Josh. 19. 14 Zebulun 69. 10 33. 30 Hapharaim. C. Josh. 19. 19 Issachar 69. 20
33. 00 Haradah. St. Trembling. Number. 34. 24 Paran Hareth. Forest. 1 Samuel 22. 5
Judah Harod. We. Fearfulness. Judge. 7. 1 Manas. cis Jor. 2 173 8 Harosheth. C.
Plowing, Silence, or deafness. Judge. 4. 2 Naphtali 69. 50 33. 50 Hashmonah. St.
Number. 33. 29 Paran Havoth-Iair. L. The livings or hamlets of Iair. Number. 32. 41
Manas. tr. Jor 70. 0 33. 30 2 96 14 Hazar-addar. T. Number. 34. 4 Judah
Hazar-enan. T. Court of their fountain Number. 34. 9 Hazar-gaddah. Court of a Kid.
Goatham Not sh.
Josh. 15. 27 Judah 69. 10 31. 10 Hazar-hatticon. Ezekiel. 47. 16 Hazaroth. St.
Courts. Deuteronomy. 1. 1 Paran 4 54 35 Haza^-shual. C. Fox-court. Foxton in Camb sh.
Josh. 15. 28 Simeon 69. 00 31. 20 Hazar-susah. C. Court of the horsemen
Hors^ley Da^by sh.
Josh. 19. 5 Simeon 68. 50 31. 20 Hazerim. T. Deuteronomy. 2. 23 Hazeroth. St. Number.
11. 35 Paran Hazezon-tamar. Genesis 14. 7 Hazor. C. A court. Josh. 11. 10 Naphtali
69. 30 33. 50 Hebron. C. Company or Communion. Genesis 13. 18 Judah 69. 20 31. 20
2 273 17 Hebron. C. Josh. 19. 28 Asher 69. 20 33. 50 Helam. C. Their army or
strength 2 Samuel 10. 16 Libanus 4 9 21 Helbath. C. Fatness. Judge. 1. 31 Asher
69. 10 33. 50 Helbon. C. Milk. Milkstreet London.
Ezekiel. 27. 18 Syria 2 132 16 Heleph. T. Changing or boring through Josh. 19. 33
Naphtali 69. 30 34. 10 Helkah. A field. Josh. 21. 31 Asher 69. 00 33. 40 2 256
39 Helkath. Josh. 19. 25 Asher H^lkath-Hazzurim. F. Field of strong-men. 2 Samuel
2. 16 Benjamin Hemath, or Hamath. 1 Chr. 13. 5 Hena. 2 King. 18. 34 Hepher. C.
Josh. 12. 17 Judah Here Is. M. The Sun. Sunburn Ham^^sh
Judge. 1. 35 Dan Hermon. M. Destruction. Deuteronomy. 3. 8 Manas. tr. Jor. 2 32 4
Heshbon. C. Thought, or Reasoning. Number. 21. 25 R^uben 70. 00 32. 40 2 66 26
Heshmon. C. Josh. 15. 27 Judah Hethlon. T. Ezekiel. 47. 15 69. 20 34. 10 Hezron.
T. Joshua. 15. 3 Judah Hilen. 1 Chr. 6. 58 3 349 6 Hinnom. V. Roaring of
shreiking. Josh. 15. 8 Judah 4 134 34 Hoba. T. Genesis 14. 15 Libanus Holon. C.
Josh. 15. 51 Judah Hor. M. A Mountain. Number. 34. 8 Asher 69. 20 34. 10 4 Hor. M.
Number. 20. 22 Edom Horeb. M. Dryness. Dri^ield in Yo^kshire.
Exodus 3. 1 Paran Horem. C. Josh. 19. 38 Naphtali 69. 40 33. 40 Horhagidgad.
St. The hill of Gidgad. Number. 33. 32 Paran Hormah. C. Destruction. Number. 14. 45
Simeon 69. 10 31. 10 2 230 9 Horonaim. C. Angers, or furies. Isa. 15. 5 Moab
Hosah. T. Josh. 19. 29 Asher Hokk^k. T. Josh. 19. 34 Naphtali 69. 10 33. 30
Hukok. C. the same with Helkah 1 Chr. 6. 75 Asher Humtah. C. A Snail Snailwell
Camb^. sh. Liza^dspoint in Cornwall.
and a Lizard. Josh. 15. 54 Judah

I
JAbbok. Ri. Striving. Genesis 32. 22 Gad 2 76 9 Iabesh-gileid. C Dryness or
blushing. Dris^oke Rutland.
1 Samuel 11. 1 Gad 69. 50 32. 50 2 81 22 Iabez. 1 Chr. 2. 55 Iabneel. C.
Building of the Lord. Josh. 15. 11 Judah 68. 50 31. 50 Iabneel. C. Josh. 19. 33
Naphtali 70. 00 33. 50 Iahneh. C. Building. 2 Chr. 26. 6 Dan Iagur. C. A guest
or strang^r. Josh. 15. 21 Judah Iahaz. C. Chiding or brawling. Wrangle (...).
Number. 21. 23 Reuben Iahazah. Josh. 13. 18 Ianoah. C. 2 King. 15. 29 Naphtali
69. 40 33. 40 Ianohah. T. Resting. Reston Lincol^shire.
Josh. 16. 6 Ephraim 69. 30 32. 20 Ianum. C. Josh. 15. 53 Judah Iaphleti. C.
Josh. 16. 3 Ephraim 69. 10 32. 00 Iapho. C. Faireness or beauty. (...)
Worcestersh
Josh. 19. 46. Dan 68. 50 31. 50 2 209 6 Iarmuth. C. Projection of death. Josh.
15. 35 Judah. 69. 10 31. 20 Iarmath. Josh. 21. 29 Issachar 69. 10 32. 50
Iashubi-lehem. 1 Chr. 4. 22 Iattir. C. Excelling. Josh. 15. 48 Judah Iazar. C.
An helper or coadjutor. 2 Samuel 24. 5 Gad 70. 20 32. 50 5 Iazer. L. Number. 22. 1
Ibleam. C. Josh. 17. 11 Manas. cis Jor. Idalah. C. Josh. 19. 15 Zebulun 69. 00
33. 10 Iearim. M. Woods. Wootton Northa^psh. Woodborrough Nottinghamsh.
Josh. 15. 10 Judah Iebus. C. Judge. 19. 10 Jerusalem. Iehud. C. Praising or
confessing. Josh. 19. 45 Dan. 68. 50 31. 50 Iekabzeel. C. See Kabzeel. N^h. 11.
25 Jericho. C. Having a good savor. Number. 22. 1 Benjamin 69. 30 31. 50 2 252 28
Ieruel. Wi. Fearing the Lord. 2 Chr. 20. 16 Judah 2 285 55 Jerusalem. C. Vision
of Peace. Josh. 15. 8 Benjamin Judah 69. 20 31. 40 3 313 Ieshimon. C. 1. Sam
26. 1 Judah 69. 30 31. 20 Ieshana. 2 Chr 13. 9 Iethlah. Suspension. Josh. 16.
42 69. 00 31. 50 Iezreel. C. Seed of the Lord. Josh. 19. 18 Issachar 69. 10 32.
40 2 158 5 Iezreel. Josh. 15. 56 Judah 69. 40 31. 10 Ije-abarim. St. Heaps of
passengers. Number. 21. 21 Moab Ijon. C. 1 King. 15. 20 Naphtali 69. 50 33. 50.
Iiphta. C. Josh. 15. 43 Judah Iipht^ahel C. Josh. 19. 14 Zebulun 69. 10 33. 40
Iegbohah. C. A sad wilderness. Number. 32. 35. Gad 70. 20 33. 00 Iokdeam. Josh.
15. 56 Judah 69. 50 31. 10 Iokmeam. 1 Chr. 6. 68 Iokneam. C. Possessing the
people. Josh. 19. 11 Zebulun 69. 00 33. 30 2 151 33 Ioktheel. C. Josh. 15. 38
Judah Ioppa. C. See Iapho. 2 Chr. 2. 16 Dan 68. 50. 31. 50 Jordan. Ri.
Descending with a powder. Genesis 13. 10 Naphtali 2 106 7 Iotbathah. St. His
goodness. Number. 33. 33 Paran Irpeel. C. Josh. 18. 27 Benjamin 69. 30 32. 10
Ir-sh^mesh. C. A City of the Sun. Sundon (...)
Josh. 19. 41 Dan 68. 50 31. 50 Ithnan. C. Giving, or an Hire. Josh. 15. 23
Judah 69. 50 31. 0 Itta-kazin. C. Now a Prince. Josh. 19. 13 Zebulun 69. 30 33.
30 Iuttah. C. Josh. 15. 55 Judah. 69 40 31. 0

K
KAbze^l. C. Congregation of God Godston S^^^ey.
Josh. 15. 21 Judah 69. 40 30. 50 Kadesh. W. Holiness. Holy Ista^d in
No^thu^berland.
Genesis 14. 7 Simeon, Paran 2 230 8 Kadesh-Barnea. C Holiness of an unstable Son.
Number. 32. 8 Judah 69. 20 30. 50 2 273 15 Kanah. Ri. A cane or reed. Josh. 16. 8
Ephraim 2 173 6 Kanah. C. Josh. 10. 28 Asher 69. 10 34. 00 2 125 7 Karkaa. T.
The pavement, or foundation. The Pavement in York.
Josh. 15. 3 Judah 69. 00 30. 50 Karkor. T. Judge. 8. 10 Gad 70. 20 33. 00
Karnaim. C. Horns. Hornchurch Essex.
Genesis 14. 5 Manas. tr. Jor. 70. 10 33. 20 2 96 15 Kartah. C. Calling or
meeting. Josh. 21. 34 Zebulun 68. 50 33. 30 2 151 34 Kartan. C. Josh. 21. 32
Naphtali 70. 00 33. 40 Kattah. C. The same with Kartah. Josh. 19. 15 Zebulun
Kedar. L. Blackness or sadness. Blackwal Middlesex. Saddington Lecestosh.
Ier. 2. 10 Edom 4 22 12 Kedemoth. W. C. Easternly. Eas^on Northampt. shire.
Deuteronomy. 2. 26 Reuben 70. 20 32. 10 2 56 5 Kedesh. C. Holiness. Holy head in
Angl^sey.
Josh. 12. 22 Nephtali 69. 40 33. 40 2 115 30 Kehelathah. St. Church or
congregation Number. 33. 22 Paran Keilah. C. Josh. 15. 44. Judah 2 281 42 Kenah.
C. A Possession Number. 32. 42 Manas. tr. Jor. 70. 20 33. 20 Kerioth. C. Cities.
Josh. 15. 25 Judah Keziz. C. Josh. 18. 21 Benjamin. 69. 40 31. 40
Kibroth-hattaavah. St. Graves of the lusters. Number. 11. 34 Paran 4 54 34
Kibzaim. C. Congregations. Josh. 21. 22 Ephraim 69. 00 32. 20 Kidron. Ri.
Black. Blackwater Hamsh.
2 Samuel 15. 23 Moriah 2 293 2 Kinah. C. A Possession. Josh. 15. 22 Judah Kir.
C. A City. 2 King. 16. 9 Moab Kirharaseth. 2 King. 3. 25 Moab 4 26 23
Kirheresh. Isa. 16. 11 Moab Kiriath. Josh. 18. 28 Benjamin Kiriath-arba. C. The
City of Arba or four, the same with Hebron. Genesis 23. 2 Josh. 15. 54 Judah 69.
20 31. 20 2 273 17 Kiriath-arim. Ezra 2. 25 Kiriath-baal. C. Josh. 15. 60 Judah
Kirloth-huzoth. City of Streets. (...), Str^etley
Number. 12. 39 Keriath-jearim. The City of woods. Josh. 9. 17 Judah
Kiriath-sannah. C The same with Debir. Josh. 15. 49 Judah Kiriath-sepher. C. A
City of a book. Josh. 15. 15 Judah 2 277 27 Kiriathaim. C. Doubleton, or^ two
Cities. Genesis 1^. 5. Reuben 2 64 22 Kirioth. Ier. 48. 24 Kishion. C. Hardness.
Hardwick, (...) shire.
Josh. 19. 20 Issachar 2 161 16 Kishon. Ri. Josh. 21. 28 Zebulun 69. 20 32. 40
Kithlish. C. A Wall. Wallington Surry.
Josh. 15. 40 Judah 69. 30 31. 20 Kitron. C. Spring or perfuming. Judge ^. 30
Zebulun

L
LAban. St. White. Whiteby Yorkshire.
Deuteronomy. 1. 1 Paran 5 Lachish C. Is walking. Walkha^stead, Surry. Walkhampton
Devon.
Josh. 10. 31 Judah 69. 20 31 30 2 278 31 Lahai-r^i. Well. That lives and
sees me. Genesis 24. 62 Simeon 2 233 17 Lahman C. Rapin or their bread. Josh. 15.
40 Judah 69. 30 31. 30 Laish. C. An old Lion. Lion-key London.
Judge. 18. 7 Naphta li 69. 40 34. 00 2 106 9 Lakum. T. Rising again or
confirming Josh. 19. ^3 Naphtali 70. 00 33. 40 Lasha. T. Fair to be seen.
Fairfield Gloc^stersh.
Genesis 10. 19 Reuben 70. 00 31. 40 2 52 9 Lasharon. C. A plain or field. Josh.
12. 18 Ephraim 68. 50 32. 00 Lebanon. M. Frankincense. Deuteronomy. 1. 7 Libanus 4 1 1
Lebaoth. C. Lionesses. Josh. 15. 32 Simeon 2 234 19 Lebnah. C. The Moon. Josh.
15. 42 Judah 69. 40 31. 30 2 277 29 Lehem. T. 1 Chr. 4. 22 Lehi. L. Jawbone.
Judge. 15. 9 Simeon 2 229 6 Leshem. C. The same with Lais^, or Dan. Josh. 19. 47
Naphtali 2 106 9 Libnah. St. Number. 33. 20 Paran 5 188 Lod. C. 1 Chr. 8. 12
Benjamin 69. 40 32. 00 Lodebar. C. Word to him. 2 Samuel 9. 4 Manas. tr. Jor. 70.
20 33. 30 2 94 10 Luhith. C. Isa. 15. 5 Moab Luz. C. An Hasel-nut. Nutwell
Devon. Nuthall Notting. sh.
Genesis 28. 19 Ephraim 69. 10 32. 00 Lydda. C. Act. 9. 32 Dan 68. 50 32. 00 2 210
7

M
MAac^athi. C. and L. The contrition of the belly. Deuteronomy. 3. 14 Libanus 4 ^ 13
Maaleh-acrabbim. T. The climing up of Scorpions. Josh. 15. 3 Judah 69. 40 30.
50 Maarah. C. Josh. 15. 59 Judah Machpelah. Cave. Genesis 23. 9 Judah 2 274 19
Madm^nnah. The measure of reward. Josh. 15. 31 Judah Madmenah. Isa 10. 31 Moab
4 25 20 Madon. C. Brawling or strife. Josh. 11. 1 Naphtali 69. 40 34. 10 2 114
29 Magdala. C. Turretted. Mat. 15. 39 Zebulun 69. 20 33. 30 2 147 20 Mahanaim.
C. Two Armies. Genesis 32. 2 Gad 70. 20 33. 10 2 76 9 Mahaneth-dan. T The tents of
Dan. Judge. 18. 12 Dan 2 214 17 Makheloth. St. Assemblies. Number. 33. 25 Para^ 4
56 41 Makkedah. C. Adoration. Josh. 10. 10 Benjamin 2 256 38 Maktesh. C. Zeph.
1. 11 Mamre. Pl. Genesis 13. 18 Judah 2 273 17 Maon. C. An habitation. Josh. 15.
55 Judah 69. 40 31. 10 2 282 44 Marah. St. Bitter. Bitte^ing Nor^olk.
Exodus 15. 23 Paran 4 46 13 Maralah. C. Josh. 19. 11 Zebulun 69. 00 33. 00
Mareshah. C. From the head or the Prince. Josh. 15. 44 Judah 2 284 51 Maroth.
T. Micah 1. 12 Massah. St. Temptation. Exodus 17. 7 Paran 4 48 18 Mattanah. St.
A gift. Number. 21. 18 Moab Mearah. T. A Cave. Stanford in the Cave. Northa^psh.
Josh. 13. 4 69. 10 34. 10 Madeba. C. Waters of grief. Number. 21. 30 Reuben
Megiddo. C. Josh. 17. 11 Manas. cis Jor. 69. 00 32. 40 2 165 27 Mejarkon. C.
Josh. 19. 46 Dan 68. 50 31. 50 M^konah. T. Neh. 11. 28 Judah Meonenim. Pl.
Judge. 9. 37 Ephraim Mephaath. C. The force or appearing of waters. Watecrton
Wal^sham. Yorkshi^e.
Josh. 13. 18 Reuben 69. 50 32. 20 Merathaim. T. Ier. 50. 21 Meribah. St.
Chiding. Exodus 17. 7 Paran 4 48 18 Merom. Ri. Heights or depths. Josh. 11. 5
Naphtali 2 107 12 Meroz. C. L. or T. Secret. Judge. 5. 23 Naphtali 69. 50 33. 50
2 114 28 Metheg-^mah. T. Bridle of the People. Bridlington Yorksh.
2 Samuel 8. 1 Dan 68. 50 31. 30 2 220 32 Michmash. C. Bringing up the poor. 1 Samuel 13. 2 Benjamin 69. 20 31. 50 2 261 52 Michmethah. T. Josh. 16. 6. Ephraim
69. 20 32. 30 Middin. C. Josh. 15. 61 Judah 69. 40 31. 40 Migdal-el. C. Tower
of God. Josh. 19. 38 69. 50 33. 40 Migdal-gad. Tower of good succes. Josh. 15.
37 Migdol. T. A tower. Exodus 14. 2 Egypt 63. 29. Migron. T. 1 Samuel 14. 2
Benjamin Minnith. C. Making ready. Indg. 11. 33 Ammon 4 29 28 Misgab. T. Ier.
48. 1 Moab Mishal. C. Asking or requesting. Askeham Yorkshire.
Josh. 21. 30 Misheal. C. Josh. 19. 26 69. 00 33. 30 Misrephothmaim. T. The
boiling of waters Josh. 11. 8 Asher 69. 10 34. 10 Mithcah. St. Sweet. Number. 33.
28 Paran Mizpah. C. A watch-tow^r. a Watchingwy, Isle of Weight.
Genesis 31. 49 Manas. tr. Jor. 70. 20 33. 30 2 94 11 Mizpeh. C. Josh. 18. 26
Benjamin 70. 20 33. 30 2 259 47 Mizpah. C. 1 Samuel 22. 3 Moab 4 25 20 Moladah.
C. Josh. 15. 26 Judah 69. 00 31. 10 Moreh. Pl. Genesis 12. 6 Ephraim Moriah. L.
Vision of the Lord. Genesis 22. 2 Moriah 2 293 1 Mosera. St. Band or Bands. Deuteronomy.
10. 6 Moseroth. St. Number. 33. 30 Paran Mozah. C. Josh. 18. 26 Benjamin 69. 20
31. 50

N
NAamah. C. Fair or pleasant. Belvoire Lincolnsh.
Josh. 15. 41 Judah Naaran. T. See Naarath. 1 Chr. 7. 28 Ephraim Naarath. T. A
young Maiden. Maidston Kent.
Josh. 16. 7 Ephraim 69. 40 32. 20 Naballal. C. Praised or bright. Brights^ow
Somersetsh.
Josh. 19. 15 Zebulun 69. 10 33. 10 Naim. Fair or beautiful. Beauli^^ Hamsh.
Luke 7. 11 Zebulun 69. 00 33. 20 Naioth. T. An habitation. 1 Samuel 19. 18
Ephraim 69. 10 32. 00 Napthali. C. Tobit 1. 2 Naphtali 69. 30 33. 40 Nazareth.
C. Mat. 2. 23 Zebulun 69. 10 33. 20 Neah. T. Josh. 19. 13 Zebulun 69. 30 33. 30
Nebo. M. and C. Speech or Prophecy. Number. 32. 3 Reuben Niel. C. The moving of
God. Josh. 19. 27 Asher 69. 10 33. 40 Nekeb. T. A ditch. Ditton Camb. sh.
Josh. 19. 33 Naphtali 69. 50 34. 00 Neptoah. We. Open or opening. Josh. 15. 9
Judah Netophathi. Nehem. 12. 28 Nezib. C. A standing or erection Josh. 15. 43
Judah Nibshan. C. Josh. 15. 62 Judah 69. 40 31. 30 Nimrah. C. Number. 32. 3 Gad
Nimrim. Ri. Leopards or Panthers. Isa. 15. 6 Gad 70. 10 32. 40 Nob. C. Speech
of Prophecy. 1 Samuel 21. 1 Benjamin 69. 30 31. 40 Nabah. Barking. Judge. 8. 11
70. 30 33. 00 Nodab. 1 Chr. 5. 19 Noph. C. Isa. 19. 13 Egypt 62. 30 4 89 22
Nop^ah. C. Number. 21. 30 Reuben

O
OBoth. St. Witches or Botles. Botlesham Cambr. sh.
Number. 21. 10 Moab Olivet. M. 2 Samuel 15. 30 Moriah On^. V. and C. His grief. 1
Chr. 8. 12 Benjamin Ophel. T. Clowdy and obscure. 2 Chr. 27. 3 Jerusalem.
Ophin. C. Josh. 18. 24 Benjamin Ophrah. C. Dusty or leaden. Josh. 18. 23 Manas.
cis Jor. 69. 40 32. 00 2 173 9

P
PArah. C. Josh. 18. 23 Benjamin Paran. W. Genesis 21. 21 Pas-dammim. T. 1 Chr.
11. 13 Pau. C. Hissing. Genesis 36. 39 Edom Penuel. C. The face of God. Genesis 32.
31 Gad 70. 10 33. 00 2 77 10 Peor. T. Opening. Number. 23. 28 Reuben Perazim. M.
Breaches. Greatbreach, Kent
Isa 28. 21 Moriah. 2 203 22 Perez-Vzza. T. The breach of Vzza. 2 Samuel 6. 8
Benjamin 2 251 26 Pi-hahiroth. St. The mouth of Hiroth. Exodus 14. 2 Egypt 63.
28. Pirathon. T. Judge. 12. 15 Ephraim 69. 30 32. 10 2 201 56 Pisgah. M. An
hill. Number. 21. 20 Reuben 70. 0 32. 10 2 63 20 Panon. St. Number. 33. 42 Moab

R
RAbbah. C. Great or spacious. Greatton No^thamp^shire.
Moab Rabbah. C. Deuteronomy. 3.11 Ammon Rabbith. C. Multitude. Josh. 19. 20 Issachar
69. 00 33. 00 Rachal. T. 1 Samuel 30. 29 Judah Rakkath. C. Josh. 19. 35 Judah 69.
30 33. 50 Rakkon. C. Josh. 19. 46 Dau 68. 50 31. 50 Ramah. High or exalted.
Vpton, Vpham Hamsh. Vpburn Busking sh. Vphall Hart^^s^ Hie-gate Midlesex.
Josh. 18. 25 Benjamin 69. 20 31. 40 Josh. 19. 29 Asher Josh. 19. 36 Naphtali
Mat. 2. 18 Moriah 69. 30 33. 50 Ramath. C. Josh. 19. 8 Simeon 69. 10 33. 50
Ramathaim. C. 1 Samuel 1. 1 Ephraim Ramath-lehi. T. The lifting up of a Jawbone.
Judge. 15. 17 Simeon Ramath-mizpeh. C The same with Ramoth Gilead. Josh. 13. 26
Gad Ramases. C. Genesis 47. 11 Egypt 63. 31. Ramoth-gilead. C. Deuteronomy. 4. 43 Gad 70.
10 32. 50 2 82 26 Rehob. C. Large or broad. Broadlands Hamshire.
Number. 13. 21 Asher 69. 20 33. 50 Rehoboth. We. Room or enlargeme^t Broadway
Somerset sh.
Genesis 10. 11 Simeon Remeth. C. High. Highley Devonsh.
Josh. 19. 21 Judah Remmon. C. A Pomegranate. Josh. 19. 7 Simeon
Remmon-methoar. T. Josh. 19. 13 Zebulun Rephaim. V. Giants. 2 Samuel 5. 18 Moriah
2 302 22 Rep^idim. St. Exodus 17. 1 Paran Riblah. C. Number. 34. 11 Naphtali 69. 50
33. 50 Rimmon. C. Josh. 15. 32 Judah 68. 50 32. 30 Rimmon-gath. Josh. 19. 45
68. 50 31. 40 Rimmon-parez. St. The division of Pomegranates. Number. 33. 19 Paran
Rissah. St. Number. 33. 21 Paran. Rithmah. St. Juniper. Number. 33. 18 Paran Rogelim.
C. 2 Samuel 17. 27 Manas. tr. Jor. 70. 20 33. 20 2 94 10 Rumah. T. 2 King. 23. 36

S
SAlcah. Josh. 12. 5 Manas. tr. Jor. Salchah. Deuteronomy. 3. 10 Salem. C. Peace. Genesis
14. 18 Moriah 69. 30 32. 20 Salim. T. John 3. 23 Manas. cis Jor. 2 176 17
Samaria. C. 1 King. 13. 32 Ephraim 69. 10 32. 30 Sansannah. C. Thorn on thorn.
Josh. 15. 31 Judah Saphir. Micah 1. 11 Sarepta. C. Luke 4. 26 Asher 69. 10 34.
10 Sarid. T. Josh. 19. 10 Zebulun 69. 10 33. 10 Saran. C. Acts 9. 35 Ephraim
69. 00 32. 00 Secacah. C. Josh. 15. 61 Judah 69. 40 31. 30 Sechu. We. 1 Samuel
19. 22 Ephraim 2 185 10 Seirah. T. Judge. 3. 26 Benjamin. Sela. C. A rock.
Rockingham Northamp. sh.
Isa. 16. 1 Edom^ 4 34 37 Sela-hammahlekoth. The rock of division. 1 Samuel 23.
28 Judah Seleucia. C. Acts 13. 4 Libanus Sench. To. A Thorn. Thorn^augh
Northamp. sh.
1 Samuel 14. 4 Benjamin Senir. 1 Chr. 5. 23 Sephar. Genesis 10. 30 Sepharad. Obad.
20 Sepharvaim. C. Books scribes or numbers. 2 King. 17. 24 Libanus Shaalbim. C.
The understanding of a Fox. Judge. 1. 35 Dan Shaaraim. T. 1 Samuel 17. 52 Dan
Shahazimath. T. Humbled with fasting. Hungcr^ord Barksh.
Josh. 19. 22 Issachar Shalem. T. Safe or entire. Genesis 33. 18 Ephraim Shalim L.
Foxes. Foxholes Darbysh Foxton B. of Durham.
1 Samuel 9. 4 Ephraim Shalisha. L. 1 Samuel 9. 4 Ephraim Shamir. C. Briers or a
Thome. Brierley He^^fordsh.
Josh. 15. 48 Judah 69. 10 31. 10 Shapher. Number. 33. 23 Paran Sharaim C. Two
gates. Gatel^y Norfolk. Yatton somers^tsh.
Josh. 15. 36 Judah Sharon. 1 Chr. 5. 16 Sharuhen. C. A Prince or song of
grace. Josh. 19. 6 Simeon 69. 00 31. 20 Shaveh. Pl. A plain. Genesis 14. 5 Reuben
Shebam. Number. 32. 3 Shechem. C. A shoulder. Genesis 33. 18 Ephraim 69. 20 32. 10
Shema. C. Hearing or obeying. Josh. 15. 26 Judah 69. 10 30. 50 Shen. T. 1 Samuel
7. 12 Benjamin Shenir. Deuteronomy. 3. 9 Shepham. T. Number. 34. 10 Naphtali 69. 50 34.
10 Shibmah. C. Number. 32. 38 Reuben 2 66 25 Shicron. T. Hire or reward. Josh. 15.
11 Dan 68. 50 31. 40 Shihor. Ri. 1 Chr. 13. 5 Simeon 2 233 18 Shihor-libnah.
Ri. Josh. 19. 26 Asher 2 142 7 Shilhim. C. Josh. 15. 32 Judah Shiloh. C.
Peaceable and happy. Josh. 18. 1 Ephraim 69. 20 31. 50 2 185 13 Shiloah. Ri.
Nehem. 3. 15 Jerusalem 3 322 13 Shimron. C. The same with Shimron-Meron. Josh.
11. 1 Zebulun Shimron-meron. C Josh. 12. 20 Zebulun 69. 00 33. 10 5 155 Shinar.
Genesis 10. 10 Shion. C. Noise or tumult. Josh. 19. 19 Issachar 69. 20 33. 00
Shocho. C. 2 Chr. 11. 7 Judah Shochoh. 1 Samuel 17. 1 Shophan. C. A Rabbet.
Co^iston in Lancast sh.
Number. 32. 35 Gad 69. 50 32. 40 Shual. L. 1 Samuel 13. 17 Ephraim Shunem. C. Josh.
19. 18 Issachar 69. 10 33. 00 2 161 17 Shur. W. Genesis 16. 7 Simeon Sibmah. C.
Gray or Hoary-hairs. Grays Oxford sh.
Josh. 13. 19 Reuben Sibraim. Ezekiel. 47. 16 Sichem. C. Genesis 12. 6 Ephraim 2 195
42 Siddim. V. Genesis 14. 3 Judah 2 268 5 Sihor. R. Josh. 13. 3 Silla. T. The
Bulwark. 2 King. 12. 20 Jerusalem 3 337 8 Siloa. We. Neh. 3. 15 Siloe. T. Luke
13. 4 Jerusalem 3 324 7 Sinai. M. Exodus 16. 1 Paran 4 50 25 Sinim. Isa. 49. 12
Siphmoth. The same with Sibmah. 1 Samuel 30. 28 Reuben Siriah. We. 2 Samuel 3. 26
Judah 2 275 22 Sitnah. We. Hatred. Genesis 26. 21 Simeon 2 231 11 Sochols. 1 King.
4. 10 Judah Socoh. C. A thick bough. Boughton Northa^psh.
Josh. 15. 35 Judah 69. 20 31. 10 Sodom. C. Chalk or ^ement. Broadchalk Wil^sh.
Genesis 13. 10 Judah 2 270 5 Sorek. Ri. A vineyard or vine. The Vine Hamsh.
Judge. 16. 4 Dan 2 214 17 South-rumoth. 1 Samuel 30. 27 Simeon Succoth. C.
Boothes. Boothby in Lincol^sh.
Genesis 33. 17 Gad 69. 50 32. 50 2 77 12 Succoth. St. Number. 33. 5 Egypt Sychar. C.
Mercenary. John 4. 5. Ephraim 69. 30 32. 20 2 199 49 Syrion. M. Deuteronomy. 3. 9.
Manas. tr. Jor. T
TAanach. Humbling thy self. Josh. 17. 11 Manas. cis Jor. 68. 50 32. 50 2 164
26 Taanath-shiloh. T. Barking or baring a figtree. Josh. 16. 6 Ephraim Tabbath.
T. Good or goodness. Judge. 7. 22 Manas. cis Jor. 69. 40 32. 30 Taberah. St.
Burning. Number. 11. 3 Paran 4 53 32 Tabor. C. and M. Election or purity. Josh.
19. 1^ Zebulun 2 149 28 Tahat. St. Underneath. Number. 33. 26 Paran Tahtim-hodshi.
L. Newly inhabited. Newland Essex.
2 Samuel 24. 6 Gad 2 78 13 Tappuah. L. and C. An Apple. Appleford Barksh.
Josh. 12. 17 Ephraim 2 176 18 Tarah. St. Number. 33. 27 Paran Taralah. C. Josh.
18. 27 Benjamin 69. 40 32. 00 Tehaphnehes. C. Ezekiel. 30. 18. Egypt 63. ^^ 30. ^^
Tekoah. C. Sounding with a Trumpet. (...)
2 Samuel 14. 2 Judah 2 279 37 Telaim. C. Probably both the same. Lambs. La^born
Ba^ksh.
1 Samuel 15. 4 Judah Telem. C. Josh. 15. 24 Thebez. T. Judge. 9. 50 Ephraim 69.
30 32. 10 Thimnathath. C. Josh. 19. 43 Dan Tiberias. C. Ioh. 6. 1 Zebulun 69.
30 33. 20 2 148 25 Timnah. C. An Image or figure. Josh. 15. 10 Judah, or
Timnath. C. Genesis 38. 12 Dan Timnath-serah. Josh. 19. 50 69. 10 32. 10
Timnathah. Josh. 19. 43 Tiphsah. C. 2 King. 15. 16 Ephraim 69. 00 32. 10 2 187
22 Tirzah. C. Sweet or delightful. Beaufield Kent.
Josh. 12. 24 Ephraim 69. 00 32. 10 2 187 22 Toh. L. Good. Judge. 11. 3 Libanus
Tochen. C. The middle. Midl^ton Oxfordsh.
1 Chr. 4. 32 Simeon Tolad. C. See Eltolad. 1 Chr. 4. 29 Simeon 69. ^0 31. 20
Tophel. T. Deuteronomy. 1. 1 Paran Trachonitis. L. Sharp-land. Luke 3. 1 Manas. tr.
Jor. Tire. C. A Rock. Rochel in France.
Josh. 19. 29 Asher. 69. 00 33. 50

U
Ummah. C. Josh. 19. 30 Asher 69. 10 33. 40 Vzz^n-sherah. C. An ear remaining.
1 Chr. 7. 24 Ephraim 69. 10 32. 20 Vz. L. Counsel. Job 1. 1 Edom 4 34 39

Z
ZAanannim. P The Bed of the sleeper. Bed^o^d.
Josh. 19. 33 Nephtali 69. 40 34. 10 2 114 27 Zaanan. T. Micah 1. 11 Zair. T. 2
King. 8. 21 Edom 4 34 36 Zalmon. M. Judge. 9. 48 Ephraim 2 196 44 Zalmon. St.
The shadowing. Number. 33. 41 Edom 4 37 44 Zanoah. C. Abomination or oblivion.
Josh. 15. 34 Judah 69. 50 31. 10 Zaphon. T. Josh. 13. 27 Gad 70. 00 33. 00
Zared. Ri. Number. 21. 12 Moab Zarephath. C. A melting place. Melton L^c^stersh.
1 King. 17. 9 Asher 2 133 26 Zaretan. T. Josh. 3. 16 Reuben 69. 30 32. 30 2 62
16 Zareth-shahar. C. Josh. 13. 19 Reuben Zartanah. C. 1 King. 4. 12 Zarthan. C.
1 King. 7. 46 Man's. cis Jor. 2 176 17 Zeboim. C. Pleasant or a Roe. Genesis 10. 19
Judah 69. 50 31. 40 Zedad. T. Number. 34. 8 69. 20 34. 10 Zelah. C. Josh. 18. 28
Benjamin 69. 30 32. 00 Zelzah. T. Shadowed. Sl adwell nigh London.
1 Samuel 10. 2 Moriah 2 301 20 (...) C. Wools. Woolto^ Do^se^sh.
Josh. 18. 22 Benjamin 69. 20 32. 00 2 262 54 Zenam. C. Josh. 15. 37 Judah
Zephath. C. Judge. 1. 17. Simeon Zephathah. V. 2 Char. 14. 10 Judah Zer. C.
Josh. 19. 35 Naphtali 69. 30 33. 50 Zered. Ri. Dispersed dominion. Deuteronomy. 2. 13
Moab Zereda. T. 1 King. 11. 26 Ephraim 69. 00 32. 10 Zeredathah. 2 Chr. 4. 17
Zererath T. Judge. 7. 22 Manas. cis Jor. 69. 30 32. 30 Ziddim. C. Huntings.
Huntington.
Josh. 19. 32 Naphtali 69. 30 34. 10 Zidon. C. Genesis 49. 13 Asher 69. 10 34. 10
2 132 22 Ziglag. C. The streightning of a measure. Josh. 15. 31 Simeon 69. 00
31. 30 2 228 4 Zin. W. Number. 13. 21 Paran Zion. C. 2 Samuel 5. 7 Jerusalem 3 334 1
Zior. C. Josh. 15. 54 Judah Ziph. C. That mouth. Josh. 15. 24 Judah Ziphron. T.
Number. 34. 9 Ziz. To. A flower or a bud. Budleigh castle, Devon. Budwo^th
Ch^shire.
2 Chr. 20. 16 Judah Zoan. C. Number. 13. 22 Egypt 63. 31. Zoar. C. Small or
little. Littleton Staffordsh. Little port Camb sh.
Genesis 13. 10 Judah 69. 40 31. 30 Zobah. L. 1 Samuel 14. 47 Libanus Zoheleth. S. 1
Kings 1. 9 Moriah Zophim. F. Number. 23. 14 Reuben Zoreah. C. Leprosy. Burton
Lazers Lecestersh.
Josh. 15. 33 Dan 2 214 17 Zuph. L. Swimming or fluctuating. 1 Samuel 9. 5
Ephraim 2 185 9

REader, be pleased to take notice, that limitary places, and all other
mentioned in Scripture, which we could not confidently refer to another Letter,
are by us (though no Towns) consigned to T. which as an Hospital, of no less
charity, then capacity, gives them all entertainment. And thus by Gods
assistance we have finished our Table. Miraculous almost was the execution done
by David on the Amalekites, who saved neither man 1 Samuel 27. 9.
nor woman alive to bring tidings to Gath. I cannot promise such exactness in
our Index, that no one Name has escaped our enquiry: some few, perchance,
hardly slipping by, may tell tales against us. This I profess I have not (in
the language of some modern Quarter Masters) wilfully burnt any Towns, and
purposely omitted them; and hope, that such as have escaped our discovery, will
upon examination appear; either, not generally agreed on by Authors for Proper
Names, or else, by proportion falling without the bounds of Palestine.

Soli Deo gloria.
Errata sic corrigas.
LIb. 2. page 76. line 37. for Na^anaim, read Ma^anaim. p. 108. l. 20. and 21,
and 30, and 41. for Cave read Cane. pa. 109. l. 15. dele though born in
Bethl^hem. page 191. l. 1. for people read pool. Ibid. l. 9. for twenty miles,
read twelve miles. page 236. l. 33. for unstrained, read unstained. page 302.
l. 9. for Vale of Ephraim, read Vale of Rephaim. page 303, l. 20. for They read
Day. page 304. l. 30. for beed, read been. Lib. 3. page 321. l. 4. for from
East to the North, read form West to the North. page 330. l. 8. for partly
natural read purely natural. page 332. l. 37. for Cose. read Close. page 397.
l. 20. for liquid, read dry. 79. l. 23. for dead, read bread. page 188. l. 19.
for (...) read (...) page 132. l. 14. for infe^^ed, read infes^ed. Lib. 5. page
147. l. 11. for less, read l^ss. page 159. l. 17. for that twelve should be
twenty, read that twenty should be twelve. page 164. l. 17. for larcinations,
read lancinations. page 179. l. 27. d^le Philol. Ibid. l. 38. dele Al^th. page
180. l. 9. dele Philol. Ibid. l. 18. dele Al^th. page, 196. l. 8. not extending
it, dele not. Ibid. dele as some do with small probability.

FINIS.

