A SERMON OF ASSVRANCE. Fourteen years ago Preached in CAMBRIDGE, since in
other Places. Now by the importunity of Friends exposed to public view. By
THOMAS FULLER B. D. late Lecturer in Lombard Street.



LONDON, Printed by J. D. for John Williams at the Sign of the Crown in Paul's
Churchyard. 1647.

TO THE HONORABLE, and nobly accomplished Knight, Sir JOHN DANVERS, all the
blessings of this, and a better life.
SIR,
We read how Zachariah I humbly submit) to make me mute, forbidding me till
further order the exercise of my public Preaching, wherefore I am feign to
employ my fingers in writing, to make the best signs I can, thereby to
express, as my desire to the general good, so my particular gratitude to your
Honor.

May this Treatise but find Eye, as once it did from your Ear, and be as well
accepted when read, as formerly when heard. And let this humble Dedication be
interpreted a weak acknowledgement of those strong obligations your bounty
has laid upon me. Well may you taste the fruits of that tree, whose root your
liberality has preserved from whithering*

Sir, these hard times have Zachariah, as his dumbness was but temporary; so I
hope by Gods goodness, and the savor of my friends, amongst whom your Honor
stands in the highest rank, the miracle may be wrought, that the dumb may
speak again, and as well by words publicly profess, as now by his hand, he
subscribes himself,

Your Servant in all Christian office. THOMAS FULLER.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
I Shall be short in my addresses unto thee; not only, because I know not thy
disposition, being a stranger unto thee; but chiefly, because I am ignorant of
my own present Condition, remaining as yet, a stranger to my self Were I
restored to the free use of my Function, I would then request, the concurrence
of thy thanks with mine, to ^ gracious God the giver* and honorable Persons
the dealers of this great favor unto me. Were I finally interdicted my (...),
without hope of recoverie, I would bespeake thy pity to bemoane my estate. But
lying as yet in the Marshes between Hope and Fear, I am no fit subject to be
condoled for, or congratulated with.

Yet it is, I trust* no piece of Popery to maintain; that the prayers of
others may be beneficial, and available for a person in my Purgatory
condition. Which moves me to cravethy Christian suffrages, that I may be rid
out of my present torment, on such terms as may most tend to Gods glory, mine
own good, and the edification of others. However matters shall succeed, it is
no small comfort to my Conscience, that in respect of my Ministerial Function,
I do not die Felo de se; not stabbing my Profession by mine own laziness, who
hither to have, and hereafter shall improve my utmost endeavors, by any
lawful means to procure my restitution.

When the Priests would have carried the Arc after David, David forbad them to
go further, If (said he* I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he
will bring me again, and show me both it, and his habitation. But if he thus
say, I have no delight in thee: behold here am I, let him do to me, as seems
good unto him* Some perchance would persuade me, to have the Pulpit carried
after me, along with me to my private Lodgings, but hitherto I have refrained
from such exercises, as subject to offense, hoping in due time to be b^ught
back to the Pulpit, and endeavoring to compose my self to David's resolution.
And if I should be totally forbidden my Function, this is my confidence, that,
That great pasture of Gods Providence, whereon so many of my Profession do
daily feed, is not yet made so bare by their biting, but that, besides them
and Millions more, it may still comfortably maintain,

Thy Friend and servant in Christ Jesus.

THOMAS FULLER.

A SERMON OF ASSVRANCE.
2 PETER 1. 10. Give rather diligence to make your calling and election sure.
Man's life may not unfitly be compared Thief in the Candle, which makes men to
spend much precious ti^e in needless disputes, the conclusions whereof are
both uncertain and unprofitable. The Schoolemens Books are stuffed with such
questions, about the distances and dignities of Angels, as if men were to
marshall them in Rank and File, how that heavenly Host do march in glory one
before another. When men hear improbable matters from far Countries related
unto them, it is their usual Return, It is better to believe them, then go
thither to confute them. But let us not credit many unlikely-hoods concerning
Angels, which the boldness of Schoolmen have obtruded upon us, but rather
labor in Gods due time, to go to heaven, there with our own happy e^perience
to confute them.

Well it is said of Socrates, that he was the Grecians, which humbled
speculative into moral Philosophy. How well would the pains of that Minister
be employed, who should endeavor to bring down and ab^te many superfluous
contemplative Queries into practical Divinity. It were liberty enough if the
Sermons of all Preachers were bound to keep Residence only on such subjects,
which all Christians are bound to believe, and practice for their souls
health; Amongst which the Doctrine in my Text, may justly challenge a
principal part. When (...) hea^d but the mention of the name of Boaz, the Man,
said Ruth. 2. 20.
she, is near unto us, and of our affinity; So no sooner do you hear this
Text read unto you, Give rather diligence to make your calling and election
sure; but every well affected heart is ready to claim blood and challenge
right therein. Questions about Angels are neither kiffe nor kin to my soul;
but this a precept of that consequence, of that concernment, we all ought to
share a part and interest in the speedy and real practice thereof.

Some difference there is betwixt us, and the Romanists, in reading the Text
who following the vulgar Latin, add per bona opera; make your calling and
election sure by good works. A clause altogether omitted in our English
Translations, because in the Greek nothing appears answerable thereunto. Good
reason therefore, that we should correct the transcript by the Original, and
purify the stream to the clearenesse of the fountain. God grant, that though
on these just grounds we exclude good works, out of the Text, we may admit,
embrace, and practice them in our lives and conversations.

My Text may not unfitly be compared to Ehuds dagger, short, but sharp. And
although now it be fallen into a lame hand, (the unworthiness of the Preacher
in this place) to manage it, yet enforced with the assistance of Gods arm, it
may prove able to give the deadly blow, to four Eglo^ sins, tyrannizing in
too many men's hearts.

1. Supine negligence in matters of Salvation. 2. Busy meddling in other men's
matters. 3. Preposterous curiosity in unsearchable mysteries. 4. Continual
wavering, or Scepticalness concerning our Calling and Election.
Supine negligence is dispa^ched in that word, Give diligence. This grace of
Assurance is unattainabl^ by ease and idleness.

Busy meddling in other men's matters is destroyed Your E^ch one ought
principally to intend his own assurance.

Prepost^rous curiosity is stab^ed with the order Calling and Election, not
Election and Calling. Men must fi^t begin to assure their Calling, and then
(...), argue and infer the assurance of their Election.

Continual wavering is wounded under the Sure. We will but touch at three
first, and land at the last, as the chief subject of our ensuing Discourse.

This Grace of Assurance is not attainable with Racers, who must stretch every
sinew to get first to the Goal: to Wrestlers, a troublesome emploiment; so
that I am unresolved whether to recount it amongst Toiles, or Exercises, (at
the best it is but a toilesome Exercise.) To Soldiers, who are in constant
Service and daily Duty, always on the Guard against their Enemies. Besides, we
Ministers are compared to Shepherds, a painful and dangerous profession
amongst the Jews; to Watchmen, which continually wake for the good of others:
so that besides the difficulties of our Christian calling, we are encumbered
with others, which attend our Ministerial function. Let none therefore
conceit, that Salvation with the Graces accompaning it (whereof this Assurance
we treat of is a Principal) is to be compassed with facility, without constant
care and endeavor to obtain it. How easily was the man in the Gospel let
down to our Savior in the house, whilst four men for him uncovering the
roof thereof, let him down with cords lying quietly on his couch? Some may
suppose that with as little hardship they may be lifted up to heaven, and that
whilst they lazily lie snorting on their beds of security, (never mortifying
their lusts, never striving for grace, never struggling against their
corruptions) they shall be drawn up to happiness, or it let down to them,
merely by the cords of Gods mercy, and Christ's merits. Such men without
amendment will one day find themselves dangerously deceived, and that it is a
laborious task, to gain either the surenesse, or assurance of salvation,
wherein, according to the Apostles prescription, we must give diligence.

To make your [Each Christian is principally the children God has given them,
of the second part of their selves lying in their bosom, their wives, of true
grace in their friends and family. How comfortable were it, if Ministers were
ascertained of true grace and piety in the breasts and bosoms of the people
committed to their charge. But the best way to pass a rational verdict, on
the sincerity of sanctity in another, is first to find an experimental
Evidence thereof in ones own heart. A Philosopher complained, that it was an
exceeding hard thing to find a wise man; true, said another, for he must be a
wise man that seeks him, and knows when he has found him; and hence arises
the difficulty, because two wise men in effect must meet together, the Seeker,
and the Finder. It is a hard thing in like manner to be assured of unfeigned
faith, and undissembled Devotion in another man's heart. Because first, that
party must have a feeling of the operation of grace in his own soul
(otherwise blind men are incompetent Judges of colors) before he can make his
presumptions of holiness in another, from those sacred symptoms and fruits of
piety, which he finds in his own Conscience. Let it therefore be every man's
maine work, first to make a scrutiny in his own soul, to make his own
Calling and Election sure.

How contrary is this to the common practice many wandering Christians: whose
home is always to be abroad, Professors in spiritual Palmestry, who will
undertake to read the Life-line, the line of eternal life in the hands of men's
souls, though for all their ^kill, they often mistake the hands of Esau for
the hands of Jacob, approving many hypocrites for their holiness and
condemning sincere souls for counterfeits and dissemblers.

Calling and Election [men are not to lanch Calling or Vocation.] Surely the
very Angels which climbed up the ladder in Jacobs Genesis 28. 12.
dream did first begin at the last and lowest Round. First look to find thy
justification, and sanctification, then thy adoption and vocation, lastly thy
election and predestination. But alas, as the Hebrews read their letters
backward: so it is to be feared that too many preposterously invert the order
of my Text, and instead of Calling and Election, read Election and Calling,
first grasping at those mysteries (both in their practice and discourse) which
are above their reach, as if their souls feared to be ^unne a-ground, if
sailing in the shallows of Faith and good works, they never count themselves
safe, but when adventuring in those secrets wherein they can find no bottom.

We are now come to the youngest part in Benjamin's portion. B^ing to discourse
of the certainty of calling and election, not in respect of Gods
predestination, it being from all Eternity sure in him, Ac^ 15. 8.
from the beginning of the world God knows all his works, but in reference
to man's apprehension, concerning the assurance thereof. And now least our
discourse like 1 Chro: 12. 15.
Jordan in the first month should overflow, we will raise these Banks to
bridle it, and consider;

1. That assurance of Calling and Election is feasible in this life-to be
attained. 2. What this assur^nce is. 3. How a Christian buckleth and applies
it to his soul? 4. We will satisfy some doubts and difficulties in this
behalf. 5. We will conclude with comfortatable uses to all sorts of
Christians.
Of the first. That assurance of ones Calling Election may, without any
miraculous revelation, be in this life acquired, appears plain in the Text;
because the Apostle in the simplicity of the Dove-like Spirit exhort's us to
the attaining thereof. Now surely it had been no better than holy fraud, (which
heaven has a Pillorie to punish) to put men upon a labor in vain, to seek
that which is not to be found. Think not therefore that the assurance of
Calling and Election is like the Philosophers stone, which so many have
searched for, yet all have lost their estates, before they could find it out;
but no doubt by God's blessing it is in this world attainable. And yet the
Papists maintain, that whilst we live in this world, and sail in our
desires and affections to the rich Indies of Heaven and happiness, no further
Land is discoverable beyond the Cape of good hope, and that it is arrogance and
presumption (without an immediate express by revelation from Heaven) for any
to conceive himself assured of his salvation.

For the second, this assurance of ones Calling and Election is a [sepa^able]
fruit or effect, not of every true, but only of some strong Paiths, whereby the
party is persuaded, of the certainty of his Calling and Election. I say
separable, to manifest my dissenting from such worthy Divines, who make this
Assurance to be the very Being, Essence, Life, Soul, and Formality of Faith
itself. Whence these two Opinions as false, as dangerous, must of necessity be
inferred. First, that every one who has true faith, and are eternally to be
saved, have always some measure of this Assurance: Secondly, that such, who
are devoid of this Assurance, are likewise deprived of all sincere faith for
the present. But God forbid any Preacher should deliver Doctrines so
destructive to Christian comfort on the one side, and advantageous to
spiritual Pride on the other. Such will prove Carnificinae, the ra^ks and
tortures of tender Consciences. And as the 1 King. 3.
careless Mother killed her little child, for she overlaid it; so the weight
of this heavy Doct^in, would press many poor, but pious soul^s; many faint,
but feeble infant-faiths to the pit of Despair, exacting and extorting from
them more than God requires, that every Faith should have assurance with it, or
else be uneffectuall to salvation. No, the formality of Faith, consists in man's
renouncing and disclaiming all sufficiency in himself, casting, rolling, and
relying his soul totally and entirely on the mercies of God, and merits of
Christ, though not assured sometimes of the certainty of his salvation. Like a
man in a tempest cast out of the ship, and lying on a planke or board,
placeth-all his humane hopes on that planke or board, thereby to escape
drowning, though he have no certainty, that the same shall bring him safe to
the shore.

As for those reverend Divines who have written

In the next place; a Christian thus collecteth this Assurance of his Calling
and Election, by composing this practical ^yllogisme in his soul.

The Major. He that truly repents himself of his sins, and relyeth with a
true faith on God in Christ, is surely Called, and by consequence Elected
before all Eternity to be a vessel of honor. The Minor. But I truly repent
my self of my sins, and rely with a true faith on God in Christ. The
Conclusion. Therefore I am truly Called and Elected, etc.
The Major is the sense of the Scripture in several places, the very effect of
Gods promises, and the general scope of the Gospel: so that if Satan should
be so impudent, as to deny the truth of this Proposition, he may be beaten with
that weapon, whereat once he challenged our Savior, it is written.

All the difficulty is in the Minor. Happy that But I, etc. For such I dare be
bold to make the Conclusion, yea it makes it self for them, without my
Assistance. But alas! many out of fearfulness dare not make this Minor,
concerning this Assumption to be presumption in them. And although, they might
truly do it (being in a better condition then they conceive themselves) yet
overwhelmed with the sense of their sins and Gods severity, they assume the
contrary, and poor souls, often apprehend and conclude their own damnation
in their wounded consciences: whereas others with a more dangerous mistake of
common illuminations, for discrim^nating grace, falsely make the Minor and
causelessly infer, their blessed condition, without just ground for the same.
Such few as go rightly to work do produce these three witnesses, to assert
the truth of this Minor proposition.

First, the testimony of their Conscience, that

Secondly, the witness of the holy Spirit in Romans 8. 16.
which bears witness with their Spirit, that they are the children of God.
Now we must with sorrow confess, that this doctrine of the Spirit dwelling in
the heart of Gods servants is much discountenanced of late, and the Devil
thereupon has improved his own interest. To speak plainly, it is not the
fierceness of the Lion, nor the fraud of the Fox, but the mimicalnesse of the
Ape, which in our Age has discredited the undoubted Truth. But what if the
Apes in India finding a glow-worme, mistook it to be true fire, and heaping
much combustible matter about it, hoped by their blowing of it, thence to
kindle a flame; I say, what if that Animal (...) that Mirth*making creature,
deceived it self, does it thence follow that there is no true fire at all? And
what if some Phanaticall Anabaptists, by u^urpation have entitled their
brainesicke fanc^es, to be so many illuminations of the spirit, must we
presently turn Acts 23. 8.
Sadduces in this point, and deny that there is any spirit at all? God forbid.
We confess the Apostles in the Primitive Church were our elder brethren, and
wi^h Isaac carri^d away the inheritance of the spirit in so great a proportion,
as to be enabled thereby to miraculous operations; Yet so, that we, (though
the younger brethren) the sons of Keturah, have rich and precious gifts of
the spirit bestowed upon us, which at sometime or other, in a higher or lower
degree sweetly move the soul of all Gods servants, and in many of them,
testify the truth of that Minor Proposition, namely the sincerity of their
faith and repentance.

The third and last witness we will insist on, is r^pining at them, Angels
rejoicing for them, God himself glorified by them, I say,* because of these
and other reasons, he does good deeds with h^mility and cheerfulness, and
finds a singular joy in his soul resulting from the doing thereof. This joy
is an excellent witness to depose the truth of his Faith and repentance, and
to confirm the Minor in the former Syllogism.

See here though good works on just ground Laban to Jacob, why stand ye
without come in ye blessed of the Lord. And this joy conceived from the good
works men do, is the more pure the more private, the more sincere, the more
secretly it is carried. I shall ever commend the modesty of Elisabeth: who
after long barrenness finding her self with child did not publish her
happiness to the veiw of the world, but hid her self three ^oneths. If after
too long sterility in goodness, thou perceivest thy self at last by God's
grace pregnant in pious works, vent not thy good success in the Marketplace,
do not boast and brag thereof in discourse to others, but be contented to
enjoy the solid comfort thereof betwixt God and thy own conscience.

So^ much for the th^ee witnesses to confirm Minor. All that I shall add is
this; let us who are or should be scholars take heed, whom our parents or
friends have bred at the Fountains of Learning and Religion, till our portions
are almost shrunk into our Education. Let us take heed, least silly simple
people, who never read Aristotle's Organon, never knew how to mould Argument in
mood and figure, make this Syllogism true in their hearts, by their
supernatural Logic; whilst we, with all our wit and (...) learning, make at
the best but a Soloecisme, and thereby put a dangerous fallacy upon our own
souls.

But here we must propound and answer Object.
first is this, whether all the servants of God now living, and in the state of
grace, are for the present assured of their Calling and Election; So that if
instantly arrested to pay their debt to nature, they are as confident of their
souls mounting up to heaven and happiness, as of their bodies falling down to
dust and corruption.

We divide the congregation of God's servants Acts.
Mnasons Answ.
old disciples, seniour pro^essors of (...). Luke 2. 3^.
Hannah's which have lived many years in the Temple, serving God with ^asting
and Prayers night and day. These by frequent acts, have contracted a habit of
Piety, Grace by custom is made another nature unto them, especially toward
the latter end of their lives; partly because their souls do steal a Glymps,
Glance, or Pisgah-sight of heaven, through the Clefts and Chinkes of their Age,
or sicknesse-broken-bodies; and partly because, as all motion is swiftest the
nearest it comes to the Center: So they, the nearer they draw by death to
heaven, God's Spir^t and all goodness grows more quick and active in them.
Of t^ese we say that it is often observed, God deals so graciously with them,
as to crown their endeavors with an assurance of salvation. To such I may add
those whom I may call young-old-Christians, whose profession of Christ, though
short, has been thick; though young in years, yet they have not only done,
but suffered for Christ. Religion has cost them dear, they have not only been
summered but wintered in piety, have not only passed prosperity, but have been
acquainted with adversity therein. Great travelors in Christianity, which have
cut the line, and have passed the Torrid Zone of Persecution, and which is
more, of a wounded conscience. These also God may admit into the former form,
and out of his undeserved mercy reward them with the Assurance of their
salvation.

But all stars which sh^ne in heaven are not David's worthies to be equalled
with the first three. Other Christians there are (who in God's due time may
mate the former both in grace and glory) Punies in piety, Novices in Religion:
Of such, I say, not one of a hundred (whatsoever they may erroneously pretend
to the contrary) are assured of their Calling and Ele^tion.

If further it be demanded, whether every Family of Faith, have some proportion
of this assurance, conferred upon them during their abode in this life. Other
Divines, no (...) inferior to the former in number, Learning, Religion, and
Christian experience, main^aine the opposite opinion: that God sometimes is so
pleased, to try the patience, and humble the hearts of some of his servants,
that a continual fear, is a constant covering of their eyes, they go heavily
all the day long, never daring for fear of presumption, to own and
acknowledge any grace in their hearts, alwai ^jealous of their own condition,
and sadly suspicious of themselves, least all their (...) prove hypoc^isie, and
their Piety be more in pro^ession then (...). Those may be (...) unto children
in their Mothers belly, which have true life in them, and yet themselves do
not know that they live. For my own part, I conceive this controversy can
only be decided betwixt God, and a man's own Conscience: no third Person can
be privy to the secret transactions betwixt them. The last of these two
Opinions (so far as one may conjecture) has most of charity, and not the
least of truth in it. I am persuaded that many a pious soul dying in the fit
of a t^mptation, has instantly expected to sink from his deathbed into
hellfire, when the same by Gods goodness has been countermanded a contrary
way, and sent to bliss and happiness; Yea, it is more then probable, that
many sad and affli^ted spirits, have been possessed of glory in heaven, before
they durst ever own that themselves had any true Grace on earth.

The next question which comes to be resolved, Grace in his heart, (which
desperate Position cuts asunder the sinews of all Gospelcomfort) but it is
only enquired into, whether the apprehension or Assurance of his calling may
not in some cases be lost. Wherein our answer is affirmative, and this usually
comes to pass on these two sad Occasions.

First, when the Party commits some Conscience-wasting Tertullian terms,
Peccatum devoratorium salutis; and continu^s in the same some season without
repentance. indeed every surreptitious sin, or sin of infirmity, and
especially a complication of many of them together, have a good mind to
destroy this Assurance; But it is seldom seen, that their strength is so
great, (though they frequently fret and daily nibble at the cords of our
Assurance) as to share or grind them asunder, a thing usually done by the
committing of high and heinous offenses. There is a whirlewinde in the
West Indies, called a Herricane, which comes but seldom, and yet too often.
For then Rasor-like it shaves down all level and flat before it, Trees, and
Towns, and Towers, in a word, it is as wild and savage as the Natives of the
Country. No less the impetuous violence and cruelty of a
Consciencewasting-sinne: such as Lots ^ncest, David's Adultery, Peter's deni^ll,
when they come, they make a depopulation of all Graces formerly planted in the
soul; maiming the hand of Faith, breaking the Anchor of Hope, quenching the
heat of Charity* darkning the light of knowledge, and totally taking away for
a time, the comfortable apprehension of Gods love to them, and their calling to
God. This made David petition to God, Restore to me the joy of thy salvation,
Wherein three things are implied. First, that once he did possess that joy,
Restore it. Secondly, that now he had lost it, Restore it; Lastly, that the
loss thereof was not so desperate, but with hope by true sorrow, to recover
this joy. Restore to me the joy of thy Salvation.

The second way to lose this Assurance, is by of a sadder hue, and blacker
complexion then what usually b^fall other Christians. In such a case a
sorrowful soul, is ready thus to reason with it self. Once I conceived my
self in a happy condition, thinking my self estated in the favor of God,
truly called, and by consequence truly elected to grace here, and glory
hereafter. But now alas, I pe^ceive my self utterly mistaken. I built my
hopes on a false bottom; I am but a mere formalist, a pretender to piety, yea
a reprobate and castaway, otherwise God would never afflict me in this
fashion, with such hideous and horrible crosses, doleful tribulations, dismal
temptations, so that the brimstone of hellfire may plainly be sented
therein. Thus holy Job, when God discharged whole volleys of Chaine-shot of
afflictions against him, one drew on another, we find him sometimes venting
expression, rankly savouring of despair, and no wonder if he began to stagger
who had drunk so deeply of the bitter cups. And now conceiving our selves
in some measure to have satisfied the most important practical queries
wherewith this doctrine of Assurance is encumbered, we come to make some
profitable application.

The Gr^cians had a threesold Song, the Old men sung, we have been, the middle
aged men we are, the young men, we shall be. This Song will serve to divide my
Auditors at this time. Some sing we have been. There was a happy time wherein
we were ascertained of our C^lling and Election; but now, alas poor souls
I have lost it. Others Sing we are for the present in the peacible poss^ssi^n
of such assurance. Others ^g we shall be in God's due time, when his
goodness and wisdom sees fit, such an happiness shall be bestowed upon us.

We begin with the first that sing, we have been* O that it were in my power
as well to help as to pity you, to amend as to bemoane your condition! It is
the greatest misery, that one has once been happy. All your Song is a
Burden. The best advice I can prescribe unto you is this; seriously consider
with your selves which way you lost this assurance of your Salvation was it by
committing a conscience-wasting-sinne? no Divine can commend unto you better or
other Physic, than only Revel. 2. 5. (...)
Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent and do thy first Works. And
although it may please God in his mercy to forgive thy dayly-imperfections and
manifold infirmities, on thy general repentance and quotidian p^ayer, and
forgive us our trespasses, yet the most comfortable course and surest way to
obtain peace of conscience after the committing of an heinous offense, is by
particular humiliation for it, without which serious sorrow, solid comfort is
either never given, or not long enjoyed.

But if thou have forfeited thy former assurance, love, at the worst of his
anger, has falsely inferred a conclusion of his hatred against thee. ^nsider
how God corrects those whom he loves most, to the intent that all grace may
be increased and improved in them. Passing by on a night in the streets, I met
a youth h^ving a lighted link in his hands, who was offended thereat, because
it burnt so da^k and dim, and therefore the better to improve the light
thereof, he beat, bruised, and battered it against the wall, that the wicke
therein might be sp^ead out, and the pitch with other comb^stible matter,
(which before stifled the light with its overstiffnesse) might be loosened,
which presently caused the link to blaze forth into a lighter flame. God in
like manner deals with thy soul; that thou may shine the brighter before
men, he does buffet and afflict thee with several temptations, which give
thee occasions to exercise thy graces which lay hid in prosperity. Such
corrections will in conclusion, greatly add to thy spiritual light and
luster. Apply these and the like consolations to thy soul, and remember what
David says, heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.
Yea but you will say, my night of sorrow, is like the nights in Greene-Land,
which last full four months together. A long night I must confess, but day
will dawne at the last, and last the longer for it.

Come we now to those that sing we are, who that for the present they are
possessed of this assurance. And is it so indeed? And do thou not deceive
thy self, beholding thy condition through a fl^ttering glass or false
spectacles? Well if thou affirmest it, I dare not deny it. It were no manners
nor charity in me to give thy belief the lie; and therefore what you say of
your selves, I give credit thereunto. Only let me stay a little and
congratulate your happy estate. Good success have you with your honor. God
has not dealt thus with every one, neither have all his servants so large a
proportion of his favor. And now I will take the boldness to commend some
counsel unto you. In the first place be thankful to God f^r this great
courtesy conferred upon thee, and know, that all heavenly gifts as they are
got by Prayer, are kept, confirmed, and increased by Praises.

Secondly, take heed of insulting over such as Calling and Election, Ergo, I am
a Saint, a chosen vessel, eternally to be sav^d; Thou lackest this certainty,
therefore art a reprobate, a cast away, a firebrand of Hell, eternally to be
damned. Is this the expression of thy gratitude to God, proudly to trample on
his servants, and thy brethren? It is hard to say, whether that thy inference
has more of profaneness, or falsehood in it. If a Favou^ite to a great
Emperor should say, [ All that are not in as high esteem and credit with the
Emperor as my self, are so many Traitors.] Would not this be accounted not
only, a vainglorious expression, but injurious, both to his sovereign and
fellow subjects? How many thousands of them, would be willing, yea desirous to
adventure their lives, in a lawful cause for their Emperors honor, who not
withstanding never had the favor, to be personably known unto him, much less
to be (...) by him to places of eminent trust and command. And may not many be
presumed on, as cordially affected to Gods glory, which from their hearts love
and honor both him and his, completely loyal to his heavenly Majesty, who
have not as yet been advanced so high, and ingratiated so far with him, as to
receive the Assurance of their Calling and Election?

Thirdly, walk humbly before God, and know souls to (...). Despair, we
confess, is poison, and has killed its thousands, but the venom there of is
more curable, as more cold and faint in the operation thereof. Take heed
therefore of presumption, lest the confidence of the Assurance of thy Calling
betray thee to spiritual Pride, that to Security, that to Destruction.

Her^ take notice that ^he soul of a Saint consists Rejoice (says Psalm. 2. 11.
David) before him with trembling* if rejoying how can he tremble, if
trembling how can he rejoice? Oh that is an unhappy soul which cannot find an
expedient betwixt these (...)! that cannot accommodate these seeming
contrarieties: Rejoicing, when he looks on a gracious God, trembling, when he
beholds a sinful self: Rejoicing, when looking upward on Gods (...),
trembling, when looking downwards on his deserts. Ever triumphing, that he
shall be saved, and evertrembling lest he should be damned; ever certain that
he shall stand, and ever c^refull least he should fall. Tantus est gradus
certitudinis, (suith Saint Augustine) quantus est gradus sollicitudinis. He
that has much sear to of^end God, has much certainty to continue in his
favor: he that fears little, has little certainty; and h^ that is altogether
fearelesse, whatsoever he proudly (...) to the contrary, has no assurance at
all to persevere in Gods favor. We may observe that such as have the shaking
Palsy in their heads, live to be very aged men: sure I am, that such as have a
fil^all fear to incur their heavenly Fathers displeasure, hold out to the
last, even to that life which has no end. The heavens themselves are said to
have M^tum trepidationis, and the best and most spiritual servants of God,
constantly feel such trembling fits in their own souls. In a word, Assurance
to persevere is a sparkle of heavenly fire, fed with the daily tinder of fear
to offend God.

Nor let any confidently presume on the mystery Medes and Persians cannot be
repealed) thereon to sin with indemnity, because once and ever Gods servant,
and no fear finally to fall from him. For, besides other answers to quell^
their pride, let such seriously consider but this particular instance. God
granted Hezekiah a Lease^ of his life for fifteen years longer, and it was
impossible for him to dye till that term was expired; so that had Hezekiah
fed on Toades and Vipers, on the most noxious food for man's nature, he was
notwithstanding immortal during the time prefixed; because Truth it self had
promised it. However if Hezekiah proved careless in his diet, though certain
of his life, he had no assurance of his health for that season. His
intemperance might draw sickness on him, so that he might lose the li^e of
his life, his liberty of walking abroad, comfort in conversing with company,
pleasure in tasting his meat and drink, to be kept constant prisoner on his
bed, a languishing as bad as death it self. Grant in like manner, that
Predestination priviledgeth thee from final Apostacy, yet if careless to
keep Gods Commandments, thou may forfeit all thy spiritual comfort, the
joy of thy Salvation, have a hell on earth in thy Conscience, having in thy
apprehension all the beams of Gods favor ecclipsed, one glimps thereof a
servant of God prizeth above millions of worlds.

We come now to these that sing, We shall be. It

First do not envy and repine at their happiness,

Secondly know to thy comfort that were it not

1. Perchance because as yet thou have not fervently sued to God for it. Thy
affections are gold weights, not zealously engaged in the desire thereof. Thou
seem indifferent and unconcerned, whether thou receivest this Assurance or
no. Now God sets such an estimate and valuation on this Assurance, as a grand
gift, and favor of the first magnitude, that he will have it sought, and
searched, and sued, and prayed; and pressed for, with holy constancy, and
restless importunity before he will grant it. Hannah called her son, 1 Samuel
1, 20.
Samuel, For (said she) I have asked him of the Lord. Every good thing,
temporal, spiritual, inward, outward, every particular grace must be a
Samuel, craved, and requested of God before the fruition thereof can be sweet
to our souls, or comfortable to our Consciences* To have a favor, before we
have requested it, is the ready way to lose it, before we know the true worth
and value thereof.

2. Perchance God as, yet withholds this assurance from thee, with intent to
render it more acceptable when it is bestowed. Never had Isaac been so welcome
to Sarah, but because long barrenness, and expectation, had set so sharp an
edge on her affection.

3. It may be God in his Providence foresees, should this Assurance be bestowed
upon thee, thou would play the unthrift and ill husband therewith: And
therefore God still keeps it in his own hand, until thou be more wise and
better able to manage and employ it. The L^e ^5.
Prodigal Son having received his Portion from his Father, riotously spent
it amongst Harlots; the same may be suspe^d by thee, and therefore as careful
Parents, jealous of their sons thriftinesse, will not deliver unto them all
their Means at once, but rather confine them for some years to a small
Pension and moderate Annuitie, intending to open their hands, and enlarge their
bounty, when they see cause; God in like manner will not entrust thee with the
gross sum of thy Assurance to be paid thee all at once, ^ut r^taile it out
unto thee, by degrees more or less; now a scruple, now a dram thereof. And
when thou shall give good Evidence of thy Christian prudence to husband and
imp^ove it, the remnant of this Assurance shall wholly be made over unto thee.

Thirdly, wait and attend the time of God. O tarry the Lords leasi^e (when he
will be, he can be at leisure) who in the most fittest minute and moment will
confi^me this long expected Assurance unto thee. Know this that all the weights
and and plu^mets of humane importunity, cannot make the Clock of Gods Time
st^ike a minute sooner then he has set it. No doubt the Virgi^ Mary shared the
greatest Interest in our Savior according to the flesh, to obtain a
reasonable request of him, and yet could not prevail for the working of a
Miracle before his John 2. 4.
ho^re was fully come. Wherefore be thou not like to Hophni and Phi^eas the
Priests, who contrary to Gods institution, when any man offered a sacrifice,
used to send a servant whilst the flesh was ^ing, with a ^ Sam. 2. 133
Flesh* hook of three te^eh in his hand, who thrusting it into the kettle,
took or his Masters part, whatsoever the Flesh-hooke brought up; And if any
advised him to stay till the fat was bu^nt, according to the custom un der the
law, he presently proved impatient, would have no sodden flesh but raw, which
if not instantly given him, he would take it by force. Now such are the
ravenous appetites, and voracious stomachs of many men, that when they propound
any thing to their desires, they will not stay till God has fitted it for
them; but by hook or by crook, by any sinister or indirect means they will
compass their ends. Such will feed on raw meat (as if the heat of their ardent
desires would roast it enough for themselves) morsels which perchance sometimes
would be pleasant for the Palate to taste, but never wholesome for the stomach
to digest. These are not pleased, though having what they please, if not also
when they please: Be not thou of their Diet; know such raw meat will occasion
crudities in thy stomach. Quietly attend till God has cooked thy meat for
thee: think not in vain to antidate, his time is the best time. Know that
generally the Watches of our desores go too fast; and therefore to set them
right, they must be set back according to the Sunne-dyall of Gods pleasure.
Wherefo^e without any murmuring or repining, do thou willingly and cheerfully
wait the happy time, when God shall be pleased to bestow this Assurance upon
thee.

To Conclude with the time; The Schoolmen evidentiae, the other adhaerentiae:
the former is when one evidently and clearly apprehends Gods favor sealed
unto him by his Spirit. This hitherto thou lackest, but do diligently labor,
daily pray, and duly wait to receive it. The latter of adherence or
recumbencie, all true Christians ought ever to be possessed off, which hope
for any happiness. Namely when a man casts himself wholly upon Christ,
clinging about him with Jobs resolution, Though thou killest me, yet will I
put my trust in thee. Till we gain the latter, let us make much of the former,
having as much safety, though not so much solace in it; and which will with as
much certainety, though not so much comfort, through Gods mercy, bring our
souls to heaven and happiness.

Amen.
FINIS.

