AN ALARM TO THE COUNTIES OF ENGLAND AND WALES, WITH THE OATH, OF ABJURATION,
For ever to be abjured. OR, The sad MALADY, and sole REMEDY of ENGLAND.

By a Lover of his Native Country.

Printed in the year, 16^^.

AN ALARM TO THE COUNTIES OF ENGLAND AND WALES. With the OATH of Abjuration
for ever abjured.
OUR Nation, which long since has lost the Luster and well-being, now at last
strugleth for the Life and Being thereof. Our many [ temporal] miseries are
reducible to two principal heads.

Daily 1. Decrease of Trading. 2. Increase of Taxes: So that every hour the
Burden grows weightier, and the Back of our Nation weaker to support it.


2. It Is sad to see, in Clothing Countries, what swarms there are of poor
people, the true objects of Charity; if any were as able to give, as they
worthy to receive relief: for they would work, and can work, yet cannot
work, because there are none to employ them.

3. As for the Sea (which is the Land of Port-Towns,) it returns small
benefit; for since Dunkirk was ours, (more to the credit than profit of our
Nation) the fire of Sea-robheries is removed out of the Chimney, and scattered
about the House, not less destructive, but more diffusive: So that our
Merchants could better guard themselves against that Single staple of Pirates,
than many lesser ones sprung since every where, the cause why rich men will not
(as poor cannot) adventure.

4. Our second misery is, increase, yea, superfetation of Taxes, so long as so
numerous an Army is maintained: For though some of their Soldiers will preach
gratis, (conscientious to tahe nothing for that which they know is worth
nothing) yet none will fight at so cheap a rate.

5. Some will say, That what the Soldier receives with one hand he returns
with another, expending his pay in Victuals, Clothes, etc. whereby Coin, by
circulation, is continued in our Country. This I deny; for some Grandees,
greatned by the Times, have made their Moneys over in Banks beyond the Seas,
which are put into MORTMAIN, or a Dead hand, whereby no profit accreweth to our
Commonwealth. Others having gotten the Estates of Lords, live after the rate of
Yeomen, whose discretion therein is to be commended, for proportioning their
expenses (for fear of afterclaps) rather according to their original, than
present condition.

6. The increase of Taxes must inevitably cause the ruin of our Nation: For
though still there be wealthy men left (as they show it in their cowardice, and
fear to engage for the general good) yet they grow thinner every day, whilst
such as are left no root of their own, rather than they will wither, will turn
Suckers on the Stock of others. So that the greatest happiness rich men can
promise to themselves, is only to be last devoured, though the comfort of the
latenesse will not countervail the sadness for the certainty of their
destruction. Indeed it is miraculous, that our Nation has subsisted so long,
and few there are that would believe that the whole Candle of our English
wealth could last so long, as we have beheld it burning in the Socket, but now
giving the last blaze, if God be not merciful, and men discreet to prevent it.

7. Pass we from the sad Malady, to the sole Remedy thereof, I say sole, not
exclusively of divine miraculous power, but according to humane apprehension,
and this is a Free and full Parliament. Indeed Free-Parliament is a Tautologie,
like a Reasonable man, who, if not reasonable is no man; as the other, if not
free, no Parliament. But the late frequent forces put on Partiaments has made
the needless Epethite become necessary, to express what kind of Parliaments
we desire. Not such in which every word must be spoken under correction of the
sword, but wherein every Member, without fear of violence (to interrupt or
dissolve them) may follow the dictates of their own judgment and conscience.

8. Nor ought a Parliament only be free from force, but also from any
Abjurations, or previous Engagements. Let them take heed of renouncing any
thing, save what is simply sinful in it self, as the forsaking of the World,
Flesh, and Devil, as was solemnly promised for them in their Baptism. But it is
bad to be busy with other Ab-renunciations, especially of the Royal Family.

9. Look backward and we may say with David, The Vows of the Lord are upon us;
I mean on so many of us as are of fifty years of age. The Oath of Supremacy
(not to mention the Covenant) is the eldest Brother, to whom the inheritance of
our Consciences does belong.

10. Look forwards, it limiteth Gods providence, which is an heinous offense;
we know not what a day, month, year, etc. may bring forth. This Age has the
least reason of any to meddle with the edge-tools of such Oaths which in a
short (but thick) time has seen so many strange things, that now nothing is
strange unto us. Have we not seen O. Cromwell from a private Gentleman gradatim
ascend to be Protector of three Nations, and (by his Courage and Wisdom
without any right) a more absolute power was possessed by, and larger Tribute
paid unto him than to any King of England. His Son and Successor (counted bad
by many for his goodness and mild spirit) for eight months was congratulated
by the most considerable Persons of our Nation. Now if some twenty years since
an Oath had been tendered unto us to abjure the Family of Cromwels from ever
having the Supreme Magistracy in our Nation; such an Oath would have seemed
safe, but yet it was not lawful to take it, because none knew what was in the
Womb of Teeming Time, though utterly improbable to our belief.

11. Besides, the Imposers of this Oath may miss the mark they propound to
themselves, viz. assurance of their own, and discovery of the opposite Party;
for many now pass not for the taking or breaking of any Oath, and assurance of
such is hard in keeping, and indeed not worth the having. Other will behold the
Oath as temporary, and expiring with the power of the Imposers. As for the
conscientious indeed, Eefusing it out of pure principles of piety, it is a
barbarous act for persons in power, to turn Executioners to strangle tender
Consciences, whose cordial fear of an Oath should be encouraged.

12. As the Parliament must be free, no Vassal, but enfranchised from the
Sword, so must it be full, no Cripple, but entire and complete in all the
Members thereof. Our Land has lately groaned under the most grievous Monopoly
as ever was or can be, when a handful of men have grasped to themselves the
representing of a whole (not to say 3) Nation, most of them being but
Burgesses, who, though equal in Votes, are not equal in their representation
with the Knights of the Shires. If they presume that the rest excluded by them
(far more considerable for Birth, Estates, Number, Love of the People, and what
not?) are virtually included in them, it is an intolerable PRESUMPTION. That
what pertains to all should be handled by all, is a Truth so clear and
strong, that they must offer a Rape to their own Reason that deny it. Such
also is this Maxim, Vnrepresented, unconcluded: So that if so few have in them
the notion of a Parliament, it is a bare Notion indeed, especially seeing this
handful of men were (say the Cavaleers) dissolved by the death of the King;
dissolved (said Cromwell) by his Sword; dissolved (say some Great ones) by an
Act of their own (entered into the Iournall Book of the Parliament) dissolved
must their own Consciences say, by their voluntary accepting of Elections in
later Parliaments.

13. Now the Members of a Free and full Parliament (the only Hope of Humane
help) ought thus to be qualified: 1. Let them be Godly and well-affected
indeed, and not in the canting language of the Times. 2. Men of Estates, who
will be tender in taxing others, as striking them thorough themselves, whilst
such who bear nothing care not how much they burden others, as if paying were
as easy as voting, and Money as free as words. 3. Men of spirits, no dull
Souls, all the sparks of whose activity are quenched in their own phlegm. 4. No
Gainers by the continuance of the Army. Demetrius the Silver-Smith was no fool
(what ever else he was) so sticking for the shrine of Diana, by which Craft he
got his Gain. 5. Men of moderation, a quality not opposed to Diligence, but to
Violence; not unactiving men, but regulating their Activity.


14. This their moderation must appear in considering all Interests, seeing
there be no two Interests in the Nation so contemptible, which if united, and
twisting their discontents together, cannot draw trouble on all the rest.
Especially the Sectarian, (though presented I believe by their party, through a
multiplying Glass) are considerable on a politic score of their numbers and
pious account of their conscience; for, though many of them carry the later in
their purses,, who when they find the moisture of Profit to fail them, will
fall off like leaves in Autumn; yet can I not be so uncharitable, but to
believe that many of them (having the heat of their affections above the light
of their judgments) follow erroneous Consciences; Besides, having gone loose
so long, they must needs swell, if hardly girded (...) a sudden*

15. This moderation also must be used by all other Persons, to work themselves
to be (if not pleased) contented with the decisions of a free Parliament. All
must sit down Losers save such alone, who can plead, that they have been no
Sinners in our Nation. The Grand design must be to have none, or, (if that be
impossible) as few as may be, utterly ruined. I confess, two hungry meals
makes a third a Glutton, and such who have long fasted from their detained
Estates, will be not only greedy, but ravenous to recover them. Yea, such will
shrewdly plead, that they now expect moderation from them, who never used
moderation to them. However, in such a general danger, men must depose their
animosities, laboring, first, to reconcile their spirits, then, their
persuasions, the later being at less distance than the former. And men must
divide, where they cannot get the whole, seeing few will pity his starving who
will eat no bread at all, because he can recover but half of his own loaf.

16. It will be objected that such a full P. is still but an Empty Parliament,
having no House of Lords therein: But know, if both hands of a man be bound, no
hope of liberty from himself; but if one be untied, it may do the brotherly
office to unloose the other: Let us be content to row in a Sculler till we can
get a pair of Oars. And such surely is the Ingenuity and public spiritnesse of
the Peers, that laying aside personal Interest (which upon debate may appear
more), they will suspend their Rights, immunities, and privileges, and submit
all to the determination of a Free-Parliament to acquiesce therein.

17. God give our Nation seasonably to understand their own strength, that the
wars begun may be ended amongst our selves before Foreigners become the
Arbitrators of our differences, who will demand great wages for little work,
yea and turn their own Paymasters thereof. And may that great General (whose
Intentions long have stood in the dark to our Nation, whilst our Nations
desires were all the while in light to him, understand that Vox Populi is Vox
Dei, and interpret, that God calls unto him by the Declarations of all
Counties, to be chiefly instrumental in asserting our Liberties, and we shall
have cause for ever to bless the Day of his Nativity; yea, to erect a Statue
better than Gold, of Gratitude in onr Hearts unto him.

18. Indeed had Providence fixed our Nativities under the Duke of Muscovy,
whose list is his Subjects Law, we would (because we must) work our selves
patiently to the obedience of his power. But seeing God has given us, with S.
Paul, to be freeborn, Acts 22.28. (though also, with the Centurion, we have
given great sums, not to obtain, but contrive this freedom) let us not tamely
loose our birthright, and vigorously endeavor their preservation.

19. The Story is well known of the old Woman who having but a small parcel of
Wood, would leasurably roast her Goose stick by stick, till her wood was all
burnt, and her Goose still raw. If the several Counties singly engage one
after another, all will be overthrown, and nothing effected as to our releife.
Let the two and fifty Shires of ENGLAND and WALES (with the City of LONDON,
which eminently is two and fifty more) be all as one, and unanimously advance
the Work, and not do as they dealt with poor CHESHIRE, using it as Ioab did
Vriah, putting him forward on action, then falsely retreating from him, and
leaving him a prey to his enemies. But I hope our old Shipwracks will be new
Sea-marks, to us, documented by former nocuments, to steer a surer course for
the general good.

20. There is no English man so inconsiderable, but he may, at the least in a
single capacity, be contributive to the happiness of his native Country, the
Wise with their Brains, the Rich with their Purses, the Learned with their
Pens, the Strong with their Persons; All with their Prayers. And if now they
suffer this opportunity which GOD puts into their hands, to slip thorough their
fingers, they may hereafter have more years to bemoane their folly, than
minutes to amend their misery; it being better now to say, WE WILL NOT, than
three years hence to say, We cannot pay our Taxes.

FINIS.

