A FULL DISCOVERY OF THE False Evidence Produced by the PAPISTS Against the
most Reverend and Learned Dr. Tho. Tenison.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for John and Thomas Lane, at the Golden-Anchor, the Corner of
Wilde-Street, next Duke-Street, 1688.

Dr. Tenison's Invisible Evidence Unclouded,
By CATHARINE LAMB.
With a further Account of the said EVIDENCE.
HAving heard a Pamphlet, (industriously cried about Streets) Entitled, Mr.
Pulton Considered by Dr Tenison, I was led by Curiosity, and the Strangeness of
the Title, to give my Self the trouble of seeing, if (according to my
Apprehension) there were any thing considerable therein: But before I had read
out the First Page, I was very much surprised, to see my Name in the very Front
of the Book; and for no other Reason (as I could perceive, or imagine) but to
Confront the Evidence I gave by my Certificate, Published with Mr. Pulton's
Remarks, about the Long-Acre Conference, betwixt Mr. Pulton, and the Reverend
Doctor: Which Certifica^e, as it concerns my Self, is my chief Design to
Maintain and Justify; which, I doubt not, but will appear to be done in the
Sequel, to any unprejudiced and unbiased Reader: And, since my only business
is to maintain my former Certificate, I must acquaint my Reader, That I shall
meddle with nothing but what concerns That, or this Grave Doctor's Reflection
upon my Self. As for the other Part of the Book, I question not, but 'twill be
fully Answered by Mr. Pulton; notwithstanding the great Conceit our Doctor has
of His own, and His Fellow Laborers great Undertakings, in this His Grand Book
of Considerations: And though this Design be a Work somewhat Improper for a
Woman; yet, that the Doctor may not hugg Himself in his old musty Opinion, that
Roman Catholics are altogether led in Ignorance, I shall give Him some Reason
to think, if He can Think as well as Consider, (as He calls it) that those
Absurdities of His, relating to my Self, I, though a Woman, have Sense enough
to take Notice of, by a just Resentment; and also to put the Doctor in mind
(though one would think, for His Godly Consorts sake) He should not have
forgot, It is ill Provoking our Weaker Sex.

First, therefore, Before I come to the Matter of the Certificate, I must take
notice of the Learned Doctor's Quarrelling at the manner of Certifying; which,
the Doctor says, Mr. Pulton terms, Testimonies in Favor of A. P. And the
Doctor (because he will not pass by the least opportunity of showing His
Profound Parts) Wittily observes to be a New Style in Certificates; which, says
He, ought to be Written without Fear, Affection, or Favor.

Now, by the Doctor's Leave, however New his Reverence may fancy the Style to
be, yet, with Submission, I think it is proper enough, to Style a Certificate
so; which, nevertheless, may be Certified without Fear, Affection, or Favor to
the Party, on whose behalf the Truth appears to be: For, where there is a
Question about Matter of Fact, (as in our present Case) and the Fact is to be
evinced by Certificate, on whosoevers side the Truth does appear to be, by the
Certificate, that Certificate may very well be termed to be, in Favor of the
Party that so Affirms the Truth, and yet be Certified without any Partiality;
as the Doctor would by all this Jargon, (to use His own Word for it) slily
Insinuate, to prepossess His Long-Acre Admirers.

But, to pass to what is most Material; There was, says the Doctor, as little
necessity of any of these Certificates, as there is Sincerity in some. Now,
though there was not an Indispensible necessity, yet I think 'twas absolutely
convenient to satisfy the World, if possible, by Certificates, that this Giant
of Dispute, and Monster at an Argument, had not knocked down Fifteen Jesuits;
as this Renowned St. Martins Oracle, or some of His Brazen Acquaintance, had
Maliciously and Falsely reported; for I do not believe our modest Doctor has, as
yet, a Forehead of Brass, since He can afford a Blush upon occasion; as it is
said He did, upon viewing Himself in the Soldier's Speculum; though some are
prone to believe, it was only, the Reflection of the Soldiers Red-Coat in his
shining Face. But, that I may not forget my Design, or at least seem like the
Wiseman in my Lord Bacon's Essays, (quoted by our Doctor) who reserves His
great Business for a Postscript; I think it is time, without keeping my Reader
any longer in suspense, to acquaint Him, That notwithstanding the Doctor, and
His Adherers sly Insinuation to the contrary, I do again Insist on it for an
Absolute Truth, (without any Equivocation, or Mental Reservation whatsoever)
That I was in the Room below, (whether the Doctor's Friend, Mrs. V. calls it a
Chamber, or by any other Name, I know not) and saw Mr. Pulton come in, and go
up Stairs: And, as I said in my former Ce^tificate; He had only one Gentleman
in His Company, and a Third Person, who followed them. I also went up Stairs
immediately after them, and was in the Room where the Conference was, before
Mr. Pulton, and the Doctor had exchanged one Word; and I think the Doctor's
Comical Schoolmaster may very well remember me there, by my desiring him (in
the midst of his Comedy) not to Interrupt the Conference with his several
Monkey-Tricks, shown upon that occasion.

And it is well known, that very Night I came home to my House, after the
Conference was ended, discoursing about it, and several things which past
thereat, in the Presence of several People of good Repute; I declared all those
Circumstances, when it was not so much as thought of, at least by me, it ever
would, as it now is, have been Publicly exposed in Print.

Besides, were it for the satisfaction of any one that deserves it, I am ready
to make Affidavit of the Truth of what I now Insist on, as to my Certificate,
before any Person, that can Legally Administer an Oath to me, for that intent
and purpose: All which, I hope, may satisfy the World of the Truth of my
Evidence in this particular.

Now, the Occasion of the mistake of putting the Chamber where the Conference
was held, in place of the Chamber below (and at which, the Doctor seems to take
so great an Advantage; though he will find it quite contrary; for, by obliging me
to give Him this more plain Account, the Truth of my Evidence appears more
clear; as also His most Injurious Proceeding in this Case, however) it is as
follows:

Understanding the fine mis-representation of the whole Matter of Fact in the
Doctor's Account, as being an Eyewitness to the contrary; I signified, by my
Husband, to Mr. Pulton, That I was willing to Attest (if He pleased) how I had
seen Him Go into the the Chamber, where the Conference was held, with only One
Gentleman in His Company, and a Third, who followed them: Mr. Pulton told my
Husband, He was sorry the other Certificate was gone to the Press; however in
have, he Wrote it in my Name (my Husband saying I assented thereto) and put the
Word Come, in place of Go. Now, that Mr. Pulton did this without Design, is
manifest; for, had He put my Testimony, as in the Chamber below, I then had
Witnessed, (as now I do) That I saw Him not only Go into the Chamber above, but
also Come in from the Street, in the aforesaid manner.

But now you may ask, Was I not there by Mr. Pulton's Appointment or Consent? I
answer to the Negative; for having accidentally heard there was such a
Conference to be, I sent to know, whether it might be allowed that I should go?
He answered, That He knew not where Himself was to go; and that He did not
desire any One should come there: But using the endeavor the Curiosity of my
Sex may render pardonable, I found means, by Enquiry in the Neighborhood, to
find out the House.

Now, I do not doubt, but the Doctor Himself, upon further Consideration, will,
or at least, may be Ashamed, (if any thing can make him so to be) publicly to
expose a Person for speaking the Truth; but the Doctor thinks he has a Proverb
on his side, That Truth ought not to be Spoke at all Times; and this he thinks
a very improper Time for it, when it hinders him from catching his Gudgeon; and
therefore thinks he has sufficient Reason for his Scurrilous Expressions,
which will appear otherways to the Reader: His Words are in this manner, viz.

The Doctor begins his Comical Humor; For, (says he, In his Book, Entitled,
Mr. P. Considered. Page 2.
by way of Caution to Mr. Pulton) Let Him from henceforth forbear his Railery
against Katharine Boren, lest He put Peplein mind of Catharine Lamb; who, for
ought I know, may be a Virtuous and True Woman; but, as she is Represented in
Mr. Pulton 's Certificate, she is a very extraordinary Person: Certainly she
must have some Relation to that Famous Dr. Lamb, whom the Mobile believed to be
a Conjurer. But whatever the Mobile believed of Dr. Lamb, surely none but that
sort of People would take our Learned Doctor for a Conjurer, by his Discourse:
For, what Parallel is there betwixt Kate Boren, and my Self; Who, for ought the
Doctor knows, may be a Virtuous and True Woman; but the Doctor pretends no such
thing of Kate Boren: So that, what the Doctor would say, if he could speak his
Mind, is no more than thus; Pray, Mr. Pulton, don't tell me no more of Kate
Boren who, you say, was a Lewd, Naughty Woman; for fear I give you a hint of
Catharine Lamb, who is a Virtuous and True Woman; and, as you have Represented
Her, is an extraordinary Person.

Now, I would fain have another Book of the Doctor's Considerations, to explain
this notable piece of Sophistry of His.

Says the Doctor, If Katharine Lamb did not Certify this, Page 3.
there is Forgery in it; and if she did, there is False-Evidence. But, as I
have said before, I did Certify it; therefore there is no Forgery in it: and
according to the Truth of the Matter aforesaid; therefore no False Evidence.

The Doctor continues his pleasant Conceit yet further: Page 4.
For (says he) on November. 4. Mr. Pulton Published his Remarks, that Night the
False Certificate of Catharina in Nubibus was Publicly exposed. But that the
Certificate is True, I think sufficient has been said before: And that I am
come out of the Clouds, (where the Doctor by his Hocus Pocus Tricks, if his
frequent Repetitions to that purpose, would have Confined me) to Justify my
self, and the Certificate from his False Aspersions; as these Papers, being
Publicly exposed, will abundantly Testify, to his great Confusion.

But for a parting Blow; Our Satirical Doctor continues his Merry Conceits
against me, Page 10.
and is resolved to make me a through paced Evidence: For (says he) if
Catharine Lamb had been there in her Magical Mantle, she may, I doubt not,
prove it upon me. Had I, Doctor, the Magical Mantle you were pleased to
mention, I might perhaps, make Discoveries not very agreeable to your
Character; and make known to the World more than a mere Coaching of it to
White-Fryars, to present your Salamanca-Narrative to Coffee-Houses.

There is several other Places to this purpose, in this Grand Book of
Consideration; but I am unwilling to trouble my Reader with such Impertinencies
any longer.

I have indeed been a great Zealot for your pretended Church; but the
Aspersive, False, and Fabulous Accounts I have often heard, in the most Sacred
Places, from Men of your Gown, most injuriously mis-representing the Catholic
Principles, seconded by the Experience I have of your own most dis-ingenuous
and insincere Proceedings, in this whole Matter, has entirely convinced me,
that Truth cannot be, where studied Falsehood is affectedly Professed: I am sorry,
Doctor, that the best Conceit of your Fifteen Sheets is spoiled, and that it
stood not with my Reputation, to Cloak your Malice with a Mantle; although, I
am sensible, it is not an ordinary One will do it.

Whereas Susanna Robinson speaks of a Train following Mr. Pulton, who shall be
named, as she says, when there is occasion; She is acquainted, that there is
now occasion; since, if her Evidence be True, I must incurr a contrary Repute:
The Train she speaks of, will be proved not to have belonged to Mr. Pulton, but
to the Doctor, who were stopped below till the Parties were met; and Mr. Pulton
being now gone up, against his Knowledge, Appointment, or Will, was, I believe,
followed not long after, by that Train, and the Famous Schoolmaster in the
midst of them.

But perchance, my Reader will Censure me for not expressing my self,
sometimes, so Respectively to the Doctor as I ought; For that, whatever he is
now, his Reverence has been accounted a modest Man; but if ever he was so, it
is certain, he does now very much Degenerate; which is too plain, by the way
which he takes in vilifying and defaming Others: Whereas, if there had been any
Fault, yet, in my Judgment, the Doctor ought not to have taken such a method to
Reprove it; but seeing so Grave a Doctor has prescribed this Method, I hope
he, nor no one else, will take it amiss, especially from a weak Woman; if she,
to Vindicate her self, make use, in a manner, of his own Language.

FINIS.

